 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(2016-17) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF ELECTRONICS AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the 
Committee contained in their Twenty-fifth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on       
‘Demands for Grants (2016-17)’] 
 
 
 
 
THIRTY-SECOND REPORT 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
 
 
 
 
December, 2016/Agrahayana, 1938 (Saka) 
 
32 


 
 
THIRTY-SECOND REPORT 
 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(2015-16) 
 
 
 
 
SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF ELECTRONICS AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
 
 
 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the 
Committee contained in their Twenty-fifth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on        
‘Demands for Grants (2016-17)’] 
 
 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 16 December, 2016 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 16 December, 2016 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
 
 
 
December, 2016/Agrahayana, 1938 (Saka) 

 
(i) 
 
 
CONTENTS 
 
 Page 
No. 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
(ii) 
INTRODUCTION 
 
(iii) 
CHAPTER I Report……………………………………………………………………… 
 
1 
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government………………………………………………………………... 
 
14 
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of replies of the 
Government…………………………………………………………………. 
 
34 
CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and require 
reiteration ………………………………………………………………………… 
 
35 
CHAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies are of interim 
in nature……………………………………………………………………… 
 
39 
  
APPENDICES  
 
 
I. Minutes of the Fifth sitting of the Committee held on 15th  December, 2016  
 
41 
II. Analysis of Action Ta ken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in their Twenty -fifth Report (Sixteenth Lok 
Sabha)  
 
     43      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
(ii) 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (2016-17) 
 
Shri Anurag Singh Thakur - Chairperson 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri L. K. Advani  
3. Shri Prasun Banerjee  
   *4. Shri Harish Dwivedi 
5. Dr. Sunil Gaikwad 
6. Shri Hemant Tukaram Godse 
7. Dr. Anupam Hazra  
8. Dr. Jayakumar Jayavardhan  
9. Shri P. Karunakaran  
10. Shri Virendra Kashyap  
11. Shri Harinder Singh Khalsa  
12. Shrimati Hema Malini  
13. Shri Keshav Prasad Maurya  
14. Dr. K.C. Patel  
15. Shri Raosaheb Danve Patil  
16. Shri Paresh Rawal  
17. Dr. (Shrimati) Bharati Shiyal  
18. Shri Abhishek Singh  
19. Shri D.K. Suresh  
20. Shri Ramdas Tadas  
21. Shrimati R. Vanaroja  
 
  Rajya Sabha 
 
22. Shrimati Jaya Bachchan 
23. Shri P. Bhattacharya 
24. Shri Suresh Gopi 
25. Shri Prabhat Jha 
26. Shri Santiuse Kujur 
27. Shri Derek O‟Brien 
28. Shrimati Kahkashan Perween 
29. Dr. K.V.P. Ramachandra Rao 
30. Dr. Vinay P. Sahasrabuddhe 
31. Shri Sachin Ramesh Tendulkar 
 
Secretariat 
 
1. Shri R.S. Kambo  -  Additional Secretary  
2. Shri Y.M. Kandpal  - Director   
3. Dr. Sagarika Dash   - Additional Director 
4. Shri Shangreiso Zimik - Under Secretary  
______________________________________________________________________ 
* Nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 19.10.2016 vide Bulletin Part-II dated 19.10.2016. 
 

 
(iii) 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Information Technology               
(2016-17), having been authorised by the Committee, do present the Twenty -second 
Report on Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of 
the Committee contained in their Twenty -fifth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on 
„Demands for Grants (20 16-17)‟ of the Ministry of Electronics and Information 
Technology. 
 
2. The Twenty-fifth Report was presented to Lok Sabha/laid on the Table of Rajya 
Sabha on 3 rd May, 2016.  The Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology 
furnished their Action Taken Notes on the Observations/Recommendations contained in 
the Twenty-fifth Report on 5th December, 2016.  
 
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their sitting held on 
15th December, 2016. 
 
4. For facility of reference and convenience,  Observations/Recommendations of the 
Committee have been printed in bold in Chapter-I of the Report.  
 
5. An analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Twenty -fifth Report of the Committee 
is given at Appendix-II. 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi; Anurag Singh Thakur, 
15 December, 2016 Chairperson,  
24 Agrahayana, 1938 (Saka) Standing Committee on 
Information Technology.  
 
 

 
1 
 
CHAPTER I 
 
REPORT 
 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Information Technology deals with the  
action taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the 
Committee contained in their Twenty -fifth Report (Sixteenth Lok Sabha) on „Demands 
for Grants (2016-17)‟ relating to the Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology. 
 
2. The Twenty-fifth Report was presented to Lok Sabha/laid in Rajya Sabha on the 
3rd May, 2016. It contained 16 Observations/ Recommendations.  
 
3. Action Taken Notes in respect of all the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Report have been received fr om the Ministry of Electronics and 
Information Technology and are categorized as under:- 
 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government 
 
 Rec. Sl. Nos.:- 1, 3, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14 and 15  
   
   
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the replies of the Government 
 
 Rec. Sl. No.: Nil  
   
   
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee  and require 
reiteration 
 
 Rec. Sl. Nos.:- 2 and 16    
   
   
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the reply of the 
Government are of interim in nature 
 
 Rec. Sl. Nos.:- 4   
   
 
4. The Committee trust that utmost importance would be g iven to 
implementation of the Observations/Recommendations accepted by the 
Government. The Committee further desire that Action Taken Notes on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in Chapter-I and final action take 

 
2 
 
replies to the Observations /Recomm endations contained in Chapter -V of this 
Report should be furnished to them at an early date. 
 
5. The Committee will now deal with action taken by the Government on some of 
their recommendations.   
 
Budget Analysis 
(Recommendation Sl. Nos. 1, 5, 8 and 14) 
6. The Committee, in their Original Report, had recommended as under:- 
 
“The Budget Estimate (BE) allocation of DeitY for the year 2016 -17 is 
Rs.3328.82 crore which includes Rs.3200 crore under Plan and Rs.128. 82 
crore under Non-Plan segment.  In the year 201 5-16, against the enhanced 
RE allocation of Rs.2700 crore, the Department could achieve decent 
utilization of the order of Rs.2521.75 crore up to March, 2016. An analysis 
of trend of expenditure in this financial year indicates that major fund 
utilization was done in the month of March, i.e., in the closing month of 
Annual Plan period.  The Committee do take note of some of the technical 
factors responsible for the same.  However, as a matter of general principle 
and financial prudence, the „March rush‟ of expenditure needs to be 
avoided.  The Committee hope the Department would take due care in the 
Annual Plan year 2016-17 to address this concern of the Committee.  
 
The Committee understand that all the Plan schemes of DeitY have been 
rationalized into five  umbrella schemes, namely, National Informatics 
Centre (NIC), Unique Identification Authority of India (UIDAI), which stand 
transferred to DeitY as an Attached Office, Regulatory Authorities, Digital 
India Programme and Assistance to Autonomous and Other B odies with 
effect from the Financial Year 2016-17.  A scrutiny of allocation made under 
Plan schemes shows that the approved GBS has been grossly downsized, 
leaving a yawning gap between the proposed and the approved GBS. This, 
indeed, is a matter of grave concern to the Committee.  For example, under 
the Digital India Programme, which is one of the flagship programmes of 
the Government of India, a sum of Rs.1282.00 crore only has been 
provisioned as against the demand of Rs.5778.07 crore.  As would be seen  
in the subsequent pages of this Report, reduced allocation under this head 
has significant impact on execution of various components of this scheme.  
The Department have stated that on account of the overall reduction of 
DeitY Budget, allocation made unde r Plan schemes has been adversely 
affected.  The Committee have been informed that DeitY have asked for 
additional funds of Rs.1500 crore to meet the minimum requirement during 
the financial year 2016 -17.  The Committee endorse the demand of the 
Department for allocation of additional funds for the current fiscal  year.  The 
Committee also desire that DeitY need to have adequate budget in the 

 
3 
 
coming Plan years because this Department are implementing some of the 
schemes/programmes which are central to the bu ilding of a technologically 
empowered society to take a lead in the global digital economy. 
 
(Recommendation No. 1) 
 
Unique Identification Authority Of India (UIDAI) 
UIDAI is a transformational initiative that includes establishing identity 
infrastructure for providing unique digital identity in the form of Aadhar 
number to its residents. The Committee note that UIDAI was earlier with 
NITI Aayog but from September 2015 onwards, it has been shifted under 
the Ministry of Communications and Information Technology, Department of 
Electronics and Information Technology, as an Attached Office. Aadhar 
enrolment is undertaken on voluntary basis and is an ongoing activity. A 
target of universal enrolment is being pursued but till 15 th March, 2016, a 
total of 99.20 cro re Aadhar have been generated out of total population of 
121.07 crore (Census 2011) which has already crossed  hundred crore 
mark. Although it is an ongoing process, one round of completion of 
enrolment is targeted in March, 2017.  A look at the financial performance 
of the scheme shows that the utilization of funds under the scheme has 
been consistently above 80% with respect to RE. During the year 2015 -16, 
as against the budgetary allocation of Rs.1916.43 crore at the RE stage, 
the Actual Expenditure has been to the tune of Rs.1606.63 crore. The 
Committee have been informed that for the year 2016 -17, an amount of 
Rs.800 crore has been allocated to the scheme. Regarding the adequacy of 
funds during the current FY, the Department have stated that the BE 
projection for UIDAI was Rs. 1468.23 crore as the Department had 
estimated an amount of Rs.731.00 crore to meet enrolment, printing and 
dispatch cost for approximately 20 crore enrolment (1.5 to 2 crore   Aadhaar 
is proposed to be issued every month) in the ne xt FY 2016 -17 and an 
amount of Rs.127 crore and Rs.176.00 crore for the committed and 
contractual expenditure such as cost of technology operations and 
procurement of machinery & equipment, etc. A provision of Rs.70 crore had 
also been proposed for constru ction of UIDAI headquarters buildings which 
is already underway, along with provision of Rs.100 crore for establishment 
related expenditure. In view of this, the current budgetary allocation of 
Rs.800 crore will not be sufficient to meet the requirement. F urther, the 
Committee note that UIDAI is fully prepared to undertake the task of the first 
round of enrolment by 2017. During the evidence, the representative of 
UIDAI also informed the Committee that they have 3.32 lakh certified 
operators throughout the country and enrolment is going on in 30,000 
centres. As on date, 6 lakh enrolment is being made per day. As UIDAI 
targets to complete the enrolment, at least the first enrolment by 2017, 
another Rs.600 crore will be required to meet the expenses. Also, UID AI 
needs funds to meet the updation activity (such as the newly born children 
who will cross 5 years and reach 15 years of age whose fingerprints change 
over time), which will continue. Keeping in view the fact that the Actual 
Expenditure under the scheme has been consistent and UIDAI Plan to 

 
4 
 
achieve the first phase of enrolment by 2017, the Committee desire that 
allocations to UIDAI may suitably be enhanced to meet the requirement so 
that the projected targets as per BE proposal 2016 -17 are not affected. The 
Committee further note that with Aadhar enrolment assuming much 
importance in light of the Aadhar Act being passed, the privacy and security 
concerns need to be addressed.  The Committee have been informed that 
the Act has in -built clauses to deal with security and privacy of individuals.  
The Committee desire that requisite steps be taken alongside the 
provisions of the Act to address security and privacy issues. 
(Recommendation No. 5) 
 
Digital India Programme 
The Digital India Programme is an umbrella programme which 
amalgamated all the ongoing Schemes/Programmes/Projects being 
implemented by DeitY.  It weaves together a large number of ideas and 
thoughts into a single, comprehensive vision so that each of them can be 
implemented as part of a larger goa l. The various components of the 
programme include manpower development, Electronic Governance, E -
Governance, National Knowledge Network, Promotion of Electronics & IT 
Hardware Manufacturing, Promotion of IT&ITES Industries and R&D in 
IT/Electronics/CCBT.  The Committee note that as against the proposed 
estimate of Rs.5778.07 crore, a sum of only Rs.1282.00 crore has been 
provided under this programme.  The Department have, however, 
requested the Ministry of Finance to provide additional allocation of 
Rs.1500 crore to meet the bare minimum requirement during FY 2016-17.   
(Recommendation No. 8) 
National Knowledge Network (NKN) 
The Committee note that the National Knowledge Network was approved in 
the year 2010 with an objective to inter -connect all knowledge  institutions 
across the country through high speed data communication network to 
encourage sharing of resources and collaborative research. This would 
cover about 1500 institutions comprising all universities, institutions of 
higher learning and research.  During the year 2014 -15, an allocation of 
Rs.300 crore had been made at the BE and RE stage which was utilized 
optimally. In the year 2015 -16, an allocation of Rs.150 crore had been 
made at the BE stage which was increased to Rs.214 crore at the RE 
stage. Out of this, the Actual Expenditure has been to the order of Rs.150 
crore as on 07.03.2016. The Committee observe that under the NKN 
Programme, the projection for FY 2016 -17 was to the tune of Rs.1000 
crore against which the approved allocation is only Rs .250 crore.   The 
Department have informed that the allocated amount would not be sufficient 
even to meet the yearly recurring expenses to sustain the NKN project 
and they would like to seek additional grants at the supplementary stage.   
The Committee note that ad-hocism in allocation of Plan funds and taking 
recourse to asking for funds at the supplementary grants stage has been a 
recurring phenomenon under the scheme of NKN. As far as the physical 
targets are concerned, the Committee note that 1580 links h ave been 

 
5 
 
commissioned and made operational. This includes 378 links to institutions 
under NMEICT, which have been migrated to NKN. During the FY 2015 -16, 
a total of 176 institutions have been connected which include 13 institutions 
migrated from NMEICT. NK N connectivity has also been extended to 447 
NIC district centers. 94 numbers of Core Links have been commissioned 
and operationalised. 66 Virtual Classrooms have also been set up under 
NKN. For the successful implementation of NKN, adequate budgetary 
provision is indispensable, failing which the scheme will not be able to 
achieve its objective. This is also evident from the concerns expressed by 
the Secretary, DeitY, who had informed the Committee that under NKN the 
achievement has been 93% of expenditure and the Department were trying 
hard to get re-appropriation at the last moment which did not materialize. In 
the case of the National Knowledge Network, there is a deficit of Rs.300 
crore and the Ministry of Finance are now seriously thinking to delegate r e-
appropriation for NKN liability. Pending the final decision of the Ministry of 
Finance regarding delegated re -appropriation, the Committee desire that 
the Ministry should ensure additional grants for the NKN programme for FY 
2016-17 so that it is able to  achieve its objective of collaborative research 
and transforming the country into a Knowledge Society.” 
 
(Recommendation No. 14) 
 
7. The Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology , in the action taken note, 
have stated as under:- 
 
“The Department has  already taken up the matter with Ministry of Finance. 
A proposal for Cash Supplementary Grant of ` 2166 crore was also 
submitted to Ministry of Finance in the 1 st Batch of Supplementary 
Demands for Grants (Aug 2016). However, the Department has received 
only ` 290 crore as Cash Supplementary Grant against the above demand. 
The matter was further taken up with Ministry of Finance in Revised 
Estimates 2016 -17. However, as per the Pre -Budget discussions held 
under the chairmanship of Secretary(Expenditure) on  27.10.2016, no 
additional grant is likely to be allocated in Revised Estimates 2016-17. 
(Reply to Recommendation No. 1) 
 
Subsequent to the publication of the Aadhaar (Targeted Delivery of 
Financial and Other Subsidies, Benefits and Services) Act 2016, in the 
Official Gazette for general information, the Government is in the process of 
notifying various sections relating to security and privacy related aspects. 
Sections relating to offences and penalties, which will govern any 
contraventions of the other pr ovisions of the Act will also e notified in due 
course. Further, the requisite Rules and Regulations including those which 
govern security and privacy aspects of information collected, which form 
part of the subordinate legislation under the Act, are under preparation.  
(Reply to Recommendation No. 5) 
 
 

 
6 
 
It is a fact that Ministry of Finance was initially requested for an additional 
allocation of    ` 1500 crore to meet the bare minimum requirement during 
FY 2016 -17. Since any additional fund can only be gra nted through 
Supplementary Demands for Grants, a proposal for grant of ` 2166 crore as 
additional grants for various programmes was submitted to Ministry of 
Finance in the 1 st batch of Supplementary Demands for Grants. However, 
an additional grant of ` 290 crore was approved in this batch of 
Supplementary Demands ( ` 190 crore for UIDAI and ` 100 crore for NIC). 
The matter was further taken up with Ministry of Finance in Revised 
Estimates 2016 -17. However, as per the Pre -Budget discussions held 
under the cha irmanship of Secretary(Expenditure) on 27.10.2016, no 
additional grant is likely to be allocated in Revised Estimates 2016-17. 
(Reply to Recommendation No. 8) 
 
Ministry of Finance was requested to provide additional grants in the          
1st batch of Supp lementary Demands for Grants 2016 -17. However, 
Ministry of Finance turned down the proposal with the suggestion that the 
matter may be taken up at RE stage. The matter was further taken up with 
Ministry of Finance in Revised Estimates 2016 -17. However, as per the 
Pre-Budget discussions held under the chairmanship of 
Secretary(Expenditure) on 27.10.2016, no additional grant is likely to be 
allocated in Revised Estimates 2016-17.” 
(Recommendation No. 14) 
 
 
8. During the examination of Demands for Grants (2016 -17), the Committee 
had noted that the Gross Budgetary Support (GBS) allocation to the Ministry of 
Electronics and Information Technology for the Plan Schemes had been grossly 
downsized leaving a  yawning gap between the proposed and the approved GBS.  
While o bserving that the allocation made under Plan Schemes have been 
adversely affected due to overall reduction of MeitY budget and  the Ministry are 
implementing some of the  crucial schemes/programmes which are central to 
building a technologically empowered society, the Committee had desired that the 
Ministry need to have adequate budget in the coming Plan years.  From the Action 
Taken Note furnished by the Ministry, the Committee note that a proposal for 
grant of Rs.2166 crore as additional grants for various  programmes was 
submitted to Ministry of Finance in the first batch of Supplementary Demands for 
Grants.  However, an additional grant of Rs.290 crore only consisting of Rs.190 
crore for UIDAI and Rs.100 crore for NIC  was approved in the first batch of 
Supplementary Demands.  The matter was further taken up with Ministry of 
Finance in Revised Estimates 2016 -17.  However, the Committee understand as 

 
7 
 
per the Pre -Budget discussion held  under the Chairmanship of Secretary, 
Expenditure on 27.10.2016 no additional grant is likely to be allocated in Revised 
Estimates 2016 -17.  The Committee are of the view that the amount of Rs.290 
crore approved in the Supplementary Grant s is grossly inadequate which will 
have an adverse impact on execution of various Plan schemes  of the Ministry.  
The Ministry are  implementing some of the important Plan schemes such as  
National Informatics Centre (NIC), Unique  Identification Authority of India (UIDAI), 
Digital India Programme, National Knowledge Network (NKN), National Digital 
Literacy Mission, State Data Centres, etc.  which need adequate fund for their 
successful implementation.  The Committee note that the BE projection for UIDAI 
alone was Rs.1468.23 crore, against which, an amount of Rs.800 crore ha d been 
allocated at BE.  Even  in case of NIC, an amount of Rs.800 crore only had been 
allocated at BE against the proposed amount of Rs.1182 crore during  2016-17.  
What is disquieting to note is that a gainst the huge requirement of funds , an 
amount of only Rs.190 crore for UIDAI and R s.100 crore for NIC  have now been 
considered for allocation at Supplementary Grants stage  which is no doubt a 
matter of serious concern.  No additional funds have been allocated for other 
important Plan schemes viz. Digital India Programme, National Knowl edge 
Network, etc. at the Supplementary Grants  stage and no additional grant is likely 
to be allocated in Revised Estimates 2016 -17 for the se Plan schemes.  The 
reluctance of the Ministry of Finance to allocate appropriate funds for 
implementation of vario us important Plan schemes especially like Digital India 
Programme stands contrary to  avowed aim  of the Government to build a 
technologically empowered society and digital economy and at the same time it 
reflects failure of the Ministry in convincing and impressing upon the Ministry of 
Finance regarding the urgency of funds for these schemes.  Keeping in view that 
the Ministry are implementing some of the flagship  Plans and programmes which 
are crucial to digitally empower the economy and s ociety, the Commit tee desire 
that the Ministry should make continued and sustained efforts to get sufficient 
funds for these schemes.     
 
 

 
8 
 
 
Position of Outstanding Utilization Certificates 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 2) 
9. The Committee, in their Original Report, had recommended as under:- 
 
“The Committee note that a large number of Utilization Certificates (UCs) are 
pending with the implementing agencies in respect of various schemes of the 
Department. While a total number of 133 UCs amounting to Rs.276.64 crore 
are pending for t he sanction period 1.04.2001 to 31.03.2014, for the sanction 
period from 1.04.2001 to 31.03. 2016, the number of UCs stand at 876 
amounting to a huge sum of Rs.2435.81 crore. The Department have informed 
that out of the 133 UCs, 94 UCs amounting to Rs.266. 82 crore (96%) of the 
pending amount pertain to the e -Governance scheme alone. Regarding 
reasons for such a large number of pending UCs, the Department have 
informed that e-Governance activities have a relatively longer gestation period 
due to stringent re quirement including civil and electrical construction, 
hardware software development, business process reengineering, etc. 
Programme activities are undertaken by the Department in co -ordination with 
the State Governments. However, e -Governance is an emergi ng sector and 
availability of trained personnel is limited. In spite of maximum possible support 
to address the issues, the implementation of the NeGP projects have been 
impacted. The Committee also note that in order to reduce the number of UCs 
and hold t he implementing agencies accountable, the Department have taken 
several measures which inter alia include insisting on submission of UCs 
before release of subsequent installment, accounting the unspent balance and 
interest before release of next installmen t, meeting of group co -ordinators 
concerned with grantee institutions, Secretary -level review of pending UCs 
from time to time, Quarterly review meetings of State IT Secretaries etc. The 
Department have also informed that UCs are submitted on the basis of GFR 
instructions and care is taken to ensure that accrued interest is accounted for.  
Though the Department have stated that they have been making earnest 
efforts to expedite implementation of various schemes and programmes, the 
non-release of money to sev eral schemes due to non -submission of UCs 
points to the fact that UCs are acting as a hurdle in the effective 
implementation of the schemes. The Committee feel that the continuous 
pendency of UCs from the implementing agencies is an undesirable trend 
which needs to be avoided as it directly affects the performance of the 
schemes, especially e -Governance Schemes. The Department have been 
running several flagship schemes and programmes as per policy decision to 
achieve the targets within the stipulated time frame. However, as the UCs have 
a direct bearing on the release of funds, this affects the outcome of 
Government schemes and policies as a whole. The Department need to take 
the issue of pending UCs more seriously and workout a mechanism to procure 
the UCs from the implementing agencies. The Department‟s approach need to 
be more pragmatic and proactive rather than leaving it to the implementing 
agencies because the ultimate onus of the successful implementation of the 

 
9 
 
schemes and thereby the policy decision of the Government lies with the 
Department.”   
 
10. The Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology , in the action taken note, 
have stated as under:- 
 
“The Committee has rightly said that UCs have a direct bearing on the release 
of funds which affects t he outcome of Government schemes and policies as a 
whole. This is the reason why the Department is vigorously making efforts for 
obtaining the pending UCs through one -to-one meetings with defaulting 
agencies. The Project Review and Steering Group (PRSG) has been reviewing 
the projects from time to time to ensure that no project is delayed or remain 
unimplemented due to non-release of grants in view of pending UCs, etc.” 
 
11. The Committee had noted that a large number of Utilization Certificates 
(UCs) are pending with the implementing agencies in respect of various schemes 
of the Ministry. The non -release of money to several schemes due to non -
submission of UCs have acted a s hurdle in the effective implementation of the 
schemes. Observing that submission of  UCs  have a direct bearing on the timely 
release of funds and  affects the outcome of Government schemes and policies as 
a whole, the Committee had recommended that the Ministry need to take the issue 
of pending UCs more seriously and work  out a mechanism to p rocure the UCs on 
time from the implementing agencies. The Committee have been informed that  
vigorous efforts are being made for obtaining the pending UCs through one -to-
one meetings with defaulting agencies. The Project Review and Steering Group 
(PRSG) ha s been reviewing the projects from time to time to ensure that no 
project is delayed or remain unimplemented due to non -release of grants in view 
of pending UCs, etc. T he information furnished by the Ministry on the status  of 
Utilization Certificates (UCs ) pending with the implementing agencies in respect 
of various schemes indicates that the aforesaid measures taken by the Ministry is 
having little impact in liquidation of pending UCs.   This can be clearly gauged 
from the fact that a total number of 133 U Cs amounting to Rs.276.64 crore are 
pending for the sanction period 1.04.2001 to 31.03.2014, for the sanction period 
from 1.04.2001 to 31.03. 2016, the number of UCs stand at 876 amounting to a 
huge sum of Rs.2435.81 crore. The Committee hope that more UCs  must have 
been sanctioned by now. Considering that the non -release of money to several 
schemes due to non -submission of UCs are acting as a hurdle in the effective 
implementation of the schemes, the  Committee once again reiterate their earlier 

 
10 
 
recommendation and urge the Ministry to  take the issue of pending UCs more 
seriously. The Committee urge the Ministry to  resort to more pragmatic and 
proactive approach for reconciliation of UCs and timely settlement of all UCs 
pending with the implementing agencies.   
 
 
Promotion of  IT & ITeS Industries 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 16) 
 
12. The Committee, in their Original Report, had recommended as under:- 
 
“The Committee note that the Indian Information Technology (IT) - Information 
Technology Enabled Services (ITES) sector has registered tremendous growth 
over the past decade, achieving iconic status all over the world, and a 
reputation for reliable and cost-effective delivery of IT services. India continued 
as the world‟s no. 1 sourcing destination with a share of 56% i n 2015. India‟s 
share in the global IT services outsourcing and ITES/BPO has reached upto 
67% and 38%, respectively. It is essential to maintain this momentum because 
of the huge potential of IT -ITES sector in terms of economy as well as 
employment generation.  Under the broad framework of promotion of IT & ITeS 
industries initiative, the Software Technology Parks of India (STPI) had been 
set up in the year 1991 with the objective to promote the development and 
export of software and software services, incl uding information technology 
enabled services/ Bio-IT, to provide statutory and other promotional services to 
exporters through Software Technology Parks and the Electronics and 
Hardware Technology Parks (EHTP) schemes. The phenomenal success of 
the IT-ITES industry has been possible, inter-alia, due to the pivotal role played 
by the STP Scheme and fiscal benefits provided under Section 10A of the 
Income Tax Act.  The fiscal benefits were available upto 31 -03-2011. The 
Committee are given to understand that non-availability of Income Tax benefits 
under Section 10A of IT Act beyond 01.04.2011 for STP units has adversely 
affected the competitive edge of these units, especially with respect to the 
Micro Small and Medium Enterprise (MSME) units.  In the absence o f tax 
benefits, the registration of new STP units has decreased and the number of 
STP units exiting/de -bonding from the STP Scheme has increased year -on-
year.  As a result, the total number of exporting STP units has been reduced to 
almost 50% from 5565 ST P units in 2010 -11. The above fact has further been 
corroborated by the representatives of the Department and STPI, 
Bhubaneswar, when the Committee had undertaken a study visit to STPI, 
Bhubaneswar. The Committee are given to understand that a study had be en 
conducted by M/s. Deloitte in 2012 to assess the impact of withdrawal of 
Income Tax benefit and suggest the way forward to mitigate the impact of 
withdrawal of tax benefit (Section 10A of IT Act) to STP units.   The study had 
recommended Performance Linked Incentive Scheme for STP Units to mitigate 
this impact. As the matter regarding incentive to  mitigate the impact of 
withdrawal of tax benefit  for STPI was taken up through EFC , the Planning 

 
11 
 
Commission (erstwhile) had taken the view that the appropriate route is 
through Income Tax exemptions which, if the Govt so wish, can be brought in 
during the  Budgetary Exercise. However, no GBS should be provided for 
export incentives as it would lead to multiple demands since  the exchange rate 
provides enough incentives. In line with the above suggestion, DeitY had taken 
up the matter regarding restoration of fiscal incentive to new STP units for a 
period of 5 years through Income Tax exemption under Section 10 A of the 
Income Tax Act in 3 Union Budgets repeatedly bu t the proposal has not been 
agreed to. The Committee observe that the withdrawal of fiscal benefits have 
adversely affected the small and medium businesses. During the year 2016 -
17, as against the proposed outlay of Rs.543 crore, an allocation of  Rs.5 crore 
has been made at the BE stage 2016 -17 for this scheme. Owing to reduction 
of funds and its likely impact on the achievement of targets under the scheme, 
the Department have stated that the BPO Promotion Schemes approved under 
the Digital India Programme are based on reimbursement of capex towards 
viability gap funding.  However, the budgeting issue may impact the objectives 
(Employment Generation and growth of IT/ITeS sector in non -metro locations) 
of the BPO Promotion Schemes under the Digital India Prog ramme. The 
matter is proposed to be taken up with the Ministry of Finance seeking 
additional funds for this purpose. Considering that the STP Scheme is a unique 
scheme, designed to promote the software industry, including innovations and 
growth of Start-Ups and SMEs without any location constraints, the Committee 
feel that the Department should come out with some alternative to incentivize 
STP units to help them sustain in business and  meet the challenges from 
SEZs. 
 
 
13. The Ministry of Electronics and Inform ation Technology, in the action taken note, 
have stated as under:- 
 
“Considering scarcity of funds for India BPO Promotion (IBPS) and North East 
BPO Promotion Scheme (NEBPS) under "Promotion of IT/ITES Industries" 
programme because of the meagre allocation  of ₹ 5 crore in BE 2016 -17, 
Ministry of Finance has been requested for allocating additional funds in the 
Revised Estimates 2016-17. However, as per the Pre -Budget discussions held 
under the chairmanship of Secretary(Expenditure) on 27.10.2016, no additional 
grant is likely to be allocated in Revised Estimates 2016-17. 
 
As regards providing incentive to STP units to help them meet the challenges 
from SEZs, the matter has again been taken up with Department of Revenue, 
M/o Finance who has provided their com ments vide OM no 
DGEP/EOU/IMSC/30/2013/3186 dated 03.06.2016, which inter-alia includes: 
"The EOU Scheme and the SEZ Scheme are both export promotion schemes 
but are based on totally different concepts. Any business entity is free to opt 
for any exported p romotion scheme i.e. either EOU or SEZ and thereafter 
seek the benefits available therein. Cherry -picking of benefits cannot be 
accepted." 
However, The "Startup India" Programme launched by M/o Commerce and 
Industry, provides income -tax exemption for 3 yea rs to "Startup", an entity 

 
12 
 
which is up to 5 years from the date of its incorporation/ registration, and if its 
turnover for any of the financial years has not exceeded INR 25 crore.” 
 
14. The Committee had noted that the Indian Information Technology (IT) - 
Information Technology Enabled Services (ITES) sector has registered 
tremendous growth over the past decade positioning India as the world’s no. 1 
sourcing destination with a share of 56% in 2015. India’s share in the global IT 
services outsourcing and ITES/BPO has reached upto 67% and 38%, respectively. 
This was made possible, inter -alia, due to the pivotal role played by the STP 
Scheme and fiscal benefits provided under Section 10A of the Income Tax Act. 
Observing that non-availability of Income Tax benefits under Section 10A of IT Act 
beyond 01.04.2011 for STP units has adversely affected the competitive edge of 
these units, especially with respect to the Micro , Small and Medium Enterprise 
(MSME) units and  the registration of new STP units has decreased an d the 
number of STP units exiting/de -bonding from the STP Scheme has increased 
year-on-year, the Committee had recommended that the Ministry should come out 
with some alternative to incentivize STP units to help them sustain in business 
and  meet the chall enges from SEZs.  The Committee understand that as regards 
providing incentive to STP units to help them meet the challenges from SEZs, the 
Ministry did take up the matter with the Department of Revenue, M/o Finance 
which were of the view that the EOU Scheme and the SEZ Scheme are both export 
promotion schemes but are based on totally different concepts. Any business 
entity is free to opt for any export promotion scheme i.e. either EOU or SEZ and 
thereafter seek the benefits available therein .  The Ministry have further informed 
that the "Startup India" Programme launched by M/o Commerce and Industry, 
provides income-tax exemption for 3 years to "Startup", an entity which is up to 5 
years from the date of its incorporation/registration, and if its turnover fo r any of 
the financial years has not exceeded INR 25 crore. However, in the opinion of the 
Committee while the incentives of income tax exemption to Startup companies as 
launched by M/o Commerce and Industry will take care of the issue to some 
extent, it d oes not adequately address the real concern of the Committee 
regarding the decrease in registration of new STP units and the increasing 
number of STP units exiting/de-bonding from the STP Scheme. The request of the 
Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology for allocating additional funds 

 
13 
 
to India BPO Promotion Scheme and North East BPO Promotion Scheme has also 
not been agreed to by the Ministry of Finance restricting the allocation under 
these schemes to Rs.5 crore only for 2016 -17.  Under these c ircumstances,  t he 
Ministry have no choice but to focus on proper implementation of these schemes 
so that Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises (MSME) benefit from these schemes.  
The Committee are given to understand the modalities for these schemes are 
being worked out and these are yet to be concretized  for implementation .  
Considering that STPI had created a congenial and thriving eco-system especially 
for Micro Small and Medium Enterprise (MSME) units, the Committee once again 
reiterate their earlier rec ommendation that the Ministry should come out with 
some alternative to incentivize STP units to help them sustain in business and 
meet the challenges from SEZs  at least till such time these schemes gain ground 
and make an impact. 
 
 

 
14 
 
CHAPTER II 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN 
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Budget Analysis 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 1) 
The Budget Estimate (BE) allocation of DeitY for the year 2016 -17 is Rs.3328.82 
crore which includes Rs.3200 crore under Plan and Rs.128.32 crore under Non-Plan 
segment.  In the year 2015 -16, against the enhanced RE allocation of Rs.2700 crore, 
the Department could achieve decent utilization of the order of Rs.2521.75 crore up to 
March, 2016. An analysis of trend of expenditure in this financial year indi cates that 
major fund utilization was done in the month of March, i.e., in the closing month of 
Annual Plan period.  The Committee do take note of some of the technical factors 
responsible for the same.  However, as a matter of general principle and financ ial 
prudence, the „March rush‟ of expenditure needs to be avoided.  The Committee hope 
the Department would take due care in the Annual Plan year 2016 -17 to address this 
concern of the Committee.  
 
 The Committee understand that all the Plan schemes of Dei tY have been 
rationalized into five umbrella schemes, namely, National Informatics Centre (NIC), 
Unique Identification Authority of India (UIDAI), which stand transferred to DeitY as an 
Attached Office, Regulatory Authorities, Digital India Programme and A ssistance to 
Autonomous and Other Bodies with effect from the Financial Year 2016 -17.  A scrutiny 
of allocation made under Plan schemes shows that the approved GBS has been grossly 
downsized, leaving a yawning gap between the proposed and the approved GBS.  This, 
indeed, is a matter of grave concern to the Committee.  For example, under the Digital 
India Programme, which is one of the flagship programmes of the Government of India, 
a sum of Rs.1282.00 crore only has been provisioned as against the demand of 
Rs.5778.07 crore.  As would be seen in the subsequent pages of this Report, reduced 
allocation under this head has significant impact on execution of various components of 
this scheme.  The Department have stated that on account of the overall reduction of  
DeitY Budget, allocation made under Plan schemes has been adversely affected.  The 
Committee have been informed that DeitY have asked for additional funds of Rs.1500 
crore to meet the minimum requirement during the financial year 2016 -17.  The 
Committee endorse the demand of the Department for allocation of additional funds for 
the current fiscal.  The Committee also desire that DeitY need to have adequate budget 
in the coming Plan years because this Department are implementing some of the 
schemes/programmes which are central to the building of a technologically empowered 
society to take a lead in the global digital economy. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Department has already taken up the matter with Ministry of Finance. A 
proposal for Cash Supplementary G rant of ` 2166 crore was also submitted to Ministry 
of Finance in the 1st Batch of Supplementary Demands for Grants (Aug 2016). However, 
the Department has received only ` 290 crore as Cash Supplementary Grant against the 
above demand. The matter was furth er taken up with Ministry of Finance in Revised 

 
15 
 
Estimates 2016 -17. However, as per the Pre -Budget discussions held under the 
chairmanship of Secretary(Expenditure) on 27.10.2016, no additional grant is likely to be 
allocated in Revised Estimates 2016-17. 
 
(Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology, O.M. No. 2(1)/2016 -Budget dated  
05.12.2016) 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 8 of Chapter I) 
 
 
Internal and Extra Budgetary Resources (IEBR) 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 3) 
The Committee note t hat a target of Rs.795.78 crore had been set by the 
Department for the year 2014 -15 which was reduced to Rs.769.39 crore at the RE 
stage. Against this, the Societies under DeitY have achieved a target of Rs.879.48 crore 
which far exceeds the targets set at  both at BE and RE stage. However, during the year 
2015-16, an amount of Rs.691.67 crore has been generated by the Societies as on 
February, 2016 which is a mere 52% of the target set for the year.  Explaining the 
reasons for shortfall under IEBR, the Depa rtment have stated that they were optimistic 
of achieving the target based on the IEBR achievement trend set by the autonomous 
Societies. However, the targets could not be fulfilled. The Committee observe that STPI 
had a target of achieving Rs.268.19 crore  at BE 2015 -16. This target was increased to 
Rs.689.43 crore at the RE stage, i.e. IR (Internal Resource) of Rs.186.58 crore and EBR 
(Extra Budgetary Resources) of Rs.502.85 crore, with the  expectation that STPI would 
be able to achieve it. However, the total IEBR generated by STPI for FY 2015 -16 settled 
at Rs.201.10 crore. The Committee are given to understand that the EBR target of STPI 
could not be achieved in view of non -receipt of funds from DeitY for the Schemes 
proposed by them as these are still un der consideration of the Department. Similarly, 
targets in respect of other Societies such as NIELIT and ERNET have not been 
achieved. The Committee observe that for the year 2016 -17, an IEBR target of 
Rs.1514.94 crore has been set for the Societies which inter alia  includes Rs.824.25 
crore for STPI, Rs.260.09 crore for NIELIT, Rs.284.00 crore for C -DAC, Rs.48.00 crore 
for SAMEER, etc. The Committee, while expressing their concern that the IEBR targets 
set for 2015-16 could not be achieved, more particularl y in respect of STPI due to non -
release of funds, desire that the Department should extend all possible support -financial 
or otherwise so that these Societies are able to achieve the IEBR targets for the FY  
2016-17. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The esteemed comments of the Committee have been noted. The Autonomous 
Societies have been requested to review their IEBR projections, especially w.r.t. the 
recommendations of the Expenditure Management Commission (EMC) on Autonomous 
Bodies, and make serious efforts to achieve the IEBR targets. 
 
 
(Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology, O.M. No. 2(1)/2016 -Budget dated 
05.12.2016) 

 
16 
 
 
Unique Identification Authority Of India (UIDAI) 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 5) 
UIDAI is a transformational initiative that includes establishing identity 
infrastructure for providing unique digital identity in the form of Aadhar number to its 
residents. The Committee note that UIDAI was earlier with NITI Aayog but from 
September 2015 onwards, it has been shifted under the Ministry of Communications and 
Information Technology, Department of Electronics and Information Technology, as an 
Attached Office. Aadhar enrolment is undertaken on voluntary basis and is an ongoing 
activity. A target of universal enrolment is being pursued but till 1 5th March, 2016, a total 
of 99.20 crore Aadhar have been generated out of total population of 121.07 crore 
(Census 2011) which has already crossed  hundred crore mark. Although it is an 
ongoing process, one round of completion of enrolment is targeted in M arch, 2017.  A 
look at the financial performance of the scheme shows that the utilization of funds under 
the scheme has been consistently above 80% with respect to RE. During the year 2015 -
16, as against the budgetary allocation of Rs.1916.43 crore at the RE stage, the Actual 
Expenditure has been to the tune of Rs.1606.63 crore. The Committee have been 
informed that for the year 2016-17, an amount of Rs.800 crore has been allocated to the 
scheme. Regarding the adequacy of funds during the current FY, the De partment have 
stated that the BE projection for UIDAI was Rs. 1468.23 crore as the Department had 
estimated an amount of Rs.731.00 crore to meet enrolment, printing and dispatch cost 
for approximately 20 crore enrolment (1.5 to 2 crore   Aadhaar is propose d to be issued 
every month) in the next FY 2016 -17 and an amount of Rs.127 crore and Rs.176.00 
crore for the committed and contractual expenditure such as cost of technology 
operations and procurement of machinery & equipment, etc. A provision of Rs.70 cro re 
had also been proposed for construction of UIDAI headquarters buildings which is 
already underway, along with provision of Rs.100 crore for establishment related 
expenditure. In view of this, the current budgetary allocation of Rs.800 crore will not be 
sufficient to meet the requirement. Further, the Committee note that UIDAI is fully 
prepared to undertake the task of the first round of enrolment by 2017. During the 
evidence, the representative of UIDAI also informed the Committee that they have 3.32 
lakh certified operators throughout the country and enrolment is going on in 30,000 
centres. As on date, 6 lakh enrolment is being made per day. As UIDAI targets to 
complete the enrolment, at least the first enrolment by 2017, another Rs.600 crore will 
be required to meet the expenses. Also, UIDAI needs funds to meet the updation activity 
(such as the newly born children who will cross 5 years and reach 15 years of age 
whose fingerprints change over time), which will continue. Keeping in view the fact that 
the Actual Expenditure under the scheme has been consistent and UIDAI Plan to 
achieve the first phase of enrolment by 2017, the Committee desire that allocations to 
UIDAI may suitably be enhanced to meet the requirement so that the projected  targets 
as per BE  proposal 2016 -17 are not affected. The Committee further note that with 
Aadhar enrolment assuming much importance in light of the Aadhar Act being passed, 
the privacy and security concerns need to be addressed.  The Committee have been 
informed that the Act has in-built clauses to deal with security and privacy of individuals.  
The Committee desire that requisite steps be taken alongside the provisions of the Act 
to address security and privacy issues. 
 

 
17 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Subsequent to the publication of the Aadhaar (Targeted Delivery of Financial and 
Other Subsidies, Benefits and Services) Act 2016, in the Official Gazette for general 
information, the Government is in the process of notifying various sections relating to 
security and privacy related  aspects. Sections relating to offences and panalities, which 
will govern any contraventions of the other provisions of the Act will also e notified in due 
course. Further, the requisite Rules and Regulations including those which govern 
security and privacy aspects of information collected, which form part of the subordinate 
legislation under the Act, are under preparation.  
 
 
(Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology, O.M. No. 2(1)/2016 -Budget dated   
05.12.2016) 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 8 of Chapter I) 
 
Cyber Security (Including CERT-In) 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 6) 
The Committee note that Cyber Security is an upcoming area which require 
increased allocation to meet the shortage of manpower in the form of Cyber Security 
experts, upgradation of technology and training to enhance capacity, etc. The 
Committee are, however, concerned to note that allocations under Cyber Security has 
been reducing continuously. During the year 2014, the allocation at the BE stage was 
Rs.116 crore which was reduced to Rs.58 crore at the RE stage and Actual Expenditure 
was Rs.54.59 crore. Similarly, during the year 2015 -16, the allocation at BE stage was 
Rs.100 crore which was reduced to Rs.80 crore and Actual Expenditure was Rs.62.11 
crore as on 07.0 3.2016. For the year 2016 -17, against the proposed sum of Rs.338.50 
crore, an allocation of only Rs.70 crore has been made to Cyber Security. The 
Department have informed that they had envisaged several initiatives and projected 
budget requirement for the 12th Plan period. However, in line with the overall reduction 
for allocation to Department, the Cyber Security related activities have been scaled 
down to Rs.500 crore. The Committee note that the budgetary requirement under the 
programme include operation al activities relating to the Indian Computer Emergency 
Response Team (Cert -in), Cyber Appellate Tribunal CAT and R & D, as well as 
expenditure for key infrastructure initiatives such as the establishment of National Cyber 
Co-ordination Centre (NCCC), cont inuous upgradation of technology, enhancement of 
capacity and skills, etc. The Department have informed that setting up of Botnet 
cleaning and Malware Analysis Centre is in advanced stage of implementation and the 
NCCC test bed project has been taken up. T he Committee observe that NCCC aims at 
generating necessary situation awareness of existing and potential Cyber Security 
threats. The mandate of NCCC also include aggregation of threat alerts, detection 
classification and trace back of Distributed Denial o f Service (DDoS) attack, detection 
and trace back of malware outbreaks and malicious activities. NCCC is envisaged to 
become operational in a period of 1 year, subject to availability of requisite fund. The 
Department have approached the Ministry of Financ e for allocation of funds in 

 
18 
 
supplementary grants stage for full scale operationalisation of the project. The 
Committee are of the view that in this age of ever expanding digital space and its 
usership, implementation of these two projects and other activi ties under Cyber Security 
should not suffer due to want of funds. The Committee desire that the concern of the 
Committee may be conveyed to the Ministry of Finance for allocation of adequate funds 
for Cyber Security at the supplementary grant stage.  Effor ts should be made to 
accomplish the above two projects and the Committee be apprised of the progress 
made in this regard. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The concerns of the Committee have been forwarded to Ministry of Finance and 
proposals have been submitted f or additional allocation under Cyber Security 
Programme for NCCC projects, etc. However, as per the Pre -Budget discussions held 
under the chairmanship of Secretary(Expenditure) on 27.10.2016, no additional grant is 
likely to be allocated under any Scheme/P rogramme (incl. NCCC) in Revised Estimates 
2016-17. 
 
(Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology, O.M. No. 2(1)/2016 -Budget dated   
05.12.2016) 
 
Cyber Security -Capacity Building 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 7) 
The Committee note that the Department are  resorting to both formal and 
informal methods for capacity building of Cyber Security professionals. The Information 
Security Education and Awareness (ISEA) project of the Department aims at creation of 
manpower in the area of information security. The fi rst phase of this project was 
completed on 31.03.2014 under which 42,000 students were trained. More than 500 
awareness workshops have been conducted throughout the country. The Committee 
observe that Phase II of the project has been initiated with an outl ay of Rs. 96.08 crore 
to be implemented over 5 years w.e.f. 1.04.2014. Out of this, Rs. 28.68 crore have been 
expended during the year 2014 -15. However, during the year 2015 -16, no funds have 
been released under the scheme. The Department have informed tha t the selection of 
51 participating institutions and signing of MOUs for implementation of the project could 
only be completed in January 2016 due to which the target of training 25862 students 
could not be achieved during 2015-16. For the year 2016-17, the Department propose to 
release Rs.11.84 crore to achieve a target of 26442 students under the academic 
component. The Committee recommend that the funds earmarked for this project should 
be released on time and efforts should be made to achieve the targets. 
 
 The Committee also note that around 7000 participants from over  200 
organisations have attended the awareness and exposure programmes conducted by 
Cert-In. Further, a joint working group constituted to suggest measures for Public Private 
Partnership (PPP) for active involvement of private sector efforts has already laid out a 
road map for capacity building to meet the demands of Cyber Security professionals 
through PPP mode. The Committee are given to understand that DeitY (My Gov and 
Cert-In), in part nership with Google, have made efforts to raise internet safety 
awareness among teachers and students during 2015 under which 5000 schools were 

 
19 
 
covered benefiting over 5.6 lakh students in 12 States. However, considering the 
massive expansion of IT in vari ous sectors and services, the above achievement seems 
limited. The Committee desire that more and more activities need to be carried out in 
collaboration with the private sector to expand the reach and scale of awareness 
campaigns. The Department should wo rk out ways and means to involve more and 
more stakeholders in the private sector in this effort. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The identification and selection of 51 institutions under the ISEA Project Phase II 
and the signing of MoUs with all the selected in stitutions was completed in January 
2016. Keeping this in view, the Competent Authority has approved the change in the 
starting date of the  project to 01.04.2015 (in place of 01.04.2014) and the date of 
completion of the project to 31.03.2020 (in place of  31.03.2019). So far, 9439 
candidates have been trained/undergoing training in various formal/non -formal 
programmes and 1779 Government officials trained under direct training programmes in 
the area of information security. Besides, 271 half -day/full-day awareness workshops in 
information security have been conducted covering 23,681 participants. 
 
(Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology, O.M. No. 2(1)/2016 -Budget dated 
05.12.2016) 
 
Digital India Programme 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 8) 
  
The Digital  India Programme is an umbrella programme which amalgamated all the 
ongoing Schemes/Programmes/Projects being implemented by DeitY.  It weaves 
together a large number of ideas and thoughts into a single, comprehensive vision so 
that each of them can be imp lemented as part of a larger goal. The various components 
of the programme include manpower development, Electronic Governance, E -
Governance, National Knowledge Network, Promotion of Electronics & IT Hardware 
Manufacturing, Promotion of IT&ITES Industries and R&D in IT/Electronics/CCBT.  The 
Committee note that as against the proposed estimate of Rs.5778.07 crore, a sum of 
only Rs.1282.00 crore has been provided under this programme.  The Department have, 
however, requested the Ministry of Finance to provid e additional allocation of Rs.1500 
crore to meet the bare minimum requirement during FY 2016 -17.  In the succeeding 
paragraphs, the Committee will evaluate the performance of some of the 
Schemes/Programmes/Projects being implemented under this umbrella programme. 
 
Reply of the Government  
 
It is a fact that Ministry of Finance was initially requested for an additional 
allocation of    ` 1500 crore to meet the bare minimum requirement during FY 2016 -17. 
Since any additional fund can only be granted through S upplementary Demands for 
Grants, a proposal for grant of ` 2166 crore as additional grants for various programmes 
was submitted to Ministry of Finance in the 1 st batch of Supplementary Demands for 
Grants. However, an additional grant of ` 290 crore was app roved in this batch of 

 
20 
 
Supplementary Demands ( ` 190 crore for UIDAI and ` 100 crore for NIC). The matter 
was further taken up with Ministry of Finance in Revised Estimates 2016 -17. However, 
as per the Pre -Budget discussions held under the chairmanship of 
Secretary(Expenditure) on 27.10.2016, no additional grant is likely to be allocated in 
Revised Estimates 2016-17. 
 
(Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology, O.M. No. 2(1)/2016 -Budget dated   
05.12.2016) 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 8 of Chapter I) 
 
Manpower Development 
 
National Digital Literacy Mission 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 9) 
 
The manpower development programme especially targets Human Resource 
Development (HRD) activities to ensure availability of trained human resources fo r the 
manufacturing and services sectors of Electronics and IT industry. With the increased 
focus on “Skill India” initiatives, the importance of Manpower Development increases 
manifold.  As against the proposed budgetary support of Rs.792.71 crore, a sum of 
Rs.365 crore has been allocated to this project for the year 2016-17. The reduction in 
budget is stated to be due to decrease in overall allocation to DeitY.  The Committee 
note that in the year 2015 -16, the Department achieved decent utilization to the  tune of 
Rs.392.28 crore upto 7 th March, 2016 as against Revised Estimate allocation of 
Rs.494.80 crore.  The National Digital Literacy Mission (NDLM) under Manpower 
Development Programme pledges to digitally literate one adult from each of the 147 
million rural households of India.  Under NDLM, two schemes, viz.  Scheme for IT Mass 
Literacy (renamed as National Digital Literacy Mission) and Scheme for Digital 
Saksharta Abhiyan (DISHA) were initially conceived for providing digital literacy to the 
masses.  The NDLM approved in March, 2014 with a total outlay of Rs.97.02 crore over 
a period of 18 months (extended upto 30 June, 2016) was launched on 21 August, 
2014. The scheme aimed to train 10 lakh persons.  DISHA with a total budget outlay of 
Rs.380 crore over a period of 4 years was approved in December, 2014 with the aim to 
make 42.5 lakh persons digitally literate.  Both these schemes are being implemented 
concurrently.  The Committee note that out of the total Budget Outlay of Rs.476.93 crore 
earmarked for both NDLM and DISHA, a sum of Rs.92.46 crore has been released upto 
2015-16 and amount to the tune of Rs.325.40 crore is to be released in the year 2016 -
17. The Committee find that out of the cumulative target of 52.5 lakh persons under 
NDLM and DISHA Schemes, a total of 67.49 lakh candidates have been enrolled, out of 
which 46.94 lakh candidates have been trained and approximately 19.50 lakh 
candidates have been certified. A total of 1927 organizations are working as Training 
Partners under these schemes . The Department expect that the envisaged/cumulative 
target of 52.5 lakh candidates under both the schemes would be achieved by 
December, 2016, i.e. much ahead of the approved duration of December, 2018.  The 
Committee  note that in pursuance of the annou ncement made by the Finance Minister 
in his budget speech in February, 2016, a new scheme, namely, “Digital Literacy Mission 
Scheme for Rural India” to cover around 6 crore additional beneficiaries  in the rural 

 
21 
 
households within the next 3 years is under formulation. The Committee appreciate the 
achievement made so far through the implementation of NDLM/DISHA.  Since Digital 
Literacy Mission will be an ecosystem of digital literacy awareness, education and 
training that will help India take a lead in the g lobal digital economy, wider coverage in 
quick pace would be the real challenge.  The pronouncement of a new scheme which 
envisages a bigger target within a specified time period is definitely a step in the right 
direction. Since this scheme is yet to be c onfigured, the Committee would like to be 
informed of the progress made under this programme within a period of three months. It 
needs to be realized that in the long run, a substantial portion of population need to be 
digitally literate to achieve the goa l of universal digital literacy.  This is a continuing 
mission and the Government need to make sustained efforts to move forward. In this 
direction, the Committee feel that in addition to the schemes being run by the 
Government, Massive Open Online Courses  (MOOC) may also be conducted with the 
help of ICT infrastructure to exponentially increase the number of trained individuals.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
A new Scheme named Pradhan Mantri Grameen Digital Saksharta Abhiyaan 
(PMGDISHA) to cover 6 crore rural  households in the next three years has been 
proposed.  The Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC) has recommended the said 
proposal.  The draft Cabinet Note is under submission. 
 
Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology (MeitY) supports R & D 
projects in thrust areas of e -Learning for development of tools and technologies. Two 
Learning Management Systems (LMS) have been developed namely Brihaspati and e -
Shikshak have been developed with funding from MeitY.  Brihaspati which is a multi -
lingual platform is being used by 281 institutes whereas e -Shikshak which is also multi -
lingual platform, is used by 14 institutes. Department of Higher Education, MHRD has 
developed Indian MOOC platform namely, SWAYAM (Study Webs of Active-Learning for 
Young Aspiring Minds) which would be ultimately capable of hosting 2000 courses and 
80000 hours of learning: covering school, under -graduate, post-graduate, engineering, 
law and other professional courses. 
 
 
(Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology, O.M. No. 2( 1)/2016-Budget dated   
05.12.2016) 
 
National E-Governance Plan (NeGP) 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 10) 
 
The National e -Governance Plan (NeGP) was approved in 2006 with a vision of 
making all Government services accessible to the common man in his/her locality 
through common services delivery outlets and ensure efficiency, transparency and 
reliability of such services at affordable costs. DeitY has implemented a number of 
projects in the e -Governance domain which are the supporting infrastructure 
components for i mplementation of various e -Governance initiatives in Central 
Ministries/Departments and States/UTs. These include the core ICT infrastructure 

 
22 
 
projects such as State Data Centres(SDCs), State Wide Area Networks (SWANs), 
Common Services Centres (CSCs), Natio nal/State Service Gateway (SSDGs), e -
District, etc.  
 
 The Committee note that as against the proposed allocation of Rs.1650 crore, the 
BE provided for the year 2016 -17 for this scheme is Rs.420 crore. The Committee 
observe that in spite of the Department being able to utilize 93% of the budget allocation 
for the year 2015-16, the budget provided for the year 2016 -17 is even less than the BE 
provision of 2015-16. The Committee urge the Department to make efforts for additional 
allocation under this head for  better execution of schemes being operated under NeGp. 
Some of the components of NeGP are discussed in the succeeding paragraphs. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
MeitY has implemented a number of projects in the e -Governance domain which 
are supporting infrastr ucture components for implementation of various e -Governance 
initiatives in Central Ministries/Departments and States/UTs.  
 
Department of Expenditure, Ministry of Finance has communicated the following 
funding pattern of Centrally Sponsored Schemes e.g. N ational e -Goovernance Action 
Plan (NeGAP) schemes: 
 
(i) For Union Territories, the Centrally Sponsored Schemes will be funded 100 
percent by the Central Government. However, schemes that will be 
implemented in a particular Union Territory, will be decided by t he Central 
Government in consultation with the administration of the Union territory 
concern. 
(ii) For 8 North East and 3 Himalayan States, the scheme is optional for the State 
Government and their fund sharing pattern is 80:20 between the Centre and 
the States. 
(iii) For other States, the scheme is optional for the State Government and their 
fund sharing pattern is 50:50 between the Centre and the States. 
 
Due to the above -mentioned funding pattern, less funds are required for central funding 
for NeGP. Six projects n amely State Wide Area Network(SWAN),State Data 
Centre(SDC), Common Services Centre(CSCs), e -District, State Service Delivery 
Gateways(SSDG) and Capacity Building(CB) are being funded with above funding 
pattern. Rs. 420.00 crore has been allocated under e -Governance Budget head and Rs. 
50.00 crore under Externally Aided Project(EAP) head to e -Governance Division for 
Financial Year 2016-17. 
 
(Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology, O.M. No. 2(1)/2016 -Budget dated   
05.12.2016) 
 
 
 
 

 
23 
 
State Wide Area Network (SWAN) 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 11) 
 
The Committee note that presently, SWAN has been made operational in 34 
States/UTs. Implementation of SWAN in Andaman & Nicobar Islands and Jammu & 
Kashmir is stated to be in progress. The Committee have been inf ormed that the 
progress of implementation of SWAN is primarily dependent on the pace of work at the 
State / UT level during various stages like pre -bid, post -bid (submission of RFP, 
publishing of RFP, evaluation of RFP) and award of contract. Any delay at any of these 
stages contributes to the overall delay in the completion of the project. Apart from these, 
delay in preparation of sites, non -availability of leased line connectivity and frequent 
power outages in rural areas contribute towards the lag. While  taking note of the 
difficulties enumerated above, the Committee would desire the Department to constantly 
engage with the States and other authorities for expeditious resolution of problems so 
that the networking infrastructure is put in place at the earl iest. The Committee find that 
the States have been utilizing the core infrastructure of SWAN for connectivity and 
dedicated close user application access connectivity. SWAN has been integrated with 
NKN in 29 States/UTs at SHQ level and 440 at the district level to provide high 
bandwidth. The Committee are glad to note that the increasing digitization amongst 
States has led to higher utilization of bandwidth. Presently, 30 States/UTs are utilizing 
more than 60% of bandwidth of the existing link capacity. To monitor the performance of 
SWANs, the Department has mandated positioning of Third Party Auditors (TPAs) in the 
States/UTs. As on date, 29 States have empanelled the TPAs for monitoring the 
performance of the SWANs in the respective States/UTs. The remaini ng States/UTs are 
in the process of empanelment of TPA. The Committee recommend that sustained 
efforts need to be made to increase bandwidth utilization. Observing that successful 
implementation of the SWAN scheme is critical for establishing the basic dig ital 
infrastructure, which is an essential pre -requisite for the success of flagship schemes 
like „Digital India‟ programme, the Committee recommend that concerted and innovative 
efforts be made to compliment the efforts of the State Governments in operati onalisation 
of the SWAN scheme. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
States are now increasingly enhancing their bandwidth usage due to increased 
thrust  on digitization. This Ministry allows upgradation from 2 Mbps in the States to cope 
up with functional requiremen t. Besides, this Ministry has been proactively suggesting 
the States to provide horizontal connection for more number  of offices at SHQ, DHQ 
and BHQ. 
 
Also, both States/UTs of J&K and Andaman & Nicobbar Islands are being 
suggested to expedite procedural f ormalities for selection of network operator/system 
integrator and necessary technical assistance/guidance is being rendered to the 
State/UT from time to time. 
 
(Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology, O.M. No. 2(1)/2016 -Budget dated   
05.12.2016) 

 
24 
 
State Data Centre (SDC)  
(Recommendation Sl. No. 12) 
 
The Committee have been given to understand that till now 24 SDCs have been 
declared operational. In FY 2015 -16, Bihar SDC got operational; implementation of 3 
SDCs (Himachal Pradesh, Jharkhand, Dad ra and Nagar Haveli (DNH) & Daman & Diu 
(DD) (DNH & DD have combined SDC), is in progress. In 2 States (Punjab and Goa) bid 
process is in an advanced stage and in 3 States (Assam, Arunachal Pradesh and 
Uttarakhand) RFP has been floated and bid process mana gement is going on for 
selection of a Data Center Operator (DCO). Percentage of rack space utilization in 
twenty-three States is more than 50% of the SDC infrastructure. The Committee have 
been informed that in order to make SDCs Cloud -enabled, DeitY has c irculated a 
template Request for Proposal (RFP) to States for initiating a bid process for Cloud 
enablement of SDCs. Seven States have completed Cloud enablement and 8 States are 
in various stages of Cloud enablement. SDCs are expected to host critical Gov ernment 
applications/services, including important citizen data, and protection of the same is of 
prime importance. In this regard, the SDC has provisioned for a Disaster Recovery (DR) 
mechanism through storage based replication as part of the SDC enhancem ent. Till 
now, 12 States are DR enabled and 8 States are in various stages of DR enablement. 
Considering that Data Centres are essential to consolidate services, applications and 
infrastructure, t he Committee recommend that the establishment of SDCs in all  
States/UTs be expedited so as to secure data storage, provide better operation & 
management control with minimized overall cost of data management, IT resource 
management, deployment and other costs for States/UTs. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
26 State Data Centres (SDCs) have been made operational (Himachal Pradesh & 
Jharkhand has been made operational during financial year 2016-17). Implementation of 
2 SDCs (Punjab & Goa) is in progress and in 2 States (Assam & Uttaranchal), bid 
process is in advanced stage . Rack utilization is more than 50% of the SDC 
Infrastructure in 25 States. Cloud enablement has been completed in 11 States and is 
under implantation in 4 States. Disaster Recovery(DR) enablement has been completed 
in 22 States. 
 
(Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology, O.M. No. 2(1)/2016 -Budget dated   
05.12.2016) 
 
Common Service Centres (CSCs) 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 13) 
 
The Committee note that the total number of CSCs established as of March, 2016 
is 1,99,325 out of which the number of CSCs  set up at Gram Panchayat level is 
122,621. The number of CSCs approved as Business Correspendents Agents (BCA) is 
28,111. As of January, 2016, a total of 11,089 BCAs set up at CSCs have been active. 
So far, 9,532 Rural Authorized Persons (RAPs) have been registered at CSCs pan India 
for Insurance Services. The number of CSCs acting as Permanent Enrolment Centres 

 
25 
 
(PECs) is 14,330. CSC SPV is now ranked 2 nd in the country -wide UID Registrar 
Ranking. “CSC 2.0 -A Way Forward” has been approved in August 2015 un der the 
Digital India Programme. CSC 2.0 aims for establishing self -sustaining network of 2.5 
lakh CSC centres at Gram Panchayats (GP). The Committee note that there is still a 
long way to go before this target is achieved. The Committee, therefore, recomm end 
that execution of this project need to be overseen by a robust monitoring mechanism 
coupled with structured planning and swift decision making at the Apex Level. Also, 
various obstacles in the form of adequate connectivity, Left Wing Extremism, adequat e 
power connectivity need to be swiftly addressed. Common Service Centres are an 
„Access to Digital Space‟ for a common man, responsible for delivery of various G2C 
and other B2C services to the citizen. Hence, the element of accountability on the part of 
CSCs is very important for this ecosystem to be reliable. The Committee recommend 
that apart from the existing mechanism to ensure accountability of CSCs, the 
Department may take recourse to innovative measures as well. The Committee may be 
informed about further progress made in setting up of CSCs in the country.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The total number of Common Services Centres (CSCs) established as of 
October, 2016 is 2,53,160 out of which the number of CSCs set up at Gram Panchayat 
level is 1,54,651 . The number of CSCs approved as Business Correspondents Agents 
(BCA) is 29,325. As of October, 2016, a total of 11,694 BCAs set up at CSCs have been 
active. So far, 13,365 Rural Authorized Persons (RAPs) have been registered at CSCs 
pan India for Insuranc e Services. The number of CSCs acting as Permanent Enrolment 
Centres (PECs) is 23,044. CSC SPV is now ranked 2 nd in the country -wide UID 
Registrar Ranking. “CSC 2.0 - A Way Forward” has been approved in August, 2015 
under the Digital India Programme. CSC 2. 0 aims for establishing self -sustaining 
network of 2.5 lakh CSC centres at Gram Panchayats (GP). 
      
The CSC portal which has been aimed to have features like robust monitoring, 
assessment and accountability mechanism are being revamped and presently 
underway. Once it is developed, all the issues pertaining to functioning of CSCs and 
delivery of services can be addressed through regular assessments at various levels 
that include districts, States and Central levels. In this regard, it is to be noted that 
migration of the already existing CSC Village Level Entrepreneurs (VLEs) to the cloud 
based new platform are in progress and being expedited to complete the entire process 
of migration with Entrepreneur Development Programme (Training) and regular hand -
hold supports. In this way, accountability of CSCs for day to day operations would be 
administered for smooth implementation of CSC scheme across the country. 
 
 
(Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology, O.M. No. 2(1)/2016 -Budget dated   
05.12.2016) 
 
National Knowledge Network (NKN) 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 14) 
 
The Committee note that the National Knowledge Network was approved in the year 
2010 with an objective to inter -connect all knowledge institutions across the country 

 
26 
 
through high speed data communication network to encourage sharing of resources and 
collaborative research. This would cover about 1500 institutions comprising all 
universities, institutions of higher learning and research. During the year 2014 -15, an 
allocation of Rs.300 crore had  been made at the BE and RE stage which was utilized 
optimally. In the year 2015 -16, an allocation of Rs.150 crore had been made at the BE 
stage which was increased to Rs.214 crore at the RE stage. Out of this, the Actual 
Expenditure has been to the order of Rs.150 crore as on 07.03.2016. The Committee 
observe that under the NKN Programme, the projection for FY 2016 -17 was to the tune 
of Rs.1000 crore  against which the approved allocation is only Rs.250 crore.   The 
Department have informed that the allocate d amount would not be sufficient even to 
meet the yearly recurring expenses to sustain the NKN project and  they would like to 
seek additional grants at the supplementary stage.   The Committee note that ad -hocism 
in allocation of Plan funds and taking recou rse to asking for funds at the supplementary 
grants stage has been a recurring phenomenon under the scheme of NKN. As far as the 
physical targets are concerned, the Committee note that 1580 links have been 
commissioned and made operational. This includes 3 78 links to institutions under 
NMEICT, which have been migrated to NKN. During the FY 2015 -16, a total of 176 
institutions have been connected which include 13 institutions migrated from NMEICT. 
NKN connectivity has also been extended to 447 NIC district c enters. 94 numbers of 
Core Links have been commissioned and operationalised. 66 Virtual Classrooms have 
also been set up under NKN. For the successful implementation of NKN, adequate 
budgetary provision is indispensable, failing which the scheme will not b e able to 
achieve its objective. This is also evident from the concerns expressed by the Secretary, 
DeitY, who had informed the Committee that under NKN the achievement has been 
93% of expenditure and the Department were trying hard to get re -appropriation at the 
last moment which did not materialize. In the case of the National Knowledge Network, 
there is a deficit of Rs.300 crore and the Ministry of Finance are now seriously thinking 
to delegate re-appropriation for NKN liability. Pending the final decision of the Ministry of 
Finance regarding delegated re -appropriation, the Committee desire that the Ministry 
should ensure additional grants for the NKN programme for FY 2016 -17 so that it is able 
to achieve its objective of collaborative research and transf orming the country into a 
Knowledge Society. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Ministry of Finance was requested to provide additional grants in the 1 st batch of 
Supplementary Demands for Grants 2016-17. However, Ministry of Finance turned down 
the proposal with t he suggestion that the matter may be taken up at RE stage. The 
matter was further taken up with Ministry of Finance in Revised Estimates 2016 -17. 
However, as per the Pre -Budget discussions held under the chairmanship of 
Secretary(Expenditure) on 27.10.2016 , no additional grant is likely to be allocated in 
Revised Estimates 2016-17. 
 
 
(Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology, O.M. No. 2(1)/2016 -Budget dated   
05.12.2016) 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 8 of Chapter I) 
 

 
27 
 
Promotion  of  Electronics & IT Hardware Manufacturing 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 15) 
 
The Committee note that an allocation of Rs.70 crore has been made for 
promotion of Electronics and IT Hardware manufacturing as against the proposed 
estimate of Rs.854.64 crore. During the year 2015-16, an allocation of Rs.74 crore at the 
BE stage was made which was increased to Rs.94 crore at the RE stage; out of this, the 
actual expenditure stood at Rs.45.57 crore (till 7.03.2016) which is roughly less than 50 
per cent. The Departmen t, however, have maintained that the expenditure on 
electronics manufacturing is growing at a significant pace for the last few years.  
 
 The Committee observe that initiatives  such as the Modified Special Incentive 
package (M -SIPs), Electronic Manufacturi ng Clusters Schemes (EMC), Electronics 
Development Fund (EDF), etc. have been taken by the Government to boost this sector.  
As far as M-SIPs are concerned, the scheme has further been streamlined with inclusion 
of 15 new product categories, easier accrual of benefits and extension of the scheme for 
a period of 5 years beyond July 26, 2015. The items that have invited maximum 
investment under M -SIPs are Components and Accessories, IT and Telecom Products 
and Automotive Electronics. Under the Electronic Manuf acturing Clusters Scheme 
(EMC), financial assistance for creating world -class infrastructure for electronics 
manufacturing units is provided. 
 
 The Committee have further been informed that the Electronic Development Fund 
(EDF) Policy approved by the Cabin et in December 2014 provides for participation in 
venture funds to support R&D, Innovation and IP Generation in Electronics, and IT and 
Nano Electronics. According to the Department, as a result of these policy initiatives, 
there has been an increase in in vestment in this sector and expenditure since 2012 -13. 
In the last three years, 181 investment proposals involving investment of Rs.1,20,418  
crore have been received under M -SIPS. This includes proposals from Multinational 
Companies. The level of interest shown by the multinationals has increased significantly 
after the launch of the „Make -in-India‟ campaign and the „Digital India Programme‟ and 
substantial investment proposals have been received thereafter. The Committee note 
with satisfaction that the Go vernment have launched several initiatives/policy measures 
to incentivize and promote the hardware manufacturing sector.  It is equally encouraging 
that the sector continues to witness substantial growth in investment, more importantly 
through multinationa l companies. The Department have also taken initiatives to fast 
pace projects under the EMC Scheme by addressing grey areas that contributed to the 
delay such as incorporation of SPV, arrangement of funds by implementing agencies, 
contribution by constituent units, etc. What is needed is to carry forward the momentum 
and realize the objective of making India a manufacturing hub.  Besides checking 
outflow of precious foreign exchange due to imports of electronic and IT products, the 
growth of indigenous prod uction would also generate employment. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that adequate allocation of funds is needed under different 
schemes of this project and it should be the constant endeavour of the Department to 
engage with the Ministry of Finance for requisite allocation. The Committee emphasize 
that the Government should continue to give incentives in different areas of this 
ambitious project so that it remains an attractive field for multinationals, encouraging 
them to have more and more investme nts.  The Committee would like to be informed of 

 
28 
 
further progress in the promotion of this sector, including the extent of employment 
generation.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The progress made so far is as follows: 
 
1.  Electronics Development Fund (EDF) - An Engine for Design in India 
 
As part of Digital India Program, Government of India is taking several initiatives 
to promote electronics design and manufacturing in the country to achieve “NET ZERO” 
import by 2020. Electronics Design & Manufacturing is a s ector which is characterized 
by high velocity of technological change and Intellectual Property is possibly the most 
critical determinant of success, not only for the companies of this sector but also to the 
countries and economies as a whole. Setting up o f EDF was one of the important 
strategies which would enable creating an electronics industry ecosystem in the country. 
Creating a vibrant ecosystem of innovation, research and development (R&D) with 
active industry involvement is essential for a thriving electronics industry. It is with this 
objective that an Electronic Development Fund (EDF) is set up as a “Fund of Funds” to 
participate in professionally managed “Daughter Funds” which in turn will provide risk 
capital to companies developing new technolog ies in the area of electronics, nano -
electronics and Information Technology (IT). This fund is expected to foster R&D and 
innovation in these technology sectors. EDF enables creation of an ecosystem for 
providing risk capital to both industry and academia to undertake research and 
development in these technology areas. It will, in the process, enrich the intellectual 
property in the country and encourage more entrepreneurs towards product and 
technology development. 
 
M/s. Canbank Venture Capital Funds Ltd. (CVCFL), a 100% subsidiary of Canara 
Bank, is the Investment Manager of EDF and is currently receiving 
applications/proposals from Venture Funds, Angel Funds and Seed Funds for 
commitment from EDF. Any Venture Funds/ Angel Funds/ Seed Funds  which is 
registered in India and abides with relevant rules and regulations including the SEBI 
regulations on Venture Funds and is set up to invest in Electronics, nano-electronics and 
IT is eligible for support from EDF. The last date for approving of Daughter Funds for 
commitments from EDF is March 31st, 2017. 
 
Electronics Development Fund was launched by Shri Ravi Shankar Prasad, 
Hon‟ble Minister for Electronics & Information Technology on Feb 15th, 2016 in Mumbai. 
Twelve Daughter Funds have been approved for in -principle commitment of Rs 510 
crore from EDF and four Daughter Funds are approved for final commitment of Rs 179 
crore. The cumulative total corpus of these funds is around Rs 6800 crore. 
 
The Contribution Agreement for subscription of Units of EDF proposed by t he 
Investment Manager of EDF was forwarded to Department of Expenditure on 
16.08.2016 for accord of approval.  Based on the deliberations held among MeitY; 
Ministry of Finance and PMO,   Department of Expenditure has forwarded the proposed 
contribution agreement to NITI Aayog for its comments. MeitY has provided the requisite 
information regarding EDF Policy to NITI Aayog. MeitY has also explained the details to 

 
29 
 
NITI Aayog in a meeting held on 11/10/2016 at NITI Aayog. Comments of NITI Aayog on 
draft contrib ution agreement have been  received and are being examined. The 
comments of Department of Expenditure are still awaited.  
 
In order to promote large scale manufacturing in the country, a Modified Special 
Incentive Package Scheme (MSIPS) was announced by the Government in July, 2012. 
Subject to certain conditions, the scheme provides incentives, by way of reimbursement, 
for investments in capital expenditure and reimbursements of CVD/excise for capital 
equipment.  In July 2015,  the government approved the ex tension and expansion of the 
MSIPS by (i) covering 15 more product categories, (ii) disbursement of incentives on a 
quarterly basis as against annual basis earlier; (iii) allowing MSIPS in any part of the 
country as against only in notified areas earlier and (iv) reckoning of incentives from date 
of application instead of date of approval.  The scheme has been extended for a period 
of five years beyond July 2015.  Based upon the deliberations held in PMO with Ministry 
of Finance; MeitY;  DIPP and NITI Aayog,  the revision of policy is under consideration.  
 
The latest status of applications under MSIPS as on 31 -10-2016 is as given 
below: 
 
 As on 31st October 2016 
M-SIPS  APPLICATION STATUS  Nos. Investment  
(Rs. crore) 
Applications approved 75 17,997 
Applications closed 30 10,808 
Applications recommended by AC 23 2,732 
Applications under appraisal 115 95,301 
Applications received 243 1,26,838 
 
 
         The above proposals are expected to generate direct and indirect employment 
opportunities  of nearly  2,25,000 over the period of 7 -8 years. Out of the 75 approved 
projects, 48 projects have rolled out and Commercial production started and 23 are in 
the process of achieving commercial production. 
 
2.  Conditional Access System (CAS)  is a system used to li mit the access of TV 
signals to only authorized viewers and forms an integral part of Set Top Boxes (STBs). A 
major impediment in design and development of domestic Set Top Boxes was identified 
as the license of Conditional Access System (CAS) players. The refore, the need as well 
as an opportunity was felt to develop Indian CAS (iCAS) for boosting the development 
and manufacturing of Set Top Boxes in the country. In November, 2014, M/s. ByDesign 
India Pvt. Ltd., Bangalore, was selected and awarded the task for development and 
implementation of iCAS, in association with Centre for Development of Advanced 
Computing (C -DAC), with technical specifications that are best in class. The 
Development Stage of iCAS was successfully completed in November, 2015, within t he 
specified time limit. The development of iCAS has enabled India to enter a niche market 
hitherto dominated by five big global companies. The iCAS is available to domestic STB 
manufacturers at a price of USD 0.5 per license for a period of three years as  against 

 
30 
 
market price of USD 4 -5 per license for other competing products. The implementation 
of iCAS in the cable networks has already started. The solution has been well received 
by Indian Operators at large. Around 1,50,000 of STBs and 40 Headends  with  iCAS 
have already been deployed across the country.   
 
 
3. (i)  To promote domestic manufacturing, differential excise duty dispensation made 
available to mobile handsets/ tablet computers has been extended to the 
specified electronic equipment. The diffe rential excise duty dispensation made 
available to mobile handsets/ tablet computers has been extended to the 
following electronic equipment. However, these will be charged excise duty of 4% 
(without input tax credit) while Countervailing Duty (CVD) on imp orts shall be 
12.5%: 
 
(i) Routers   
(ii) Broadband modems  
(iii) Set-top boxes for gaining access to internet  
(iv) Set-top boxes for TV  
(v) Digital Video Recorder (DVR) / Network Video Recorder (NVR)  
(vi) CCTV Camera / IP Camera  
(vii) Lithium-ion batteries (other than those for mobile handsets including cellular 
phones) 
 
 
(ii)    As a result of the various initiatives taken by DeitY, production of electronic items 
in the country has witnessed significant growth. Based on industry estimates, the 
growth in production of selected electronic items is as under:  
 
Production of Mobile Handsets: 
-   2015-16: 110 Million Nos. valued at Rs.54,000 crore (Estimated) 
-   2014-15: 60 Million Nos. valued at Rs.18,900 crore 
-   Growth of 83% in quantity terms 
 
Production of LCD/LED TVs: 
- 2015-16: 12.0 Million Nos. valued at Rs.21,000 crore (Estimated) 
- 2014-15: 8.75 Million Nos. valued at Rs.16,200 crore 
-   Growth of 37% in quantity terms  
-  This segment has also witnessed a reduction in the average prices during this 
period. 
 
Production of Light Emitting Diodes (LEDs): 
-   2015-16: Rs.3,590 crore (Estimated) 
-   2014-15: Rs.2,172 crore 
-   Growth of 65% 
(Estimated growth in investment, production and employment in mobile handsets 
manufacturing sector after the introduct ion of differential excise duty dispensation 
[Updated upto April 2016, Source: Indian Cellular Association (ICA)): 
 

 
31 
 
(iii)    Due to differential excise duty dispensation which was enhanced to 11.5% in favour 
of domestic mobile handset manufacturers vis -a-vis imports in the Budget 2015 -16, 
(from the earlier 5%), India has rapidly started attracting investments into this 
sector. The domestic production of mobile handsets witnessed a spectacular 
growth of approx. 185% in value terms in 2015 -2016, compared to t he production 
witnessed in 2014 -2015. All major brands (both foreign and Indian) either have 
already set up their own manufacturing facilities or are in the process of doing so or 
have sub -contracted manufacturing to Electronics Manufacturing Services (EMS ) 
companies operating from here. Approx. 40 new manufacturing units have already 
come up during 2015 -2016 providing direct employment to approx.60,000 persons 
and indirect employment to approx.60000 persons. The total investments made by 
these companies to set up manufacturing capacities during 2015-16 is estimated at 
INR 400 -450 crore. 15 new units established for manufacturing of components / 
accessory of mobile handsets providing employment to about 20,000 persons 
during the past 5-6 months. Mobile handset production in India estimated to grow to 
500 million nos. by 2019-2020 with total employment potential for 15 lakh persons. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4.     Electronics Manufacturing Cluster (EMC) Scheme  
 
To provide support for creation of world class infrastructure fo r attracting 
investment in electronics manufacturing, Department is implementing Electronics 
Manufacturing Clusters (EMC) scheme. till date Ministry has received 49 applications 
(45 for Greenfield EMCs and 4 for setting up of Common Facility Centre (CFC) o ver an 
area of 7715 acres with project outlay of Rs. 8773 crore for seeking grant assistance of 
Rs. 3787 crore for creating world class infrastructure from 18 states across the country 
which in turn is expected to generate 10.86 Lakh employment opportunities.  
 

 
32 
 
Out of which, 12 Greenfield EMCs and 1 Common facility Centre (CFC) in 
Brownfield Cluster) with project cost of Rs. 1658 crore in ten states have been accorded 
final approval. (Andhra Pradesh -2, Chhattisgrah -1, Gujarat -1, Jharkhand -1, Kerala -1, 
Madhya Pradesh-2, Odisha-1, Rajasthan-1, West Bengal -2, Karnataka-1(CFC). These 
EMCs are poised to attract an investment of Rs. 33340 crore and will generate 1.78 
lakh employment opportunities. As of now, an amount of Rs. 41.86 crore has been 
released as Govern ment of India grant to five Greenfield EMCs at Badwai -Bhopal; 
Purva-Jabalpur-Madhya Pradesh; Bhiwadi - Rajasthan; Naya Raipur –Chhattigsrah; 
Bhiwadi-Rajasthan and Mundra Kutch District -Gujarat.  
 
In addition,16 applications have been accorded in -principle approval (13 
applications for Greenfield EMC and 3 applications for setting up of Common Facility 
Centre (CFC) in Brownfield EMC. For the time being, no fresh applications are being 
considered for accord of in-prinicple approval based upon the deliberations held in PMO 
in meeting  with DIPP; NITI Aayog ; Ministry of Finance and MeitY. 
 
Details of Applications accorded final approval: 
 
S. 
No. 
State Location of 
EMC 
Area 
(Acres) 
Chief 
Promoter/SPV 
Date of 
accord of 
final  
approval 
Financial out lay 
(Rs. in crore) 
Amount 
Released 
(Rs. in 
crore) Project 
Cost 
GIA 
1 Andhra 
Pradesh 
Chilamathur, 
Anantapur 
District 
47.32 ELCINA RAAGA 
MAYURI Electronics 
Park Private Limited 
04.02.16 52.13 23.00  
2 Andhra 
Pradesh 
Village-Cherivi, 
Satyavedu 
Mandal, 
Chittor District 
94 Sri City Pvt. Ltd. 20.07.16 56.75 27.34  
3 Chhattisgarh Village-Tuta, 
Sector-22, Naya 
Raipur,Tehsil-
Abhanpur, 
Raipur District 
69.98 Chhattisgarh State 
Industrial 
Development 
Corporation ltd. 
(CSIDC) 
07.01.16 
   89.23 
 
 
 
43.08 
 
 
 
8.62 
4 Gujarat Village-Tunda, 
Taluka- Mundra, 
District-Kutch  
631.38 Mundra Solar 
Techno park Private 
Limited (MSTPL) 
04.07.16 745.14 315.69 23.50 
5 Jharkhand Adityapur,  
 Saraikela-
Kharsawan 
District 
82.49 Adityapur  
Industrial Area 
 Development 
Authority (AIADA) 
22.09.15 97.88 41.48 - 
6 Karnataka 
(CFC) 
Plot No. 360, 
KIADB Industrial 
Area, Hebbal, 
Hottagalli, 
Mysore 
1.11 Mysore ESDM 
Cluster Private 
Limited 
15.09.15 29.53 21.31 - 

 
33 
 
7 Kerala Kakkanad 
Village,Kanayan
nur Taluk, 
Ernakulam 
District 
66.87 Kerala Industrial 
Infrastructure 
Development 
Corporation 
(KINFRA) 
24.08.16 140.01 50  
8 
 
Madhya 
Pradesh 
Badwai-Bhopal 50 Madhya Pradesh 
State Electronics 
Development 
Corporation 
Ltd.(MPSEDC) 
 
25.08. 14 46.16 20.86 4.17 
9 Madhya 
Pradesh 
Purva-Jabalpur 
 
40 25.08.14 38.01 17.76 3.55 
10 Odisha Infovalley at 
Bhubaneswar 
Industrial Area, 
Khurda District 
203.367 Odisha Industrial 
development 
Corporation (IDCO) 
05.09.16 200.76 93.09  
11 Rajasthan SPL-1, Salarpur, 
Khushkera, 
Bhiwadi 
50.3 ELCINA  Electronics 
Manufacturing 
Cluster Pvt. Ltd 
(EEMCPL) 
15.09.15 46.09 20.24 2.02 
12 West Bengal Sector-IV & V, 
Falta Industrial 
Centre, P.S 
Ramnagar, 
District South 24 
Parganas 
58.04 West Bengal 
Electronics Industry 
Development 
Corporation Limited 
(WEBEL) 
04.02.16 58.86 26.52  
13 West Bengal Naihati town,  
North 24 
Parganas in 
district  
 
70 West Bengal 
Electronics Industry 
Development 
Corporation Limited 
(WEBEL) 
31.08.16 58.31 25.70  
     Total  1464.86  1658.86 726.07  41.86 
 
5.     Four Incubators for electronics start ups at Delhi-NCR; IIT-Patna ; IITM-Kerala and 
IIT-Hyderabad are being set up and innovation in ESDM Sector is also being promoted 
through BIRAC and GITA.  
 
6.   The policy for providing preference to domestically manufactured electronic 
products in Government procurement is und er implementation. In this regard, the nine 
electronic products have already been notified by MeitY in furtherance of the policy. An 
Online Monitoring System “ http://www.meity-pma.gov.in” has also been operationali sed 
w.e.f. 27.01.2015 for reporting compliance to the Policy by Ministries / Departments of 
Government of India and their agencies.    
 
7.   The Ministry has projected the requirement of additional Rs. 300 crore for meeting 
the requirement of M-SIPS; EMC and EDF in the Revised Estimates.  
 
(Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology, O.M. No. 2(1)/2016 -Budget dated  
05.12.2016) 
 

 
34 
 
CHAPTER III 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE 
TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
-Nil- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
35 
 
CHAPTER IV 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND WHICH 
REQUIRE REITERATION 
 
Position of Outstanding Utilization Certificates 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 2) 
The Committee note that a large number of Utilization Certificates (UCs) are 
pending with the implementing agencies in respect of various schemes of the 
Department. While a total number of 133 UCs amounting to Rs.276.64 crore are 
pending for the sanction period 1.04.2001 to 31.03.2014, for the sanction period from 
1.04.2001 to 31.03. 2016, the number of UCs stand at 876 amounting to a huge sum 
of Rs.2435.81 crore. The Department have informed that out of the 133 UCs, 94 UCs 
amounting to Rs.266. 82 crore (96%) of the pending amount pertain to the e -
Governance scheme alone. Regarding reasons for such a large number of pending 
UCs, the Department have informed that e -Governance activities have a relatively 
longer gestation period due to stringent re quirement including civil and electrical 
construction, hardware software development, business process reengineering, etc. 
Programme activities are undertaken by the Department in co -ordination with the 
State Governments. However, e-Governance is an emerging sector and availability of 
trained personnel is limited. In spite of maximum possible support to address the 
issues, the implementation of the NeGP projects have been impacted. The 
Committee also note that in order to reduce the number of UCs and hold t he 
implementing agencies accountable, the Department have taken several measures 
which inter alia include insisting on submission of UCs before release of subsequent 
installment, accounting the unspent balance and interest before release of next 
installment, meeting of group co -ordinators concerned with grantee institutions, 
Secretary-level review of pending UCs from time to time, Quarterly review meetings 
of State IT Secretaries etc. The Department have also informed that UCs are 
submitted on the basis of GFR instructions and care is taken to ensure that accrued 
interest is accounted for.  Though the Department have stated that they have been 
making earnest efforts to expedite implementation of various schemes and 
programmes, the non-release of money to several schemes due to non-submission of 
UCs points to the fact that UCs are acting as a hurdle in the effective implementation 
of the schemes. The Committee feel that the continuous pendency of UCs from the 
implementing agencies is an undesirable trend which  needs to be avoided as it 
directly affects the performance of the schemes, especially e -Governance Schemes. 
The Department have been running several flagship schemes and programmes as 
per policy decision to achieve the targets within the stipulated time f rame. However, 
as the UCs have a direct bearing on the release of funds, this affects the outcome of 
Government schemes and policies as a whole. The Department need to take the 
issue of pending UCs more seriously and workout a mechanism to procure the UCs 
from the implementing agencies. The Department‟s approach need to be more 
pragmatic and proactive rather than leaving it to the implementing agencies because 

 
36 
 
the ultimate onus of the successful implementation of the schemes and thereby the 
policy decision of the Government lies with the Department.   
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Committee has rightly said that UCs have a direct bearing on the release of 
funds which affects the outcome of Government schemes and policies as a whole. This 
is the reason why th e Department is vigorously making efforts for obtaining the pending 
UCs through one -to-one meetings with defaulting agencies. The Project Review and 
Steering Group (PRSG) has been reviewing the projects from time to time to ensure that 
no project is delaye d or remain unimplemented due to non -release of grants in view of 
pending UCs, etc. 
 
(Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology, O.M. No. 2(1)/2016 -Budget dated 
05.12.2016) 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 11 of Chapter I) 
 
Promotion of  IT & ITeS Industries 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 16) 
 
The Committee note that the Indian Information Technology (IT) - Information 
Technology Enabled Services (ITES) sector has registered tremendous growth over the 
past decade, achieving iconic status al l over the world, and a reputation for reliable and 
cost-effective delivery of IT services. India continued as the world‟s no. 1 sourcing 
destination with a share of 56% in 2015. India‟s share in the global IT services 
outsourcing and ITES/BPO has reached upto 67% and 38%, respectively. It is essential 
to maintain this momentum because of the huge potential of IT -ITES sector in terms of 
economy as well as employment generation.  Under the broad framework  of promotion 
of IT & ITeS industries initiative, the Software Technology Parks of India (STPI) had 
been set up in the year 1991 with the objective to promote the development and export 
of software and software services, including information technology enabled services/ 
Bio-IT, to provide statutory and other promotional services to exporters through Software 
Technology Parks and the Electronics and Hardware Technology Parks (EHTP) 
schemes. The phenomenal success of the IT -ITES industry has been possible, inter -
alia, due to the pivotal role played by the STP S cheme and fiscal benefits provided 
under Section 10A of the Income Tax Act.  The fiscal benefits were available upto 31 -
03-2011. The Committee are given to understand that non -availability of Income Tax 
benefits under Section 10A of IT Act beyond 01.04.201 1 for STP units has adversely 
affected the competitive edge of these units, especially with respect to the Micro Small 
and Medium Enterprise (MSME) units.  In the absence of tax benefits, the registration of 
new STP units has decreased and the number of STP  units exiting/de-bonding from the 
STP Scheme has increased year -on-year.  As a result, the total number of exporting 
STP units has been reduced to almost 50% from 5565 STP units in 2010 -11. The above 
fact has further been corroborated by the representativ es of the Department and STPI, 
Bhubaneswar, when the Committee had undertaken a study visit to STPI, Bhubaneswar. 
The Committee are given to understand that a study had been conducted by M/s. 
Deloitte in 2012 to assess the impact of withdrawal of Income Ta x benefit and suggest 

 
37 
 
the way forward to mitigate the impact of withdrawal of tax benefit (Section 10A of IT 
Act) to STP units.  The study had recommended Performance Linked Incentive Scheme 
for STP Units to mitigate this impact. As the matter regarding in centive to mitigate the 
impact of withdrawal of tax benefit  for STPI was taken up through EFC , the Planning 
Commission (erstwhile) had taken the view that the appropriate route is through Income 
Tax exemptions which, if the Govt so wish, can be brought in during the  Budgetary 
Exercise. However, no GBS should be provided for export incentives as it would lead to 
multiple demands since  the exchange rate provides enough incentives. In line with the 
above suggestion, DeitY had taken up the matter regarding restoration of fiscal incentive 
to new STP units for a period of 5 years through Income Tax exemption under Section 
10 A of the Income Tax Act in 3 Union Budgets repeatedly but the  proposal has not 
been agreed to. The Committee observe that the withdrawal of f iscal benefits have 
adversely affected the small and medium businesses. During the year 2016 -17, as 
against the proposed outlay of Rs.543 crore, an allocation of  Rs.5 crore has been made 
at the BE stage 2016 -17 for this scheme. Owing to reduction of funds and its likely 
impact on the achievement of targets under the scheme, the Department have stated 
that the BPO Promotion Schemes approved under the Digital India Programme are 
based on reimbursement of capex towards viability gap funding.   However, the 
budgeting issue may impact the objectives (Employment Generation and growth of 
IT/ITeS sector in non-metro locations) of the BPO Promotion Schemes under the Digital 
India Programme. The matter is proposed to be taken up with the Ministry of Finance 
seeking additional funds for this purpose. Considering that the STP Scheme is a unique 
scheme, designed to promote the software industry, including innovations and growth of 
Start-Ups and SMEs without any location constraints, the Committee feel that the 
Department should come out with some alternative to incentivize STP units to help them 
sustain in business and  meet the challenges from SEZs. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
Considering scarcity of funds for India BPO Promotion (IBPS) and North East 
BPO Promotion Scheme (N EBPS) iunder "Promotion of IT/ITES Industries" programme 
because of the meagre  allocation of ₹ 5 crore in BE 2016 -17, Ministry of Finance has 
been requested for allocating additional funds in the Revised Estimates 2016 -
17. However, as per the Pre -Budget discussions held under the chairmanship of 
Secretary(Expenditure) on 27.10.2016,  no additional grant is likely to be allocated in 
Revised Estimates 2016-17. 
As regards providing incentive to STP units to help them meet the challenges 
from SEZs, the matter has again been taken up with Department of Revenue, M/o 
Finance who has provided their comments vide OM no DGEP/EOU/IMSC/30/2013/3186 
dated 03.06.2016, which inter-alia includes: 
"The EOU Scheme and the SEZ Scheme are both export promotion schemes 
but are based on totally different concepts. Any business entity is free to opt 
for any exported promotion scheme i.e. either EOU or SEZ and thereafter 
seek the benefits available therein. Cherry -picking of benefits cannot be 
accepted." 
However, The "Startup India" Programme launched by M/o Commerce and 
Industry, provides income-tax exemption for 3 years to "Startup", an entity which is up to 

 
38 
 
5 years from the date of its incorporation/ registration, and if its turnover for any of the 
financial years has not exceeded INR 25 crore. 
(Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology, O.M. No. 2( 1)/2016-Budget dated   
05.12.2016) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 14 of Chapter I) 

 
39 
 
CHAPTER V 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
REPLIES ARE OF INTERIM IN NATURE 
 
National Informatics Centre (NIC) 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 4) 
 
The National Informatics Programme of the Department is for providing national 
IT infrastructure to facilitate ushering in “e -Governance” applications at all levels of 
Government. NIC provides ICT support to Government Ministries/Departments. 
Currently, NICNET has more than 70,000 end users; the data centres of NIC host more 
than 7000 websites of the Government and it has the largest e -mail service in the 
country.  The NIC National cloud hosts a large number of critical applications and has 
target e-mail service of the country with more than 220 million e -mails per month. The 
Committee note that during the year 2014 -15, NIC had been provided with Rs.800 crore 
at BE and RE stage, out of which the Actual Expenditure was Rs. 779.56 crore. During 
the year 2015 -16, the allocation for NIC was reduced to Rs.700 crore which was 
subsequently increased to Rs.800 crore and the Actual Expenditure has been 87.5% of 
RE. Regarding challenges faced by NIC, the Department have informed that NIC‟s main 
focus is on providing the latest state of -the-art ICT infrastructure and in this effort, 
shortage of manpower, shortage of building and sitting capacity are major constraints. 
Considering the massive IT requirement for States and District services, it is increasingly 
becoming d ifficult to sustain the number of projects with the same manpower and 
reduced budget. The Committee also note with concern that NIC has to accommodate 
their increasing activities in a reduced manner. Further, on the issue of manpower 
requirement, the Commi ttee observe that NIC had got a study conducted to estimate 
manpower requirement and, as per this study, NIC has a requirement of 1407 posts at 
different levels. A proposal had been mooted for creation of 1407 posts across different 
levels to meet the e -Governance requirements of NIC. The Committee, in their Sixth 
Report on Demands for Grants (2015 -16), had recommended to the Department to 
expedite the above proposal and get these posts created at an early date to meet their 
manpower requirement. The Committee are, however, concerned to note that even after 
a lapse of more than a year, the proposal has not materialized and is still under 
consideration for inter -Ministerial approval. The Committee feel that NIC being the 
backbone of the ICT infrastructure of the country, it is very much essential that their 
manpower and infrastructure needs are given due attention. This assumes added 
significance in the light of the fact that the Digital India Programme and National e -
Governance are on the top of the agenda of the Government. The Committee, therefore, 
recommend that the proposal for creation of posts for NIC which is under inter -
Ministerial consultation, be expedited and the manpower issue of NIC resolved. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
40 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The proposal for creation of posts for NIC was examined in the Ministry and some 
queries relating to this proposal were forwarded to NIC for necessary clarification. NIC 
has recently forwarded replies/clarifications to the Ministry and the same are being 
examined further. 
 
(Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology, O.M. No. 2(1)/2016 -Budget dated   
05.12.2016) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi; Anurag Singh Thakur, 
15 December, 2016 Chairperson,  
24 Agrahayana, 1938 (Saka) Standing Committee on 
Information Technology.  
 
 

 
41 
 
Annexure-I  
 
 MINUTES OF THE FIFTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (2016-17) HELD ON 15TH DECEMBER, 2016 
 
----------- 
 
 The Committee sat on Thursday, the 15th December, 2016, from 1 515 hours                     
to 1600 hours in Committee  Room ‘ B’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New 
Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Shri Anurag Singh Thakur- Chairperson 
 
 MEMBERS   
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri L. K. Advani 
3. Shri Prasun Banerjee 
4. Dr. Sunil Baliram Gaikwad 
5. Shri Virender Kashyap 
6. Shri Keshav Prasad Maurya 
7. Dr. K.C. Patel 
8. Shri Raosaheb Danve Patil 
9. Shri Abhishek Singh 
10. Shri Ramdas C. Tadas 
 
Rajya Sabha   
11. Smt. Jaya Bachchan 
12. Shri P. Bhattacharya 
13. Shri Suresh Gopi 
14. Smt. Kahkashan Perween 
15. Dr. K.V.P. Ramachandra Rao 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri R. S. Kambo    - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri Y. M. Kandpal   - Director 
3. Dr. Sagarika Dash   - Additional Director 
4. Smt. Reena Gopalakrishnan - Deputy Secretary 
5. Shri Shangreiso Zimik  - Under Secretary 
 
 

 
42 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee convened to consider and adopt the following four Draft Action Taken Reports:-  
I. xxxxx……..xxxxx……..xxxxx……..xxxxx……..xxxxx……..xxxxx……..xxxxx……..xxxxx ……..;  
II. xxxxx……..xxxxx……..xxxxx……..xxxxx……..xxxxx……..xxxxx……..xxxxx……..xxxxx ……..;  
III. Action Taken Report on the Twenty-fifth Report on ‘Demands for Grants        
(2016-17)’ of the Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology; and 
IV. xxxxx……..xxxxx……..xxxxx……..xxxxx……..xxxxx……..xxxxx……..xxxxx……..xxxxx ……..;  
 
3. The Committee, thereafter, took up for consideration  the above Reports  and after 
due deliberation adopted the same without any modification. 
 
4. The Committee, then, authori sed the Chairperson to present the  Action Taken 
Reports to the House during the current session of Parliament. 
 
The Committee, then, adjourned 
 
 
***** 
___________________________________________________________________________  
…..xxxxx Matter not related to the Report. 
 

 
43 
 
Annexure-II 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE OBSERVATIONS/ 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THEIR TWENTY-FIFTH REPORT 
(SIXTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
[Vide Paragraph No. 5 of Introduction] 
 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government 
 
 Para Nos.:- 1, 3, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14 and 15   
 Total 13 
 Percentage 81.25 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue 
in view of the replies of the Government 
 
 Para No.:- Nil  
 Total Nil 
 Percentage 0.00 
 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the government 
have not been accepted by the Committee and require reiteration 
 Para Nos.:-  2 and 16    
 Total 02 
 Percentage 12.5 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of the reply which is of interim 
nature 
 Para Nos.:-  4  
 Total 01 
 Percentage 6.25 
 
 