STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
COMMUNICATIONS AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(2021-22) 
 
 
SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF COMMUNICATIONS   
(DEPARTMENT OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS) 
 
 
 
 
SUSPENSION OF TELECOM SERVICES/INTERNET AND ITS IMPACT 
 
TWENTY- SIXTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
 
December, 2021/Agrahayana, 1943 (Saka) 
 
26 


 
TWENTY- SIXTH REPORT 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
COMMUNICATIONS AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(2021-22) 
 
 
SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
MINISTRY OF COMMUNICATIONS   
(DEPARTMENT OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS) 
 
 
SUSPENSION OF TELECOM SERVICES/INTERNET AND ITS IMPACT 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 01.12.2021  
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 01.12.2021 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
 
 
December, 2021/Agrayahana, 1943 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 


(i) 
CONTENTS 
  Page  
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2019-20) (iii) 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE(2020-21) (iv) 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE(2021-22) (v) 
ABBREVIATIONS (vi)) 
INTRODUCTION (viii) 
 REPORT  
 PART I  
I. Introductory 1 
II. Legal provision empowering the Government to restrict Telecom services 1 
III. Temporary Suspension of Telecom Services (Public Emergency and Public 
Safety Rules, 2017) 
2 
IV. Supreme Court Observation and Judgement on Suspension of Telecom 
Services 
4 
V. Amendments to Telecom Suspension Rules 5 
VI. Grounds for Suspension of Telecom Services  6 
VII. Official Data on Internet Shutdown 8 
VIII. Rules Governing Internet Shutdown in the Country 10 
IX. Telecom Suspension under Section 144 Cr.P.C. 11 
X. Review Committee for reviewing the decision regarding suspension of 
telecom services – Composition and Powers 
14 
(i)  Composition 14 
(ii)  Powers of the Review Committee 15 
XI. Constitution of Review Committee in all States 16 
XII. Safeguards Against misuse of provision for Internet Shutdown 17 
XIII. Efficacy of Internet Shutdown 18 
XIV. International Scenario: Telecom/Internet Shutdown Rules in Other Countries 22 
XV. Time period for suspension orders and Consultation with the Stakeholders 22 
XVI. Access to Internet and Constitutional Position 24 
XVII. Principle of Proportionality and Procedure for Lifting of Internet Shutdown 26 
XVIII. Selective Banning of Services and continuation of services over Government 
Telecom Network  
27 
 PART II  
 OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS 28 
 APPENDICES  
I. Minutes of the Twenty ­first sitting of the Committee (2019 ­20) held on             
11th August, 2020. 
60 
II. Minutes of the Third sitting of the Committee (2020 ­21) held on 16th October, 
2020. 
63 
III. Minutes of the Seventh sitting of the Committee (2020 ­21) held on                  
25th November, 2020 
67 
IV. Minutes of the Second sitting of the Committee (2021 ­22) held on                   
16th November, 2021 
72 
ANNEXURES  
I. Indian Telegraph Act, 1885  
II. Clause 10.1(ii) of Unified License Agreement  
III. Gazette Notification No. G.S.R. 998 (E) dated 7th August, 2017.  

(ii) 
IV. Copy of the relevant portions of the Hon’ble Supreme Court Judgement In the 
case of Anuradha Bhasin Vs. UoI (WP No. 1031/ 2019) and Ghulam Nabi 
Azad Vs. UoI and Anr (WP No. 1164/2019), 
 
V. Gazette Notification dated 10.11.2020  

(iii) 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (2019-20) 
 
Dr. Shashi Tharoor - Chairperson 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Smt. Locket Chatterjee 
3. Shri Karti P. Chidambaram 
4. Shri Sunny Deol  
5. Dr. Nishikant Dubey  
6. Shri Vijay Kumar Dubey  
7. Choudhary Mehboob Ali Kaiser 
8. Smt. Raksha Nikhil Khadse  
9. Dr. Sukanta Majumdar  
10. Shri Dhairyasheel Sambhajirao Mane 
11. Ms. Mahua Moitra 
12. Shri P. R. Natarajan 
13. Shri Santosh Pandey 
14. Shri Nisith Pramanik  
15. Col. Rajyavardhan Singh Rathore 
16. Dr. Gaddam Ranjith Reddy  
17. Shri M V V Satyanarayana  
18. Shri Sanjay Seth  
19. Shri L.S. Tejasvi Surya 
20. Dr. T. Sumathy (A) Thamizhachi Thangapandian  
21. Shri Bhanu Pratap Singh Verma 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
22. Dr. Anil Agrawal  
23. Dr. Subhash Chandra  
24. Shri Y. S. Chowdary  
25. Shri Suresh Gopi  
26. Shri Md. Nadimul Haque 
27. Shri Syed Nasir Hussain  
28. Dr. Narendra Jadhav  
29. Shri Shaktisinh Gohil* 
30. Shri Parimal Nathwani* 
31. VACANT# 
___________________________________________________________________ 
Committee constituted w.e.f. 13th September, 2019 vide Bulletin Part­II Para No. 542 
dated 13th September, 2019. 
* Nominated  to the Committee w.e.f. 22nd  July , 2020 vide Para No.1370 Bu lletin 
Part­II dated 24 July, 2020 
# Shri Beni Prasad Verma, MP, Rajya Sabha, expired on 27th March, 2020. 

(iv) 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (2020-21) 
 
Dr. Shashi Tharoor - Chairperson 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Smt. Locket Chatterjee 
3. Shri Karti P. Chidambaram 
4. Dr. Nishikant Dubey  
5. Smt. Sunita Duggal* 
6. Smt. Raksha Nikhil Khadse  
7. Dr. Sukanta Majumdar  
8. Shri Dhairyasheel Sambhajirao Mane 
9. Ms. Mahua Moitra 
10. Shri P. R. Natarajan 
11. Shri Santosh Pandey 
12. Col. Rajyavardhan Singh Rathore 
13. Dr. Gaddam Ranjith Reddy  
14.  Shri Jayadev Galla 
15.  Shri Sanjay Seth  
16.  Shri Chandan Singh 
17.  Shri L.S. Tejasvi Surya 
18.  Dr. T. Sumathy (A) Thamizhachi Thangapandian  
19.  Smt. Sumalatha Ambareesh 
20. Shri Ganesh Singh* 
21. Shri Parvesh Sahib Singh* 
 
 
Rajya Sabha 
22. Dr. Anil Agrawal  
23. Dr. Subhash Chandra  
24. Shri Y. S. Chowdary  
25. Shri Shaktisinh Gohil 
26. Shri Suresh Gopi  
27. Shri Md. Nadimul Haque 
28. Shri Syed Nasir Hussain  
29. Shri Syed Zafar Islam 
30. Dr. Narendra Jadhav  
31. Shri Nabam Rebia 
_________________________________________________________________ 
* Smt. Sunita Duggal, Shri Ganesh Singh and Shri Parvesh Sahib Singh ( vice Shri 
Sunny Deol) were nominated to the Committee vide Para No. 2822 of Bulletin Part­II  
dated 27 July, 2021. 
 

(iv) 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON COMMUNICATIONS                               
AND  INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (2021-22) 
 
Dr. Shashi Tharoor - Chairperson 
Members 
 
Lok Sabha 
32. Smt. Sumalatha Ambareesh 
33. Smt. Locket Chatterjee 
34. Shri Karti P. Chidambaram 
35. Dr. Nishikant Dubey  
36. Smt. Sunita Duggal 
37. Shri Jayadev Galla 
38. Smt. Raksha Nikhil Khadse  
39. Dr. Sukanta Majumdar  
40. Shri Dhairyasheel Sambhajirao Mane 
41. Ms. Mahua Moitra 
42. Shri Santosh Pandey 
43. Shri P. R. Natarajan 
44. Col. Rajyavardhan Rathore 
45. Dr. Gaddam Ranjith Reddy  
46. Shri Sanjay Seth  
47. Shri Ganesh Singh 
48. Shri Parvesh Sahib Singh 
49. Shri Tejasvi Surya 
50. Dr. T. Sumathy (A) Thamizhachi Thangapandian  
51. Vacant 
Rajya Sabha 
52. Dr. Anil Agrawal 
53. Shri John Brittas  
54. Dr. Subhash Chandra  
55. Shri Y. S. Chowdary  
56. Shri Ranjan Gogoi 
57. Shri Suresh Gopi  
58. Shri Syed Nasir Hussain  
59. Shri Syed Zafar Islam 
60. Shri Jawhar Sircar 
61. Vacant  
Secretariat 
1. Shri Y.M. Kandpal   ­ Joint Secretary 
2. Dr. Sagarika Dash   ­ Additional Director 
3. Shri Shangreiso Zimik  ­ Deputy Secretary 
___________________________________________________________________ 
Committee constitu ted w.e.f. 13 Septemb er, 2021 vide Para No.3184 of Bulletin 
Part­II dated 9 October, 2021. 
 

(iv) 
ABBREVIATIONS 
 
  
COAI  Cellular Operators Association of India  
ISPs  Internet Services Providers  
SMS  Short Message Service  
SOPs  Standard Operating Procedures  
CrPC –  Criminal Procedure Code 
DoT –  Department of Telecommunications 
MHA –  Ministry of Home Affairs  
NCRB ­  National Crime Records Bureau 
OTT –  Over The Top  
TRAI –  Telecom Regulatory Authority of India 

(v) 
INTRODUCTION 
  
  I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Communications and Information 
Technology (2021 ­22), having been authorized by the Committee do present the 
Twenty­sixth Report on ‘Suspension of telecom services/internet and its impact’ 
relating to the Ministry of Communications (Department of Telecommunications).   
2. The Standing Committee on Information Technology (2019 ­20) selected this 
subject for detailed examination and report to the Parliament. The examination of the 
subject, however, could not be completed during 2019 ­20. Keeping in view the 
importance of the subject and the need for wider consultation, the Committee                 
re­selected the subject for further examination and report during 2020 ­21.  The 
Report though finalized could not be considered by the Committee  during the year 
2020­21 due to expiry of the term of the Committee.  The Committee, therefore, 
selected the subject once again during 2021­22 for its adoption and presentation to 
the House.     
 
3. The representatives of the Ministry of Communications (Department of 
Telecommunications) briefed the Committee on the subject on 11 th August, 2020.   
The Committee took evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of 
Communications (Department of Telecommunications), the Ministry of Home Affairs, 
the State Government of Bihar and the Union Territory of NCT of Delhi on              
16th October, 2020. The Committee took conclusive evidence of the representatives 
of the Ministry of Communications (Department of Telecommunications) and the 
Ministry of Home Affairs on 25th November, 2020.  
 
4. The Committee at their sitting held on 16 th November, 2021 considered and 
adopted the Report.  
 
5. The Committee wish to express their thanks to the representatives of the 
Ministry of Communications (Department of  Telecommunications), the Ministry of 
Home Affairs, the State Government of Bihar and the U.T. of NCT of Delhi for 
tendering evidence before the Committee and also for furnishing written information  
in connection with examination of the subject .  The Commi ttee also wish to express 

(vi) 
 
their thanks to the  State Government of Kerala  and U.T. of J&K for furnishing  
valuable input in writing which was of great help in the examination of the subject.   
 
6. The Committee also place on record their appreciation for the invaluable 
assistance rendered by the officials of Lok Sabha Secretariat attached to the 
Committee.   
 
7. For facility of reference and convenience the Observations/Recommendations 
of the Committee have been printed in bold in Part­II of the Report.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi;   DR. SHASHI THAROOR, 
 29    November, 2021  Chairperson, 
  8   Agrahayana, 1943 (Saka) Standing Committee on Communications and 
Information Technology. 

1 
 
Part-I 
Narration Analysis 
 
I. Introductory  
 The Depa rtment of Telecommunications (Do T) is inter-alia responsible for 
Telecom Policy; Licensing and C o­ordination matters relating to telegraph, 
telephones, telecom wireless data; international co ­operation in matters connected 
with telecommunications; and promotion of private investment in the sector. Do T is 
also responsible for frequency management in the field of radio communication in 
close co­ordination with the international bodies. Do T enforces wireless regulatory 
measures by monitoring wireless transmission of the users in the country.   
 
2. The Central Government grants licenses under the provisions of Section 4 of 
Indian Telegraph Act, 1885 for various types of telecom services including Access 
Services, Internet Services, etc. The Access Services cover collection, carriage, 
transmission and delivery of voice and/or non ­voice messages over Licensee’s 
network in the designated service area and includes mobile, wir eline & internet 
services. Internet Service Provider can provide data services. A copy of Indian 
Telegraph Act, 1885 is attached as Annexure-I. 
 
II. Legal provision empowering the Government to restrict Telecom services 
 
3. Section 5 of Indian Telegraph Act, 1885  empowers Government to take 
possession of licensed telegraphs, to order interception of messages and issue 
instructions for not transmitting the message. The “message” means any 
communication sent by telegraph, or given to a telegraph officer or to be del ivered. 
The provision reads as under:  
(1) On the occurrence of any public emergency, or in the interest of the public 
safety, the Central Government or a State Government or any officer specially 
authorized in this behalf by the Central Government or a State Government 
may, if satisfied that it is necessary or expedient so to do, take temporary 
possession (for so long as the public emergency exists or the interest of the 
public safety requires the taking of such action) of any telegraph established, 
maintained or worked by any person licensed under this Act. 

2 
 
 
(2) On the occurrence of any public emergency, or in the interest of the public 
safety, the Central Government or a State Government or any officer specially 
authorized in this behalf by the Central Government  or a State Government 
may, if satisfied that it is necessary or expedient so to do in the interests of 
the sovereignty and integrity of India, the security of the State, friendly 
relations with foreign States or public order or for preventing incitement t o the 
commission of an offence, for reasons to be recorded in writing, by order, 
direct that any message or class of messages to or from any person or class 
of persons, or relating to any particular subject, brought for transmission by or 
transmitted or received by any telegraph, shall not be transmitted, or shall be 
intercepted or detained, or shall be disclosed to the Government making the 
order or an officer thereof mentioned in the order: 
 
 Provided that press messages intended to be published in India of 
correspondents accredited to the Central Government or a State Government 
shall not be intercepted or detained, unless their transmission has been 
prohibited under this sub-section. 
 
 
4. Under clause 10.1(ii) of Unified License Agreement, the Licensor reserves the 
right to suspend the operation of License/Service Authorization in whole or in part, at 
any time, if, in the opinion of the Licensor, it is necessary or expedient to do so in 
public interest or in the interest of the security of the State or for t he proper conduct 
of the Telegraph. A copy of said clause is attached as Annexure-II. 
 
5. Section 7 of Indian Telegraph Act, 1885 empowers the Central Government 
to make rules for the conduct of telegraphs as under:  
“The Central Government may, from time to time, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, make rules consistent with this Act for the conduct of all 
or any telegraphs established, maintained or worked by the Government 
or by persons licensed under this Act.” 
 
 
III. Temporary Suspension of Telecom Services (Public Emergency and 
Public Safety Rules, 2017) 
 
6. In order to streamline the process of Telecom shutdowns in the country and in 
pursuance to the provisions contained in Section 5 of the Indian Telegraph Act 1885, 
the Temporary Suspension of Telecom Services (Public Emergency & Public Safety) 

3 
 
Rules, 2017 were notified vide Gazette Notification No. G.S.R. 998 (E) dated            
7th August, 2017. A copy of notified rules is attached as Annexure-III. 
 
7. The Salient features of these Rules are as under: 
 Orders of temporary suspension of telecom services are to be issued by 
Union/State Home Secretary only. For emergent cases, Joint  Secretary 
Level officer can issue order subject to confirmation from Competent 
Authority within 24 hours. If no confirmation is received from Competent 
Authority within 24 hours, then such orders cease to exist. 
 Orders contain reasons for such directions and are to be forwarded to 
Review Committee latest by next working day. 
 Directions of suspension to Telecom Service Provider have to be 
conveyed by an officer not below the rank of Superintendent of Police or 
equivalent rank. 
 Review Committee has to meet w ithin five days of issue of directions for 
suspension of services due to public emergency or public safety and 
record its findings whether the directions of suspension issued under the 
Rules are in accordance with the provisions of sub­section (2) of Section 5 
of the Indian Telegraph Act, 1885. 
 
8. When the Committee desired to know whether the Government at any point 
of time has resorted to Section 5 of the Indian Telegraph Act, the Department in their 
written submission stated that police and public orders a re State subjects as per the 
Constitution and State Governments are responsible for prevention, detection and 
investigation of crimes through their law enforcement agencies. 
 
9. The Department further informed that in temporary shutdown of internet 
services in the region, only internet/data services are suspended temporarily and  
other communications modes/services like voice calling and Short Message S ervice 
(SMS) remain available during the suspension period of internet services through 
which people in the region can communicate.  On 28.09.2018, the Chief Secretaries 
of all States have been requested to sensitize the concerned officials/agencies 

4 
 
against perceptible actions leading to shutting  down of internet services etc. a nd 
also to ensure that provisions of Suspension Rules 2017 are strictly followed.   
 
IV. Supreme Court Observation and Judgement on Suspension of Telecom 
Services 
 
10. In the case of Anuradha Bhasin Vs. UoI (WP No. 1031/ 2019) and Ghulam 
Nabi Azad Vs. UoI and Anr (WP No. 1164/2019), the Hon’ble Supreme Court vide its 
order dated 10 January 2020 made following observation: 
“28. None of the counsels have argued for declaring the right to access 
the internet as a fundamental right and therefore we are not expressing 
any view on the same.  We are confining ourselves to declaring that the 
right to freedom of speech and expression under Article 19(1)(a), and the 
right to carry on any trade or business under 19(1)(g), using the medium 
of internet is constitutionally protected.” 
 
11. Hon’ble Supreme Court in its judgment dated 10.01.2020  in the said petitions 
apropos to the internet  restrictions, inter-alia, directed as under: 
 The Respondent State/competent authorities are directed to publish all orders 
in force and any future orders under  Section 144, Cr.P.C and for suspension 
of telecom services, including internet, to enable the affected persons to 
challenge it before the High Court or appropriate forum. 
 
 We declare that the freedom of speech and expression and the freedom to 
practice any profession or carry on any trade, business or occupation over the 
medium of internet enjoys constitutional protection under  Article 
19(1)(a) and Article 19(1)(g).  The restriction upon such fundamental  rights 
should be in consonance with the mandate under  Article 19 (2) and (6) of the 
Constitution, inclusive of the test of proportionality. 
 
 An order suspending internet services indefinitely is impermissible under the 
Temporary Susp ension of Telecom Services (Public Emergency or Public 
Service) Rules, 2017. Suspension can be utilized for temporary duration only. 
 
 Any order suspending internet issued under the Suspension Rules, must 
adhere to the principle of proportionality and must not extend beyond 
necessary duration. 
 

5 
 
 Any order suspending internet under the Suspension Rules is subject to 
judicial review based on the parameters set out herein. 
 
 The existing Suspension Rules neither provide for a periodic review nor a 
time limitation for an order issued under the Suspension Rules. Till this gap is 
filled, we direct that the Review Committee constituted under Rule 2(5) of the 
Suspension Rules must conduct a periodic review within seven working days 
of the previous review, in terms of the requirements under Rule 2(6). 
 
 We direct the respondent State/competent authorities to review all orders 
suspending internet services forthwith. 
 
 Orders not in accordance with the law laid down above, must be revoked. 
Further, in future, if there is a n ecessity to pass fresh orders, the law laid 
down herein must be followed. 
 
 In any case, the State/concerned authorities are directed to consider forthwith 
allowing government websites, localized/limited e ­banking facilities, hospitals 
services and other e ssential services, in those regions, wherein the internet 
services are not likely to be restored immediately. 
 
12. Copy of the relevant portions of the Hon’ble Supreme Court Judgement is 
attached as Annexure –IV. 
 
V. Amendments to Telecom Suspension Rules 
 
13. In the light of the Hon’ble Supreme Court judgment and in consultation with all 
stakeholders, Temporary Suspension of Telecom Services (Public Emergency & 
Public Safety) Rules, 2017 has been amended vide Gazette Notification dated 
10.11.2020 and has been i ssued by DoT vide O.M dated 10.11.2020.  It is 
envisaged that any suspension order issued under these rules shall not be in 
operation for more than fifteen days, all such orders be published to enable the 
affected persons to challenge it before the High Court or appropriat e forum and the 
order must adhere to the principle of proportionality.  The Gazette Notification issued 
by DoT dated 10.11.2020 is attached as Annexure-V. 
 

6 
 
VI. Grounds for Suspension of Telecom Services  
 
14. Telecom shutdown is governed as per Temporary Suspension of Telecom 
Services (Public Emergency & Public Safety) Rules, 2017. Section 5(2) of the Indian 
Telegraph Act, 1885 stipulates that “messages” shall not be transmitted on the 
occurrence of any public emergency, or in the interest of the public safety.  
 
15. Both DoT and MHA submitted before the Committee that ‘Public Emergency’ 
and ‘Public Safety’ are the two grounds on which internet shutdown can be ordered.  
Secretary, DoT, also submitted during evidence that  any suspension which is done, 
is for public order or for reasons of law and order and public safety. 
  
16.  In this background, the Committee desired to know as to whether any 
parameters have been laid down to define ‘Public Emergency’ and ‘Public Safety’ 
and what constitutes ‘Public Emergency’ and ‘Public Safety’ according to DoT/MHA. 
The Department through their written submission informed the Committee that the 
parameters have been laid down in section 5(2) of  the Indian Telegraph Act, 1885 
which reads as under:  
 
 “On the occurrence of any public emergency, or in the interest of the public  
safety, the Central Government or a State Government or any officer specially 
authorised in this behalf by the Central Government or a State Government 
may, if satisfied that it is necessary or expedient so to do in the interests of 
the sovereignty and integrity of India, the security of the State, friendly 
relations with foreign states or public order or for preventing incitement to the 
commission of an  offence, for reaso ns to be  recorded in writing, by order, 
direct that any message or  class of messages to or from any person or class 
of persons, or relating to any particular subject, brought for transmission by or 
transmitted or received by any  telegraph, shall not be tra nsmitted, or shall be 
intercepted or detained, or shall be  disclosed to the Gover nment making the 
order or an officer thereof mentioned in the order: 
 Provided that the press messages intended to be published in India of  
correspondents accredited to the Central Government or a State Government 
shall not be intercepted or detained, unless their transmission has been 
prohibited under this sub­section.” 
 

7 
 
17. MHA further clarified that the expression public emergency, has not been 
defined in the statute, but contou rs broadly delineating its scope and features are 
discernible from the section which has to be read as a whole. In Anuradha Bhasin 
vs. Union of India on 10 th January, 2020 order, Supreme Court mentioned the case 
of Hukam Chand Shyam Lal vs. Union of India, (1976) 2 SCC 128, a four­Judge 
Bench of Supreme Court which interpreted Section 5 of the Telegraph Act and 
observed in sub­section (1) the phrase ‘occurrence of any public emergency’ is 
connected with and is immediately followed by the phr ase “or in the interests of the 
public safety”. These two phrases appear to take colour from each other. In the first 
part of sub­section (2) those two phrases again occur in association with each other, 
and the context further clarifies with amplification  that a “public emergency” within 
the contemplation of this section is one which raises problems concerning the 
interest of the public safety, the sovereignty and integrity of India, the security of the 
State, friendly relations with foreign States or publ ic order or the prevention of 
incitement to the commission of an offence. It is in the context of these matters that 
the appropriate authority has to form an opinion with regard to the occurrence of a 
public emergency with a view to taking further action under this section. 
 
18. Asked as to whether the parameters have been laid down to decide the merit 
or justness of the telecom/internet shutdowns and  whether it will not  be better if an 
independent or impartial body decides the merit or justness of the shutdown, instead 
of letting Executive alone to decide, the Department submitted that in Rule 6 of 
Temporary Suspension of Telecom Services (Public Emergency & Public Safety) 
Rules, 2017, it has been specified that the Review committee shall record its finding 
whether the directions issued for the suspension of telecom services are in 
accordance with the provisions of section 5(2) of the Indian Telegraph Act,1885. The 
Review C ommittees as specified under Rule 5 of the Temporary Suspension of 
Telecom Services (Public Emergency & Public Safety) Rules, 2017 are independent 
and impartial.  
 

8 
 
19. The Committee wanted to know the number of occasions when internet 
shutdown has been invoked on reasons other than ‘Public Emergency’ and ‘Public 
Safety’. To this, the Department informed that they do not maintain any records 
related to internet shutdown. Parameters for Public Emergency and Public Safety 
have been laid down in section 5(2) of the Indian Telegraph Act, 1885. 
 
20. The Ministry of Home Affairs informed that they have issued directions for the 
suspension twice in December, 2019 due to Public Emergency and Public Safety as 
per Temporary Suspension of Telecom Services (Amendment) Rules, 2020. 
 
21. On the need to properly define the term ‘Public Emergency’ and ‘Public 
Safety’, representative of MHA during evidence stated as under: 
 “Sir, these words occur in the Telegraph Act, which is  administered by 
DoT. So, in the definitions of that Act they will have to search  whether 
there are any explanations.” 
 
VII. Official Data on Internet Shutdown 
 
22. The Department in their initial submission of Background Note on the subject 
informed the Committee that concerned State Governments are empowered to issue 
orders for temporary suspension of internet services to maintain law and order in the 
State or part thereof under the provisions contained in the Temporary Suspension of 
Telecom Services (Public Emergency or Public Safety) Rules, 2017. Records related 
to telecom services/internet shutdowns ordered by State Governments are not 
maintained by Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA). 
 
23. On being asked about the reasons for not maintaining records related to 
telecom services/internet shutdowns ordered by the State Governments, the 
Department have stated that  p olice and public order are State subjects as pe r the 
Constitution and States are responsible for prevention, detection and investigation of 
crimes through their law enforcement machinery. Records related to internet 
shutdowns ordered by State Governments are not maintained by DoT.  
 

9 
 
24. The Department have further informed the Committee that DoT/TRAI have 
information related to the telecom services license service area ­wise. DoT does not 
maintain any information on State subjects. 
 
25. Secretary, DoT, during evidence submitted as under: 
 “As Central Government, we do not have a mechanism in which we review 
as to how many States have given such orders, what were the details 
given, what were the reasons etc. Sir, essentially Police and Public Order 
are State Subjects. So, whether they would be enth usiastic about sharing 
this information, we can explore this.” 
 
  
26. Elaborating on the issue, representative of MHA during the sitting stated as 
under: 
 “…..xxxxx…we have a National Crime Records Bureau which collects 
information on certain aspects of crime.  Communal riots is one of them. 
That information is collected on a regular basis. It is published on a regular 
basis. Our view at the moment is that the suspension of internet for 
purposes of public order, etc. does not actually come under the ambit of 
crimes. So, this is not within the present purview of the NCRB. At the 
moment, there is no proposal in MHA at least to collect this information at a 
central level.” 
 
27. When the Committee desired information on total number of internet and 
telecom shutdown decis ions in last two years, the Government of NCT, Delhi 
informed the Committee that no decisions have been taken by Govt. of NCT of Delhi 
in the last two years on shutting down inte rnet and telecom services in Delhi . UT of 
J&K in their written submission stat ed that since issuance of the directions by the 
Hon’ble Supreme Court, a total of 93 orders, including 76 orders issued by the 
competent authority to the effect of confirming the directions by the authorized 
officers, have been issued.  All these orders ar e in the public domain and can be 
accessed on the official website of the Home Department. 
 
 
 
 

10 
 
28. State Government of Bihar submitted that as per records available with the 
Home Department, between August, 2018 to 25 August, 2020 the Competent 
Authority on th e basis of report received from the concerned District Administration 
has directed six times in three Districts to all Internet Services Providers (ISPs), that 
any messages to or from any person or class of person relating to any subject or any 
pictorial c ontent through the social networking sites or application shall not be 
transmitted. Government of Bihar has invoked this power only in extreme emergency 
situations. 
 
29. The representative of Bihar during his deposition before the Committee 
informed that durin g the last two years, after September, 2018 there are only three 
instances of suspension of internet services that has taken place in Bihar . One was 
in the year 2018 and twice in 2019.  On all these occasions it was 2 ­3 days initially, 
which was extended by two more days. The maximum period was five days in a 
district and on two occasions four days in a district.   
 
30. On the issue of balancing bet ween citizens’ rights and maintenance of public 
order, the representative further submitted as under: 
“….xxxx….there is a definite trade ­off between personal liberty, citizens’ 
rights, and maintenance of public order. It is a definite trade ­off. If we 
protect the citizens’ rights fully and, in all circumstances, then in certain 
situations some steps that are being taken to control the adverse situation 
will not be taken. In order to balance this trade ­off and keep the 
inconvenience to the minimum, we, in th e Government of Bihar, are doing 
two things. The shutdown of internet is kept to the minimum required 
period, as I had submitted, of 4 ­5 days maximum on each of three 
occasions during the last three years.  
 Secondly, on each occasion, it was within the Di strict only and not outside 
or not even bordering the District.” 
 
 
VIII. Rules Governing Internet Shutdown in the Country 
 
31. When asked how the rules relating to shutting down of telecom/internet 
services have evolved in the country over a period of time,   the Department have 
replied that the  Temporary Suspension of Telecom Services (Public Emergency & 

11 
 
Public Safety) Rules, 2017 were notified vide Gazette Notification no. G.S.R. 998 (E) 
dated 07th August, 2017. Amendment to the said Rules have been notified on 
10.11.2020. 
 
32. The Committee further enquired whether shutting down of telecom/internet 
services is regulated under a single law/Rule or telecom/internet shutdown is 
allowed under other rules like Section 144 of CrPC.  To this query, the Department 
have informed the Committee that t elecom shutdown is governed as per Temporary 
Suspension of Telecom Services (Public Emergency & Public Safety) Rules, 2017. 
 
IX. Telecom Suspension under Section 144 Cr.P.C. 
 
33. Hon’ble Supreme Court in its judgement dated 10th January, 2020 in the writ 
petitions WP(C) 1031/2019 and 1164/2019 made the following directions: 
 The Respondent State/competent authorities are directed to publish all orders 
in force and any future orders under  Section 144, Cr.P.C and for suspension 
of telecom services, including internet, to enable the affected persons to 
challenge it before the High Court or appropriate forum. 
 
34. When the Committee desired to know whether under the Suspension of 
Internet Rules  there can be any separate suspension done under Section 144 of 
Cr.P.C.  The Telecom Rules issued in 2017 make no reference to Section 144.  Now 
suspension can be done without invoking Section 144 and Section 144 can be 
invoked without suspension.  To this, the  Secretary, DoT, clarified during the sitting 
as under: 
 “Sir, my  understating is that prior to these Rules, recourse was taken to 
Section 144 to do the suspension. But once the Rules have come, then the 
suspension is done under these Rules.”  
   
35. Asked as to whether in a volatile situation it is the SDM who under the rules 
has an authority to order an internet shutdown or it is the Home Secretary who is the 
only competent authority to order the shutdown,  Secretary, DoT, clarified as under: 

12 
 
 “Sir, the rules have specified that under such situations a Joint Secretary 
level officer can order for a shutdown and within 24 hours  the appropriate 
authority has to approve it.”  
 
  
36. Also asked whether the Central Government had empowered the State to 
issue suspension order under CrPC 144 , the Department have replied that telecom 
shutdown is governed as per Temporary Suspension of Telecom Services (Public 
Emergency & Public Safety) Rules, 2017. 
 
37. To the same query, MHA have replied that they have not issued any such 
order. However, Section 144, Cr.P.C. is one of the mechanisms that enable the 
State to maintain public peace. It forms part of the Chapter in the Criminal Procedure 
Code dealing with “Maintenance of Public Order and Tranquillity”. Sect ion 144, 
Cr.P.C. enables the State to take preventive measures to deal with imminent threats 
to public peace. It enables the Magistrate to issue a mandatory order requiring 
certain actions to be undertaken, or a prohibitory order restraining citizens from 
doing certain things. 
 
38. The Committee desired to know u nder what provision of Section 144 of the 
CrPC can internet suspension be issued  or whether internet shutdown can still be 
ordered by District Magistrate under Section 144 of the CrPC given the fact tha t 
under Suspension Rules 2017 orders of temporary suspension of telecom services 
are to be issued by Union/State Home Secretary only . To this, DoT replied that they 
have empowered the States to issue suspension orders for telecom services under 
Temporary S uspension of Telecom Services (Public Emergency & Public Safety) 
Rules, 2017. 
 
39. On the number of cases where State  Governments have used the powers 
under Section 144 of Cr .P.C. to suspend  telecom/internet services  and w hether 
orders issued under Cr.P.C. are not in contravention of Suspension Rules, 2017, the 
Department have replied that DoT do not maintain any records related to internet 

13 
 
shutdown. DoT has empowered the States to issue suspension orders for telecom 
services under Temporary Suspension of T elecom Services (Public Emergency & 
Public Safety) Rules, 2017. 
 
40. MHA have also replied that Union Home Secretary issues directions for 
suspension of telecom services under Suspension of Telecom Services 
(Amendment) Rules, 2020. Ministry of Home Affairs has  also no information on the 
number of internet shutdown done by the State under Section 144 of Cr.P.C.   
 
41. As per Suspension Rules, orders of temporary suspension of telecom 
services are to be issued by Union/State Home Secretary only.  The Committee 
desired to know as to whether proper procedures have been followed in all the 
internet suspension orders and in how many occasions orders have been issued by 
officers other than those permitted under the Rules. To this, the Department in their 
written submission have stated that DoT do not maintain any records related to the 
procedure followed in the internet shutdown.  As per  Rule 6 of the Temporary 
Suspension of Telecom Services (Public Emergency & Public Safety) Rules, 2017, 
the Review comm ittee records its finding whether the directions issued for the 
suspension are in accordance with the provisions of section 5(2) of the Indian 
Telegraph Act,1885. Records related to orders not in accordance with the Rules may 
be furnished from the concerned Review Committees.  
 
42. To the same query, MHA have informed that directions of suspension of 
telecom services were issued twice in the month of December, 2019 by Ministry of 
Home Affairs with the approval of Union Home Secretary only as Competent 
Authority under the Rule. 
 
 
 
 

14 
 
X. Review Committee for reviewing the decision regarding suspension of 
telecom services – Composition and Powers 
 
(i) Composition 
 
43. One of the important requirements under the Temporary Suspension of 
Telecom Services (Public Emergency and Public Safety) Rules, 2017 is that Review 
Committee has to meet within five day s of issue of directions for suspension of 
services due to public emergency or public safety and record its findings whether the 
directions of suspension issued under the Rules are in accordance with the 
provisions of sub­section (2) of Section 5 of the Indian Telegraph Act, 1885. 
 
44. The composition of Review Committee defined under the Rules are as 
follows: 
For Central Government 
(a)   Cabinet Secretary      Chairman  
(b)  Secretary to the Government of India   Member 
In­charge, Legal Affairs  
      
(c)   Secretary to the Government,    Member 
 Department of Telecommunications   
 
For State Government 
(a)   Chief Secretary     Chairman  
(b)   Secretary Law or Legal Remembrancer  Member 
 In­Charge, Legal Affairs  
 
(c)   Secretary to the State Government   Member 
(other than the Home Secretary) 
 
45. Having observed that the Review Committee consists of functionaries from 
executive, the Committee enquired as to why there is no representation of a Member 
from public or a former or a retired Member of the judiciary  in the Review 
Committee. To this, Secretary, DoT, submitted during evidence as under: 
 “Normally, Sir, the Law Secretaries in States are the judicial officers, they 
are judges. For example, when I was Chief Secretary in Delhi, the Law 

15 
 
Secretary was one of  the very senior District Judge. From what I noticed, 
normally, the persons who come as Law Secretary as judges, they 
certainly put forth their view points on law issues quite firmly.” 
 
46. In this regard, t he representative of State Government of Bihar submitted 
during evidence as under: 
“A Law Secretary is not a bureaucrat, he is a judge. He is among the 
senior most district judges in our State. He is appointed Law Secretary for 
a tenure and there have been many instances when he was elevated as a 
High Court Judge. So, he also applies his judicial mind as a member of 
the committee and he contributes in that respect also. To that extent, it is 
a sort of judicial check also by including that person in this committee.” 
 
 
47. To the Committee’s query as to wheth er an independent voice should not 
feature on the Review Committee, the Department submitted that the current 
composition of Review Committee is balanced. However, they have noted the 
suggestion.   
 
(ii) Powers of the Review Committee 
 
48. When asked about powers vested with the Review Committee and whether 
the Review Committee has the power to  countermand the Suspension orders , the 
Department have replied that t he Review committee records its finding whether the 
directions issued for the suspension are in accordance with the provisions of section 
5(2) of the Indian Telegraph Act,1885.   Under the Temporary Suspension of 
Telecom Services (Public Emergency & Public Safety) Rules, 2017, Review 
Committee is empowered to review all suspension orders issued by the competent 
authority.  
 
49. With regard to number of suspension orders countermand by the Review 
Committee at Union and State level, the Department have replied that n o such 
records are being maintained by DoT.  On this issue, Secretary, DoT,  submitted 
during evidence as under: 
 

16 
 
  “Whether the review committee has overturned or upset the order 
passed”, we do not have the information nor do we collect it but we can 
certainly pass it on to the Ministry of Home Affairs. Sir, tomorrow, if you 
raise a question in Parliament about police and law and order, it will not be 
addressed to us or marked to us, it will be addressed to the Home 
Ministry. So, this is my submission, Sir.” 
 
 
XI. Constitution of Review Committee in all States 
  
50. As per the Temporary Suspension Rules, State Review Committee shall 
consist of Chief Secretary, Law Secretary and one other Secretary.  During the 
evidence, the Committee  were informed that Review Committee was  yet to be 
constituted in Delhi.  In this back ground, the Committee desired to know whether 
Review Committees have been constituted in  all the States including Delhi and the 
measures taken by the Department to ensure that Review Committees ar e 
constituted in all the States . To this,  the Department submitted that constitution of 
the Review Committee is the responsibility of the State Government.  Status of 
formation of Review Committee or otherwise is not monitored by DoT. 
 
51. On this issue the representative of DoT further submitted during evidence as 
under: 
 “I would like to submit that the Department has to work within the 
framework of law which, obviously, all of us know. When an Act is made in 
the Parliament and it has certain provisions, then it is the duty to follow 
those provisions. Now, police a nd public order, without doubt, are State 
subjects and States are responsible for prevention, detection and 
investigation of crimes through their law enforcement machinery. That is 
one point. 
  
 Secondly, under the Act and the rules, the concerned State Governments 
have been empowered to issue orders for temporary suspension of 
telecom services. We believe that the States are responsible entities and 
with due application of mind and in public inte rest, they would be 
exercising these powers. We have not been reviewing this for what each 
state has done in this belief that they are empowered to do it and they are 
accountable in their own systems on how they do it and in the structure 
which we have of governance. We have not thought to ask each State. 
Even if such information was sought by any hon. Member, the nodal 
Ministry for law and order and for police and issues relating to such 

17 
 
suspension is the Ministry of Home Affairs. It is because even in our  
scheme of things, when the Central Government has to make any such 
suspension, it is not the Department of Telecommunications, it is the 
Home Secretary who orders this. So, Sir, my submission would be while 
we absolutely appreciate the concerns which have  been expressed, the 
Department of Telecommunications would not be the nodal agency to 
review what State Governments are doing in this regard provided it is 
happening in the Constitutional framework.” 
 
 
52. The Committee asked as to how many States/UTs have framed their own 
Rules and SoP for internet shutdown and the  measures taken by the Department to 
ensure that States strictly  adhere to the Suspension Rules . To this, the Department 
informed that no such information is available with DoT.  In 2018, Secretary (T) has 
written DO letters to all Chief Secretaries/Administrators of States/UTs to sensitize 
the concerned officials against precipitate actions leading to shutdown to internet 
services and also to ensure that the provisions of the Temporary Suspension of 
Telecom Services (Public Emergency & Public Safety) Rules, 2017 are followed 
strictly. In 2020, the amendment dated 10.11.2020 to Temporary Suspension of 
Telecom Services (Public Emergency & Public Safety) Rules, 2017  have been 
forwarded to all Chief Sec retaries/Administrators mentioning that Hon’ble Supreme 
Court has mandated the publication of all future suspension orders so that the 
affected person can approach the court against such orders; and all orders for 
suspension of Telecom Services must adhere  to the principle of proportionality and 
must not extend beyond necessary duration. 
 
XII. Safeguards Against misuse of provision for Internet Shutdown 
 
53. When the Committee drew attention  of the representative of Bihar to vague 
expression such as ‘objectionable content’ as the ground for shut down of internet 
facilities, the representative of State Government of Bihar,  submitted during the 
evidence as under: 
 “At the first place, I would like to draw your attention towards the Rules 
framed by the State Government, that is, the SOP for temporary 
suspension of internet services that was issued in the month of 
September, 2017 ­­ within a period of six weeks after the relevant Rules 

18 
 
were published by the Central Government. These Rules themselve s 
contain enough safeguards going beyond the Government of India 
Notification to take care of the details. For example, I am reading from the 
Notification No. 8695 dated 26 September, 2017 under para 3 (i) of those 
Rules where it is specified that : “The R eport must come from the 
concerned District Magistrate & SP or the Divisional Commissioner & DIG, 
and at the State ­level, Additional DG Police (Law & Order)”. It further 
states that : “The request for suspension of internet services will be done 
only in su ch conditions when undesirable messages have to be stopped 
by stopping internet and there is no other way of doing so”. It also says 
that : “The relevant grounds will be rumourmongering leading to possibility 
or instances of breach of public peace or law a nd order problem”. It also 
says that : “The officers will take care of the reasons / grounds / needs 
and the possibility if not done”. All these things are there. The period also 
has to be specified and recommended by the State District authorities and 
the period has to be kept to the minimum so that the public are not put to 
inconvenience. Finally, it also says that this suspension of internet 
services will not cover the Government telecom networks to the extent of 
maintaining Government internet and intra net based public services 
including Bihar Wide Area Network, NICNET, National Knowledge 
Network, banking, Railways, etc.” 
 
 
54. Asked about their vi ews on adequate safeguard and SO P for internet 
shutdown, MHA submitted that directions for suspension of telecom/internet services 
are issued  as per procedures and safeguards provided in Temporary Suspension of 
Telecom Services (Amendment) Rules, 2020. 
 
 
XIII. Efficacy of Internet Shutdown 
 
55. Internet Freedom Foundation , an organization working in the field of free 
speech, electronic surveillance data protection, net neutrality and innovation made a 
submission  to the Committee  highlighting the ill effects of internet shutdown as 
under:  
“Aside from the obvious constitutional and human rights challe nges, internet 
shutdowns cause enormous economic losses. Prior studies by institutions like 
Brookings Institution and the Indian Council for Research on International 
Economic Relations(ICRIER) certainly corroborate this. Moreover, a 
representation by the Cellular Operators Association of India(COAI) states 
that telecom operators lose INR 24.5 million per hour in every circle area 

19 
 
where there is a shutdown or throttling.  This is concerning since the telecom 
sector is already under considerable financial str ess and relies on ensuring 
steady ARPUs via data packs for internet usage. COAI's former Director 
General, Mr Rajan Mathews has even stated that other businesses which rely 
on the internet could lose up to 50% of the aforementioned amount.  
 
 Further, the perceived trade­off of internet shutdowns leading to                           
better law and order outcomes with reduced risk of violence or hate speech, 
is dubious in its assumption. First, many media reports indicate citizens tend 
to not be convinced about the success of internet suspensions in curbing 
hateful messaging or disinformation. Second, researchers like Jan Rydzak 
have empirically studied internet shutdowns and observed that internet 
shutdowns are ineffective in pacifying protests and often have the unintended 
consequence of incentivizing violent forms of collective action which require 
less communication and coordination. 
 
 
56. Internet connectivity is of much significance in today’s context when  
Government’s thrust has been more on digitization, including digital India, promotion 
of mobile banking, digital payments, financial inclusion through the internet etc.  
Since suspension of services affect normal citizens in a big way, the Committee 
desired to know what the Government  is doing so that normal citizens’ rights and 
freedom are not affected.  To this, the Department informed that in temporary 
shutdown of internet, Data services are affected. The services of Voice and Text 
(SMS) are, however,  available to the users.  
 
57. Keeping in view the immense hardship faced by general public during internet 
shutdown which affect services like business, education, health etc., t he Committee 
enquired whether the Department of Telecommunications  have explored less 
restrictive mechanism short of total internet shutdown to deal with civil unrest or  
other national security issues, the Department replied that s uspensions are done by 
the State Governments and the area of operation and number of days is up to the 
authority suspending the servi ces.  DoT is not in a position to comment on the 
subject matter. 
 
 

20 
 
58. Asked about overall impact of telecom/internet shutdown on common people 
and whether any assessment has been made in this regard, the Department 
informed that no such assessment has been made by them. MHA too submitted that  
no such assessment is available with them. 
 
59. The Committee have  also been informed that since the actual shutdown is 
ordered by either the State Governments or by the Ministry of Home Affairs, the 
Department of Telecommunications are not assessing whether the objectives have 
been achieved or not .  The responsibility for assessing the effectiveness of internet 
shutdown lies completely either with the MHA or the concerned State Governments.   
 
60. When asked to comment  on the above observations, MHA in a written note 
have stated that directions for the suspension of telecom/internet services are issued 
due to  public emergency or public safety as per the Temporary Suspension of 
Telecom Services (Amendment) Rules, 2020 . Internet shutdown is done as a 
preventive measure if the situation arises concerning the interest of the public safety, 
the sovereignty and integrity of India, the security of the State, friendly relations with 
foreign States or public order or the prevention of incitement to the commission of an 
offence. Suspension is revoked as and when the situation comes under control. 
 
61. When the Committee pointed out that riots happened during pre ­internet and 
post­internet phases and if t he Department has undertaken any  study to establish  
correlation between internet and communal riots, representatives of both the 
DoT/MHA submitted that they are not in a position to furnish reply .   DoT has not 
done any such study. MHA, however, submitted that  Internet has fast and vast 
increased capability of spreading rumours and malicious content by the criminals 
and anti ­social elements . Suspension of telecom services / internet shutdown is 
done in the interest of public emergency and public safety as per safeguards 
provided in Suspension of Telecom Services (Amendment) Rules, 2020. 
 

21 
 
62. Asked to furnish their comments on the assumption that internet shutdown 
leads to better law and order outcomes with reduced risk of violence or hate speech  
assumption, the Department have stated that the matter does not pertain to DoT. To 
the same query, MHA submitted that directions for the suspension of 
telecom/internet services are issued only due to public emergency or public safety 
as per the Temporary Suspension of Telecom Services (Amendment) Rules, 2020. 
 
 
63. On the issue of internet shutdown affecting the lives of people, Secretary, 
DoT, submitted during evidence as under: 
 “Sir, while we are implementing the Indian Telegraph Act and the DoT 
administers this Act and makes rules thereunder, the actual shutdown is 
ordered either by the State Governments or by the Ministry of Home 
Affairs. The Department of Telecommunications doe s not order a 
shutdown. So, we are not actually gauging or assessing the efficacy of the 
objectives which were sought to be achieved and whether the se were 
achieved or not, but having said that, I would hasten to add that certainly, 
the Government, the Exe cutive would take such a decision only in the 
interest of public order or safety and security as per the provisions of the 
rules and the Act. All such decisions are justiciable. The aggrieved 
persons can go to the court and if the Executive has exceeded it s 
mandate, it can certainly be challenged not only before the hon. 
representatives, but also in the courts of law. My experience otherwise, 
over the years, has been that social media, in particular, can be a medium 
to propagate issues or things which can l ead to escalation of problems. 
So, it would be necessary and appropriate to take recourse of the existing 
provisions of the law and rules in the interest of security, public safety etc. 
As I said, the caveat which I made in the beginning, this is not the 
mandate of DoT.” 
 
 
64. On being asked to be specific on parameters/metrics, the r epresentative of 
MHA during evidence further added: 
 “Sir, for instance, in a riot situation which we witnessed in Delhi a few 
months back, the very evident metric would be the number of incendiary 
and provocative messages which are meant to disrupt public peace and 
order which are going around on social media. Definitely, we can get 
together some kind of an estimate which may not be extreme ly accurate, 
but an estimate nevertheless of how we could stop that messaging 
through these internet or mobile shutdowns. While the shutdown is, of 
course, a drastic measure to stop that kind of dissemination of provocative 
messages, but in such times, the  estimation of the law enforcement 

22 
 
agencies is that it is well worth the trouble that is caused to some 
members of the society because it prevents a larger harm. That is the 
estimation. It may not be an objective estimation. It may be a slightly 
subjective estimation, but it is based on experience, it is based on prior 
sort of view on these things and it is done in the rarest of rare cases.” 
 
 
XIV. International Scenario: Telecom/Internet Shutdown Rules in Other 
Countries 
 
65. Regarding r ules/laws governing telecom/internet shutdown in other 
democratic countries of the world , the Committee asked w hether any attempt has 
been made by the Department to study the telecom/internet shutdown rules adopted 
in other democratic countries like USA, UK and other European  countries.  To this, 
the Department have replied that no such study has been conducted by DoT. 
 
66. As per media report India had maximum number of internet shutdowns and 
has emerged as the internet shutdown capital of the world.  When as ked to react on 
these reports Do T submitted that no such information is available with them.  
Sufficient safeguards are inbuilt in the Temporary Suspension of Telecom Services 
(Public Emergency &Public Safety) Rules, 2017 .  Internet shutdowns can only be 
ordered by the competent authority on the grounds of Public Emergency and Public 
Safety   MHA have stated that s uspension of telecom services/ internet shutdown is 
done in the interest of public emergency and public safety as  per safeguards 
provided in Suspension of Telecom Services (Amendment) Rules, 2020. 
   
XV. Time period for suspension orders and Consultation with the 
Stakeholders 
 
67. In the light of the Hon’ble Supreme Court judgment and in consultation with all 
stakeholders, Temporary Suspension of Telecom Services (Public Emergency & 
Public Safety) Rules, 2017 has been amended vide Gazette Notification dated 
10.11.2020 and has been i ssued by DoT vide O.M dated 10.11.2020.  It is 
envisaged that any suspension order issued under these rules shall not be in 
operation for more than fifteen days, all such orders be published to enable the 
affected persons to challenge it before the High Co urt or appropriate forum and the 

23 
 
order must adhere to the principle of proportionality.   When the Committee desired 
to know how the Government have arrived at the suspension order to be in 
operation for a maximum period of 15 days and what factors have bee n taken into 
consideration for this, the Department informed that the maximum Period of 15 days 
has been arrived after general consensus with the relevant stakeholders.   Factors of 
Public Safety and Public Emergency have been taken into consideration. 
 
68. On being asked further details on the number of stakeholders consulted by 
DoT bef ore issuing this amendment and mechanisms laid down for regular 
consultations with various stakeholders inclu ding civil societies and public . DoT 
submitted that they have consulted Ministry of Law & Justice and Ministry of Home 
Affairs before issuing the said amendment dated 10.11.2020. No mechanism, as yet, 
has been laid down for regular consultation with various stakeholders including civil 
societies and public.  
 
69. On this iss ue, Secretary, DoT, submitted before the Committee during 
evidence as under: 
 “Telecom operators and the internet service providers, certainly are 
important stakeholders also. We have not formally consulted them yet, but 
we take your point. We can have a meeting with them and get their 
viewpoint also; certainly.” 
 
70. To a related query on whether the public have been consulted as they are 
directly affected by suspension of telecom services, he further added: 
 “Sir, we have not envisaged the situation of consu ltation with the general 
public I do not know how pragmatic it would be, and then we have the 
benefit of the hon. representatives like yourself and other Members, who 
are representing the public. So, we do get feedback from you. Whatever 
the hon. Committee  says, we will duly factor in what we are processing 
without doubt.” 
 
 
71. Media had reported about many complaints from students who have lost one 
year because they are unable to upload examination registrations on the internet 
during the shutdown period.  Interruptions in telecom services also impact s the 

24 
 
business and services such as hospital administration, etc. In this background, t he 
Committee enquired as to whether any suggestions have been received from 
various stakeholders/public for review of the telecom/internet suspension rules and if 
so the main suggestions received from them.  To this, the Department through their 
written submission informed the Committee that s uggestions have been received 
from various non ­Governmental organisations on the subje ct of Temporary 
Suspension of Telecom Services (Public Emergency & Public Safety) Rules, 
2017.These are as under: 
a) As directed by the Hon’ble Supreme Court in Anuradha  Bhasin v UoI, 
Government of India should commence to review the extant Temporary 
Suspension of Telecom Services (Public Emergency & Public Safety) 
Rules, 2017  under Section 5(2) of the Telegraph Act. Such a reform 
requires a public consultation. 
 
b) As per the directions of Hon’ble Supreme Court an advisory must be 
urgently issued to all state governments on the legal standards and 
limitations articulated by the Supreme Court. This must specifically include 
the necessity for proactive publication of all orders passed under the 
Temporary Suspension of Telecom Services (Public Emergency & Pu blic 
Safety) Rules, 2017. 
 
c) The Government of India should commence a dialogue to develop a 
system to centralized record keeping of all internet shutdown orders. 
 
d) In order to sensitize authorities on the financial losses and injury to the 
right of trade and  profession under Article 19(1)(g) caused by internet 
shutdowns, the Government of India should commence periodic economic 
impact assessment which compute the exact losses stemming from 
internet suspensions. This should become an intrinsic part of the nati onal 
economic survey.   
 
XVI. Access to Internet and Constitutional Position 
 
72. The Hon’ble Supreme court vide its order dated 10 January 2020 has made 
following observations: 
“None of the counsels have argued for declaring the right to access the 
internet as a fundamental right and therefore we are not expressing any view 

25 
 
on the same.  We are confining ourselves to declaring that the right to 
freedom of speech and expression un der Article 19(1)(a), and the right to 
carry on any trade or business under 19(1)(g), using the medium of internet is 
constitutionally protected.” 
 
73. On being enquired about the status accorded by international bodies like UN 
and other democratic countries w ith regard to the right of the citizens to access 
internet, it is stated that no such information is available with DoT. 
 
74. On judicial pronouncement made by the courts in the country on the right of 
the citizens to access internet, the Department replied that Hon’ble Supreme Court 
in the cases of WP(C)  No.1031/2019 and WP(C) No. 1164/2019 has made 
observations on the right of the citizens to access internet.  
 
75. Regarding the present legal status of citi zens’ right to ac cess internet and   
whether citizens have any right to approach the courts in case of any violation or 
shutting down of telecom /internet services by the Government, MHA have replied 
that citizens have always the right to approach the Court s. MHA has already made 
available copies of directions issued by the Competent Authority in public domain. 
 
76. Internet Connectivity is of importance due to policy initiative of the 
Government to promote mobile banking, digital payments, financial inclusions,  etc. 
The Government has embarked upon a program to take services to citizen through 
mobiles and internet apart from promoting a cashless economy. In absence of 
telecom connectivity, banking transactions using credit/debit card/UPI and internet 
banking get affected.  
 
77. Secretary, DoT, submitted during evidence as under: 
 “The Government places the utmost importance on the need for a very 
vibrant ecosystem of internet services, of mobile services, of digital 
communication. The hon. Members would be extremely happy to know 
that even in remote locations, like Andaman Islands a nd Lakshadweep 
Islands, this Government has been putting up sub ­marine cables etc. to 
ensure that the people of these very remote areas, for the first time in the 

26 
 
history, have access to free and unfettered internet services.   Having said 
that, while the p rovision of these services which are citizen ­centric – 
internet and mobile services – is very essential for the growth of an 
economy, it is also important to keep in mind that some of these services 
may be misused. I do not have with me to be pointedly ans wering your 
question, whether any specific study has been done, that I can show you 
right now, but there is umpteen evidence available with law enforcement 
agencies, both in the Centre and in the States, that these services are 
also misused especially in times of stress.” 
 
 
XVII. Principle of Proportionality and Procedure for Lifting of Internet 
Shutdown 
 
78. Any order suspending internet issued under the suspension rules, must 
adhere to the principle of proportionality and must not extend beyond necessary 
duration.  However, in the absence of any study to assess the eff ectiveness of 
internet shutdown, the Committee asked how the Government will decide on t he 
principle of proportionality and w hether any parameters have been laid down in th is 
regard, the Department replied that parameters can be furnished from the competent 
authority imposing Telecom shutdowns. 
 
79. The Suspension Rules do not mention the procedure for lifting of the 
shutdown.  Subsequent to notification dated 10.11.2020, any suspension order shall 
not be in operation for more than 15 days. 
 
 
80. On the considerations taken in the past for lifting of the shutdown, MHA have 
informed the Committee that d irections for the suspension of telecom / internet 
services are issued due to  public emergency or public safety as per the Temporary 
Suspension of Telecom Services (Amendment) Rules, 2020 for the specified period 
only as mentioned in the particular order and services are automatically restored by 
the service providers after the expiry of the suspension period.  
 
 
 

27 
 
XVIII. Selective Banning of Services  and continuation of services over 
Government Telecom Network  
 
81. Bihar Government had issued in their order that t he suspension of internet 
services will not cover the Government telecom network to the extent of maintaining 
Government interest and intranet based public services including Bihar Vide Area 
Network, NICNET, National Knowledge Networks, Banking, Railways, etc.   In this 
background, the Committee desired to know whether  it is  technically feasible to 
shutdown only t hose services likely to be used by terrorist/anti ­social elements 
rather than shutting down internet as a whole. The Committee were informed that 
the Department need more time to study the question. 
 
82. The Department informed the Committee in a written reply  that s ervices 
hosted on cloud are difficult to selectively ban since they operate from multiple 
locations in multiple countries and continuously shift from one server to the other.  
However, websites operating through fixed URLs can be banned.  
 
 
83. On this issue, representative of DoT submitted during evidence as under: 
 “Sir, you all are much knowledgeable. You all are aware that the services 
which you are talking about – Facebook, WhatsApp, Telegram etc. –they 
are basically categorised as over the top telecom services, OTT services  
in short. These OTT services are riding over the existing telecom service 
provider’s network. Now, Department of Telecom has categorically 
requested that recommendations on the state of OTT services being made 
available in th e country to TRAI. It is body which provides the 
recommendation on the technology which is to be inducted into the 
network plus a lot of other things related to the telecom technologies.  
Recently, Department of Telecom has received a recommendation from 
TRAI on the OTT services and one of the major recommendations of the 
TRAI is that currently the OTT services are not required to be regulated. 
So, once the recommendation has been given to DoT, DoT is examining 
the recommendation and will take an appropriate  decision on the 
recommendations. We certainly would be in a position to provide the 
Committee once the decision is taken whether we would be able to block 
the OTT service or not. That is what the hon. Members of the Committee 
are looking for.” 
 
  

28 
 
Part-II 
 
Observations/Recommendations 
Regulatory Powers vested in Government to Restrict the Telecom Services  
1. The Central Government grants licenses under the provisions of 
Section 4 of Indian Telegraph Act, 1885 for various types of telecom services 
including Access Services, Internet Services, etc. Section 5 of Indian 
Telegraph Act, 1885 empowers Government to take possession of licensed 
telegraphs, to order interception of messages and issue instructions for not 
transmitting the message. The “message” means a ny communication sent by 
telegraph, or given to a telegraph officer or to be delivered.  Temporary 
Suspension of Telecom Services (Public Emergency & Public Safety) Rules, 
2017 and its amendment dated 10.11.2020 have been issued in accordance 
with section 5 (2) of the Indian Telegraph Act , 1885 .  Under clause 10.1(ii) of 
Unified License Agreement, the Licensor reserves the right to suspend the 
operation of License/Service Authorization in whole or in part, at any time, if, 
in the opinion of the Licensor, it is nec essary or expedient to do so in the 
public interest or in the interest of the security of the State or for the proper 
conduct of the Telegraph. Section 7 of Indian Telegraph Act, 1885 empowers 
the Central Government to make rules for the conduct of telegraphs. Under 
this Act “The Central Government may, from time to time, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, make rules consistent with this Act for the conduct of all or 
any telegraphs established, maintained or worked by the Government or by 
persons licensed under this Act.” 

29 
 
In order to streamline the process of Telecom shutdowns in the Country 
and in pursuance to the provisions contained in Section 5 of the Indian 
Telegraph Act 1885, the Temporary Suspension of Telecom Services (Public 
Emergency & Public Safety) Rules, 2017 were notified  on 07th August, 2017. 
Some of the Salient features of these Rules are: (i) o rders of temporary 
suspension of telecom services are to be issued by Union/State Home 
Secretary only. For emergent cases, Joint Secretary Level officer can issue 
order subject to confirmation from Competent Authority within 24 hours. If no 
confirmation is received from Competent Authority within 24 hours, then such 
orders cease to exist. (ii) Orders contain reasons for such directions and are 
to be forwarded to Review Committee la test by next working day.                      
(iii) Directions of suspension to Telecom Service Provider have to be 
conveyed by an officer not below the rank of Superintendent of Police or 
equivalent rank. (iv) Review Committee has to meet within five days of issue of 
directions for suspension of services due to public emergency or public safety 
and record its findings whether the directions of suspension issued under the 
Rules are in accordance with the provisions of sub -section (2) of Section 5 of 
the Indian Telegraph Act, 1885. 
 
Hon’ble Supreme court in its judgment dated 10.01.2020 in the said 
petitions apropos to the internet  restrictions, inter alia, directed that (i) The 
Respondent State/competent authorities are directed to publish all orders in 
force and any future orders under  Section 144, Cr.P.C and for suspension of 
telecom services, including internet, to enable the affected persons to 

30 
 
challenge it before the High Court or appropriate forum. (ii) Declare that the 
freedom of speech and expression and the freedom to practice any profession 
or carry on any trade, business or occupation over the medium of internet 
enjoys constitutional protection under Article 19(1)(a) and Article 19(1)(g). The 
restriction upon such fundamental  rights should be in consonance with the 
mandate under Article 19 (2) and (6) of the Constitution, inclusive of the test of 
proportionality. (iii) An order suspending internet services indefinitely is 
impermissible under the  Temporary Suspension of Telecom Services (Public 
Emergency or Public Service) Rules, 2017. Suspension can be utilized for 
temporary duration only. (iv) Any order suspending internet issued under the 
Suspension Rules, must adhere to the principle of propor tionality and must 
not extend beyond necessary duration. (v) Any order suspending internet 
under the Suspension Rules is subject to judicial review based on the 
parameters set out herein. (vi) The existing Suspension Rules neither provide 
for a periodic re view nor a time limitation for an order issued under the 
Suspension Rules. Till this gap is filled, Supreme Court direct that the Review 
Committee constituted under Rule 2(5) of the Suspension Rules must conduct 
a periodic review within seven working days of the previous review, in terms 
of the requirements under Rule 2(6). (vii) Direct the respondent 
State/competent authorities to review all orders suspending internet services 
forthwith. (viii) Orders not in accordance with the law laid down above, must 
be revoked. Further, in future, if there is a necessity to pass fresh orders, the 
law laid down herein must be foll owed. (ix) In any case, the State/concerned 

31 
 
authorities are directed to consider forthwith allowing government websites, 
localized/limited e -banking facilities, hospital services and other essential 
services, in those regions, wherein the internet service s are not likely to be 
restored immediately. 
In the light of the Hon’ble Supreme Court judgment and in consultation 
with all stakeholders, Temporary Suspension of Telecom Services (Public 
Emergency & Public Safety) Rules, 2017 has been amended vide Gazette 
Notification dated 10.11.2020.  It is envisaged that any suspension order 
issued under these rules shall not be in operation for more than fifteen days, 
all such orders be published to enable the affected persons to challenge it 
before the High Court or a ppropriate forum and the order must adhere to the 
principle of proportionality.   
 
 The Committee note that internet is of immense importance in the 
present digital era.   It is the lifeline which is propelling businesses and 
services, permitting students to enroll for important examination, and enabling 
home delivery of essentials.  The Government are also taking several policy 
initiatives to promote digitisation in governance to take more and more 
Government services to the people at their doorsteps. Covid-19 pandemic has 
significantly accelerated the adoption of digital technologies with far reaching 
implications across the sectors and services. Growing mobile and internet 
penetration and its effective use for ensuring unhindered busi ness and 
services has become the new normal. In such a scenario, it is but essential 
that any interruption to these services should be avoided and where  

32 
 
unavoidable, the power to interrupt needs to be exercised with abundant 
caution.  Even the Supreme Court in its verdict  had clearly decla red that 
freedom of speech and expression and the freedom to practice any profession 
or carry on any trade or occupation over the medium of internet enjoys  
constitutional protection under Article 19(2) and (6)  of the Constitution. 
Considering the growing importance of internet on the one hand, and frequent 
shutting down of telecom services/internet by the authorities affecting the life 
and liberty of people , on the other, the Committee took up the subj ect for a  
detailed examination.  Observations and Recommendations of the Committee 
are given in subsequent paragraphs. 
Delay in framing of Suspension Rules and inadequacy of subsequent 
amendments  
 
2. The Committee are disappointed to note that though the regulatory 
powers of the Government to restrict the telecom services were outlined under 
various provisions of the Indian Telegraph Act, the Department gave a serious 
thought to streamlining the process only in the year 2017.   I t was only in 2017 
that the Department c ame out with the Suspension Rules for regulating 
internet shutdown in the country.  The Committee are  given to understand  
that before the Suspension Rules came into force, telecom/internet shutdowns 
were largely being done under Section 144 of Cr.P.C. in an arbitrary manner 
without an adequate safety valve.  Further, though the Department came out 
with Suspension Rules, these were sketchy and far too inadequate , lacking in 
several aspects which needed clarity and precision.   T his is clear from the 
fact that the Hon’ble Supreme Court  took cognizance of this  problem in 

33 
 
Anuradha Bhasin vs. UoI and Ghulam Nabi Azad vs. UoI and Anuradha Bhasin  
case wherein it was pointed out that n o adequate safeguards have been 
provided in the Rules.  The Committee  are disturbed to note  that the 
Suspension Rules, 2017 ha d been haphazardly formulated and it required  the 
intervention of the  apex Court to lay down various safeguards  in the 
provisions.  It is only after the Supreme Court observed and pin p ointed the 
loopholes in the existing provisions that the Government came out with 
amendments to the Suspension Rules, 2017.   What is all the more 
disheartening to note is that when there was a second chance  for the 
Department to ensure adequate safeguards in these Rules, then also the Rules 
have not been strengthened and many of the provisions have been left open -
ended (as discussed in subsequent paras), restricting the amendments only to 
those provisions pointed out by the Hon’ble Supreme Court.  The Committee 
feel that the amendment s made in the Suspension Rules  are still inadequate.  
While on the one hand, the Department/MHA need to ensure adherence to the 
orders of Supreme Court in letter and spirit, on the other hand, there is a need 
to review/revisit all the provisions so as to make the Rules/amendments all 
inclusive and plug the deficiencies. The Committee recommend the 
Department to review the releva nt Sections in co -ordination with the Ministry 
of Home Affairs and the Ministry of Law and Justice to address all aspects of 
telecom/internet shutdown in the country.  If required, the views of State/UT 
Governments may also be sought.  The Rules/amendments should also take 
into account the technological developments taking place in the area of  

34 
 
telecom/internet so as to bring the Rules/regulations in tune with changing 
times and technology so that Government is able to achieve its objective with 
bare minimum disturbance to the public. 
 
Grounds for Temporary Suspension of Telecom/Internet Services  
 
3. The Committee note that police  and public order are State subjects as 
per the Constitution and States are responsible for prevention, detection and 
investigation of crimes through their law enforcement machinery. Concerned 
State Governments are empowered to issue orders for temporary s uspension 
of internet services in the State or part thereof under the provisions contained 
in the Temporary Suspension of Telecom Services (Public Emergency or 
Public Safety) Rules, 2017. The Committee have been informed that any 
suspension which is done, is for public order or for reasons of law and order 
and public safety. ‘Public Emergency’ and ‘Public Safety’ are the two grounds 
on which internet shutdown can be ordered.  On being asked what constitute 
‘Public Emergency’ and ‘Public Safety’ , the Department have stated that 
parameters have been laid down in section 5(2) of the Indian Telegraph Act, 
1885. Section 5(2) of the Indian Telegraph Act, 1885  which states “On the 
occurrence of any public emergency, or in the interest of the public safe ty, the 
Central Government or a State Government or any officer specially authorised 
in this behalf by the Central Government or a State Government may, if 
satisfied that it is necessary or expedient so to do in the interests of the 
sovereignty and integri ty of India, the security of the State, friendly relations 
with foreign states or public order or for preventing incitement to the 

35 
 
commission of an offence, for reasons to be recorded in writing, by order, 
direct that any message or class of messages to or  from any person or class 
of persons, or relating to any particular subject, brought for transmission by 
or transmitted or received by any telegraph, shall not be transmitted, or shall 
be intercepted or detained, or shall be disclosed to the Government mak ing 
the order or an officer thereof mentioned in the order: Provided that the press 
messages intended to be published in India of correspondents accredited to 
the Central Government or a State Government shall not be intercepted or 
detained, unless their t ransmission has been prohibited under this sub -
section.” M inistry of Home Affairs have replied that the expression public 
emergency, has not been defined in the statute, but contours broadly 
delineating its scope and features are discernible from the secti on which has 
to be read as a whole. Appropriate authority has to form an opinion with 
regard to the occurrence of a public emergency with a view to taking further 
action under this section. 
 The Committee note that under the present mec hanism/dispensation no 
parameters have been laid down to decide the merit or justice of the 
telecom/internet shutdowns. In the absence of any such laid down parameters, 
internet shutdowns have been ordered purely on the basis of subjective 
assessment and reading of the ground situations by District level officer and 
is largely based on executive decisions. The Committee also note that even 
though Public Emergency and Public Safety are the only grounds on which 
internet shutdowns can be imposed, as of n ow, there is no clear cut definition 

36 
 
of what constitute Public Emergency and Public safety. State Government s 
are exercising their own judgment to decide the merits of the situation to 
impose internet shutdown. The result is that even though  internet shutdown 
can be ordered strictly on grounds of ‘Public Emergency’ and ‘Public Safety’ , 
it is reported that Governments have resorted to telecom/internet shutdown on 
grounds not so pressing and have been regularly using this as a  tool for 
routine policing and even administrative purposes, such as preventing 
cheating in exams to defusing local crime, which do not amount to large scale 
public safety concerns and certainly do not amount to a ‘Public Emergency’.  
What is all the more disturbing is that the data relating to the number of 
shutdowns are not codified , leaving the procedure open ended for 
misinterpretation, subjective assessment and misuse, (the absence of data on 
shutdown is dealt in subsequent pages ).  Suspension Rules ha ve been 
grossly misused leading to huge economic loss  and also causing untold 
suffering to the public, as well as severe reputational  damage to the country.   
The Committee are of the view that  when the Government’s thrust is on 
digitization and knowledge economy with free and open access to int ernet at 
its core, frequent suspension of internet on flimsy grounds is uncalled for and 
must be avoided. There is a need to monitor the exercise of this  provision so 
that these are not misused to the disadvantage of people at large.  The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that a proper mechanism is put in place at 
the earliest to decide on the merit or appropriateness of telecom/internet 
shutdowns. Defined parameters of what constitutes public emergency and 

37 
 
public safety may also be adopted and codified so as to ensure that there is 
no ambiguity in deciding the ground by different States while implementing 
the Suspension Rules.  
Maintenance of Official Data on Internet Shutdown 
4. The Com mittee note that records relating to telecom services/internet 
shutdowns ordered by State Governments are neither maintained by the 
Department of Telecommunications nor  the Ministry of Home Affairs.   As of 
now, the Department have no mechanism to review how many States have 
issued internet suspension orders,  including their details, reasons etc.   The 
Ministry of Home Affairs informed the Committee that National Crime Records 
Bureau (NCRB) collects information on certain aspects of crime.  Communal 
riots is one of them.  The information is collected on a regular basis.  The 
Ministry have further informed the Committee that the suspension of internet 
for the purpose of public order, etc. does not actu ally come in the ambit of 
crimes and is not within the purview of the NCRB. At the moment, there is also 
no proposal in MHA to collect this information at Central level. 
 The Committee received written submissions from the State of Bihar, UT 
of NCT of Delh i, UT of J&K  and State of Kerala .  The State Government of 
Bihar have informed the Committee that between August, 2018 to August, 
2020, internet shutdowns have been issued six times.  UT of J&K have 
informed the Committee that since issuance of directions by the Hon’ble 
Supreme Court, a total of 93 orders, including 76 orders issued by the 
competent authority to the effect of confirming the directions by the 

38 
 
authorized officers, have been issued.  Government of NCT of Delhi have 
informed the Committee that no decisions have been taken by Govt. of NCT of 
Delhi in the last two years on shutting down internet and telecom services in 
Delhi.  The Ministry of Home Affairs have ordered suspension of internet twice 
in December, 2019. The Committee have also been informed that no temporary 
suspension of telecom/internet services under Temporary Suspension of 
Telecom Services (Public Emergency or Public Safety) Rules, 2017 was done 
by the State of Kerala, since 2017. The Committee also n ote that various 
agencies have compiled the number of internet shutdown s in the country. As 
per one Media Report, between January 2012 and March 2021, there were 518 
Government imposed internet shutdown  across India resulting in the highest 
number of inter net blockings in the world by far. However, there is no 
mechanism to verify this claim/assertion as both DoT and MHA do not 
maintain any record of internet shutdown orders by the States. It is surprising 
to note that records related to internet shutdowns ordered by State 
Governments are not maintained by either DoT or MHA and  both the 
Ministries/Departments are not aware of the number of internet shutdowns 
imposed by the States.  They have made the plea that police and public order 
are essentially State su bjects and suspension of Internet does not actually 
come under the ambit of crimes.  This has resulted in the absence of any 
appropriate mechanism to verify the number of internet shutdowns in the 
country and the reasons for imposing such shutdowns.  The  Committee 
observe that  in the absence of such  a verifiable mechanism, the 

39 
 
Department/MHA do not have any means to ascertain whether internet 
shutdowns have been clamped strictly as per the Suspension Rules or the 
order given by the Supreme Court.  The Com mittee are not satisfied with such 
a reply and draw attention  of the Department  to the Standard Operating  
Procedure for interception laid down in the Notification No. G.S.R. 780 (E) 
dated 27 th October, 2009 under Section 69(2) of the IT Act, 2000  which 
provides for maintenance of records by designated officer , review of 
directions of competent authority, etc . The Committee strongly  recommend 
that both the Department of Telecommunications and the Ministry of Home 
Affairs should establish a mechanism at the earliest to maintain a centralised 
database of all internet shutdown orders in the country, which will contain 
various types of  information on internet shutdowns, such as the number of 
times suspension has been  imposed, reasons, duration, decision of the 
competent authority, decision of the Review Committees and also whether any 
internet shutdown has been ordered by resorting to Section 144 of Cr. PC. etc. 
Such information should also be made available in the public domain which 
will not only help in transparency but also course correction in case of 
deviation from Rules/procedures and to gauge its impact on the economy.     
Rules Governing Internet Shutdown in the Country : Temporary Suspension of 
Telecom Services Rules, 2017 vs. Section 144, Cr. P.C.  
 
5. The Committee note that telecom shutdown is governed as per 
Temporary Suspension of Telecom Services (Public Emergency & Public 
Safety) Rules, 2017.  Amendment to the said Rules ha ve been notified  on 
10.11.2020 which envisaged that any suspension order issued under these 

40 
 
rules shall not be in operation for more than fifteen days etc. Hon’ble Supreme 
Court in its order dated 10 th January, 2020 had observed that t he Respondent 
State/competent authorities are directed to publish all orders in force and any 
future orders under  Section 144 , Cr.P.C and for suspension of telecom 
services, includin g internet, to enable the affected persons to challenge it 
before the High Court or appropriate forum. This has raised the issue whether 
internet shutdown can be ordered under Section 144, Cr.P.C and if so what are 
the safety measures.  When asked, Secretary, DoT, during the evidence stated 
that his understating is that prior to these Rules, recourse was taken to 
Section 144 to do the suspension. However, once the Rules have come  into 
force, then the suspension is done under these Rules.   Asked as to whether 
SDM under the rules, or under the 144 Cr.P.C., has an authority to order an 
internet shutdown,  t he Department have clarified that under such situation a 
Joint Secretary level officer can order  a shutdown and within 24 hours the 
appropriate authority has to approve it.  Telecom shutdown is governed as per 
Temporary Suspension of Telecom Services (Public Emergen cy & Public 
Safety) Rules, 2017 and it cannot be order ed under Section 144 Cr.P.C.  under 
any circumstances.  The Committee have been informed that as per 
Suspension Rules, orders of temporary suspension of telecom services are to 
be issued by Union/State Home Secretary only.  At the same time, asked as to 
whether DoT/MHA have any information on States resorting to Section 144 
Cr.P.C. for telecom/internet suspension, the Department have submitted that 
they do not maintain any records related to the procedure followed in the 

41 
 
internet shutdown and hence are  not aware of any order issued by officers 
other than those permitted under the Rules.   
 It is surprising to note that the Department of Telecommunication s/MHA 
are not aware whether States have so far ordered shutting down of in ternet 
under section 144 of Cr.P.C. The Committee feel that there is an urgent need to 
sensitize the States /UTs about the new position that they no longer can 
suspend internet under Section 144 of Cr.P.C. and internet shutdowns can be 
ordered only under the Suspension Rules, 2017.  The Committee desire that a 
robust monitoring mechanism be put in place by the Department so that 
States/UTs do not resort to section 144 of Cr.P.C. to shutdown internet in the ir 
territory.  Appropriate action may also be taken against the States /UTs which 
deviate from the Rules to maintain sanctity of these Rules.   While the 
Committee expressed concern about the prolonged internet shutdown in 
Jammu and Kashmir, Government indicated that thi s was  undertaken for 
reasons of national security.  
Composition, Powers and functions of Review Committees  to review the 
decision on Telecom Suspension 
 
6. The Committee note that the Review Committee  constituted for the 
purpose has to meet within five days of issue of directions for suspension of 
services due to public emergency or public safety and record its findings 
whether the directions of suspension issued under the Rules are in 
accordance with the provisions of sub -section (2) of Section 5 of the Indi an 
Telegraph Act, 1885.  So far as the composition of the R eview Committee is 
concerned, the Committee note that a t the Central level Cabinet Secretary is 

42 
 
the Chairman,  Secretary, In-charge, Legal Affairs and Secretary, Department 
of Telecommunications are the Members of the Review Committee.  At the 
State levels, Chief Secretary  is the Chairman, Secretary Law or Legal 
Remembrancer, In-Charge, Legal Affairs , and Secretary to the State 
Government (other than the Home Secretary)  are the Members.  The 
Committee have been informed that normally , the Law Secretaries in S tates 
are the judicial officers; in many cases,  they are judges. The persons with a 
judicial background who come as Law Secretary, certainly put forth their view 
points on law issues quite  firmly.  The Committee observe that even though 
the Law Secretary is a judicial officer and not a bureaucrat, as maintained by 
the Department, the Committee feel that the composition of the Review 
Committees is largely confined to the executive side of the Government and 
there is a need to make the Review Committees more broadbased by including 
more non-official Members such as retired Judges, Members of the public, etc. 
so as to  enable them to  gauge the situation in the  right broadest possible 
perspective and provide a critical and objective assessment of the ground 
situation.   
 
 The Committee further note that the Department have no record of 
information on the number of  decisions on orders of suspension  
countermanded by the Review Committee.  This is vital piece of information 
which need to be maintained by the Department for course correction.   
Considering the  fact that  Review Committees  are intended to  act as  an 
important instrument to ensure checks and balances , the Committee 

43 
 
recommend that the composition of the Review Committee should be 
expanded so as to include non -official Members, such as retired Judges,  
eminent citizens, heads of   Pubic organizations, TSPs etc. To this end, the 
Committee also desire the Department to explore the possibility of including 
the local MP and MLA in the Review Committee , as they know the ground 
reality.  The Committee further recommend that DoT/MHA should take 
necessary steps so that authentic data on  the decisions taken by the Review 
Committee are maintained .  This will help in understanding whether all 
telecom/internet shutdowns have been issued by the competent authority  as 
per established procedure and whether due process of law have been followed 
while issuing the orders for telecom/internet shutdown.  
 
Constitution of Review Committees in all States 
7. The Committee note that as per the Suspension Rules, 2017, a Review 
Committee has to be constituted in all States to review the directions for 
suspension of services due to public emergen cy or public safety and record 
its findings whether the directions of suspension issued under the Rules are 
in accordance with the provisions of Sub-Section (2) of Section  5 of the Indian 
Telegraph Act, 1885. The Committee have been informed that Review 
Committee is yet to be constituted in Delhi.  When the Committee desired to 
know the status of constitution of Review Committees in all the States, the 
Department replied that constitution of the Review Committee  is the 
responsibility of the State Governments and the status of formation of Review 

44 
 
Committee or otherwise is not monitored by DoT.  MHA ha ve also replied that 
this has to be replied by DoT. 
The Committee feel that constitution of Review  Committee by all  
States/UTs is an essential pre-requisite to ensure adequate checks and 
balances in exercising the Suspension Rules.  It is, therefore, absolutely 
necessary that the Review  Committees are constituted in all the states.  
Considering this, the Committee find  it strange that the Department do not 
have information whether Review Committees have been constituted in all 
States/UTs. The Department have simply replied that it is the responsibility of 
the State Governments and there is no mechanism to ascertain whet her 
Review Committees have been constituted in all States /UTs. The Committee 
feel that being the nodal Department for the Telecom Suspension Rules,  it is 
the duty of the Department to see  and ensure  that Review Committees  are 
constituted in all the States. The role of the Department is not limited to mere 
issue of  Rules and Guidelines but also to ensure that these Rules or 
Guidelines are followed and implemented in letter and spirit .  The Committee 
recommend the Department to take necessary action  to ensure that Review 
Committees are constituted in all the States  in a time bound manner .  The 
Committee also recommend that the data regarding constitution of Review  
Committee by all States /UTs are obtained and reco rd maintained by the 
Department with periodic monitoring. 
 
 

45 
 
Safeguards against misuse of Internet Shutdown 
8.  The Committee are unhappy to note that neither the Department of 
Telecommunications nor the Ministry of Home Affairs have any information on 
the Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs) being followed by the State 
Governments while invoking the Temporary Suspension of Tele com Services 
(Public Emergency and Public Safety) Rules, 2017. T he State Government of 
Bihar submitted that they  had issued SOP for temporary suspension of 
Internet services in the month of September, 2017, within a period of six weeks 
after the relevant R ules were published by the Central Government.  The 
Committee are given to understand  that as per the notification issued by the 
State Government of Bihar , report for internet shutdown at District level must 
come from the concerned District Magistrate and SP or the Divisional 
Commissioner and DIG, and at the State -level, Additional DG Police (Law and 
Order).  The request for suspension of Internet services will be done only in 
such conditions when undesirable messages have to be stopped by blocking 
the internet and there is no other way of doing so.  The period also has to be 
specified and recommended by the State/District authorities and the period 
has to be kept to the minimum so that public are not put to inconvenience.  
Finally, it also says that thi s suspension of Internet services will not cover the 
Government telecom networks to the extent of maintaining Government 
internet and intranet based public services including Bihar Wide Area 
Networks, NICNET, National Knowledge Network, Banking, Railways, etc.  
Asked as to whether any other State /UT have taken similar initiative , the 

46 
 
Department have informed the Committee that no such information is 
available with the Department.  The Committee were also informed that in the 
year 2018, Secretary (T) ha d written D.O. letters to all Chief 
Secretaries/Administrators of State/UTs to sensitize the concerned officials 
against precipitate actions leading to shutdown of internet services and also 
to ensure that provisions of Suspension Rules, 2017 are followed stric tly.  
Amended Rules have been forwarded to all Chief Secretaries/Administrators 
mentioning that Hon’ble Supreme Court has mandated the publication of all 
future suspension orders so that the affected person can approach the Court 
against such orders; and a ll orders for suspension of telecom services must 
adhere to the principles of proportionality and must not extend beyond 
necessary duration. 
 From the above stated facts, the Committee observe that while Hon’ble 
Supreme Court laid down the broad contours  of safeguards against telecom 
shutdown, the Department/MHA, on their part have not taken any initiative for 
devising/outlining SOP on telecom shutdown except merely conveying the 
decision of the Supreme Court to States/UTs through routine orders.  The 
Committee are of the view that  lack of stipulated guidelines and safety 
measures gives a lever to State Governments to resort to telecom shutdown 
on the slightest pretext  of maintaining law and order and there is a need to 
follow the laid-down procedure by States/UTs to avoid internet shutdowns in 
unwarranted situations. The Committee appreciate the measures /SOP put in 
place by the State Government of Bihar which has also helped in  ensuring 

47 
 
transparency with regard to invoking of these Rules.  The Department, besides 
routinely issuing letters and communications to State /UT Governments, 
should also see to it that the directions issued by them are adhered to and 
implemented in right earnest.  The Committee also feel that leaving the job of  
formulating safeguards with the States/UTs will  only give rise to confusion 
leading to misuse of these provisions.   The Committee, therefore, recommend 
that the Department in coordination with the Ministry of Home Affairs  should 
take proactive measures and issue a uniform set of SOP and guidelines to be 
followed by all States/UTs.  Some of these guidelines viz. an order suspending 
internet services indefinitely is impermissible but can be utilized for temporary 
duration only, must adhere to the principle of proportionality, conducting a 
periodic review within seven working days of the previous review,  etc. have 
already been identified by the Supreme Court.  The Committee find that these 
guidelines have not been followed by all States/UTs uniformly, thus giving rise 
to scope for ambiguity and non -compliance. The Committee, therefore, urge 
the G overnment to  ensure that proper SOP/guidelines are  devised and 
Supreme Court mandated guidelines are strictly adhered to in the future.  The 
Committee desire the set of SOP and guidelines so devised are shared with 
them. 
Effectiveness of Suspension of Telecom Services/Internet Shutdown 
9. The Committee note that as per Cellular Operators Association of India 
(COAI), telecom operators  reportedly lose INR 24.5 million per hour in every 
Circle Area where there is a shutdown or throttling.  Othe r businesses whic h 

48 
 
rely on the internet could lose up to 50 per cent of the afore -mentioned 
amount.  As per newspaper reports, India lost 2.8 billion  US dollars in 2020 to 
internet shutdowns. The Committee note that the  suspension of telecom 
services/ internet greatly affect the local economy, healthcare services, 
freedom of press and education, etc.   From the information provided by the 
Department, the Committee note that no impact assessment study has been 
done by the Department.  As per the Departmen t of Telecommunications,  
since the actual shutdown is ordered either  by the State Governments or by 
the Ministry of Home Affairs, the Department are not assessing whether the 
objectives have been achieved or not, and the responsibility for assessing the 
effectiveness of Internet Shutdown lies completely with the Ministry of Home 
Affairs or the concerned State Government.  The Committee have  also been 
informed that no assessment is available with MHA.  According to them, 
internet shutdown is done as a preventive measure if the situation arises 
concerning the interest of the public safety, the sovereignty and integrity of 
India, the security of the State, friendly relations with foreign states or public 
order or the preve ntion of incitement to the commission of an offence.  
Suspension is revoked when the situation comes under control.  When the 
Committee pointed out that communal riots took place during pre-internet era 
also and enquired if any study has been conducted by DoT/MHA to establish 
the correlation between internet and riots , both DoT and MHA have  informed 
the Committee that they have  not conducted any study to establish the link  
between internet shutdown and communal riots.   

49 
 
The Committee  also received submission from organizations stating 
that the perceived trade -off of Internet shutdowns leading to better law and 
order outcomes with reduced risk of violence or hate speech  is dubious in its 
assumption. Many media reports indicated citizens tend to not convinced 
about the success of internet suspensions in curbing hateful messaging or 
disinformation.  The se submissions also suggested that as per empirical 
study internet shutdowns are ineffective in pacifying protests and often have 
the unin tended consequences of incentivising violent forms of collective 
action which require less communication and coordination. 
 While the veracity of above submissions  would necessitate greater 
insight into situations which is beyond the scope of present subject, there is 
no second opinion about the fact that shutting down of telecom/internet 
services cause great inconvenience to thousands of people in the process.  
Frequent shutdown of Internet services is an indication to the fact t hat the 
State/UT Governments are resorting to this method as a convenient way to 
deal with any restive situations without properly assessing the effectiveness 
of such drastic measure  in controlling such situations.   So far , it is purely 
based on the assumption s of law enforcement agencies and there is no 
empirical proof to suggest that internet shutdowns have been effective in 
controlling law and order, civic unrest, etc.  The Committee further note that 
while a number of studies on the impact of internet shutdo wns have been 
conducted by different agencies/entities which are in the public domain , no 
such study has been conducted by either DoT or MHA.  The Committee are of 

50 
 
the view that absence of such study is a clear omission o n the part  of both 
DoT and MHA w hile taking recourse to measures such as telecom/internet 
shutdown which has massive implications for national economy, 
constitutional rights of the citizens to freedom of speech and expression, right 
to carry on any trade or business, etc. It has affected and disrupted healthcare 
services, freedom of press and education  etc.  The Committee recommend 
that a thorough study should be commissioned by the Government of India so 
as to assess the impact of internet shutdown on the economy and also find 
out its effectiveness in dealing with Public Emergency and Public Safety.  In 
the opinion of the C ommittee shutting down of internet in this digital era is 
both anachronistic and acting as a bulwark against economic development 
and democratic rights of the people.  The Committee desire that internet 
shutdowns should not be  taken too frequently as matter of recourse  since 
internet is indispensable to ordinary citizens in their daily lives, and vital for 
such matters as examination enrolment, tourism, and online enterprise. While 
national security is undoubtedly a prime concern, it is nevertheless desirable 
that internet shutdowns are resorted to as rarely as possible  only as last 
resort given their disproportionate impact on innocent citizens.   
International Practice: Telecom/Internet Shutdown Rules in Other Countries 
10. The Committee find that no study has been  conducted by the 
Department to understand or analyse the telecom/inte rnet shutdown rules 
adopted in other democr atic countries like USA, UK and  other European 
countries.  They have also submitted that n o information is available with 
them regarding States/UTs frequently resorting to internet shutdowns on 

51 
 
grounds of ‘Public Emergency' and ‘Public Safety'  in the country .  The 
Department have simply stated that sufficient safeguards are inbuilt in the 
Suspension Rules, 2017 and internet shutdown s can only be ordered by the 
competent authority on grounds of ‘Public Emergency' and ‘Public Safety'.   
The Committee are not in agreement with the Department and MHA that 
sufficient safeguards have been built in the S uspension Rules and internet 
shutdowns in the interest of public emergency and public safety, particularly 
since these measures are resorted to more frequently than any other country 
in the world.  So far, there is no proof to indicate that internet shutdown have 
been effective in addressing public emergency and ensuring public safety.  
The Committee are of the view that using internet  shutdowns to deal with 
Public Emergency and Public Safety refle cts poorly on the part of the law and 
order machinery of the State to deal with such issues.  Riots, protests, and 
various other forms of civil unrests take place in various other democratic and 
non-democratic countries.  However, not all of them have reso rted to shutting 
down of internet to deal with such situations, especially in democratic 
countries. Shutting down of internet to deal with such situation in countries 
like USA or European countries is unheard of and reflects poorly on India.  
The Committee , therefore,  feel that a study needs to be undertaken by the 
Department to gather knowledge about telecom/internet shutdown rules 
adopted by other democratic countries of the world.  The Committee desire 
that our country needs to learn from  those standards that are internationally 
accepted as the best practices  globally keeping also the specifics of this 

52 
 
country in mind and the country should not adopt policies not in tune with the 
international best practices in this regard.   With regard to Jammu and 
Kashmir, the Committee hope that the Government can devise less sweeping 
methods to intercept terrorist communications  in order to avoid recourse to 
methods that have a disproportionate impact on innocent citizens.  
Need for Consultation with Stakeholders 
11. The Committee note that in the light of the Hon’ble Supreme Court 
judgement and in consultation with all stakeholders, Temporary Suspension 
of Telecom Services (Public Emergency and Public Safety) Rules, 2017 has 
been amended vide Gazette Notification dated 10.11.2020.  It is envisaged that 
any suspension order issued under these Rules shall not be in operation for 
more than fifteen days, all such orders be published to enable the affected 
persons to challenge it before the High Co urt or appropriate forum and the 
order must adhere to the principle of p roportionality.  The Department have 
informed that they have consulted the Ministry of Law and Justice and 
Ministry of Home Affairs before issuing the said amendment s. However, no 
mechanism has been laid down  yet for regular consultation with other 
stakeholders including civil societies and public.  The Department have also 
informed the Committee that suggestions have been received from various 
non-Governmental organisations. Some of these suggestions include  public 
consultation of Suspension Rules, issuing of advisory to all State 
Governments on the legal standards and limitations articulated by the 
Supreme Court, to develop a centralized record keeping of all internet 

53 
 
shutdowns, and periodic economic impact assessment to compute losses 
from internet suspensions.   
 The Committee feel that there is definitely a need for wider consultation 
with various stakeholders including non-Governmental Organisations working 
in the field of  internet freedom, Telecom Service Providers, commercial 
bodies, public organisations, etc.  The Committee are disappointed to note 
that the Department have consulted only Ministry of Law and Justice and 
Ministry of Home Affairs before coming  out with the amendment to 
Suspension Rules, 2017.  Keeping in view the wider ramification of internet 
shutdown, the Department/MHA should have done wider consultations before 
finalizing the Suspension Rules.  The Committee strongly sense that without 
involving all stakeholders and affected parties in the consultation process, the 
Department will not be able to get the larger picture on the issue and hence 
will not be able to formulate a holistic policy in this regard.  The Committee, 
therefore, recommend the Department to lay down a mechanism through 
which regular consultation can be held  with multiple stakeholders viz. TSPs, 
elected representatives, peoples organizations, commerc ial/industry bodies, 
civil society, etc. so as to formulate a holistic policy relating to internet 
shutdown.  The policy inter-alia should address the concerns of these 
stakeholders as it is they who are directly affected by telecom/internet 
shutdowns.  The Committee would like to  be apprised of the action taken in 
the above direction and also the steps taken by the Department to incorporate 

54 
 
the suggestions received from  various stakeholders into the existing 
Rules/guidelines.  
  
Access to Internet and Constitutional position 
12. The Committee note that the Hon’ble Supreme Court vide its order dated 
10 January, 2020 had declared that freedom of speech and expression under 
Article 19(1)(a), and the right to carry on trade or business under Article 19 (1) 
(g), using the internet is constitutionally protected.  The Committee further 
note that information regarding the status accorded by international bodies 
like UN and other democratic countries with regard to the right of the citizens 
to access internet is not available with the Department.  Supreme Court in its  
judgement dated 10 January, 2020 had directed that any order suspending 
internet under the Suspension Rules is subject to judicial review based on 
parameters set out therein, which implies that the affected person can 
approach the Court against such order s.  Elaborating on the importance of 
internet, the Department have informed the Committee that the internet 
connectivity is of importance due to policy initiative of the Government to 
promote mobile banking, digital payments, financial inclusions, etc.  Th e 
Government have embarked upon a programme to take services to citizens 
through mobiles and internet apart from providing a cashless economy. In the 
absence of telecom connectivity, banking transactions using credit/debit 
card/UPI and internet banking get affected. 
From the above observations, the Committee note that today internet 
has become extremely important in day to day activities of the common man. 

55 
 
Though Hon’ble Supreme Court has not declared the citizens right to access 
to internet as fundamental right , it has categorically stated that the right to 
freedom of speech and expression under Article 19 (1) (a) and the right to 
carry on any trade or business under Article 19 (1) (g), using the internet , is 
constitutionally protec ted.  The importance of the internet can hardly be 
overemphasized; more so in the backdrop of the Supreme Court judgement 
that any internet shutdown is subjected to judicial review and all orders of 
internet shutdown can be challenged by the aggrieved citizens in the court of 
law. The Committee are of the view that there is a need to maintain a delicate 
balance between the citizens’ right to access internet to exercise their rights 
and the duty of the State to deal with Public Emergency and Public Safety. The 
Committee recommend that while making efforts to maintain Public 
Emergency and Public Safety, the Department/MHA need to ensure that rights 
of the citizens to freedom of speech and expression under Article 19 (1) (a), 
and the right to carry on any t rade or business under Article 19 (1) (g), using 
the medium of internet are not violated on grounds of Public Emergency and 
Public Safety.  The Department should make sincere efforts to sensitize the 
State/UT Governments of this new interpretation of bring ing the medium of 
internet into the ambit of Article 19 (1) (g).   Considering the fact that more and 
more people are using internet for their livelihood, it is important that 
appropriate legal framework needs to be put in place so that individual's right 
to access internet is protected.    
 

56 
 
Principle of Proportionality and Procedure for Lifting of Internet Shutdown 
13. Hon’ble Supreme Court had ordered that any order suspending internet 
issued under the Suspension Rules must adhere to the principle of 
proportionality and must not extend beyond necessary duration. In this 
background, the Committee desired to know from DoT/MHA as to how they are 
deciding on the principle of proportionality and whether any parameters hav e 
been laid down in this regard.  The Committee also asked about the laid down 
procedure for lifting of internet shutdown.  Whereas  the Department have 
informed that parameters can be obtained from the competent authority who 
is imposing telecom shutdowns , MHA have informed that directions for the 
suspension of telecom/internet services are issued due to Public Emergency 
or Public Safety as per the Temporary Suspension of Telecom Services 
(Amendment) Rules, 2020 for the specified period only as mentioned in the 
particular order and services are automatically restored by the service 
providers after the expiry of the suspension period.   
The Committee feel that the replies furnished by DoT and MHA on the 
principle of proportionality and procedure for lifting th e shutdown are vague 
and lack clarity.    The Committee note that internet shutdowns are ordered by 
the State Governments mainly for the purpose of maintaining Public Order and 
Public Safety  and no proper procedure has been laid down for lifting of 
internet shutdown .  T he Committee are of the view that one of the best 
mechanisms to deal with any law and order situation is the ability of the law 
enforcement agency to quickly respon d to the crisis.   Internet shutdown  

57 
 
cannot be a substitute for enforcing law and order.  Recourse to i nternet 
shutdown should ideally be avoided and be taken sparingly only when it is 
absolutely necessary and expedient and that too only for a limited period  of 
time which need to be clearly defined.  The Committee are of the view that the 
current provision that any internet suspension order can be extended by 
subsequent order leaves enough scope for State /UT Governments to misuse 
the Suspension Rules.  The Committee, therefore, recommend   the 
Department in co -ordination with Ministry of Home Affairs should lay down a 
clear cut principle of proportionality and procedure for lifting of shutdown  so 
that these are not extended indefinitely even when the situation comes under 
control affecting the life and liberty of people.    
Selective Banning of Services 
14. Keeping in view the fact that complete shutdown of telecom 
services/internet affects the people in many ways, t he Committee desired to 
know if it was  technically possible to shutdown only those services  in areas 
likely to be used by terrorist/anti -social elements rather than shutting down 
internet as a whole.  The Department have informed that services hosted on 
cloud are difficult to ban selectively since they operate from multiple locations 
in multiple countries and continuously shift from one service to the other.  
However, websites operating through fixed URLs can be banned.  The 
Department have also informed the Committee that  Facebook, WhatsApp, 
Telegram etc. are basically categorised as over the top  telecom services, OTT 
services in short.  These OTT services are riding over the existing telecom 

58 
 
service provider’s network. The Committee note that r ecently, Department of 
Telecom have received a recommendation from TRAI on the OTT services and 
one of the major recommendations of the TRAI is that currently these OTT 
services are no t required to be regulat ed. DoT are examining the 
recommendation and will take an appropriate decision on t he 
recommendations. DoT would be in a position to provide  answer to  the 
Committee once the decision is taken whether they would be able to block the 
OTT services selectively or not.  
 The Committee feel that it will be of great relief if the Department can  
explore the option of banning of selective services, such as Face book, 
WhatsApp, Telegram, etc. instead of banning the internet as a whole.  This will 
allow financial services, health, education and various other services to 
continue to operate for business as usual  thereby minimizing inconvenience  
and suffering to the general public and also help in controlling spreading of 
misinformation during unrest.  Adoption of such less restrictive mechanisms 
will be a welcome initiative.  The Committee strong ly recommend  that the 
Department urgently examine the recommendation of TRAI and come out with 
a policy which will enable the selective banning of OTT services  with suitable 
technological intervention, such as Facebook, WhatsApp, Telegram services  
during period of unrest/crisis that are liable to be used by the terrorists or anti-
national element/forces to ferment trouble in  the specified regions.  The 
Committee look forward to positive development in this regard.  Till such time 
every effort should be made to ensure that uninterrupted services are 

59 
 
provided through the State broadband network which can be monitored easily 
for possible misuse. 
 
 
 
 
  
New Delhi;   DR. SHASHI THAROOR, 
    29     November, 2021  Chairperson, 
     8  Agrahayana, 1943 (Saka) Standing Committee on Communications and 
Information Technology. 

60 
 
Appendix-I 
  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(2019-20) 
 
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY-FIRST SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
----------- 
 
 The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 11 August, 2020 from 1100 hours to 
1345 hours in Main Committee Room, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
 
Dr. Shashi Tharoor - Chairperson 
 
 MEMBERS 
  
Lok Sabha 
 
2.  Smt. Locket Chatterjee  
3.  Dr. Nishikant Dubey 
4.  Smt. Raksha Nikhil Khadse  
5.  Ms. Mahua Moitra  
6.  Shri Santosh Pandey  
7.  Col. Rajyavardhan Singh Rathore  
8.  Shri L.S. Tejasvi Surya  
Rajya Sabha 
9.  Dr. Anil Agrawal  
10.  Shri Syed Nasir Hussain  
11.  Shri Shaktisinh Gohil 
 
 
Secretariat 
 
1. Shri Y. M. Kandpal          - Director 
2. Dr. Sagarika Dash          -     Additional Director 
3. Shri Shangreiso Zimik               -     Deputy Secretary 

61 
 
 
 
List of Witnesses 
Department of Telecommunications 
 
Suspension of Telecom Services/Internet and its impact 
 
Sl. No. Name Designation 
1.  Anshu Prakash Secretary 
2.  K. Ramchand Advisor (equivalent to Additional Secretary) 
3.  Tushar Kanti Paul Director General Telecom 
4.  S. B. Singh DDG 
5.  P. K. Singh DDG 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee convened for briefing by the representatives of the Department of 
Telecommunications on the subjects ‘Suspension of Telecom Services/Internet 
and its impact’ and…..xxxxx…..xxxxx…..  
 
(The representatives of the Department of Telecommunications were then called 
in) 
 
3.    The Chairperson welcomed the representatives of the DoT to the sitting 
of the Committee.  The Committee decided to take up the subject ‘Suspension of 
Telecom Services/Internet and its impact’ first.  Accordingly, the representatives 
of the Department  made a power -point presentation on the subject which 
included issues, such as Regulatory Framework for suspension of telecom 
services, Temporary Suspension of Telecom Services (Public Emergency & Public 
Safety, Rules, 2017, Judgment of Hon’ble Supreme Court with regard to non -
permissible indefinite shut down of internet, principle of proportionality and non-
extension of order beyond necessary duration, etc. 
 
4. Thereafter, Members raised queries on issues, such as reasons for 
suspension of telecom services, mechanism to review the number of suspension 
issued by States, time limit for extension of shut down by the States, measures 
to protect citizens’ rights and freedom, etc.  The Committee also deliberated on  

62 
 
timeline for review of Suspension Rules based on Supreme Court orders, 
stakeholders consulted by the Department, status of Section 144 of Cr.P.C., 
power of the Review Committee an d the number of orders countermand ed by 
them, non-inclusion of non-executive Members in the composition of the Review 
Committee, etc.   
 
5. The Committee were informed that Police and Public order are State 
subjects and States are responsible for prevention, detention and investigation 
of crimes through their law enforcement machinery.  The concerned State 
Governments are empowered to issue orders for temporary suspension of 
telecom services.  The representative of the Department also informed the 
Committee that the nodal Ministry for law and order and for police and issues 
relating to such suspension is the Ministry of Home Affairs.  The Committee 
decided to hear the views of the representatives of  some of the State 
Governments/U.T. Administrations. 
 
6.  …..xxxxx…..xxxxx…..  
7. …..xxxxx…..xxxxx…..  
8. The Chairperson, then, thanked the representatives of the Department of 
Telecommunications for deposing before the Committee. 
9. …..xxxxx…..xxxxx…..  
10. …..xxxxx…..xxxxx…..  
11. …..xxxxx…..xxxxx…..  
   
The witnesses then withdrew 
Verbatim proceedings of the sitting have been kept on record. 
The Committee, then, adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
________________________________________________________________________ 
xxxxxMatters not related to the Report. 

63 
 
Appendix-II 
 
MINUTES OF THE THIRD SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (2020-21) HELD ON 16th OCTOBER, 2020 
----------- 
 
 The Committee sat on Friday, the 16th October, 2020 from 1100 hours to 1300 
hours in Committee Room ‘B’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Dr. Shashi Tharoor – Chairperson 
 
 MEMBERS 
  
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri Karti P. Chidambaram  
3. Shri Santosh Pandey 
4. Sanjay Seth 
5. Shri L.S. Tejasvi Surya 
6. Shri Bhanu Pratap Singh Verma 
 
Rajya Sabha 
  
7. Dr. Anil Agrawal 
8. Shri Y.S. Chowdary 
9. Shri Syed Zafar Islam 
10. Shri Nabam Rebia 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1.     Shri Y.M. Kandpal   - Joint Secretary 
2. Dr. Sagarika Dash   - Additional Director 
3. Smt. Geeta Parmar   - Additional Director 
4. Shri Shangreiso Zimik  - Deputy Secretary 
  

64 
 
List of Witnesses 
 
Department of Telecommunications (DoT) 
Sl. No. Names Designation 
 
1.  Shri Anshu Prakash Secretary 
2.  Shri K. Ramchand Advisor 
3.  Shri S.B. Singh Dy. Director General 
4.  Shri P.K. Singh Dy. Director General 
 
Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA) 
 
1.  Shri Govind Mohan Additional Secretary  (UT) 
2.  Shri Ashutosh Agnihotri Joint Secretary (CIS) 
3.  Shri Shailendra Vikram Singh Deputy Secretary (CIS) 
 
State Government of Bihar 
 
1.  Shri Amir Subhani Additional Chief Secretary, 
Home Department, Bihar 
 
Government of NCT of Delhi 
 
1.  Shri Ajay Kumar Gupta Special Secretary (Home) 
2.  Shri P.S. Kushwaha DCP Special Cell, Delhi Police 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee convened…..xxxx….xxxx…..to hear the views of the representatives of 
Department of Telecommunications, Ministry of Home Affairs, State Governments of 
Bihar and UT of NCT of Delhi  on the subject ‘ Suspension of Telecom 
Services/Internet and its impact’.   
 
3. …..xxxx….xxxx….. 
4. …..xxxx….xxxx….. 
5. …..xxxx….xxxx….. 
 
(The representatives of DoT, MHA, State Government of Bihar and 
Government of NCT of Delhi were then called in) 
 
 
6. The Chairperson welcomed the representatives of the Department of 
Telecommunications, Ministry of Home Affairs, State Government of Bihar and 

65 
 
Government of NCT of Delhi to the sittin g of the Committee. Thereafter, the 
Committee discussed policy issues and practices regarding suspension of telecom 
and internet services, Supreme Court direction on orders issued under Section 144 
CrPC for suspension of telecom services, Supreme Court obs ervation that the 
existing Suspension Rules neither provide for a periodic review nor for a time 
limitation for an order issued under the Suspension Rules and its direction that until 
that gap is filled, the review Committee should conduct periodic reviews . Issues 
such as the reasonableness and proportionality of internet shutdowns, balancing 
the inconvenience to the public, lack of access to the governance and so on versus 
law and order were discussed in detail. 
  
7. Members also raised pertinent issues such as powers of State Governments 
to issue orders for temporary suspension of telecom services, grounds on which 
internet shut downs are/can be ordered, subjectivity involved in decision making 
regarding imposition of internet shutdowns, misuse of internet sh utdown for trivial 
purposes like prevention of cheating in exams or defusing local crimes which do not 
qualify under public emergency and public safety, tendency of State Governments 
to order frequent suspension of internet access amounting to intrusion in  basic 
rights of the citizens etc. to which the representatives of the Ministries/State 
Governments responded. The representatives of State Governments shared their 
experiences with internet shutdowns in their respective States. 
 
8. The Committee, then, delib erated on i ssues such as constitution of review 
committees by the States and Union Territories and their composition, powers of 
review committees to revoke the suspension orders, any other inbuilt safeguards 
being contemplated to prevent misuse of the Susp ension Provisions, internet 
shutdown rules in other democratic countries and international practices in this 
regard, lack of any study or empirical data to gauge the effectiveness of internet 
shutdowns in India etc. While being surprised to find that no re cord whatsoever of 
telecom and internet shutdowns is maintained either by DoT or the MHA, the 
Committee desired that a nodal Ministry should maintain a record of all internet 
shutdowns in the country. The Committee also observed that India has not only 

66 
 
obtained the dubious distinction of being number one in the world in internet 
shutdowns but has more internet shutdowns every year than the rest of the world 
combined.  
 
9. The Committee further desired to know the end -objective in ordering the 
internet shutdown  and whether those objectives are actually fulfilled, the 
effectiveness of internet shutdown as a tool for maintaining law and order and 
whether any study can be conducted to gauge the effectiveness of internet 
shutdowns in India etc.  The representatives o f the Ministries/State Governments 
responded to the queries raised by the Members. The Chairperson directed that 
written replies to points on which information was not readily available may be 
furnished to the Committee. 
 
10. The Chairperson, then, thanked the  representatives of the Department  of 
Telecommunications, Ministry of Home Affairs, State Government of Bihar and UT of 
NCT of Delhi for deposing before the Committee.  
 
The witnesses then withdrew 
   
Verbatim proceedings of the sitting have been kept on record. 
 
The Committee, then, adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
xxxxxMatters not related to the Report. 
 
 
  

67 
 
Appendix-III 
 
MINUTES OF THE SEVENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (2020-21) HELD ON 25TH NOVEMBER 2020 
----------- 
 
 The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 25th November, 2020 from 1600 hours 
to 1812 hours in Committee Room ‘B’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Dr. Shashi Tharoor – Chairperson 
 
 MEMBERS 
  
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri Karti P. Chidambaram 
3. Dr. Nishikant Dubey 
4. Ms. Mahua Moitra 
5. Col. Rajyavardhan Singh Rathore 
6. Shri Jayadev Galla 
7. Shri Sanjay Seth 
8. Shri Bhanu Pratap Singh Verma 
 
Rajya Sabha 
  
9. Dr. Anil Agrawal 
10. Shri Md. Nadimul Haque 
11. Shri Syed Nasir Hussain 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1.     Dr. Sagarika Dash   - Additional Director 
2. Smt. Geeta Parmar   - Additional Director 
3. Shri Shangreiso Zimik  - Deputy Secretary 
  

68 
 
List of Witnesses 
Department of Telecommunications (DoT) 
Sl. No. Names Designation 
1.  Shri K. Ramchand Member (T) 
2.  Shri Ranjan Ghosh DDG (AS­I) 
3.  Shri P.K. Singh DDG (SA) 
4.  Shri Robin Adaval Director (AS­II) 
Ministry of Home Affairs 
1.  Shri Govind Mohan Additional Secretary (UT) 
2.  Shri Ashutosh Agnihotri Joint Secretary 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee convened…..xxxxx…..xxxxx…..to take final evidence of the 
representatives of Department of Telecommunications and Ministry of Home 
Affairs on the subject ‘ Suspension of Telecom Services/Internet and its 
impact’.   
 
3. …..xxxxx…..xxxxx….. 
 
4.  …..xxxxx…..xxxxx….. 
5.  
5. Thereafter, the Chairperson directed that the representatives of the Ministry 
of Communications ( Department of Telecommunications ) and Ministry of Home 
Affairs may be called in for a conclusive evidence on the subject ‘Suspension of 
telecom services/internet and its impact . As some Members raised objection to 
discussing the subject due to its sensitive nature, he assured the Members that the 
Committee were not dealing with any issues relating, in any way, t o the direct 
problems and sensitivities of nation’s national security apparatus and not going into 
questions that need to cause any concern.  He also informed the Members that 
Secretaries of DoT and MHA have sought exemption from attending the sitting as 
they had to attend meeting chaired by Hon’ble Prime Minister.  He informed the 

69 
 
Members that he had an interaction over phone with Home Secretary on two 
questions that remain pending i.e. compliance with the Supreme Court directive on 
review of internet shut down in the UT of Jammu and Kashmir and maintenance of 
records on the number of internet shutdown by all the States.  Home Secretary had 
agreed that the questions did not involve national security and hence decided to 
send Additional Secretary for the sitting.   
  
6. Before the witnesses could be called, the same  Members again raised 
objection on the ground that under Rule 331E of the Rules of Procedure and 
Conduct of Business, the subject cannot be taken up by the Co mmittee since it 
relates to day-to- day activity of the Ministry.  They drew attention of the chair to 
Rule 270 which provides that if any question arises whether the evidence of a 
person or the production of a document is relevant for the purposes of the 
Committee, the question shall be referred t o the Hon’ble Speaker whose decision 
shall be final.   Hon’ble Chairperson informed the Members that the subject is a 
continuing subject from previous term of the Committee and the present 
Committee have re -selected the subject by consensus at their first s itting and 
subsequently the subject has also been bulletinized on 8th October, 2020. 
 
7. The dissenting Members, thereafter, invited attention of Chairperson to Rule  
261 which states that all queries in any sitting of a Committee shall be determined 
by a majority of votes of Members present in voting.  They demanded that the 
questions whether the Committee can examine the subject should be put to vote 
under Rule 261 of Rules and Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha.  
They also pointed out that the su bject is sub -juice and any matter that is being 
discussed in the Court should not be taken up. 
 
8. Chairperson informed the dissenting Members that the Committee are not 
contradicting the judiciary in any way, nor are the Committee arriving at a decision 
which could be at variance with the decision taken by the judiciary.  The Committee 
are simply seeking information which is very much the prerogative of the 
Committee.  Two sittings of the Committee have already be en held on the subject 

70 
 
and the sitting has been convened for a final deliberation on the subject.  In one of 
the sittings, after getting the approval of Hon’ble Speaker under Director 60 (1), 
the Committee have heard the views of the representatives of the  State of Bihar 
and U.T. of NCT of Delhi alongwith the representatives of the Department of 
Telecommunications and Ministry of Home Affairs. In the above sitting, the 
Department of Telecommunications & Ministry of Home Affairs had assured to come 
back on m any queries that remained unresolved on that day. As Members 
continued to demand a voting, Chairperson invoked Direction 54 of  ‘Directions by 
the Speaker Lok Sabha’ which states as under:   
 
 “If a member desires to reopen a question on which a Committee has 
already taken a decision the member shall, in the first instance, obtain 
the permission of the Chairperson to do so.” 
 
 He informed the House that some Members are trying to reopen a question 
i.e. not to discuss the subject and in the instant case Committee have already 
decided to examine the subject and he is not allowing them to reopen the question 
under Direction 54. Thereafter, he directed that the witness be called in. 
(The witnesses were, then, called in) 
9. The Chairperson welcomed the represent atives of the DoT and MHA to the 
sitting of the Committee and informed them that the sitting has been convened 
mainly to hear answers on some of the issues that remained unanswered during the 
previous sitting of the Committee on the subject.  He also made it clear that the 
Committee’s interest is to understand issues at policy level and the question of 
principle of accountability to the Parliament and not to encroach upon matters of 
national security or day-to-day activities of the Ministries/Department.  
 
10. Members then raised queries on issues, such as status of internet shutdown 
in the UT of Jammu and Kashmir post Gazette Notification of 10th November, 2020 
on Suspension Rules, study conducted to assess the effectiveness of internet 
shutdowns, telecom or in ternet shutdown rules as prevailing in other countries, 
possibility of selective blocking of services, co -relation between internet shutdown 
and law and order, information regarding number of internet shut  down by States, 

71 
 
definition of Public Emergency and  Public Safety, safeguards measures, etc.  The 
representatives of MHA and DoT responded to the queries raised by the Members.  
Chairperson directed that written replies to points  on which information was not 
readily available may be furnished to the Committee.     
 
11. The Chairperson, then, thanked the representatives of the Department  of 
Telecommunications and Ministry of Home Affairs for deposing before the 
Committee.  
 
The witnesses then withdrew 
   
Verbatim proceedings of the sitting have been kept on record. 
The Committee, then, adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

72 
 
Appendix IV 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY  
(2021-22) 
 
MINUTES OF THE SECOND SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
 The Committee sat on Tuesday, 16 November, 2021 from 1600 hours to 1820 
hours in Committee Room ‘D’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Dr. Shashi Tharoor- Chairperson 
 
 MEMBERS 
  
 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Smt. Sunita Duggal 
3. Ms. Mahua Moitra 
4. Shri P. R. Natarajan 
5. Shri Santosh Pandey 
6. Shri Jayadev Galla 
7. Smt. Sumalatha Ambareesh 
Rajya Sabha 
 
8. Dr. Anil Agrawal 
9. Shri John Brittas 
10. Shri Jawhar Sircar 
 
Secretariat 
 
1. Shri Y. M. Kandpal          ­ Joint Secretary 
2. Dr. Sagarika Dash   ­ Additional Director 
3. Shri Shangreiso Zimik                 ­     Deputy Secretary 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairp erson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee convened to consider and adopt  Draft Report on the subject ‘Suspension of 
Telecom Services/Internet and its impact’ relating to the Ministry of Communications 
(Department of Telecommunications) and      xxxxx….. …..xxxxx….. …..xxxxx 
 

73 
 
3. Thereafter, the Committee took up the following draft Reports for consideration 
and adoption.  The Chairperson , then, gave a broad overview  of the important 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Reports. 
(i) ‘Suspension of Telecom Services/Internet and its impact’ relating to the Ministry 
of Communications (Department of Telecommunications); and 
 
(ii) ‘xxxxx….. …..xxxxx….. …..xxxxx 
 
 
4. After due deliberations, the Committee adopted the Reports with slight 
modifications. 
 
5. The Committee, then, authorized the Chairperson to present the above Reports 
to the House during the next Session of Parliament. 
(…..xxxxx….. …..xxxxx….. …..xxxxx….. …..xxxxx…..) 
6. …..xxxxx….. …..xxxxx….. …..xxxxx….. …..xxxxx….. …..xxxxx….. …..xxxxx…..* 
7. …..xxxxx….. …..xxxxx….. …..xxxxx….. …..xxxxx….. …..xxxxx….. …..xxxxx….. 
8. …..xxxxx….. …..xxxxx….. …..xxxxx….. …..xxxxx….. …..xxxxx….. …..xxxxx….. 
9. …..xxxxx….. …..xxxxx….. …..xxxxx….. …..xxxxx….. …..xxxxx….. …..xxxxx….. 
10. …..xxxxx….. …..xxxxx….. …..xxxxx….. …..xxxxx….. …..xxxxx….. …..xxxxx….. 
 
…..xxxxx….. …..xxxxx….. …..xxxxx….. …..xxxxx….. 
 
Verbatim Proceedings of the sitting have been kept on record. 
 
The Committee, then, adjourned. 
 
 
***** 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
*Matters not related to the Report. 

THE INDIAN TELEGRAPH ACT, 1885
(13 of 1885)
[22nd July, 1885]
An Act to amend the law relating to Telegraphs in India.
W HEREAS it is expedient to amend the law relating to telegraphs in India; It is
hereby enacted as follows:­
PART!
PRELIMINARY
1. Short title, local extent and commencement.- (1) This Act may be called
the Indian Telegraph Act, 1885.
1[(2) It extends to the whole of India ?[ ] .]
(3) It shall come into force on the first day of October, 1885.
2. Repeal and savings.- [Rep. by the Repealing Act, 1938 (1 of 1938), sec. 2 and
Sch.].
3. Definitions.In this Act, unless there issomething repugnant in the subject
or context,-
·[(1) "Fund" means the Universal Service Obligation Fund established
under sub-section (1) of section 9A; '
(lA) "Universal Service Obligation" means the [ obligation to provide
access to telegraphservices]to people in the rural and remote areas at
affordable and reasonable prices;]
5[6[(1AA)] "telegraph" means any appliance, instrument, material or apparatus
used or capable of use for transmission or reception of signs, signals,
writing, images, and sounds or intelligence of any nature by wire,
visual or other electro-magnetic emissions, Radio waves or Hertzian
waves, galvanic, electricormagnetic means;
Explanation.- "Radiow aves" or" Hertz ian waves" means electro
magneticwaves offrequencies lower than 3,000 giga-cycles per second
propagated in space without artificial guide.] ··
(2) "telegraph officer" means any person employed either permanently or
temporarily in connection with a telegraph established, maintained or
worked by '[the Central Government] or-by a person licensed under
this Act;
(3) "message" means any communication sentby telegraph, or given to a
telegraph officer to besentby telegraph or to be delivered;
1. Subs. by Act 45 of 1948 sec. 2 for sub-section (2) (we.f. 3-9-1948).
2. The words "except the State of Hyderabad" omitted by Act 3 of 1951, sec. 3 and Sch.
(w.e.f. 1-4-1951). Earlier these words were inserted by the A.O. 1950.
3. Ins. by Act 8 of 2004, sec. 2 (w.r.e.f 1-4 -2002).
4. Subs. by Act 57 of 2006, sec. 2, for "obligation to provide access to basic telegraph
services" (w.r.e.f. 30-10-2006).
5. Subs. by Act 15 of 1961, sec. 2, for clause (1) (w.e.f. 2-5-1961).
6. Clause (1) re-numbered as clause (1AA) by the Act 8 of 2004, sec. 2 (w.r.e.f. 1-4-2002).
7. Subs. by the A.O. 1937, for "the Government".
4


5The Indian Telegraph Act, 1885
"telegraph line" means a wire or wires used for the purpose of a
telegraph, with any casing, coating, tube or pipe enclosing the same,
and any appliances and. apparatus connected therewith for the
purpose of fixing or insulating the same;
(5) "posl" means a post, pole, standard, stay, strut or other above ground
contrivance for carrying, suspending or supporting a telegraph line;
(6) "telegraph authority" means the Director-General of 1[Posts and
Telegraphs], and includes any officer empowered by him to perform all
or any of the functions of the telegraph authority under this Act;
(7) "local authority" means any municipal committee, district board, body
ofport commissioners or other authority legally entitled to, or entrusted
by 2[the Central or any State Government] with, the control or
management of any municipal or local fund.
Sec. 4]
(4)
PART II
PRIVILEGES AND POWERS OF THE GOVERNMENT
4. Exclusive privilege in respectof telegraphs, and powerto grant licences.-
4[(1)] Within 5[1ndia], the Central Government shall have the exclusive privilege of
establishing, maintaining and working telegraphs:
Provided that the Central Government may grant a licence, on such conditions
and in consideration of such payments as it thinks fit, to any person to establish,
maintain or work a telegraph within any part of 5[India]:
6[Provided further that the Central Government may, by rules made under this
Act and published in the Official Gazette, permit, subject to such restrictions and
conditions as it thinks fit, the establishment, maintenance and working-
(a) of wireless telegraphs on ships within Indian territorial waters 7[and
on aircraft within or above [India], or Indian territorial waters], and
(b) of telegraphs other than wireless telegraphs within any pa:-t of 5[India].
[Explanation.T he payments made for the grant of a licence under this sub­
section shall include such sum attributable to the Universal Service Obligation as
may be determined by the Central Government after considering the
recommendation made in this behalf by the Telecom Regulatory Authority ofIndia
established under sub-section (1) of section 3of the Telecom Regulatory Authority
of India Act, 1997 (24 of 1997).]
1. Subs. by Act 14 of 1914, sec. 2, for "Tel graphs".
2. Subs. by the A.O. 1937, for "the Government".
3. Clause (8) omitted by Act 3 of 1951, sec. 3 and Sch. (w.e.f. 1-4-1951). Earlier clause (8)
was inserted by the A.O. 1950.
4. Section 4 re-numbered as sub-section (1) of that section by Act 7 of 1914, sec 4.
5 Subs. by Act 45 of 1948, sec. 3 for "the Provinces".
6. Ins. by Act 7 of 1914 sec. 4
7. Ins. by 27 0f 1930, sec. 2.
8. Ins. by Act 8 0f 2004, sec. 3 (w.r.e.f. 1-4-2002).


1[(2) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette,
delegate to the telegraph authority all or any of its powers under the first proviso
to sub-section (1).
The exercise by the telegraph authority of any power so delegated shall be
subject to such restrictions and conditions as the Central Government may, by the
notification, think fit to impose.]
?[5. Power for Government to take possession of licensed telegraphs and to
order interception of rnessages.- (1) On the occurrence of any public emergency,
or in the interest of the public safety, the Central Government or a State
Government, or any officer specially authorised in this behalf by the Central
Government or a State Government, may, if satisfied that it is necessary or
expedient so to do, take temporary possession (for so long as the publicemergency
exists or the interest of the public safety requires the taking of such action) of any
telegraph established, maintained or worked by any person licensed under this
Act.
(2) On the occurrence of any public emergency, or in the interest of the public
safety, the Central Government or a State Government or any officer specially
authorised in this behalf by the Central Government or a State Government may,
if satisfied that it is necessary or expedient so to do in the interests of the
sovereignty and integrity of India, the security of the State, friendly relations with
foreign states or public order or for preventing incitement to the commission of an
offence, for reasons to be recorded in writing,by order, direct that any message or
class of messages to or from any person or class of persons, or relating to any
particular subject, brought for transmission by or transmitted or received by any
telegraph, shall not be transmitted, or shall be intercepted or detained, or shallbe
disclosed to the Goverrunent making the order or an officer thereof mentioned in
the order:
Provided that the press messages intended to be published in India of
correspondents accredited to the Central Government or a State Government shall
not be intercepted or detained, unless their transmission has been prohibited
under this sub-section.]
6. Power to establish telegraph on land of Railway Company.An y Railway
Company, on being required so to do by the Central Govemment,shall permit the
Government to establish and maintain a telegraph upon any part of the land of
the Company, and shall give every reasonable facility for working the same.
3[6A. Power to notify rates for transmission of messages to countries outside
India. (1) The Central Government may, from time to time, by order, notify the
rates at which, and the other conditions and restrictions subject towhich messages
shall be transmitted to any country outside India.
(2) In notifying the rates under sub-section (1), the Central Government shall
have due regard to all or any of the following factors, namely:­
[Sec. 4The Indian Telegraph Act, 18856
\
1. Ins. by Act 7 of 1914 sec. 4.
2. Subs. by Acl 38 of 1972, sec. 2 (w e.f. 21-8-1972).
3. Ins. by Acl 33 of 1971, sec. 2 (w e.f. 10-6-1971).


Sec. 7]
-,
The Indian Telegraph Act, 1885 7
(a) the rates for the time being in force, for transmission of messages, in
countries outside India;
(b) the foreign exchange rates for the time being in force;
(c) the rates for the time being in force for transmission ofmessages within
India;
(d) such other relevant factors as the Central Government may think fit in
the circumstances of the case.)
7. Power to make rules for the conduct of telegraphs.- (1) The Central
Governm ent may, from time to time, by notification in the Official Gazette, make
rules consistent with this Act for the conduct of all or any telegraphs, established,
maintained or worked by the Government or by persons licensed under this Act.
(2) Rules under this section may provide for all or any of the following among
other matters, that is to say:-
(a) the rates at which, and the other conditions and restrictions subject to
·which, messages shall be transmitted '[within India];
(b) the precautions tobe taken for preventing the improper interception or
disclosure of messages;
(c) the period for which, and the conditions subject to which, telegrams
and other documentsbelonging to, or beingin the custody of, telegraph
officers shall be preserved;
(d) the fees to be charged for searching for telegrams OJ<other documents
in the custody of any telegraph officer;
[ (e) the conditions and restrictions subject to which any telegraph line,
appliance or apparatus for telegraphic communication shall be
established, maintained, worked, repaired, transferred, shifted,
withdrawn or disconnected;]
[ (ee) the charges in respect of any application for providing any telegraph
line, appliance or apparatus;]
[ (eea) the manner in which the fund may be administered;
(eeb) the criteria based on which sums may be released;]
2[(f) the charges in respect of-
(i) the establishment, maintenance, working, repair, transfer or
shifting of any telegraph line, appliance or apparatus;
(ii) the services of operators operating such line, appliances or
apparatus;]
Ig) the matters in connection with the transition from a system ·
whereunder rights and obligations relating to the establishment,
maintenance, working, repair, transfer or shifting of any telegraph line,
l. Ins. by Act 33 of 1971, sec. 3 (w.e.f. 10-8-1971).
2. Ins. by Act 47 of 1957, sec. 2 (w.e.f. 1-7-1959).
3. Ins. by Act 48 of 1974, sec. 2 (w.e.f. 1-6-1975).
4. Ins. by Act 8 of 2004, sec. 4 (w.r.e.f. 1-4-2002).


8 The Indian Telegraph Act, 1885 [Sec. 7
appliance or apparatus for telegraphic communication attach by virtue
of any agreement to a system whereunder such rights and obligations
attach by virtue of rules made under this section;]
1[(h) the time at which, the manner in which, the conditions under which
and the persons by whom the rates, charges and fees mentioned in this
sub-section shall be paid and the furnishing of security for the
payment of such rates, charges and fees;]
1[(i) the payment of compensation to the Central Government for any loss
incurred in connection with the provision of any telegraph line,
appliance or apparatus for the benefit of any person- ­
(a) where the line, appliance or apparatus is, after it has been
connected for use, given up by that person before the expiration of
the period fixed by these rules, or
(b) where the work done for the purpose of providing the line,
appliance, or apparatus is, before it is connected for use, rendered
abortive by scime act or omission on the part of that person;]
'I@) the principles according to which and the authority by whom the
compensation referred to in clause (i) shall be assessed;]
2[0i) the qualifications to be possessed and the examinations, if any, to be
passed by the persons employed for the establishment, maintenance or
working of any telegraph and the fees to be charged for admission to
such examinations;] and
·[(k) any other matter for which provision is necessary for the proper and
efficient conduct of all or any telegraphs under this Act.]
(3) When making rules for the conduct of any telegraph established,
maintained or worked by any person licensed under this Act, the Central
Government may by the rules prescribe fines for any breach of the same:
Provided that the fines so prescribed shall not exceed the following limits,
namely:
(i) when the person licensed under this Act is punishable for the breach,
one thousand rupees, and in the case of a continuing breach a further
fine of two hundred rupees for every day after the first during the
whole or any part of which the breach continues;
(ii) when a servant of the person so licensed, or any other person, is
punishable for the breach, one-fourth of the amounts specified in
clause (i).
[ (4) Nothing in thi s section or in any rules made hereunder shallbe construed
as-
(a) precluding the Central Government from entering into an agreement
with a person for the establishment, maintenance and working by that
l. Ins. by Act 47 0f 1957, sec. 2 (w.e.f. 1-7-1959).
2. Ins. by Act 15 0f 1961, sec. 3 (we .f. 2-5-1961)


l.
Sec. 7) The Indian Telegraph Act, 1885 9
Government on terms and conditions specified in the agreement, of any
telegraph line, appliance or apparatus for the purpose of affording
means of telegraphic communication, where having regard to the
number of the lines, appliance or apparat us required by that person for
telegraphic commun ication, it is necessary or expedient to enter into
such agreement with him, or
(b) subjecting the Central Government to any obligation to provide any
telegraph line, appliance or apparatus for the purpose of affording
means of telegraphic communi cation.
1[(5) Every rule made under th.is section shall be laid as soon as may be after
it is made before each House of Parliament while it is in session for a total period
of thirty days 2[which may be comprised in one session or in two or more
successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following
the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,] both Houses agree in making any
modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made,
the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect,
as the case may be; so however, that any such modification or annulment shall be
without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule]).
COMMENTS
(i) System of multimetering local calls was made applicable only to electronic
exchanges and not to non-electronic exchanges with an objective of relieving congestion
in the lines, thus resulting in wide range of services. Such an exercise of power under this
section is not arbitrary as it did not amount to an attempt to secure additional revenue; C.
Lakshmi Narain v. Secretary, Government of India, Ministry of Communications,New Delhi,AIR
1994 Mad 213.
(ii) Father of the applicant and his family members used to use the telephone
though not allotted in his name. No justification to hold father of the applicant
responsible/ liable for non-payment of bills nor for refusal to grant new connection to the
applicant just because the premises concerned was the same; Ginni Vitreous Pvt. Ltd. v.
Union of India, AIR 1994 Ori 151. ·
(ill) The petitioner after having entered into a hiring contract with the department
agreeing to pay the enhanced levy unilaterally by the department, forfeited his right to
question or challenge. The enhanced levy, as being arbitrary or unreasonable exercise of
powers under this section, even as the petition selected to enjoy the facilities provided by
the department;Mani Varghesev. Regional Controller(T.T), AIR 1994Ker 274.
(iv) Mother and son are independent subscribers having two different telephones.
Just because of the said relationship, son can not be held liable and his telephone
disconnected owing to default in payment on the part of the mother. Such disconnection
of telephone of son is arbitrary and unreasonable; Pridhvi Kumar v. G.M. Telecom District,
Hyderabad, AIR 1993 AP 131.
(v) Metering of calls and charging at the rate of one call unit for every five minutes
or part thereof of a local call in an electronic telephone exchange is well in accordance with
law and not arbitrary as it neither alters free call units nor rate prescribed for call units;
Bombay Telephone Users' Association v.M T.N.L., AIR 1993 Bom 194.
1. Ins. by Act 15 f 1961, sec. 3 (w.e f. 2-5-1961).
2. Subs. by Act 48 0f 1974, sec. 2 (we .f. 1-6-1975).


(vi) In the absence of any provisions relating to commission and change/ variation
therein in the agreement/ contract and rules, exercise of power under this section to
reduce the commission payable to holders of Public Telephone Booth by the department
was not proper unless and until a requisite modification was effected in the contract, in
accordance with law; S. Karunamb ran v. Union of IndiaAIR 1992 Ker 316.
(vii) Demand for additional enhanced security deposit by the telegraph Authority is
stricitly subject to the principles of natural justice; K. Channnppa v. Union of India, AIR1991
Kar 18.
(viii) Retired employees of High Court cannot be treated at par with retired
Government Officers in respect of eligibility for making application under rule 2.3(e) of
Non-OYT-SS/ category for telephone allotment since the Chief Justice has the exclusive
power with regard to the former and the Director General of Posts and Telegraphs had
not provided for suitable provisions in that behalf; Mehtab Singh Khanna v. Union of India,
AIR 1991P&H 278.
(ix) The telephone can be installed for subscriber's use or such person's use who are
directly assisting the subscriber in a particular field, be it business or like engagement, at
the address given by the subscriber; C.Jose Ukkuv v. Union of hidia, AIR 1990 Mad 248.
(x) In case when a telephone subscriber is a partnership firm, all partners in such
firm are treated as owners and subscribers of the telephone and thus have such rights and
liabilities. In case of default in payment of dues of telephone of firm, the partner is liable
for it and any telephone rented to such partner even in his individual capacity is liable to
disconnection; Indravadan Pranlal Shah v. G.M. Ahmedabad Telephones District, Kharpur,
Ahmedabad, AIR1990 Guj 85.
1(7A. Saving of existing agreements.- Nothing in section 7shallauthorise the
making of any rules determining any agreement entered into by the Central
Government with any person before the commencement of the Indian Telegraph
(Amendment) Act, 1957, relating to the establishment, maintenance or working of
any telegraph line, appliance or apparatus for telegraphic communication; and all
rights and obligations thereun der relating to such establishment, maintenance or
working shall be determined in accordance with the terms and conditions of such
agreement.]
[ 7B. Arbitration of disputes. (1) Except as otherwise expressly provided in
this Act, if any dispute concerning any telegraph line, appliance or apparatus
arises between the telegraph authority and the person for whose benefit the line,
appliance or apparatus is, or has been, provided, the dispute shall be determined
by arbitration and shall, for the purposes of such determination, be referred to an
arbitrator appointed by the Central Government either specially for the
determination of that dispute or generally for the determination of disputes under
this section.
2) The award of the arbitrator appointed under sub-section (1) shall be
conclusive between the parties to the dispute and shall not be questioned in any
Court.]
COMMENTS
(i) The arbitrator was not appointed by the Central Government thereby violating
the essential requirement of this section. Hence, the award passed by such arbitrator
(appointed by MTNL) was void ab intio; Fly Wings Travels (P) Ltd. v. MTNL, AIR 1995 Del
171.
[Sec. 7The Indian Telegraph Act, 188510
1. Ins. by Ac! 47 0f 1957, sec. 2 (w.e.f. 1-7-1959).


Sec. 9A)
;::;. n,
The Indian Telegraph Act, 1885 11
(ii) Dispute regarding safe custody, disconnection, excess billing etc., of the telegraph
line, appliance or apparatus is certainly a dispute covered under this section. However, it
does not prevent the High Court to exercise its jurisdiction under Article 226 of the
Constitution of India; PradeepKumarTripathi v. TelecomDistrict Manager, AIR 1994 All 325.
(iii) Dispute of excess telephone billing can be referred to an arbitrator for arbitration
proceedings; P.T.Bellv. Unionof l11din,AIR 1993Mad 312.
(iv) The provisions of Arbitration Act or its general scheme are/is not applicable to
an arbitration as contemplated in this section; Div. Engr., Telephones, Cuttack v, Beharilal
Shgyams undar, AIR 1993 Ori 302.
(v) Instrument being appliance within the ambit of this section and dispute relating
to bills, disconnection and user falling under this section, can be referred to arbitration by
making an application for appointment of an arbitrator;Dr.].N. Sethv. Unionof India,AIR
1990MP 180. · t • }­
(vi) Even an official of the Government or the telephone departm ent itself can be
appointed as an arbitrator, lest there is a reasonable apprehension, 'as expressed by
aggrieved party, of bias or act being contrary to judicial and fair exercise of powers; S.
Kanyalal v. Unionof Indin, AIR 1990AP 1. +. ..s i
(vii) Remedy of resorting to arbitration does not bar the jurisdiction of the High
Court to exercise its jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution in case of
disconnection of telephone for default; Santosh Singh v. Div. Engineer, Telephones, Shillong,
AIR 1990 Gau 49.
8. Revocation of licences.- The Central Goveuun entmay,at anytime, revoke
any licence granted under section 4, on the breach of any of the conditions therein
contained, or in default of payment of any consideration payable thereunder.
9. Government not responsible for loss or damage.Th e '[Government]shall
not be responsible for any loss or damage which may occur in consequence.ofany
telegraph officer failing in his duty with respect to the receipt, transmission or
delivery of any message; and no such officer shallbe responsiblefora11y such loss
or damage, unless he causes the same negligently, maliciously er fraudulently.
[PART IIA ; :
UNIVERSAL SERVICE OBLIGATION FUND
9A. Establishment of UniversalServiceObligation Fund. 1)On and from
the commencement of the Indian Telegraph (Amendment)Act,2003, there shallbe
established, for the purposes of this Ad ,aFundtobe called th~"Universal Service
Obligation Fund".
(2) The Fund shall be under the controlof the Central Government and there
shall be credited thereto-
(a) any sums of money paid under section 9B;
(b) any grantsand loans made by the CentralGovernment under section 9C.
(3) The balance to the credit of the Fund shall not lapse at the end of the
financial year.
1. Subs. by the A.O. 1950, for "Crown". Earlier the word "Crown" was substituted by the
A.O, 1937, fo r "Secretary of State fo r India in Cow1eil".
2. Part llA (Containing sections 9A to 9D) ins. by Act 8 of 2004, sec. 5 (w.r.e.f. 1-4-2002).


--,
12 The Indian Telegraph Act, 1885 [Sec. 9B
9B. Crediting of sum to Consolidated Fund of India.Th e sums of money
received towards the Universal Service Obligation under section 4 shall first be
credited to the Consolidated Fund of India, and the Central Government may, if
Parliament by appropriation made by law in this behalf so provides, credit such
proceeds to the Fund from time to time for being utilised exclusively for meeting
the Universal Service Obligation.
9C. Grants and loans by the Central Government.T he Central Government
may, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law in this behalf, credit by
way of grants and loans such sums of money as that Government may consider
necessary in the Fund.
9D. Administration and utilisation of Fund.- (1) The Central Government
shall have the power to administer the Fund in such manner as may be prescribed
by rules made under this Act.
(2) The Fund shall be utilised exclusively for meeting the Universal Service
Obligation.
(3) The Central Government shall be responsible for the co-ordination and
ensuring timely utilisation and release of sums in accordance with the criteria as
may be prescribed by rules made under this Act.J
PART III
POWER TO PLACE TELEGRAPH LINES AND POSTS
10. Power for telegraph authority to place and maintain telegraph lines and
posts.- The telegraph authority may, from time to time, place and maintain a
telegraph line under, over, along, or across, and posts in or upon, any immovable
property:
Provided that-
(a) the telegraph authority shall not exercise the powers conferred by this
section except for the purposes of a telegraph established or
maintained by the 1[Central Government], or to be so established or
maintained;
(b) the 1[Central Government] shall not acquire any right other than that
of user only in the property under, over, along, across, in or upon
which the telegraph authority places any telegraph line or post; and
(c) except as hereinafter provided, the telegraph authority shall not
exercise those powers in respect of any property vested in or under the
control or management of any local authority, without the permission
of that authority; and
(d) in the exercise of the powers conferred by this section, the telegraph
authority shall do as little damage as possible, and, when it has
exercised those powers in respect of any property other !han that
referred to in clause (c), shall pay full compensation to all persons
interested for any damage sustained by them by reason oi the exercise
of those powers.
1. Subs. by the A.O. 1937, for "Government".


Sec. 15] The Indian Telegraph Act, 1885 13
11. Power to enter on property in order to repair or remove telegraph lines
or posts. The telegraph authority may, at any time, for the purpose of examining,
repairing, altering or removing any telegraph line or post, enter on the property
under, over, along, across, in or upon which the line or post has been placed.
Provisions applicable to property vested in or under the control
or management of local authorities
12. Power for local authority to give permission under section 10, clause (c),
subject to conditions.- Any permission given by a local authority under section
10, clause (c) may be given subject to such reasonable conditions as that authority
thinks fit to impose, as to the payment ofany expenses to which the authority will
necessarily be put in consequence of the exercise of the powers conferred by that
section, or as to the time or mode ofexecution of any work, or as to any other thing
connected with or relative to any work undertaken by the telegraph authority
under those powers.
13. Power for local authority to require removal or alteration of telegraph line
or post. When, under the foregoing provisions of this Act,a telegraph line orpost
has been placed by the telegraph authority under, over, along, across, in or upon
any property vested in or under the control or management of a local authority,
and the local authority, having regard to circumstances which have arisen since
the telegraph line or post was so placed, considers it expedient that it should be
removed or that its position should be altered, the local authority may require the
telegraph authority to remove it or alter its position, as the case may be.
14. Power to alter position of gas or water pipes or drains.Th e telegraph
authority may, for the purpose of exercising the powers conferred upon it by this
Act in respect of any property vested in or under the control or management of a
local authority, alter the position thereunder of any pipe (not being a main) for the
supply of gas or water, or of any drain (not being a main drain):
Provided that-
(a) When thetelegraph authority desires to alter the position of any such
pipe or drain, it shall give reasonable notice of its intention to do so,
specifying the time at which itwillbegin to do so, to the local authority,
and, when the pipe or drain is not under the control of the local
authority, to the personunder whose control the pipe or drain is;
(b) a local authority or person receiving notice under clause (a) may send
a person to superintend the work, and the telegraph authority shall
execute the work to the reasonable satisfaction of the person so sent.
15. Disputes between telegraph authority and local authority.- (1) If any
dispute arises between the telegraph authority and a local authority in
consequence of the local authority refusing the permission referred to in section 10,
clause (c), or prescribing any condition under section 12, or in consequence of the
telegraph authority omitting to comply with a requisition made under section 13,
or otherwise in respect of the exercise of the powers conferred by this Act, it shall
be determined by such officer as the '[Central Govemment] may appoint either
generally or specially in this behalf.
- 1. Subs. by the A.O. 1937, for "Local Government".
j
I
1
---•·----·-·------·1


14 The Indian Telegraph Act, 1885 [Sec.
(2) An appeal from the determination of the officer so appointed shall lie
the 1[Central Government]; and the order of the 1[Central Government] shall
final.
Provisions applicable to other property
16. Exercise of powers conferred by section 10, and disputes as
compensation, in case of property other than that of a local authority.-- (1) If I
exercise of the powers mentioned in section 10in respect of property referred
in clause (d) of that section is resisted or obstructed, the District Magistrate mi
in his discretion, order that the telegraph authority shall be permitted to exerc
them.
(2) If,after the making of an order under sub-section (1), any person resists I
exercise of those powers, or, having control over the property, does not give
facilities for their being exercised, he shallbe deemed tohave committed an offer
under section 188 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 (45 0f 1860).
(3) 1 any dispute arises concerning the sufficiency of the compensation to
paid under section 10, clause (d), it shall, on application for that purpose by eitl
of the disputing parties to the DistrictJudge within whose jurisdiction the prope
is situate, be determined by him.
(4) Ifany dispute arises as tothe persons entitled to receive compensation,
as to the proportions in which the persons interested are entitled to share in it,
telegraph authority may pay into the Court of the District Judge such amount
he deems sufficient or, where all the disputing parties have in writing admit!
the amount tendered tobe sufficient or theamounthas been determined under s
section (3), that amount; and the District Judge, after giving notice to the part
and hearing such of them as desire to be heard, shall determine the pers
entitled to receive the compensation or,as the case may be, the proportions
which the persons interested are entitled to share in it.
(5) Every determination of a dispute by a District Judge under sub-section
or sub-section (4) shall be final: ·
Provided that nothing in this sub-section shall affect the right of any pen
to recoverby suit the whole or any part of any compensation paid by the telegr
authority, from the person who has received the same.
COMMENTS
(@) The District Magistrate discharges an administrative function exercising
discretion on the basis of general principles of natural justice and other proced1
regulations. So, sub-section (1) of this section is in no way violative of Article 14 of
Constitution;A.M. Ismail v. Unionof India,AIR1995Ker 1.
(ii) The duties to be discharged by the District Magistrate are not purely judi
nature even though conferment of judicial functions on the Executive Magistrate
Special Executive Magistrate is not violative of the Constitution; A.M. Ismail v. Unio
India, AIR 1995 Ker 1.
17. Removal or alteration of telegraph line or post, on property other tl
that of a local authority. (1) When, under the foregoing provisions of this A
1. Subs. by the A.O. 1937, for "Local Government".
a . « _____.,_....., -·.. ----- - .


Sec. 19A] The Indian Telegraph Act, 1885 15
telegraph line or post has been placed by the telegraph authority under, over,
along, across, in or upon any property, not being property vested in or under the
control or management of a local authority, and any person entitled to do so
desires to deal with that property in such a manner as to render it necessary or
convenient that the telegraph line or post should be removed to another part
thereof or to ahigher or lower level or altered in from,he may require the telegraph
authority to remove or alter the line of post accordingly:
Provided that, if compensation has been paid under section 10, clause (d), he
shall, when making the requisition, tender to the telegraph authority the amount
requisite to defray the expense of the removal or alteration, or half of the amount
paid as compensation, whichever may be the smaller sum.
(2) If the telegraph authority omits to comply with the requisition, the person
making it may apply to the District Magistrate within whose jurisdiction the
property is situate to order the removal or alteration.
(3) A District Magistrate receiving an application under sub-section (2) may,
in his discretion, reject the same or make an order, absolutely or subject to
conditions, for the removal of the telegraph line or post to any other part of the
property or to a higher or lower level or for the alteration of its form; and the order
so made shall be final.
Provisions applicable to all property
18. Removal of trees interrupting telegraphic communication. (1) If any tree
standing or lying near a telegraph line interrupts, or is likely to interrupt,
telegraphic communication, a Magistrate of the first or second class may, on the
application of the telegraph authority, cause the tree to be removed or dealt with
in such other way as he deems fit.
(2) When disposing of an application under sub-section (1), the Magistrate
shall, in the case of any tree in existence before the telegraph line was placed,
award to the persons interested in the tree such compensation as he thinks
reasonable, and the award shall be final.
19. Telegraph lines and posts placed before the passing of this Act.E very
telegraph line or post placed before the passing of this Act under, over, along,
·across, in or upon any property, for the purposes of a telegraph established or
maintained by the 1[Central Government], shall be deemed to have been placed in
exercise of the powers conferred by, and after observance of all the requirements
of, this Act. ·
2[19A. Person exercising legal right likely to damage telegraph or interfere
with telegraphic communication to give notice.- (1) Any person desiring to deal
in the legal exercise of aright with any property in such a manner as is likely to
cause damage to a telegraph line or post which has been duly placed in
accordance with the provisions of this Act, or to interrupt or interfere with
telegraphic communications, shall give not less than one month's notice in writing
of the intended exercise ofsuch right to the telegraph authority, or to any telegraph
officer whom the telegraph authority may empower in this behalf.
1. Subs. by the A.O. 1937, for "Government".
2. Ins. by Act 7 of 1914, sec. 5.


16 The Indian Telegraph Act, 1885 [Sec. 19A
(2) 1 any such person without having complied with the provisions of sub­
section (1) deals with any property in such a manner as is likely to cause damage
to any telegraph line or post, or to interrupt or interfere with telegraphic
communication, a Magistrate of the first or second class may, on the application
of the telegraph authority, order such person to abstain from dealing with such
property in such manner for a period not exceeding one month from the date of
his order and forthwith to take such action with regard to such property as may
be in the opinion of the Magistrate necessary to remedy or prevent such damage,
interruption or interference during such period.
(3) A person dealing with any property in the manner referred to in sub-section
(1) with the boma fideintention, of averting imminent danger of personal injury to
himself or any other human being shall be deemed to have complied with the
provisions of the said sub-section if he gives such notice of the intended exercise
of the right as is in the circumstances possible, or where no such previous notice
can be given without incurring the imminent danger referred to above, if he
forthwith gives notice of the actual exercise ofsuch right to the authority or officer
specified in the said sub-section.]
1[19B. Pmver to confer upon licensee powers of telegraph authority under
this Part.T he Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette,
confer upon any licensee under section 4, in respect of the extent ofhis license and
subject to any conditions and restrictions with the Central Government may think
fit to impose and to the provisions of this Part all or any of the powers which the
telegraph authority possesses under this Part with regard to a telegraph
established or maintained by the Government or to be so established or
maintained:
Provided that the notice prescribed in section 19A shall always be given to the
telegraph authority or officer empowered to receive notice under section 19A(l).]
PART TV
PENALTIES
2[20. Establishing, maintaining or working unauthorised telegraph.- (1) If
any person establishes, maintains or works a telegraph within 3[India) in
contravention of the provisions ofsection 4or otherwise than as permitted by rules
made under that section, he shall be punished, if the telegraph is a wireless
telegraph, with imprisonment which may extend to three years, or with fine, or
with both, and, in any other case, with a fine which may extend to one thousand
rupees.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure,
1898 (5 0f 1898), offences under this section in respect of a wireless telegraph shall,
for the purposes of the said Code, be bailable and non-cognizable.
(3) When any person is convicted of an offence punishable under this section,
the court before which he is convicted may direct that the telegraph in respect of
l. Ins. by Act 7 of 1914, sec. 5.
2. Subs. by the Act 7 of 1914, sec. 6, for the original section.
3. Subs. by Act 45 0f 1948, sec..3, for "the Provinces"
!
.1


Sec. 25] The Indian Telegraph Act, 1885 17
which the offence has been committed, or any part of such telegraph, be forfeited
toGovernment.]
1[20A. Breach of condition of license.I f the holder of a license granted under
section 4 contravenes any condition contained in his license, he shall be punished
with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, and with a further fine which
may extend to five hundred rupees for every week during which the breach of the
condition continues.]
21. Using unauthorised telegraphs.I f any person, knowing or having reason
to believe that a telegraph has been established or is maintained or worked; in
contravention of this Act, tra.nsmits or receives any message by such telegraph, or
performs any ser vice incidental thereto, or delivers any message for transmission
by such telegraph or accepts delivery of any message sent thereby, he shall be
punished with fine which may extend to fifty rupees.
22. Opposing establishment of telegraphs on railway land.- If a Railway
Company, or an officer of a Railway Company, neglects or refuses to comply with
the provisions of section 6, it or he shall be punished with fine which may extend
to one thousand rupees for every day during which the neglect or refusal
continues.
23. Intrusion into signal-room, trespass in telegraph office or obstruction.­
If any person-
(a) without permission of competent authority, enters the signal-room of
a telegraph office of the Government, or ofa person licensed under this
Act, or
(b) enters a fenced enclosure round such a telegraph office in
contravention of any rule or notice not to do so, or
(c) refuses to quit such room or enclosure on being requested to do so by
any officer or servant employed therein, or
(d) wilfully obstructs or impedes any such officer or servant in the
performance of his duty, ·
he shall be punished with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees.
24. Unlawfully attempting to learn contents of messages.- Ifany person does
any of the acts mentioned in section 23 with the intention of unlawfully learning
the contents of any message or of committing any offence punishable under this
Act, he may (in addition to the fine with which he is punishable under section 23)
be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year.
25. Intentionally damaging or tampering with telegraphs.- If any person,
intending-
(a) to prevent or obstruct the transmission or delivery of any message, or
(b) to intercept or to acquaint himself with the contents of any message,
or
(c) to commit mischief,
1. Ins. by Act 7 of 1914, sec. 7.


18 The Indian Telegraph Act, 1885 [Sec. 25
damages, removes, tampers with or touches any battery, machinery, telegraph
lines, post or other thing whatever, being part ofor used in or about any telegraph
or in the working thereof,
he shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three
years, or with fine, or with both.
1[25A. Injury to or interference with a telegraph line or post.- If, in any case
not provided for by section 25, any person deals with any property and thereby
wilfully or negligently damages any telegraph line or post duly placed on such
property in accordance with the provisions of this Act, he shall be liable to pay
the telegraph authority such expenses (if any) as may be incurred in making good
such damage, and shall also, if the telegraphic communication is by reason of the
dama ge so caused interrupted, be punishable with a fine which may extend to one
thousand rupees:
Provided that the provisions of this section shall not apply where such
damage or interruption is caused by a person dealing with any property in the
legal exercise of a right if he has complied with the provisions of section 19A(1).]
26. Telegraph officer or other official making away with or altering, or
unlawfully intercepting or disclosing, messages, or divulging purport of
signals. If any telegraph officer, or any person, not being a telegraph officer but
having official duties connected with any office which is used as a telegraph
office,
(a) wilfully secrets, makes away with or alters any message which he has
received for transmission or delivery, or
b) wilfully, and otherwise than in obedience to an order of the Central
Government or of a State Government, or of an officer specially
authorised 2[by the Central or a State Government] to make the order,
omits to transmit or intercepts or detains, any message or any part
thereof, or otherwise than in pursuance of his official duty or in
obedience to the direction of a competent court, discloses the contents
or any part of the contents of any message, to any person not entitled
to receive the same, or ·
(c) divulges the purport of any telegraphic signal to any person not
entitled to become acquainted with the same,
he shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three
years or with fine, or with both.
27. Telegraph officer fraudulently sending messages without payment.- If
any telegraph officer transmits by telegraph any message on which the charge
prescribed by the 3[Central Government], or by a person licensed under this Act,
as the case may be, has not been paid, intending thereby to defraud the
3
[Central
Government] or that person, he shall be punished with imp risonme nt for a term
which may extend to three years, or with fine, or with both.
1. Ins. by Act 7 of 1914, sec. 8.
2. Subs. by the A.O. 1937, for "by the Governor-General in Council"
3. Subs. by the A.O. 1937, for "Government".


Sec. 33] The Indian Telegraph Act, 1885 19
28. Misconduct. If any telegraph officer, or any person not being a telegraph
officer but having official duties conn ected with any office which is used as a
telegraph office, is guilty of any act of drunkenness, carelessness or other
misconduct whereby the correct transmission or the delivery of any message is
impeded or delayed, or if any telegraph officer loiters or delays in the transmission
or delivery of any message, he shall be punished with imprisonment for a term
which may extend to three months, or with fine which may extend to one hundred
rupees, or with both.
29. Sending Fabricated message. [Rep. by the Indian Telegarph (Amendment)
Act, 1971 (33 of 1971), sec. 4 (0.ef. 10-8-1971).]
1[29A. Penalty.- If any person, without due authority,-
(a) makes or issues any document of a nature reasonably calculated to
cause it to be believed that the document has been issued by, or under
the authority of, the Director-General of 2[Posts and Telegraphs], or
(b) makes on any document any mark in imitation of, or similar to, or
purporting to be, any stamp or mark of any telegraph office under the
Director-General of 2[Posts and Telegraphs], or a mark of a nature
reasonably calculated to cause it to be believed that the document so
marked has been issued, by or under the authority of, the Director­
General of ?[Posts and Telegraphs],
he shall be punished with fine which may extend to fifty rupees.]
30. Retaining a message delivered by mistake.I f any person fraudulently
retains, or wilfully secretes, makes away with or detains a message which ought
to have been delivered to some other person, or, being required by a telegraph
officer to deliver up any such message, neglects or refuses to do so, he shall be
punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years, or with
fine, or with both.
31. Bribery.A telegraph officer shall be deemed a public servant within the
meaning of sections 161, 162, 163, 164 and 165 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 (45
of 1860); and in the definition of "legal remuneration" contained in the said
section 161, the word "Government" shall, for the purposes of this Act, be deemed
to include a person licensed under this Act.
32. Attempts to commit offences.Wh oever attempts to commit any offence
pun ishable under this Act shall be punished with the punishment herein provided
for the offence.
PART V
SUPPLEMENTAL PROVISION
33. Power to employ additional police in places where mischief to telegraphs
is repeatedly committed. (1) Whenever it appears to the State Government that
any act causing or likely to cause wrongful damage to any telegraph is repeatedly
and maliciously committed in any place, and that the employment ofan additional
1. Ins. by Act 7 of 1914 sec. 9.
2. Subs. by Act 14 of 1914, sec. 2, for "Telegraphs".
c» -2


20 The Indian Telegraph Act, 1885 [Sec. 33
police-force in that place is thereby rendered necessary, the State Government may
send such additional police-force as it thinks fit to the place, and employ the same
therein so long as, in the opinion of that Government, the necessity of doing so
continues.
(2) The inhabitants of the place shall be charged wi th the cost of the additional
police-force, and the District Magistrate shall, subject to the orders of the State
Government, assess the proportion in which the cost shall be paid by the
inh abitants according to his judgment of their respective means.
(3) All moneys pa) able under sub-section (2) shall be recoverable either under
the warrant of a Magistrate by distress and sale of the movable property of the
defaulter within the local limits of his jurisdiction, or by suit in any competent
court.
(4) The State Government may, by order in writing, define the limits of any
place for the purposes of thi s section.
1[34. Application of Act to Presidency-towns. (1) This Act, in its application
to the Presidency-towns, shall be read as if for the words "District Magistrate" in
section 16, sub-section (1), and section17, sub-sections (2) and (3), for the words
"Magistrate of the first or second class" in section 18, sub-section (1), -[and section
19A, sub-section (2)] and for the words "Magistrate" in section 18, sub-section (2),
there had been enacted the word "Commissioner of Police" and for the words
"District Judge" in section 16, sub-sections (3), (4) and (5), the words "ChiefJudge
of the Court of Small Causes".
3[++j
(3)The fee in respect of an application to the ChiefJudge of a Presidency Court
of Small Causes under sub-section (3) of section 16 shall be the same as would be
payable under the Court-fees Act, 1870 (7 of 1870), in respect of such an
application to a District Judge beyond the limits of a Presidency-town, and fees for
summonses and other processes in proceedings before the ChiefJudge under sub­
section (3) or sub-section (4) of that section shall be payable according to the scale
set forth in the Fourth Schedule to the Presidency Small Cause Courts
Act, 1882 (15 0f 1882).]
[ 35. Reference to certain Jaws of Part BStates.[ Rep. by Part BStates(Laws)
Act, 1951 (3 0f 1951), sec. 3 and Sch.]
1. Ins. by Act 11 of 1888 sec. 1.
2. Ins. by Act 7 of 1914, sec. JO.
3. Sub-section (2) omitted by the A.O. 1937.
4. Subs. by the A.O. 1950, for section 35. Earlier section 35 was inserted by Act 45 of 1948.


GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
MINISTRY OF COMMUNICATIONS & IT
DEPARTMENT OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS
SANCHAR BHAWAN, 20, ASHOKA ROAD,
NEW DELHI-110 001, INDIA.
LICENSE AGREEMENT
FOR
UNIFIED LICENSE
NO. DATED
TOTAL PAGES
Rnnexus - [T


(iii) All the past dues are fully paid till the date of transfer/assignment by the
Transferor Company and Transferee Company; and thereafter the transferee company
undertakes to pay all future dues inclusive of anything remained unpaid of the past
period by the outgoing company.
[NOTE: The format of the Tripartite Agreement shall be provided by the Licensor as and
when requested by the Licensee and the Tripartite Agreement, if signed, shall become
part of this License agreement as annexure.]
7. Provision of Service:
The Licensee shall be responsible for, and is authorized to own, install, test and
commission all the Applicable systems for providing the Service authorized under this
License agreement. The Licensee shall intimate to the Licensor well in advance before
the proposed date of commencement of any service in any Service Area containing the
details of network and required facilities for monitoring of the service installed by the
Licensee. Any service, permitted under the scope of this License Agreement, shall be
commenced by the Licensee only after prior approval of the Licensor. The approval
shall normally be granted within 90 days from the date of receipt of such intimation
provided that the Applicable System/Service is broadly compliant to the scope of the
License and requisite monitoring facilities are successfully demonstrated by the
Licensee.
8. Delivery of Service (Service to subscriber):
The Licensee shall intimate the Licensor and TRAI of Commencement of Service
within 15 days of such commencement.
9. Requirement to furnish information:
9.1 The Licensee shall furnish to the Licensor/TRAI, on demand in the manner and
as per specified timelines such documents, accounts, estimates, returns, reports or
other information in accordance with the rules/ orders as may be prescribed or as
directed from time to time. The Licensee shall also submit information to TRAI as per
any order or direction or regulation issued from time to time under the provisions of
TRAI Act, 1997 as amended from time to time.
10. Penalty, Suspension, Surrender, Termination/Revocation of License:
10.1 (i) The Licensor may impose a financial penalty not exceeding the amount shown
in Annexure-VI for each service as per applicable service area per occasion for
violation of terms and conditions of license agreement. This penalty is exclusive of
Liquidated Damages, if any, as prescribed in this License Agreement.
10.1 (ii) The Licensor reserves the right to suspend the operation of this
License/Service Authorization in whole or in part, at any time, if, in the opinion of the
Licensor, it is necessary or expedient to do so in public interest or in the interest of the
security of the State or for the proper conduct of the Telegraph. License Fee payable to
the Licensor will not be required to be paid for the period for which the operation of this
License remains suspended in whole. Provided that if situation so warrants, the
Licensor may dispense with the issue of notice prior to such suspension. The decision
of the Licensor shall be final and binding in this regard.
13


Provided further that the Licensor shall not be responsible for any damage or loss
caused or arisen out of aforesaid action. Provided also that the suspension of the
License shall not be a cause or ground for extension of the period of the License and
suspension period will be taken as period spent.
10.2 (i) The Licensor may, without prejudice to any other remedy available for the
breach of any conditions of License, by a written notice to the Licensee at its registered
office, terminate/revoke this License in whole or in part or any of the authorized
service(s) under any of the following circumstances :
If the Licensee:
a) fails to perform any obligation(s) under the License including timely
payments of fee and other charges due to the Licensor, including
securitization of dues;
b) fails to rectify, within the time prescribed, any defect/deficiency/correction
in service/equipment as may be pointed out by the Licensor/TRAI.
c) goes into liquidation or ordered to be wound up.
d) is recommended by TRAI for revocation of License for non-compliance of
the terms and conditions of the License.
e) fails to comply with FDI norms.
f) has furnished information/ certificates for obtaining the license which is
found false at any stage.
For this purpose, the Licensor shall issue a show cause notice of 21 days to the
Licensee. If the Licensor decides to revoke the license, the same will be effective from
the 61st calendar day from the date of issue of such termination/revocation order. The
Licensee shall be required to give a notice of at least 30 Calendar days to its customers
within this period of revocation order.
10.2(ii) In case of suspension or termination/revocation of the License / authorized
service, the Licensor may also impose a financial penalty not exceeding the amount
shown in Annexure-VI for each service per service area for violation of terms and
conditions of license agreement.
10.3 Licensee may surrender the License or any service authorization under this
License, by giving notice of at least 60 Calendar days in advance. In that case it shall
also notify all its subscribers by sending a 30 Calendar days notice to each subscriber.
The Licensee shall pay all fees payable by it till the date on which the surrender of the
License/Service authorization becomes effective. The effective date of such surrender
shall be 61st Calendar days counted from the date of receipt of such notice by the
Licensor, if it is not rejected by the Licensor within 30 days of date of receipt of the
notice.
10.4 The Licensor reserves the right to terminate/revoke/suspend the License or any
authorized service under this License, in whole or in part, at any time in the interest of
public by giving a notice of 60 Calendar days from the date of issue of such notice.
Provided that, in the interest of national security or in the event of national
14


Annexu,,u-.nr
REGD. NO. D. L.-33004/99
~ ~ . ~ . wrnr s, 2017/ fflqUT 17, 1939
"NEW DELHI, TUESDAY,AUGUST 8, 2017/SRAVANA 17, 1939
iat rialar
(aiar fan )
sfr4aar
£ fa# ,7 3777+=, 2017
m.cfiT.f.t 998(7).era marz, ta az afafa , 1885 (1885 efiT13) (fs zui ~
trli~ ~ ~ ~ -rm i )cFT"ITTU7"[1U~ !imfi<!TefiT>!<ftlT~ gC;.<1lcfi3WlTTf<ITmofiW !\TTt
'-fiR1lTf (zji1I( ffclnITt ~ ~ efiTfclf.ll.l'F1~ t fu-Q:f.l~R\f©d R"l.111-.r,:mrr~.3f~ :-
1. (1) ~ ~ cfiTm&IB'1TITaria sraft #at ~ (mofi3TTlffif <ITffi WeTT)~ . 2017! I
(2) ~~ if m 1,fcfif!IR cF1"~ ~ ~ ~ I
2. (1) f (zji1I< WTT3IT~ ~ ~ t fu-Q:ITT!if m«r ~ t +n+raif m«r ~ t 'N ~
t mcf "[TU mw<T ~ t +n+raif <Nfcl-m-rt w<T ~ t m-zm&cFfa (f zm~
tr~ "f!"e-Tlf~ ~ <Tmt). "[TU ~ 1fC1;3ITT"!if "ITTU~ w ~ ~ ~ ~ *
619Rt_l4 trftfi~ if,~ ¥ ITT!ITarn:rmcwTT ~ ~ t.~ iJ:m3ITT"!IT~ ~
~ "ITTU, -;;rt'lTT«f ~ t ~ mcf cF1"tj-fu; itffi"cfiT;,-~. ~ . ~ ~ . ~ 'N
mcf m ~ <Nmcf "ITTU~ : ~ mr -rm ~ . "ITTUw mr ;;ir ~ :
Ti{ a#ra Tzfa n + Tzmcf "[TU ~ m&cfiTfr"[TU w ~ ooarrt
fa+a f a u,ii sq2n #s farn # #if iz t 'lfun:tren:rmf&cfim*-srn:r~ t
ra ft rm:
~ ~ 3ittfcl>f (zjij I( ~ arrt ~ efiT3ITT"!if 3a #tat e ft aafr # 'lTicR~e-Tlf
~ cF1"1ffe"t ,m:r ;,-~ cF1"~!ITTif 61ffilat ztsum
ah l
([he <5a-:£ette of J ndia
m:mmur
EXTRAORDINARY
'lTI7TIJ- (91ls 3- ~ -(91ls (i)
PART 11- Section 3- Sub-section (i)
7Tfran 7arfa
PUBLI SHED BY AUTHORITY
"ff. 679]
No. 679)
~ "Bo "gTo ~ o- 33004/99
4764 Gl/2017 (I)


2 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA: EXTRAORDINARY [PART II- SEC. 3(i)]
(2) '3""9"-R<l"+l"(1) t 3'.!"m;:r~an:rmfucf;m mr -;;rift~ -nJ:31Rl<rit,~ f.Rl<rt ~ "if.R1Tf~
~ 3ITT~ 31Rlif cf;'t-"SITTf~ ffl ~ a1ll ~ '3.1fitc1lc/i1 m,:rfu of.I"3fWTTrcf;'t-~ I
(3) '3""9"-~ (1) t 3'.j"m,:fn fa mufriar fr fa s cm:mfucf;mt ~ ~ of.I"
a r ia mararii,fsi za sf0fa ft mu 4t 3'.!"m;:r6lj :i1nl'-li ~ cf;'t-'T{t t ~
~ of.I",1ffern"3'.!"tlt~'fcFcf;'t-w a mer if i smasmart z ffa # a fa
zre fRa +iaaararr faa R sii # =fr z4a; f a +iqaar sii 7ma+raf aa nrin
cfR mf'&"cfil"ftIDU 3fc:fmfurNi<rr~ I
(4) cm:mfucf;m 3fn:wn->RlcIT, <T'4TIBITTl", ,ITTcfi~ wn-ITTat zsr at +iaz1sq#a ii
sf0a7f=ii #rzciarziarai fa+a fr fr szr ars#iof.I"'SITTfffl" 3fn:~ ~ ~ ffi"
nfarrzaafar=ii u i rafafea ait
(5) zaf@fa,arr =arr a ·5a +·al qafaRa ffa a +z+a.f
(i)+f7a mar 1 +7faft snrarrff #raaff fauf faa faa= anf ,srat­
("<ti) i:iRi:is;;1~ -3-T~<rirr
(W) 'llmf ~ t fctfuffl fct'lW!"t 'llRBT Wli ~ - ~
(-r) +Ta var #aria= faa # +faa -+arr
(ii) 1=a +al an=7n ft aft gaff# a f.fa f f#f ai f.aa=a#f, rafa­
(+)+r fa
(W) 'llRBT Wli ff +fa a fctfitlRml<ff-f<tfirffl
(57)+Raa,·Tr za (+z +faa nr,;;r)
(6) 3.1rt ~1cfi1 miTfctm<fi3TT1lTTrm Ra +=a # a7= ar ii # fa#a fr f atmaffi" t
ffi m Reimafa= az#a=f#tz ar itu faaa faaf#faaa=ft fa cf<TT'3""9"-~ (1)
t 3,m,,-;;rift~ -nJ:ITT.!IT~ ~ cf;'t-mu s cf;'t-'3""9"-mu (2)t ~ mt ~ t 1
[1fil.B". 800-37/2016-~ .II]
~ ~ firm, ,cffur'3""9"-~ !(Tcfi(~ )
MINISTRY OF COMMUNICATIONS
(Department of Telecommunications)
NOTIFICATION
New Delhi, the 7th August, 2017
G.S.R. 998(E).- ln exercise of the powers conferred by section 7 of the Indian Telegraph Act, I885
(13 of 1885) (hereinafter referred to as the said Act), the Central Government hereby makes the following
rules to regulate the tempora1y suspension of telecom services due to public emergency or public safety,
namely:-
1. (1) These rules may be called the Temporary Suspension of Telecom Services (Public Emergency or
Public Safety) Rules, 2017.
(2) They shall come into force on the date of their publication in the Official Gazette.
2. (1) Directions to suspend the telecom services shall not be issued except by an order made by the
Secretary to the Government of India in the Ministry of Home Affairs in the case of Government of


(c) Secretary to the Government, Department of Telecommunications -Member.
(ii) The Review Commi ttee to be constituted by the State Government shall consist of the following,
namely:-
(a) Chief Secretary -Chairman;
(b) Secretary Law or Legal Remembrancer In-Charge, Legal Affairs -Member;
(c) Secretary to the State Government (other than the Home Secretary) -Member.
(6) The Review Committee shall meet within five working days of issue of directions for suspension of
services due to public emergency or public safety and record its findings whether the directions
issued under sub-rule (1) are in accordance with the provisions of sub-section (2) of section 5 of the
said Act.
[F. No. 800-37/2016-AS.II]
PRAMOD KUMAR MITTAL, Senior Dy. Director General (AS)
India or by the Secretary to the State Government in-charge of the Horne Department in the case of
a State Government (hereinafter referred to as the competent authority), and in unavoidable
circumstances, where obtaining of prior direction is not feasible, such order may be issued by an
officer, not below the rank of a Joint Secretary to the Government of India, who has been duly
authorised by the Union Horne Secretary or the State Home Secretary, as the case may be:
Provided that the order for suspension of telecom services, issued by the officer authorised by the
Union Home Secretary or the State Home Secretary, shall be subject to the confirmation from the
competent authority within 24 hours of issuing such order:
Provided further that the order of suspension of telecom services shall cease to exist in case of
failure of receipt of confirmation from the competent authority within the said period of 24 hours.
(2) Any order issued by the competent authority under sub-rule (l) shall contain reasons for such
direction and a copy of such order shall be forwarded to the concerned Review Committee latest by
next working day.
(3) The directions for suspension issued under sub-rule (l) shall be conveyed to designated officers of
the telegraph authority or to the designated officers of the service providers, who have been granted
licenses under section 4 of the said Act, in writing or by secure electronic communication by an
officer not below the rank of Superintendent of Police or of the equivalent rank and mode of secure
electronic commu nication and its implementation shall be determined by the telegraph authority.
(4) The telegraph authority and service providers shall designate officers in every licensed service area
or State or Union territory, as the case may be, as the nodal officers to receive and handle such
requisitions for suspension of telecom services.
(5) The Central Government or the State Government, as the case may be, shall constitute a Review
Committee.
(i) The Review Committee to be constituted by the Central Government shall consist of the
following, namely:­
(a) Cabinet Secretary -Chairman;
3
-Member;(b) Secretary to the Government of India In-charge, Legal Affairs
[Tr II--av 3(i)]
Digitally signed by RAKESH
RAKESH SUKULs o
Date: 2017.08.09 20.18:50 +05 30'
Uploaded by Dte. of Printing at Government ofl ndia Press, Ring Road, Mayapuri,New Delhi-110064
and Published by the Controller of Publications, Delhi-110054.
