1 
 
      STANDING COMMITTEE ON COMMUNICATIONS AND  
   INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(2022-23) 
 
 
 
SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF INFORMATION AND BROADCASTING 
 
 
 
 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the 
Committee contained in their Twenty-seventh Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on 
‘Ethical Standards in Media Coverage'] 
 
 
THIRTY-EIGHTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
 
 
 
February, 2023/Magha, 1944(Saka) 
38 


2 
 
THIRTY-EIGHTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
COMMUNICATIONS AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(2022-23) 
 
 
SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
MINISTRY OF INFORMATION AND BROADCASTING 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the 
Committee contained in their Twenty-seventh Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on 
‘Ethical Standards in Media Coverage' 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on    09.02.2023 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on   09.02.2023  
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
February, 2023/Magha, 1944(Saka) 
 
 
 
 


3 
 
 
CONTENTS 
 Page 
No. 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
(ii) 
INTRODUCTION 
 
(iii) 
CHAPTER I Report…………………………………………………………………………………………………. 
 
 
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government………………………………………………………………………………………… 
 
 
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of replies of the 
Government………………………………………………………………………………………… 
 
 
CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and require 
reiteration …………………………………………………………………………………………… 
 
 
CHAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies are of 
interim in nature………………………………………………………………………………….. 
 
  
ANNEXURES 
 
 
I. Minutes of the seventh sitting of the Committee held on 7th February, 
2023. 
  
 
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in their Twenty-seventh Report 
(Seventeenth Lok Sabha)  
 
 
 

4 
 
Composition of the Standing  Committee on Communications and  
Information Technology (2022-23) 
 
Shri Prataprao  Jadhav - Chairperson 
 
 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Smt. Sumalatha Ambareesh 
3. Shri Karti P. Chidambaram 
4. Dr. Nishikant Dubey 
5. Smt. Sunita Duggal 
6. Shri Jayadev Galla 
7. Smt. Raksha Nikhil Khadse 
8. Dr. Sukanta Majumdar 
9. Smt. Mahua Moitra 
10. Shri P. R. Natarajan 
11. Shri Santosh Pandey 
12. Col. Rajyavardhan Singh Rathore 
13. Dr. Gaddam Ranjith Reddy 
14. Shri Sanjay Seth 
15. Shri Ganesh Singh 
16. Shri Parvesh Sahib Singh 
17. Shri Shatrughan Prasad Sinha 
18. Shri L.S. Tejasvi Surya 
19. Dr. T. Sumathy (A) Thamizhachi Thangapandian 
20 Dr. M. K. Vishnu Prasad@ 
21. Shri S. Jagathrakshakan$ 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
22. Dr. Anil Agrawal 
23. Dr. Laxmikant Bajpayee 
24. Dr. John Brittas 
25. Shri Syed Nasir Hussain 
26. Shri Ilaiyaraaja 
27. Shri Jaggesh 
28. Shri Praful Patel 
29. Shri Kartikeya Sharma 
30. Shri Jawhar Sircar 
31. Shri Lahar Singh Siroya 
 
Secretariat 
 
1. Shri Satpal Gulati   - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. A. Jyothirmayi   - Director 
3. Smt. Rinky Singh                         - Executive Officer 
___________________________________________________________________________ 
Committee constituted w.e.f. 13th September, 2022 vide Para No.5288 of Bulletin Part-II dated                  
4th October, 2022. 
 
@   Dr. M. K. Vishnu Prasad has been nominated vice Dr. Shashi Tharoor vide Para No. 5311 of Bulletin 
Part-II dated 12th October, 2022. 
$    Shri S. Jagathrakshakan has been nominated vide Para No. 5580 of Bulletin Part –II dated 8th 
December, 2022.  

5 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Communications and Information 
Technology (2022-23), having been authorised by the Committee, present this Thirty-
eighth Report on Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Twenty-seventh 
Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Ethical Standards in Media Coverage’ of the 
Ministry of Information and Broadcasting. 
2. The Twenty-seventh Report was presented to Lok Sabha and also laid on the 
Table of Rajya Sabha on 1st December, 2021.  The Ministry of Information and 
Broadcasting furnished their Action Taken Notes on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Twenty-seventh Report on 7th July, 
2022 
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their sitting held on 
7th February, 2023.  
4. For facility of reference and convenience, Observations/Recommendations of the 
Committee have been printed in bold in Chapter-I of the Report.  
5. An analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Twenty-seventh Report of the 
Committee is given at Annexure-II. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      New Delhi; PRATAPRAO JADHAV,  
    8 February, 2023 
 
 Chairperson, 
    19 Magha, 1944 (Saka) Standing Committee on 
Communications and Information Technology. 

6 
 
 CHAPTER I 
REPORT 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Communications and Information 
Technology deals with the action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Twenty-seventh 
Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Ethical Standards in Media Coverage’ relating to 
the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting. 
 
2. The Twenty-seventh Report was presented to Lok Sabha/laid in Rajya Sabha on                          
01 December, 2021.  It contained 23 Observations/Recommendations. Replies of the 
Government in respect of all the Observations/Recommendations have been received 
from the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting and are categorized as under:- 
 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by 
the Government 
Rec. Sl. Nos.:- 1, 2, 4, 5, 9, 10, 11, 12, 15, 17, 18, 19 and 22 
 
  Total -13 
Chapter-II 
 
 
 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the replies of the Government 
Rec. Sl. No.: 23 
 
  Total - 01 
Chapter-III 
 
 
 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and 
require reiteration 
Rec. Sl. Nos.:- 3, 6, 7, 14, 20 and 21  
 
  Total - 06 
Chapter-IV 
 
 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government are of interim in nature  
Rec. Sl. No.:- 8, 13, and 16 
 
  Total – 03 
Chapter-V 
 

7 
 
 
3. The Committee trust that utmost importance would be given to 
implementation of the Observations/Recommendations accepted by the 
Government. The Committee further desire that Action Taken Statement on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in Chapter-I and final action taken 
replies in respect of Observations/Recommendations contained in Chapter-V, for 
which only interim replies have been given by the Government, should  be 
furnished to them expeditiously. 
 
4. The Committee will now deal with action taken by the Government on some of 
their recommendations.   
 
PRINT MEDIA 
 
Existing Codes/ Acts/ Mechanism for observing ethical standards in Print Media 
 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 3) 
5. The Committee, in their 27th Report on the subject ‘Ethical standards in Media 
Coverage’, had made following observation/recommendation:  
“The Committee note that the Press Council of India (PCI), a statutory, quasi 
judicial body functions under the Press Council Act, 1978 acts as a watchdog 
of the press. It adjudicates the complaints against and by the press for 
violations of ethics and for violation of the freedom of the press, respectively. 
The criteria adopted for codifying ethical standards for the Print Media is to 
ensure that news, views, comments and information are disseminated by the 
press in the public interest in a fair, accurate, unbiased and decent manner 
and to keep in mind the cascading effect of reporting on the society and on the 
individuals and institutions concerned. Another criterion is to take note of 
sponsored news content which has come to the fore and is damaging quality 
journalism. Section 14 of the Act empowers the Council to warn, admonish or 
censure the newspaper, the news agency, the editor or the journalist 
concerned or disapprove the conduct of the editor or the journalist if it finds 
that a newspaper or a news agency has offended against the standards of 
journalistic ethics or public taste or that an editor or a working journalist that 
has committed any professional misconduct, on the receipt of complaint or 
otherwise. Further, PCI has formulated ‘Norms of Journalistic Conduct’ under 
Section 13(1) of the Press Council Act, for the newspapers, news agencies 
and journalists for maintaining ethical standards in print media journalism and 
for journalists to practice the profession within ethical boundaries, which cover 
principles and ethics as well as detailed guidelines on specific issues. This is 
being continuously updated by the Council while incorporating new norms 
based on the important adjudications rendered by it from time to time. 
 
The Committee, however find to their utmost concern that the erring 
newspapers tend to repeat the same mistakes, even after being censured by 
PCI till action is taken by the Bureau of Outreach and Communication (BOC) 

8 
 
to withhold government advertisements to that particular newspaper for a 
certain period of time as per the Government of India’s Policy. It is surprising 
to note that a lot of time is wasted in taking a decision by the BOC against 
such newspapers, which eventually dilutes the impact of the decision. 
Supposedly, once PCI takes a decision to censure a newspaper today, BOC 
takes almost a year to come out with a decision to withhold government 
advertisements. The Press Council, hence has proposed that the Government 
of India may prescribe a certain time period to BOC to act on the decisions of 
the PCI and withhold Government advertisements to such offenders to make 
the decision of PCI more effective on the erring newspapers. The Committee 
find merit in the proposal of PCI which would not only ensure prompt action by 
BOC on the cases referred to them but also have a deterrent effect on the 
erring newspapers. The Committee, therefore, exhort the Ministry of I&B to 
prescribe a certain time limit for BOC to take action on the cases censured by 
PCI, in the interest of maintaining and promoting high standards of press in 
India”. 
 
6. The Ministry of Information and Broadcasting, in their Action Taken Reply, have 
stated  as under: 
“BOC imposes penalty on publications censured by PCI as per the provisions of 
extant Print Media Advertisement Policy-2020, clause 17 (vii) which is extracted 
as under: 
Penalties: If a publication is found by PCI to have violated the ‘Norms 
of Journalistic Conduct’ or having indulged in any anti-national activity; 
penalties, as under, may be imposed on such publications by BOC 
a. Warning to the edition of the publication or suspension of fifteen 
(15) days on 1st offence. 
b. Suspension of two (2) months of the same edition of publication 
on 2nd offence. 
c. Suspension of six (6) months of the same edition of publication 
on 3rd offence. 
 
 Newspapers/Publications censured by PCI, which are on the panel of BOC, are 
suspended from the panel of BOC for a period of 2 months. Further, it was 
decided that Newspapers/Publications which are not on the panel of BOC and 
have been censured by PCI would not be empanelled or re-empanelled for a 
similar period of 2 months.  During last 5 years, PCI censured 142 publications. 
Out of this, BOC has suspended 112 empanelled publications. Remaining 30 
censured publications were not on BOC Panel. The details are as below 
 
PCI Reference Date Action Taken by BOC No. of Publications 
21.07.2016 17.08.2016 5 
06.04.2017 18.05.2017 1 
09.06.2017 & 
04.07.2017 
17.07.2017 3 
18.07.2017 13.09.2017 51 
22.11.2019 10.07.2020 42 
29-30.09.2020 20.10.2020 1 
28.01.2021 12.02.2021 6 

9 
 
04-07.06.2021 28.06.2021 3 
Total  112 
Accordingly, BOC has taken action against censured publications by PCI in 
timely manner following the guidelines/policy provisions”. 
 7. The Committee, in their Original Report, had expressed concern over the 
fact that even after being censured by Press Council of India (PCI), Newspapers 
repeated the same mistake till action is taken by Bureau of Outreach and 
Communication (BOC) to withhold Government advertisements. In this regard, 
the Committee had also noted that a lot of time was wasted by the BOC in taking 
a decision against such newspapers, so much so that after the decision of PCI to 
censure a newspaper, BOC would take almost a year to come out with a decision 
to withhold Government advertisements. Finding merit in the proposal of PCI, the 
Committee had recommended the Ministry of I&B to prescribe a certain time limit 
for BOC to take action on the cases censured by PCI and withhold Government 
advertisements to such offenders.  Responding to this, the Ministry have stated 
that Newspapers/Publications censured by PCI, which are on the panel of BOC, 
are suspended from the panel of BOC for a period of 2 months and which are not 
on the panel of BOC and have been censured by PCI would not be empanelled or 
re-empanelled for a similar period of 2 months. However, the Ministry’s reply is 
completely silent on fixing a time limit for BOC to take action on the cases 
censured by PCI. Reiterating their recommendation, the Committee urge the 
Ministry to provide action taken on the proposal of PCI for stipulating time period 
for BOC to act on the decisions of the PCI especially when PCI themselves have 
desired for the same. The Committee feel that this step would ensure prompt 
action on the cases and would also have a deterrent effect on the repetitive erring 
Newspapers. The Committee also recommend the Ministry to ensure providing 
action taken/complete reply to the recommendations/observations of the 
Committee. 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 6) 
8. The Committee, in their Original Report, had made following 
observation/recommendation: 
“The Committee have been informed that PCI in its meeting held on 
29.05.2019 has passed a resolution suggesting that when the Print Media has 

10 
 
a watchdog in the form of Press Council of India, something parallel is 
advisable for the entire media i.e. newspapers and periodicals in print or other 
form, e-newspapers, news portals, social media and any other platform of 
news disseminations besides electronic media. The PCI has made 
recommendations to the Government to enact a single legislation so as to 
cover all the aforesaid media, in line with the Press Council Act, 1978. The 
Chairman, PCI, submitted that a few months back, they had received a large 
number of complaints against the electronic media, the news channels other 
than the print media but were unable to act against those entities. 
 
The Committee also observed that PCI, a statutory body governing the print 
media may entertain complaints and is empowered to warn, admonish or 
censure the newspaper, the news agency, the editor or the journalist 
concerned, however, it does not have the power to enforce compliance as 
advisories issued by PCI are not enforceable in a Court of law. Besides, the 
self-organised News Broadcasting Standard Authority (NBSA) governing news 
broadcasting has the power to fine, but its jurisdiction extends to only those 
organizations that choose to be members of the News Broadcasters 
Association. Therefore, its efficacy is limited and depends on voluntary 
compliance with its orders. In view of the above, the Committee are of the firm 
opinion that PCI needs restructuring to cover all types of media and therefore 
desire that the Ministry should explore the possibility of establishing a wider 
Media Council encompassing not just the print media but the electronic and 
digital media as well, and equip it with statutory powers to enforce its orders 
where required. This would enable it to have a holistic view of the media 
scenario and take appropriate steps to check irregularities, ensure freedom of 
speech and professionalism, and maintain the highest ethical standards and 
credibility, which are so critical for the fourth pillar of democracy. The 
Committee, however, feel need for the Government of India to create a Media 
Commission comprising of experts for wider consultations amongst the 
interested groups/ stakeholders to evolve a consensus in this regard. 
Meanwhile, pending a decision on this, the Committee would like the Ministry 
to look into the possibility of expanding the regulatory framework to monitor e-
newspapers”. 
 
9. In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting have 
submitted as under: 
“The Ministry had earlier received a proposal from the Press Council of India 
regarding constitution of Media Council encompassing various Media 
Platforms. 
 
At present, separate regulatory mechanisms already exist for different media 
platforms – Press Council of India under the Press Council Act, 1978 for print 
media, Cable TV Network (Regulation) Act, 1995 for television and the 
Information Technology (Intermediary Guidelines and Digital Media Ethics 
Code) Rules, 2021 under the Information Technology Act, 2000 for digital 
news publishers and OTT platforms. As each platform is unique and distinctive 
in its own way, unifying and merging them under one regulatory framework 
may not be desirable”. 

11 
 
 
10. While noting the limitations with respect to enforcement of advisories 
issued by Press Council of India (PCI) and applicability of jurisdiction of self 
regulatory organizations like News Broadcasting Standard Authority (NBSA) to 
only its members, the Committee had opined that the Ministry should explore the 
possibility of establishing a Media Council encompassing print, electronic and 
digital media which should be equipped with statutory powers to enforce its 
orders where required. For this, the Committee had also expressed the need for 
wider consultations amongst the interested groups/stakeholders for evolving 
consensus. Responding to this, the Ministry have informed that they too had 
received a proposal from the PCI regarding constitution of Media Council 
encompassing various Media Platforms. In this regard, the Committee also 
acknowledge Ministry’s submission that currently there exist separate regulatory 
mechanisms for different media platforms and each platform is unique and 
distinctive in its own way and therefore unifying and merging them under one 
regulatory framework may not be desirable. However, in light of the rising need 
for inter-sectoral coordination due to emergence and convergence of new 
technologies, the Committee would like to reiterate and recommend the Ministry 
to explore the possibilities for having unified Media Commission/Body/Council 
with separate wings and regulatory mechanism for print/electronic/digital media 
so as to have holistic view of the Media and to ensure inter-media parity in 
handling the similar cases of unethical media coverages.  
 
Cases of Non-compliance with ethical standards by Print Media 
 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 7) 
 
11. The Committee, in their 27 th Report, had made the following 
observation/recommendation: 
“The Committee note that on violations of ethical standards by Print Media, the 
Press Council directs newspapers to publish corrigenda or issue directions to 
publish the version of the complainant and try to bring the parties to arrive at 
settlement. In cases of gross violation of journalistic conduct, papers are 
warned, admonished and censured. Further, in cases where newspapers are 
censured, PCI forwards such decisions to the Bureau of Outreach and 
Communication (BOC) and the concerned Government of the States/ UTs for 
further necessary action at their end. However, the Committee find to their 
dismay that PCI do not have the information with regard to action taken on 

12 
 
their forwarded decisions by the concerned State Governments/ UTs. During 
the last 5 years, PCI censured 142 Newspapers for violating “Norms of 
Journalistic Conduct” and forwarded adjudication to various State 
Governments/UTs. This clearly indicates the limitation of the powers of the 
PCI to penalize the newspapers and news agencies, etc., for violation of the 
norms of journalistic conduct. The Committee are of the considered opinion 
that rules and regulations framed under the Press Council Act, 1978 have no 
meaning unless there exists an effective mechanism for their efficient 
implementation. The Committee, therefore, recommend that Government 
should take comprehensive and practical measures so that PCI’s decisions on 
cases of violation of ethics in newspapers and other publications, are 
genuinely implemented or taken to their logical end and it should be incumbent 
upon the concerned State Government/ UT to inform PCI about the action 
taken”. 
 
12. The Ministry of Information and Broadcasting, in their Action Taken Reply, have 
submitted as under: 
“In respect of newspaper empanelled with BOC, appropriate penal action is 
taken by BOC. In case of Newspapers that are not registered with or in the 
panel of the Bureau of Outreach and Communication (BOC), New Delhi, the 
adjudication Orders of the Press Council of India are communicated/forwarded 
to the concerned State Govt. /Administration of the UT through its Dept. of 
Information and Public Relations and the jurisdictional District Magistrate for 
taking appropriate action”.  
 
13. On finding that PCI did not have information regarding action taken on their 
decisions forwarded to the concerned State Governments/ UTs, the Committee 
had recommended that the Government should take comprehensive and practical 
measures so that PCI’s decisions on cases of violation of ethics in newspapers 
and other publications are implemented and taken to their logical end. The 
Committee had also recommended that it should be made incumbent upon the 
concerned State Government/UT to inform PCI about the action taken.  
Responding to this, the Ministry have just stated that in respect of Newspapers 
empanelled with BOC appropriate penal action is taken by BOC and in case of 
Newspapers that are not registered with BOC, the adjudication Orders of the PCI 
are communicated/forwarded to the concerned State Government/Administration 
of the UT through its Department of Information and Public Relations and the 
jurisdictional District Magistrate for taking appropriate action. The Committee 
disapprove the way Ministry’s reply is silent with respect to receipt of information 
from State Government/UTs regarding action taken at their end. The Committee, 
therefore, desire to be apprised about the steps taken in this direction along with 

13 
 
response received from State Governments/ UTs alongwith the impact on the 
action taken by them. The Committee, at the cost of sounding repetitive, strongly 
recommend the Ministry to ensure providing complete action taken/reply to the 
recommendations/observations of the Committee. 
 
Self- Regulation in TV Channels by Broadcasting Industry 
 
 (Recommendation Sl. No. 14) 
 
14. The Committee, in their original Report, had observed/recommended the 
following: 
“The Committee note that private TV news and non-news channels are 
governed by mechanisms of self-regulation. One such mechanism has been 
created by the News Broadcasters Associations (NBA), a representative body 
of news and current affairs TV channels. NBA has set up the News 
Broadcasting Standards Authority (NBSA), which is empowered to warn, 
admonish, censure, express disapproval and fine a sum upto Rs. 1 lakh upon 
the broadcaster and/or recommend to the concerned authority for 
suspension/revocation of license of such broadcaster for violation of the Code. 
Further, the Indian Broadcasting Foundation (IBF), is a representative body of 
non-news & current affairs TV channels which has set up the Broadcasting 
Content Complaints Council (BCCC) to examine and redress complaints. In 
case of violations of the programme code BCCC directs the concerned 
channel to modify or withdraw such content and may also impose a financial 
penalty up to a maximum of Rs. 30 lakhs based on the nature of violations. 
Recently, a new self-regulatory association called the News Broadcasters 
Federation has also been launched. Likewise, Advertising Standards Council 
of India (ASCI) is another self-regulatory voluntary organization, which has set 
up Consumer Complaints Council (CCC) to consider complaints in respect of 
advertisements. 
 
 As informed by the Ministry of I&B, all the 926 private satellite TV channels are 
not a Members of NBA and IBF and therefore, complaints against those 
channels are forwarded to the Ministry, for appropriate action. The 
Committee’s attention has further been drawn to the fact that during the last 5 
years viz. from the year 2015 to 2019, though action was taken against 141 
cases for violation of programme and advertisement codes, 119 cases 
pertained to non-members of either IBF or NBA. 
 
 In view of the foregoing, the Committee note with satisfaction that self-
regulatory bodies are performing reasonably well, as evidenced by the fact 
that during last 5 years, action was taken against only 22 cases of NBA and 
IBF member, out of the total of 141 cases, which suggests that the compliance 
rate in respect of non-members is not satisfactory. Therefore, the Committee 
are of the considered view that the Ministry should encourage self-regulation 
in electronic media by the broadcasting Industry and recommend that the 
Ministry should examine the matter to bring all the private Satellite TV 
channels under the mechanism of self-regulation and also take steps to make 

14 
 
the mechanism of self-regulation more effective. In this way, the Ministry may 
also divest itself of some of its responsibilities, which also require additional 
hands to cope with the extra workload”. 
 
15. In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting have 
submitted as under: 
“The Cable Television Networks (Amendment) Rules, 2021 notified on 
17.06.2021, provide, inter-alia, a three level complaint redressal structure 
(i) Level I - A self-regulation by broadcasters; 
(ii) Level II - Self-regulation by the self-regulating bodies of the 
broadcasters; and 
(iii) Level III - Oversight mechanism by the Central Government.  
Level-II provides for Self-regulation by the self-regulating body of 
broadcasters, which shall be headed by a retired judge of the Supreme Court 
or of a High Court or an independent eminent person from the field of media, 
broadcasting, entertainment, child rights, human rights or such other relevant 
fields, and shall have other members, not exceeding six, being independent 
experts in the field of media, broadcasting, entertainment, child rights, human 
rights and such other relevant fields.    The self-regulating body shall register 
itself with the Central Government.  It shall perform the following functions, 
namely:  
(i) oversee and ensure the alignment and adherence by the 
broadcaster to the Programme Code and the Advertising Code; 
(ii) provide guidance to the broadcaster on various aspects of the 
Programme Code and the Advertising Code; 
(iii) dispose of grievances which have not been disposed of by the 
broadcaster within the specified period of fifteen days; 
(iv) hear appeals filed by the complainant against the decision of the 
broadcaster; 
(v) Issue such guidance or advisories to a broadcaster, including 
those specified in sub-rule (5), for ensuring compliance to the 
Programme Code and the Advertising Code. 
Following bodies have been registered as Level-II Self Regulating Bodies by 
the Ministry under Rule 18 of the of the Cable Television Networks 
(Amendment) Rules, 2021. 
(a) Broadcasting Content Complaints Council (BCCC) with 309 TV 
channels as its members 
(b) News Broadcasters Federation - Professional News 
Broadcasting Standards Authority (NBF-PNBSA) with 41 TV 
channels as its members”. 
 
16. The Committee, in their 27th Report, had noted that compliance to 
programme and advertisement codes by members of self-regulatory bodies were 
reasonably well however that by non-members was not satisfactory. Further, 
while noting that out of 926 private channels, 309 channels are members of 
BCCC, 41 with NBF and 576 TV Channels are not members of any self regulating 

15 
 
body, the Committee had recommended the Ministry to take initiatives for 
bringing all the private satellite TV channels under the mechanism of self 
regulation. The Committee note that the Ministry have provided details of the 
three level complaint redressal structure under ‘The Cable Television Networks 
(Amendment) Rules, 2021’ which was notified on 17.06.2021. While noting that 
576 TV Channels are not members of any self regulating body, the Committee feel 
that if the mechanism of self-regulation has to work effectively then in addition to 
the self-regulation by the Broadcasters at Level-I, it should be made mandatory 
for all the channels to be a member of a related self-regulating body. This would 
ensure that in case of failure of a Broadcaster to comply with self-regulation at 
Level-I, there would be effective self-regulation by the self-regulating bodies at 
Level-II. Thus, the Committee recommend the Ministry to encourage self-
regulation as well as ensure that all the private satellite TV channels are part of 
one or the other self-regulatory body. The Committee would like to be informed 
about the action taken in this regard. 
 
Fake News 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 20) 
 
17. The Committee, in their 27 th Report, had made following 
observation/recommendation: 
“There already exist laws and rules under the Indian Penal Code (IPC) 1860, 
the Information Technology Act, 2000 and the Information Technology 
(Intermediaries Guidelines) Rules 2011 to tackle and penalize persons 
spreading ‘Fake News’. Further, a Fact Check Unit (FCU) has been 
established in the PIB in December, 2019 and such FCUs have also been set 
up in 17 Regional Offices of PIB. This Cell is mandated to counter 
misinformation on Government policies and schemes either suo-motu or 
under a reference via various input methods like WhatsApp Hotline number, 
e-mail, Twitter and PIB’s website. The mechanism depends on various 
feeder units like Ministries, Departments, PSUs for verification of information 
and is connected to them via PIB officers in the Ministries. The Committee 
are concerned that the menace of false/ fake news has become a disturbing 
trend in India, where the contributors of content are not only owners of 
websites, but also individual subscribers, on whom exercising control is 
posing a very big challenge. As informed by the Ministry, the Central 
Government vide its notification dated 09.11.2020 has amended the 
Allocation of  Business Rules, 1961 in respect of Ministry of I & B and has 
inserted the entries relating to Digital/ Online Media, Films and Audio-Visual 
programmes made available by online content providers and News and 
current affairs content on online platforms.  
 

16 
 
In this context, while appreciating the establishment of Fact Check Units in 
17 Regional Offices of PIB, the Committee desire that the Ministry should 
open more such FCUs to remain vigilant for viral videos/ news which could 
create public disorder. The Committee would also recommend that the term 
‘Fake News’ should be broadly defined”.   
18. The Action Taken Reply of the Ministry, on the aforesaid recommendation of the 
Committee, is as follows: 
“A Fact Check Unit has been set up under Press Information Bureau in 
November, 2019.This Unit takes cognizance of fake news both suo-motu and 
by way of queries sent by citizens on its portal or through e-mail and 
Whatsapp. The Unit responds to the relevant queries with correct information 
when the same pertains to Central Government or forwards them to 
States/UTs in other cases. The Unit also maintains a twitter account 
@PlBFactcheck and posts cases of fake news, being busted, on the same 
on regular basis. The Fact Check Unit of PIB covers news on various media 
platforms, including electronic media.PIB Fact Check Unit has responded to 
around 30,000 actionable queries. As Such the Fact Check Units located at 
PIB Headquarter in Delhi and its regional offices address the instances of 
misinformation/Fake News across the country”. 
 
19. The Committee, in their Original Report, had learnt that in December, 2019 
a Fact Check Unit (FCU) with 17 Regional Offices were established to tackle 
misinformation on Government policies and schemes either suo-motu or under a 
reference via various input methods like WhatsApp Hotline number, e-mail, 
Twitter and PIB’s website. The Committee had appreciated establishment of Fact 
Check Units and had desired for opening more such FCUs.  The Committee had 
also recommended the Ministry to broadly define the term ‘Fake News’. The 
Committee, while disapproving silence of the Ministry over this, recommend them 
to provide their response on the need/sufficiency of Fact Check Units in the 
country. In the light of false/fake news becoming a disturbing trend in India, the 
Committee would also like to know whether the Ministry intends to have such 
FCUs for countering misinformation in general. 
 
 (Recommendation Sl. No. 21) 
 
20. The Committee, in their original Report,  had made the following 
observation/recommendation: 
“The Committee endorse the views of the CEO, Prasar Bharati that the 
regulatory mechanisms should look at embracing latest technologies such as 
Artificial Intelligence to check fake news and to be able to intervene in near 
real time. Hence, there is a need to take suitable steps accordingly and also 
to factor in the existing expertise in the domain of news fact check through 

17 
 
non-Government agencies such as ‘AltNews’, ‘check4spam’, SMHoaxslayer’ 
etc. Further, while observing that countries like Australia, Malaysia and other 
democracies have Anti-Fake News Laws, the committee would like the 
Ministry to study their laws and develop some legal provisions to counter as 
big a challenge as fake news”. 
 
21. The Ministry of Information and Broadcasting, in their Action Taken Reply, have 
submitted: 
“Government has statutory and institutional mechanisms in place to prevent 
spread of fake news. For Print Media, Press Council of India has framed 
'Norms of Journalistic Conduct' under the Press Council Act, 1978 which 
inter-alia emphasize the principles of accuracy and fairness. 
 
For Television, all TV Channels are required to adhere to the Programme 
Code under the Cable Television Networks (Regulation) Act, 1995, including 
that programmes should not contain anything obscene, defamatory, 
deliberate, false and suggestive innuendos and half-truths. 
 
For digital news publishers, the Government has notified the Information 
Technology (Intermediary Guidelines and Digital Media Ethics Code) Rules, 
2021 under the IT Act, 2000 on 25th February, 2021, which inter alia 
provides for a Code of Ethics for adherence by digital news publishers. 
 
 The Government takes action in appropriate cases where violation of the 
Codes is found.   It also issues advisory from time to time to the media to 
adhere to the laid down Codes”. 
 
22. To check fake news, the Committee, in their 27th Report, had recommended 
the Ministry (i) to use the latest technologies like Artificial Intelligence, (ii) to 
consider existing expertise in non-Government agencies, and (iii) to study the 
Anti-Fake News Laws of countries like Australia, Malaysia and other democracies 
for developing some legal provisions.  The Committee note that the Ministry’s 
reply is silent on all these aspects and they submitted merely the statutory and 
institutional mechanisms for preventing spread of fake news existing for Print 
Media, TV Channels and digital news publishers. In the light of rapid spread of 
Fake News due to latest technologies and its impact on the citizens, the 
Committee opine that there is always a scope for learning from the expertise of 
non-Government organizations in the field and for studying anti-fake news laws 
of other countries so as to have some legal provisions for curbing fake news in 
the country. The Committee, therefore, recommend the Ministry to provide action 
taken in this direction alongwith the initiatives taken for utilizing latest 
technologies such as Artificial Intelligence for intervening and checking fake 
news in near real time. 
 
******

18 
 
CHAPTER II 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN 
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 1) 
 
INTRODUCTORY 
 
The Constitution of India guarantees to all its citizens the right to freedom of 
speech under Article 19(1)(a), which has been liberally construed by the Hon’ble 
Supreme Court through various pronouncements as incorporating not just the 
importance and concern. Media which is considered as the 4th pillar of democracy plays 
a vital role in shaping public opinion and in the overall development of the democracy by 
keeping the citizenry informed of the state of governance. Thus, media is the key stone 
of democracy. Freedom of media has always been cherished right in all democracies. 
However, with so much power, the media is supposed to follow the conduct which is in 
conformity with highest standards of rectitude and journalistic ethics. 
 
 It is, however, a matter of grave concern that media which was once the most 
trusted weapon in the hands of the citizenry in our democracy and acted as trustees of 
the public interest is gradually losing its credibility and integrity where values and 
morality are being compromised. Rampant instances of violations of code of conduct of 
ethics by the media reflected in the form of paid news, fake news, TRPs manipulation, 
media trials, sensationalism, biased reporting, etc. have placed a big question mark on 
its credibility in the minds of people which is not a good sign for the healthy democracy. 
A healthy democracy thrives on participation of the public which is only possible through 
circulation of accurate information by responsible media. 
 
 The Committee, while taking note of this, would like to recall here the famous 
speech of Justice G. N. Ray, Ex-Chairman of Press Council of India stating that 
Parliamentary democracy can flourish only under the watchful eyes of the media. Such 
is the influence of media that it can make or unmake any individual, institution or any 
thought. So all pervasive and all-powerful is today its impact on the society. With so 
much power and strength, the media cannot lose sights of its privileges, duties and 
obligations. Journalism is a profession that serves society. By virtue thereof it enjoys 
the privilege to ‘question’ others. However to enjoy these privileges, Media is mandated 
to follow certain ethical standards in collecting and disseminating the information. 
 
 While endorsing the views expressed by Shri Ray, the Committee trust that 
media whether electronic, print or social, would adhere to the established ethical 
standards, either through an established regulatory framework or a self-regulatory 
mechanism. The Committee also trust that the Government would bestow utmost 
importance to the freedom and independence of media so that they cover news as 
impartially as possible without fear and favour. It is also incumbent upon the 
Government to ensure the necessary legal and social framework which may encourage 
the media to respect and follow established values of their profession. In the succeeding 
paragraphs, the Committee have given their observations on the efficacy of existing 

19 
 
rules, the regulatory framework for observing ethical standards in media coverage, 
various constraints being faced by regulatory bodies, etc. and hope that these 
recommendations would help in restoring the credibility of media as the 4th pillar of 
democracy while ensuring ethical standards in the media coverage. 
 
Reply of the Government 
The observations/ recommendations of the Committee made in this para have 
been noted for compliance. 
 
[Ministry of Information & Broadcasting O.M. No. N-18013/6/2021-BC-II Dated 7th July, 
2022] 
 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 2) 
 
 The Committee note that in India there are a total of 1,44,893 newspapers/ 
periodicals which have been registered with Registrar of Newspapers for India (RNI), 
926 permitted satellite television channels (with 387 channels being under News and 
current affairs category and 539 being under non-News and current affairs category), 36 
Doordarshan channels with 2 News and 34 non-News channels, 495 All India Radio FM 
radio stations and 384 private FM radio stations. The Committee finds that in addition to 
the above, social media platforms, like Facebook, WhatsApp, Instagram, Twitter, etc. 
have placed journalism in the hands of the citizens. Citizens use their personal 
recording devices including cell phones to capture events and post them on the internet. 
Though, the Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology (MeitY) does not have a 
record of the number of internet websites in India, according to a popular site 
‘Internetlivestats.com’ there are at present more than 150 crores websites across the 
world and it is expected that around 20 crores out of these are active websites across 
the world. 
 
 Amidst the above state of affairs, the Committee are aware of the existing Acts 
and provisions for observing ethical standards in Print Media and Electronic Media and 
the recently notified ‘The Information Technology (Guidelines for Intermediaries and 
Digital Media Ethics Code) Rules, 2021’ of which Part-II relates to ‘Intermediaries’ to be 
administered by MeitY and Part-III relates to Digital Media Ethics Code and to be 
administered by the MIB. The Committee hope that these guidelines will go a long way 
in regulating digital media content and both the Ministries will work coherently and in 
tandem to ensure that the code for ethics are  followed by digital media also. The 
Committee also impress upon the Ministry to ensure that adequate consultation take 
place with all stakeholders and that oversight of digital media may be exercised while 
fully preserving their right to freedom of expression.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 In the interest of direct engagement with the stakeholders, the Ministry has 
conducted 11 Webinars at national and regional levels for awareness creation. The 
webinars involved a total participation of over 2,400 stakeholders including: 
 Representatives from standalone digital news publishers 
 Editors and management representatives from national and regional media 
 Representatives from OTT platforms, content managers 

20 
 
 Journalism faculty and students  
 Representatives from associations of digital media publishers 
 
 
The webinars had a two-phase format- a presentation on Digital Media Ethics 
Code for 30 mins, followed by a free flowing Q&A session for 2 hour 30 mins. With 
about 50-60 questions being asked in each webinar, the webinars led to clarification of 
doubts and apprehensions, as well as a way for receiving suggestions. The concerns of 
the stakeholders in relation to free speech, journalistic freedom and artistic creativity 
were also addressed through the webinars. It was informed to the stakeholders that the 
Code of Ethics for digital news publishers provides for observance of the Norms of 
Journalistic Conduct of the Press Council of India, and Programme Code under the 
Cable Television Network (Regulation) Act, 1995. These are time-tested norms/ codes 
for conventional news media which have protected journalistic freedom. Similarly, the 
Code of Ethics for OTT platforms provides for self-classification of content, and 
therefore does not mandate prior certification by the Government. The webinars were 
also reported in Print and Digital Media. A booklet containing the learnings, 
presentation, and commonly asked doubts from the webinars has been published and 
made available on the MIB website. 
 
 [Ministry of Information and Broadcasting O.M. No. N-18013/2/2015-BC-II (Vol.II) dated      
21.02.2022] 
Details of Webinar Date No. of Participants 
Webinar for Gujarat Region 8 th April, 2021 75 
Webinar in collaboration with FICCI 7 June, 2021 175 
Webinar in collaboration with CII 15 th June, 2021 100 
Webinar for Southern Region (5 States) 26th June, 2021 240 
Webinar for MP, Rajasthan, Chhattisgarh 30th June, 2021 260 
Interaction with media at Gautam Buddha 
University 
2nd July, 2021 
 
50 
Webinar for UP, Bihar, Uttarakhand, 
Jharkhand 
7th July. 2021 448 
Webinar for Maharashtra, Goa 12 th July, 2021 320 
Webinar for NE Region, WB and Odisha 14th July, 2021 278 
Webinar for HP, Chandigarh, Punjab, 
Haryana, J&K and Ladakh 
20th July, 2021 
 
341 
Webinar in collaboration with Indian Institute 
of Mass Communication (IIMC) 
20th August, 2021 160 
Total  2,447 

21 
 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 4) 
 
The Committee note that during 2016, 2017 and 2020, there were a total of 105 
cases censured by PCI, out of which 73 cases were suspended by BOC. The 
Committee have been informed that in respect of another 31 cases, no action was taken 
as the publications are not on the BOC Portal and in one case, stay has been granted 
by the High Court. It is intriguing to note there are many publications which are not on 
the BOC portal, though they are censured by PCI and forwarded to BOC for action. The 
Committee are unhappy at such a situation and would expect the Ministry/PCI to 
strengthen the enforcement mechanism of PCI so that all its orders are acted upon 
against all the publications irrespective of them being part of BOC portal or not and the 
ambiguities, if any, in this regard may be removed. They also desire that in light of ‘The 
Information Technology (Guidelines for Intermediaries and Digital Media Ethics Code) 
Rules, 2021’, the Ministry may run proper awareness campaigns to make e-
Newspapers (which are currently not being registered like print Newspapers) aware of 
the provisions of ‘The IT Rules, 2021’.  
Reply of the Government 
In case of Newspapers that are not registered with or in the panel of the Bureau of 
Outreach and Communication (BOC), New Delhi, the adjudication Orders of the Press 
Council of India are communicated/forwarded to the concerned State Govt. /Administration 
of the UT through its Dept. of Information and Public Relations and the jurisdictional District 
Magistrate for taking appropriate action.  
 
Further BOC takes cognizance of the non-empanelled publications which are 
censured by PCI at the time of empanelment of these publications. 
 
The Ministry has taken several steps for awareness generation about Part-III of 
the IT Rules, 2021: 
 
 The Hon’ble I&B Minister held several interactions with representatives of OTT 
Platforms and Digital News Publishers. 
 An information booklet on IT Rules, 2021 explaining various aspects in simple 
language has been prepared and made available on the website of the Ministry. 
 Comprehensive Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs) in Hindi and English on various 
aspects of IT Rules, 2021 have been prepared and made available on the website of 
the Ministry. For the benefit of citizens, the FAQs have been translated in various 
Indian languages, including Tamil, Telugu, Malayalam, Urdu, Kannada, Khasi, 
Gujarati, Punjabi, Assamese, Marathi, Bangla and Manipuri, and have also been 
uploaded on the Ministry’s website.  
 On 9th March, 2021, briefing and presentation before the Hon’ble Members of 
Parliament was organized collectively by MeitY and MIB. 
 Advertisement in various newspapers was carried out on 25th March, 2021 across the 
country for the benefit of the citizens, informing them about the Rules. 
 After the notification of the Rules, infographics on various aspects of the Rules were 
disseminated on social media. 
 The Ministry also conducted a series of webinars for outreach. 

22 
 
 
A booklet containing the learnings, presentation, and commonly asked doubts 
from the webinars has been published and made available on the MIB website. 
 
[Ministry of Information and Broadcasting O.M. No. N-18013/2/2015-BC-II (Vol.II) dated      
21.02.2022] 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 5) 
 
 The Committee further note that PCI is headed by a Chairman, and consists of 
28 other members, of whom 20 represent the press and are nominated by the press 
organizations/ news agencies recognized and notified by the Council as all-India bodies 
of categories such as editors, working journalists and owners and managers of 
newspaper and news agencies, 5 members are nominated from the two Houses of 
Parliament; and 3 represent cultural, literary and legal fields as nominees of the Sahitya 
Academy, UGC and the Bar Council of India. Accordingly, the Council has to notify the 
associations of the editors, and the working journalists. The Chairman, PCI, submitted 
that all those associations, who have their presence at least in 12 to 15 States, are 
recognized. Earlier, it was very difficult to have an association having affiliations with 12 
to 15 States. Now, a lot of newspapers are sold and read in different States, thus the 
matter for representation of various States in the Council needs to be looked into. In 
view of the above submission, the Committee desires that there is an urgent need to 
examine the matter of increasing the membership of PCI so that it could have a broad-
based membership representing various States of the country.  
 
Reply of the Government 
Under the Press Council Act, 1978, out of 28 members of PCI, 20 represent the 
press and are nominated by the press organizations/ news agencies notified by the 
Press Council under the prescribed categories such as Editors, Working Journalists, 
Owners and Managers of Newspaper and news agencies. There was no laid down 
procedure or criteria for the eligibility of the associations of persons from which the 
claims are to be invited and the manner in which the associations of persons would be 
shortlisted by the Council for the purpose of nomination of members.   
 
The need to rationalize the process of defining eligibility criteria of association/ 
bodies was felt which led to issuance of Gazette of India Notification dated 05.02.2021, 
notifying the Press Council (Procedure for Notification of Association of Persons) Rules, 
2021. These Rules have widened the scope of claims and have provided unequivocal 
opportunity to all the associations who have continuously conducted the business for six 
years and enabled wider participation, subject to certain eligibility conditions. 
 
 [Ministry of Information and Broadcasting O.M. No. N-18013/2/2015-BC-II (Vol.II) dated      
21.02.2022] 
 
 
 

23 
 
Cases of Non-compliance of ethical standards by TV Channels 
 
 (Recommendation Sl. No. 9) 
 
 The Committee note that the Ministry of I&B had constituted an Inter-Ministerial 
Committee (IMC) in the year 2005 under the Chairpersonship of Additional Secretary, 
I&B with representatives from the Ministries of Consumer Affairs, Home Affairs, Law & 
Justice, Women & Child Development, Health & Family Welfare, External Affairs, 
Defence and a member from Advertising Standards Council of India (ASCI), to look into 
specific complaints on violation of the Programme and Advertising Codes. After 
receiving a complaint against a TV channel, as reported by Electronic Media Monitoring 
Centre (EMMC), or from the general public, or if taken up Suo-motu by the Ministry, a 
Show-Cause Notice is issued to the channel. The matter is generally placed before the 
IMC along with the response received from the TV channel. Personal hearing before the 
IMC is also accorded to the TV channel. The IMC functions in a recommendatory 
capacity. IMC recommendations include issuance of warnings and advisories, asking 
channels to run apology scrolls on their channels and directing channels to be ‘off air’ 
‘temporarily for varying periods, depending on the gravity of the violation. The Ministry 
takes a final decision regarding penalties and their quantum with respect to the channel. 
  
The Committee further note that the Ministry of I & B  had taken action in respect 
of 3 TV channels in 2017-18, 1 channel in 2018-19 and 101 channels in 2019-20. The 
Committee is not convinced by the reasons advanced by the Ministry for such a 
quantum jump in cases against which action was taken in 2019-20. The Ministry has 
justified that during the years 2017 and 2018, 4 meetings of the IMC were held in which 
35 cases were considered and during 2019, 5 meetings of IMC were held in which 122 
cases were considered, including cases of earlier years. The Committee takes a serious 
note of this apparent laxity on the part of the Ministry of I&B in timely holding of their 
sittings to take a decision on the cases pending with them. They, therefore, impress 
upon the Ministry to hold their sittings at regular intervals of time to take action on the 
cases referred to them, for violation of Programme and Advertising Codes, and not wait 
for piling up of cases as such a lackadaisical approach not only dilutes the impact of 
action taken but also gives erring channels a chance to commit repeated violations.  
 
Reply of the Government 
The meetings of Inter-Ministerial Committee are being conducted at regular 
intervals. During 2020-21 and in April, 2021, 5 meetings of the IMC were conducted in 
which complaints relating to 56 cases/ TV channels were considered.   
 
Based on the recommendation of the committee, the action was taken against the 
TV channels during the period 2020-21 are as under: 
 
Year Number of channels in which action taken 
Advisory Warning Order to run 
Apology Scrolls 
Off-
air 
Permission 
cancelled 
Total 
2020 1 4 - - - 5 
2021 3 18 9 - 1 31 
 

24 
 
 Subsequently, the Cable Television Networks Rules, 1994 were amended, vide 
Notification No.GSR 416(E) dated 17.06.2021, as the Cable Television Networks 
(Amendment) Rules, 2021 thereby providing for a statutory mechanism for redressal  of 
grievances/ complaints of citizens relating to content broadcast by television channels. 
These Rules provide, inter-alia, that any person aggrieved by the content of a 
programme of a channel as being not in conformity with the Programme Code or the 
Advertising Code may file his complaint in writing to the broadcaster: The amended 
rules also provided for registration of self-regulatory bodies with the Ministry thereby 
providing a statutory role of these bodies for addressing matters relating to violation of 
the Programme Code/Advertising Code. It may also be mentioned that the Hon’ble 
Supreme Court in its Order in WP(C) No. 387 of 2000 in the matter of “Common Cause 
Vs. UOI & Ors.” while expressing satisfaction over the existing mechanism of grievance 
redressal had advised to frame appropriate rules to formalize the complaint redressal 
mechanism.  Copy of the Cable Television Networks (Amendment) Rules, 2021 is 
attached at Annexure-I. 
 
In pursuance of Cable Television Networks (Amendment) Rules, 2021, an Inter-
Departmental Committee (IDC) was constituted on 14.07.2021 and the erstwhile Inter-
Ministerial Committee (IMC) has been superseded by the IDC. Since its constitution, 
three meetings of Inter-Departmental Committee have been held on 13.10.2021, 
02.11.2021 and 14.02.2022. Based on the recommendations of IDC in its first 2 
meetings, penal action has been taken against the TV channels as under: 
 
 
Number of channels in which action taken 
Advisory Warning Order to run 
Apology Scrolls 
Order to run 
Disclaimer 
Off-air Total 
2 7 2 1 1 13 
 
[Ministry of Information and Broadcasting O.M. No. N-18013/2/2015-BC-II (Vol.II) dated      
21.02.2022] 
 
 (Recommendation Sl. No. 10) 
 
 The Committee have been told that the IMC, while considering cases of alleged 
violations of the Programme Code by a particular channel, inter-alia, takes into account 
past violations of Programme Code by that channel and makes an appropriate 
recommendation to the Ministry. There exists a provision of graded penalties under the 
Uplinking and Downlinking Guidelines for Private satellite TV channels. The penalties 
prescribed are viz. (i) In the event of first violation, suspension of the permission of the 
company and prohibition of broadcast/ transmission up to a period of 30 days, (ii) In the 
event of second violation, suspension of the permission of the company and prohibition 
of broadcast up to a period of permission, (iii) In the event of third violation, revocation 
of the permission of the company and prohibition of broadcast up to the remaining 
period of permission, and (iv) In the event of failure of the permission holder to  comply 
with the penalties imposed within the prescribed time, revocation of permission and 
prohibition of broadcast for the remaining period of the permission and disqualification 
to hold any fresh permission in future for a period of five years. In this background, the 
Committee gather the view that the Ministry have been maintaining the records of the 
channels for their violation/ repeated violations scrupulously. The Committee, however, 

25 
 
wonder if present a system of graded penalty is acting as an effective deterrent to the 
violators of codes. The Committee would like to be enlightened in this regard.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 The provision of graded penalty referred to in para 8 of the Policy Guidelines for 
Uplinking of Satellite TV Channels, 2011 and para 6 of the Guidelines for Downlinking of 
Satellite TV channels, 2011 is in respect of terms and condition of grant of permission of 
a TV channel under these Guidelines.  In case of violation of the terms & conditions, 
these provisions are invoked for imposition of penalty in a graded manner. 
 
In respect of violation of Programme Code/Advertising Code laid down under the 
CTN Rules, 1994, the Ministry has since 2005 used the instrumentality of the Inter-
Ministerial Committee for taking penal action. The Committee, after giving due 
opportunity to the TV channel, recommends action by way of advisory, warning, apology 
scrolls, an off-air orders.  The recommendations of the IMC are considered by the 
Ministry and decisions taken.   
 After amendment to the Cable Television Networks Rules vide Notification dated 
17.06.2021, a statutory 3-Tier mechanism for redressal of grievances in respect of 
observance of the Programme Code and Advertising Code by the broadcasters has 
been established.  This mechanism empowers the self-regulatory bodies established by 
them to issue following guidance/advisories to the broadcasters, namely: 
 
(i) advisory, warning, censure, admonish or reprimand; or 
(ii) an apology to be telecast by the broadcaster; or 
(iii) include a warning card or a disclaimer; or 
(iv) in case of any content where it is satisfied that there is a need for taking action 
to delete or modify content, refer it to the Central Government for the 
consideration of the oversight mechanism referred to in rule 19 for appropriate 
action.   
 
 Similarly, the Inter-Departmental Committee (IDC), established as per the 
Oversight Mechanism for grievance redressal, can hear complaints/grievances from 
Level-I/II of the grievance redressal mechanism and those referred to it by the Ministry.  
The IDC can make following recommendations to the Government for violation of the 
Programme Code / Advertising Code: 
 
(i) advising, warning, censuring, admonishing or reprimanding such broadcaster; 
or 
(ii) requiring an apology of such broadcaster; or 
(iii) requiring such broadcaster to include a warning card or a disclaimer; or 
(iv) requiring such broadcaster to delete or modify content or take the channel or a 
programme off-air for a specified time period where it is satisfied that such 
action is warranted. 
 
 The Central Government may, based on the recommendations of IDC, issue 
appropriate orders and directions for compliance by the broadcasters. 
 
 
[Ministry of Information and Broadcasting O.M. No. N-18013/2/2015-BC-II (Vol.II) dated      
21.02.2022] 

26 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 11) 
 
 The Committee observe that on 6th March, 2020, the Ministry of I & B issued 
prohibitory orders against two TV Malayalam News channels viz. ‘Asianet News’ and 
‘Media One’, for 48 hrs. However, the ban was lifted in less than 48 hours with a press 
statement by the Minister. As per the submission of the Ministry, Electronic Media 
Monitoring Centre (EMMC) had reported that these two channels carried reports of the 
North-East Delhi violence in a manner which were violative of the prescribed Code viz. 
Rules 6(1)(c) and 6(1)(e) of the Cable Television Networks Rules, 1994. Subsequent to 
the off-air order, Asianet News tendered an unconditional apology on 06.03.2020 and 
requested resumption of their transmission. Considering the apology of Asianet News, 
the competent authority curtailed the off-air penalty and channel was allowed to resume 
transmission from 01:30 AM on 07.03.2020 onwards. Keeping proportionate penalty in 
mind for similar violations committed by the two channels, the transmission for the other 
channel (Media One) was also resumed from 09:30 AM on 07.03.2020 onwards with the 
approval of the competent authority. The Secretary, I & B apprised the Committee that 
all the orders for warning were issued at the Secretary, I & B level, and the off-air orders 
were issued with by the approval of the Hon’ble Minister. The Ministry was unable to 
clarify why in that case, the public annulment of the disciplinary action was announced 
on the ground that the Minister had been unaware. 
 
 In this very case, the Committee finds that after issue of show-cause notice to the 
two channels on 28.2.2020, the channels had furnished their replies on 03.03.2020. As 
submitted by the Secretary, Ministry of I&B, in television network, normally, all the 
complaints are referred to the NBSA. Their feedback and comments are taken and 
based on that the Inter-Ministerial Committee, by an executive order, takes action. The 
Committee, however regret to note that in this particular case, instead of taking 
recourse to due procedure in dealing with such complaints, prohibitory orders were 
issued against the channels with undue haste. The Committee is of the considered 
opinion that it would be too harsh a decision to serve prohibitory orders against any 
channel without giving it ample opportunity to be heard as per the extant procedure 
before its act of violation of codes is established. The Committee trusts that the Ministry 
of I&B in future would act in a transparent and impartial manner while dealing with such 
cases, lest such a decision on the part of the Government should be looked upon as a 
move to suppress the freedom of press. 
 
Reply of the Government 
Show Cause Notices were issued to the two channels namely, Asianet News and 
Media One for telecast of the programme that were prima facie violative of the 
Programme Code. On examination of the response of the channels, both the channels 
were found in violation of the Programme Codes and accordingly the competent 
authority directed the channels to take their transmission off-air for 48 hrs. on 
06.03.2020 starting at 7.30 PM. 
 
Subsequently, based on unconditional apology tendered by one of the channel, 
the duration of off-air order was curtailed to 6 hrs. for the channel. Transmission of other 
channel was also resumed after 14 hrs. keeping proportionate penalty in mind of  similar 
violation.   
 

27 
 
 The Cable Television Networks Rules, 1994 have been amended, vide 
Notification No. GSR 416(E) dated 17.06.2021, as the Cable Television Networks 
(Amendment) Rules, 2021, to provide for statutory mechanism for redressal of 
grievances/ complaints of citizens relating to content broadcast by television channels, 
which would be transparent and benefit the citizens. The above notification is significant 
as it paves the way for a strong institutional system for redressing grievances while 
placing accountability and responsibility on the broadcasters and their self-regulating 
bodies. 
 
[Ministry of Information and Broadcasting O.M. No. N-18013/2/2015-BC-II (Vol.II) dated      
21.02.2022] 
 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 12) 
 
 The Committee note that Rule 6(1)(e) of the Cable Network Rules, 2014 states 
that “no programme should be carried in the cable service which is likely to encourage 
or incite violence or contains anything against maintenance of law and order or which 
promote ‘Anti-national attitudes’. The term ‘Anti-national attitude’ has, however, not 
been separately defined in the Programme Code enumerated in the CTN Rules, 1994. 
The Ministry have justified that ‘Anti-national’ is commonly understood as opposed to 
national interests or nationalism. However, the Committee are of the considered opinion 
that the term ‘Anti-national attitude’ used in Rule 6(1)(e) of the Cable Network Rules, 
2014 may be the cause of unnecessary harassment of the private channels and 
therefore recommend that the term ‘Anti-national attitude’ be properly defined to remove 
any ambiguity in the interpretation of the term in the prescribed code. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 The word ‘anti-national’ has not been defined in Statutes. However, there are 
criminal legislations and various judicial pronouncements to sternly deal with unlawful 
and subversive activities which are detrimental to the unity and integrity of the country. 
In this regard, it is relevant to mention that the Constitution (Forty-Second Amendment) 
Act, 1976 inserted in the Constitution Article 31D (during Emergency) which defined” 
anti-national activity’ and this Article 31D was, subsequently, omitted by the Constitution 
(Forty-third Amendment) Act, 1977. 
 
[Ministry of Information and Broadcasting O.M. No. N-18013/2/2015-BC-II (Vol.II) dated      
21.02.2022] 
 
 (Recommendation Sl. No. 15) 
 
 The Committee are not happy to note that out of total 119 cases, action against 
87 cases were taken only in the year 2019, which shows that the system of disposal of 
cases by the Ministry is not very efficient and needs to be looked into. The Committee 
do not approve of the manner in which the Ministry have been taking time to decide on 
the cases of violation of code in media coverage and desire that cases at their level 
should be disposed of in a time-bound manner to have the desired impact.  
 

28 
 
Reply of the Government 
The meeting of Inter-Ministerial Committee/Inter Departmental Committee is being 
conducted at regular intervals. Following meetings of IMC were conducted during the 
year 2020-21: 
 
Sl. No. IMC meeting held on No. of Items considered 
1 04.08.2020 13 
2 01.10.2020 01 
3 11.12.2020 18 
4 04.03.2021 11 
5 07.04.2021 01 (a Complaint which included cases 
pertaining to 13 channels) 
6 13.10.2021 06 
7 02.11.2021 09 
8 14.02.2022 5 (involving 54 cases of violation of 
Programme Code / Advertising Code) 
 
Based on the recommendation of the committee, the action was taken against the 
TV channels during the period 2020-21 against 36 channels. 
 
[Ministry of Information and Broadcasting O.M. No. N-18013/2/2015-BC-II (Vol.II) dated      
21.02.2022] 
 
Digital / Social Media 
  
(Recommendation Sl. No. 17) 
 
 The Committee note that the Ministry of Electronic and Information Technology 
(MeitY) on receipt of complaints with reference to cyber security or pertaining to online 
content that warrants action under section 69A of the IT Act, takes appropriate follow up 
action in accordance with the applicable legal provisions. During 2017, 2018 and 2019, 
MeitY ordered 1385, 2799 and 3603 URLs, respectively to be blocked. The Committee 
also note that earlier all publications over the internet, including e-newspapers, were 
governed under the provisions of IT Act, 2000. However, in a recent development, the 
Central Government vide notification dated 09.11.2020, has amended the Allocation of 
Business Rules, 1961 of M/o I&B and now the Ministry of I & B has the mandate for 
Digital/ Online Media i.e. for ‘Films and Audio-Visual programmes’ made available by 
online content providers and ‘News and current affairs’ content on online platforms. The 
Committee, while hoping that the new rules will promote accountability, would like to 
know the extent to which the objective of bringing the notification has been achieved by 
the Ministry. 
 
 While examining the subject, the Committee also considered the issue of the 
unregulated content made available through online/ OTT platforms which had hitherto 
escaped any architecture of regulation. During the Covid pandemic, more and more 
people have resorted to these platforms due to closure of cinema halls. The Committee 
is conscious that the information and content portrayed on such platforms can impact 
viewers, including minor children. At the same time, the Committee acknowledges that 
OTT platforms offer freedom to the individual user to decide what to watch, a freedom 

29 
 
that should not be abridged by the heavy hand of Government. The Committee note 
that Social media platforms are stated to be the intermediaries as defined in the IT Act, 
2000 and enjoy exemption from liability if they follow due diligence, which has been 
notified as the Information Technology (Intermediaries Guidelines) Rules, 2011. Section 
79 of the IT Act empowers the ‘Appropriate Government or its agency’ to notify the 
intermediary for removal of unlawful content relatable to Article 19(2) of the Constitution 
of India. However, recently on 25th February, 2021, the Government have notified ‘The 
Information Technology (Guidelines for Intermediaries and Digital Media Ethics Code) 
Rules, 2021’ wherein Part-II relates to ‘Intermediaries’ and shall be administered by 
MeitY. The new IT Rules, 2021 has introduced two categories of Intermediaries and 
additional due diligence to be followed by Significant Social Media Intermediaries. The 
Committee hope that the new Rules/ Guidelines would go a long way in ensuring 
transparency and accountability for the social media platforms with a robust oversight 
mechanism by the Government. Nevertheless, considering that these Rules are at their 
early stage of implementation, the Committee recommend the Ministry of I&B to 
coordinate with MeitY to take care of the grievances and numerous concerns raised by 
the general public, stakeholders and other media activists about the efficacy of these 
Rules and their implications for free speech, journalistic freedom and artistic creativity. 
The Committee are of the view that any regulation must have checks and balances to 
ensure that it is neither misused nor violative of Article 14, 19 and 21 of Indian 
Constitution. The Committee, therefore, expects both the Ministries to promote better 
Inter-Ministerial coordination, systematic awareness creation about these new Rules/ 
guidelines, etc., so that the Rules are implemented effectively to ensure accountability 
of online/ OTT platforms. 
  
 The Committee desire that the Ministry should specially ensure training 
programmes/ workshops for executive/ administrative officials at District and State level 
in order to brief them about the new guidelines and about the possible misuse/ 
misinterpretation. The Committee would like to be kept apprised about the 
implementation of these Rules along with any problems/ constraints faced by the 
Ministry in so doing. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 The Information Technology (Intermediary Guidelines and Digital Media Ethics 
Code) Rules, 2021 (hereinafter referred to as “IT Rules, 2021”) under the Information 
Technology Act, 2000, were notified by the Government on 25th February, 2021. Part III 
of the IT Rules, 2021 relates to publishers of news and current affairs content and 
publishers of online curated content (OTT Platforms) on digital media, which is 
administered by the Ministry of Information & Broadcasting. 
  
The Rules inter-alia provide for a Code of Ethics to be adhered to by the digital 
media publishers and a three tier complaint-based mechanism for addressing 
grievances related to the violation of the Code of Ethics as under: 
i. Level I:  Publisher 
ii. Level II: Self-Regulatory Bodies of publishers 
iii. Level III: Oversight Mechanism by the Central Government 
 
The Rules also provide a mechanism for information disclosure by digital news 
publishers and OTT platforms. Based on the provisions under the Rules, the digital 

30 
 
media publishers are required to furnish the details about their entity to the Ministry, and 
publish a monthly report on the grievances received and addressed by them.   
The Ministry released formats for furnishing information by the digital media 
publishers vide Public Notice dated 26 May, 2021. The Public Notice provided separate 
formats for standalone digital news publishers, digital arms of traditional (TV/print) news 
publishers, and OTT platforms. Reminders for furnishing of information have also been 
sent to digital media publishers in June, 2021, and September, 2021. In October 2021, 
the Ministry issued a communication issued to YouTube to facilitate furnishing of 
information from YouTube based digital news channels. In this regard, YouTube has 
informed that a notification to this effect has been sent to YouTube users. Emails were 
also sent to YouTube based news channels in November, 2021. It is hereby informed 
that 2,349 digital media publishers have furnished information to the Ministry till 
07.01.2022. 
The above mentioned digital news publishers and OTT platforms have appointed a 
grievance officer as Level-I of the three-tier grievance redressal mechanism under the 
Rules. Through the establishment of a grievance officer, the Rules have played a crucial 
role in institutionalizing a mechanism for self-regulation by the publisher. 
Furthermore, with the establishment of Self-Regulatory Bodies (SRBs) formed by 
publishers or their associations at Level-II of the grievance redressal mechanism, the 
Rules have also institutionalized a mechanism for industry level self-regulation without 
any involvement of the Government in this regard. Five Self-Regulatory Bodies (SRBs) 
have been registered with the Ministry.  
 Since the notification of the Rules, with the laying down of a Code of Ethics for 
digital media publishers, there has been a sharp decline in grievances related to digital 
media content received in the Ministry. These grievances are transferred to the 
publishers in accordance with the Rules.  
 In accordance with rule 19 of the IT Rules, 2021, the Ministry, vide Public Notice 
dated 09 September 2021, released formats for monthly disclosure of the grievances 
being received and resolved by the publishers and the self-regulatory bodies. 
 Level-III of the grievance redressal mechanism, the Inter-Departmental 
Committee (IDC), consisting of the Authorized Officer, the representatives of various 
Ministries, and domain experts, has been constituted.  In this regard, the domain 
experts included in the IDC are nominees of the Press Council of India, Bar Council of 
India, Federation of Indian Chambers of Commerce and Industry (FICCI), and 
Confederation of Indian Industry (CII). Nomination from the Bar Council of India is still 
awaited. 
 In December 2021, using the emergency powers under rule 16 of the IT Rules, 
2021, the Ministry ordered the blocking of 20 news channels on YouTube and 2 news 
websites. In January, 2021, similar order were issued for blocking of 35 news channels 
on YouTube, 2 news websites, 2 Twitter accounts, 1 Facebook account and 2 
Instagram accounts. 
 With the advent of institutional mechanism for regulating the content of 
publishers of news and current affairs on digital media and publishers of online curated 
content (OTT Platforms), grievances of common citizens regarding the content on these 
platforms are being addressed as per the Rules. The Rules, in this regard, would help to 
fight the menace of fake news on online/ digital media through a citizen-centric and time 
bound grievance redressal mechanism. 
 Through the mechanism of information disclosure under the IT Rules, 2021, 
accountability of the digital media publishers to their audience is being ensured. 

31 
 
Furthermore, the Rules have been instrumental in providing recognition to the digital 
media publishers, and establishing a mechanism for future co-ordination.    
The Ministry has taken several steps for awareness generation about Part-III of the 
IT Rules, 2021: 
 The Hon’ble I&B Minister interacted with representatives of OTT Platforms on 4 
March, 2021, with representatives of digital news publishers on 11 Mar, 2021, 
and with the representatives from the Producers Guild of India on 26 Mar, 2021 
 An information booklet on IT Rules, 2021 explaining various aspects in simple 
language has been prepared and made available on the website of the Ministry. 
 Comprehensive Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs) in Hindi and English on 
various aspects of IT Rules, 2021 have been prepared and made available on 
the website of the Ministry. For the benefit of citizens, the FAQs have been 
translated in various Indian languages, including Tamil, Telugu, Malayalam, 
Urdu, Kannada, Khasi, Gujarati, Punjabi, Assamese, Marathi, Bangla and 
Manipuri, and have also been uploaded on the Ministry’s website.  
 On 9th March, 2021, briefing and presentation before the Hon’ble Members of 
Parliament was organized collectively by MeitY and MIB. 
 Advertisement in various newspapers was carried out on 25th March, 2021 
across the country for the benefit of the citizens, informing them about the 
Rules. 
 After the notification of the Rules, info graphics on various aspects of the Rules 
were disseminated on social media. 
 
Furthermore, in the interest of direct engagement with the stakeholders, the 
Ministry has conducted 11 Webinars at national and regional levels for awareness 
creation. The webinars involved a total participation of over 2,400 stakeholders 
including: 
 Representatives from standalone digital news publishers 
 Editors and management representatives from national and regional media 
 Representatives from OTT platforms, content managers 
 Journalism faculty and students  
 Representatives from associations of digital media publishers 
Details of Webinar Date No. of Participants  
Webinar for Gujarat Region 8 th April, 2021 75 
Webinar in collaboration with FICCI 7th June, 2021 175 
Webinar in collaboration with CII 15th June, 2021 100 
Webinar for Southern Region (5 States) 26th June, 2021 240 
Webinar for MP, Rajasthan, Chhattisgarh 30th June, 2021 260 
Interaction with media at Gautam Buddha 
University 
2nd July, 2021 
 
50 
Webinar for UP, Bihar, Uttarakhand, Jharkhand 7th July. 2021 448 

32 
 
 
The webinars had a two-phase format- a presentation on Digital Media Ethics 
Code for 30 mins, followed by a free flowing Q&A session for 2 hour 30 mins. With 
about 50-60 questions being asked in each webinar, the webinars led to clarification of 
doubts and apprehensions, as well as a way for receiving suggestions.  The concerns of 
the stakeholders in relation to free speech, journalistic freedom and artistic creativity 
were also addressed through the webinars. It was informed to the stakeholders that the 
Code of Ethics for digital news publishers provides for observance of the Norms of 
Journalistic Conduct of the Press Council of India, and Programme Code under the 
Cable Television Network (Regulation) Act, 1995. These are time-tested norms/codes 
for conventional news media which have protected journalistic freedom. Similarly, the 
Code of Ethics for OTT platforms provides for self-classification of content, and 
therefore does not mandate mandatory prior certification by the Government. A booklet 
containing the learnings, presentation, and commonly asked doubts from the webinars 
has been published and made available on the MIB website. 
 
Coordinate with MeitY: 
With regard to implementation of Rules, coordination between MIB and MeitY has 
been established at multiple levels. The two Ministries worked in tandem during the 
process of framing and notification of the Rules. After the notification, both MIB and 
MeitY briefed the Hon’ble Members of Parliament together on 9thMarch, 2021, and 
before the Standing Committee on Information Technology on 15th March, 2021. The 
two Ministries have also been coordinating for preparation of inputs to the questions 
asked by the Standing Committee. Frequently Asked Questions on various aspects of 
the Rules have been released by both the Ministries on aspects pertaining to their 
respective domains. Through meetings and discussions, the Ministries have exchanged 
their views on implementation of the Rules. 
Part-III of the IT Rules, 2021relates to publishers of news and current affairs 
content and publishers of online curated content (OTT Platforms) on digital media, and 
is administered by the Ministry of Information & Broadcasting. 
  
On 1st March, 2021, the District Magistrate of the Imphal West District of Manipur 
issued a Notice to a local news portal directing the publisher to issue to the District 
Magistrate all relevant documents for ensuring compliance to the IT Rules. On 
becoming aware of the notice, Secretary, I&B, within 24 hours of the issue of the Notice, 
wrote to the Chief Secretary, Manipur informing that IT Rules are administered by the 
Ministry of Information &Broadcasting, Government of India with no powers for 
furnishing information being delegated to the  State Government or local administration. 
Webinar for Maharashtra, Goa 12th July, 2021 320 
Webinar for NE Region, WB and Odisha 14th July, 2021 278 
Webinar for HP, Chandigarh, Punjab, Haryana, 
J&K and Ladakh 
20th July, 2021 
 
341 
Webinar in collaboration with Indian Institute of 
Mass Communication (IIMC) 
20th August, 
2021 
160 
Total  2,447 

33 
 
With the above communication, the aforementioned Notice by the District Magistrate 
was withdrawn. 
 A communication was also issued on 3rd March, 2021 to Chief Secretaries of all 
States, and Administrators of all Union Territories, informing that no powers under Part-
III of the IT Rules, 2021 have been delegated to the State Governments/ District 
Magistrates/ Police Commissioners. No incident of misuse/ misinterpretation of the IT 
Rules, 2021 by the District/State level authorities has come to light since the issue of 
the above communications. 
In December, 2021, the Ministry issued a communication to the officials of 
State/UT level Departments of Information & Public Relations (DIPRs) informing them 
about the various aspects of the Rules. Vide this communication, soft copies as well as 
multiple physical copies of the following resource material were also shared with the 
officials: 
 IT Rules, 2021; 
 Information booklets (including FAQs); and 
 Booklets on awareness initiatives and webinars conducted by the Ministry. 
The Ministry has requested the DIPRs to share the resource material with officials 
of the State/UT Government, and with district level authorities for their information and 
understanding. The Ministry has also communicated its willingness conduct webinars 
with officers in the States/Districts. 
 
[Ministry of Information and Broadcasting O.M. No. N-18013/2/2015-BC-II (Vol.II) dated      
21.02.2022] 
 
Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) 
  
(Recommendation Sl. No. 18) 
 
 The Committee note that FDI for different forms of Print and Electronic Media is 
different for different entities. For publishing Newspapers and periodicals dealing with 
News and current affairs, the even for Indian editions of foreign magazines dealing in 
them, the FDI limit is 26% and it is to be done only through the Government route. While 
publishing/ printing of scientific and technical magazines/ speciality journals/ periodicals 
and their facsimile editions, a larger FDI limit of 100% is permitted this is also to be 
done through the Government route. Even within the Broadcasting Sector, the 
percentage of Equity/ FDI Cap varies from 49% to 100% and sectoral cap varies from 
26% to 100% with the Entry Route through Government/Automatic. The FDI provisions 
in the DTH and HITS Guidelines also varies from 20% to 74% and there is variation in 
the Entry Route and management control too. The Committee also note the Ministry’s 
concern that though the ‘Newspapers’ have a limit on FDI, there is no guidelines for 
Online News. 
 
While noting that the M/o I&B have given their comments on the issue of FDI to the 
Ministry of Commerce and Department of Promotion of Industry and Internal Trade 
(DPIIT), the Committee would like to be apprised about the responses of both the 
Ministries. The Committee feel that FDI within limits in the media sector may be good for 
promoting competition and maintaining positive checks and balances and also to check 
malpractices in ethical standards. The Committee, accordingly, recommend that the M/o 

34 
 
I&B harmonise the FDI rules relating to Media in such a way that the grey areas are 
taken care of and support to this industry is ensured while maintaining its autonomy. 
 
Reply of the Government 
The recommendation of the Committee for harmonizing the FDI Rules relating to 
media has been taken note of. It may be mentioned that with regard to Direct-to-Home 
(DTH) the Ministry vide its order of 30.12.2020 has amended the DTH Guidelines and 
aligned the FDI limits/approvals with the extant policy guidelines issued by the 
Department for Promotion of Industry and Internal Trade (DPIIT) of the Ministry of 
Commerce and Industry. Accordingly 100 per cent equity/FDI in DTH is permissible 
subject to certain conditions in including the requirement of Government approvals. 
 
 In respect of online media it may be mentioned that vide Press Note No. 4 of 
2019 dated 18.09.2019 the Government has allowed 26% FDI through Government 
approval route in entities engaged in “Uploading/Streaming of News and Current Affairs 
through Digital Media’ Clarification in this regard was issued by Department for 
Promotion of Industry and Internal Trade (DPIIT) on 16.10.2020 as under: 
 
(i) The decision of Permitting 26% FDI through Government route would 
apply to following categories of Indian entities, registered or located in 
India: 
(a)  Digital media entity streaming/uploading news and current affairs on 
websites, apps or other platforms; 
(b) News agency which gathers, writes and distributes/transmits news, 
directly or indirectly, to digital media entities and/or news aggregator; 
and  
(c) News aggregator, being and entity which, using software or web 
application, aggregates news content from various sources, such as 
news website, blogs, podcasts, video blogs, user submitted links, etc. 
in one location. 
(ii) Entities covered under (i) above would be required to align their FDI to the 
26% level with the approval of the Central Government, within one year 
from the date of issue of this clarification. 
 
Compliance with the FDI Policy and the application FEMA Notification would be 
the responsibility of the investee entity. Further, the entity would adhere to the following 
conditions: 
 
(a) The majority of Directors on the Board of the Company shall be Indian citizen; 
(b) The Chief Executive Officer shall be an Indian citizen; 
(c) The entity shall be required to obtain security clearance of all foreign 
personnel likely to be deployed for more than 60 days in a year by way of 
appointment, contract or consultancy or in any other capacity for functioning 
of the entity prior to their deployment. In the event of  security clearance of 
any of the foreign personnel being denied or  withdrawn for any reasons 
whatsoever, the investee entity will ensure that the concerned person resigns 
or his/her services are terminated forthwith after receiving such directives 
from the Government. 
 

35 
 
FDI cap of 26% with Government Route is kept uniformly for publishing of 
newspapers and periodicals dealing with news and current affairs, publication of Indian 
edition of foreign magazine dealing in News and Current Affairs on print as well as 
Digital Media and to news agencies.  
 
[Ministry of Information and Broadcasting O.M. No. N-18013/2/2015-BC-II (Vol.II) dated      
21.02.2022] 
 
 
 
Miscellaneous 
 
(a)  Paid News 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 19) 
 
 The Committee learns that PCI redresses complaints on ‘Paid news’ in 
accordance with the Press Council (Procedure for Inquiry) Regulation, 1979. Besides, 
Election Commission of India (ECI) has a well-structured mechanism at the national, 
state and district levels to receive complaints relating to ‘Paid News’ and take necessary 
remedial action. A sub-committee of PCI in its ‘Report on Paid News’ in 2010 inter alia 
recommended for amendment in the Representation of People (RP) Act, 1951 to make 
incidence of paid news, a punishable electoral malpractice. ECI had also proposed that 
a provision should be made in the RP Act, 1951 to include publishing and abetting of 
publishing of ‘Paid News’ as an electoral offence with exemplary punishment. The 
matter was, however, referred to the Ministry of Law & Justice, which referred the 
matter to the Law Commission of India, which submitted its 255th report on ‘Electoral 
Reforms’ on 12.03.2015, recommending paid news as electoral offence. Thereafter, M/o 
Law & Justice constituted a Task Force to prepare a roadmap to implement the 
recommendation of the Law Commission, which submitted its report in 2016. Both the 
reports are under consideration in the M/o Law & Justice. The Committee would desire 
the Ministry of I & B to pursue the matter with the M/o Law & Justice for early 
implementation of the recommendation of the Law Commission to make paid news as 
electoral offence, so that it has a deterrent effect on the incidence of paid news. The 
Committee may be apprised of the progress in the matter. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The issue of ‘Paid News’ has been raised and deliberated from time to time at 
various forum.  Ministry of Law & Justice informed that the issue of ‘Paid News’ was 
also discussed by the Law Commission of India in its 255th Report and a Task Force 
has been constituted in Legislative Department of Ministry of Law & Justice to prepare a 
roadmap to implement the recommendation of the Law Commission. The Task force 
committee has submitted its report in 2016 for implementation of the same. Both the 
Reports are under consideration of the Government. The matter is pursued regularly 
with the M/o Law and Justice. 
 
[Ministry of Information and Broadcasting O.M. No. N-18013/2/2015-BC-II (Vol.II) dated      
21.02.2022] 

36 
 
Grievance Redressal Mechanism 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 22) 
 
 The Committee note that at present there does not exist a grievance redressal 
mechanism for an individual to register a complaint for redressal of his grievance, if 
something is written against him. As informed by the Ministry, they are planning to have 
different levels of regulation to address different public concerns. In this regard, the 
Committee would recommend to the Ministry to include such Grievance Redressal 
Mechanism at all levels i.e. District, State and Centre and make it people friendly. 
Further, all the TV Channels, News Papers, etc., should have an in-house Grievance 
Redressal Mechanism/ Cell/ Ombudsman, and information in this regard can be 
published in the newspapers or journals or can also be run on their channel’s scroll. The 
Committee would also recommend to the Ministry to look into the possibility of having a 
‘Media Helpline Number’ so as to strengthen the Grievance Redressal Mechanism, 
which would not only help the aggrieved person/ organization but would also help 
maintain the standards of ethics in Media. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Cable Television Networks Rules, 1994 have been amended vide 
Notification No.GSR 416(E) dated 17.06.2021 thereby providing for a statutory 
mechanism for redressal of grievances/complaints of citizens relating to content 
broadcast by television channels.  These rules are called the Cable Television Networks 
(Amendment) Rules, 2021.  
 
The Rules provide that in order to ensure observance and adherence to the 
Programme Code and the Advertising Code by the broadcaster and to address the 
grievance or complaint, if any, relating thereto, there shall be a three-level structure 
(complaint redressal structure) as under:  
 
Level I   -  A self-regulation by broadcasters;  
Level II - Self-regulation by the self-regulating bodies of the broadcasters; and  
Level III - Oversight mechanism by the Central Government.  
 
 Rule 19 of the amended Cable Rules provides that the Central Government shall 
coordinate and facilitate the adherence to the Programme Code and the Advertising 
Code by the broadcaster, develop an Oversight Mechanism whose functions include, 
inter-alia, to establish an Inter-Departmental Committee (IDC) for hearing grievances or 
complaints and refer to the IDC grievances or complaints arising out of the decision of 
the self-regulating body under rule 17, or if no decision has been taken by the self-
regulating body within the stipulated time, or on receipt of such other complaints or 
references relating to violation of Programme Code or Advertising Code as it may 
consider necessary. 
 
 In pursuance of Cable Television Networks (Amendment) Rules, 2021, an Inter-
Departmental Committee (IDC) has been constituted on 14.07.2021.  
 
 Following bodies have been registered as Level-II Self Regulating Bodies by the 
Ministry under Rule 18 of the of the Cable Television Networks (Amendment)  
Rules, 2021: 
 

37 
 
(a) Broadcasting Content Complaints Council (BCCC) with 309 TV channels as its 
members 
(b) News Broadcasters Federation - Professional News Broadcasting Standards 
Authority" (NBF-PNBSA) with 41 TV channels as its members 
 
For Print Media 
 
The Press Council of India takes cognizance, suo-motu or on complaints, of the 
contents in print media which are in violation of the ‘Norms of Journalistic Conduct’. As 
per section 14 of the Press Council Act, 1978, the Council, after holding an inquiry, may 
warn, admonish or censure the newspaper, the news agency, the editor or the journalist 
or disapprove the conduct of the editor or the journalist, as the case may be. Hence, for 
any grievance relating to contents published in the print media, the person aggrieved 
may approach Secretary, Press Council of India, Soochna Bhawan, CGO Complex, 
Lodhi Road, New Delhi-110003 directly, in accordance with provisions of “Complaint 
Mechanism” given on the Council’s website www.prescouncil.nic.in.   
 Moreover, as per guidelines prescribed under  para 3(c) of the Press Council 
(Procedure for Inquiry) Regulations, 1979, before filing the complaint before the Council, 
draw the attention of the newspaper, news agency, editor or other working journalist 
concerned, to the matter appearing in the newspaper etc. or to the non-publication there 
of which, in the opinion of the complainant, is objectionable and he shall also furnish to 
the newspaper, news agency, editor or the working journalist, as the case may be, the 
grounds for holding such opinion. The complainant shall, along with the complaint, 
enclose a copy of the letter written by him to the newspaper, news agency, editor or 
other working journalist together with a copy of the reply, if any received by him, 
provided that the Chairman may in his discretion waive this condition. 
 
For Digital Media: 
 
With the advent of institutional mechanism for regulating the content of 
publishers of news and current affairs on digital media and publishers of online curated 
content (OTT Platforms), grievances of common citizens regarding the content on these 
platforms are being addressed as per the Information Technology (Intermediary 
Guidelines and Digital Media Ethics Code) Rules, 2021. The Rules, in this regard, would 
help to fight the menace of fake news on online/ digital media through a citizen-centric 
and time bound grievance redressal mechanism.   
Through the mechanism of information disclosure under the IT Rules, 2021, 
accountability of the digital media publishers to their audience is being ensured. 
Furthermore, the Rules have been instrumental in providing recognition to the digital 
media publishers, and establishing a mechanism for future coordination.  
 
When any public grievance in respect of DTH/ HITS or Television Rating Agency 
is received through online GPGRAMS Portal or physically, this Ministry forwards the 
same to the concerned Company for redressal. Based on the reply of the concerned 
Company, this Ministry then redresses the public grievance accordingly. The Report on 
disposal of grievances for the period from 01.01.2017 to 22.12.2021 is indicated in the 
following table: 
 

38 
 
Grievance Source Total Receipt during 
the period 
Case disposed during 
the period 
DARPG 987 986 
Local/Internet 5312 5308 
President Secretariat 53 53 
PMO 1526 1525 
Total 7878 7872 
 
[Ministry of Information and Broadcasting O.M. No. N-18013/2/2015-BC-II (Vol.II) dated      
21.02.2022] 
 

39 
 
CHAPTER- III 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO 
PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Commissioning of Media Commission 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 23) 
 
 In view of the wide range of complexity of issues covered in this Report, the 
Committee recommends commissioning of a Media Commission to recommend all 
aspects covered in the Report. The Media Commission may be a broad based body, 
involving experts as well as stakeholders and should be given a strict timeline to submit 
its Report. The Committee also desire that the Report of the Media Commission should 
be placed before them within 6 months of the inception of Media Commission’s work. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
A Commission, primarily, has a role to collect information about the current 
scenario in any sector or to make projections/recommendations for the future, etc. 
Registrar of Newspapers for India (RNI) brings out a report yearly containing all 
available information and statistics about the Press in India, with particular reference to 
emerging trends in circulation. Reports of various industrial Forum/Bodies are published 
from time to time  on media and entertainment sector for bringing out the current 
scenario, growth rate, future projections, etc., which can be made use of. All such data, 
information are available with the Government and are duly considered on the matters 
of policy and their implementation. Under such circumstances, setting up a Media 
Commission will serve a limited purpose. 
 
[Ministry of Information and Broadcasting O.M. No. N-18013/2/2015-BC-II (Vol.II) dated      
21.02.2022] 

40 
 
CHAPTER IV 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND REQUIRE 
REITERATION 
 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 3) 
 
II.  PRINT MEDIA 
 
(i) Existing Codes/Acts/Mechanism for observing ethical standards in Print Media 
 
 The Committee note that the Press Council of India (PCI), a statutory, quasi 
judicial body functions under the Press Council Act, 1978 acts as a watchdog of the 
press. It adjudicates the complaints against and by the press for violations of ethics and 
for violation of the freedom of the press, respectively. The criteria adopted for codifying 
ethical standards for the Print Media is to ensure that news, views, comments and 
information are disseminated by the press in the public interest in a fair, accurate, 
unbiased and decent manner and to keep in mind the cascading effect of reporting on 
the society and on the individuals and institutions concerned. Another criterion is to take 
note of sponsored news content which has come to the fore and is damaging quality 
journalism. Section 14 of the Act empowers the Council to warn, admonish or censure 
the newspaper, the news agency, the editor or the journalist concerned or disapprove 
the conduct of the editor or the journalist if it finds that a newspaper or a news agency 
has offended against the standards of journalistic ethics or public taste or that an editor 
or a working journalist that has committed any professional misconduct, on the receipt 
of complaint or otherwise. Further, PCI has formulated ‘Norms of Journalistic Conduct’ 
under Section 13(1) of the Press Council Act, for the newspapers, news agencies and 
journalists for maintaining ethical standards in print media journalism and for journalists 
to practice the profession within ethical boundaries, which cover principles and ethics as 
well as detailed guidelines on specific issues. This is being continuously updated by the 
Council while incorporating new norms based on the important adjudications rendered 
by it from time to time. 
 
 The Committee, however find to their utmost concern that the erring newspapers 
tend to repeat the same mistakes, even after being censured by PCI till action is taken 
by the Bureau of Outreach and Communication (BOC) to withhold government 
advertisements to that particular newspaper for a certain period of time as per the 
Government of India’s Policy. It is surprising to note that a lot of time is wasted in taking 
a decision by the BOC against such newspapers, which eventually dilutes the impact of 
the decision. Supposedly, once PCI takes a decision to censure a newspaper today, 
BOC takes almost a year to come out with a decision to withhold government 
advertisements. The Press Council, hence has proposed that the Government of India 
may prescribed a certain time period to BOC to act on the decisions of the PCI and 
withhold Government advertisements to such offenders to make the decision of PCI 
more effective on the erring newspapers. The Committee find merit in the proposal of 
PCI which would not only ensure prompt action by BOC on the cases referred to them 
but also have a deterrent effect on the erring newspapers. The Committee, therefore, 

41 
 
exhort the Ministry of I&B to prescribe a certain time limit for BOC to take action on the 
cases censured by PCI, in the interest of maintaining and promoting high standards of 
press in India. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 BOC imposes penalty on publications censured by PCI as per the 
provisions of extant Print Media Advertisement Policy-2020, clause 17 (vii) which is 
extracted as under: 
“Penalties: If a publication is found by PCI to have violated the ‘Norms of 
Journalistic Conduct’ or having indulged in any anti-national activity; penalties, as under, 
may be imposed on such publications by BOC: 
a. Warning to the edition of the publication or suspension of fifteen (15) days on 1st 
offence. 
b. Suspension of two (2) months of the same edition of publication on 2nd offence. 
c. Suspension of six (6) months of the same edition of publication on 3rd offence.” 
 
  Newspapers/Publications censured by PCI, which are on the panel of BOC, are 
suspended from the panel of BOC for a period of 2 months. Further, it was decided that 
Newspapers/Publications which are not on the panel of BOC and have been censured 
by PCI would not be empanelled or re-empanelled for a similar period of 2 months. 
During last 5 years, PCI censured 142 publications. Out of this, BOC has 
suspended 112 empanelled publications. Remaining 30 censured publications were not 
on BOC Panel. The details are as below: 
 
PCI Reference Date Action Taken by BOC No. of Publications 
21.07.2016 17.08.2016 5 
06.04.2017 18.05.2017 1 
09.06.2017 & 04.07.2017 17.07.2017 3 
18.07.2017 13.09.2017 51 
22.11.2019 10.07.2020 42 
29-30.09.2020 20.10.2020 1 
28.01.2021 12.02.2021 6 
04-07.06.2021 28.06.2021 3 
Total  112 
Accordingly, BOC has taken action against censured publications by PCI in timely 
manner following the guidelines/policy provisions. 
 
[Ministry of Information and Broadcasting O.M. No. N-18013/2/2015-BC-II (Vol.II) dated      
21.02.2022] 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No. 7 of Chapter I) 
 
 
 
 
 
 

42 
 
 (Recommendation Sl. No. 6) 
 
 The Committee have been informed that PCI in its meeting held on 29.05.2019 
has passed a resolution suggesting that when the Print Media has a watchdog in the 
form of Press Council of India, something parallel is advisable for the entire media i.e. 
newspapers and periodicals in print or other form, e-newspapers, news portals, social 
media and any other platform of news disseminations besides electronic media. The 
PCI has made recommendations to the Government to enact a single legislation so as 
to cover all the aforesaid media, in line with the Press Council Act, 1978. The Chairman, 
PCI, submitted that a few months back, they had received a large number of complaints 
against the electronic media, the news channels other than the print media but were 
unable to act against those entities. 
 
 The Committee also observed that PCI, a statutory body governing the print 
media may entertain complaints and is empowered to warn, admonish or censure the 
newspaper, the news agency, the editor or the journalist concerned, however, it does 
not have the power to enforce compliance as advisories issued by PCI are not 
enforceable in a Court of law. Besides, the self-organised News Broadcasting Standard 
Authority (NBSA) governing news broadcasting has the power to fine, but its jurisdiction 
extends to only those organizations that choose to be members of the News 
Broadcasters Association. Therefore, its efficacy is limited and depends on voluntary 
compliance with its orders. In view of the above, the Committee are of the firm opinion 
that PCI needs restructuring to cover all types of media and therefore desire that the 
Ministry should explore the possibility of establishing a wider Media Council 
encompassing not just the print media but the electronic and digital media as well, and 
equip it with statutory powers to enforce its orders where required. This would enable it 
to have a holistic view of the media scenario and take appropriate steps to check 
irregularities, ensure freedom of speech and professionalism, and maintain the highest 
ethical standards and credibility, which are so critical for the fourth pillar of democracy. 
The Committee, however, feel need for the Government of India to create a Media 
Commission comprising of experts for wider consultations amongst the interested 
groups/ stakeholders to evolve a consensus in this regard. Meanwhile, pending a 
decision on this, the Committee would like the Ministry to look into the possibility of 
expanding the regulatory framework to monitor e-newspapers. 
 
Reply of the Government 
The Ministry had earlier received a proposal from the Press Council of India 
regarding constitution of Media Council encompassing various Media Platforms.  At 
present, separate regulatory mechanisms already exist for different media platforms – 
Press Council of India under the Press Council Act, 1978 for print media, Cable TV 
Network (Regulation) Act, 1995 for television and the Information Technology 
(Intermediary Guidelines and Digital Media Ethics Code) Rules, 2021 under the 
Information Technology Act, 2000 for digital news publishers and OTT platforms. As 
each platform is unique and distinctive in its own way, unifying and merging them under 
one regulatory framework may not be desirable. 
 
[Ministry of Information and Broadcasting O.M. No. N-18013/2/2015-BC-II (Vol.II) dated      
21.02.2022] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 10 of Chapter I) 

43 
 
 
Cases of Non-compliance with ethical standards by Print Media 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 7) 
 
 The Committee note that on violations of ethical standards by Print Media, the 
Press Council directs newspapers to publish corrigenda or issue directions to publish 
the version of the complainant and try to bring the parties to arrive at settlement. In 
cases of gross violation of journalistic conduct, papers are warned, admonished and 
censured. Further, in cases where newspapers are censured, PCI forwards such 
decisions to the Bureau of Outreach and Communication (BOC) and the concerned 
Government of the States/ UTs for further necessary action at their end. However, the 
Committee find to their dismay that PCI do not have the information with regard to 
action taken on their forwarded decisions by the concerned State Governments/ UTs. 
During the last 5 years, PCI censured 142 Newspapers for violating “Norms of 
Journalistic Conduct” and forwarded adjudication to various State Governments/UTs. 
This clearly indicates the limitation of the powers of the PCI to penalize the newspapers 
and news agencies, etc., for violation of the norms of journalistic conduct. The 
Committee are of the considered opinion that rules and regulations framed under the 
Press Council Act, 1978 have no meaning unless there exists an effective mechanism 
for their efficient implementation. The Committee, therefore, recommend that 
Government should take comprehensive and practical measures so that PCI’s decisions 
on cases of violation of ethics in newspapers and other publications, are genuinely 
implemented or taken to their logical end and it should be incumbent upon the 
concerned State Government/ UT to inform PCI about the action taken. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 In respect of newspaper empanelled with BOC, appropriate penal action is taken 
by BOC. In case of Newspapers that are not registered with or in the panel of the 
Bureau of Outreach and Communication (BOC), New Delhi, the adjudication Orders of 
the Press Council of India are communicated/forwarded to the concerned State Govt. 
/Administration of the UT through its Dept. of Information and Public Relations and the 
jurisdictional District Magistrate for taking appropriate action.  
 
[Ministry of Information and Broadcasting O.M. No. N-18013/2/2015-BC-II (Vol.II) dated      
21.02.2022] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 13 of Chapter I) 
 
 
Self- Regulation in TV Channels by Broadcasting Industry 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 14) 
 
 The Committee note that private TV news and non-news channels are governed 
by mechanisms of self-regulation. One such mechanism has been created by the News 
Broadcasters Associations (NBA), a representative body of news and current affairs TV 
channels. NBA has set up the News Broadcasting Standards Authority (NBSA), which is 
empowered to warn, admonish, censure, express disapproval and fine a sum upto Rs. 1 

44 
 
lakh upon the broadcaster and/or recommend to the concerned authority for 
suspension/revocation of license of such broadcaster for violation of the Code. Further, 
the Indian Broadcasting Foundation (IBF), is a representative body of non-news & 
current affairs TV channels which has set up the Broadcasting Content Complaints 
Council (BCCC) to examine and redress complaints. In case of violations of the 
programme code BCCC directs the concerned channel to modify or withdraw such 
content and may also impose a financial penalty up to a maximum of Rs. 30 lakhs 
based on the nature of violations. Recently, a new self-regulatory association called the 
News Broadcasters Federation has also been launched. Likewise, Advertising 
Standards Council of India (ASCI) is another self-regulatory voluntary organization, 
which has set up Consumer Complaints Council (CCC) to consider complaints in 
respect of advertisements. 
 
 As informed by the Ministry of I&B, all the 926 private satellite TV channels are 
not a Members of NBA and IBF and therefore, complaints against those channels are 
forwarded to the Ministry, for appropriate action. The Committee’s attention has further 
been drawn to the fact that during the last 5 years viz. from the year 2015 to 2019, 
though action was taken against 141 cases for violation of programme and 
advertisement codes, 119 cases pertained to non-members of either IBF or NBA. 
 
 In view of the foregoing, the Committee note with satisfaction that self-regulatory 
bodies are performing reasonably well, as evidenced by the fact that during last 5 years, 
action was taken against only 22 cases of NBA and IBF member, out of the total of 141 
cases, which suggests that the compliance rate in respect of non-members is not 
satisfactory. Therefore, the Committee are of the considered view that the Ministry 
should encourage self-regulation in electronic media by the broadcasting Industry and 
recommend that the Ministry should examine the matter to bring all the private Satellite 
TV channels under the mechanism of self-regulation and also take steps to make the 
mechanism of self-regulation more effective. In this way, the Ministry may also divest 
itself of some of its responsibilities, which also require additional hands to cope with the 
extra workload. 
 
Reply of the Government 
The Cable Television Networks (Amendment) Rules, 2021 notified on 
17.06.2021, provide, inter-alia, a three level complaint redressal structure as under: 
 
(iv) Level I - A self-regulation by broadcasters; 
(v) Level II - Self-regulation by the self-regulating bodies of the broadcasters; 
and 
(vi) Level III - Oversight mechanism by the Central Government.  
 
Level-II provides for Self-regulation by the self-regulating body of broadcasters, which 
shall be headed by a retired judge of the Supreme Court or of a High Court or an 
independent eminent person from the field of media, broadcasting, entertainment, child 
rights, human rights or such other relevant fields, and shall have other members, not 
exceeding six, being independent experts in the field of media, broadcasting, 
entertainment, child rights, human rights and such other relevant fields. 
 

45 
 
The self-regulating body shall register itself with the Central Government.  It shall 
perform the following functions, namely: -  
 
(vi) oversee and ensure the alignment and adherence by the broadcaster to the 
Programme Code and the Advertising Code; 
(vii) provide guidance to the broadcaster on various aspects of the Programme Code 
and the Advertising Code; 
(viii) dispose of grievances which have not been disposed of by the 
broadcaster within the specified period of fifteen days; 
(ix) hear appeals filed by the complainant against the decision of the broadcaster; 
(x) issue such guidance or advisories to a broadcaster, including those specified in 
sub-rule (5), for ensuring compliance to the Programme Code and the 
Advertising Code. 
 
Following bodies have been registered as Level-II Self Regulating Bodies by the 
Ministry under Rule 18 of the of the Cable Television Networks (Amendment) Rules, 
2021: 
(c) Broadcasting Content Complaints Council (BCCC) with 309 TV channels as its 
members 
(d) News Broadcasters Federation - Professional News Broadcasting Standards 
Authority" (NBF-PNBSA) with 41 TV channels as its members. 
 
[Ministry of Information and Broadcasting O.M. No. N-18013/2/2015-BC-II (Vol.II) dated      
21.02.2022] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 16 of Chapter I) 
 
 
Fake News 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 20) 
 
 
 There already exist laws and rules under the Indian Penal Code (IPC) 1860, the 
Information Technology Act, 2000 and the Information Technology (Intermediaries 
Guidelines) Rules 2011 to tackle and penalize persons spreading ‘Fake News’. Further, 
a Fact Check Unit (FCU) has been established in the PIB in December, 2019 and such 
FCUs have also been set up in 17 Regional Offices of PIB. This Cell is mandated to 
counter misinformation on Government policies and schemes either suo-motu or under 
a reference via various input methods like WhatsApp Hotline number, e-mail, Twitter 
and PIB’s website. The mechanism depends on various feeder units like Ministries, 
Departments, PSUs for verification of information and is connected to them via PIB 
officers in the Ministries. The Committee are concerned that the menace of false/ fake 
news has become a disturbing trend in India, where the contributors of content are not 
only owners of websites, but also individual subscribers, on whom exercising control is 
posting a very big challenge. As informed by the Ministry, the Central Government vide 
its notification dated 09.11.2020 has amended the Allocation of  Business Rules, 1961 
in respect of Ministry of I & B and has inserted the entries relating to Digital/ Online 

46 
 
Media, Films and Audio-Visual programmes made available by online content providers 
and News and current affairs content on online platforms.  
 In this context, while appreciating the establishment of Fact Check Units in 17 
Regional Offices of PIB, the Committee desires that the Ministry should open more such 
FCUs to remain vigilant for viral videos/ news which should create public disorder. The 
Committee would also recommend that the term “Fake News” should be broadly 
defined. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 A Fact Check Unit has been set up under Press Information Bureau in 
November, 2019.This Unit takes cognizance of fake news both suo-motu and by way of 
queries sent by citizens on its portal or through e-mail and Whatsapp. The Unit 
responds to the relevant queries with correct information when the same pertains to 
Central Government or forwards them to States/UTs in other cases. The Unit also 
maintains a twitter account @PlBFactcheck and posts cases of fake news, being 
busted, on the same on regular basis. The Fact Check Unit of PIB covers news on 
various media platforms, including electronic media.PIB Fact Check Unit has responded 
to around 30,000 actionable queries. As Such the Fact Check Units located at PIB 
Headquarter in Delhi and its regional offices address the instances of 
misinformation/Fake News across the country. 
 
[Ministry of Information and Broadcasting O.M. No. N-18013/2/2015-BC-II (Vol.II) dated      
21.02.2022] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 19 of Chapter I) 
 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 21) 
 
 The Committee endorse the views of the CEO, Prasar Bharati that the regulatory 
mechanisms should look at embracing latest technologies such as Artificial Intelligence 
to check fake news and to be able to intervene in near real time. Hence, there is a need 
to take suitable steps accordingly and also to factor in the existing expertise in the 
domain of news fact check through non-Government agencies such as ‘AltNews’, 
‘check4spam’, SMHoaxslayer’ etc. Further, while observing that countries like Australia, 
Malaysia and other democracies have Anti-Fake News Laws, the committee would like 
the Ministry to study their laws and develop some legal provisions to counter as big a 
challenge as fake news. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 Government has statutory and institutional mechanisms in place to prevent 
spread of fake news. For Print Media, Press Council of India has framed 'Norms of 
Journalistic Conduct' under the Press Council Act, 1978 which inter alia emphasize the 
principles of accuracy and fairness. 
 

47 
 
           For Television, all TV Channels are required to adhere to the Programme Code 
under the Cable Television Networks (Regulation) Act, 1995, including that programmes 
should not contain anything obscene, defamatory, deliberate, false and suggestive 
innuendos and half-truths. 
 
          For digital news publishers, the Government has notified the Information 
Technology (Intermediary Guidelines and Digital Media Ethics Code) Rules, 2021 under 
the IT Act, 2000 on 25th February, 2021, which inter alia provides for a Code of Ethics 
for adherence by digital news publishers. 
 
 The Government takes action in appropriate cases where violation of the Codes 
is found.   It also issues advisory from time to time to the media to adhere to the laid 
down Codes. 
 
[Ministry of Information and Broadcasting O.M. No. N-18013/2/2015-BC-II (Vol.II) dated      
21.02.2022] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 22 of Chapter I) 
 
 

48 
 
CHAPTER V 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE INTERIM IN NATURE 
 
 
Electronic Media 
 
A. Television Channels 
 
(i) Existing Codes / Acts / mechanism for maintaining Ethical Standards in TV 
Channels 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 8) 
 
 The Committee note that the programmes and advertisements telecast on private 
satellite TV channels are regulated in terms of the Programme and Advertising Codes 
prescribed under the Cable TV Networks (Regulation) Act, 1995 (CTN Act) and Cable 
TV Network Rules, 1994 framed thereunder. The Ministry of I&B have the statutory 
mandate, through the CTN Act and the Rules framed thereunder, to regulate the 
content carried by TV channels. Further, the Government has framed the Uplinking and 
Downlinking Guidelines, 2011 under which permission is granted to private TV channels 
to uplink/ downlink in India. The Guidelines, inter-alia, require that the channels should 
abide by the Programme and Advertising Codes prescribed under the CTN Act, 1995. 
 
 It has been brought to the notice of the Committee by the Secretary, I&B that 
Cable TV Networks (Regulation) Act, 1995 requires changes. Press Council is a 
statutory body and is in existence for the print media but for the television there is no 
such statutory body. While NBSA and NBA have developed an organization, it is not 
formally recognized by the Government. There are many channels which are not 
members of the NBA. By amending the Act, a provision would be made that action on 
any complaint should be by rule instead of being by an executive order. The proposed 
amendments to CTN (Regulation) Act, 1995 were placed in public domain for 
stakeholder’s comments on 15.01.2020 and the Ministry has informed us that it is 
examining the comments received from stakeholders/ general public. There is also 
discussion over having an umbrella Statute for the entire Broadcasting Sector covering 
Print, Electronic and online media, which is under examination. The Committee would 
desire the Ministry to expeditiously look into making necessary amendments in the 
existing Cable Television Networks (Regulation) Act, 1995 which is 25 years old, and 
needs changes in accordance with the changing regulatory environment, while ensuring 
that the gray areas in the interpretation and implementation of the said Act are duly 
addressed and also to ensure that the proposed amendments are consumer-friendly. 
This will address the issues of stakeholders by bringing more transparency in the 
system. The Committee would like to be kept informed of the progress made in this 
regard. 
Reply of the Government 
 The proposal relating to amendment of Cable Television Networks 
(Regulation) Act, 1995 is under consideration. 
 
[Ministry of Information and Broadcasting O.M. No. N-18013/2/2015-BC-II (Vol.II) dated      
21.02.2022] 

49 
 
 (Recommendation Sl. No. 13) 
 
 CEO, Prasar Bharati submitted that AIR and Doordarshan have pre-dated Prasar 
Bharati as a corporate by several decades, and already had the existing programming 
code and commercial code which they have been strictly following for their news and 
general programming. Television, in addition, follows the guidelines given in the Cable 
Television Network Rules, 1994 because of its visual element. Besides, the AIR Code is 
much older and much broader and that has been the general guiding principle across 
the organization. Prasar Bharati, in general, does not have too many instances of ethics 
complaints as most of the news operations are managed by Government officers who 
are held accountable to disciplinary rules. Historically, these complaints were disposed 
of at the level of Directorate-Generals of Doordarshan and AIR and Prasar Bharati 
Secretariat or the Board rarely was involved in the editorial matters. 
 
 As per the submission of CEO, Prasar Bharati, the existing Codes are found to 
be adequate, however, a need is felt for some of the aspects to be aligned with the Act 
as these Codes were written prior to Prasar Bharati’s existence. The required process is 
stated to be undertaken. The Committee would like Prasar Bharati to urgently initiate 
the required process of alignment of codes with the Act wherever required and apprise 
them of the steps taken in this direction and the progress thereon. This could be part of 
the overall review and restructuring exercise recommended by the Committee. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 Prasar Bharati has started the process of aligning the Code with the Act. 
Accordingly a draft of Programme Code for Prasar Bharati has been circulated for 
internal consultation soliciting comments from various field units who would be 
responsible for implementing these codes on various AIR and DD channels. 
  
[Ministry of Information and Broadcasting O.M. No. N-18013/2/2015-BC-II (Vol.II) dated      
21.02.2022] 
 
Television Rating Points (TRPs):- 
 
 (Recommendation Sl. No. 16) 
 
 The Committee note that television audience measurement mechanism in the 
form of Television Rating Points (TRPS) has been in existence in India since 1993 when 
Doordarshan audience ratings collected by Doordarshan audience research units were 
used. It was followed by other rating agencies such as Indian National Audience 
Training Measurement (INTAM), Television Audience Measurement Media Research 
Pvt. Ltd. (TAM), Audience Measurement and Analytics Ltd. (AMAP) etc. Gradually TAM 
remained the only TRP agency in the country prior to issuance of Guidelines for TRP 
agencies by Ministry of I & B on 16.01.2014. On 28.07.2015, BARC was granted 
registration as a Television Rating Agency by the Ministry for a period of 10 years under 
the Policy Guidelines. BARC is a self-regulated, not-for-profit body created by the IBF, 
the Indian Society for Advertisers (ISA) and the Advertising Agencies Association of 
India (AAAI). BARC operates through Technical Committee, Oversight Committee, 
Disciplinary Council and Board of Directors. As per the submission of CEO, Prasar 

50 
 
Bharati, when the audience base is large, the measurement system is fairly accurate 
and reflects what is being watched. BARC has over the years increased the sample and 
presently BARC is rating on 44,000 households. Census-wide measurement is done 
typically in the digital world. Google or Facebook measures it across the board, and 
there everyone is measured and not just a sample. However, on television, there are 
challenges because for such ratings return-path data and set-top box are needed. Every 
set-top box has to measure usage but there will be privacy issues. This makes it a 
complicated matter but certain pilot projects are being conducted globally. The 
Committee’s attention was also drawn to the fact that in India some of the operators like 
Tata Sky and Airtel do measurement at the level of their set-top boxes though they do 
not share the data with BARC. Further, around 80 percent of the households use Set-
Top Boxes. 
 
The Committee are, however, not satisfied with the present system of measuring 
of TRP and would like to draw the attention of the Ministry to the recent reported 
episodes of manipulation of TRPs by some TV channels rigging the device used by 
BARC. This has put a big question mark on the objectivity, accuracy, efficacy, and 
transparency of the current system and clearly indicates how the ratings can be 
manipulated by some channels in connivance with the BARC officials. While taking a 
serious view of this, the Committee desire the Ministry to look into the entire process of 
the TRP system and identify a solution for a more transparent and accountable system 
for measuring TRPs. The Committee also find that the present TRP system is heavily 
biased towards urban areas and there is a need to change the system of measurement 
by giving equal weightage to rural and semi-urban areas through increasing the sample 
size. The Committee also desire that the Ministry should study global practices adopted 
in the TRP system including the possibility of finding a solution to the privacy issues in 
the STBs through appropriate technical measures such as the use of scramblers to 
ensure accuracy, confidentiality and transparency within the TRP system. The 
Government has constituted a Committee to examine BARC. The Committee desire 
that the Report of the BARC inquiry Committee, commissioned by the Government of 
India, must be placed before them for examination. 
 
Reply of the Government 
Ministry of Information and Broadcasting sought the recommendations of 
Telecom Regulatory Authority of India (TRAI) in August 2012 for a comprehensive 
guidelines/ accreditation mechanism for television rating agencies in India to ensure fair 
competition, better standards and quality of services by television rating agencies. 
Based on the recommendations of TRAI, a comprehensive policy guideline for 
Television Rating Agencies in India was issued by the Ministry on 16th January, 2014. In 
view of aforesaid guidelines, Broadcast Audience Research Council (BARC) was 
granted registration as Television Rating Agency on 28th July, 2015, by Ministry of 
Information and Broadcasting for a period of 10 years under the Policy Guidelines. 
BARC is a self-regulated, not-for-profit body created by the Indian Broadcasting 
Foundation (IBF), the Indian Society for Advertisers (ISA) and the Advertising Agencies 
Association of India (AAAI). BARC operates through Technical Committee, Oversight 
Committee, Disciplinary Council and Board of Directors. 
 In October 2020, some news items were published in print and electronic media 
regarding manipulation of television rating points by various TV channels and the FIRs 
registered by police agencies including the Mumbai Police. Further, this Ministry on 

51 
 
09.10.2020 called for a report from BARC. BARC  furnished reports to this Ministry on 
09.10.2020 stating that apart from the Disciplinary Council action to maintain the panel 
sanctity, BARC has actively pursued action against those involved in tampering of 
samples and has filed 11 FIRs through its vendor across Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka, 
Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra  and Assam so far. BARC stated that the 
suspected panel homes mentioned in the FIR are quarantined and are in the process of 
de-installation. BARC stated that they are providing all necessary data, documents, 
information and necessary assistance to the investigation agency. 
 Based on the operation of the existing policy guidelines for Television Rating 
Agencies in India for a few years, a need was felt to have a fresh look on the guidelines 
particularly keeping in view the recent recommendations of TRAI dated 28.04.2020 on 
“Review of Television Audience Measurement and Rating System in India”, 
technological advancements/interventions to address the system and further 
strengthening of the procedures for a credible and transparent rating system. 
Accordingly, a Committee was constituted on 04.11.2020 under the Chairmanship of 
Chief Executive Officer (CEO), Prasar Bharati with members from IIT, C-DOT and IIM, 
to inter alia, review the guidelines on Television Rating Agencies in the country and to 
make recommendations on way forward for robust, transparent and accountable rating 
system in India. The Committee has made recommendations on strengthening 
corporate governance and bolstering technical oversight of the existing rating agency, 
open data ecosystem/ return path data, curbing unhealthy business practices, 
promoting innovation, new business models and competitiveness, etc. The 
recommendations of the Committee also addressed various other issues referred to 
them including the recommendations of the TRAI.  
Further, BARC has apprised this Ministry that it has taken a number of steps to 
improve its Corporate Governance viz. complete insulation of management from the 
rating process, outlier corrections by empirically derived statistical parameters and 
automated procedure with no manual intervention or exceptions. This is a continuous 
process and policy prescriptions as may be required are made by the Government from 
time to time. 
Further, M/s Broadcast Audience Research Council (BARC) has undertaken 
revision in its processes, protocols, oversight mechanism and initiated changes in 
governance structure etc. The reconstitution of the Board and the Technical Committee 
to allow for the induction of independent Members has been initiated by BARC. A 
permanent Oversight Committee has also been formed. The access protocols for data 
have been revamped and tightened. 
The release of the TRP ratings for news channels was withheld by BARC for 8-
12 weeks (effective 15.10.2020) during which its Technical Committee was to review 
and augment the data reporting standards for the genre. Now BARC has indicated that 
in view of the changes undertaken by it, they are reaching out to related constituencies 
to explain the new proposals and are in readiness to actually commence the release as 
per the new protocols. BARC has also apprised that they are reaching out to related 
constituencies to explain the new proposals for 'News and Special interest genres' and 
would need a minimum of 10 weeks to resume weekly news ratings. 
 
This Ministry has asked BARC on 12.1.2022 to release the News ratings 
immediately and also to release the last three months data, for the genre in a monthly 
format, for fair and equitable representation of true trends. As per the revised system, 

52 
 
the reporting of News and Niche Genres shall be on a ‘four week rolling average 
concept'. 
This Ministry vide order dated 12.01.2022 has also constituted a 'Joint Working 
Group' under the Chairmanship of the CEO, Prasar Bharati, for the consideration of 
leveraging the Return Path Data (RPD) capabilities for the use of TRP services, as also 
recommended by TRAI and the TRP Committee Report. The Group shall submit its 
report to this Ministry in four months time. 
 
[Ministry of Information and Broadcasting O.M. No. N-18013/2/2015-BC-II (Vol.II) dated      
21.02.2022] 
 
 
 
 
 New Delhi; PRATAPRAO JADHAV,  
8 February, 2023 
 
 Chairperson, 
19 Magha, 1944 (Saka) Standing Committee on 
Communications and Information Technology. 

53 
 
 
 Confidential 
  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON COMMUNICATIONS AND 
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(2022-23) 
MINUTES OF THE SEVENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
----------- 
 The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 07th February, 2023 from 1500 
hours to 1520 hours in Main Committee Room, Parliament House Annexe, 
New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
 
Shri Prataprao Jadhav- Chairperson 
 
 MEMBERS 
  
Lok Sabha 
 
2.  Smt. Sumalatha Ambareesh 
3.  Shri Karti P. Chidambaram 
4.     Smt. Sunita Duggal 
5.  Smt. Raksha Nikhil Khadse 
6.  Shri P. R. Natarajan 
7.  Shri Santosh Pandey 
8.  Shri Sanjay Seth 
9.      Shri Ganesh Singh 
10.      Dr. T. Sumathy (A) Thamizhachi Thangapandian 
11.  Dr. M.K. Vishnu Prasad 
 
Rajya Sabha 
12.  Dr. Anil Aggarwal 
13.     Shri Kartikeya Sharma  
 
 
SECRETARIAT 

54 
 
 
1. Shri Satpal Gulati  - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Jyothirmayi  - Director 
3. Shri Nishant Mehra  - Deputy Secretary 
 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of 
the Committee convened to consider and adopt five Action Taken Reports 
which included four Draft Action Taken Reports on Demands for Grants 
(2022-23) relating to the Ministries/Departments under their jurisdiction and 
one Draft Action Taken Report on Twenty Seventh Report on the subject 
‘Ethical Standards in Media Coverage’ of the Ministry of Information and 
Broadcasting. 
 
3. The Committee, then, took up the following draft Reports for 
consideration and adoption. 
(i) Draft Action Taken Report on Twenty-Seventh Report on the subject 
‘Ethical Standards in Media  Coverage’ relating to the Ministry of 
Information and Broadcasting.  
(ii)  Draft Action Taken Report on Thirty Second Report on ‘Demands for 
Grants (2022-23)’ relating to the  Ministry of Communications 
(Department of Telecommunications). 
(iii) Draft Action Taken Report on Thirty Third Report on ‘Demands for 
 Grants (2022-23)’ relating to the  Ministry of Communications 
 (Department of Posts). 
(iv) Draft Action Taken Report on Thirty Fourth Report on ‘Demands for 
 Grants (2022-23)’ relating to the  Ministry of Information and 
 Broadcasting. 

55 
 
(v) Draft Action Taken Report on Thirty Fifth Report on ‘Demands for 
 Grants (2022-23)’ relating to the  Ministry of Electronics and 
 Information Technology.  
 
4. After due deliberations, the Committee adopted the Reports without any 
modifications. 
5. The Committee authorized the Chairperson to finalize the draft Action 
Taken Reports and present the same to the House during the current Session 
of Parliament. 
 
The Committee, then, adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

56 
 
Annexure-I 
  
  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON COMMUNICATIONS AND 
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(2022-23) 
MINUTES OF THE SEVENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
----------- 
 The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 07th February, 2023 from 1500 
hours to 1520 hours in Main Committee Room, Parliament House Annexe, 
New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
 
Shri Prataprao Jadhav- Chairperson 
 
 MEMBERS 
  
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Smt. Sumalatha Ambareesh 
3.  Shri Karti P. Chidambaram 
4.     Smt. Sunita Duggal 
5.  Smt. Raksha Nikhil Khadse 
6.  Shri P. R. Natarajan 
7.  Shri Santosh Pandey 
8.  Shri Sanjay Seth 
9.      Shri Ganesh Singh 
10.      Dr. T. Sumathy (A) Thamizhachi Thangapandian 
11.  Dr. M.K. Vishnu Prasad 
 
Rajya Sabha 
12.  Dr. Anil Aggarwal 
13.     Shri Kartikeya Sharma  
 
 
 

57 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1.    Shri Satpal Gulati  - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Jyothirmayi  - Director 
3. Shri Nishant Mehra  - Deputy Secretary 
 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of 
the Committee convened to consider and adopt five Action Taken Reports 
which included four Draft Action Taken Reports on Demands for Grants 
(2022-23) relating to the Ministries/Departments under their jurisdiction and 
one Draft Action Taken Report on Twenty-Seventh Report on the subject 
‘Ethical Standards in Media Coverage’ of the Ministry of Information and 
Broadcasting. 
3. The Committee, then, took up the following draft Reports for 
consideration and adoption. 
(i) Draft Action Taken Report on Twenty-Seventh Report on the subject 
‘Ethical Standards in Media  Coverage’ relating to the Ministry of 
Information and Broadcasting.  
(ii) xxxxx.....xxxxx.....xxxxx* 
(iii) xxxxx.....xxxxx.....xxxxx 
(iv) xxxxx.....xxxxx.....xxxxx 
(v) xxxxx.....xxxxx.....xxxxx 
4. After due deliberations, the Committee adopted the Reports without any 
modifications. 
5. The Committee authorized the Chairperson to finalize the draft Action 
Taken Reports and present the same to the House during the current Session 
of Parliament. 
The Committee, then, adjourned. 
* Matters not related to the Report 

58 
 
Annexure-II 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE OBSERVATIONS/ 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THEIR TWENTY-FIFTH REPORT 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
[Vide Paragraph No. 5 of Introduction] 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government 
 
Rec. Sl. Nos.: 1, 2, 4, 5, 9, 10, 11, 12, 15, 17, 18, 19 and 22 
Total     13 
Percentage 56.52 
 
 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the replies of the Government 
 
        Rec. Sl. No.: 23  
Total 01 
Percentage 4.35 
 
 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and require 
reiteration 
 
        Rec. Sl. Nos.:  3, 6, 7, 14, 20 and 21  
Total     06 
Percentage 26.09 
 
 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the replies of the 
Government are of interim in nature 
 
         Rec. Sl. Nos.: 8, 13, and 16  
Total    03 
Percentage 13.04 
 
 
 