STANDING COMMITTEE ON COMMUNICATIONS AND  
   INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(2023-24) 
 
 
 
SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF INFORMATION AND BROADCASTING 
 
 
 
 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the 
Committee contained in their Forty-seventh Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on 
'Review of functioning of Central Board of Film Certification (CBFC)'] 
 
 
FIFTY-THIRD REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
 
 
 
December, 2023/Agrahayana, 1945(Saka) 
 
 
 
 
53 


FIFTY-THIRD REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
COMMUNICATIONS AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(2023-24) 
 
 
SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
MINISTRY OF INFORMATION AND BROADCASTING 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the 
Committee contained in their Forty-seventh Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on 
'Review of functioning of Central Board of Film Certification (CBFC)'] 
 
 
 Presented to Lok Sabha on    19.12.2023 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on   19.12.2023 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
December, 2023/Agrahayana, 1945(Saka) 
 
 
 
 
 


CONTENTS 
 Page 
No. 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
(ii) 
INTRODUCTION 
 
(iii) 
CHAPTER I Report…………………………………………………………………………………………………. 
 
 
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government………………………………………………………………………………………… 
 
 
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of replies of the 
Government………………………………………………………………………………………… 
 
 
CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and require 
reiteration …………………………………………………………………………………………… 
 
 
CHAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies are of 
interim in nature………………………………………………………………………………….. 
 
  
ANNEXURES 
 
 
I. Minutes of the third sitting of the Committee held on 14th December, 
2023 
   
 
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in their Forty-seventh Report (Seventeenth 
Lok Sabha)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(i) 
 
 

Composition of the Standing  Committee on Communications and  
Information Technology (2023-24) 
 
Shri Prataprao  Jadhav - Chairperson 
 
 
Lok Sabha 
  
2. Smt. Sumalatha Ambareesh 
3. Shri Karti P. Chidambaram 
4. Dr. Nishikant Dubey 
5. Smt. Sunita Duggal 
6. Shri Jayadev Galla 
7. Shri S. Jagathrakshakan 
8. Smt. Raksha Nikhil Khadse 
9. Dr. Sukanta Majumdar 
10. Shri P. R. Natarajan 
11. Shri Santosh Pandey 
12. Dr. Gaddam Ranjith Reddy 
13. Shri Sanjay Seth 
14. Shri Ganesh Singh 
15. Shri Parvesh Sahib Singh 
16. Shri Shatrughan Prasad Sinha 
17. Shri L.S. Tejasvi Surya 
18. Dr. T. Sumathy (A) Thamizhachi Thangapandian 
19. Dr. M. K. Vishnu Prasad 
20. VACANT* 
21. VACANT** 
 
Rajya Sabha 
22. Dr. Anil Agrawal 
23. Dr. Laxmikant Bajpayee 
24. Dr. John Brittas 
25. Shri Syed Nasir Hussain 
26. Shri Ilaiyaraaja 
27. Shri Jaggesh 
28. Shri Praful Patel 
29. Shri Kartikeya Sharma 
30. Shri Jawhar Sircar 
31. Shri Lahar Singh Siroya 
 
Secretariat 
 
1. Shri Satpal Gulati   - Additional Secretary 
2. Smt. A. Jyothirmayi   - Director 
3. Smt. Rinky Singh                       - Executive Officer 
_____________________________________________________________________ 
Committee constituted w.e.f. 13th September, 2023 vide Para No.7371 of Bulletin Part-II dated                  
16th September, 2023. 
* Col. Rajyavardhan Singh Rathore resigned from Lok Sabha w.e.f. 06th December, 2023.  
** Smt. Mahua Moitra ceased to be a Member of the Lok Sabha w.e.f. 08th December, 2023. 
 
(ii) 

INTRODUCTION 
I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Communications and Information 
Technology (2023-24), having been authorised by the Committee, present this               
Fifty-third Report on Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Forty-seventh 
Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on 'Review of functioning of Central Board of Film 
Certification (CBFC)'of the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting. 
2. The Forty-seventh Report was presented to Lok Sabha and also laid on the 
Table of Rajya Sabha on 1st August, 2023.  The Ministry of Information and 
Broadcasting furnished their Action Taken Notes on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Forty-seventh Report on 17th 
November, 2023.  
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their sitting held on 
14th December, 2023. 
4. For facility of reference and convenience, Observations/Recommendations of the 
Committee have been printed in bold in Chapter-I of the Report.  
5. An analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Forty-seventh Report of the 
Committee is given at Annexure-II. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iii)
      New Delhi; PRATAPRAO JADHAV,  
15 December, 2023 
24 Agrahayana, 1945 (Saka) 
 Chairperson, 
       Standing Committee on 
Communications and Information Technology. 

1 
 
CHAPTER I 
REPORT 
 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Communications and Information 
Technology deals with the action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Forty-Seventh 
Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on 'Review of functioning of Central Board of Film 
Certification (CBFC)' relating to the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting. 
 
2. The Forty-Seventh Report was presented to Lok Sabha/laid in Rajya Sabha on                          
1st August, 2023.  It contained 14 Observations/Recommendations. Replies of the 
Government in respect of all the Observations/Recommendations have been received 
from the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting and are categorized as under:- 
 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by 
the Government 
Rec. Sl. Nos.:- 1, 2, 3, 4, 6, 7, 8, 10, 11, 12 and 14 
 
  Total -11 
Chapter-II 
 
 
 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the replies of the Government 
Rec. Sl. No.:- 5 
 
  Total - 1 
Chapter-III 
 
 
 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and 
require reiteration:- NIL 
 
  Total - NIL 
Chapter-IV 
 
 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government are of interim in nature  
Rec. Sl. No.:- 9 and 13 
 
  Total – 2 
Chapter-V 
 

2 
 
 
3. The Committee trust that utmost importance would be given to 
implementation of the Observations/Recommendations accepted by the 
Government. The Committee further desire that Action Taken Statement on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in Chapter-I and final action taken 
replies to the Observations/Recommendations contained in Chapter-V of this 
Report should be furnished to them at an early date. 
 
4. The Committee will now deal with action taken by the Government on some of 
their recommendations.   
 
Human Resource in CBFC 
 (Recommendation Sl. No. 2) 
5. The Committee, in their 47th Report on the subject 'Review of functioning of 
Central Board of Film Certification (CBFC)', had made the following 
observation/recommendation:- 
 
“The Committee note that the Central Board of Film Certification (CBFC) is a 
two tier organization viz. the Board at Mumbai and 9 regional offices at 
Mumbai, Kolkata, Chennai, Bangalore, Thiruvananthapuram, Hyderabad, New 
Delhi, Cuttack and Guwahati.  At each of the nine regional offices of CBFC, 
there is an Advisory Panel established for assisting CBFC for discharging its 
functions efficiently under the Act. CBFC has 12 to 25 members appointed for 
a term of three years or till such time as per the directions given by the Central 
Government. The Committee have been informed that all the appointed 
members are eminent personalities from different spheres like education, art, 
film, social sciences, law, etc., representing a cross section of the society and 
the Board has sufficient representation of women. When asked about the 
adequacy of number of members in CBFC, the Ministry have informed that 
over last few years the Board has been functioning with 12 Board members 
and 963 advisory panel members across different offices. Both Board 
members and panel members have been active participants in the certification 
process. According to the Ministry no changes are proposed in the role, 
function and structure of CBFC. The Committee note that the functioning of 
Board has not witnessed any problem with regard to their numerical strength 
and there has been sufficient representation of women in the Board. 
Nevertheless, the Committee feel that it should be made obligatory to have 
one-third Members as Women in the CBFC Board and Advisory Panel. 
Further, the Committee also note that in light of the growth of film industry and 
almost 3 fold increase in the number of feature films certification, the Ministry 
have conducted a detailed study of human resources of CBFC vis-à-vis 
workload. The Committee, desire to be apprised about the outcome of the said 

3 
 
study alongwith the measures taken for smooth functioning of the 
Organization.  The Committee feel that in addition to the eminent personalities 
in the CBFC Board, having some representation from general public at large 
would provide an inclusive face to the composition of the Board. Furthermore, 
in the light of the concerns expressed by some of the Stakeholders regarding 
functioning of Regional Boards/Officers, the Committee desire to be informed 
about action taken on any such grievances received by CBFC/Ministry during 
last five years alongwith the details of complaints regarding functioning of the 
Members of the Board and Advisory Panel Members and action taken 
thereon”. 
 
6. In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting have 
submitted as under:- 
“The Cinematograph Act, 1952 has been amended through the passing of the 
Cinematograph (Amendment) Act, 2023 during the Monsoon Session, 2023 of 
the Parliament. Ministry of Information and Broadcasting is now in the process 
of comprehensively reviewing and amending the Cinematograph (Certification) 
Rules, 1983 framed under the Cinematograph Act, 1952. The 
recommendation of the Standing Committee to have one-third Members as 
women in the CBFC Board and Advisory Panel is noted.  
  
The CBFC’s manpower vis-à-vis workload study broadly recommends taking 
necessary measures to enhance/augment the human resources for smooth 
working of the organization. In view of the increasing number of films every 
year, it is felt that the pool of Examining Officers available to every Regional 
Office of CBFC needs to be increased. The existing manpower requires to be 
suitably augmented in line with the increasing workload. Therefore, 
vacancies/posts for Examining Officers as per the extant requirements are 
proposed to be created in consultation with Department of Expenditure and 
Department of Personnel and Training. 
  
As regards Committee’s recommendation for having representation from 
general public, it is informed that the Members of regional Advisory Panels are 
drawn from various walks of life, being persons who are qualified to judge the 
effect of films on the public. Generally, these members of the panel come from 
different walks of life like social sciences, education, legal, film making, art, 
etc. and represent a cross-section of population. 
 
Some of the grievances received by the CBFC/Ministry during the last 5 years 
are given below: 
  
(i)         A grievance was received from a Filmmaker against the then Regional 
Officer, CBFC, Thiruvananthapuram in respect of her behaviour towards 
applicants/filmmakers etc. in November 2022. Suitable action was taken to 
repatriate the Regional Officer. 
  
(ii)        An Advisory Panel Member, CBFC, Mumbai casted serious allegations of 
harassment and corruption against regional officer, CBFC, Mumbai and 

4 
 
subordinate staff on social media. Considering his act of defaming and 
unnecessary dragging of senior officer/staff of CBFC on social media as a gross 
violation of conduct norms and highly unbecoming behaviour, a show cause 
notice dated 31.03.2023 was issued to him. 
 
 (iii)       A Show cause notice dated 13.7.2023 for violation of conduct norms and 
failure to maintain confidentiality while acting as Advisory panel member was 
issued to another advisory panel member with respect to. her posts on social 
media about a certain film and the examining committee”. 
   7. The Committee, in their Original Report, had recommended to include one-
third Members as women in the CBFC Board and Advisory Panel. Responding to 
this, the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting have stated that they are in the 
process of comprehensively reviewing and amending the Cinematograph 
(Certification) Rules, 1983 framed under the Cinematograph Act, 1952 and they 
have taken note of the recommendation of the Committee. In this regard, the 
Committee desire to know about the roadmap/plan of action and tentative 
timeframe for completing the review and amending the Cinematograph 
(Certification) Rules, 1983. 
 
 
 Further, with respect to adequacy of number of members in CBFC, the 
Committee note that the human resources of CBFC vis-à-vis workload study has 
broadly recommended taking necessary measures to enhance/augment the 
human resources for smooth working of the organization. In view of the 
increasing number of films every year, the Ministry have felt that the pool of 
Examining Officers available to every Regional Office of CBFC needs to be 
increased and the existing manpower requires to be suitably augmented in line 
with the increasing workload. The Committee desired to be apprised about the 
number of vacancies/posts of Examining Officers that are proposed to be created 
alongwith the initiatives taken in this direction. The Ministry may also apprise the 
Committee about the time frame fixed for completing the entire task alongwith the 
expected hindrances, if any. 
 
 
 
 

5 
 
 
Time limits for the certification process   
 (Recommendation Sl. No. 4) 
 
8. The Committee, in their Original Report, had made the following 
observation/recommendation:- 
"The Committee note that the Cinematograph (Certification) Rules, 1983 
prescribes a time limit of 68 days for the film certification process i.e. from 
submission of complete application to issuing of certificate. This time limit 
includes Scrutiny of Application, formation of Examination Committee (EC), 
forwarding the EC report to Chairman, Communication of the order to the 
applicant, Surrender of cuts by the producer, Examination of cuts and for Issue 
of Certificate. The Committee are given to understand that all the films are 
certified within 68 days and CBFC do not have a backlog of more than a 
month’s time. However, raising concern over delay in film certification, 
President of ‘Indian Motion Picture Producers' Association (IMPPA)’ informed 
the Committee that there is an inordinate delay in previewing the film and even 
with the advent of online certification the producers were made to wait for 
weeks to get the SMS regarding the preview and no information is given to the 
producer over phone or in writing. Referring to a Report of Comptroller and 
Auditor General of India (C&AG) he submitted that CAG had observed that the 
time taken by CBFC to issue certificates varied from 3 to 491 days. The 
Committee express concern that despite repeated requests there has been no 
change in the timelines of 68 days. When asked for clarification, the 
representative of CBFC informed the Committee that almost all the films are 
certified within 20 to 25 days and generally it is done within 15 days. It is only 
when films go through the Committees, Sub-Committees, and Revising 
Committees, the delays occur. He also informed that at times it all depended 
on the workload, but maximum time limit was of 68 days. Besides, with the 
implementation of e-pramaan, the notice is sent online on the day the film is 
screened and the Report has to be submitted within that evening. The show 
cause notice, if any, is given the next day and screening of film is done within 
one week of filing of application.  On another suggestion received by the 
Committee, to reduce the time for issuing certificate from 64 days to 3-4 days, 
the Ministry clarified that 68 days is the maximum time that has been 
mentioned in the Cinematograph (Certification) Rules, 1983, however, CBFC 
ensured that certification of most of the films is completed within 10-15 days. 
Regarding submission of the President, IMPPA that in case of big budget 
films, certification is done within short period whereas for medium and small 
budget films (which form 90% of the films) it takes almost 491 days or little 
less, the Committee have been  informed that there is no preferential 
treatment given to big budget films and very occasionally, films have taken 
longer time of a few months because the filmmakers/applicants have not 
complied by producing requisite documents (NOCs) or submitted the 
necessary cuts in time.  On the differential treatment in issuing certificate, the 
CEO, CBFC, informed the Committee that it depends on the kind of 
compliance. Regarding the inordinate delays in certification leading to huge 

6 
 
financial burden on producers, Member CBFC clarified that there is no delay 
and the process is really expedited.   
 
The Committee note with appreciation that by and large the time limit for 
certification process of 68 days is adhered to by CBFC. Nonetheless, in the 
light of the concerns raised by the stakeholders, the Committee recommend 
the Ministry/CBFC to adhere to time limit for certification process in letter and 
spirit. The Committee call upon the Ministry/CBFC to reduce the time period 
by streamlining the entire certification process and ensuring transparency in 
the working of CBFC. Further, synchronization of all the stages of certification 
with SMS facility will enable filmmakers to be updated about each stage 
concurrently. The Committee maybe kept apprised about the action taken. 
 
 
9. The Ministry of Information and Broadcasting, in their Action Taken Reply, have 
submitted as under:- 
 
“At present, a film is to be processed and decided by CBFC within a period of 
68 days from the date of complete application. But due to digitization of the 
workflow, this period has been reduced in real time. Table indicating average 
time taken for certification of feature and short films during the last 2 years is 
given below: 
  
Sr. 
No. 
Regional Office 2021-22 2022-23 2023 (Up to Sept.23) 
Feature Short Feature Short Feature Short 
1 Mumbai 29 4 25 5 29 5 
2 Kolkata 33 20 38 15 45 17 
3 Chennai 25 5 21 4 17 4 
4 Bangalore 43 15 31 12 29 13 
5 Thiruvanathpuram 21 8 17 6 14 5 
6 Hyderabad 28 3 34 7 38 7 
7 New Delhi 34 9 25 9 15 6 
8 Cuttack 22 7 33 15 37 9 
9 Guwahati 7 5 6 5 8 3 
  Average time 
taken per film 
29 5 26 6 28 6 
  
The Certification Rules are being reviewed and shall be adequately modified 
to be made more contemporary in view of the online processing of 
applications for certification and the reduced time of certification. 
  
As regards the recommendation of the Committee for synchronization of all 
the stages of certification with SMS facility, it is informed that CBFC has 
recently launched a newly developed Mobile App which aims at simplification 
of certification process by providing more valuable, user-centric, and inclusive 
features to filmmakers, applicants, and other users in general. The Mobile App 
provides features such as real-time progress tracking of application status and 

7 
 
intimation of tentative screening dates, a facility to respond to intimation and 
show cause notice, and uploading of required documents (including video of 
less than 10 minutes duration), thereby encouraging complete automation 
process and minimal human intervention”. 
  
10. The Committee, in their original Report, had recommended the Ministry for 
streamlining and reducing the time period of certification process and thereby 
ensuring transparency in the working of CBFC. Responding to this, the Ministry 
have stated that the Certification Rules are being reviewed and shall be 
adequately modified to make it more contemporary in view of the online 
processing of applications for certification and the reduced time of certification. 
The Committee desire to be apprised of the details of the review being done viz. 
the process undertaken to review the Certification Rules, aspects of the 
Certification Rules that are being reviewed, tentative timeline for completing the 
review and modifying the Certification Rules for streamlining and reducing the 
time period of certification process. 
 
Certification vis-à-vis Censorship 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 6) 
 
11. The Committee, in their 47 th Report, had made the following 
observation/recommendation:- 
“The Committee note that during examination of the subject, the discussion 
mainly revolved around the contention whether there should be 
cut/modification while certifying films or should there be a purely certification 
model without any cuts/modification or to have no regulation at all. The 
Committee note that most of the stakeholders from film industry voiced against 
any form of regulation and desired for having minimal regulation i.e. only 
Certification. Justification for having only certification model was that 
certification provided choice to the viewer and content is not being pushed and 
act of watching film is voluntary.  Examining the role of CBFC in this regard, 
the Committee learnt that CBFC has been working mostly on certification and 
not on censorship. CBFC informed that many a times to get a certificate under 
a certain category the filmmakers themselves offer to go for cuts/modification 
because sometimes the film makers are unaware that a particular scene is 
violating a Section under the Act/Rule. However, the Committee note with 
concern that over the years the number of films cleared without cuts have 
been sharply reducing and the number of controversies over film certification 
has been on the rise. In this regard, one of the Members of CBFC submitted 
before the Committee that ‘Regulation’ is a scary term for media or film 
industry actors or content makers, however, with absolute no oversight 
mechanism in a country like India, the main concern would always remain for 

8 
 
children being exposed to unwanted contents. Further, in the light of 
submission of one of the stakeholders that the creative freedom of filmmakers 
and rights of speech and expression should be protected, the Committee feel 
that with right to freedom of speech and expression there exists reasonable 
restrictions on the exercise of the rights conferred by Article 19(1)(a) of the 
Constitution and Article 19 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights 
(UDHR) and International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, 1966 
(ICCPR), that provides for the protection and promotion of the right to speech 
and expression, carries special duties and responsibilities and have 
reasonable restrictions for protection of the rights and reputations of others/ 
national security/ public order/ public health and morals.   
 
Furthermore, during deliberations on the issue of certification, the Member, 
CBFC submitted before the Committee that there are cultural nuances to 
every country. For example in France, gender nudity is not a problem while 
gangster films are and likewise, in other countries other factors can be an 
issue and thus a country cannot be devoid of the tradition that people belong 
to. The Committee, therefore, feel that in a country like India which has diverse 
culture, there is a need to consider the sensibility of the people of the country 
while making and showing films in our country and therefore there is a need 
for deliberation and certification. It is important to recollect the words of 
Supreme Court  in K.A. Abbas v. Union of India case wherein it took a stand 
that treatment of motion pictures must be different from other forms of art and 
expression because motion picture has the ability to stir up emotions more 
deeply than any other product of art. Thus, the Committee are of the opinion 
that open accessibility to violent and pornographic material, especially to kids, 
would lead to desensitization and consequent collateral damage cannot be 
offset by gains to the exchequer. Nevertheless, the Committee also feel that it 
will be grossly wrong to be heavy handed and to have over regulation. The 
Committee, feel that a great responsibility lies with the Ministry/CBFC/Film 
industry as there is a need for striking a balance between freedom of 
speech/creativity/artistic expression and at the same time being sensitive 
about the cultural diversity of the country and the impact of content of the film. 
For this, a preemptive mindset is needed to avoid fire-fighting after the 
damage is already done.  The Committee, therefore, desire and hope the 
Ministry/CBFC along with the Film fraternity will make all endeavours to 
achieve this balance as it is imperative duty of the film makers to be 
considerate about the impact of the content of films on the public at large and 
on children in particular. Besides, in light of paradigm shift in how content is 
created and consumed today, the Committee urge the Ministry to holistically 
examine the type of certification model required for the Country and apprise 
the Committee accordingly. The Committee also recommend the 
Ministry/CBFC to increase objectivity in parameters for determining category 
for film certification because with the advent of new technologies, with 
digitization and with pragmatic approach, human intervention and personal 
biasness can be minimized and the certification process can be made 
responsive to social change. The Ministry may apprise the Committee about 
the action taken on all the issues highlighted in this paragraph”. 
 

9 
 
12. The Ministry of Information and Broadcasting, in their Action Taken Reply, have 
submitted as under:- 
“Our Constitution guarantees freedom of speech and expression as a 
fundamental right but subjects it to reasonable restrictions. These restrictions 
are placed in the interest of the ‘sovereignty and integrity of India, security of 
the State, friendly relations with foreign States, public order, decency and 
morality and in relation to contempt of Court, defamation or incitement to any 
offence’. Keeping in view these provisions of the Constitution, the basic 
principles for the guidance of the Board in certifying films for public exhibition 
in India are laid down in the Cinematograph Act 1952. Section 5B(2) of the Act 
authorizes the Central Government to issue such directions as it may think fit, 
setting out the principles which shall guide the CBFC in sanctioning films for 
public exhibition. Accordingly, under Section 5B(2) of the Act, the Central 
Government issued Guidelines for certification of films for Public Exhibition in 
1991.  
 
CBFC always strives to ensure that powers under Section 4 (iii) “powers to 
direct excisions and modifications” and Section 4 (iv) “power to refuse” of 
Cinematograph act are used in an objective and restrained manner, without 
holding any moral compass. It strives to ensure that in a mass consumption 
medium like cinema, artistic sensibility and freedom are balanced with a 
modicum of social sensitivity.  
 
A comprehensive review of the Cinematograph Act, 1952 was undertaken in 
the Ministry to address the various issues concerning the certification process. 
The Cinematograph (Amendment) Act, 2023 (12 of 2023), passed by the 
Parliament and received the assent of the Hon’ble President on 4th August, 
2023 shall comprehensively address the issues relating to film certification. 
First, the Act attempts to address the issue of unauthorized recording and 
exhibition of films and curb the menace of film piracy by transmission of 
unauthorized copies on the internet. Second, the Act attempts to improve the 
procedure for certification of films for public exhibition by the Central Board of 
Film Certification, as well as improve categorizations of the certifications of the 
films. Third, the Act attempts to harmonize the law with extant executive 
orders, Supreme Court judgments, and other relevant legislations. 
 
Age-based categories of certification have been introduced by further sub-
dividing the existing UA category into three age-based categories, viz. seven 
years (UA 7+), thirteen years (UA 13+), and sixteen years (UA 16+), instead of 
twelve years. These age-based markers would be only recommendatory, 
meant for the parents or guardians to consider whether their children should 
view such a film. Also, these Markers have been harmonized with the 
Information Technology (Guidelines for Intermediaries and Digital Media 
Ethics Code) Rules, 2021 to enable a uniform categorization across all 
platforms as also to align the law in India with global best practices. An 
exercise has been undertaken to frame category-specific guidelines for the 
new sub-divided categories of certification under the existing UA category viz., 
seven years (UA 7+), thirteen years (UA 13+), and sixteen years (UA 16+). 

10 
 
The stakeholders shall be consulted before framing the standardized 
guidelines in this regard”. 
 
13. The Committee, in their 47th Report, had urged the Ministry to holistically 
examine the type of certification model required for the Country and increase 
objectivity in parameters for determining category for film certification. The 
Ministry, in their Action Taken Reply, have stated that Age-based categories of 
certification have been harmonized with the Information Technology (Guidelines 
for Intermediaries and Digital Media Ethics Code) Rules, 2021 to enable a uniform 
categorization across all platforms as well as to align the law in India with global 
best practices. They have also stated that an exercise has been undertaken to 
frame category-specific guidelines for the new sub-divided categories of 
certification under the existing UA category viz., seven years (UA 7+), thirteen 
years (UA 13+), and sixteen years (UA 16+) and the stakeholders shall be 
consulted before framing the standardized guidelines. In this regard, the 
Committee may be apprised about the details of the standardized guidelines 
being framed for the new sub-divided categories of certification alongwith the 
exercise being undertaken to frame them and the targeted timeline by which the 
same will be framed. The Committee call upon the Ministry to frame people/viewer 
friendly guidelines for the new sub-divided categories for film certification and 
adhere to the timeline set for framing the said guidelines. 
 
Digitization / Online Certification system – ‘e-Cinepramaan’ 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 9) 
 
14. The Committee, in their Original Report, had made the following 
observation/recommendation:- 
“The Committee note that since 2009 CBFC has been progressively moving 
from manual operations to automation and on 27th March, 2017 online 
certification system of CBFC - ‘e-cinepramaan’ was launched. The Committee 
appreciate that system for paying certification fees has been fully integrated 
with Bharatkosh e-payment gateway and the work of scanning and digitization 
of past certification records has also been undertaken by CBFC. The 
Committee have been informed that the present online certification system has 
been developed and changes are done in the system from time to time based 
on the feedback received from all stakeholders including filmmakers and 
applicants. The Ministry have informed that four years into operation, the 
online system is functioning satisfactorily and applicants are also comfortable 

11 
 
with it. The Committee note that online certification system has not only 
reduced the time taken for film certification substantially but has also enabled 
the filmmakers to check the status of their applications through their logins, 
reply to intimations and make enquiries through dedicated helpdesk of CBFC. 
This has brought in transparency in documentation processes and has brought 
down the average time taken for long film certification to less than 10-15 days 
as compared to earlier 20-30 days. Further, short films certification time has 
reduced to just 1 to 2 days. Duplications in certifications is eliminated and with 
QR code implementation, authenticity of certificates can be checked, thereby 
tackling the problem of forged certificates”.  Some system improvements that 
are being carried out in the second phase based on the suggestions/feedback 
received inter-alia include (i) merging of four different application forms into a 
common simplified form, also removing redundant entries (ii) Making cut 
verification process completely online (iii) Informing applicants on the tentative 
date of screening on their dashboard (iv) Providing alternate and additional 
payment gateway for deposition of fees, etc.  With the launch of ‘e-
cinepramaan’, CBFC have also started online examination of short films (films 
of less than 10 minutes duration), enabling swift certification of these films.   
 
Further, the Committee are given to understand that the next phase of 
digitization is to make ‘e-cinepramaan’ more user-friendly and Computerisation 
Phase-II aims at complete automation with minimal human intervention.  
However, it is a matter of concern to note the grievance raised by film makers 
with respect to some of the manual processes that are still being followed i.e. 
there is a need for submission of 8 hard copies of all documents like 
script/screen play at the time of screening and at the time of scrutiny of all the 
documents producer's personal presence is compulsorily required and there is 
no provision for allowing authorized representative of the producer to complete 
the formalities, etc.  Even after completing the full process of certification the 
producer is required to collect the certificate personally. Besides, even after 
the film is cleared, to collect the certificate producer has to visit CBFC office 
repeatedly because it does not get signed for one or the other reason.  The 
Committee call upon the Ministry that the initiatives being taken for digitization 
of certification process may address all concerns of the stakeholders. Further, 
these initiatives be implemented at the earliest”. 
 
15. The Ministry of Information and Broadcasting, in their Action Taken Reply, have 
submitted as under:- 
“The present online certification system has been developed and changes are 
done in the system from time to time based on the feedback/suggestions 
received from all stakeholders including filmmakers and applicants. The 
Ministry and the CBFC are in the process of making further improvements in 
the online certification process for complete automation and minimal human 
intervention. It has been decided to do away with the physical submission of 
documents (script, synopsis, and any other documents) by the 
applicant/representative, and all such documents are to be uploaded at the 
time of online application only. Further, to initiate steps for no manual 
intervention, it has been decided to scan the copy of the certificate(s) which 

12 
 
shall be shared on the registered email ID of the respective applicant. The 
physical copy of the certificate can be dispatched if requested. Provision shall 
be made on the e-Cinepramaan portal for digitally signing the certificates and 
the same to be downloaded by the applicant himself/herself only at their end”. 
   
16. The Committee, in their original Report, had noted that the phase-II of 
Computerisation in CBFC aimed to complete automation with minimal human 
intervention. The Committee had also noted the grievances of film makers with 
respect to some of the manual processes that are still being followed and had 
recommended that the initiatives being taken for digitization of certification 
process may address all concerns of the stakeholders. The Ministry has 
submitted that they alongwith CBFC are in the process of making further 
improvements in the online certification process for completing automation and it 
has been decided to do away with the physical submission of documents (script, 
synopsis, and any other documents) by the applicant/representative, and all such 
documents are to be uploaded at the time of online application only. In this 
regard, the Committee would like to be kept apprised about the work done in this 
direction alongwith expected time for implementing the Provision on the e-
Cinepramaan portal for digitally signing the certificates.  
 
Grievance Redressal Mechanism 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 12) 
 
17. The Committee, in their original Report, had made the following 
observation/recommendation:- 
“The Committee note that at present the representations from filmmakers as 
well as other complainants are considered by the Committees of CBFC before 
making final recommendations and it is compulsory for all their Committees to 
hear filmmakers before writing their Reports.  However, an aggrieved 
filmmaker can approach Revising Committee constituted under Rule 24 of 
Cinematograph Certification Rules 1983. There is also a provision for Re-
revising Committee, if the issue is not resolved at the stage of revising 
committee. In case of any disagreement, the filmmaker/applicant can appeal in 
the respective High Court for appropriate remedies. The Ministry have 
informed that the Chairperson and all officers of the Board are accessible to 
general public or various organizations/groups that have any complaints about 
the contents of the Film. Such complaints are put before the respective 
Committees who decide and dispose the same based on their merit. The 
Ministry have also informed that they have strived for an environment of 
dialogue and discourse. Thereby, encouraging a collaborative and facilitative 

13 
 
approach to film certification and overall focus has been on detailing and 
streamlining the processes. As a result there has been improved mutual 
understanding and   appreciation by the film fraternity of the work of CBFC. 
However, in due course of examination, the Committee have come across 
numerous problems/constraints encountered by actors, producers, directors, 
film makers, etc., in getting approval/certification by CBFC.   
 
On the concerns related to submission of NOC from the Animal Welfare Board 
as a mandatory requirement for application for certification and inconvenience 
faced by the Producers/Film makers, Committee have been assured that the 
matter will be looked into it. The Ministry have also informed that whenever 
there is a sensitive issue and there is requirement of expert comments, CBFC 
has an expert window where they invite experts on any subject. Regarding 
violations of certification Rules, the Committee note that during the last 5 years 
there has been a few cases of violations against certification of films. Further, 
Out of three vigilance cases that were reported in CBFC, in two cases the 
investigation/proceedings against the officers which started in 2017 are still in 
process and has not been settled even after 5 years. Therefore, in addition to 
the present arrangement of having Chief Executive Officer for administrative 
matters, CBFC should also have one Chief Grievance Redressal Officer at 
each regional level for dealing with other matters.  The Committee urge the 
Ministry to expedite the pending vigilance cases along with the grievances of 
Producers/Directors/other Stakeholders of the Film industry at the earliest and 
apprise the Committee about the same.   Having a single window/platform for 
complaint registration and to fix a timeline for redressing each category of 
grievance alongwith a help line number for Grievance Redressal and for any 
aggrieved party seeking appointment with the Chairperson or Regional Officer 
would ameliorate the situation. The Committee may be apprised about the 
action taken in this direction. 
 
18. The Ministry of Information and Broadcasting, in their Action Taken Reply, have 
submitted as under:- 
“Chairperson and all officers of the Board are accessible to general public or 
various organizations, groups that have any complaints about the contents of 
the Film. Such complaints are put before the respective committees who 
decide and dispose the same based on their merit. Chief Executive Officer 
acts as Chief Grievance Redressal Officer for administrative matters as well as 
Appellate Authority under RTI Act, 2005. 
 
Filmmakers and applicants are involved and their views are considered while 
deciding on their films. The representations from filmmakers as well as other 
complainants are considered by the CBFC committees before making final 
recommendations. Providing hearings to filmmakers has been made 
compulsory to all committees before writing their reports.  
 
As for the Committee’s observations on the pending vigilance cases, it is 
submitted that the delay in settlement of the vigilance cases is due to the 
matters being sub-judice. As regards recommendation of the Committee for 

14 
 
having a single window/platform for complaint registration and to fix a timeline 
for redressing each category of grievance alongwith a help line number for 
Grievance Redressal and for any aggrieved party seeking appointment with 
the Chairperson or Regional Officer, it is felt that there should be a transparent 
grievance receiving and grievance redressal system in every office of CBFC. 
In addition, the Regional Officers of all the nine regions of CBFC may have 
Open House sessions with producer associations in their jurisdiction at least 
twice a year and listen to their issues regarding certification process and 
address them in a healthy manner”. 
 
19. In their original Report, the Committee had urged the Ministry to expedite 
the pending vigilance cases along with the grievances of 
Producers/Directors/other Stakeholders of the Film industry at the earliest.   The 
Committee had also desired for having a single window/platform for complaint 
registration and to fix a timeline for redressing each category of grievance 
alongwith a help line number for Grievance Redressal and for any aggrieved party 
seeking appointment with the Chairperson or Regional Officer to ameliorate the 
situation. In response, the Ministry, in their Action Take Note, have stated that the 
delay in settlement of the vigilance cases is due to the matters being sub-judice. 
With respect to having a single window/platform for complaint registration and to 
fix a timeline for redressing each category of grievance alongwith a help line 
number for Grievance Redressal and for any aggrieved party seeking 
appointment with the Chairperson or Regional Officer, the Ministry have felt that 
there should be a transparent grievance receiving and grievance redressal 
system in every office of CBFC.  They have also stated that in addition, the 
Regional Officers of all the nine regions of CBFC may have Open House sessions 
with producer associations in their jurisdiction at least twice a year and listen to 
their issues regarding certification process and address them in a healthy 
manner. Taking cognisance of the intended course of action by the Ministry, the 
Committee urge the Ministry to take concrete action to implement them at the 
earliest and apprise them about the action taken on all these aspects. 
 
Initiatives for person with special needs 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 13) 
 
20. The Committee, in their original Report, had made the following 
observation/recommendation:- 

15 
 
“The Committee note that on 01.10.2019 the Ministry had issued an advisory 
to major Film Industry bodies with the request to persuade and motivate their 
associated members for making their film more accessible to person with 
special needs by using Audio Description and closed captioning in films. 
However, the Committee note with extreme concern that only one film - 
‘Gandhi’ (Hindi) (by Director: Richard Attenborough, produced by NFDC) was 
certified in accessible format for differently-abled persons after 1st October, 
2019. The Committee are perturbed about the shoddy implementation of 
accessibility standards for persons with disabilities, and feel that such 
initiatives should emanate from the industry suo-moto to cater to the special 
needs of differently-abled persons. The Committee urge the Ministry to ensure 
that their efforts for sensitizing film makers about the accessibility standards 
has tangible outcomes”.  
 
21. The Ministry of Information and Broadcasting, in their Action Taken Reply, have 
submitted as under:- 
“The issue of accessibility standards for cinema viewing for persons with 
disabilities has been under examination in the Ministry of Information and 
Broadcasting since 2019 and a number of steps have been taken/initiated for 
the implementation of the accessibility standards.  
 
In view of the concerns regarding high costs to accessibility features raised by 
the film makers, the Ministry looked at technology as a solution. The 
implementation of accessibility standards in the television sector was also 
reviewed periodically. Various technology solution providers have approached 
the Ministry from time to time to showcase their solutions for making film 
watching more accessible and cost-effective at the same time. Under 
Ministry's directions, CBFC issued a Notice for inviting Expression of Interest 
in May, 2023 regarding advanced technology solutions from various consulting 
agencies for providing accessibility in films for persons with disabilities, 
including hearing and visual impairment and conducted a workshop with the 
film industry stakeholders in July, 2023. Further, a draft concept note has also 
been prepared that outlines various research methods that filmmakers and film 
distributors could adopt to enhance the accessibility in cinema viewing and 
also includes best practices being followed by few countries worldwide in 
enhancing accessibility for cinema viewing for persons with disabilities using 
related technological solutions. 
 
The Ministry is currently in the process of framing draft guidelines for enforcing 
and implementing accessibility standards for cinema viewing for the benefit of 
persons with disabilities. Consultation meetings with various stakeholders are 
going on in earnest to ensure that the concerns of stakeholders are duly 
addressed before mandatory guidelines are issued by the Ministry”. 
 
22.  The Committee, in their original Report, had expressed concern over 
implementation of accessibility standards for persons with disabilities and had 

16 
 
urged the Ministry to ensure that their efforts for sensitizing film makers about 
the accessibility standards has tangible outcomes. The Ministry, in their Action 
Taken Note, have stated that in May, 2023, the Central Board of Film Certification 
has issued a Notice for inviting Expression of Interest regarding advanced 
technology solutions from various consulting agencies for providing accessibility 
in films for persons with disabilities, including hearing and visual impairment and 
conducted a workshop with the film industry stakeholders in July, 2023. Further, 
a draft Concept Note has also been prepared that outlines various research 
methods that filmmakers and film distributors could adopt to enhance the 
accessibility in cinema viewing and also includes best practices being followed 
by few countries worldwide in enhancing accessibility for cinema viewing for 
persons with disabilities using related technological solutions. The Ministry have 
also stated that they are in the process of framing draft guidelines for enforcing 
and implementing accessibility standards for cinema viewing for the benefit of 
persons with disabilities and consultation meetings with various stakeholders are 
going on to ensure that the concerns of stakeholders are duly addressed before 
mandatory guidelines are issued by the Ministry. The Committee may be apprised 
about the Concept Note and also about the above-mentioned guidelines that are 
in the making. The Committee also desire to be apprised about the current status 
of finalisation of both Concept Note and guidelines. The Ministry may inform the 
Committee about the impediments faced in finalising the guidelines, alongwith 
the steps taken to address them, if any.  
 
 
 

17 
 
CHAPTER II 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN 
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 1) 
 
 
INTRODUCTORY 
 
The Committee note that ‘Boards of Film Censors’ were setup in 1920 at four 
places (Bombay, Calcutta, Madras and Rangoon) where films were imported into the 
country. Thereafter, in 1951, the Board was established as the ‘Central Board of Film 
Censorship’. In 1952, a consolidated statute (Act 37 of 1952) called the ‘Cinematograph 
Act of 1952’ was enacted. On 1st June, 1983 through an amendment in the 
Cinematograph Act, the name of the Board was changed to its present version i.e. 
‘Central Board of Film Certification (CBFC)’. The Committee note that a lot of water has 
flowed under the bridge since inception of CBFC and it has witnessed a long and 
dynamic journey from being ‘Board of film censors’ to ‘Central Board of Film 
Certification’. The Board has evolved with change in technology, governance, audience, 
etc., since at that time of inception there was hardly any indigenous industry of 
filmmaking and the principles of censorship were based on the rules of censorship 
drawn up by the British Board of Film Censors.   
  
While noting a few significant changes in last few years like notification of 
‘Information Technology (Intermediary Guidelines and Digital Media Ethics Code) Rules, 
2021’; emergence of myriad content viewing platforms; change in ‘Allocation of 
Business Rules, 1961’ of the M/o I&B so as to include the mandate for Digital/Online 
Media yet with no change in the mandate of CBFC; etc., the functioning of CBFC has 
been taken up for review. During examination of the subject, the Committee heard 
divergent views varying from need for regulation to complete freedom in film making 
and viewing. In the process of examination, the Committee learnt that CBFC under its 
current regime is pragmatic and believes in consultation with the stakeholders/film 
industry. Nonetheless, the Committee are of the opinion that functioning of CBFC 
indeed necessitate certain changes to keep pace with the emerging technologies and 
changes in the film industry today particularly because India is unique not only in being 
diverse in culture but also in terms of growth and development.  Besides, with digital 
growth, entertainment industry has surpassed all the barriers and has reached to the 
remotest part of the country requiring CBFC to function in tandem with the changes and 
fulfill their mandate. Accordingly, in the succeeding paragraphs, the Committee have 
made their observations/recommendations on various issues of Central Board of Film 
Certification.  The Committee hope that these recommendations would help in better 
functioning of CBFC and in achieving the mandate of CBFC and objective of film 
certification which inter-alia include Certification being responsible to social changes, 
Artistic expression and creative freedom not being curbed unduly, Medium of film 
remaining responsible and sensitive to the values and standards of society, and so on.  
  
 

18 
 
Reply of the Government 
Action Taken Notes on the observations/recommendations of the Committee in 
the Report are given in the succeeding paragraphs. 
 
(Ministry of Information and Broadcasting O.M. No. H-11017/73/2023-DO(FC) dated 
17.11.2023) 
 
 (Recommendation Sl. No. 2) 
 
Human Resource in CBFC 
 
 The Committee note that the Central Board of Film Certification (CBFC) is a two 
tier organization viz. the Board at Mumbai and 9 regional offices at Mumbai, Kolkata, 
Chennai, Bangalore, Thiruvananthapuram, Hyderabad, New Delhi, Cuttack and 
Guwahati.  At each of the nine regional offices of CBFC, there is an Advisory Panel 
established for assisting CBFC for discharging its functions efficiently under the Act. 
CBFC has 12 to 25 members appointed for a term of three years or till such time as per 
the directions given by the Central Government. The Committee have been informed 
that all the appointed members are eminent personalities from different spheres like 
education, art, film, social sciences, law, etc., representing a cross section of the society 
and the Board has sufficient representation of women. When asked about the adequacy 
of number of members in CBFC, the Ministry have informed that over last few years the 
Board has been functioning with 12 Board members and 963 advisory panel members 
across different offices. Both Board members and panel members have been active 
participants in the certification process. According to the Ministry no changes are 
proposed in the role, function and structure of CBFC. The Committee note that the 
functioning of Board has not witnessed any problem with regard to their numerical 
strength and there has been sufficient representation of women in the Board. 
Nevertheless, the Committee feel that it should be made obligatory to have one-third 
Members as Women in the CBFC Board and Advisory Panel. Further, the Committee 
also note that in light of the growth of film industry and almost 3 fold increase in the 
number of feature films certification, the Ministry have conducted a detailed study of 
human resources of CBFC vis-à-vis workload. The Committee, desire to be apprised 
about the outcome of the said study alongwith the measures taken for smooth 
functioning of the Organization.  The Committee feel that in addition to the eminent 
personalities in the CBFC Board, having some representation from general public at 
large would provide an inclusive face to the composition of the Board. Furthermore, in 
the light of the concerns expressed by some of the Stakeholders regarding functioning 
of Regional Boards/Officers, the Committee desire to be informed about action taken on 
any such grievances received by CBFC/Ministry during last five years alongwith the 
details of complaints regarding functioning of the Members of the Board and Advisory 
Panel Members and action taken thereon. 
 
 
 
 
 

19 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Cinematograph Act, 1952 has been amended through the passing of the 
Cinematograph (Amendment) Act, 2023 during the Monsoon Session, 2023 of the 
Parliament. Ministry of Information and Broadcasting is now in the process of 
comprehensively reviewing and amending the Cinematograph (Certification) Rules, 
1983 framed under the Cinematograph Act, 1952. The recommendation of the Standing 
Committee to have one-third Members as women in the CBFC Board and Advisory 
Panel is noted.  
  
The CBFC’s manpower vis-à-vis workload study broadly recommends taking 
necessary measures to enhance/augment the human resources for smooth working of 
the organization. In view of the increasing number of films every year, it is felt that the 
pool of Examining Officers available to every Regional Office of CBFC needs to be 
increased. The existing manpower requires to be suitably augmented in line with the 
increasing workload. Therefore, vacancies/posts for Examining Officers as per the 
extant requirements are proposed to be created in consultation with Department of 
Expenditure and Department of Personnel and Training. 
  
As regards Committee’s recommendation for having representation from general 
public, it is informed that the Members of regional Advisory Panels are drawn from 
various walks of life, being persons who are qualified to judge the effect of films on the 
public. Generally, these members of the panel come from different walks of life like 
social sciences, education, legal, film making, art, etc. and represent a cross-section of 
population. 
 
  Some of the grievances received by the CBFC/Ministry during the last 5 years 
are given below: 
  
(i)         A grievance was received from a Filmmaker against the then Regional 
Officer, CBFC, Thiruvananthapuram in respect of her behavior towards 
applicants/filmmakers etc. in November 2022. Suitable action was taken to 
repatriate the Regional Officer. 
  
(ii)        An Advisory Panel Member, CBFC, Mumbai casted serious allegations of 
harassment and corruption against regional officer, CBFC, Mumbai and 
subordinate staff on social media. Considering his act of defaming and 
unnecessary dragging of senior officer/staff of CBFC on social media as a gross 
violation of conduct norms and highly unbecoming behavior, a show cause notice 
dated 31.03.2023 was issued to him. 
 
  

20 
 
(iii)       A Show cause notice dated 13.7.2023 for violation of conduct norms and 
failure to maintain confidentiality while acting as Advisory panel member was 
issued to another advisory panel member with respect to. her posts on social 
media about a certain film and the examining committee. 
  
(Ministry of Information and Broadcasting O.M. No. H-11017/73/2023-DO(FC) dated 
17.11.2023) 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 7 of Chapter I) 
 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 3) 
Infrastructure of CBFC 
 
 
The Committee are informed that the office space of CBFC and its 9 regional 
offices are mainly used for video film screenings, administrative and certification-related 
work and for conducting meetings, smaller conferences and workshops. Screenings of 
theatrical films are also held in Films Division theatre in the same premises. As far as 
Headquarter office of CBFC is concerned, it also examines films for certification in the 
auditorium of Films Division located in the same premises.  During initial phase of 
examination of the subject, the Committee were apprised that the Digital Projection 
System and Digital Theatres could not be procured or installed as planned because of 
shortage of space in the Films Division Complex at CBFC Headquarter in Mumbai. 
However, the Committee note with satisfaction that suitable action for providing office 
space for CBFC have been taken by utilizing the existing auditorium of Films Division in 
the same building complex and three theatres from Films Division have been allotted in 
the Films Division Complex. The Committee have also been informed that after merger 
of media units, the Films Division’s space and other space within the campus will be 
available for CBFC. With these measures, the Committee hope that the space 
constraints and related problems witnessed by CBFC would be resolved and the 
theatres are used effectively. Nevertheless, the Committee recommend the 
Ministry/CBFC to ensure that such constraints are addressed immediately so as to 
avoid its cascading effect on the functioning of CBFC. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
CBFC, Mumbai was allotted three theatres from Films Division for redressing the 
space issue in the Films Division Complex and the theatres are being effectively used 
by CBFC. This has also helped in improved coordination and saving of time in the film 
certification process, besides revenue generation. After the merger of media units, the 
Films Division’s space and other space within the campus, more space has been made 
available for CBFC. The space issue has now been resolved and the existing Audi-I, 
Audi-II and RR-3 theatres are being effectively utilized for film screening. 
(Ministry of Information and Broadcasting O.M. No. H-11017/73/2023-DO(FC) dated 
17.11.2023) 

21 
 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 4) 
 
Time limits for the certification process   
 
The Committee note that the Cinematograph (Certification) Rules, 1983 prescribes 
a time limit of 68 days for the film certification process i.e. from submission of complete 
application to issuing of certificate. This time limit includes Scrutiny of Application, 
formation of Examination Committee (EC), forwarding the EC report to Chairman, 
Communication of the order to the applicant, Surrender of cuts by the producer, 
Examination of cuts and for Issue of Certificate. The Committee are given to understand 
that all the films are certified within 68 days and CBFC do not have a backlog of more 
than a month’s time. However, raising concern over delay in film certification, President 
of ‘Indian Motion Picture Producers' Association (IMPPA)’ informed the Committee that 
there is an inordinate delay in previewing the film and even with the advent of online 
certification the producers were made to wait for weeks to get the SMS regarding the 
preview and no information is given to the producer over phone or in writing. Referring 
to a Report of Comptroller and Auditor General of India (C&AG) he submitted that CAG 
had observed that the time taken by CBFC to issue certificates varied from 3 to 491 
days. The Committee express concern that despite repeated requests there has been 
no change in the timelines of 68 days. When asked for clarification, the representative 
of CBFC informed the Committee that almost all the films are certified within 20 to 25 
days and generally it is done within 15 days. It is only when films go through the 
Committees, Sub-Committees, and Revising Committees, the delays occur. He also 
informed that at times it all depended on the workload, but maximum time limit was of 
68 days. Besides, with the implementation of e-pramaan, the notice is sent online on 
the day the film is screened and the Report has to be submitted within that evening. The 
show cause notice, if any, is given the next day and screening of film is done within one 
week of filing of application.  On another suggestion received by the Committee, to 
reduce the time for issuing certificate from 64 days to 3-4 days, the Ministry clarified that 
68 days is the maximum time that has been mentioned in the Cinematograph 
(Certification) Rules, 1983, however, CBFC ensured that certification of most of the 
films is completed within 10-15 days. Regarding submission of the President, IMPPA 
that in case of big budget films, certification is done within short period whereas for 
medium and small budget films (which form 90% of the films) it takes almost 491 days 
or little less, the Committee have been  informed that there is no preferential treatment 
given to big budget films and very occasionally, films have taken longer time of a few 
months because the filmmakers/applicants have not complied by producing requisite 
documents (NOCs) or submitted the necessary cuts in time.  On the differential 
treatment in issuing certificate, the CEO, CBFC, informed the Committee that it depends 
on the kind of compliance. Regarding the inordinate delays in certification leading to 
huge financial burden on producers, Member CBFC clarified that there is no delay and 
the process is really expedited.   
  
The Committee note with appreciation that by and large the time limit for 
certification process of 68 days is adhered to by CBFC. Nonetheless, in the light of the 
concerns raised by the stakeholders, the Committee recommend the Ministry/CBFC to 
adhere to time limit for certification process in letter and spirit. The Committee call upon 
the Ministry/CBFC to reduce the time period by streamlining the entire certification 
process and ensuring transparency in the working of CBFC. Further, synchronization of 

22 
 
all the stages of certification with SMS facility will enable filmmakers to be updated 
about each stage concurrently. The Committee maybe kept apprised about the action 
taken. 
 
Reply of the Government 
At present, a film is to be processed and decided by CBFC within a period of 68 
days from the date of complete application. But due to digitization of the workflow, this 
period has been reduced in real time. Table indicating average time taken for 
certification of feature and short films during the last 2 years is give below: 
  
Sr. 
No. 
Regional Office 2021-22 2022-23 2023 (Up to 
Sept.23) 
Feature Short Feature Short Feature Short 
1 Mumbai 29 4 25 5 29 5 
2 Kolkata 33 20 38 15 45 17 
3 Chennai 25 5 21 4 17 4 
4 Bangalore 43 15 31 12 29 13 
5 Thiruvanathpuram 21 8 17 6 14 5 
6 Hyderabad 28 3 34 7 38 7 
7 New Delhi 34 9 25 9 15 6 
8 Cuttak 22 7 33 15 37 9 
9 Guwahati 7 5 6 5 8 3 
  Average time 
taken per film 
29 5 26 6 28 6 
  
The Certification Rules are being reviewed and shall be adequately modified to 
be made more contemporary in view of the online processing of applications for 
certification and the reduced time of certification. 
  
As regards the recommendation of the Committee for synchronization of all the 
stages of certification with SMS facility, it is informed that CBFC has recently launched a 
newly developed Mobile App which aims at simplification of certification process by 
providing more valuable, user-centric, and inclusive features to filmmakers, applicants, 
and other users in general. The Mobile App provides features such as real-time 
progress tracking of application status and intimation of tentative screening dates, a 
facility to respond to intimation and show cause notice, and uploading of required 
documents (including video of less than 10 minutes duration), thereby encouraging 
complete automation process and minimal human intervention. 
  
  (Ministry of Information and Broadcasting O.M. No. H-11017/73/2023-DO(FC) dated 
17.11.2023) 
 

23 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 10 of Chapter I) 
 
 
 (Recommendation Sl. No. 6) 
 
Certification vis-à-vis Censorship 
 
 
The Committee note that during examination of the subject, the discussion 
mainly revolved around the contention whether there should be cut/modification while 
certifying films or should there be a purely certification model without any 
cuts/modification or to have no regulation at all. The Committee note that most of the 
stakeholders from film industry voiced against any form of regulation and desired for 
having minimal regulation i.e. only Certification. Justification for having only certification 
model was that certification provided choice to the viewer and content is not being 
pushed and act of watching film is voluntary.  Examining the role of CBFC in this regard, 
the Committee learnt that CBFC has been working mostly on certification and not on 
censorship. CBFC informed that many a times to get a certificate under a certain 
category the filmmakers themselves offer to go for cuts/modification because 
sometimes the film makers are unaware that a particular scene is violating a Section 
under the Act/Rule. However, the Committee note with concern that over the years the 
number of films cleared without cuts have been sharply reducing and the number of 
controversies over film certification has been on the rise. In this regard, one of the 
Members of CBFC submitted before the Committee that ‘Regulation’ is a scary term for 
media or film industry actors or content makers, however, with absolute no oversight 
mechanism in a country like India, the main concern would always remain for children 
being exposed to unwanted contents. Further, in the light of submission of one of the 
stakeholders that the creative freedom of filmmakers and rights of speech and 
expression should be protected, the Committee feel that with right to freedom of speech 
and expression there exists reasonable restrictions on the exercise of the rights 
conferred by Article 19(1)(a) of the Constitution and Article 19 of the Universal 
Declaration of Human Rights (UDHR) and International Covenant on Civil and Political 
Rights, 1966 (ICCPR), that provides for the protection and promotion of the right to 
speech and expression, carries special duties and responsibilities and have reasonable 
restrictions for protection of the rights and reputations of others/ national security/ public 
order/ public health and morals.   
   
Furthermore, during deliberations on the issue of certification, the Member, CBFC 
submitted before the Committee that there are cultural nuances to every country. For 
example in France, gender nudity is not a problem while gangster films are and 
likewise, in other countries other factors can be an issue and thus a country cannot be 
devoid of the tradition that people belong to. The Committee, therefore, feel that in a 
country like India which has diverse culture, there is a need to consider the sensibility of 
the people of the country while making and showing films in our country and therefore 
there is a need for deliberation and certification. It is important to recollect the words of 
Supreme Court  in K.A. Abbas v. Union of India case wherein it took a stand that 
treatment of motion pictures must be different from other forms of art and expression 
because motion picture has the ability to stir up emotions more deeply than any other 

24 
 
product of art. Thus, the Committee are of the opinion that open accessibility to violent 
and pornographic material, especially to kids, would lead to desensitization and 
consequent collateral damage cannot be offset by gains to the exchequer. 
Nevertheless, the Committee also feel that it will be grossly wrong to be heavy handed 
and to have over regulation. The Committee, feel that a great responsibility lies with the 
Ministry/CBFC/Film industry as there is a need for striking a balance between freedom 
of speech/creativity/artistic expression and at the same time being sensitive about the 
cultural diversity of the country and the impact of content of the film. For this, a 
preemptive mindset is needed to avoid fire-fighting after the damage is already done.  
The Committee, therefore, desire and hope the Ministry/CBFC along with the Film 
fraternity will make all endeavours to achieve this balance as it is imperative duty of the 
film makers to be considerate about the impact of the content of films on the public at 
large and on children in particular. Besides, in light of paradigm shift in how content is 
created and consumed today, the Committee urge the Ministry to holistically examine 
the type of certification model required for the Country and apprise the Committee 
accordingly. The Committee also recommend the Ministry/CBFC to increase objectivity 
in parameters for determining category for film certification because with the advent of 
new technologies, with digitization and with pragmatic approach, human intervention 
and personal biasness can be minimized and the certification process can be made 
responsive to social change. The Ministry may apprise the Committee about the action 
taken on all the issues highlighted in this paragraph. 
 
Reply of the Government 
Our Constitution guarantees freedom of speech and expression as a 
fundamental right but subjects it to reasonable restrictions. These restrictions are placed 
in the interest of the “sovereignty and integrity of India, security of the State, friendly 
relations with foreign States, public order, decency and morality and in relation to 
contempt of Court, defamation or incitement to any offence”. Keeping in view these 
provisions of the Constitution, the basic principles for the guidance of the Board in 
certifying films for public exhibition in India are laid down in the Cinematograph Act 
1952. Section 5B(2) of the Act authorizes the Central Government to issue such 
directions as it may think fit, setting out the principles which shall guide the CBFC in 
sanctioning films for public exhibition. Accordingly, under Section 5B(2) of the Act, the 
Central Government issued Guidelines for certification of films for Public Exhibition in 
1991.  
  
CBFC always strives to ensure that powers under Section 4 (iii) “powers to direct 
excisions and modifications” and Section 4 (iv) “power to refuse” of Cinematograph act 
are used in an objective and restrained manner, without holding any moral compass. It 
strives to ensure that in a mass consumption medium like cinema, artistic sensibility and 
freedom are balanced with a modicum of social sensitivity.  
  
A comprehensive review of the Cinematograph Act, 1952 was undertaken in the 
Ministry to address the various issues concerning the certification process. The 
Cinematograph (Amendment) Act, 2023 (12 of 2023), passed by the Parliament and 

25 
 
received the assent of the Hon’ble President on 4th August, 2023 shall comprehensively 
address the issues relating to film certification. First, the Act attempts to address the 
issue of unauthorized recording and exhibition of films and curb the menace of film 
piracy by transmission of unauthorized copies on the internet. Second, the Act attempts 
to improve the procedure for certification of films for public exhibition by the Central 
Board of Film Certification, as well as improve categorizations of the certifications of the 
films. Third, the Act attempts to harmonize the law with extant executive orders, 
Supreme Court judgments, and other relevant legislations. 
  
Age-based categories of certification have been introduced by further sub-
dividing the existing UA category into three age-based categories, viz. seven years (UA 
7+), thirteen years (UA 13+), and sixteen years (UA 16+), instead of twelve years. 
These age-based markers would be only recommendatory, meant for the parents or 
guardians to consider whether their children should view such a film. Also, these 
Markers have been harmonized with the Information Technology (Guidelines for 
Intermediaries and Digital Media Ethics Code) Rules, 2021 to enable a uniform 
categorization across all platforms as also to align the law in India with global best 
practices. An exercise has been undertaken to frame category-specific guidelines for 
the new sub-divided categories of certification under the existing UA category viz., 
seven years (UA 7+), thirteen years (UA 13+), and sixteen years (UA 16+). The 
stakeholders shall be consulted before framing the standardized guidelines in this 
regard 
  
(Ministry of Information and Broadcasting O.M. No. H-11017/73/2023-DO(FC) dated 
17.11.2023) 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 13 of Chapter I) 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 7) 
 
Validity of Certificate 
 
 
The Committee note that as per sub-section 3 of section 5A of ‘The 
Cinematograph Act, 1952’, the certificate issued by the Board is valid for 10 years and 
in 1984 the Central Government had passed an order to remove this restriction on 
validity of certificate. However, the provision in the Act is still in existence. The 
Committee note that the Ministry have proposed an amendment, relating to ‘Validity of 
the Certificate’, in the draft ‘Cinematograph (Amendment) Bill, 2021’.  Justifying the 
proposed amendment, the Ministry have stated that although the restriction on validity 
of certificate for only 10 years was removed through an executive order, the existing 
provision in the Act is to be amended so that the certificate is valid in perpetuity and the 
proposed amendment would continue to allow the films to be exhibited without getting 

26 
 
the certification revalidated from time to time. In this regard, the Committee have been 
informed that Mudgal Committee had also recommended for making the validity of 
certificates perpetual because it is in tandem with ease of doing business policy of the 
Government. The Committee note that almost all stakeholders have welcomed and 
concurred with the amendment proposed regarding validity of certificates in the 
‘Cinematograph (Amendment) Bill, 2021’. The Committee welcome the move of the 
Ministry in initiating this amendment. 
 
Reply of the Government 
The Cinematograph (Amendment) Act, 2023 (12 of 2023), passed by the 
Parliament and received the assent of the Hon’ble President on 4th August, 2023 
comprehensively addresses the issues relating to film certification. The amendments in 
the 2023 Act inter-alia provide for removal of the restriction in the Act on validity of 
certificate for only 10 years for perpetual validity of certificates of CBFC. 
  
  
(Ministry of Information and Broadcasting O.M. No. H-11017/73/2023-DO(FC) dated 
17.11.2023) 
  
(Recommendation Sl. No. 8) 
 
Revisionary power of the Government 
 
While examining the subject, the Committee had noted that another amendment 
proposed in the draft ‘Cinematograph (Amendment) Bill, 2021’ related to sub-section (1) 
of Section 6 which was regarding ‘Revisional powers of the Central Government’. In this 
regard, the Committee had learnt that High Court of Karnataka in its judgment on 2nd 
April, 1990 in Writ Petition No. 4335 of 1979 - K.M. Shankarappa Vs Union of India, had 
struck down some clauses in sub-section(1) of Section 6. As a result the Central 
Government could not exercise revisional powers in respect of films that are already 
certified by the Board, viz. ‘or has been decided by’, ‘or as the case may be decided by 
the Tribunal’, and ‘or to whom a certificate has been granted as the case may be". This 
was also upheld by the Hon’ble Supreme Court vide judgment dated 28/11/2000 in Civil 
Appeal 3106 of 1991.  During the course of examination of the subject the Committee 
came across various views regarding amendment proposed to Section 6(1) of ‘The 
Cinematograph Act, 1952’.  
  
Regarding this proposed amendment in ‘ The Cinematograph (Amendment) Bill, 
2021’, the Chairperson, CBFC stated that the amendment to sub-section(1) of Section 6 
would create an unnecessary layer because even if the intent is to go for the rare 
cases,  yet it will open a Pandora’s Box where everything becomes important. Clarifying 
about the amendment, the Ministry had informed the Committee that the said provision 
in ‘The Cinematograph (Amendment) Bill, 2021’ has been largely misunderstood or not 
understood in the right spirit because the Central Government cannot have the power to 
re-examine a case that has been decided by the Board or the Tribunal because the 
Supreme Court has struck down this power. The Ministry had also stated that the 
Hon’ble Supreme Court vide judgment dated 28/11/2000 in Civil Appeal 3106 in the 

27 
 
K.M. Shankarappa case had also opined that at most, the Government may apply to the 
Tribunal itself for a review, if circumstances so warrant. However, with the abolishment 
of the Film Certification Appellate Tribunal (FCAT) the option to apply to the Tribunal for 
review is no longer available.  Therefore, the amendment proposed in  the draft 
‘Cinematograph (Amendment) Bill, 2021’ was for cases where the Central Government 
might receive a complaint either from the Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA) or from the 
CBFC itself. In such cases, the Government may direct CBFC to re-examine and the 
decision of the CBFC will be final. Endorsing the need for this exception, the CEO, 
CBFC informed the Committee that there are certain cases in which some 
developments come after a film is certified and in that case CBFC does not have any 
provision to review, because Certification by CBFC is the final process after it has gone 
through all the revising Committees. He also informed the Committee that CBFC suo-
motu cannot take up a film for review after certification is done and so in that case the 
revisionary power is needed.  The Committee also learnt that Central Government 
cannot recall or re-certify any film certified by the CBFC but sometimes after a film is 
certified complaints are received against a film that allude to violation of Section 5B(1) 
of the Cinematograph Act, 1952 which has been derived from Article 19(2) of the 
Constitution and which are non-negotiable and in that case the Central Government 
may refer the matter to CBFC for re-examination of the film.  Clarifying the intent on the 
amendment proposed in ‘The Cinematograph (Amendment) Bill, 2021’, the Ministry had 
informed that the Central Government will be referring a case for re-examination only on 
receipt of complaint on account of violation of Principles for guidance in certifying films 
mentioned in section 5B(1) such as sovereignty and integrity of India, the security of the 
State, friendly relations with foreign States, public order, decency or morality, or 
involves defamation or contempt of court or is likely to incite the commission of any 
offence. The Ministry had assured that this would be in the rarest of the rare cases and 
in case the certification of a film is re-examined by the CBFC, the interest of the 
producers of the film will be safeguarded by giving him an opportunity to be heard 
before orders are passed by CBFC.  At the same time, Rules will be framed to clarify 
the procedure and circumstances under which this power can be exercised so that there 
is no arbitrariness in the action taken.   While noting that 'The Cinematograph 
(Amendment) Bill, 2023' has been introduced in Rajya Sabha on 20th  July, 2023  the 
Committee hope that the Ministry have taken into consideration all the concerns raised 
during deliberations on the subject. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 The High Court of Karnataka in KM Shankarappa Vs. Union of India case had 
struck down the revisional powers of the Central Government by stating that the Central 
Government cannot exercise revisional powers in respect of films that are already 
certified by the Board. This has also been upheld by the Hon’ble Supreme Court vide 
judgment dated 28th November 2000 in Civil Appeal 3106 of 1991. In compliance of the 
aforesaid judgement, the revisional powers of Central Government have been entirely 
omitted through the Cinematograph (Amendment) Act, 2023.  
 
(Ministry of Information and Broadcasting O.M. No. H-11017/73/2023-DO(FC) dated 
17.11.2023) 
 

28 
 
 (Recommendation Sl. No. 10) 
 
Act/ Rules/Guidelines related to functioning of CFBC 
 
 
 The Committee note that CBFC discharges its function of certification in 
accordance with the provisions of (i) The Cinematograph Act 1952, (ii) The 
Cinematograph (Certification) Rules, 1983 (iii) The Guidelines issued by the Central 
Government under Section 5B of the Cinematograph Act, in 1991 and (iv) Article 
19(1)(a) and 19(2) of the Constitution of India. The Committee also note that there are 
various other Acts, Rules and Guidelines that CBFC needs to consider while certifying 
films. The Committee have been informed that the guidelines issued by the Central 
Government for film certification in 1991 have been time tested and are relevant even 
today as they provide broader objectives and issue-specific insights for the Committees 
to judge the contents for public exhibition. However, the present Cinematograph Act 
enacted in 1952 needs review/amendment. The Ministry of Information and 
Broadcasting had notified the draft ‘Cinematograph (Amendment) Bill, 2021’ on their 
website seeking public comments. The Committee have been informed that that it was 
decided that before a final view is taken on the comments received, wider stakeholder 
consultations would be held in person to allay the concerns of the film industry and to 
make them active partners in the regulatory ecosystem. Accordingly, two consultation 
meetings were held with major stakeholders on 3th March, 2022 in Chennai and in 
Mumbai on 4th March, 2022 to inter-alia discuss the proposed amendments in the 
Cinematograph Act and improvements in the certification process. The Ministry also 
informed that a review of the Cinematograph Act, 1952 has been done to address the 
various issues   concerning   the   certification   process   in   a   comprehensive   
manner.  Inter-ministerial consultations (IMC) and the pre-legislative consultations were 
also done with the major stakeholders. During the course of examination of the subject 
the Ministry had informed that since the initially proposed amendment has undergone 
substantial changes, it is required to undertake IMC for approaching the Cabinet for its 
approval to convey the new Bill in Parliament. After the IMC & Cabinet approval, the Bill 
will be laid in the Parliament. They also had informed the Committee that the proposed 
Draft, Bill 2021, is a comprehensive amendment. Further, the Committee note that ‘The 
Cinematograph (Amendment) Bill, 2023’ is introduced in the Rajya Sabha on 20th July, 
2023.  
  
In addition, the Committee note that the recommendations of the two Committee, 
viz. Mukul Mudgal Committee and Shyam Benegal Committee, are yet to be 
implemented in toto.  On delayed implementation of the recommendations, the Ministry 
have submitted that upon examination they felt that the recommendations fall under 
three categories wherein (i) some would be included in the Act in terms of additional 
definitions or other amendments, and there could be amendments in the 
Cinematograph Certification Rules of 1983, (ii) some of the recommendations could be 
met by issue of Executive Orders, and (iii) certain recommendations made by the 
Mudgal and Shyam Benegal Committees, are already under implementation.  The 
Committee disapprove the delay by the Ministry in taking concrete action on these two 
Reports. Having delayed it for more than 6 years, the Committee strongly urge the 
Ministry to implement the recommendations depending on the feasibility and ensure to 
avoid such excessive delays in future.  The Ministry may also informed whether the 

29 
 
concerns expressed by the Committee on the Subject were considered in ‘The 
Cinematograph (Amendment) Bill, 2023’ introduced in the House.  
  
Reply of the Government 
The concerns expressed from time to time by the Standing Committee in relation 
to amendment of the Cinematograph Act, 1952 have been duly considered by the 
Ministry. The recommendations made by the two Expert Committees constituted under 
chairmanship of Justice Mukul Mudgal (in 2013) and Shri Shyam Benegal (in 2016) 
were examined in consultation with various stakeholders to comprehensively address 
the issues relating to film certification. Wherein it emerged, that not only the piracy issue 
needed to be tackled more comprehensively, but there was a need of introducing age-
based categories of certification and removal of some redundant provisions. 
  
The Cinematograph (Amendment) Act, 2023 (12 of 2023), passed by the 
Parliament and received the assent of the Hon’ble President on 4th August, 2023 shall 
comprehensively address the issues relating to film certification. First, the Act attempts 
to address the issue of unauthorized recording and exhibition of films and curb the 
menace of film piracy by transmission of unauthorized copies on the internet. Second, 
the Act attempts to improve the procedure for certification of films for public exhibition 
by the Central Board of Film Certification, as well as improve categorizations of the 
certifications of the films. Third, the Act attempts to harmonize the law with extant 
executive orders, Supreme Court judgments, and other relevant legislations. The 
amendments in the 2023 Act provide for: 
  
a) Provisions to Check Unauthorised Recording and Exhibition of Films 
Amounting to Piracy: To check film piracy by way of cam-cording in the theatres; 
and most importantly also prohibit any unauthorized copying and online 
transmission & exhibition of a pirated copy of any film, strict penal provisions 
have been incorporated. 
  
b) Age-Based Certification: Introduction of age-based categories of certification 
by further sub-dividing the existing UA category into three age-based categories, 
viz. seven years (UA 7+), thirteen years (UA 13+), and sixteen years (UA 16+), 
instead of twelve years. These age-based markers would be only 
recommendatory, meant for the parents or guardians to consider whether their 
children should view such a film. 
  
c) Aligning with the Supreme Court Judgements: Omission of Revisional Powers 
of Central Government as per judgment of Supreme Court in the case of K.M. 
Shankarappa vs Union of India (2000). 
  

30 
 
d) Perpetual Validity of Certificates: Removal of the restriction in the Act on 
validity of certificate for only 10 years for perpetual validity of certificates of 
Central Board of Film Certification (CBFC). 
  
e) Change of Category of Film for Television: Recertification of the edited film for 
Television broadcast, as only Unrestricted Public Exhibition category films can be 
shown on television. 
  
f) Reference to Jammu and Kashmir: Omission of references to the erstwhile 
State of Jammu and Kashmir in line with the Jammu and Kashmir Reorganisation 
Act, 2019. 
 
(Ministry of Information and Broadcasting O.M. No. H-11017/73/2023-DO(FC) dated 
17.11.2023) 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 11) 
 
Film Certification Appellate Tribunal (FCAT)  
 
 
 The Committee note that with promulgation of ‘The Tribunals Reforms 
(Rationalization and Conditions of Service) Ordinance, 2021’ on 04.04.2021, the Film 
Certification Appellate Tribunal (FCAT) has been abolished and its functions have been 
transferred to the High Courts. The role of FCAT was to hear appeals made under 
Section 5C of the Cinematograph Act, 1952 by an applicant for a certificate in respect of 
a film in case he was aggrieved by an order of the CBFC. Explaining the reasons for 
abolishing FCAT, the Ministry has said that under the Cinematograph Act, 1952 and 
Cinematograph (Certification) Rules, 1983, CBFC has a robust and efficient mechanism 
to deal with the concerns of the film fraternity and it has a well placed internal 
mechanism for representation and appeals in the form of revising committees 
comprising of eminent persons from different fields outside Government as their 
members. The Ministry also submitted that examining and revising committees of CBFC 
after patient hearing and through a collaborative effort address the grievances of the 
film makers. According to the Ministry, the number of films having to go to an appellate 
body saw a steady decline and during last 2-3 years, only around 0.2% films were taken 
to FCAT. Thus, considering the miniscule ratio of films approaching FCAT, abolition of 
FCAT is not expected to have any significant impact on the film industry. While perusing 
the Statement of Objects and Reasons of ‘The Tribunals Reforms (Rationalization and 
Conditions of Service) Bill, 2021’, the Committee learnt that the tribunals that are 
proposed to be abolished through this Bill/Act are of the kind which handle cases in 
which public at large is not a litigant or those which neither take away any significant 
workload from High Courts which otherwise would have adjudicated such cases nor 
provide speedy disposal. Many cases do not achieve finality at the level of tribunals and 
are litigated further till High Courts and Supreme Court, especially those with significant 
implications. Therefore, these tribunals only add to another additional layer of litigation. 
Having separate tribunal requires administrative action in terms of filling up of posts and 
such other matters, and any delay in such action further delays disposal of cases. The 

31 
 
Ministry also informed that reducing the number of tribunals shall not only be beneficial 
for the public at large, reduce the burden on public exchequer, but also address the 
issue of shortage of supporting staff of tribunals and infrastructure.  In the light of the 
submissions made by the Ministry and keeping in view the larger interest of the public, 
the Committee see merit in the Government’s justification in abolishing FCAT.   
Nonetheless, the Committee take into cognizance the submissions of the stakeholders 
that such experts Appellate Tribunal not only enables stakeholders to have an 
affordable, easily accessible and timely adjudication of grievances but also avoids 
cumbersome process of going to courts which inhibits most of the filmmakers because 
time is the essence in release of films. Thus, the Committee feel such decisions of 
abolishing a body meant for grievance redressal should at least be done after thorough 
discussions with the respective stakeholders, in this case film industry fraternity. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend the Ministry to have extensive/wider consultation so 
as to have negligible grievances and court cases after implementation of such decision.  
The Committee desire to be apprised about all the related developments/cases/appeals 
filed after ‘The Tribunals Reforms Act, 2021’ was passed by the Parliament in August, 
2021 and FCAT was abolished.   
  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
With the promulgation of the Tribunals Reforms (Rationalization and Conditions of 
Service) Ordinance, 2021 on 04.04.2021, the FCAT has been abolished and its 
functions have been transferred to the High Courts. Therefore, the filmmakers can 
exercise their right to appeal by directly approaching the High Court against the 
decisions of CBFC.  
If the filmmaker is aggrieved with the recommendation of Examining Committee, 
he can approach Revising Committee constituted under Rule 24 of Cinematograph 
Certification Rules 1983. There is also provision for re-revising committee if the issue is 
not resolved at the stage of revising committee. Further, in case of any disagreement, 
the filmmaker/applicant can appeal in the respective High Court for appropriate 
remedies. The films approaching Revising committees are discussed by the 
Chairperson and the Chief Executive Officer with the concerned Examining Officers and 
Board Members and appropriate guidance is given to the officers. 
Filmmakers and applicants are involved and their views are considered while 
deciding on their films. The representations from filmmakers as well as other 
complainants are considered by the CBFC committees before making final 
recommendations. Providing hearings to filmmakers has been made compulsory to all 
committees before writing their reports. Further, Chairperson and all officers of the 
Board are accessible to general public or various organizations, groups that have any 
complaints about the contents of the Film. Such complaints are put before the 
respective committees who decide and dispose the same based on their merit. 
  
 (Ministry of Information and Broadcasting O.M. No. H-11017/73/2023-DO(FC) dated 
17.11.2023) 
 
 
 

32 
 
 (Recommendation Sl. No. 12) 
 
Grievance Redressal Mechanism 
 
 
 The Committee note that at present the representations from filmmakers as well 
as other complainants are considered by the Committees of CBFC before making final 
recommendations and it is compulsory for all their Committees to hear filmmakers 
before writing their Reports.  However, an aggrieved filmmaker can approach Revising 
Committee constituted under Rule 24 of Cinematograph Certification Rules 1983. There 
is also a provision for Re-revising Committee, if the issue is not resolved at the stage of 
revising committee. In case of any disagreement, the filmmaker/applicant can appeal in 
the respective High Court for appropriate remedies. The Ministry have informed that the 
Chairperson and all officers of the Board are accessible to general public or various 
organizations/groups that have any complaints about the contents of the Film. Such 
complaints are put before the respective Committees who decide and dispose the same 
based on their merit. The Ministry have also informed that they have strived for an 
environment of dialogue and discourse. Thereby, encouraging a collaborative and 
facilitative approach to film certification and overall focus has been on detailing and 
streamlining the processes. As a result there has been improved mutual understanding 
and   appreciation by the film fraternity of the work of CBFC. However, in due course of 
examination, the Committee have come across numerous problems/constraints 
encountered by actors, producers, directors, film makers, etc., in getting 
approval/certification by CBFC.   
  
On the concerns related to submission of NOC from the Animal Welfare Board as a 
mandatory requirement for application for certification and inconvenience faced by the 
Producers/Film makers, Committee have been assured that the matter will be looked 
into it. The Ministry have also informed that whenever there is a sensitive issue and 
there is requirement of expert comments, CBFC has an expert window where they invite 
experts on any subject. Regarding violations of certification Rules, the Committee note 
that during the last 5 years there has been a few cases of violations against certification 
of films. Further, Out of three vigilance cases that were reported in CBFC, in two cases 
the investigation/proceedings against the officers which started in 2017 are still in 
process and has not been settled even after 5 years. Therefore, in addition to the 
present arrangement of having Chief Executive Officer for administrative matters, CBFC 
should also have one Chief Grievance Redressal Officer at each regional level for 
dealing with other matters.  The Committee urge the Ministry to expedite the pending 
vigilance cases along with the grievances of Producers/Directors/other Stakeholders of 
the Film industry at the earliest and apprise the Committee about the same.   Having a 
single window/platform for complaint registration and to fix a timeline for redressing 
each category of grievance alongwith a help line number for Grievance Redressal and 
for any aggrieved party seeking appointment with the Chairperson or Regional Officer 

33 
 
would ameliorate the situation. The Committee may be apprised about the action taken 
in this direction. 
  
Reply of the Government 
Chairperson and all officers of the Board are accessible to general public or 
various organizations, groups that have any complaints about the contents of the Film. 
Such complaints are put before the respective committees who decide and dispose the 
same based on their merit. Chief Executive Officer acts as Chief Grievance Redressal 
Officer for administrative matters as well as Appellate Authority under RTI Act, 2005. 
  
Filmmakers and applicants are involved and their views are considered while 
deciding on their films. The representations from filmmakers as well as other 
complainants are considered by the CBFC committees before making final 
recommendations. Providing hearings to filmmakers has been made compulsory to all 
committees before writing their reports.  
  
As for the Committee’s observations on the pending vigilance cases, it is 
submitted that the delay in settlement of the vigilance cases is due to the matters being 
sub-judice. As regards recommendation of the Committee for having a single 
window/platform for complaint registration and to fix a timeline for redressing each 
category of grievance alongwith a help line number for Grievance Redressal and for any 
aggrieved party seeking appointment with the Chairperson or Regional Officer, it is felt 
that there should be a transparent grievance receiving and grievance redressal system 
in every office of CBFC. In addition, the Regional Officers of all the nine regions of 
CBFC may have Open House sessions with producer associations in their jurisdiction at 
least twice a year and listen to their issues regarding certification process and address 
them in a healthy manner. 
  
 (Ministry of Information and Broadcasting O.M. No. H-11017/73/2023-DO(FC) dated 
17.11.2023) 
  
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 19 of Chapter I) 
 
 
  
 (Recommendation Sl. No. 14) 
 International practices  
 
 
The Committee note that in India, the digital media sector is a sunrise sector 
which has been evolving at a rapid pace with changes in technology, entertainment 
patterns and other socio-economic factors. The Ministry have informed that the 
provisions adopted in Part III of the ‘Information Technology (Intermediary Guidelines 

34 
 
and Digital Media Ethics Codes) Rules, 2021’ are in consonance with measures 
adopted globally and it would provide an institutional mechanism for the sector while 
protecting artistic freedom and creativity. According to the Ministry, it is expected that 
policy certainty and a level playing field for all stakeholders of the sector would help in 
attracting higher investments, leading to growth in the industry. The Committee note 
that the Ministry are making efforts to collaborate and learn from global best practices 
especially in the field of technology and artificial intelligence. The Ministry have also 
stated that a comparison between regulations adopted by various countries may need 
to account for politico-administrative, socio-cultural, legal, and demographic factors. 
However, since these factors vary from country to country, the Committee feel that the 
nuances of other countries cannot be compared/implemented in totality particularly in 
case of assessment of a film and certification which is essentially a human process 
based on appreciation of content in the light of narrative and theme of the film and 
people to whom it relates to. Neither it can be mechanized, nor a uniform one-size-fits-
all formula be applied to the films while deciding on their classification. Thus, the 
Committee expect that the Ministry to adopt a balanced approach while bringing any 
Act/Guideline/Policy changes by ensuring protection to the artistic freedom and 
creativity taking into consideration the diverse nature of the country. Nevertheless, the 
Committee recommend the Ministry to take comprehensive, concerted efforts on all the 
issues affecting the functioning of CBFC and inform the Committee about the action 
taken. 
  
 
Reply of the Government 
A comprehensive review of the Cinematograph Act, 1952 was undertaken in the 
Ministry to address the various issues concerning the certification process. The 
Cinematograph (Amendment) Act, 2023 (12 of 2023), passed by the Parliament and 
received the assent of the Hon’ble President on 4th August, 2023 shall comprehensively 
address the issues relating to film certification. First, the Act attempts to address the 
issue of unauthorized recording and exhibition of films and curb the menace of film 
piracy by transmission of unauthorized copies on the internet. Second, the Act attempts 
to improve the procedure for certification of films for public exhibition by the Central 
Board of Film Certification, as well as improve categorizations of the certifications of the 
films. Third, the Act attempts to harmonize the law with extant executive orders, 
Supreme Court judgments, and other relevant legislations. The amendments in the 
2023 Act inter-alia provide for: 
  
a) Provisions to Check Unauthorised Recording and Exhibition of Films 
Amounting to Piracy: To check film piracy by way of cam-cording in the theatres; 
and most importantly also prohibit any unauthorized copying and online 
transmission & exhibition of a pirated copy of any film, strict penal provisions 
have been incorporated. The proposed amendments in the Act to check film 
piracy align the law in India with global best practices in jurisdictions such as the 

35 
 
United States of America, Canada, Germany, Italy and Philippines which have 
anti-camcording legislations in place. 
  
b) Age-Based Certification: Introduction of age-based categories of certification 
by further sub-dividing the existing UA category into three age-based categories, 
viz. seven years (UA 7+), thirteen years (UA 13+), and sixteen years (UA 16+), 
instead of twelve years. These age-based markers would be only 
recommendatory, meant for the parents or guardians to consider whether their 
children should view such a film. Also, these Markers have been harmonized with 
the Information Technology (Guidelines for Intermediaries and Digital Media 
Ethics Code) Rules, 2021 to enable a uniform categorization across all platforms 
as also to align the law in India with global best practices. 
  
   
(Ministry of Information and Broadcasting O.M. No. H-11017/73/2023-DO(FC) dated 
17.11.2023) 

36 
 
CHAPTER- III 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO 
PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 
 (Recommendation Sl. No. 5) 
 
Revenue from Certification and fees 
 
The Committee note that the fees charged by CBFC for examination of films 
have been prescribed under Rule 36 of the Cinematograph (Certification) Rules, 1983 
and the present fees are in accordance with notification dated 27.01.2017. 
Predominantly Educational (PE) films that generally includes different kinds of 
documentaries, children’s films, scientific films, films on health and environmental 
awareness, etc. are given a discount. For a two hour long film, the Certification fee 
works out as Rs. 4350/- for PE films and Rs 21,850/- for other (Non-PE) films. The 
Committee also note that during the year 2021-22, CBFC received Rs. 12,21,40,116/- 
as certification charges and from 2017-18 (upto September 2022)they have received 
Rs. 63,74,97,611/-.The Committee are pleased to learn that the existing fee structure of 
CBFC is found to be reasonable and that there is no lacunae.  The Committee also 
learn that in the light of increased procedural costs and honorarium of panel members, 
the Film Certification fees structure is reviewed at regular intervals and there is no 
immediate likelihood of revision of certification fees due to impact of COVID-19 
pandemic on film industry.  Nevertheless, the Committee are concerned over the issue 
highlighted by the President of Indian Motion Picture Producers' Association (IMPPA) 
wherein it has been stated that since 'A' certified films cannot be screened on Satellite, 
the producers are forced to re-apply for grant of 'UA' Certificate/'U' Certificate for the 
same film and in that case the producers are expected to pay the same amount of fees 
again for a new certificate which is expensive. A request has been made to the 
Committee that in case of re-certification of 'A' films into 'UA' it should not be treated as 
new certificate because the already financially suffering producer is made to pay heavy 
CBFC fees. Taking into consideration the above submission, the Committee would like 
the Ministry to apprise about the feasibility of waiving off the certification fees in cases 
when a film is re-submitted for re-certification. The Ministry may look into the grievances 
related to certification fees and other fees charged by CBFC and provide details of the 
action taken on such grievances.  
  
Reply of the Government 
Fees chargeable for examination of films is prescribed under Rule 36 of the 
Cinematograph (Certification) Rules, 1983. The present fees charged by CBFC for 
examination are in accordance with Notification dated 27.01.2017. There is discount 
given for Predominantly Educational (PE) films that generally includes different kinds of 

37 
 
documentaries, children’s films, scientific films, films on health and environmental 
awareness, etc. For a two hour long film, the Certification fee works out as Rs 4350 for 
PE films and Rs 21,850/- for other (Non-PE) films. No lacunae have been noted by 
Ministry in the existing fee structure of CBFC and it is found to be quite rational and 
logical. As per available records, no grievance related to certification fees and other 
fees charged by CBFC for re-certification of films have been received. It is also relevant 
to mention that a major part of film’s revenue comes from its telecast on television and 
therefore waiving off the certification fees, which is quite nominal, may not be 
necessary. 
  
   
(Ministry of Information and Broadcasting O.M. No. H-11017/73/2023-DO(FC) dated 
17.11.2023) 
  
  

38 
 
CHAPTER IV 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND REQUIRE 
REITERATION 
 
 
---NIL---

39 
 
CHAPTER V 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE INTERIM IN NATURE 
 
Digitization / Online Certification system – ‘e-Cinepramaan’ 
  
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 9) 
 
The Committee note that since 2009 CBFC has been progressively moving from 
manual operations to automation and on 27th March, 2017 online certification system of 
CBFC - ‘e-cinepramaan’ was launched. The Committee appreciate that system for 
paying certification fees has been fully integrated with Bharatkosh e-payment gateway 
and the work of scanning and digitization of past certification records has also been 
undertaken by CBFC.  The Committee have been informed that the present online 
certification system has been developed and changes are done in the system from time 
to time based on the feedback received from all stakeholders including filmmakers and 
applicants. The Ministry have informed that four years into operation, the online system 
is functioning satisfactorily and applicants are also comfortable with it. The Committee 
note that online certification system has not only reduced the time taken for film 
certification substantially but has also enabled the filmmakers to check the status of 
their applications through their logins, reply to intimations and make enquiries through 
dedicated helpdesk of CBFC. This has brought in transparency in documentation 
processes and has brought down the average time taken for long film certification to 
less than 10-15 days as compared to earlier 20-30 days. Further, short films certification 
time has reduced to just 1 to 2 days. Duplications in certifications is eliminated and with 
QR code implementation, authenticity of certificates can be checked, thereby tackling 
the problem of forged certificates”.  Some system improvements that are being carried 
out in the second phase based on the suggestions/feedback received inter-alia include 
(i) merging of four different application forms into a common simplified form, also 
removing redundant entries (ii) Making cut verification process completely online (iii) 
Informing applicants on the tentative date of screening on their dashboard (iv) Providing 
alternate and additional payment gateway for deposition of fees, etc.  With the launch of 
‘e-cinepramaan’, CBFC have also started online examination of short films (films of less 
than 10 minutes duration), enabling swift certification of these films.   
  
Further, the Committee are given to understand that the next phase of digitization is to 
make ‘e-cinepramaan’ more user-friendly and Computerisation Phase-II aims at 
complete automation with minimal human intervention.  However, it is a matter of 
concern to note the grievance raised by film makers with respect to some of the manual 
processes that are still being followed i.e. there is a need for submission of 8 hard 
copies of all documents like script/screen play at the time of screening and at the time of 
scrutiny of all the documents producer's personal presence is compulsorily required and 

40 
 
there is no provision for allowing authorized representative of the producer to complete 
the formalities, etc.  Even after completing the full process of certification the producer is 
required to collect the certificate personally. Besides, even after the film is cleared, to 
collect the certificate producer has to visit CBFC office repeatedly because it does not 
get signed for one or the other reason.  The Committee call upon the Ministry that the 
initiatives being taken for digitization of certification process may address all concerns of 
the stakeholders. Further, these initiatives be implemented at the earliest. 
  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The present online certification system has been developed and changes are 
done in the system from time to time based on the feedback/suggestions received from 
all stakeholders including filmmakers and applicants. The Ministry and the CBFC are in 
the process of making further improvements in the online certification process for 
complete automation and minimal human intervention. It has been decided to do away 
with the physical submission of documents (script, synopsis, and any other documents) 
by the applicant/representative, and all such documents are to be uploaded at the time 
of online application only. Further, to initiate steps for no manual intervention, it has 
been decided to scan the copy of the certificate(s) which shall be shared on the 
registered email ID of the respective applicant. The physical copy of the certificate can 
be dispatched if requested. Provision shall be made on the e-Cinepramaan portal for 
digitally signing the certificates and the same to be downloaded by the applicant 
himself/herself only at their end. 
  
  
 (Ministry of Information and Broadcasting O.M. No. H-11017/73/2023-DO(FC) dated 
17.11.2023) 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 16 of Chapter I) 
  
  
Initiatives for person with special needs 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 13) 
 
 The Committee note that on 01.10.2019 the Ministry had issued an advisory to 
major Film Industry bodies with the request to persuade and motivate their associated 
members for making their film more accessible to person with special needs by using 
Audio Description and closed captioning in films. However, the Committee note with 
extreme concern that only one film - ‘Gandhi’ (Hindi) (by Director: Richard 
Attenborough, produced by NFDC) was certified in accessible format for differently-
abled persons after 1st October, 2019. The Committee are perturbed about the shoddy 
implementation of accessibility standards for persons with disabilities, and feel that such 

41 
 
initiatives should emanate from the industry suo-moto to cater to the special needs of 
differently-abled persons. The Committee urge the Ministry to ensure that their efforts 
for sensitizing film makers about the accessibility standards has tangible outcomes.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 
 The issue of accessibility standards for cinema viewing for persons with 
disabilities has been under examination in the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting 
since 2019 and a number of steps have been taken/initiated for the implementation of 
the accessibility standards.  
  
In view of the concerns regarding high costs to accessibility features raised by 
the film makers, the Ministry looked at technology as a solution. The implementation of 
accessibility standards in the television sector was also reviewed periodically. Various 
technology solution providers have approached the Ministry from time to time to 
showcase their solutions for making film watching more accessible and cost-effective at 
the same time. Under Ministry's directions, CBFC issued a Notice for inviting Expression 
of Interest in May, 2023 regarding advanced technology solutions from various 
consulting agencies for providing accessibility in films for persons with disabilities, 
including hearing and visual impairment and conducted a workshop with the film 
industry stakeholders in July, 2023. Further, a draft concept note has also been 
prepared that outlines various research methods that filmmakers and film distributors 
could adopt to enhance the accessibility in cinema viewing and also includes best 
practices being followed by few countries worldwide in enhancing accessibility for 
cinema viewing for persons with disabilities using related technological solutions. 
  
The Ministry is currently in the process of framing draft guidelines for enforcing 
and implementing accessibility standards for cinema viewing for the benefit of persons 
with disabilities. Consultation meetings with various stakeholders are going on in 
earnest to ensure that the concerns of stakeholders are duly addressed before 
mandatory guidelines are issued by the Ministry. 
   
 (Ministry of Information and Broadcasting O.M. No. H-11017/73/2023-DO(FC) dated 
17.11.2023) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 22 of Chapter I) 
 
 
      New Delhi; PRATAPRAO JADHAV,  
15 December, 2023 
24 Agrahayana, 1945 (Saka) 
 Chairperson, 
       Standing Committee on 
Communications and Information Technology. 

42 
 
 Annexure-I 
  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON COMMUNICATIONS AND INFORMATION 
TECHNOLOGY 
(2023-24) 
MINUTES OF THE THIRD SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
----------- 
 The Committee sat on Thursday, the 14 December, 2023 from 1615 hours to          
1745 hours in Committee Room No. ‘3’, Extension to Parliament House Annexe, New 
Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Shri Prataprao Jadhav- Chairperson 
 MEMBERS 
  
Lok Sabha 
 
2.  Shri Karti P. Chidambaram 
3.      Smt. Sunita Duggal 
4.  Dr. Sukanta Majumdar 
5.  Shri Santosh Pandey 
6.  Shri Sanjay Seth 
7.      Shri Ganesh Singh 
8.      Shri Shatrughan Prasad Sinha 
 
Rajya Sabha 
9.  Dr. Anil Aggarwal 
10.  Dr. John Brittas 
11.       Shri Syed Nasir Hussain 
12.  Shri Praful Patel 
13.  Shri Kartikeya Sharma 
14.  Shri Jawahar Sircar 
15.  Shri Lahar Singh Siroya 
SECRETARIAT 

43 
 
1. Shri Satpal Gulati  - Additional Secretary 
2. Smt. Jyothirmayi  - Director 
3. Shri Nishant Mehra   - Deputy Secretary 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the Sitting of the 
Committee convened to consider and adopt two draft Action Taken Reports on Demands 
for Grants (2023-24) relating to the Ministries/Departments under their jurisdiction and to 
have briefing by the representatives of the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting, 
Department of Telecommunications, Telecom Regulatory Authority of India (TRAI) and All 
India Digital Cable Federation (AIDCF)  on the Subject ‘Regulation of Cable Television in 
India’ relating to Ministry of Information and Broadcasting. 
 
3. The Committee, then, took up the following two draft Reports for consideration and 
adoption:- 
(i) Draft Report on Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Forty-fifth 
Report on ‘Demands for Grants (2023-24)’ relating to the Ministry of Electronics 
and Information Technology. 
(ii) Draft Report on Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their              
Forty-seventh Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Review of functioning of 
Central Board of Film Certification (CBFC)’ relating to the Ministry of Information 
and Broadcasting.  
4. The Committee adopted the Reports without modifications. 
 
5. The Committee authorized the Chairperson to finalize the draft Action Taken 
Reports and present the same to the House during the current Session of Parliament. 
 
6. XXXXX…..XXXXX…….. XXXXX…..XXXXX….. XXXXX…..XXXXX 
7. XXXXX…..XXXXX…….. XXXXX…..XXXXX….. XXXXX…..XXXXX 
 
The witnesses then withdrew. 
 
Verbatim Proceedings of the sitting have been kept on record. 
 
The Committee, then, adjourned. 
 
 
xxx…xxx….Matter not related  

44 
 
Annexure-II 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE OBSERVATIONS/ 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THEIR FORTY-SEVENTH REPORT 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
[Vide Paragraph No. 5 of Introduction] 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government 
 
Rec. Sl. Nos.: 1, 2, 3, 4, 6, 7, 8, 10, 11, 12 and 14 
Total     11 
Percentage 78.57 
 
 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the replies of the Government 
 
        Rec. Sl. Nos.: 5  
Total 1 
Percentage 7.14 
 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and require 
reiteration:NIL 
 
          
Total     NIL 
Percentage 0.00 
 
 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the replies of the 
Government are of interim in nature 
 
         Rec. Sl. Nos.: 9 and 13  
Total    02 
Percentage 14.29 
 
 
 