STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(2020-21) 
 
 
SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
MINISTRY OF COMMUNICATIONS 
(DEPARTMENT OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of 
the Committee contained in their First Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on 
„Demands for Grants (2019-20)] 
 
 
 
 
 
THIRTEENTH REPORT 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
 
 
February, 2021/Magha, 1942 (Saka) 
 
 
 
13 
 

Jj 
THIRTEENTH REPORT 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(2020-21) 
 
 
SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
MINISTRY OF COMMUNICATIONS 
(DEPARTMENT OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS) 
 
 
 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
of the Committee contained in their First Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) 
on „Demands for Grants (2019-20)] 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 08.02.2021 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 08.02.2021  
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
 
February, 2021/Magha, 1942 (Saka) 
 
 
 


Jj 
CONTENTS 
 Page 
No. 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
(ii) 
INTRODUCTION 
 
(iii) 
CHAPTER I Report……………………………………………………………………… 
 
1 
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government…………………………………………………………………… 
 
17 
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of replies of the 
Government…………………………………………………………………… 
 
38 
CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the  Committee and require 
reiteration …………………………………………………………………….. 
 
39 
CHAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies are of 
interim in nature……………………………………………………………… 
 
51 
  
ANNEXURES 
 
 
I. Minutes of the Third sitting of the Committee held on 16 October, 2020. 
  
61 
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in their First Report (Seventeenth Lok 
Sabha)  
 
          63   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(i) 
 

Jj 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(2020-21) 
Dr. Shashi Tharoor - Chairperson 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Smt. Locket Chatterjee 
3. Shri Karti P. Chidambaram 
4. Shri Sunny Deol  
5. Dr. Nishikant Dubey  
6. Smt. Raksha Nikhil Khadse  
7. Dr. Sukanta Majumdar  
8. Shri Dhairyasheel Sambhajirao Mane 
9. Ms. Mahua Moitra 
10. Shri P. R. Natarajan 
11. Shri Santosh Pandey 
12. Shri Nisith Pramanik  
13. Col. Rajyavardhan Singh Rathore 
14. Dr. Gaddam Ranjith Reddy  
*15.  Shri Jayadev Galla 
16.   Shri Sanjay Seth  
   17.  Shri Chandan Singh 
   18.  Shri L.S. Tejasvi Surya 
   19.  Dr. T. Sumathy (A) Thamizhachi Thangapandian  
   20.  Shri Bhanu Pratap Singh Verma 
 #21. Smt. Sumalatha Ambareesh 
 
Rajya Sabha 
22. Dr. Anil Agrawal  
23. Dr. Subhash Chandra  
24. Shri Y. S. Chowdary  
25. Shri Shaktisinh Gohil 
26. Shri Suresh Gopi  
27. Shri Md. Nadimul Haque 
28. Shri Syed Nasir Hussain  
29. Shri Syed Zafar Islam 
30. Dr. Narendra Jadhav  
31. Shri Nabam Rebia 
Secretariat 
 
1. Shri Y.M. Kandpal   - Joint Secretary 
2. Dr. Sagarika Dash   - Additional Director 
3. Shri Shangreiso Zimik  - Deputy Secretary 
 
______________________________________________________________________________________ 
*Nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 15.10.2020 vide Bulletin Part-II dated 15.10.2020 
 
#Nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 28.12.2020 vide Bulletin Part-II dated 28.12.2020 
(ii) 

 
INTRODUCTION 
I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Information Technology    
(2020-21), having been authorised by the Committee, present this Thirteenth 
Report on Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their First Report 
(Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on „Demands for Grants  (2019-20)‟ of the Ministry of 
Communications (Department of Telecommunications). 
 
2. The First Report was presented to Lok Sabha and also laid on the Table 
of Rajya Sabha on 10 th December, 20 19.  The Department of 
Telecommunications furnished their Action Taken Notes on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the First Report on 5th May, 2020.  
 
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their sitting 
held on 16 October, 2020. 
 
4. For facility of reference and convenience, 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold in 
Chapter-I of the Report.  
 
5. An analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the First Report of the Committee 
is given at Annexure-II. 
 
 
 
 
 
(iii) 
      New Delhi;   DR. SHASHI THAROOR, 
04 February, 2021  Chairperson, 
15 Magha, 1942 (Saka) Standing Committee on 
Information Technology. 

1 
 
CHAPTER I 
REPORT 
 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Information Technology deals 
with the action taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
of the Committee contained in their First Report ( Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on 
„Demands for Grants (2019 -20)‟ rel ating to the Ministry of Communications 
(Department of Telecommunications). 
 
2. The First Report was presen ted to Lok Sabha/laid in Rajya Sabha on       
10th December, 2019. It contained 15 Observations/Recommendations. 
 
3. Action Taken Notes in respect of all the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Report have been received from the Department of 
Telecommunications and are categorized as under:- 
 
(i)  Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted 
by the Government 
 
 Rec. Sl. Nos.: 1, 2, 3, 6, 8, 11 and 15  
  Total - 7 
  Chapter-II 
(ii)  Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of the replies of the Government 
 
 Rec. Sl. No.: Nil  
  Total - Nil 
  Chapter-III 
(iii)  Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies 
of the Government have not been accepted by the 
Committee and require reiteration 
 
 Rec. Sl. Nos.: 4, 5, 7 and 12  
  Total - 04  
  Chapter-IV 
(iv)  Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the  
replies of the Government are of interim in nature 
 
 Rec. Sl. Nos.: 9, 10, 13 and 14 
 
 
  Total - 04 
  Chapter-V 
   
   

2  
4. The Committee trust that utmost importance would be given to 
implementation of the Observations/Recommendations accepted by the  
Government. The Committee further desire that Action Taken Statement on 
the Observations/Recommendations contained in Chapter-I and final action 
taken replies to the Observations/Recommendations contained in Chapter -
V of this Report should be furnished to them at an early date. 
5. The Committ ee will now deal with action taken by the Government on 
some of their Observations/Recommendations. 
 
BharatNet 
(Recommendation No.4) 
 
6. The Committee, in their original Report, had recommended as under:- 
 
“The Committee note that Bharat Net is being implemented to provide 
broadband connectivity to all Gram Panchayats (approx 2.5 lakh 
GPs) in the country.  Once completed it is proposed to provide non -
discriminatory, affordable broadband services to citizens and 
institutions in rural areas, in partnersh ip with States and the private 
sector.  The Committee note that the initial target for connecting all 
the 2.50 lakh GPs was March, 2019.  However, as against the above 
target, only 1.18 lakh GPs could be connected by March, 2019.  The 
status of utilization  of the infrastructure created so far is equally 
discouraging as out of 1,26,223 GPs which have been made service 
ready, Wi -Fi hot spots have been made functional in only 15,500 
GPs, 5179 GPs integrated to SWAN and FTTH connections provided 
to only 27,856,  etc. The Committee have been informed that the 
network architecture, the connectivity to old BSNL fiber in part of the 
network operation and maintenance through BSNL, etc. are some of 
the reasons which had held back optimal utilization of the network.  
The Committee are given to understand that in order to address 
these issues Operation and Maintenance of the OFC network along 
with first line maintenance and custodianship of the equipment at GP 
level and 2 Wi -Fi Access Points in each GP has been entrusted to 
Community Service Centre -Special Purpose Vehicle (CSC -SPV), an 
agency under Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology 
w.e.f. 1st July, 2019. Under Phase -II, the State implementing agency 
has been given the responsibility of O&M of the network f or 7 years 
under State led Model.  Discussions are also underway with BSNL to 
provide a Service Level Agreement (SLA) for the fiber network.  The 
Department are hopeful that all these are expected to improve the 
uptime of the network which, in turn, will increase network utilization.   
The Committee feel that increasing the utilization of the network 
created is urgently needed, the network should not be a waste of 

3  
national resources. Considering the fact that huge amount of 
Rs.19,516.37 crore has been inves ted, the Committee feel that there 
ought to be some return on the investment made through increased 
utilization of the network infrastructure.  To improve the uptime and 
increase the network utilization, operation and maintenance of the 
OFC network at the GP level should be properly allocated, monitored 
and responsibilities fixed.  The Committee urge the Department to 
make sincere efforts to increase utilization of the network created 
under BharatNet and wish to be apprised of the achievements made 
in this regard.” 
 
7. The Department of Telecommunications, in th e Action Taken N ote, have 
stated as under:- 
 
“In view of the concerns of the Committee regarding poor utilization of 
the network under BharatNet, the Department has decided to award 
the work of utilizati on of the created network under Phase -I for 
provision of Last Mile connectivity through Government of Rajasthan 
and CSC e-Governance Services Ltd. (an SPV under MeitY).  
Steps taken by Government to promote utilization of BharatNet 
are as follows: 
i) As part of BharatNet project, the Last Mile connectivity, through Wi -Fi 
or any other suitable broadband technology to access broadband 
/internet services is being provided at all the 2.5 lakh GPs in the 
country through Viability Gap Funding by USOF, DoT. Work has 
already been awarded to the Govt. of Rajasthan for Wi -Fi provisioning 
in all the 10,000 GPs of Rajasthan and to CSC-SPV for  25,000 GPs in 
Uttar Pradesh, 3,243 GPs in Himachal Pradesh. Besides CSC -SPV 
is providing Wi -Fi services in 5,000 GPs in various sta tes under a 
USOF pilot. 
ii) For the remaining GPs (about 78, 000 GPs) of Phase -I, keeping in 
view the GP -level presence of CSC e -Governance Services Ltd. (an 
SPV under MeitY), it has been assigned the provision of 1 Wi -Fi 
Access Point and 5 FTTH connections to  Government institutions by 
the DCC in its meetings of 13.06.2019 and 20.12.2019. This approval 
has been taken in order to get maximum utilization of the network for 
provision of e-Governance services that will hugely benefit the general 
public. This work is in an advanced stage and is expected to 
substantially increase the utilization of the network in the next 6 -9 
months. 
iii) The BharatNet Tariff has been made highly attractive & affordable to 
reduce the entry barrier for Service Providers.  
iv) Field level surveys have been facilitated for the service providers.  

4  
v) TSPs and ISPs have finalised 354 and 5461 locations respectively, out 
of which provisioning has been done at 341 and 2,155 locations 
respectively. 
vi) Wi-Fi have been installed in 45,769 GPs, out of which services are 
being provided in 20,816 GPs. The No. of users is 12.9 lakh, using 
1,36,319 GB data per month. 
vii) Fibre to the Home ( FTTH) connections on BharatNet have been 
provided to 35,296 GPs and SWAN connections to 5325 GPs. Leasing 
of dark Fiber is of 9579 km and Bandwidth provisioning is 529 Gbps. 
viii)BBNL is replacing the lossy fibre of BSNL with new fibre so that better 
optical power is available at Gram Panchayats as well as dark fibres 
from OLT location in a Block to GPs become available for the service 
providers. 
ix) BharatNet Phase-II provides for end to end fibre laying by BBNL from 
Block to GPs so that dark fibre is available to Service Providers from 
Block to GP for delivery of their services. 
x) Meetings and discussions are being held with the State Governments 
for utilization of the network for SWAN, e -governance and other 
services. Some States, such as Maharashtra, have issued instructions 
to all the District Collectors for getting broadband connections installed, 
say through BSNL, at the GPs  
xi) Conferences are being organized with TSPs/ISPs/Cable TV Operators 
in order to sensitize them about the availability of BBNL bandwidth and 
dark fibre and further to encourage them for providing services in the 
rural areas using BharatNet.  
xii) Other steps: 
 In Phase – II, under State -Led Model; SIAs (State Implementation 
Agencies), at their own cost, are to provide at least one FTTH 
connection in each GP. They are also supposed to submit a business 
model for utilization of the network from which part of the OPEX shall 
be met. 
 All stakeholders – TSPs/ISPs/Content providers/Cable TV 
providers/State Government Agencies, etc. are encouraged to utilize 
the BharatNet network. 
 To encourage utilization of BharatNet, Bandwidth and fi bre lease 
charges have been kept at low rates by BBNL. 
 Apart from the above, the Department has also taken the approval of 
the DCC on 20.12.2019 for a strategy (State -wise) to be implemented 
under the PPP model and hired a consultant, who has carried out 
market consultation, and the preparation of RFP for PPP model is in 
an advanced stage." 
Comments of the Committee 
 
8. Poor utilization of network is o ne of the main concerns of the 
Committee so far as i mplementation of BharatNet  is concerned . T he 

5  
Committee have been consistently recommending for increase in utilization 
of the network created so that it should not be a waste of national 
resources with maximum return on the investment made. The Committee 
express satisfaction that the Department have taken note of the concerns 
expressed by the Committee and decided to award the work of utilization of 
the network created under Phase -I through State Government of Rajasthan 
and CSC e-Governance Services Ltd., an SPV under Ministry of Electronics 
and Information Technology. Work has already been awarded to the Govt. 
of Rajasthan for Wi-Fi provisioning in all the 10,000 GPs in the state and to 
CSC-SPV for  25,000 GPs in Uttar Pradesh, 3,243 GPs in H imachal Pradesh. 
For the remaining GPs (about 78, 000 GPs) of Phase -I, approval has been 
given by Digital Communications Commission to assign CSC-SPV for 
provision of 1 Wi -Fi Access Point and 5 FTTH connections to Government 
institutions. The Committee fur ther note that  the Department have also 
taken various steps, such as making BharatNet tariff highly attractive and 
affordable, holding meetings and discussions with State Governments, 
organizing conference with TSPs/ISPs/Cable TV operators, etc. The 
Committee are , however, disheartened to note that in spite of the above 
initiatives, the status of implementation of the project reveals a gloomy 
picture as services are being provided in only 20,816 GPs, FTTH 
connections have been provided to only 35,296 GPs a nd SWAN 
connections to only 5325 GPs. With regard to leasing of dark fiber, 9579 km 
has been leased out and bandwidth provisioning is 529 G bps. This 
reaffirms Committee‟s apprehension that there  is inadequate utilization of 
BharatNet network which needs to be upgraded at once. As more and more 
GPs are being provided with OFC connectivity, the Committee are of the 
view that more  GPs should be brought under the fold of the network and  
provided with last mile connectivity for broadband service. There is an 
urgent need for extension of broadband services in rural areas which will 
enable various service providers to provide e -health, e -education, e -
governance, e -banking, internet and other services. The Committee 

6  
therefore, reiterate their earlier recommendation  and impress upon the 
Department to make sincere efforts to increase utilization of the network 
created under BharatNet .  The Committee may be apprised of t he 
achievements made in BharatNet including the achievements made by the 
State Govt. of Rajasthan an d CSC -SPV and the status /outcome of 
preparation of RFP for PPP model. 
 
Comprehensive Telecom Development Plan for North East Region (NER) 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 5) 
 
9. The Committee, in their original Report, had recommended as under:- 
 
“The Committee note that a Comprehensive Telecom Development 
Plan (CTDP) for North East Region (NER) is being implemented to 
install 6673 mobile towers at 8621 identified uncovered villages, 321 
mobile towers along National Highways and strengthening of 
transmission network i n the NER.  The Government had approved 
the project on 10 thSeptember, 2014.  During 2018 -19, an amount of 
Rs.400 crore had been allotted at BE, however no amount had been 
allocated at RE and hence the utilization was „Nil‟.  For the year 
2019-20, an amount  of Rs. 500 crore has been allocated at BE for 
Mobile service in uncovered villages of Arunachal Pradesh and 2 
Districts of Assam by BSNL and Rs.500 crore for Mobile service in 
uncovered villages in rest of NER and seamless coverage along 
National Highway (by USOF) including Meghalaya (Rs.100 crore for 
Meghalaya).  However, at RE no amount has been proposed by the 
Department for Mobile service in uncovered villages of Arunachal 
Pradesh and 2 Districts of Assam and Mobile services in Meghalaya. 
In respect of  mobile services in uncovered villages in NER by Airtel, 
an amount of Rs. 600 crore has been proposed at RE out of which 
only Rs.60.03 crore has been utilized so far.  The Committee are 
given to understand that total 2004 towers (1694 towers for 2128 
uncovered villages + 310 towers for National Highways) are to be set 
up by Airtel in Assam except 2 Districts,  Sikkim, Manipur, Mizoram, 
Nagaland, Tripura and Arunachal Pradesh (NH only).  The project is 
targeted to be completed by October, 2019.  However, as on 
22ndOctober, 2019, only 878 towers have been installed and 732 
towers are radiating which substantiates Committee‟s apprehension 
that the project has failed miserably in meeting its target. The 
Committee note with great concern that even though the proj ect had 
been approved by the Government in 2014, no headway has been 
made so far under the Comprehensive Telecom Development Plan 

7  
for the North East Region due to Court case in case of Arunachal 
Pradesh and two Districts of Assam and high tender discovered  cost 
in comparison to DPR in Case of Meghalaya. The only project which 
is being implemented is also behind schedule. It is surprising to note 
that this is happening in spite of the project being monitored closely 
at the highest level and review meetings being convened periodically.  
  
The Committee desire that Committee of Inquiry be set up forthwith 
to establish responsibility for the implementation failure, particularly in 
comparison with the project implemented by Airtel.  
  
From these observations, the Committee are constrained to note that 
the way USOF Schemes are being implemented by Department in 
the NER clearly reflects the general apathy and lack of concern for 
the region waiting for years to get much needed telecom connectivity. 
The Committee lay their emphasis that the Department need to take 
their NER Schemes more seriously and expedite the implementation 
of the Schemes under USOF to improve connectivity in the areas.  
Keeping in view the fact that the region suffers from difficult 
conditions peculiar to the region, the Committee are of the view that 
the Department should explore innovative measures to speed up the 
work, such as providing incentive for timely completion on the one 
hand and imposing penalty in case of failure to meet the target on the 
other. The concrete steps in this direction may be apprised to the 
Committee within three months of presentation of the Report. ” 
 
10. The Department of Telecommunications, in the action taken note, have 
stated as under:- 
“The Steps taken by the Department is given below: 
Comprehensive Telecom Development Plan for NER: 
On 10.9.2014, the Government approved a “Comprehensive 
Telecom Development Plan” to install 6673 mobile towers at 8621 
identified uncovered villages, 321 mobile towers along National 
Highways, and strengthening of transmission network in the NER at 
an esti mated cost of Rs. 5336 crore to be funded from Universal 
Service Obligation Fund (USOF). Earlier 2 tenders for Meghalaya 
were not successful. Therefore, on 23.05.2018, the Cabinet approved 
a proposal for 2G+4G connectivity at an estimated cost of Rs 3911 
crore and enhanced estimated cost of CTDP Project for NER for Rs 
8,120.81 crore .  The project consists of the following schemes and 
their present status is as under: - 
A. Mobile connectivity in Arunachal Pradesh and 2 districts (Karbi 
Anglong and Dima Hasao) o f Assam: Department of 
Telecommunications had earlier signed an Agreement with BSNL 
through Universal Service Obligation Fund for provision of 2G based 
mobile services in 4119 (2805+1314) uncovered villages of 

8  
Arunachal Pradesh and 2 Districts of Assam, un der Comprehensive 
Telecom Development Plan for NER. In the meantime, State 
Governments requested to provide mobile services based on latest 
4G technology. Also, Telecom Watchdog filed a Writ Petition in the 
Hon‟ble Supreme Court to quash the agreement dated 16.01.2018 on 
2G technology, which is sub -judice. Subsequently, the matter was 
reviewed on 06.05.2019 in NITI Aayog, wherein it has been decided 
to prepare DPR for 4G connectivity and submit for the approval of the 
Cabinet. In June 2018, a revised list o f 2968 (2215+753) uncovered 
villages of Arunachal Pradesh and 2 Districts of Assam received was 
finalized. In view of the decision taken in NITI Aayog, DCC has 
approved a proposal for provision of 4G based mobile services for 
revised number of 2968 (2215+7 53) uncovered villages of Arunachal 
Pradesh and 2 Districts of Assam on 19.09.2019. Meanwhile, due to 
expansion of network, uncovered villages in Arunachal Pradesh & 2 
Districts of Assam have reduced to 2374 (1683+691) uncovered 
villages for which estimated  cost is Rs. 2028.80 crore.  
B. Mobile connectivity in uncovered villages of the States of North -
East and along National Highways [Assam (except 2 -Districts), 
Manipur, Mizoram, Nagaland, Tripura, Sikkim,  and Arunachal 
Pradesh (only Highways)]: Telecom Comm ission approved to 
award the project on 08.09.2017 and accordingly, the scheme is 
being implemented through M/s Bharti Airtel Limited & M/s Bharti 
Hexacom on open tender basis. The Agreements were signed on 
08.12.2017 for covering Assam [except  2 Districts viz. Karbi Anglong 
& Dima Hasao], Sikkim, Manipur, Mizoram, Nagaland, Tripura and 
Arunachal Pradesh (National Highways only) for provision of mobile 
services.  Under this project, 2004 mobile towers (1694 towers for 
2128 uncovered villages+310 for Nationa l Highways) are to be 
installed. The project Cost is Rs 1655.66 crore.  
To expedite the implementation of the scheme and to discuss the 
issues involved therein, a meeting was taken by Administrator, USOF 
on 22.10.2019 wherein the officers of the State Governments, LSAs, 
CCA etc. were invited.  It was the unanimous opinion of 
representative of the States present that NE being a difficult territory, 
extension of the proposal may be considered up to June, 2020. 
Accordingly, the extension of time of the Project up to June, 2020 has 
been given, keeping in view the hardship, terrain, floods, delay in 
finalization of survey, difficulties in getting the possession of land, 
apart from many other force majeure conditions prevailing, including 
protests & restrictin g the movement of the man and resources etc.  
As of March 2020, 1405 sites have been acquired and 1218 have 
been installed, out of which 1181 are radiating.  Officers of USOF are 
visiting the NE states and holding meetings with Chief Secretary & 
Principal Secretary concerned of the State to resolve the issues for 
expediting implementation. Meetings are also being held with Sr. 

9  
Executives of the implementing agencies /USP for review & speeding 
up execution. So far, meetings have been held in Agartala, Guwahat i 
and Imphal.  
Since end -March 2020, due to various advisories issued by 
Government and lockdown in view of the outbreak of pandemic 
Covid-19, the implementation of the projects has been adversely 
affected.   
C. Mobile connectivity in Meghalaya and along N ational Highways 
on Technology: On 23.05.2018, a revised proposal to install 2173 
towers of 2G+4G technology for providing mobile services in 2374 
uncovered villages and along National Highways at an estimated cost 
Rs. 3911 crore was approved by the Cabine t. In June, 2018, a 
revised list of 2691 number of uncovered villages of Meghalaya was 
finalized. In view of the decision taken in NITI Aayog, the DCC has 
approved a proposal for provision of 4G connectivity for 2691 
uncovered villages and National Highway s of Meghalaya on 
19.09.2019. Meanwhile, due to expansion of network, uncovered 
villages in Meghalaya have reduced to 1164, for which the estimated 
cost is Rs. 1165.54 crore. A Tender has been floated and 
subsequently, a pre -bid meeting was held on 18.02.2 020. Due to 
outbreak of pandemic Covid -19, the tender submission date has 
been extended.” 
Comments of the Committee 
 
11. The Committee feel that the progress of implementation of USOF 
schemes in North East Region is far from satisfactory and the efforts made 
by the Department leave a lot to be desired. Considering that the 
Comprehensive Telecom Development Plan  (CTDP) for North East Region 
had been approved by the Government on 10 th September, 2014, it is quite 
surprising to note that two major component s of t he Plan, i.e., Mobile 
connectivity in Arunachal Pradesh and 2 districts  (Karbi Anglong and Dima 
Hasao) of Assam for setting up of towers in 2374 uncovered villages and 
Mobile connectivity in Meghalaya for setting up of towers in 1164 
uncovered villages are  yet to be implemented. The Department certainly 
owe an explanation as to why the projects could not take off even after 5 
years of approval given by the Government. It is in the light of such poor 
performance that the Committee had expressed the view that  the way the 
USOF schemes are being implemented by the Department in NER clearly 

10  
reflects the general apathy and lack of concern for the region. The only 
project where some headway has been made is the project being 
implemented by Airtel. Even this project  is also behind schedule.  Under 
this project against the target of setting up 2004 towers, as on March, 2020, 
1405 sites have been acquired and 1218 have been insta lled, out of which 
1181 are radiating. Keeping in view the various difficulties, the extension of 
time of the project up to June, 2020 ha d been given. In view of the Covid 
pandemic, the Committee hope that the Department will put in their best 
effort to complete the project and would appreciate a status update on the 
progress of work done by December, 2020.  For speedy implementation of 
the project in North East, the Committee ha d recommended that the 
Department should explore innovative measures such as providing 
incentives for timely completion and imposing penalty in case of failure to 
meet the target.  The Committee note that no concrete follow up measures 
have been taken by the Department in this regard. The Committee are of 
the view that implementation of such innovative measure s in NER is 
inevitable. The fact that there are still 2374 u ncovered village in Arunachal 
Pradesh and 2 Districts of Assam and 1164 uncovered villages in 
Meghalaya clearly indicates  that telecom connectivity is still neglected in 
the region which calls for urgent and serious measures to address it.  The 
Committee note that the implementation of the projects has further been 
hampered due to outbreak of Covid -19 pandemic. The Committee desire 
that all necessary steps would be taken to mitigate the damage due to the 
above circumstances and efforts be made to fast track  the above two 
projects at the earliest. The Committee may be kept apprised of the status 
of the projects. 
 
 
 
 
 

11  
Setting up of towers in Left Wing Extremism (LWE) affected areas 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 7) 
12. The Committee, in their original Report, had recommended as under:- 
 
“The Committee are of the strong view that robust communication 
network is a must for LWE areas so as to bring about greater 
integration with the mainstream as well as to take various services 
directly to the citizens living in the areas.  To achieve this objective, the 
Department should think in the line of formulating and implementing 
separate USOF scheme in LWE areas in the line of scheme being 
implemented for NER in addition to setting up of towers initiated by 
MHA.  In this regard, the Committee desire that the Department should 
work closely with the elected representatives of the areas to achieve 
better coordination and balanced achievements in the area." 
 
13. The Department of Telecommunications, in the Action Taken Note, have 
stated as under:- 
 
The Department, keeping in view the special focus on Left Wing 
Extremism Affected areas, has formulated and already implemented a 
separate USOF scheme viz. “Provision of Mobile Services in Left Wing 
Extremism Affected Areas (Phase -I)”. The s cheme has already been 
completed by installation of 2343 towers for providing mobile services. 
The concept is based on the lines of NER areas, where separate 
schemes are formulated. Now, the Department has taken up the 
implementation of another scheme name ly “Provision of Mobile 
Services in Left Wing Extremism Affected Areas (Phase -II)”. This 
scheme envisages the provision of mobile services by installation of 
2217 towers, and a tender for selection of the Implementation Agency 
has been floated. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
14. The Committee are glad to note that in order to have special focus on 
Left Wing Extremism Affected areas, the Department have formulated and 
implemented a separate USOF scheme, “Provision of Mobile Services in 
Left Wing Extremism Affected Areas (Phase -I)”. Und er this scheme 2342 
towers had been installed. Another scheme, “Provision of Mobile Services 
in Left Wing Extremism Affected Areas (Phase-II)” has been taken up by the 
Department for installation of 2217 towers, and a tender for selection of the 
implementation Agency has been floated. The Committee hope that with 
the implementation of LWE Phase -II complete coverage will be made 

12  
available in the LWE affected areas. The Committee had recommended the 
Department to  work closely with the elected representatives  for 
coordination and balanced achievements in the area.  This aspect has not 
been touched upon by the Department in their reply.  The Committee are of 
the view that working at the ground level, elected representatives are more 
aware of the local issues and needs , including problem of telecom 
connectivity. In special needs areas like LWE affected areas  their 
involvement will facilitate smooth impl ementation of projects . While 
appreciating the Department for successfully implementing the LWE 
Phase-I, the Committee hope that the Department would  work closely with 
the elected representatives of the areas  as they embark on a new venture 
to implement th e LWE Phase -II. The Committee further desire that the 
Department should take all necessary measures for  successful 
implementation of LWE Phase -II for providing much needed telecom 
connectivity in the areas . The Department may keep the Committee 
informed of the progress made in this regard.   
(Recommendation Sl. No. 12) 
 
Promotion of domestic manufacturing of telecom equipment 
15. The Committee, in their o riginal Report, had further recommended as  
under:-  
"The Committee note that India is highly dependent on import of 
telecom equipment to meet their demands in the country.  This 
indicates that domestic industries are clearly unable to meet the 
demand and the country lacks the requisite eco -system for the 
promotion of domestic manufacturing of telecom equipment.  During 
2016-17, India had imported telecom equipment worth Rs.1,13,057 
crore, Rs.1,41,168 crore in 2017-18 and Rs.1,24,992 crore in 2018 -19.  
China remains the number one country from where India is m aking the 
maximum import.  The Committee feel that the import of telecom 
equipment will increase substantially with the introduction of newer 
technology like 5G and desire to know why the Department have made 
no plans to develop 5G indigenously.  On the ch allenges in India 
confronting domestic telecom equipment manufacturing eco -system, 
the Department have flagged factors, such as Information Technology 
Agreement which brought most of electronic and telecom equipment at 
zero duty, low R&D investment and IPR  creation, lack of market 

13  
access for indigenous manufacturers, need for better coordination 
between academia, research and innovation for leveraging the vast 
manufacturing potential of our country, etc.  The Government have 
taken several measures to promot e domestic manufacturing which 
include imposition of tariff on non -ITA products, preference to Make in 
India products, releasing of National Digital Communications Policy 
2018 that contains several policy initiatives for promoting domestic 
manufacturing, setting up of Telecom Equipment and Services Export 
Promotion Council, mandatory testing and certification of telecom 
equipment, etc.  Undoubtedly, these measures are significant strides in 
the promotion of domestic manufacturing of telecom equipment.  
However, at the same time, the continuance of such massive import 
raises doubts on the adequacy of the above initiatives. The country is 
yet to take a giant leap in domestic manufacturing of telecom 
equipment as the extent of import is still very high. 
 
Considering the fact that electronic manufacturing is an important 
constituent of Make in India and Digital India which envisages 
increasing production of electronic goods in order to generate 
employment and income, the Committee feel that the Department 
needs t o give adequate attention and review the efficacy of the 
measures being taken by them and come out with prescription of what 
more need to be done. The Committee are of the view that until and 
unless concerted efforts are made, it is very unlikely that the trend of 
increasing import of telecom equipment will be reversed and domestic 
manufacturing of telecom equipment in the country will grow.  The 
Committee strongly recommend that the Department should clearly 
identify all the challenges and prepare all the necessary measures to 
tackle these challenges on a war footing. In this regard, the Committee 
suggest that the Government should consider incentivizing the 
domestic equipment manufacturers to promote domestic 
manufacturing and encouraging telecom service p roviders to install 
domestically manufactured equipment, including revisiting the existing 
tariff obligations under WTO and other international treaties." 
 
16. The Department of Telecommunications, in the Action Taken N ote, have 
stated as under:- 
 
“For promoti ng domestic manufacturing of telecom products following 
measures have been taken: 
a) MeitY has notified following schemes for promotion of 
Electronics products in the    country: 
 
 Production Linked Incentive Scheme (PLI) for Large Scale 
Electronics Manufacturing on 1 st April 2020 - To promote 

14  
manufacturing of mobile phones and specified electronics 
components. It provides 4-6% incentive on incremental sales for 
a period of 5 years, 
 Scheme for Promotion of manufacturing of Electronic 
Components and Sem iconductors (SPECS) on 1 st April 2020 - 
To offset the disability for domestic manufacturing of 
components and semiconductors. Under this scheme there is 
subsidy of Capital Expenditure up to 25%, and 
 
 Modified Electronics Manufacturing Clusters (EMC 2.0) Sch eme 
on 1st April 2020- To make India an Electronics Manufacturing 
Hub- modification of existing EMC scheme for creation of 
manufacturing clusters. 
 
 These schemes will enable creation of ecosystem and attracting 
large investment in manufacturing thereby pro moting Make in 
India and also exports. 
 
b) In pursuance of Department for Promotion of Industry and 
Internal Trade (DPIIT) Public Procurement (Preference to Make 
in India), Order 2017 dated 28.05.2018, Department of 
Telecommunications has issued PPP Mll Order  2017- 
Notification for Telecom products, services or works on 
29.08.2018 for Government procurement to encourage Make in 
India and to promote manufacturing and production of telecom 
goods and services in India with a view to enhance income and 
employment.  
 
c) Under BharatNet project, fully designed, developed and 
domestically manufactured GPON equipments are being 
deployed. 
 
d)  Government has imposed basic custom duty (ranging from 10 -
20%) on certain identified non -ITA telecom/electronic items on 
finished products and 10% on populated PCBs to promote their 
domestic manufacturing. 
 
e) DoT along with COAI has been organising India Mo bile 
Congress in New Delhi, an iconic International event for 
promotion of innovations and showcasing India‟s prowess in 
technology domain. DoT subsidised more than 70 start -ups and 
SMEs in exclusive India Pavilion during October 2019.  
 
 
 
 

15  
Comments of the Committee 
 
17. The Committee had noted that the country is highly dependent on 
import of telecom equipment and China remains the number one country 
from where India is making the maximum import . Numerous measures, 
such as imposition of tariff on non -ITA products, preference to make in 
India products, setting up of Telecom Equipment and Services Export 
Promotion Council, etc. have been taken by the Government to promote 
domestic manufacturing. Ho wever, continuance of massive imports have 
raised doubts on the adequacy of the above initiatives and the Committee 
had recommended the Department to take necessary measures to address 
the challenges including revisiting the existing tariff obligations und er 
WTO and other international treaties. The Department have now informed 
the Committee that on 1 st April, 2020, Ministry of Electronics and 
Information Technology have notified three schemes for promotion of 
Electronics products in the country viz. Produc t Linked Incentive Scheme 
(PLI) for Large Scale Electronics Manufacturing, Scheme for Promotion of 
manufacturing of Electronic components and Semiconductors (SPECs) and 
Modified Electronics Manufacturing  Clusters. The Department are hopeful 
that these sche mes will enable creation of ecosystem and attract large 
investment in manufacturing thereby promoting Make in India and also 
exports. How far the above schemes will help in promotion of domestic 
manufacturing of electronic equipment including telecom is yet to be seen. 
With regard to revisiting the existing tariff obligations under WTO and other 
international treaties, no reply has been furnished by the Department. 
Since I nformation Technology Agreement (I TA) is one of the challenges 
confronting domestic te lecom equipment ecosystem, the Committee had 
expressed the view that the agreement needed to be revisited. The 
Committee are of the view that the Department should urgently examine 
whether its demerits have out weighed against its merits and see to what 
extent tariff obligations under WTO and other international treaties have 
acted to the detriments for promotion of domestic electronics/telecom 

16  
equipment manufacturing in the country . To the Committee, the status  of 
country‟s telecom imports is a real concern, more so because the situation 
has not undergone significant change for the better in spite of the various 
initiatives taken by the Government. The  sector is full of challenges  and 
there is a need to make concerted efforts to promote domestic electronics 
manufacturing including telecom‟s equipment. There is excessive 
dependence on imports which is detrimental to the economy  and security 
of the country.  The Committee are also of the view that the ongoing Covid 
pandemic has provided an opportunity to India to invite global 
manufacturing giants to set up their manufacturing bases in the country.  
The Government should seize this opportunity and do their best to attract 
these units to set up their base in  India.  The Committee reiterate their 
earlier recommendation for revisiting various tariff obligations under WTO 
and other international treaties and apprise the Committee accordingly.   
 
  

17  
CHAPTER II 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN  
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
DoT Budget 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 1) 
 
The Department of Telecommunications (DoT) have laid the Detailed 
Demands for Grants (2019-20) in Lok Sabha on 17 thJuly, 2019 for a total amount 
of Rs.40413.36 crore, consisting of Rs.30693.64 crore under the Revenue 
Section and Rs.9719.72 crore under the Capital Section.  During the year      
2018-19, an amount of Rs. 33052.53 crore had been allocated at the BE stage 
which was reduced to Rs. 24530.48 crore at RE stage mainly due to reduction of 
funds under USOF to the tune of Rs. 5000 crore. Out of this, the Department had 
utilized Rs. 24691.73 crore under Revenue Section. Under Capital Section, an 
amount of Rs.5002.75  crore had been allocated at BE which was increased to 
Rs. 5956.75 crore at RE inclusive of Rs. 2500 crore transferred to Central Road 
and Infrastructure Fund for OFC based network for Defence Services and actual 
expenditure incurred was Rs. 4041.45 crore.   Some of the reasons cited for the 
underutilization of funds during 2018 -19 under Capital Section was due to the 
surrender of Rs. 572 core under OFC based network for Defence Services and 
under utilization and ultimate surrender of Rs. 751 crore under the  HPIL Scheme 
to Ministry of Finance due to the transfer of the scheme to Ministry of Housing 
and Urban Affairs.  For the year 2019 -20, the funds allocated under the Revenue 
Section at BE was Rs. 30693.64 crore which was reduced to Rs. 26554.49 crore 
as pro posed RE and the actual utilization has been Rs. 8173.55 crore till 
30thOctober, 2019.  For Capital Section, the allocation at BE was Rs. 9719.72 
crore which was increased to Rs. 16387.42 crore at proposed RE and the actual 
utilization has been Rs. 2802.16  crore only till 30 thOctober, 2019.  The 
Committee do note with concern, the similar underutilization of funds under 
Capital Section in the year 2017-18 and 2018-19.  
The Committee note that while utilization of funds under Revenue Section 
has exceeded the amount allocated at RE during 2017-18 and 2018-19, the trend 

18  
under the Capital Section has been exactly the opposite during the same period.  
It is the onerous responsibility of the Department to ensure that precious funds 
allocated are fully utilized and  the surrender of funds is avoided at any cost.  
While taking a strong note of parking/idling of funds for crucial Schemes such as 
NFS, the Committee recommend that the Department should make concerted 
effort for the optimum utilization of funds under the Capital Section during 2019 -
20 by ensuring that funds allocated at RE are fully utilized and not surrendered to 
Ministry of Finance.  The Committee need not emphasize that remaining few 
months are crucial as expenditure under Capital Section till 30 thOctober, 2019 
has been only 17.10 per cent of the amount proposed at RE.  The Committee 
recommend that the Department should undertake an urgent review of Schemes 
where gross under utilization has led to the surrender of funds and take 
appropriate corrective measures for optimal utilization. 
Reply of the Government 
In this regard it is submitted that the Department is committed to judicious 
utilization of funds under both Revenue and Capital Heads. For 2019 -20, it is 
submitted that Ministry of Finance has allocated Rs. 21435.10 crore (including Rs 
527.71 crore towards implementation of Voluntary Retirement Scheme in 
BSNL/MTNL) under Revenue Section and Rs 9640.39 crore under Capital 
Section at the RE stage. An additional amount of Rs 5000.00 crore has been 
allotted for Ex Gratia payment to BSNL and MTNL employees in the Second and 
Final batch of Supplementary Demands for Grants 2019 -20 under Revenue 
Section, thus taking the total allocation under this Section to Rs. 26,435.10 crore. 
  All the nodal branches concer ned are being instructed from time to time 
for effective expenditure monitoring and also utilization of funds judiciously. As of 
31st March 2020, Rs. 25,842.93 crore under Revenue Section and Rs. 9634.49 
crore under Capital Section have been utilized. 
 
(Ministry of Communications/Department of Telecommunications                         
O. M. No. 16-3/2019-B/1st Report dated 05/05/2020) 
 

19  
Overall status of implementation of schemes 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 2) 
 
The Committee note that the Department are implementing several 
important Schemes under the Revenue and Capital Sections.  Compensation to 
Service Providers for creation and augmentation of Telecom Infrastructure -
USOF, C -DoT, TRAI, Wireless Monitoring Serv ice, Financial relief to ITI, 
Financial support to MTNL for payment of interest on bonds, etc. are being 
implemented under the Revenue Section. Some important Schemes under 
Capital Section include OFC  based network for Defence Services, ITI Revival 
(Equity Investment), Physical infrastructure to NICF, Telecom Testing and 
Security Certification Centre (TTSC), Telecom Computer Emergency Response 
Team (T-Cert), Indigenous 5G Connectivity Test Bed, etc.  During the year 2018 -
19, as against the proposed amount of Rs.16066.20 crore for implementation of 
the above Schemes,  the Ministry of Finance had allocated an amount of 
Rs.15862.62 crore at BE stage, which was reduced to Rs.11814.37 crore at RE 
and the actual utilization has been Rs.9667.29 crore i.e. 81.83 per cent of the 
allocation made at RE.  While the Department have stated that there is no 
substantive Scheme where a major shortfall has been noticed during 2018 -19, 
the Committee note the under -utilization of funds under several Schemes such 
as Financial re lief to ITI, Wireless Monitoring Service, Telecom Engineering 
Centre, Physical infrastructure for NICF, Loans to HPIL, Investment in Public 
Sector and other Undertakings – Indian Overseas Communications Corporation 
Investment, etc.  For the year 2019 -20, as against Rs.37169.36 crore proposed 
by the Department, an amount of Rs.13400.59 crore has been allocated at BE.  
However, at RE stage against the proposed amount of Rs.13450.66 crore, the 
actual utilization achieved till 30 thOctober, 2019 has been Rs.3541.35 crore only.  
Considering the fact that it is just 26.33 per cent of the amount proposed at RE, 
proposing such huge amount at RE is not only unrealistic but highly ambitious.  
Though there are still few months left during w hich the Department can increase 
the expenditure, the Committee are unable to understand the reasons for „Nil‟ 

20  
expenditure under Schemes such as Establishment of Satellite Gateway 
assistance to BSNL, Telecom Computer Emergency Response Team   (T -Cert), 
Central Equipment Identity Register (CEIR), Champion Service Sector Scheme, 
etc.   
The Committee, while expressing their displeasure over the non -utilization 
of capital under these Schemes, desire that the Department should take pro -
active steps to ensure tha t utilization of funds in the above schemes improves in 
the remaining months.  While priority Schemes do deserve special emphasis, the 
Committee recommend that utilization in the above Schemes should not be lost 
sight of; and more  focused attention needs to be given to Schemes where 
persistent underutilization of funds have been noted.  The Committee desire that 
due consideration be given to important schemes like T -Cert. The Committee 
may be apprised of all the progress made in this regard.  
 
Reply of the Government 
In this regard it is submitted that the Department is committed to ensure 
proper utilization of funds for various ongoing schemes. Efforts are made for 
judicious utilization of funds. 
For OFC Based Network for Defence Services  
As per RE for FY  2019-20, amount of Rs 4725 crore has been allotted for 
OFC based Defence project. As of 31 st March 2020, an amount of Rs 4705 
crore has been utilized. However, there was no significant savings under 
Capital Section as the overall funds were fully utilized. 
For lTl Ltd. 
 The Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs (CCEA), during February 
2014, approved the Revival plan of ITI by fund infusion of Rs.4156.79 crore. This 
package consisted of Rs.2264 crore in the form of equity for financial assistance 
of ITI for implementation of new projects and Rs.1892.79 Cr as financial 
assistance as grant -in-aid. Out of Rs.2264 crore, The Government has released 
Rs.769 crore till 30.11.2019. The funds have been utilized for upgrading the 


21  
manufacturing infrastructure at various Units of ITI t o cater to the need of 
emerging technologies in Telecom industry. 
 For Central Equipment Identity Register (CEIR) 
 The project has been undertaken by the Department of 
Telecommunications (DoT) in financial year 2017 -18 and the execution has been 
entrusted to Centre for Development of Telematics ( C-DOT) including R&D and 
commissioning.  
There is no ready to use solution available globally to deal with 
multiple/duplicate handsets with same IMEI number. Hence, t o finalise the 
technical solution, a Proof of Con cept (PoC) of the system was undertaken in 
Maharashtra LSA with major TSPs i.e. BSNL, RJio, Airtel, Vodafone, Idea. 
Thereafter, a pilot project has been launched in Maharashtra on 13.09.2019 for 
blocking and tracing of lost/stolen mobile phones.  Subsequen tly, the project 
has been launched in Delhi for blocking and tracing of lost/stolen mobile 
phones.  
Presently, preparation and submission of Detail Project Report (DPR) of 
the project by C-DOT is under progress. Pan India implementation is targeted to 
be completed in FY 2020-21.  
 For Telecom Computer Emergency Response Team (T-CERT)  
The project has been undertaken by DoT in financial year 2017 -18. C-
DOT has been entrusted with the work of research, design, development and 
deployment of the project.  
No c ommercial or off -the-shelf solution of required magnitude was 
available. Being a large and complex project, the required skill set for 
development in this area was also not readily available. The project has major 
challenges to design and develop a network  probe with the standard interfaces, 
having big -data platform and big -data security analytics considering threat 
landscape to Indian telecom network. This has taken some time. However, a 
Proof of Concept (POC) has been developed having connectivity with 4 internet 
gateways.  

22  
(Ministry of Communications/Department of Telecommunications                      
O. M. No. 16-3/2019-B/1st Report   dated 05/05/2020) 
 
Implementation of Schemes under USOF 
(Recommendation Sl. No.3) 
 
The Committee note that some crucial Schemes are being implemented 
by the Department. These are BharatNet, Setting up of Public Wi -Fi Networks, 
Mobile Services in Left Wing Extremism Affected areas, Comprehensive 
Development Plans for NE Region, Comprehens ive Development Plans for 
Islands, etc. under USOF.  The resources for meeting the expenses for 
implementation of USOF Schemes are generated through a Universal Service 
Levy (USL) which presently is 5 per cent of the Adjusted Gross Revenue (AGR) 
of all the  telecom licensees.  During 2018 -19, against the amount of Rs.10450 
crore proposed by the Department, an amount of Rs.10000 crore had been 
allocated at BE.  The Committee are unhappy to note that the Department could 
not completely utilize the funds alloc ated at BE as only Rs.4788.22 crore 
allocated at RE could be utilized.  Some of the reasons cited for difference 
between BE and RE under USOF during 2018-19 were that under BhatatNet only 
4 States were able to finalize their tenders and work could be award ed only in 
Chhattisgarh at RE stage, tender for submarine OFC connectivity between 
Chennai and Andaman and Nicobar Islands was unique and took longer time for 
finalization, project in NER for Arunachal Pradesh and 2 Districts of Assam was 
held up due to a court case and higher tender discovered cost in comparison to 
DPR (Meghalaya), etc. This massive deduction indicates that the implementation 
of USOF Schemes by the Department during the previous year is far from 
satisfactory.  It is all the more disturbing  to note that the status of implementation 
during the current financial year is once again below the desired level. During the 
year 2019 -20, an amount of Rs.8350 crore has been allocated at BE which is 
Rs.1650 crore less than the allocation made at BE of t he previous year. Clearly 
indicating that something is wrong in the implementation of the Schemes during 
2019-20, the Department have proposed an amount of Rs.5000 crore only at RE 

23  
which is Rs.3350 crore less than the amount allocated at BE. Till date, the  
Department has utilized Rs.884.21 crore only or 10.59 per cent of the BE 
allocation.  An amount of Rs.500 crore and Rs.100 crore have been allocated at 
BE for Mobile services in uncovered villages of Arunachal Pradesh and 2 
Districts of Assam (by BSNL) an d Mobile services in Meghalaya respectively.  
However, no amount has been proposed for the two Schemes at RE.  In respect 
of Schemes like LWE Areas (Phase -II), Provisions for special projects, 
Submarine OFC connectivity to Andaman and Nicobar Islands, Mobi le services 
in 361 uncovered villages of Ladakh and Kargil in Jammu and Kashmir, border 
areas and other priority areas, the status of utilization till date has been indicated 
as Nil.  The Committee have also been informed that there are about 28000 
uncovered villages.  The Committee note that there are sufficient funds available 
for implementation of USOF Schemes and as per the Ministry of Finance, as and 
when the Scheme takes off, Government is bound to provide funds for the 
Schemes of USOF.  The Committee  are pained to see that while on the one 
hand most of the above Schemes are pending completion for a long time, new 
Schemes such as mobile coverage in uncovered villages and separate Scheme 
for aspirational District is proposed.   
 
Taking into account these facts, the Committee believe that the success of 
implementation of USOF Schemes greatly depends on meticulous planning and 
a focused approach. Whereas the objectives and goals for implementation of 
USOF schemes are high and noble, the pace at which the s chemes are being 
implemented lacks the desired momentum. The Committee note that the project 
for providing OFC connectivity between mainland India and Andaman Nicobar 
Islands had been approved by the Cabinet on 21.09.2016 and the Hon‟ble Prime 
Minister had  laid the foundation of the project on 30.12.2018 at Port Blair.  
Considering that the Prime Minister himself had laid the foundation stone, the 
Committee feel that there should have been greater progress made towards 
project implementation. The Committee recommend that the Department should 
relentlessly pursue timely completion of all USOF Schemes. 

24  
 
Reply of the Government 
The implementation pace of BharatNet was slower as compared to the 
expectation during 2019 -20. It is stated that the Phase -II work is largely 
dependent on 8 States (around 65000 GPs under State Led Model) and BSNL 
(23000 GPs in CPSUs led Model). BSNL suffered from capacity constraints 
because of its precarious financial condition. The State -led Model, barring 
Gujarat, could not progress at the anticipated pace. One of the major reasons for 
slow progress is higher tender discovered rates, leading to revision in DPRs and 
their re -approval at Digital Communications Commission (DCC) level. Now, 
based on the recommendations of a committee Chai red by CEO, NITI Aayog, a 
PPP Model has also been proposed for certain areas for creation, O&M and 
Utilization of BharatNet. 
 
For other USOF schemes, the RE was proposed taking into account the 
actual implementation and progress of the schemes. The tender for Submarine 
OFC connectivity between Chennai and Andaman & Nicobar Islands was unique 
and took longer time for finalization, thereby pushing the date of completion to 
June 2020.  There was a case in the Hon‟ble Supreme Court in India regarding 
the provis ion of 2G mobile services in Arunachal Pradesh and two Districts of 
Assam, and in view of the said case, it was decided by USOF to go for a fresh 
tender with 4G technology. The Meghalaya mobile project could not be awarded 
due to higher tender discovered c ost in comparison to the estimated cost in the 
approved DPR.  The timeline for NER mobile connectivity (all States except 
Arunachal Pradesh and Meghalaya) had to be extended owing to prevailing of 
Force Majeure  conditions and difficult terrain. Since end March 2020, due to 
various advisories issued by Government and lockdown in view of the outbreak 
of pandemic Covid -19, the implementation of the projects has been adversely 
affected.   
 
 

25  
The following steps have been taken to facilitate improved performance of 
the USOF Schemes: 
 
1. BharatNet: -  
a) The cash -flow constraints of BSNL have been addressed to 
facilitate faster progress of the project under Phase-II.  
b) After review of BharatNet and on the recommendations of a 
Committee, Chaired by CEO, NITI Aayog, DCC in its meeting dated 
13.06.2019 & 20.12.2019 has given in -principle approval to migrate to PPP 
Model of BharatNet, as required.    
c) For better utilization o f BharatNet, CSC e -Governance Services 
India Ltd. (CSC -SPV in short), which is an SPV under the Ministry of 
Information Technology (Meity), has been assigned the job of providing one 
Wi-Fi AP and 5 FTTH connections in the GPs of Phase – I of BharatNet.  
d) Further, regular reviews are also being undertaken with the State 
Implementing Agencies under State led Model to ensure early completion. 
The Project is being monitored at appropriate levels for early completion. 
2. Mobile connectivity in uncovered villages of the States of North-East 
and along National Highways [Assam (except 2 -Districts), Manipur, 
Mizoram, Nagaland, Tripura, Sikkim, and Arunachal Pradesh (only 
Highways)]: Out of total 1823 towers approved on the basis of survey reports , 
1218 towers have been installed, and of them 1181 sites are radiating/providing 
mobile services. The NER States experienced massive floods due to heavy 
monsoon in the year 2019, as a result , installation became slow for about 3 
months. Further, installation of 154 towers is pending due to non -receipt of 
clearances from State Forest Departments, and 294 towers are pending due to 
village name mismatch/discrepancy in revenue records.  
 Officers of USOF are visiting the NE states and holding meetings with 
Chief Secretary & Principal Secretary concerned of the State to resolve the 
issues for expediting implementation. Meetings are also being held with Sr. 

26  
Executives of the Implementing Agencies /U SP for review & speeding up 
execution. So far, meetings have been held in Agartala, Guwahati and Imphal.   
 Recently, due to various advisories issued by Government and lockdown 
in view of the outbreak of pandemic Covid-19, there is a huge resistance from the 
local people for giving the installation teams access to the village sites for 
implementation of the project that has adversely affected the progress.   
3. Submarine OFC Connectivity between Mainland India (Chennai) and 
Andaman & Nicobar Islands : The Proj ect is under implementation as per 
schedule. Cable laying work started from 10.01.2020 and submarine cable laying 
has been completed. However, testing and A/T of equipment has been affected 
due to Covid-19 lockdown. All efforts are being made to complete t he project on 
time, i.e. by June 2020. 
 Sufficient funds are available with USOF as per payment schedule. 
 
4. Satellite Bandwidth Augmentation for Andaman & Nicobar Islands: Digital 
Communications Commission, in its meeting held on 13.06.2019, approved a 
proposal for augmentation of bandwidth to 4 Gbps. The Bandwidth for Andaman 
& Nicobar Islands has been augmented to 3.49 Gbps by BSNL. 
 
5. Satellite Bandwidth Augmentation for Lakshadweep: The Digital 
Communications Commission, in its meeting held on 31.08.2018, approved the 
proposal for augmentation of bandwidth from 318 Mbps to 1.71 Gbps. Bandwidth 
for Lakshadweep has been augmented to 1.15 Gbps by BSNL. 
 
6. 4G Mobile Services in Arunachal Pradesh and 2 Districts (Karbi Anglong 
and Dima Hasao) of Assam:  Pursuant to the decision of the DCC meetings held 
on 13 June 2019 and 19 September 2019, it has been decided to prepare a DPR 
for 4G connectivity and submit for the approval of the Cabinet. Due to expansion 
of network, the number of uncovered villages of Arunachal Pradesh & 2 Districts 
of Assam has reduced to 2374 (1683+691) at an estimated cost of Rs. 2028.80 
crore.  

27  
7. Various Schemes for Provision of mobile services in uncovered and 
difficult areas,  such as Schemes for border areas as per MHA list, Jammu 
& Kashmir and priority areas for 354 uncovered villages, LWE Phase -II, 
Meghalaya, Andaman & Nicobar, Aspirational Districts etc: 
 The Tender for provision of mobile services at 354 uncovered Villages has 
been finalized, and the Agreement has been signed. Out of the remaining 
schemes, tenders for 3 schemes have been floated.  
 
8. Submarine OFC connectivity between Mainland (Kochi) and 
Lakshadweep: Envisages to provide 2 x 100 Gbps Bandwidth Connectivity from 
Mainland India (Kochi) to Kavarati and ten other Isl ands namely Kalpeni, Agatti, 
Amini, Androth, Minicoy, Bangaram, Bitra, Chetlat, Kiltan and Kadmath. Digital 
Communications Commission (DCC) in its meeting dated 20.12.2019 approved 
the proposal with estimated cost of Rs. 1072 crore. The Project is targeted  to be 
completed within 24 months after award of work.  
(Ministry of Communications/Department of Telecommunications                          
O. M. No. 16-3/2019-B/1st Report   dated    05 /05/2020) 
 
Setting up of towers in Left Wing Extremism (LWE) affected areas  
 
(Recommendation Sl. No.6) 
 
The Committee note that under the LWE Project Phase -I out of total of 
2355 towers, 2343 towers are radiating and 12 towers are not radiating due to 
damage by Naxalites.  The project had to be foreclosed due to non -grant of 
permission by the State Governmen t.  During 2018 -19, 375 VSAT sites have 
been upgraded to 2Mbps and the project has been declared completed during 
2018-19.  The Department have also informed the Committee that the Cabinet on 
21 December, 2017 has approved LWE Phase -II project proposed for  provision 
of mobile connectivity using 2G and 4G technology at 4072 towers identified by 
Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA).  However, the list has been revised and the 
revised estimate of Rs.5024 crore for 3465 locations has been approved.  The 

28  
list is being  further revised and as directed by MHA, RFP with revised tower 
locations is under process.  The Department are hopeful that LWE -II project may 
be completed by March, 2021.  With regard to budgetary allocations, the 
Committee notes that during the year 201 8-19, an amount of Rs.524 crore had 
been allocated at BE, which was reduced to Rs.414.30 crore at RE and this 
amount had been fully utilized, for the upgradation of VSAT sites.  For the year 
2019-20, out of an amount of Rs.300 crore allocated at BE for LWE  Phase-I, the 
Department have so far utilized an amount of Rs. 207.95 crore and proposed Rs. 
430 crore at RE.  With regard to LWE Phase-II, where an amount of Rs.500 crore 
has been allocated at BE, the utilization so far has been „Nil‟.  The Department 
have now proposed a reduced allocation i.e. Rs.150 crore only at RE stage. It is 
worrisome to note that a scheme which is planned to be completed by March 
2021 is yet to take off.   
The Committee desire to fix responsibility for this egregious failure and the  
resultant cost escalation.  The Committee further desire that renewed efforts 
should be made by the Department with the concerned State Governments to get 
the necessary site permissions for 12 towers destroyed by the Naxalites so that 
towers could be set up in the areas for providing connectivity. The Committee 
also urge the Department that the RFP for LWE Phase -II which is under process 
for revised tower locations should be completed at the earliest.  The Committee 
recommend that the Department should com plete the necessary formalities on 
time and ensure that the project is completed within the targeted deadline. It will 
not only reduce the cost overrun but will also provide the much needed 
connectivity for people living in the areas. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Best efforts are made by the Department for completion of the project 
within the targeted deadline.  The current status of the issues referred to under 
Committee‟s observations is as follows:   
 
Provision of Mobile Services in Left Wing Extremism Affected areas (Phase II): 

29  
 
 On 23 May 2018, the Cabinet approved the proposal for installing 4072 
mobile towers by using 2G+4G technology at locations identified by the Ministry 
of Home Affair (MHA) in LWE affected areas with subsidy support of Rs. 7330 
crore (Excluding taxes) from USOF. The estimated project cost of the proposal 
was Rs 7,330 Crore plus applicable taxes, consisting of CAPEX and OPEX for 5 
years for 4072 tower locations. Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA) provided a list of 
4072 locations for p rovision of mobile services in the LWE affected areas on    
27th Oct 2017. A meeting was held on 26.08.2019 under the Chairmanship of 
Hon‟ble Home Minister wherein it was decided to verify the 4G coverage status 
at MHA identified locations for LWE Phase -II. Accordingly, the feedback on 4G 
coverage status was obtained f rom respective Licensed Service Area (LSA) 
units. As per coverage status given by LSAs,  2217 locations were found 
uncovered. Accordingly, an RFP has been floated on 04.11.2019 for 2217 
locations at the estimated cost of 3214.65 crore. The implementing agen cy is to 
be selected through competitive bidding process and the implementation period 
of the project is 18 months from the date of signing of contract with the 
Implementing Agency.  
 
It needs to be stated that as per the tender floated and the delivery 
timelines, the survey shall be completed within a period of 3 months and the 
installation and commissioning of the mobile services shall be completed within 
a period of 18 months. As per the subsidy payment schedule, the payments are 
released only after the sites are installed and commissioned in the form of Front 
Loaded Subsidy. Due to the delay in finalisation of the list of villages among 
other things, the tender finalisation has taken longer than anticipated. After 
completion of the tender, an agreement  will be signed with the selected USP 
and work will be started. 
 

30  
Regarding proposal of R.E. 2019 -20 of Rs. 430 crore for LWE Phase –I, 
the amount of Rs. 346.23 has been disbursed up to 31.01.2020 in FY 2019 -20 
and the balance amount shall be utilized during this current FY 2019-20. 
 
(Ministry of Communications/Department of Telecommunications                             
O. M. No. 16-3/2019-B/1st Report   dated     /05/2020) 
 
OFC based network for Defence Services 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No.8) 
 
The Committee are  given to understand that OFC based network for 
Defence Services was approved by Cabinet Committee on Infrastructure (CCI) 
on 3 rdDecember, 2009 for providing alternate communication network for 
Defence Services for release of spectrum.  The project is mainly implemented by 
BSNL and MTNL.  As per CCI approval, the Air Force network was to be 
completed by 30 thJune, 2010 and for Army and Navy to be completed by 31 st 
December, 2012.  While the Air Force network has been dedicated to the nation 
by Air Force on 14 thSeptember, 2010, the network related to Army and Navy is 
yet to be completed which indicates that it has undergone considerable time 
overrun.  This delay has also resulted in massive cost overrun from the initial 
estimation of Rs.8098 crore in 2009 to Rs.24,664 crore in 2018.  The revised 
timeline for completion of the project is May, 2020.  However, the Committee 
have now been informed that taking into account the complex nature of the 
project, limited working season and difficult terrain in Arunach al Pradesh, Sikkim 
and Leh, the completion of the project may get delayed by few months more and 
the project is expected to be completed by December, 2020. As far as financial 
achievement is concerned, the Committee note that an amount of Rs.4500 crore 
had been allocated at BE which was reduced to Rs.2500 crore at RE and actual 
utilization has been only Rs.1973 crore resulting in surrender of Rs.527 crore to 
the Ministry of Finance.  As for the reasons for surrender of funds, the 
Department have informed th at there was a delay in Cabinet approval for 

31  
enhanced cost and also delay in finalization of tender for complex part of 
equipment.  During the year 2019 -20, an amount of Rs.4725 crore has been 
allocated at BE, out of which the Department have utilized an a mount of 
Rs.2627.40 crore till 30 thOctober, 2019 and the Department have now proposed 
an amount of Rs.8000 crore at RE. So far as the physical progress is concerned, 
the Committee are given to understand that out of 60,000 km of OFC 94 per cent 
has been laid.  With regard to equipment part, all tenders except one have been 
finalized and purchase orders have been placed.   
However, the Committee have not been informed whether the equipment 
has been upgraded keeping in view the current needs of the Army and t he Navy.  
Since these telecom equipment can rapidly become obsolete, the Committee 
desire a clarification as to whether the tenders were suitably updated before 
issuance.  
The Committee further desire that tender for Unified Network Management 
System (UNMS) which is under finalization should be completed at the earliest.  
The Committee are hopeful that with adequate budgetary allocation, the project 
could be completed by Dec ember, 2020.  The Committee need not emphasize 
that the project has already witnessed massive cost and time escalation and any 
further delay in a priority project such as NFS would only jeopardize the national 
interest and security. The Department should treat this as an urgent priority.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Action on the said Recommendation of the committee has already been 
initiated as detailed below. 
NFS project is being implemented by BSNL in close co -ordination and 
monitoring of Project Implementation Core Group (PICG), consisting of members 
from Defence services. BSNL has intimated that all the equipments being 
installed/ commissioned in this project are of latest/ upgraded versions only. 
During implementation stage itself, obsolete version equip ments are being 
upgraded to latest versions in consultation with PICG and with the approval of 
competent authorities. 

32  
Tender for Unified Network Management System (UNMS) has been 
finalized and purchase order has been placed on 09.03.2020. 
 
The project is being monitored on regular basis with periodic review 
meetings at various levels in the Government. 
The target date given by the Cabinet is May 2020 but seeing the highly 
complex nature of the project, pan -India presence, limited working season in 
Arunachal Pradesh/Sikkim/Ladakh/Kashmir, very large number of Right of Way 
permissions from NHAI/Railways/Forest Deptt/Wildlife/Municipal bodies etc, the 
project was envisaged to be completed by December 2020. Further, because of 
lockdowns in the country due to Co rona virus spread, the project is likely to be 
completed by March 2021. 
(Ministry of Communications/Department of Telecommunications                               
O. M. No. 16-3/2019-B/1st Report   dated    05/05/2020) 
 
5G Connectivity Test Bed 
(Recommendation Sl. No.11) 
The Committee note that the Department had approved financial grant for 
the multi-institute collaborative project for setting up of „Indigenous 5G Test Bed‟ 
in India. The project was approved on 22 ndMarch, 2018 at an estimated cost of 
Rs. 224.01 crore to be completed within 36 months i.e. by April, 2021. The 
purpose of the project is to set up end -to-end open 5G Test Bed for Indian 
companies and academia.  Reputed institutions like IIT Madras, Delhi, 
Hyderabad, Bombay, Kanpur, IISC Bangalore, Society for Applied Microwave 
Electronics Engineering and Research (SAMEER) and Centre of Excellence in 
Wireless Technology (CEWiT) have been engaged for the project.  The Test Bed 
is proposed to be realized in fo ur stages.  The Committee have been informed 
that the project has kicked off in right earnest and out of four stages, version 0 to 
validate all the hardware design components and the base on which the other 
versions will be built is already completed.  The  Department are also very much 
satisfied that significant progress has been made by institutes in system design, 

33  
hardware design and algorithm design in all locations.  However, financial 
achievement and the status of utilization of funds depicts a differe nt story 
altogether.  During the year 2018 -19, an amount of Rs.134.48 crore had been 
allocated for the Scheme at BE stage which was reduced to Rs.36.75 crore at 
RE stage and the actual expenditure increased to Rs.59.27 crore.  For the year 
2019-20 as against the proposed amount of Rs.82.23 crore, only Rs.38.59 crore 
has been allocated at BE.  The Committee have been informed that an amount of 
Rs.82.24 crore has been proposed at RE by the Department.  With regard to 
utilization, approval for payment of Rs.46 .73  crore has been received and 
release of payment is under process.  The Committee are of the considered view 
that any shortage of funds will adversely affect the progress of the project and 
impact the timely completion of the project.   
Considering that  the introduction of new technology like 5G has the 
potential for ushering in a major transformation across manufacturing, education, 
healthcare, agriculture, financial, social and other sectors, the Committee 
recommend that the Department should take all necessary steps for allocation of 
requisite funds so that progress of the project implementation does not suffer and 
could be completed as per the schedule.  Nonetheless, the Committee will 
appreciate if they are informed of its environmental and health co nsequences 
that have been observed in those countries where 5G has been initially 
implemented. The Committee are also of the view that proper implementation of 
the project will enable Institutes in India to gain sufficient expertise that can be 
leveraged f or future gain. Introduction of 5G will not only be limited to major 
transformation in the economic field, but will also have widespread implications 
for national security.  The Committee wish to be informed whether an 
assessment has been conducted of all the implications of 5G.  The Committee 
desire that the Department should act in the right earnest for the appropriate 
implementation of 5G so that Indian industry can reach out to global markets and 
fruitfully take advantage of the opportunities that will emerge with 5G and also 
adequately address the security concerns. The Committee wish to be apprised of 
all the progress made in the implementation of the project.  

34  
Reply of the Government 
Sufficient funds have been made available in 2019-20. 
The progress report on the project is given below: 
(a) The International Commission on Non ‐Ionizing Radiation Protection 
(ICNIRP) issues g uidelines for Limiting Exposure to Electromagnetic Fields 
(100 kHz to 300 GHz)  which cover many applications such as 5G 
technologies, W iFi, Bluetooth, mobile phones, and base stations. 
Department of Telecommunications has adopted stricter norms for safety 
from Electric and Magnetic Fields (EMF) emission from mobile towers in 
India which has been fixed to be 10 times more stringent than the safe limits 
prescribed by International Commissi on on Non -Ionizing Radiation 
Protection (ICNIRP) and recommended by World Health Organisation. 
Further, Government of India has taken adequate steps to ensure that 
Telecommunications Service Providers strictly adhere to these prescribed 
norms. 
(b)  With regard to assessment conducted with respect to implications of 5G 
regarding national security, action has been initiated to establish a security 
test bed at Security Assurance Standards Facility (SASF) at NCCS, 
Bengaluru. NCCS has been directed to prepare a detailed project estimate 
for setting up security test bed for 5G. 
(c)  DoT has received applications for 5G technology trials at different locations 
to study 5G India specific use cases and develop applications in different 
economic verticals. T o identify and promote applications relevant to India in 
the 5G realm, the Department of Telecommunications has launched “5G 
Hackathon” on 21 st February 2020 with support of stakeholders. T he 
Hackathon will be spread across three phases and the winners of the various 
phases will share a total prize pool of INR 2.5 crore. 
 
(Ministry of Communications/Department of Telecommunications                                
O. M. No. 16-3/2019-B/1st Report   dated    05 /05/2020) 
 

35  
Revival of ITI 
(Recommendation Sl. No.15) 
 
 The Committee note that under the ITI revival plan, ITI was provided 
Rs.4156 crore consisting of Rs.1892 crore as non -plan funds and Rs.2264 as 
plan funds for implementation of new projects in ITI.  The Committee are happy 
to note that the implementation  of the Revival Plan has brought a new lease of 
life for ITI and succeeded in changing the fortune of ITI for better. Out of Rs.2264 
crore for Capital expenditure, ITI has received Rs.769 crore only as of now.  With 
an investment of Rs.769 crore, ITI has m anaged to get orders worth Rs.2193.90 
crore during 2016 -17 to 2019 -20 and generate revenue to the tune of Rs.1000 
crore.  The Committee have been informed that as on 30 th September 2019, ITI 
has booked order for Rs.13821 crore including Advance Purchase Or der and is 
executing major projects like Gujnet, Mahanet, Network for Spectrum (NFS), 
Smart energy meters to achieve turnover targets of Rs.3300 crore during 2019 -
20.  In the given set of things it is appropriate that ITI continues its strides and 
achieve a complete turn over.  For this, the funds as assured in the revival 
package needs to be made available to the company so that there is no financial 
distress.  The Committee are, however, disheartened to note that allocation of 
funds to ITI under Capital h as not been in line with the funds requested by ITI.  
During 2018-19, an amount of Rs.400 crore had been proposed at RE, however, 
ITI had received only Rs. 55 crore.  Similarly, during 2019 -20 as against an 
amount of Rs.405 crore proposed at BE stage, ITI received only Rs.105 crore.  
The decreased allocation has badly affected the project implementation by ITI 
under the Revival Plan. The Committee note for RE 2019 -20, additional amount 
of Rs.418 crore and Rs.385 crore for BE 2020 -21 have been proposed.  The  
Committee also take note of the submission of ITI that the fulfillment of project at 
hand are subject to realization of funds.   
 
The Committee are of the view that the future of telecom PSUs like ITI lies 
in the introduction of new technologies and diversifying its products according to 
the requirement in market.  Therefore, there is a need for continuous flow of fund 

36  
to ITI for tec hnological upgradation to keep pace with the changing demands for 
various electronic or telecom products and stay relevant. Considering the fact 
that it is already on a revival path and huge orders booked, the Committee find 
no reasons as to why funds as r equested by ITI should not be allocated to ITI.  
The handholding and support by the Government should not be left midway 
which may force ITI to go back to its old state.  The Committee, therefore, urge 
the Government that the balance amount under Capital e xpenditure required as 
per the revival package for implementation of various revival projects should be 
released to ITI so that it can invest on newer technologies like 5G.  The concern 
of the Committee in this regard may be communicated to the Ministry of  Finance.  
At the same time, the Committee hope that with increase in revenue, ITI will be 
able to meet some of the funds towards payment of the statutory dues and other 
liabilities.    
Reply of the Government 
Best efforts are being made by the Department for of the issues referred 
to under the Committee‟s observations. The current status of ITI is as follows:   
 
ITI has achieved a profit of Rs. 111 crore (including other comprehensive 
income of Rs. 18 crore) with a turnover of Rs.1894 crore in FY 2018 -19. The 
profits are without any grants given by Government of India. ITI's turnover is 
increasing steadily over the recent years from Rs.1253 crore in 2015 -16 to Rs. 
1894 crore in 2018-19 as given below. 
Sl. No. Year Turnover (Rs. Cr.) 
1 2015-16 1253 
2 2016-17 1611 
3 2017-18 1703 
4 2018-19 1894 
ITI is having strong Order Book of about Rs.13759.50 crore as on 
30.11.2019. Another Rs. 7700 crore order is in the pipe lines for ASCON -IV 

37  
project under Defence. Further ITI is addressing many tenders and business 
opportunities and will improve order booking further. 
Against Rs. 2264 crore approved by CCEA under revival plan for CAPEX, 
Rs. 769 crore only has been sanctioned to ITI from 2014 till 2019. CAPEX fund 
provided by Government of India (Rs.769 crore ) till date has been invested and 
the Projects have been implemented in all the Units of ITI. 
In BE 2020 -21, an amount of Rs. 105 crore has been allotted to ITI for 
meeting its Capex requirement against the requirement of Rs. 385 crore 
projected by ITI. He nce, the remaining amount of Rs. 280 crore will be sought in 
RE 2020-21.  
 The projects planned for 2020 -21 are OFC, HDPE Pipe, ISS 
(EVM/VVPAT) Assembly, Testing and Mfg. of Space products (VSSC project), 
Smart Card, Smart Solutions, N -GPON, Non Telecom Defence projects, Data 
Centre and Solar Cell Manufacturing projects. 
 
 ITI has also planned to utilize the balance amount of Rs. 1110.00 crore for 
the various projects. This amount will be sought progressively. This will help ITI 
to further augment the manufacturing infrastructure. 
 
  As mentioned above, the Company is already in the revival mode, 
earning profits and the Company will put all out efforts to improve turnover and 
profits in the years to come. 
 The concern of the Committee regarding the allocat ion of less funds to ITI 
under Capital Section has been intimated to the Ministry of Finance. 
 
(Ministry of Communications/Department of Telecommunications                         
O. M. No. 16-3/2019-B/1st Report   dated     05/05/2020) 
 
 
  

38  
CHAPTER- III 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS  WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 
-NIL- 
 

39  
CHAPTER IV 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS  IN  RESPECT OF  WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND REQUIRE 
REITERATION 
BharatNet 
(Recommendation Sl. No.4) 
Bharat Net is being implemented to provide broadband connectivity to all 
Gram Panchayats (approx 2.5 lakh GPs) in the country.  Once completed it is 
proposed to provide non -discriminatory, affordable broadband services to citizens 
and institutions in rural areas, in partnership with States and the private sector.  The 
Committee note that the initial target for connecting all the 2.50 lakh GPs was 
March, 2019.  However, as against the above target, only 1.18 lakh GPs could be 
connected by March, 2019.  The s tatus of utilization of the infrastructure created so 
far is equally discouraging as out of 1,26,223 GPs which have been made service 
ready, Wi -Fi hot spots have been made functional in only 15,500 GPs, 5179 GPs 
integrated to SWAN and FTTH connections prov ided to only 27,856, etc. The 
Committee have been informed that the network architecture, the connectivity to old 
BSNL fiber in part of the network operation and maintenance through BSNL, etc. are 
some of the reasons which had held back optimal utilization  of the network.  The 
Committee are given to understand that in order to address these issues Operation 
and Maintenance of the OFC network along with first line maintenance and 
custodianship of the equipment at GP level and 2 Wi -Fi Access Points in each GP  
has been entrusted to Community Service Centre -Special Purpose Vehicle (CSC -
SPV), an agency under Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology w.e.f.       
1st July, 2019. Under Phase -II, the State implementing agency has been given the 
responsibility of O&M of the network for 7 years under State led Model.  Discussions 
are also underway with BSNL to provide a Service Level Agreement (SLA) for the 
fiber network.  The Department are hopeful that all these are expected to improve 
the uptime of the network which, in turn, will increase network utilization.   
 
The Committee feel that increasing the utilization of the network created is 
urgently needed, the network should not be a waste of national resources. 

40  
Considering the fact that huge amount of Rs.19,516.37 crore has been invested, the 
Committee feel that there ought to be some return on the investment made through 
increased utilization of the network infrastructure.  To improve the uptime and 
increase the network utilization, operation and maint enance of the OFC network at 
the GP level should be properly allocated, monitored and responsibilities fixed.  The 
Committee urge the Department to make sincere efforts to increase utilization of the 
network created under BharatNet and wish to be apprised of the achievements 
made in this regard. 
 
Reply of the Government 
In view of the concerns of the Committee regarding poor utilization of the 
network under BharatNet, the Department has decided to award the work of 
utilization of the created network under Phase -I for provision of Last Mile 
connectivity through Government of Rajasthan and CSC e -Governance Services 
Ltd. (an SPV under MeitY).  
Steps taken by Government to promote utilization of BharatNet are as 
follows: 
 
i) As part of BharatNet project, the Last Mile connectivity, through Wi -Fi or any 
other suitable broadband te chnology to access broadband /internet services 
is being provided at all the 2.5 lakh GPs in the country through Viability Gap 
Funding by USOF, DoT. Work has already been awarded to the Govt. of 
Rajasthan for Wi -Fi provisioning in all the 10,000 GPs of Raj asthan and to 
CSC-SPV for  25,000 GPs in Uttar Pradesh, 3,243 GPs in Himachal Pradesh. 
Besides CSC-SPV is providing Wi-Fi services in 5,000 GPs in various states 
under a USOF pilot. 
ii) For the remaining GPs (about 78, 000 GPs) of Phase -I, keeping in view the 
GP-level presence of CSC e -Governance Services Ltd. (an SPV under 
MeitY), it has been assigned the provision of 1 Wi -Fi Access Point and 5 
FTTH connections to Government institutions by the DCC in its meetings of 
13.06.2019 and 20.12.2019. This approval ha s been taken in order to get 
maximum utilization of the network for provision of e -Governance services 

41  
that will hugely benefit the general public. This work is in an advanced stage 
and is expected to substantially increase the utilization of the network i n the 
next 6-9 months. 
iii) The BharatNet Tariff has been made highly attractive & affordable to reduce 
the entry barrier for Service Providers.  
iv) Field level surveys have been facilitated for the service providers.  
v) TSPs and ISPs have finalised 354 and 5461 locations respectively, out of 
which provisioning has been done at 341 and 2,155 locations respectively. 
vi) Wi-Fi have been installed in 45,769 GPs, out of which services are being 
provided in 20,816 GPs. The No. of users is 12.9 lakh, using 1,36,319 GB 
data per month. 
vii) Fibre to the Home ( FTTH) connections on BharatNet have been provided to 
35,296 GPs and SWAN connections to 5325 GPs. Leasing of dark Fiber is of 
9579 km and Bandwidth provisioning is 529 Gbps. 
viii) BBNL is replacing the lossy fibre of BSNL with new f ibre so that better optical 
power is available at Gram Panchayats as well as dark fibres from OLT 
location in a Block to GPs become available for the service providers. 
ix) BharatNet Phase-II provides for end to end fibre laying by BBNL from Block to 
GPs so th at dark fibre is available to Service Providers from Block to GP for 
delivery of their services. 
x) Meetings and discussions are being held with the State Governments for 
utilization of the network for SWAN, e -governance and other services. Some 
States, such as Maharashtra, have issued instructions to all the District 
Collectors for getting broadband connections installed, say through BSNL, at 
the GPs  
xi) Conferences are being organized with TSPs/ISPs/Cable TV Operators in 
order to sensitize them about the avail ability of BBNL bandwidth and dark 
fibre and further to encourage them for providing services in the rural areas 
using BharatNet.  
xii).  Other steps: 

42  
 In Phase – II, under State-Led Model; SIAs (State Implementation Agencies), 
at their own cost, are to provide at least one FTTH connection in each GP. 
They are also supposed to submit a business model for utilization of the 
network from which part of the OPEX shall be met. 
 All stakeholders – TSPs/ISPs/Content providers/Cable TV providers/State 
Government Agencies, etc. are encouraged to utilize the BharatNet network. 
 To encourage utilization of BharatNet, Bandwidth and fibre lease charges 
have been kept at low rates by BBNL. 
 Apart from the above, the Department has also taken the approval of the 
DCC on 20.12.2019 for a strategy (State -wise) to be implemented under the 
PPP model and hired a consultant, who has carried out market consultation, 
and the preparation of RFP for PPP model is in an advanced stage. 
 
(Ministry of Communications/Department of Telec ommunications                                
O. M. No. 16-3/2019-B/1st Report   dated 05/05/2020) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 8 of Chapter I) 
 
Comprehensive Telecom Development Plan for North East Region (NER) 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No.5) 
 
The Committee note that a Comprehensive Telecom Development Plan 
(CTDP) for North East Region (NER) is being implemented to install 6673 mobile 
towers at 8621 identified uncovered villages, 321 mobile towers along National 
Highways and strengthening of transmission network in the NER.  The Government 
had approved the project on 10 thSeptember, 2014.  During 2018 -19, an amount of 
Rs.400 crore had been allotted at BE, however no amount had been allocated at RE 
and hence the utilization was „Nil‟.  For the y ear 2019 -20, an amount of Rs. 500 
crore has been allocated at BE for Mobile service in uncovered villages of Arunachal 
Pradesh and 2 Districts of Assam by BSNL and Rs.500 crore for Mobile service in 

43  
uncovered villages in rest of NER and seamless coverage a long National Highway 
(by USOF) including Meghalaya (Rs.100 crore for Meghalaya).  However, at RE no 
amount has been proposed by the Department for Mobile service in uncovered 
villages of Arunachal Pradesh and 2 Districts of Assam and Mobile services in 
Meghalaya. In respect of mobile services in uncovered villages in NER by Airtel, an 
amount of Rs. 600 crore has been proposed at RE out of which only Rs.60.03 crore 
has been utilized so far.  The Committee are given to understand that total 2004 
towers (1694  towers for 2128 uncovered villages + 310 towers for National 
Highways) are to be set up by Airtel in Assam except 2 Districts,  Sikkim, Manipur, 
Mizoram, Nagaland, Tripura and Arunachal Pradesh (NH only).  The project is 
targeted to be completed by Octobe r, 2019.  However, as on 22 ndOctober, 2019, 
only 878 towers have been installed and 732 towers are radiating which 
substantiates Committee‟s apprehension that the project has failed miserably in 
meeting its target. The Committee note with great concern tha t even though the 
project had been approved by the Government in 2014, no headway has been made 
so far under the Comprehensive Telecom Development Plan for the North East 
Region due to Court case in case of Arunachal Pradesh and two Districts of Assam 
and high tender discovered cost in comparison to DPR in Case of Meghalaya. The 
only project which is being implemented is also behind schedule. It is surprising to 
note that this is happening in spite of the project being monitored closely at the 
highest level and review meetings being convened periodically.   
 
The Committee desire that Committee of Inquiry be set up forthwith to 
establish responsibility for the implementation failure, particularly in comparison with 
the project implemented by Airtel.   
 
 From these observations, the Committee are constrained to note that the way 
USOF Schemes are being implemented by Department in the NER clearly reflects 
the general apathy and lack of concern for the region waiting for years to get much 
needed telecom connectivity. The Committee lay their emphasis that the Department 
need to take their NER Schemes more seriously and expedite the implementation of 
the Schemes under USOF to improve connectivity in the areas.  Keeping in view the 

44  
fact that the region suffers from d ifficult conditions peculiar to the region, the 
Committee are of the view that the Department should explore innovative measures 
to speed up the work, such as providing incentive for timely completion on the one 
hand and imposing penalty in case of failure  to meet the target on the other. The 
concrete steps in this direction may be apprised to the Committee within three 
months of presentation of the Report.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Steps taken by the Department is given below: 
 
Comprehensive Telecom Development Plan for NER: 
 On 10.9.2014, the Government approved a “Comprehensive Telecom 
Development Plan” to install 6673 mobile towers at 8621 identified uncovered 
villages, 321 mobile towers along National Highways, and strengthening of 
transmission ne twork in the NER at an estimated cost of Rs. 5336 crore to be 
funded from Universal Service Obligation Fund (USOF). Earlier 2 tenders for 
Meghalaya were not successful. Therefore, on 23.05.2018, the Cabinet approved a 
proposal for 2G+4G connectivity at an estimated cost of Rs 3911 crore and 
enhanced estimated cost of CTDP Project for NER for Rs 8,120.81 crore .  The 
project consists of the following schemes and their present status is as under: - 
A. Mobile connectivity in Arunachal Pradesh and 2 districts (Karbi Anglong 
and Dima Hasao) of Assam: Department of Telecommunications had earlier 
signed an Agreement with BSNL through Universal Service Obligation Fund for 
provision of 2G based mobile services  in 4119 (2805+1314) uncovered villages 
of Arunachal Pradesh and 2 Districts of Assam, under Comprehensive Telecom 
Development Plan for NER. In the meantime, State Governments requested to 
provide mobile services based on latest 4G technology. Also, Telecom Watchdog 
filed a Writ Petition in the Hon‟ble Supreme Court to quash the agreement dated 
16.01.2018 on 2G technology, which is sub-judice. Subsequently, the matter was 
reviewed on 06.05.2019 in NITI Aayog, wherein it has been decided to prepare 
DPR for 4 G connectivity and submit for the approval of the Cabinet. In June 

45  
2018, a revised list of 2968 (2215+753) uncovered villages of Arunachal Pradesh 
and 2 Districts of Assam received was finalized. In view of the decision taken in 
NITI Aayog, DCC has approve d a proposal for provision of 4G based mobile 
services for revised number of 2968 (2215+753) uncovered villages of Arunachal 
Pradesh and 2 Districts of Assam on 19.09.2019. Meanwhile, due to expansion 
of network, uncovered villages in Arunachal Pradesh & 2  Districts of Assam have 
reduced to 2374 (1683+691) uncovered villages for which estimated  cost is Rs. 
2028.80 crore.  
B. Mobile connectivity in uncovered villages of the States of North -East and 
along National Highways [Assam (except 2 -Districts), Manipur, Mizoram, 
Nagaland, Tripura, Sikkim,  and Arunachal Pradesh (only Highways)]: 
Telecom Commission approved to award the project on 08.09.2017 and 
accordingly, the scheme is being implemented through M/s Bharti Airtel Limited & 
M/s Bharti Hexacom on open tend er basis. The Agreements were signed on 
08.12.2017 for covering Assam [except  2 Districts viz. Karbi Anglong & Dima 
Hasao], Sikkim, Manipur, Mizoram, Nagaland, Tripura and Arunachal Pradesh 
(National Highways only) for provision of mobile services.  Under this project, 
2004 mobile towers (1694 towers for 2128 uncovered villages+310 for National 
Highways) are to be installed. The project Cost is Rs 1655.66 crore.  
To expedite the implementation of the scheme and to discuss the issues 
involved therein, a meet ing was taken by Administrator, USOF on 22.10.2019 
wherein the officers of the State Governments, LSAs, CCA etc. were invited.  It 
was the unanimous opinion of representative of the States present that NE being 
a difficult territory, extension of the propo sal may be considered up to June, 
2020. Accordingly, the extension of time of the Project up to June, 2020 has 
been given, keeping in view the hardship, terrain, floods, delay in finalization of 
survey, difficulties in getting the possession of land, apart  from many other force 
majeure conditions prevailing, including protests & restricting the movement of 
the man and resources etc.  As of March 2020, 1405 sites have been acquired 
and 1218 have been installed, out of which 1181 are radiating. 

46  
Officers of US OF are visiting the NE states and holding meetings with Chief 
Secretary & Principal Secretary concerned of the State to resolve the issues for 
expediting implementation. Meetings are also being held with Sr. Executives of 
the implementing agencies /USP for  review & speeding up execution. So far, 
meetings have been held in Agartala, Guwahati and Imphal.  
Since end-March 2020, due to various advisories issued by Government and 
lockdown in view of the outbreak of pandemic Covid -19, the implementation of 
the projects has been adversely affected.   
C. Mobile connectivity in Meghalaya and along National Highways on 
Technology: On 23.05.2018, a revised proposal to install 2173 towers of 2G+4G 
technology for providing mobile services in 2374 uncovered villages and a long 
National Highways at an estimated cost Rs. 3911 crore was approved by the 
Cabinet. In June, 2018, a revised list of 2691 number of uncovered villages of 
Meghalaya was finalized. In view of the decision taken in NITI Aayog, the DCC 
has approved a propo sal for provision of 4G connectivity for 2691 uncovered 
villages and National Highways of Meghalaya on 19.09.2019. Meanwhile, due to 
expansion of network, uncovered villages in Meghalaya have reduced to 1164, 
for which the estimated cost is Rs. 1165.54 crore. A Tender has been floated and 
subsequently, a pre -bid meeting was held on 18.02.2020. Due to outbreak of 
pandemic Covid-19, the tender submission date has been extended. 
 
(Ministry of Communications/Department of Telecommunications                              
O. M. No. 16-3/2019-B/1st Report   dated    05/05/2020) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 11 of Chapter I) 
 
Setting up of towers in Left Wing Extremism (LWE) affected areas    
(Recommendation Sl. No.7) 
The Committee are of the strong view that robust communication network is a 
must for LWE areas so as to bring about greater integration with the mainstream as 
well as to take various services directly to the citizens living in the areas.  To achieve 

47  
this o bjective, the Department should think in the line of formulating and 
implementing separate USOF scheme in LWE areas in the line of scheme being 
implemented for NER in addition to setting up of towers initiated by MHA.  In this 
regard, the Committee desire that the Department should work closely with the 
elected representatives of the areas to achieve better coordination and balanced 
achievements in the area. 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The Department, keeping in view the special focus on Left Wing Extremism 
Affected areas, has formulated and already implemented a separate USOF scheme 
viz. “Provision of Mobile Services in Left Wing Extremism Affected Areas (Phase -I)”. 
The scheme has already been completed by installation of 2343 towers for providing 
mobile services. The concept is based on the lines of NER areas, where separate 
schemes are formulated.  
 
 Now, the Department has taken up the implementation of another scheme 
namely “Provisio n of Mobile Services in Left Wing Extremism Affected Areas 
(Phase-II)”. This scheme envisages the provision of mobile services by installation of 
2217 towers, and a tender for selection of the Implementation Agency has been 
floated. 
 
(Ministry of Communica tions/Department of Telecommunications                                     
O. M. No. 16-3/2019-B/1st Report dated 05/05/2020) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 14 of Chapter I) 
 
Promotion of domestic manufacturing of telecom equipment 
(Recommendation Sl. No.12) 
The Committee note that India is highly dependent on import of telecom 
equipment to meet their demands in the country.  This indicates that domestic 
industries are clearly unable to meet the demand and the country lacks the requi site 
eco-system for the promotion of domestic manufacturing of telecom equipment.  

48  
During 2016 -17, India had imported telecom equipment worth Rs.1,13,057 crore, 
Rs.1,41,168 crore in 2017-18 and Rs.1,24,992 crore in 2018 -19.  China remains the 
number one co untry from where India is making the maximum import.  The 
Committee feel that the import of telecom equipment will increase substantially with 
the introduction of newer technology like 5G and desire to know why the Department 
have made no plans to develop 5G indigenously.  On the challenges in India 
confronting domestic telecom equipment manufacturing eco-system, the Department 
have flagged factors, such as Information Technology Agreement which brought 
most of electronic and telecom equipment at zero duty, low R&D investment and IPR 
creation, lack of market access for indigenous manufacturers, need for better 
coordination between academia, research and innovation for leveraging the vast 
manufacturing potential of our country, etc.  The Government have taken  several 
measures to promote domestic manufacturing which include imposition of tariff on 
non-ITA products, preference to Make in India products, releasing of National Digital 
Communications Policy 2018 that contains several policy initiatives for promotin g 
domestic manufacturing, setting up of Telecom Equipment and Services Export 
Promotion Council, mandatory testing and certification of telecom equipment, etc.  
Undoubtedly, these measures are significant strides in the promotion of domestic 
manufacturing of telecom equipment.  However, at the same time, the continuance 
of such massive import raises doubts on the adequacy of the above initiatives. The 
country is yet to take a giant leap in domestic manufacturing of telecom equipment 
as the extent of import is still very high. 
 
Considering the fact that electronic manufacturing is an important constituent 
of Make in India and Digital India which envisages increasing production of 
electronic goods in order to generate employment and income, the Committee feel 
that the Department needs to give adequate attention and review the efficacy of the 
measures being taken by them and come out with prescription of what more need to 
be done. The Committee are of the view that until and unless concerted efforts are 
made, it is very unlikely that the trend of increasing import of telecom equipment will 
be reversed and domestic manufacturing of telecom equipment in the country will 

49  
grow.  The Committee strongly recommend that the Department should clearly 
identify all the chal lenges and prepare all the necessary measures to tackle these 
challenges on a war footing. In this regard, the Committee suggest that the 
Government should consider incentivizing the domestic equipment manufacturers to 
promote domestic manufacturing and en couraging telecom service providers to 
install domestically manufactured equipment, including revisiting the existing tariff 
obligations under WTO and other international treaties. 
 
Reply of the Government 
For promoting domestic manufacturing of telecom pr oducts following 
measures have been taken: 
f) MeitY has notified following schemes for promotion of Electronics products 
in the country: 
 Production Linked Incentive Scheme (PLI) for Large Scale Electronics 
Manufacturing on 1 st April 2020- To promote manufacturing of mobile phones 
and specified electronics components. It provides 4 -6% incentive on 
incremental sales for a period of 5 years, 
 Scheme for Promotion of manufacturing of Electronic Components and 
Semiconductors (SPECS) on 1st April 2020- To offset the disability for domestic 
manufacturing of components and semiconductors. Under this scheme there is 
subsidy of Capital Expenditure up to 25%, and 
 Modified Electronics Manufacturing Clusters (EMC 2.0) Scheme on 1 st April 
2020- To make India an Electronics Manufacturing Hub - modification of 
existing EMC scheme for creation of manufacturing clusters. 
 
These schemes will enable creation of ecosystem and attracting large investment in 
manufacturing thereby promoting Make in India and also exports. 
g) In pursuance of Department for Promotion of Industry and Internal Trade 
(DPIIT) Public Procurement (Preference to Make in India), Order 2017 
dated 28.05.2018, Department of Telecommunications has issued PPP 
Mll Order 2017 - Notification fo r Telecom products, services or works on 
29.08.2018 for Government procurement to encourage Make in India and 
to promote manufacturing and production of telecom goods and services 
in India with a view to enhance income and employment.  
 
h) Under BharatNet pro ject, fully designed, developed and domestically 
manufactured GPON equipments are being deployed. 
 

50  
i)  Government has imposed basic custom duty (ranging from 10 -20%) on 
certain identified non -ITA telecom/electronic items on finished products 
and 10% on populated PCBs to promote their domestic manufacturing. 
 
j) DoT along with COAI has been organising India Mobile Congress in New 
Delhi, an iconic International event for promotion of innovations and 
showcasing India‟s prowess in technology domain. DoT subsidised mo re 
than 70 start -ups and SMEs in exclusive India Pavilion during October 
2019.  
    
(Ministry of Communications/Department of Telecommunications                               
O. M. No. 16-3/2019-B/1st Report   dated    05/05/2020) 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 17 of Chapter I) 
 
 
  

51  
CHAPTER V 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF  
WHICH REPLIES  OF THE  GOVERNMENT ARE INTERIM IN NATURE 
 
Telecom Engineering Centre 
(Recommendation Sl. No.9) 
The Committee note that the Department are implementing various Schemes 
under Telecom Engineering Centre, such as Setting up of NGN (Transport) Lab, 
Setting up of SAR Lab at TEC New Delhi/Mumbai, Procurement of EMF measuring 
Instrument, Setting up of Security Lab, setting up of CPE and TL Lab, Sett ing up of 
Access Lab, Setting up of Green Passport Lab (Phase -I), Setting up of Regional 
Test at RTECs, and Setting up of NGN Control Lab.  These Schemes are at various 
stages of implementation.  However, what has disturbed the Committee is the poor 
utilization of funds in respect of some of the Schemes reflecting their faulty 
implementation.  During the year     2018-19, an amount of Rs. 44.10 crore had been 
allocated to TEC at BE, which was reduced to Rs.7.20 crore at RE stage and the 
actual utilization has been Rs.96.9 lakh only which is just 13.45 per cent of the funds 
allocated at RE. Out of 09 Schemes being implemented by TEC, in respect of 06 
Schemes there has been „Nil‟ utilization portraying a very sad state of affairs.  Some 
of the reasons cited by  the Department viz. pending court cases, cancellation of 
tenders due to non -responsiveness of bidders, revision of tender document etc. are 
just not acceptable to the Committee.  During the year 2019 -20, the Department had 
proposed an amount of Rs.51.17 c rore out of which an amount of Rs. 20.11 crore 
was allocated at BE.  But the Committee are disheartened to note that the 
Department proposed only Rs.11.79 crore at the RE stage and utilized only Rs.58 
lakh till 30thOctober, 2019 i.e. 2.88 percent of the allocation made at BE.  
 
The Committee would like the Department to explain the reasons for the 
persistent under utilization of funds by TEC.  The Committee are of the view that 
cancellation of tenders in respect of S chemes of TEC due to non -responsiveness of 
the bidders and inability to finalize tenders only reflects the general incompetence 
and lack of requisite expertise to formulate practical tenders by TEC.  In view of the 

52  
persistent failure of TEC to properly imp lement Schemes for setting up of various 
Labs for testing of telecom equipment, the Committee strongly recommend the 
Department to review the whole planning process of TEC and ensure that 
implementation of Schemes under TEC improve in the current fiscal.  The 
Committee urge the Department to take their concern seriously and do the course 
correction and apprise them of the corrective measures. 
Reply of the Government 
Overall status of various schemes is as below 
Schemes implemented by TEC: 
 Establishment of NGN transport Lab 
 Establishment of Specific Absorption Rate (SAR) Lab 
NGN Transport lab is partially functional. Cases of NGN Transport lab as well as 
SAR Lab were under arbitration and arbitration awards were received in both 
cases. However, awards were n ot accepted by the competent authority and the 
matter is sub-judice. 
Schemes to be implemented by TEC: 
 Establishment of Control Lab – Scheduled for commissioning in 2020-21 
 Establishment of Green Passport Lab Phase-I – Will be installed in 2020-21 
 Establishment of Security Lab – Scheduled for start of installation in 2020-21 
 Establishment of CPE &Terminal Lab * 
 Establishment of Access Lab * 
 Establishment of Regional Test Labs * 
(* Specifications are being finalised and further procurement will start shortly) 
NGN Control lab: 
 The equipment for NGN control lab for which the purchase order was placed 
in August 2019 has been received and installed. 
 All sincere efforts are being made to set-up the labs successfully. 
 
(Ministry of Communications/Department of Telecommunications                              
O. M. No. 16-3/2019-B/1st Report   dated     05/05/2020) 
 

53  
Setting up of Security Lab 
(Recommendation Sl. No.10) 
Setting up of Telecommunication Security Testing Lab is one of the important 
Schemes being implemented by TEC.  The purpose of this lab is to cater to the 
needs of the telecom industry for security testing of various network elements and 
CPEs.  The Committee note that tender was floated on 9 thNovember, 2015 but since 
no bid was received, tender could not be processed.  Subsequently tender was 
reviewed and refloated in October 2016 but again got cancelled on 12 th May, 2016 
due to non -responsiveness of bidders.  The Committee have been informed that 
tender was again floated on 12 th September, 2018 but has been cancelled due to 
non-responsiveness of all bidders.  Now revised tender document is under 
preparation. Such casual approach on the part of TEC and the way matter is stuck in 
tendering and retendering proce ss clearly points to the fact that TEC has failed to 
handle a highly technical project like this.  It has raised serious doubts as to whether 
TEC really has the technical competence for the setting up of Telecommunications 
Security Lab.  The Committee have  now been informed that an open house 
feedback session has been conducted by TEC in August, 2019 to take inputs on 
technical specification of tender document and based on feedback, the estimate is 
being revised.  The way the Scheme has been handled since i ts conception stage 
gives an impression to the Committee that TEC alone will not be able to execute the 
project.  The Committee are also of the firm view that in the aforesaid scenario the 
chance of setting up of the lab in the current financial year seems  remote.  
Telecommunication Security Lab has assumed significance in view of the fact that 
Government of India has mandated that it will be compulsory for the telecom 
equipment to be tested and certified prior to its import, use or sale into the country.  
More so as admitted by Secretary, DoT during evidence, security equipment testing 
in India is not of the world standard.  
 
Keeping in view that Security Test Lab shall be one such lab carrying out the 
testing of telecom equipment to ensure that the telecom  network elements are free 
from security vulnerabilities, its early set up is the urgent need of the hour.  At the 

54  
same time, taking into account the complex dynamics in testing, the Committee 
opine that the implementation of the project should not be left  to TEC alone. The 
Committee recommend that the Department should try to rope in other agencies with 
expert knowledge in the domain for early setting up of security test lab.  The 
Committee may be informed about the steps taken in the direction and the act ual 
progress made on the ground. 
Reply of the Government 
Telecom test lab is a very specialized setup for which TEC has not been able 
to solicit sufficient response from vendors. As observed by the Hon‟ble Committee, 
efforts for procurement of test lab equ ipment have not materialized due to either 
non-receipt of bids or non-eligibility of bidders even though bids were called on three 
occasions. However, consultations with stakeholders have been held and the 
process for fresh tender has been initiated, which will be monitored. 
 
Sincere efforts are being made considering lessons learnt from past 
experience to set-up the labs successfully. 
 
(Ministry of Communications/Department of Telecommunications                             
O. M. No. 16-3/2019-B/1st Report   dated     05/05/2020) 
 
Champion Service Sector Scheme (CSSS) 
(Recommendation Sl. No.13) 
The Committee note that under the Champion Service Sector Scheme 
(CSSS) of the Department of Commerce, Government have approved two Schemes 
for promoting development in telecom sector, such as Scheme for brand building of 
India as telecom manufacturing and services destination at the cost of Rs. 46.2 crore 
over 3 years, and Scheme for setting up of Digital Communication Innovation square 
at the cost of Rs.104 c rore over 3 years.  From the information provided by the 
Department, the Committee note that an amount of Rs.50.07 crore has been 
allocated at BE for the Schemes during 2019 -20.  The Committee are given to 
understand that the purpose of the two Schemes is to showcase capabilities of 

55  
Indian telecom equipment manufacturers and service providers at important 
international forums that will help in branding India as a technology supplier, and 
promote innovative ideas and knowledge for viable technology development.  
 
The Committee while appreciating the Government for implementing such 
innovative schemes also desire that the DoT should take all necessary steps to 
ensure effective utilization of funds to achieve the stated aims and objectives of the 
Schemes.  The Commit tee would like to be updated on the progress made in this 
regard.  
 
Reply of the Government 
The updated status of the scheme is furnished below:- 
The following two sub -schemes of DOT were proposed under Champion Sector 
Services Scheme (CSSS): 
a. Brand-building of India as Telecom Manufacturing and Services Destination 
b. Setting up of Digital Communication Innovation Square (DCIS) 
The aforementioned 2 sub-schemes of DOT have been approved by Expenditure 
Finance Committee (EFC) and minutes of EFC meeting conveying the approval has 
been received by Department of Telecommunications on 21 Oct 2019. 
Post receipt of the EFC minutes, Department of Telecommunications is in the 
process of preparing and finalizing the guidelines of both the sub -schemes. 
Appropriate framework to ensure effective utilization of funds to achieve the 
objectives of the sub schemes will be developed and included in these guidelines. 
 
(Ministry of Communications/Department of Telecommunications                                    
O. M. No. 16-3/2019-B/1st Report   dated    05 /05/2020) 
 
 
 

56  
Revival of BSNL and MTNL 
(Recommendation Sl. No.14) 
The Committee note that both BSNL and MTNL have been incurring losses 
continuously since the financial year 2009 -10.  BSNL has incurred total loss  of 
Rs.4794 crore during 2016 -17, Rs.8738 crore in 2017 -18 and Rs.14904 crore in 
2018-19.  The projected loss of BSNL during 2019 -20 is Rs.25753 crore mainly due 
to assumption of VRS.  In case of MTNL, the loss incurred by the company during 
2016-17 was Rs .2941.8 crore, which rose to Rs.2973.45 crore in 2017 -18 and 
Rs.3390.20 crore in 2018 -19.  The projected Net loss of the company for the year 
2019-20 is 4012.5 crore. The Committee have also been informed that the net worth 
and outstanding debt of BSNL as on 31 st March, 2019 were Rs.74734 crore and 
Rs.(-)15983 crore excluding overdraft respectively.  As for MTNL for the same 
period, the net worth was Rs.( -)9734.94 crore and outstanding debt was 
Rs.19750.35 crore excluding DoT Bonds of Rs.4533.97 crore.  Wit h DoT Bonds, the 
outstanding debt of MTNL as on 31 st March, 2019 was Rs. 24,284.32 crore. The 
Committee take note of the fact that the financial position of both the companies, 
especially that of MTNL is very precarious. As per the submission of the 
Department, the main reasons for the present state of the two companies are due to 
factors, such as stiff competition in mobile segment, high employee cost which is 
more than 75 per cent to revenue in case of BSNL and MTNL against the market 
ratio of 5 to 7 per cent, and absence of 4G services except in few places for BSNL. 
The Committee are, however, glad to note that a Comprehensive revival plan for 
BSNL and MTNL has been approved by the Cabinet and with the implementation of 
the revival plan both the PSUs will be able to register growth and will soon come out 
of losses.  The Committee feel that both PSUs have played a significant role in 
expansion of telecom connectivity in the country and still have an important role to 
play.  The Committee are in full agreeme nt with the strategic and crucial role of 
BSNL and MTNL highlighted in NTP -2012 in meeting the strategic and security 
needs of the nation. 
 

57  
The Committee stress that the revival and growth of the two companies are in 
the best interest of the nation and the y are of the view that half the battle has been 
won with the decision of the Government to go ahead with the revival package for 
both companies.  However, the real challenge remains to be the work of revival 
itself. The Committee feel that 4G services, VRS  to employees and monetization of 
land/building assets along with debt restructuring are the major issues of immediate 
intervention for revival of BSNL and MTNL and any revival plan of both the PSUs 
must include these components. The Committee recommend th at all out effort 
should be made by the Department to implement the approved revival plan in letter 
and spirit and bring them to their former glory. The committee also desire that the 
modus operandi and other details of the approved revival plan and the st atus of 
progress made in the implementation may be communicated to them also.  
The Committee are also of the view that due to offer of VRS to the employees 
of BSNL and MTNL, many employees of the two PSUs will leave the companies 
resulting in vacation of r esidential quarters occupied by them.  These quarters can 
be put to profitable use by them.  
Reply of the Government 
 The Cabinet in its meeting held on 23 -10-2019 approved the revival plan for 
BSNL and MTNL. The revival plan inter-alia, includes the measu res to reduce the 
Staff cost through a Voluntary Retirement Scheme (VRS) for employees of age 
above 50 years for the employees of BSNL and MTNL, Administrative allotment of 
Spectrum to BSNL/MTNL for providing 4G services, Monetisation of Land/Building 
and Tower/Fibre Assets of BSNL/MTNL, Debt restructuring by raising of Sovereign 
Guarantee Bonds and in-principle approval for merger of BSNL & MTNL. 
The following actions have been taken: 
Measure -1: Staff Cost Reduction 
(i) The Voluntary Retirement Scheme (VRS) was offered by both BSNL/MTNL 
on 4th November, 2019 and was closed on 03.12.2019. The VRS has effected 
from 31.01.2020. After the closure of the scheme, 78,569 employees of BSNL 

58  
and 14,387 employees of MTNL have opted for the VRS. Post VRS, BSNL 
will have 71057 and MTNL will have 4325 employees. 
(ii) The target for VRS was set as 83000 and 15000 employees respectively for 
BSNL and MTNL, considering the strength as on 1.10.2019. Since the VRS 
has been implemented wef 31.01.2020, 5607 and 1408 employees of BSNL 
and MTNL respectively, retired in natural course. As such, the net reduction 
in employees is 84239 and 15795 employees in BSNL and MTNL 
respectively. 
(iii) Fund amounting Rs 5000 Cr for payment of 1 st installment of ex-gratia (to be 
paid by 31.3.2020) was receiv ed from MoF, which has been distributed to 
both PSUs with the direction to utilize the same by 31.03.2020. The 2 nd and 
final installment will be paid in first quarter of 2020 -21. Budget of Rs 9889 
crore for the 2 nd installment has been allotted in FY 2020 -21. Due to less 
allotment during 2019-20, the requirement for 2020-21 is Rs 11206 crore.  
Measure – 2 A: Asset Monetisation (Land/Buildings) 
(i) Pursuant to Cabinet decision dated 23.10.2019 on Revival/ Restructuring of 
BSNL/MTNL for monetisation of Land/Build ing assets through DIPAM route, 
14 assets of BSNL and 16 assets including 494 flats of MTNL were identified 
for monetisation in the first phase. 
(ii) IMG in its meeting held on 24.12.2019 gave go -ahead for monetisation of 11 
assets of BSNL (tentative value Rs. 18,200 Cr.) and 06 assets, including 398 
flats, of MTNL (tentative value Rs. 5,158 Cr). 
(iii) IMG deferred monetisation of 03 assets of BSNL, 11 assets, including 96 flats 
of MTNL in order to obtain requisite clearances from respective land owning 
Agency/State Govt. 
(iv) Alternate Mechanism (AM) consisting of Group of Ministers has accorded 
approval for monetisation of assets recommended by IMG constituted by 
DIPAM.  
(v) Pre-bid meeting of representatives of BSNL/MTNL with empaneled 
consultants was held on 31.01.2020. Que ries of International Property 

59  
Consultants (IPC) were replied to by DoT and DIPAM has issued certain 
amendments in the relevant clauses of RFP on 13.02.2020. 
(vi) The IMG of DIPAM opened financial bids for appointment of IPC on 
02.03.2020. DIPAM has issued appo intment letters to M/s Cushman and 
Wakefield India Pvt Ltd, M/s JLL Property Consultants (India) Pvt Ltd, M/s 
Knight Frank (India) Pvt Ltd and M/s CBRE South Asia Pvt. Ltd. as IPC on 
24.03.2020. 
Measure – 2 B: Asset Monetisation (Fibre/Towers) 
(i) In the meeti ng held on 10.01.2020 in NITI Aayog, monetization of core 
assets, viz.  Fiber Network of BBNL, Fiber/Cables/Towers of BSNL/MTNL etc 
were discussed. Accordingly, M/s SBI Caps and M/s Deloitte are conducting 
study for MTNL & BSNL respectively.  
Measure - 3: Allocation of Spectrum 
(i) Budget for 4G spectrum for Rs 24,084 Cr (BSNL -16,656 Cr, MTNL -7428 Cr) 
was requested in RE 2019 -20. Ministry of Finance has provisioned the funds 
required for 4G spectrum in BE 2020-21. 
(ii) The process for spectrum allocation for 4G services to BSNL/MTNL has been 
initiated in DoT.  
Measure - 4: Issue of Sovereign Guarantee Bonds  
(i) Request for Sovereign Guarantee for the bonds to be raised by BSNL (Rs 
8500 Cr) and MTNL (Rs 6500 Cr) has been sent to Ministry of Finance on 2-
12-2019.  
(ii) DEA has intimated that the Sovereign Guarantee will be issued in first 
Quarter of FY 2020-21. 
Measure -5: In-principle approval for merger of MTNL into BSNL 
(i) A letter has been addressed to DIPAM seeking necessary guid ance for 
merger/ making MTNL a subsidiary of BSNL, in view of DIPAM circular no. 
7/13/2018-Policy dated December 26, 2018 directing that „ …… AII 
proposals of CPSEs/Administrative Departments that have a bearing on 

60  
capital structure or networth of a CPSE e. g. issue of bonus/rights shares 
or bonus debentures, merger or demerger, formation of a subsidiary or an 
associate company, payment of dividend, etc. are required to be referred 
to DIPAM for prior consultation/consent’ 
(ii) DIPAM had convened a preliminary meet ing on 14.01.2020. DIPAM has 
engaged a Legal Advisor and further course of action will be decided as per 
the report of the Legal Advisor. A reminder to expedite the report of Legal 
advisor has been issued by this office to DIPAM. 
 
(Ministry of Communications/Department of Telecommunications                              
O. M. No. 16-3/2019-B/1st Report   dated    05 /05/2020) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
      New Delhi;   DR. SHASHI THAROOR, 
04 February, 2021  Chairperson, 
15 Magha, 1942 (Saka) Standing Committee on 
Information Technology. 

61  
Annexure-I 
 
MINUTES OF THE THIRD SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (2020-21) HELD ON 16th OCTOBER, 2020 
----------- 
 The Committee sat on Friday, the 16 th October, 2020 from 1100 hours to 
1300 hours in Committee Room „B‟, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Dr. Shashi Tharoor – Chairperson 
 
 MEMBERS 
  
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri Karti P. Chidambaram  
3. Shri Santosh Pandey 
4. Sanjay Seth 
5. Shri L.S. Tejasvi Surya 
6. Shri Bhanu Pratap Singh Verma 
 
Rajya Sabha 
  
7. Dr. Anil Agrawal 
8. Shri Y.S. Chowdary 
9. Shri Syed Zafar Islam 
10. Shri Nabam Rebia 
Secretariat 
 
1. Shri Y.M. Kandpal   - Joint Secretary 
2. Dr. Sagarika Dash   - Additional Director 
3. Smt. Geeta Parmar   - Additional Director 
4. Shri Shangreiso Zimik  - Deputy Secretary 

62  
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee convened to consider and adopt four Draft Action Taken Reports on 
Demands for Grants (2019-20).....xxxxx….xxxxx…..   
 
3. The Committee took up the following draft Reports for consideration:- 
(i) Draft Action Taken Report on Demands for Grants (2019 -20) of 
Ministry of Communications (Department of Telecommunications),  
(ii) ....xxxxx….xxxxx…......xxxxx….xxxxx…......xxxxx….xxxxx…......xxxxx…     
(iii) ....xxxxx….xxxxx…......xxxxx….xxxxx…......xxxxx….xxxxx…......, and  
(iv) ....xxxxx….xxxxx…......xxxxx….xxxxx…......xxxxx….xxxxx…......xxxxx….     
4. After due deliberations, the Committee adop ted the above Report  with slight 
modifications. 
5. The Committee, then, authorized the Chairperson to finalize the Report and 
present the same to the House during the next session of Parliament. 
(....xxxxx….xxxxx…..) 
6. ....xxxxx….xxxxx…......xxxxx….xxxxx…......xxxxx….xxxxx…......xxxxx….      
7. ....xxxxx….xxxxx…......xxxxx….xxxxx…......xxxxx….xxxxx…......xxxxx….     
8. ....xxxxx….xxxxx…......xxxxx….xxxxx…......xxxxx….xxxxx…......xxxxx….     
9. ....xxxxx….xxxxx…......xxxxx….xxxxx…......xxxxx….xxxxx…......xxxxx….     
10. ....xxxxx….xxxxx…......xxxxx….xxxxx…......xxxxx….xxxxx…......xxxxx….     
....xxxxx….xxxxx….. 
   
Verbatim proceedings of the sitting have been kept on record. 
 
The Committee, then, adjourned. 
....xxxx....Matters not related to Report. 

63  
Annexure-II 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THEIR FIRST REPORT 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
[Vide Paragraph No. 5 of Introduction] 
 
(i)  Observations/Recommendations which have been 
accepted by the Government 
 
 Rec. Sl. Nos.: 1, 2, 3, 6, 8, 11 and 15  
  Total - 7 
 Percentage 46.67 
(ii)  Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of the replies of the 
Government 
 
 Rec. Sl. No.: Nil  
  Total - Nil 
 Percentage 0.00 
(iii)  Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies 
of the Government have not been accepted by the 
Committee and require reiteration 
 
 Rec. Sl. Nos.: 4, 5, 7 and 12  
  Total - 04  
 Percentage 26.67 
(iv)  Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the  
replies of the Government are of interim in nature 
 
 
 Rec. Sl. Nos.: 9, 10, 13 and 14 
 
 
  Total - 04 
 Percentage 26.66 
 
 
 
 