STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
COMMUNICATIONS AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(2022-23) 
 
 
SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
MINISTRY OF INFORMATION AND BROADCASTING 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
of the Committee contained in their Forty-sixth Report (Seventeenth Lok 
Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants (2023-24)’] 
 
FIFTIETH REPORT 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
 
 
August 2023/ Sravana1945 (Saka) 
 
 
50 


FIFTIETH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
COMMUNICATIONS AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(2022-23) 
 
 
SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
MINISTRY OF INFORMATION AND BROADCASTING 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
of the Committee contained in their Forty-sixth Report (Seventeenth Lok 
Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants (2023-24)] 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 10.08.2023 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 10.08.2023 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
August, 2023/Sravana,1945 (Saka) 


 
CONTENTS 
 Page 
No. 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
(ii) 
INTRODUCTION (iii) 
CHAPTER I Report………………………………………………………………………  
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government…………………………………………………………………… 
 
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of replies of the Government……………………………… 
 
CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and require 
reiteration ……………………………………………………………………. 
 
CHAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies are of 
interim in nature……………………………………………………………… 
 
 ANNEXURES  
I. Minutes of the 17 th sitting of the Committee held on 7th August, 2023   
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in their Forty-sixth Report (Seventeenth 
Lok Sabha)  
 
             
 
(i) 
 

 
Composition of the Standing  Committee on Communications and  
Information Technology (2022-23) 
 
Shri Prataprao  Jadhav - Chairperson 
 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Smt. Sumalatha Ambareesh 
3. Shri Karti P. Chidambaram 
4. Dr. Nishikant Dubey 
5. Smt. Sunita Duggal 
6. Shri Jayadev Galla 
7. Smt. Raksha Nikhil Khadse 
8. Dr. Sukanta Majumdar 
9. Smt. Mahua Moitra 
10. Shri P. R. Natarajan 
11. Shri Santosh Pandey 
12. Col. Rajyavardhan Singh Rathore 
13. Dr. Gaddam Ranjith Reddy 
14. Shri Sanjay Seth 
15. Shri Ganesh Singh 
16. Shri Parvesh Sahib Singh 
17. Shri Shatrughan Prasad Sinha 
18. Shri L.S. Tejasvi Surya 
19. Dr. T. Sumathy (A) Thamizhachi Thangapandian 
20 Dr. M. K. Vishnu Prasad@ 
21. Shri S. Jagathrakshakan$ 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
22. Dr. Anil Agrawal 
23. Shri V. Vijayendra Prasad# 
24. Dr. John Brittas 
25. Shri Syed Nasir Hussain 
26. Shri Ilaiyaraaja 
27. Shri Jaggesh 
28. Shri Praful Patel 
29. Shri Kartikeya Sharma 
30. Shri Jawhar Sircar 
31. Shri Lahar Singh Siroya 
 
Secretariat 
 
1. Shri Satpal Gulati     - Additional Secretary 
2. Smt. A. Jyothirmayi     - Director 
3. Smt. Rinky Singh                       - Executive Officer 
____________________________________________________________________________________ 
Committee constituted w.e.f. 13th September, 2022 vide Para No.5288 of Bulletin Part-II dated                  
4th October, 2022. 
@   Dr. M. K. Vishnu Prasad has been nominated vice Dr. Shashi Tharoor vide Para No. 5311 of Bulletin 
Part-II dated 12th October, 2022. 
$    Shri S. Jagathrakshakan has been nominated vide Para No. 5580 of Bulletin Part –II dated 8th 
December, 2022.  
# Shri V. Vijayendra Prasad has been nominated vice Dr. Laxmikant Bajpayee  vide Rajya Sabha Bulletin 
No. 63085 dated 12th April, 2023 of Parliamentary Bulletin Part II. 
 
(ii) 

 
 
INTRODUCTION 
I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Communications and Information 
Technology (2022-23), having been authorised by the Committee, present this Fiftieth 
Report on Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of 
the Committee contained in their Forty-sixth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on 
‘Demands for Grants (2023-24)’ of the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting.  
 
2. The Forty-sixth Report was presented to Lok Sabha and also laid on the Table of 
Rajya Sabha on 21st March, 2023.  The Ministry of Information and Broadcasting 
furnished their Action Taken Notes on the Observations/Recommendations contained in 
the Forty-sixth Report on 27th June, 2023.  
 
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their sitting held on 
7th August, 2023. 
 
4. For facility of reference and convenience, Observations/Recommendations of the 
Committee have been printed in bold in Chapter-I of the Report.  
 
5. An analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Forty-sixth Report of the Committee is 
given at Annexure-II. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iii) 
 
      New Delhi;   PRATAPRAO JADHAV,  
      7 August, 2023, 
     16 Sravana,1945 (Saka) 
 Chairperson, 
       Standing Committee on 
Communications and Information Technology. 

1 
 
CHAPTER I 
REPORT 
 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Communications and Information 
Technology deals with the action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Forty-sixth Report 
(Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants (2023-24)' relating to the Ministry of 
Information and Broadcasting. 
 
2. The Forty-sixth Report was presented to Lok Sabha/laid in Rajya Sabha on                          
21 March, 2023.  It contained 17 Observations/Recommendations. Replies of the 
Government in respect of all the Observations/Recommendations have been received 
from the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting and are categorized as under:- 
 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by 
the Government 
Rec. Sl. Nos.:- 1, 2, 3, 8, 10, 13, 16 and 17 
 
  Total -08 
Chapter-II 
 
 
 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the replies of the Government 
 
 
  Total - NIL 
Chapter-III 
 
 
 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and 
require reiteration 
Rec. Sl. Nos.:- 6 and 12 
 
  Total - 02 
Chapter-IV 
 
 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government are of interim in nature  
Rec. Sl. No.:- 4, 5, 7, 9, 11, 14 and 15 
 
  Total – 07 
Chapter-V 

2 
 
 
 
3. The Committee trust that utmost importance would be given to 
implementation of the Observations/Recommendations accepted by the 
Government. The Committee further desire that Action Taken Statement on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in Chapter-I and final action taken 
replies to the Observations/Recommendations contained in Chapter-V of this 
Report should be furnished to them at an early date. 
 
4. The Committee will now deal with action taken by the Government on some of 
their recommendations.   
 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 2) 
 
CENTRAL SECTOR SCHEMES (CSS) 
 
5. The Committee, in their 46th Report on the subject 'Demands For Grants               
(2023-24)', had made the following observation/recommendation: 
“The Committee note that a comprehensive rationalization and restructuring of 
the Plan Schemes was carried out by the Ministry of Information and 
Broadcasting in the year 2019-20, which was implemented in 2020-21. As a 
result, 14 Schemes and 13 sub-schemes were reduced to 5 Schemes viz. 
Development Communication & Information Dissemination (DCID), 
Development Communication & Dissemination of Filmic Content (DCDFC), 
Champion Service Sector Scheme (CSSS), Broadcasting Infrastructure 
Development (Prasar Bharati) and Supporting Community Radio (SCR). 
Further, CSSS was merged with DCDFC scheme from FY 2022-23, as the 
objectives of the Champion Services Sector Scheme for Audio Visual Services 
were closely related with the Development Communication and Dissemination 
of Filmic Content scheme of the Ministry. Thus, after the merger of CSSS with 
DCDFC, the Ministry now have four (4) Central Sector Schemes.  The 
Committee note that during the year 2022-23, the allocations for ‘Central 
Sector Schemes’ at BE and RE stage were Rs. 630.00 crore and Rs. 639.00 
crore respectively. The actual utilisation, till 31.01.2023, was Rs. 356.83 crore 
which is 55.84 % of RE allocations. The Committee also note with concern 
that under all the four ‘Central Sector Schemes’ [DCID, DCDFC, BIND and 
Supporting Community Radio Movement in India], there has been 
underutilization of funds during the year 2022-23 and actual expenditure, till 
31.01.2023, for these 4 Central Sector Schemes were 73.19%, 75.78%, 
37.23% and 40% of RE allocations respectively.   
 
In light of the fact that the actual utilisation under two of the four Central Sector 
Schemes (i.e. BIND and Supporting Community Radio Movement), during the 

3 
 
year 2022-23 (till 31.01.2023), was just 37.23% and 40% of RE allocations 
respectively, the Committee observe that the rationalization of ‘Central Sector 
Schemes’, for having effective and better utilisation of resources, does not 
appear to be achieving its desired result. Further, the expenditure under the 
other two Central Sector Schemes (i.e. DCID and DCDFC) were around 70% 
of RE allocations. The Committee note that the Ministry has been able to 
achieve the financial and physical targets to some extent under DCID and 
DCDFC Schemes where the primary objectives of the DCID Scheme is 
targeted towards meeting the requirements of publicity for various Government 
Schemes and that of DCDFC is to promote and preserve quality Indian 
cinemas. However, the financial and physical targets are way too far from the 
targets set under ‘BIND Scheme’ - which aims to improve physical 
infrastructure of Doordarshan and All India Radio and to expand the networks 
and upgrade quality of programmes and transmission - as well as under 
‘Supporting Community Radio Movement in India Scheme’. In the light of 
these, the Committee are of the opinion that after more than 2 years of 
rationalization of Schemes, the Ministry should avoid such lag in the targets by 
addressing the recurrent hindrances impacting ‘Central Sector Schemes’ 
particularly under ‘BIND’.  The Committee recommend the Ministry to ensure 
proper utilisation of funds for meeting the physical target under all the Central 
Sector Schemes, during the year 2023-24. The Committee also recommend 
the Ministry to gear up their mechanism of implementing the physical targets 
under ‘Central Sector Schemes’ as per defined timelines as it will ultimately 
lead to consolidation of resources and result in better utilization of funds. The 
Committee may be apprised about the measures taken alongwith the 
outcomes of the same”. 
 
6. The Ministry of Information and Broadcasting, in their Action Taken Notes, have 
stated  as under: 
 “During the year 2022-23, the allocations for ‘Central Sector Schemes’ at FG 
(Final Grant) stage was ₹ 646.90 crore, out of which 88.01% of funds were 
utilized by the Ministry. Against RE 2022-23 of ₹ 639.00 crore, 89.10% of 
funds were utilized under Central Sector Scheme. 
Development Communication & Information Dissemination (DCID) utilized 
95.59% of Final Grant, Development Communication & Dissemination of 
Filmic Content (DCDFC) used 96.50% of allocated FG whereas Supporting 
Community Radio (SCR) used 88.94% of its allocated FG and Broadcasting 
Infrastructure Development (Prasar Bharati) utilized 72.82% out of Final Grant 
allocated to this scheme. 
 Under DCID Scheme, a quarterly planner of annual physical targets has 
been prepared and targets have been assigned to various regions/units of PIB 
accordingly. Further, a monthly calendar of physical targets is also being 
framed in a centralized manner and will be shared with regions/units of PIB for 
compliance. Monthly & Quarterly calendar of physical targets will help in 
achieving the targets in a phased manner and will also help the regions/units 
of PIB in maintaining the continuum of activities. It will also ensure better 
utilization of funds in defined timelines. 

4 
 
 To improve the performance under BIND, it is the constant endeavor of 
Prasar Bharati to complete the projects within the specified time frame. 
Monitoring mechanism has been strengthened considerably. Procurement 
procedures have been streamlined. Project review meetings are being held 
regularly at Zonal level & HQ level and various activities involved in 
procurement of capital equipment and execution of works are critically 
assessed & targets are fixed. The frequency of monitoring meetings has been 
increased at all levels of Directorate & Prasar Bharati Secretariat. Use of 
digital platform viz. e-office, e-tendering, procurement through GEM, Video 
conference is also being utilized. 
The Integrated Project Monitoring Cell (IPMC) created under the chairmanship 
of CEO (PB) is monitoring the progress of projects and improvement in their 
implementation. Review meeting to assess progress of BIND Scheme is also 
taken by Secretary (I&B) from time to time. 
 
 For better utilization of funds under Supporting Community Radio, the 
Ministry has taken several measures to ensure that physical as well as 
financial Targets are met under the Scheme. Activities to be conducted during 
2023-24 have been planned for timely implementation. Output and Outcome 
based targets have been fixed”. 
 
 
7. In light of the fact that under two of the four Central Sector Schemes i.e. 
[Broadcasting Infrastructure Network Development (BIND) and Supporting 
Community Radio Movement (SCR)], the actual utilization during the year 2022-23 
(till 31.01.2023), was just 37.23% and 40% of RE allocations respectively, the 
Committee had recommended the Ministry to gear up their mechanism of 
implementing the physical targets under ‘Central Sector Schemes’ particularly 
under BIND scheme. The Committee had also desired to be apprised about the 
measures taken along with their outcomes. Responding to this, the Ministry have 
replied that during the year 2022-23, the allocation for ‘Central Sector Schemes’ at 
Final Grant Stage was Rs. 646.90 crore, out of which 88.01% of funds were 
utilized. Further, out of the Final Grant allocated, 72.82% have been utilized under 
BIND (Prasar Bharati) and 88.94% under SCR. They have also informed that the 
Integrated Project Monitoring Cell (IPMC) created under the Chairmanship of CEO 
(Prasar Bharati) is monitoring the progress of projects and improvement in their 
implementation. Further, for better utilization of funds under Supporting 
Community Radio, several measures have been taken; Output and Outcome 
based targets have been fixed and activities have been planned for the year 2023-
24 for timely implementation of SCR Schemes. As the reply of the Ministry is 

5 
 
silent on the outcome of all the measures taken, the Committee desire to be 
apprised about the outcome of all the measures taken to achieve the physical and 
financial targets under all Central Sector Schemes (CSS) including BIND Scheme. 
The Ministry may also elaborate about the Output and Outcome based targets 
fixed for SCR Schemes along with the activities planned for their timely 
implementation. The Ministry may also provide details of the steps that will be 
taken to ensure full utilization of fund during the financial year 2023-24.  
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 3) 
 
BROADCASTING SECTOR (INCLUDING PRASAR BHARATI) 
 
Broadcasting Infrastructure Network Development (BIND) 
8. The Committee, in their 46th Report on the subject 'Demands For Grants               
(2023-24)', had made the following observation/recommendation: 
 
“The Committee note that the basic objective of the ‘BIND’ Scheme is 
Modernization (including Digitization) Augmentation & Replacement of 
Transmitters, Broadcast Equipments & Studios, FM Expansion/Replacement, 
Strengthening of Coverage in sensitive areas, Expansion of TV Channels, E-
Governance, Content Development, etc. BIND Scheme also provides support 
to Prasar Bharati for strengthening border area infrastructure with special 
focus on development of J&K and NE. The Budgetary allocations for BIND 
Scheme, for the year 2023-24 (at BE stage) is Rs. 600.00 crore. During the 
year 2022-23, the BE and RE allocations have been same i.e. Rs. 315.00 
crore. However, it is a matter of concern to note that the actual expenditure till 
31st January, 2023 was just Rs. 117.29 crore which is 37.23% of RE 
allocations. Regarding under-utilisation, the Ministry furnished a few reasons 
which inter-alia include: (i) Cancellation of tender of FM project like Mobile FM 
Transmitters due to technical reasons, Tower erection work still under 
progress at some places, delay in supply of 10 kW FM Transmitters, delay in 
acquisition of site at Dahod (Gujarat) due to cost factor;             (ii) Delay in 
receipt of Decision Letter (DL) from WPC for Supply, Installation, Testing and 
Commissioning (SITC) for uplink Antenna system (7 locations) &  UPS system 
for 11 locations; (iii) SITC of End to End File based workflow system at DDK 
Hyderabad -  delayed by the firm due to different technical reasons and 
technical requirement of Kendra; (iv) Cancellation of the tender of 
Procurement of archive system  Linear Open Tape (LTO) cancelled due to 
administrative reasons; (v) Cancellation of tenders for procurement of DD Free 
Dish Receiver Sets due to limited participation of bidders and unreasonable 
higher price bids/quoted rates due to low participation of bidders; (vi) Tower 
strengthening work at Gangtok got delayed due to recommendation of CCW 
based on the report of IIT Guwahati; and (vii) Delay due to non-compliance of 
terms and conditions of the agreement by the producers in some content 
cases.   The Ministry has informed that most of the broadcast equipment are 
imported with no production in India. This procedure takes considerable time. 

6 
 
The Committee note that there has been a shortfall in utilization which is also 
due to Covid-19 pandemic during which movement of man and material 
across the globe was impacted. While observing that having indigenous 
manufacturing of broadcasting equipment would reduce the dependence on 
imports, the Committee hope that since the impact of Covid 19 pandemic is 
over, the Ministry would adhere to their assurance that efforts will be made to 
take action with full speed and the creation of portals for  E-procurement 
through GeM would help in meeting the requirement of Transmitters on time. 
The Ministry may apprise the Committee about the initiatives envisaged to 
have proper utilisation and to meet the physical and financial targets set for 
the year 2023–24”.  
 
9. The Ministry of Information and Broadcasting, in their Action Taken Notes, have 
stated  as under: 
“It is the constant endeavor of Prasar Bharati to complete the projects within 
the specified time frame. Monitoring mechanism has been strengthened 
considerably. Procurement procedures have been streamlined. Project review 
meetings are being held regularly at Zonal level & HQ level and various 
activities involved in procurement of capital equipment and execution of works 
are critically assessed & targets are fixed. The frequency of monitoring 
meetings has been increased at all levels of Directorate & Prasar Bharati 
Secretariat. Use of digital platform viz. e-office, e-tendering, procurement 
through GEM, Video conference is also being utilized. 
The Integrated Project Monitoring Cell (IPMC) created under the chairmanship 
of CEO (PB) is monitoring the progress of projects and improvement in their 
implementation. Review meeting to assess progress of BIND Scheme is also 
taken by Secretary (I&B) from time to time. 
An amount of Rs. 600 crore has been allocated to PB in BE 2023-24 for BIND 
Scheme. Prasar Bharati would strive to ensure its full utilization”. 
 
10. The Committee in their 46th Report, had noted that the actual expenditure 
under BIND Scheme, till 31st January, 2023, was just Rs. 117.29 crore which is 
37.23% of RE allocations. Regarding under-utilisation, the Ministry had furnished 
a few reasons and had also informed that most of the broadcast equipment were 
imported with no production in India. While observing that having indigenous 
manufacturing of broadcasting equipment would reduce the dependence on 
imports, the Committee had hoped that the Ministry would adhere to their 
assurance that efforts will be made to take action with full speed and the creation 
of portals for  E-procurement through GeM would help in meeting the requirement 
of Transmitters on time. The Committee had also desired to be apprised about the 
initiatives envisaged to have proper utilisation and to meet the physical and 
financial targets set for the year 2023–24.  The Ministry, in their Action Taken 

7 
 
Notes, have outlined several measures which inter-alia include (i) Monitoring 
mechanism has been strengthened; (ii) Procurement procedures have been 
streamlined; (iii) The Integrated Project Monitoring Cell (IPMC) has been created 
under the Chairmanship of CEO (PB) for monitoring the progress of projects and 
improvement in their implementation; (iv) Prasar Bharati would strive to fully 
utilize the amount of Rs. 600 crore allocated for BIND Scheme in BE 2023-24, etc. 
The Committee would like to be apprised of the outcome of all the above-
mentioned measures taken by the Ministry to meet the physical and financial 
targets under BIND Scheme.  
 
CONTENT CREATION AND CONTENT PROCUREMENT POLICY 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 6) 
11. The Committee, in their 46th Report on the subject 'Demands For Grants               
(2023-24)', had made the following observation/recommendation:  
“The Committee note that to streamline the process for acquisition of 
programmes, a comprehensive content procurement policy has now been 
notified by Prasar Bharati. The Committee note the submission of Ministry 
that they will focus on content which is very important in light of growing 
competition from private networks. The Committee hope that the Ministry and 
Prasar Bharati realize the importance of content and the need to avoid 
outgoes and losses. Further, the Committee note that Doordarshan is in the 
process of revamping the content of its channels according to need and taste 
of audience both at National and Regional levels.  The Committee also note 
and appreciate that the budget allocated to AIR and Doordarshan for content 
creation during the year 2023-24 is Rs. 498.32 crore which includes Rs. 
353.32 crore from IEBR and Rs.145.00 crore under BIND. With respect to 
plans to be self-sufficient and steps taken to get more advertisements from 
private sector, the Committee are happy to note that the Ministry/Prasar 
Bharati is taking several measures which inter-alia include (i) Sales Division is 
approaching both government and private sector directly and also through 
agencies to get business; (ii) Programme Heads have been asked to make all 
efforts for revenue generation; (iii) Monitoring of Revenue is being done on a 
regular basis; (iv) Doordarshan sales Rate Card has been revised to remain 
competitive in the Market and (v) All producers are being asked to have the 
commercial angle in mind while conceiving the content and work in close 
coordination with sales division in monetization. The Committee appreciate the 
initiatives taken by the Ministry to increase the level of self sufficiency and for 
getting more advertisements. The Committee recommend the Ministry to 
utilize Rs. 498.32 crore allocated for content creation judiciously. Further, the 
Committee desire to be apprised about the financial targets set and achieved 
for content creation during 2023-24. The Ministry may also provide details of 
the targets for revenue generation and actual revenue generation through 

8 
 
content during 2023-24.    The Committee recommend Ministry/Prasar Bharati 
to ensure both financial accountability and content performance. It goes 
without saying that if content is good and improved, it will automatically attract 
advertisements and commercials. The Committee feel that the initiatives for 
having good content is the need of the hour particularly in light of emergence 
of Over-The-Top (OTT) Platforms which are providing myriad range of 
content/programme.  The Committee, therefore, recommend the Ministry to 
have professionalism in improving and procuring the content and to focus on 
creating and getting quality content so as to match the competitive market as 
well as for revenue generation”. 
 
12. The Ministry of Information and Broadcasting, in their Action Taken Notes, have 
stated  as under: 
"The actual revenue generation during 2023-24 will be available only after 
March 2024. However, the commercial revenue generation for the FY 2022-23 
(upto February 2023) is 363.44 Crore. Calculation     sheet is as follows: 
  
Sl. 
No 
REVENUE OF AIR 
For the FY 2022-23 (Upto Feb 2023) 
REVENUE OF Doordarshan 
For the FY 2022-23 (Upto Feb 2023) 
Figures in crore 
1 Commercial revenue From CBS 
Centres and CSU 
182.02 Commercial revenue from channels 
including CRDs, DCD and Ministry of 
agriculture and farmer welfare 
177.91
2 PB Resources (AIR Component ) 55.25 PB Resources (DD Component ) 37.06  
3 PB Archives 0.41 DTH Carriage fees 674.72
4 Misc. deposits 0.36 Misc. deposits 0.56 
5 Total Revenue 238.04 Revenue from Digital operations 3.1 
Total 893.35
 The commercial revenue of AIR is 182.02+0.41 = 182.43 Crore  
 The commercial revenue of Doordarshan is 177.91+3.1 = 181.01 Crore  
Total Commercial Revenue during FY 22-23(upto Feb 2023) = 363.44 Crore 
 
13. The Committee, in their 46th Report on DFG (2023-24), had recommended 
the Ministry: 
(i) To utilize Rs. 498.32 crore allocated for content creation 
judiciously; 
(ii) To apprise about the financial targets set and achieved for content 
creation during 2023-24; 
(iii)  To provide details of the targets for revenue generation and actual     
revenue generation through content during 2023-24; 
(iv) To ensure both financial accountability and content performance; 
and 
(v) To have professionalism in improving and procuring the content 
and to focus on creating and getting quality content so as to 
match the competitive market as well as for revenue generation. 
 

9 
 
The Committee note that the Ministry, in their Action Taken Notes, have 
been silent on the targets set for revenue generation for 2023-24. However, they 
have stated that the actual revenue generation during 2023-24 will be available 
only after March 2024. Further, it is stated that the commercial revenue 
generation for the year 2022-23 (upto February 2023) is 363.44 crore. According to 
the details provided by the Ministry, the total Commercial Revenue during 2022-
23 (up to February 2023), is Rs. 363.44 crore wherein Commercial Revenue of AIR 
and DD are Rs. 182.43 crore and Rs. 181.01 crore respectively. The Committee, 
while expressing concern over the fact that no reply has been furnished by the 
Ministry on some of the above-mentioned recommendations, desire to be 
apprised about the action taken on the point nos. (i), (ii), (iv) and (v).   
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 10) 
 
Nation Films Development Corporation (NFDC) - Merger of Four Media Units with  
NFDC 
 
14. The Committee, in their 46th Report on the subject 'Demands For Grants               
(2023-24)', had made the following observation/recommendation:  
“The Committee note that the National Film Development Corporation (NFDC) 
Ltd. was set up by the Government of India in 1975 with the primary objective 
of planning, promoting and organizing an integrated and efficient development 
of the Indian Film Industry in accordance with the National Economic Policy 
and Objectives laid down by the Central Government from time to time. NFDC 
was re-incorporated in the year 1980 by merging the Film Finance Corporation 
(FFC) and Indian Motion Picture Export Corporation (IMPEC) with NFDC. On 
23rd December 2020, the Union Cabinet had decided to merge four Film Media 
Units, namely Films Division (FD), National Film Archive of India (NFAI), 
Directorate of Film Festivals (DFF) and Children’s Film Society, India (CFSI) 
with National Film Development Corporation Ltd. (NFDC) by expanding the 
Memorandum and Articles of Association (MoAA) of NFDC, which would then 
carry out all the activities hitherto performed by them and to all consequential 
action/ actions required to be taken, including closure of FD/ NFAI/ DFF/ CFSI. 
The Ministry informed that all operations of Films Division, Children’s Film 
Society, India (CFSI), Directorate of Film Festivals (DFF) and National Film 
Archive of India (NFAI) have ceased w.e.f. 31.12.2022 and their activities have 
been transferred to NFDC. The ownership of all assets shall vest in this 
Ministry and NFDC shall have the Right to Use for Operations and 
Maintenance of these assets. The Committee have taken note of the fact that 
the Umbrella Organization, NFDC, consequent upon the merger of Film Media 
Units is now uniquely placed with regard to Promotion, Production & 
Preservation of Filmic content - all under one management.  The Ministry have 

10 
 
informed that no objectives of the closed Media Units have been affected 
adversely as these are being carried out by NFDC from 01.01.2023 and there 
is no retrenchment of human resources of the closed Film Media Units. 
Nevertheless, the Committee recommend the Minsitry to ensure that the 
objectives of all the four closed Media Units are carried out in their essence 
even after the merger of these four Units with NDFC and apprise about the 
hindrances in doing so. The Ministry may also be vigilant about the impact of 
the merger the four Media Units on their objectives and targets.  The 
Committee feel it would be prudent if the impact of the merger is analysed in 
the beginning itself so as to avoid any aftermath failure. The Ministry may also 
look into the grievances of the employees who have been affected by the 
aforesaid merger and apprise the Committee of the same, if any. Thus, now 
that the merger is completed, the Committee also  recommend the Ministry to 
apprise the physical and financial targets under NFDC and ensure that the 
target set for the year 2023-24 may be achieved as per the deadlines.  The 
Ministry may also apprise about the concerns expressed regarding merger 
alongwith the action taken by them on those concerns, if any. Further, in view 
of the submission of the Ministry that with the merger of NFDC they will be 
able to do some commercial utilization of archived films, the Committee desire 
to be apprised of the income so generated and the utilisation status of the 
same. The Committee may also be apprised of the creative and supportive 
role of the Ministry in films”. 
 
15. The Ministry of Information and Broadcasting, in their Action Taken Notes, have 
stated  as under: 
“The ownership of all the assets of closed Film Media Units shall be with 
Ministry of I&B. The matter of Right to Use of the assets by NFDC is under 
submission to IFD. The activities like International Film Festival of India (IFFI), 
Mumbai International Film Festival (MIFF), National Film Awards (NFA) have 
already been organized successfully by NFDC. The other activities transferred 
to NFDC are also being carried out efficiently. 
With regard to progress of physical and financial targets under NFDC set for 
the year 2023-24 and explaining income from commercial utilization of 
archived films, necessary directions have been given to NFDC for compliance. 
The grievances received from the staff of these merged Film Media Units, who 
have now been declared as Surplus and placed in Surplus Staff 
Establishment, have been resolved. 
Regarding concerns expressed relating to merger and the creative and 
supportive role of the Ministry in films, it is stated that it is the constant 
endeavour by this Ministry to revive the new role and responsibility of NFDC. 
Action on various issues including revision of MoAA of NFDC is under active 
consideration in this Ministry”. 
 
16. The Committee, in their Original Report, had noted that the merger of four 
Film Media Units, namely Films Division (FD), National Film Archive of India 
(NFAI), Directorate of Film Festivals (DFF) and Children’s Film Society, India 
(CFSI) have been completed with National Film Development Corporation Ltd. 

11 
 
(NFDC) and had recommended that the physical and financial targets set under 
NFDC for the year 2023-24 may be achieved as per the deadlines.  The Committee 
had also desired to be apprised about the concerns regarding the merger along 
with the action taken, if any. The Ministry, in their Action Taken Notes, have 
stated that “necessary directions have been given to NFDC for compliance of 
physical and financial targets under NFDC set for the year 2023-24 and explaining 
income from commercial utilization of archived films”. They have also stated that 
action on various issues including revision of Memorandum and Articles of 
Association (MoAA) of NFDC is under active consideration. The Committee desire 
to know the details of the directions given to NFDC along with the mechanism 
envisaged to ensure the compliance of the said directions. The Committee may 
be apprised about the various issues of NFDC which are under active 
consideration by the Ministry. The Committee would like to know whether there has 
been any instance of failure/delay from NFDC in honouring the contracts which were 
earlier executed by the erstwhile Media units. The Ministry may also provide details of 
the total staff (category-wise) who were declared surplus and were placed in surplus 
staff because of the merger. The details should also include their entitled salary and 
allowances. The Committee would also like to know about the timeline by which the 
surplus staff would be redeployed.  
 
National Centre for Excellence for Animation, Visual effects, Gaming and Comics 
(NCOE-AVGC) 
 
 (Recommendation Sl. No. 12) 
17. The Committee, in their Original Report, had made following 
Observation/Recommendation: 
“The Committee note that to realize the potential of the Indian AVGC industry, 
announcement for formation of an Animation, Visual effects, Gaming, and 
Comic (AVGC) promotion Task Force was made in the Budget speech for the 
fiscal year 2022-2023.  The AVGC Task Force was constituted on 08.04.2022. 
After having collated the recommendations of the sub task force on subjects 
viz. policy formulation, skill development, education and gaming, a final report 
was prepared and was duly approved by the Secretary (I&B) on 15.12.2022. 
The Committee observe that the AVGC Task Force have broadly 
recommended for    (i) Market access and development through information, 
education, communication and outreach; (ii) Skilling and mentorship by 
defining AVGC related job roles, qualification packs and strong integration with 
the education framework; (iii) Standardization of education focused on AVGC 
sector; (iv) Enhancing accessibility to technology vis-à-vis creating financial 

12 
 
viability; and (v) Promoting ‘Create in India’ initiative with exclusive focus on 
content creation while giving equal weightage to skilling, re-skilling and 
upskilling of people across gender, economic background and geography, 
thus, diversifying the sector through equity and inclusion.  The Ministry have 
informed that pursuant to the AVGC Task Force final recommendations, they 
have contemplated some key actions for the implementation of the 
recommendations of the Task Force which inter-alia include (i) need for 
creation of a National AVGC-XR Mission with a budget outlay for providing 
promotional funding and support infrastructure; (ii)  Need to establish a 
National Centre of Excellence (NCOE) for the AVGC sector to become an 
international reference point across Skilling, Education, Industry Development 
and Research & Innovation for the AVGC sector; (iii) To seek Cabinet 
approval on the Draft National Policy for AVGC Sector potential realization; (iv) 
Deliberations with State/UT Governments for adopting Model State Policy 
prepared by the task force for growth of AVGC sector in their respective 
State/UT. The Committee find that currently there is no Law/Rule with respect 
to AVGC sector and there is no concrete budgetary allocation provided for this 
sector. However, once the National and Model State Policy is approved, 
financial requirement for the same shall be drawn up. The Ministry have also 
informed that the Draft National Policy is still in consultation stage and the 
recommended State Model Policy for AVGC-XR Sector has been circulated to 
the States for consultation. Further, the Committee were informed that States 
like Karnataka, Telangana, Maharashtra and Tamil Nadu are advanced in the 
field of AVGC sector and most of the other States are behind in this sector. 
The Committee appreciate the fact that most of the issues related to non-
development of AVGC sector, such as unavailability of infrastructures, 
technology access etc., have been addressed in the draft National and model 
State policy and once the policies are approved, the AVGC mission will 
encompass all of these issues and provide strategies on how to take this 
sector forward. With respect to rules and policy for gaming and gambling 
industry, the Ministry has informed that recently, the Government has decided 
that the MeitY will look into the online gaming and consequently frame rules 
and it will be dealt with by MeitY. On the concerns related to advertisements 
for betting and gambling, the Ministry has informed that some commercials of 
betting and gambling still continue because there is a thin line between 
gaming and gambling advertisements. For example, the Supreme Court has 
called game like Rummy as a game of skill.  
 
The Committee appreciate all the aforesaid initiatives undertaken by the 
Ministry to realize the potential of the Indian AVGC industry. Nevertheless, the 
Committee feel that the Ministry will have to gear up the entire process of 
implementing the AVGC-XR Mission because India is still at a nascent stage 
in this sector and opportunities are galore in AVGC Sector. The Committee 
also feel that there is a need for facilitating infrastructure and accessibility to 
technology relating to the AVGC sector in States/UTs that are lagging behind 
as well as in tier-II and tier-III cities. The Committee, feel that the need of the 
hour is to have a coordinated effort with all the concerned Ministries alongwith 
the industry and other stakeholders. The Committee, therefore, recommend 
the following and desire to be apprised accordingly: 

13 
 
(i) To fix timeline and quarterly targets for creation of National 
AVGC-XR Mission and for establishing  the National Centre of 
Excellence (NCOE); 
(ii) To Complete the consultation process with States/UTs and other 
Stakeholders within the current financial year ; 
(iii) Apprise the Committee about the decision for having specific 
budgetary allocations for this Sector; 
(iv) To fix the year-wise targets for each of the initiatives under AVGC 
Sector; 
(v) To apprise the Committee about the main points proposed in the 
Draft National and model state policy alongwith the roadmap 
year-wise; 
(vi) Measures taken for coordinated effort with MeitY w.r.t. regulating 
gambling and betting; and 
(vii) Apprise the Committee about the plans for leveraging Indian 
comic characters and comic market under the Mission of 
promoting AVGC Sector in India”. 
 
18. In their Action Taken Notes, the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting have 
submitted as under: 
“To promote AVGC Sector in the country, an Animation, Visual Effects, 
Gaming and Comics (AVGC) Promotion Task Force was constituted on 8th 
April, 2022 headed by Secretary (I&B) and inter alia  include Secretary of 
relevant Ministries/Department with administrative secretaries handling AVGC 
policy in selected States, representative from Core Practitioners from AVGC 
Industry, FICCI, CII, etc.  
As decided in the first meeting of the AVGC Promotion Task Force held on 4th 
May, 2022, four Sub-Task Forces were also constituted namely, for Education, 
Skilling, Gaming and Industry & Policy. 
After having collated the recommendations of the sub task force on subjects 
viz. policy formulation, skill development, education and gaming, a final report 
was prepared and was duly approved by the Secretary (1&B) on 15.12.2022. 
This Ministry has uploaded the AVGC Task Force’s Report including draft 
National Policy and draft Model State Policy on Ministry’s Website   on 23rd 
January, 2023 for offering comments. All the concerned Ministries/ 
Departments of Central Government, States, UTs and Industry stakeholders 
were also requested to offer their comments on the AVGC Task Force’s 
Report.   
A National Workshop and consultation on Draft National Policy and Draft 
Model State Policy has been organised on 18th April, 2023 to take view of 
States/UTs and Industry stakeholders.  Now further procedures of taking it to 
Cabinet is being initiated.  
Further, Ministry is in process of establishing the National Centre of 
Excellence (NCOE) for AVGC. NCoE has been proposed to be set up on 
Shareholder agreement basis as Section 8 company in collaboration of FICCI, 
CII and State Government of Maharashtra. In-principal decision has been 
taken to establish NCoE in the Ministry. The same has been submitted to the 
Committee of Establishment Expenditure (CEE). Subsequently, Cabinet 
approval will be sought. 

14 
 
As this Ministry has to obtain Cabinet Approval on both National AVGC Policy 
and Setting of NCoE, it is not feasible to fix timelines creation of National 
AVGC-XR Mission and for establishing the National Centre of Excellence 
(NCOE)”. 
 
 
19.   While noting all the initiatives of the Ministry to realize the potential of the 
Indian Animation, Visual Effects, Gaming and Comics (AVGC) industry, the 
Committee, in their 46th Report,  had felt that the Ministry will have to gear up the 
entire process of implementing the AVGC-XR Mission because India is still at a 
nascent stage in AVGC sector and opportunities are galore in AVGC Sector. 
Accordingly, the Committee had recommended/desired following: 
(i) To fix timeline and quarterly targets for creation of National AVGC-
XR Mission and for establishing  the National Centre of Excellence 
(NCOE); 
(ii) To Complete the consultation process with States/UTs and other 
Stakeholders within the current financial year ; 
(iii) Apprise the Committee about the decision for having specific 
budgetary allocations for this Sector; 
(iv) To fix the year-wise targets for each of the initiatives under AVGC 
Sector; 
(v) To apprise the Committee about the main points proposed in the 
Draft National and model state policy alongwith the roadmap year-
wise; 
(vi) Measures taken for coordinated effort with MeitY w.r.t. regulating 
gambling and betting; and 
(vii) Apprise the Committee about the plans for leveraging Indian 
comic characters and comic market under the Mission of 
promoting AVGC Sector in India." 
 
The Committee note that the Ministry have updated about the workshop 
and consultation on Draft National Policy and Draft Model State Policy and they 
have stated that they are in the process of establishing the National Centre of 
Excellence (NCOE) for AVGC and in-principal decision has been taken to 
establish NCoE in the Ministry. The Ministry have also stated that as they have to 
obtain Cabinet Approval on both National AVGC Policy and Setting of NCoE, it is 
not feasible to fix timelines creation of National AVGC-XR Mission and for 
establishing the National Centre of Excellence (NCOE). In view of the importance 
of this AVGC sector, the Committee express concern over Ministry’s silence on 
other recommendations of the Committee relating to this sector. The Committee, 
therefore, while reiterating their recommendation, desire for an updated status of 
the Action Taken on point nos. (iii) to (vii). 
***** 

15 
 
CHAPTER II 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN 
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 1) 
 
BUDGET OVERVIEW AND DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2023-24) 
 
The Ministry of Information and Broadcasting is the focal point regarding policy 
matters relating to private broadcasting, administering of the public broadcasting service 
(Prasar Bharati), multimedia advertising and publicity of the policies and programmes of 
the Government of India, film promotion and certification and regulation of print and 
digital media. Demand No. 61 covers the expenditure of the Ministry of Information and 
Broadcasting and its attached/sub-ordinate offices and autonomous/grantee bodies, 
including Prasar Bharati.  For the year 2023-24, as against the proposed sum of Rs. 
5199.51 crore, an amount of Rs. 4692.00 crore has been fixed for M/o I&B at the BE 
stage. Out of this, Rs. 1105.00 crore has been fixed for the ‘Central Sector Schemes’ 
against the proposed sum of Rs. 1519.05 crore; Rs. 535.50 crore has been earmarked 
for the ‘Establishment Expenditure of the Centre’ against the proposed amount of           
Rs. 572.65 crore and Rs. 3051.50 crore is fixed for ‘Other Central Expenditure 
[including those on Central Public Sector Enterprises (CPSEs) and Autonomous Bodies] 
against the proposed sum of Rs. 3107.83 crore.      
 
The Committee note that during the year 2022-23, the BE allocation was Rs. 
3980.77 crore which was increased to Rs. 4182.00 crore at RE stage, however, the 
actual expenditure till 31st January, 2023 was Rs. 3403.54 crore which is 81.39 % of RE 
allocation. The utilisation percentage (w.r.t RE) for three categories i.e. Central Sector 
Schemes, Establishment Expenditure of the Centre and ‘other Central Expenditure', 
during the year 2022-23, were 77.47%, 55.84% and 87.68% respectively. The 
Committee note that the Schemes that suffered due to underutilization of funds during 
the year 2022-23, include Community Radio Station and Broadcasting Infrastructure 
Network Development (BIND) Schemes. When asked for the reasons for under-
utilisation of funds during 2022-23, the Ministry replied that upto 31.01.2023 they had 
utilized 81.39% of RE allocations and it is expected that the funds will be fully utilized 
upto the end of Financial Year 2022-23. While noting that the utilisation trend for last 4 
years (except for the year 2022-23) has improved and the Ministry has utilized more 
than 90% of allocations made at RE stage, the Committee hope that the Ministry will 
keep up their assurance of fully utilizing the funds allocated for the Year 2022-23. The 
Committee desire to be apprised about the updated status of the fund utilized, during 

16 
 
the year 2022-23, alongwith the status of the physical targets that were set 
corresponding for the remaining unutilized fund for the year 2022-23. The Committee 
recommend the Ministry to ensure full utilisation even during the year 2023-24 and look 
into the feasibility of preparing a Statement with quarterly financial and physical targets 
set and achieved during the year 2023-24. The Ministry may also apprise about the 
outcome of the initiatives taken for improving the performance under ‘Broadcasting 
Infrastructure Network Development (BIND)’ and ‘Supporting Community Radio 
Movement in India’ Schemes that have suffered due to underutilization of funds during 
the year 2022-23. 
 
Reply of the Government 
During 2022-23, Ministry utilized 96.22% of its total allocated funds of ₹ 4,182.00 
crore. The utilization percentage (w.r.t. Final Grant) for three categories i.e. Central 
Sector Schemes, Establishment Expenditure of the Centre and ‘Other Central 
Expenditure', during the year 2022-23, were 88.01%, 97.00% and 97.86% respectively. 
Under Central Sector Scheme, Ministry utilized 88.01% of its Final Grant of ₹ 
646.90 crore. Out of this, DCID utilized 95.59%, DCDFC 96.50%, SCR 88.94% and 
BIND 72.82% of their allocated funds.  Physical targets are set for a quarter as such. Quantifying the same for a portion 
of the quarter may not be feasible. However, the physical targets set for the year 2022-
23 along with progress thereon in the statement of Output Outcome Monitoring 
Framework (2022-23) is enclosed at Annexure-I. 
To improve the performance under BIND, it is the constant endeavor of Prasar 
Bharati to complete the projects within the specified time frame. Monitoring mechanism 
has been strengthened considerably. Procurement procedures have been streamlined. 
Project review meetings are being held regularly at Zonal level & HQ level and various 
activities involved in procurement of capital equipment and execution of works are 
critically assessed & targets are fixed. The frequency of monitoring meetings has been 
increased at all levels of Directorate & Prasar Bharati Secretariat. Use of digital platform 
viz e-office, e-tendering, procurement through GEM, Video conference is also being 
utilized. 
  The Integrated Project Monitoring Cell (IPMC) created under the chairmanship of 
CEO (PB) is monitoring the progress of projects and improvement in their 
implementation. Review meeting to assess progress of BIND Scheme is also taken by 
Secretary(I&B) from time to time. 
An amount of Rs. 600 crore has been allocated to PB in BE 2023-24 for BIND Scheme. 
Prasar Bharati would strive to ensure its full utilization. 
 

17 
 
As far as Supporting Community Radio is concerned, the Ministry has taken 
several measures to ensure that physical as well as financial Targets are met under the 
Scheme. Activities to be conducted during 2023-24 has been planned for timely 
implementation. 
 
[Ministry of Information and Broadcasting O.M. No. W-11/17/2023-PC Cell  
dated   .06.2023] 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 2) 
 
CENTRAL SECTOR SCHEMES (CSS) 
 
The Committee note that a comprehensive rationalization and restructuring of the 
Plan Schemes was carried out by the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting in the 
year 2019-20, which was implemented in 2020-21. As a result, 14 Schemes and 13 
sub-schemes were reduced to 5 Schemes viz. Development Communication & 
Information Dissemination (DCID), Development Communication & Dissemination of 
Filmic Content (DCDFC), Champion Service Sector Scheme (CSSS), Broadcasting 
Infrastructure Development (Prasar Bharati) and Supporting Community Radio (SCR). 
Further, CSSS was merged with DCDFC scheme from FY 2022-23, as the objectives of 
the Champion Services Sector Scheme for Audio Visual Services were closely related 
with the Development Communication and Dissemination of Filmic Content scheme of 
the Ministry. Thus, after the merger of CSSS with DCDFC, the Ministry now have four 
(4) Central Sector Schemes.  The Committee note that during the year 2022-23, the 
allocations for ‘Central Sector Schemes’ at BE and RE stage were Rs. 630.00 crore and 
Rs. 639.00 crore respectively. The actual utilisation, till 31.01.2023, was Rs. 356.83 
crore which is 55.84 % of RE allocations. The Committee also note with concern that 
under all the four ‘Central Sector Schemes’ [DCID, DCDFC, BIND and Supporting 
Community Radio Movement in India], there has been underutilization of funds during 
the year 2022-23 and actual expenditure, till 31.01.2023, for these 4 Central Sector 
Schemes were 73.19%, 75.78%, 37.23% and 40% of RE allocations respectively.   
 
In light of the fact that the actual utilisation under two of the four Central Sector 
Schemes (i.e. BIND and Supporting Community Radio Movement), during the year 
2022-23 (till 31.01.2023), was just 37.23% and 40% of RE allocations respectively, the 
Committee observe that the rationalization of ‘Central Sector Schemes’, for having 
effective and better utilisation of resources, does not appear to be achieving its desired 
result. Further, the expenditure under the other two Central Sector Schemes (i.e. DCID 
and DCDFC) were around 70% of RE allocations. The Committee note that the Ministry 

18 
 
has been able to achieve the financial and physical targets to some extent under DCID 
and DCDFC Schemes where the primary objectives of the DCID Scheme is targeted 
towards meeting the requirements of publicity for various Government Schemes and 
that of DCDFC is to promote and preserve quality Indian cinemas. However, the 
financial and physical targets are way too far from the targets set under ‘BIND Scheme’ 
- which aims to improve physical infrastructure of Doordarshan and All India Radio and 
to expand the networks and upgrade quality of programmes and transmission - as well 
as under ‘Supporting Community Radio Movement in India Scheme’. In the light of 
these, the Committee are of the opinion that after more than 2 years of rationalization of 
Schemes, the Ministry should avoid such lag in the targets by addressing the recurrent 
hindrances impacting ‘Central Sector Schemes’ particularly under ‘BIND’.  The 
Committee recommend the Ministry to ensure proper utilisation of funds for meeting the 
physical target under all the Central Sector Schemes, during the year 2023-24. The 
Committee also recommend the Ministry to gear up their mechanism of implementing 
the physical targets under ‘Central Sector Schemes’ as per defined timelines as it will 
ultimately lead to consolidation of resources and result in better utilization of funds. The 
Committee may be apprised about the measures taken alongwith the outcomes of the 
same. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 During the year 2022-23, the allocations for ‘Central Sector Schemes’ at FG 
(Final Grant) stage was ₹ 646.90 crore, out of which 88.01% of funds were utilized by 
the Ministry. Against RE 2022-23 of ₹ 639.00 crore, 89.10% of funds were utilized 
under Central Sector Scheme. 
Development Communication & Information Dissemination (DCID) utilized 95.59% of 
Final Grant, Development Communication & Dissemination of Filmic Content (DCDFC) 
used 96.50% of allocated FG whereas Supporting Community Radio (SCR) used 
88.94% of its allocated FG and Broadcasting Infrastructure Development (Prasar 
Bharati) utilized 72.82% out of Final Grant allocated to this scheme. 
 
 Under DCID Scheme, a quarterly planner of annual physical targets has been 
prepared and targets have been assigned to various regions/units of PIB accordingly. 
Further, a monthly calendar of physical targets is also being framed in a centralized 
manner and will be shared with regions/units of PIB for compliance. Monthly & Quarterly 
calendar of physical targets will help in achieving the targets in a phased manner and 
will also help the regions/units of PIB in maintaining the continuum of activities. It will 
also ensure better utilization of funds in defined timelines. 

19 
 
 To improve the performance under BIND, it is the constant endeavor of Prasar 
Bharati to complete the projects within the specified time frame. Monitoring mechanism 
has been strengthened considerably. Procurement procedures have been streamlined. 
Project review meetings are being held regularly at Zonal level & HQ level and various 
activities involved in procurement of capital equipment and execution of works are 
critically assessed & targets are fixed. The frequency of monitoring meetings has been 
increased at all levels of Directorate & Prasar Bharati Secretariat. Use of digital platform 
viz. e-office, e-tendering, procurement through GEM, Video conference is also being 
utilized. 
 The Integrated Project Monitoring Cell (IPMC) created under the chairmanship of CEO 
(PB) is monitoring the progress of projects and improvement in their implementation. 
Review meeting to assess progress of BIND Scheme is also taken by Secretary (I&B) 
from time to time. 
 
 For better utilization of funds under Supporting Community Radio, the Ministry 
has taken several measures to ensure that physical as well as financial Targets are met 
under the Scheme. Activities to be conducted during 2023-24 have been planned for 
timely implementation. Output and Outcome based targets have been fixed. 
 
 
[Ministry of Information and Broadcasting O.M. No. W-11/17/2023-PC Cell  
dated   .06.2023] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 7 of Chapter I) 
 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 3) 
 
BROADCASTING SECTOR (INCLUDING PRASAR BHARATI) 
 
Broadcasting Infrastructure Network Development (BIND) 
 
The Committee note that the basic objective of the ‘BIND’ Scheme is 
Modernization (including Digitization) Augmentation & Replacement of Transmitters, 
Broadcast Equipments & Studios, FM Expansion/Replacement, Strengthening of 
Coverage in sensitive areas, Expansion of TV Channels, E-Governance, Content 
Development, etc. BIND Scheme also provides support to Prasar Bharati for 
strengthening border area infrastructure with special focus on development of J&K and 
NE. The Budgetary allocations for BIND Scheme, for the year 2023-24 (at BE stage) is 
Rs. 600.00 crore. During the year 2022-23, the BE and RE allocations have been same 
i.e. Rs. 315.00 crore. However, it is a matter of concern to note that the actual 
expenditure till 31st January, 2023 was just Rs. 117.29 crore which is 37.23% of RE 

20 
 
allocations. Regarding under-utilisation, the Ministry furnished a few reasons which 
inter-alia include: (i) Cancellation of tender of FM project like Mobile FM Transmitters 
due to technical reasons, Tower erection work still under progress at some places, 
delay in supply of 10 kW FM Transmitters, delay in acquisition of site at Dahod (Gujarat) 
due to cost factor;             (ii) Delay in receipt of Decision Letter (DL) from WPC for 
Supply, Installation, Testing and Commissioning (SITC) for uplink Antenna system (7 
locations) &  UPS system for 11 locations; (iii) SITC of End to End File based workflow 
system at DDK Hyderabad -  delayed by the firm due to different technical reasons and 
technical requirement of Kendra; (iv) Cancellation of the tender of Procurement of 
archive system  Linear Open Tape (LTO) cancelled due to administrative reasons; (v) 
Cancellation of tenders for procurement of DD Free Dish Receiver Sets due to limited 
participation of bidders and unreasonable higher price bids/quoted rates due to low 
participation of bidders; (vi) Tower strengthening work at Gangtok got delayed due to 
recommendation of CCW based on the report of IIT Guwahati; and (vii) Delay due to 
non-compliance of terms and conditions of the agreement by the producers in some 
content cases.   The Ministry has informed that most of the broadcast equipment are 
imported with no production in India. This procedure takes considerable time. The 
Committee note that there has been a shortfall in utilization which is also due to Covid-
19 pandemic during which movement of man and material across the globe was 
impacted. While observing that having indigenous manufacturing of broadcasting 
equipment would reduce the dependence on imports, the Committee hope that since 
the impact of Covid 19 pandemic is over, the Ministry would adhere to their assurance 
that efforts will be made to take action with full speed and the creation of portals for                          
E-procurement through GeM would help in meeting the requirement of Transmitters on 
time. The Ministry may apprise the Committee about the initiatives envisaged to have 
proper utilisation and to meet the physical and financial targets set for the year                 
2023–24.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
It is the constant endeavor of Prasar Bharati to complete the projects within the 
specified time frame. Monitoring mechanism has been strengthened considerably. 
Procurement procedures have been streamlined. Project review meetings are being 
held regularly at Zonal level & HQ level and various activities involved in procurement of 
capital equipment and execution of works are critically assessed & targets are fixed. 
The frequency of monitoring meetings has been increased at all levels of Directorate & 
Prasar Bharati Secretariat. Use of digital platform viz. e-office, e-tendering, procurement 
through GEM, Video conference is also being utilized. 
 

21 
 
  The Integrated Project Monitoring Cell (IPMC) created under the chairmanship of 
CEO (PB) is monitoring the progress of projects and improvement in their 
implementation. Review meeting to assess progress of BIND Scheme is also taken by 
Secretary (I&B) from time to time. 
 
An amount of Rs. 600 crore has been allocated to PB in BE 2023-24 for BIND 
Scheme. Prasar Bharati would strive to ensure its full utilization. 
 
 
[Ministry of Information and Broadcasting O.M. No. W-11/17/2023-PC Cell  
dated   .06.2023] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 10 of Chapter I) 
 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 8) 
 
Supporting Community Radio Movement in India 
 
 
The Committee note that the Community Radio is an important third tier in Radio 
Broadcasting, distinct from Public Service Radio. Community Radio Stations (CRS) are 
low power Radio Stations, which are meant to be set-up and operated by local 
communities. In December 2002, the Government of India approved a policy for 
granting permissions, for setting up of Community Radio Stations, to well established 
educational institutions. The policy guidelines were amended in 2006, 2017 and 2018.   
To support the Community Radio movement, a Central Sector Scheme namely 
“Supporting Community Radio Movement in India” is being implemented. At present, 
there are 412 Community Radio Stations in India and out of these, 5 Community Radio 
Stations are non-functional as they had not applied for extension of the Grant of 
permission Agreement (GOPA). The permissions issued to these CRS are under 
process of cancellation of GOPA. The Committee also note that till December, 2022, a 
total of 85 applications were received for the year 2022-23. Out of these 85 applications, 
Letter of intent (LoI), for grant of permission for setting up of Community Radio Station, 
have been issued to 18 organizations. A total of 5 applications were rejected due to 
non-availability of frequency spot and 62 applications are at various stages of 
processing. The Committee note that 71 LOIs were issued in 2022-23, in respect of 
applications received prior to the FY 2022-23. Thus, in the year 2022-23 (till Dec 2022) 
a total of 89 LOIs were issued. The Ministry informed that after obtaining LOI, applicant 
applies to Ministry of Communication for Wireless Operating License before 

22 
 
commissioning the CRS and the License for CRS is issued by the Ministry of 
Communication.   The Committee observed that there are ‘No’ CRS in a few States/UTs 
like Andaman and Nicobar Islands, Dadra and Nagar Haveli, Goa, Ladakh, 
Lakshadweep, Meghalaya and Mizoram and asked the Ministry for reasons. To this, the 
Ministry have informed that Setting up of Community Radio Station is a voluntary 
activity and as per the Policy Guidelines, only “Not-for profit” organizations are eligible 
for seeking permission for operationalization of Community Radio Stations. In addition, 
the prime reason for non-presence of CRS in these States/UTs is lack of awareness 
amongst eligible organizations and lack of financial resources with these not-for profit 
organisations.   Further, the Committee note that as per the Policy Guidelines, CRS are 
not permitted any progamme, which relate to news and current affairs and are otherwise 
political in nature. However, CRS can broadcast news and current affairs contents 
sourced exclusively from All India Radio in its original form or translated into the local 
language/dialect and it is the responsibility of the CRS permission holder to ensure that 
the news is not distorted or edited during translation. The Committee have also been 
informed that the Stakeholders, from time to time, have been requesting the Ministry to 
allow News on CRS on various forums. However, no formal request for allowing news 
on CRS has been received.  
 
The Committee note that the Community Radio provides a platform to air local 
voices among the local community on issues concerning Health, Nutrition, Education, 
Agriculture etc., and it is a powerful medium for the marginalized sections of society to 
voice their concerns.  In a country like India, where every state has its own language 
and distinctive cultural identity, CRSs are also a repository of local folk music and 
cultural heritage and it has the potential to strengthen people’s participation in 
development programmes through its holistic approach. The unique position of CRS as 
an instrument of positive social change makes it an ideal tool for community 
empowerment. Thus, the Committee observe/recommend following: 
(i) The Committee are happy to note that against the BE and RE for the 
year 2022-23 the actual expenditure has been around 40%  and the 
main reason for less expenditure is due to savings as awareness 
Workshops were held in online mode. The Ministry may ensure that the 
under-utilisation of funds is not due to shortfall in the physical targets. 
 
(ii) The Committee recommend the Ministry to look into the demand of 
CRS for promoting local News, if any and the feasibility of permitting the 
same.  
 
(iii) The Committee recommend the Ministry to address the above-
mentioned concerns and hold awareness camps and pay attention to 
such States/UTs to facilitate setting up of CRS in States/UTs where 
there are no CRSs like Andaman and Nicobar Islands, Dadra and 

23 
 
Nagar Haveli, Goa, Ladakh, Lakshadweep, Meghalaya and 
Mizoram,etc. 
 
Reply of the Government 
i) The Ministry has taken several measures to ensure that physical as well as 
financial Targets are met under the Scheme. Activities to be conducted during 
2023-24 have been planned for timely implementation. 
 
ii) As per the Policy Guidelines, the broadcast pertaining to the following categories 
are permissible: 
a)      Information pertaining to sporting events excluding live coverage.  
b)  Information pertaining to Traffic and Weather; 
c)  Information pertaining to and coverage of local cultural events, festivals; 
d) Coverage of topics pertaining to examinations, results, admissions, career       
counseling; 
e) Availability of employment opportunities; 
f) Public announcements pertaining to civic amenities like electricity, water supply, 
natural calamities, health alerts etc. as provided by the local administration. 
 
iii) The Ministry has planned to organize Community Radio Workshops especially in 
CR dark areas including Andaman and Nicobar Islands, Dadra and Nagar Haveli, 
Goa, Ladakh, Lakshadweep, Meghalaya and Mizoram. A total of 5 workshops have 
been planned during 2023-24. Besides this 8 Webinars have been proposed. 
 
 
[Ministry of Information and Broadcasting O.M. No. W-11/17/2023-PC Cell  
dated   .06.2023] 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 10) 
 
Nation Films Development Corporation (NFDC) - Merger of Four Media Units with  
NFDC 
 
 
 
The Committee note that the National Film Development Corporation (NFDC) 
Ltd. was set up by the Government of India in 1975 with the primary objective of 
planning, promoting and organizing an integrated and efficient development of the 
Indian Film Industry in accordance with the National Economic Policy and Objectives 
laid down by the Central Government from time to time. NFDC was re-incorporated in 
the year 1980 by merging the Film Finance Corporation (FFC) and Indian Motion 
Picture Export Corporation (IMPEC) with NFDC. On 23rd December 2020, the Union 

24 
 
Cabinet had decided to merge four Film Media Units, namely Films Division (FD), 
National Film Archive of India (NFAI), Directorate of Film Festivals (DFF) and Children’s 
Film Society, India (CFSI) with National Film Development Corporation Ltd. (NFDC) by 
expanding the Memorandum and Articles of Association (MoAA) of NFDC, which would 
then carry out all the activities hitherto performed by them and to all consequential 
action/ actions required to be taken, including closure of FD/ NFAI/ DFF/ CFSI. The 
Ministry informed that all operations of Films Division, Children’s Film Society, India 
(CFSI), Directorate of Film Festivals (DFF) and National Film Archive of India (NFAI) 
have ceased w.e.f. 31.12.2022 and their activities have been transferred to NFDC. The 
ownership of all assets shall vest in this Ministry and NFDC shall have the Right to Use 
for Operations and Maintenance of these assets. The Committee have taken note of the 
fact that the Umbrella Organization, NFDC, consequent upon the merger of Film Media 
Units is now uniquely placed with regard to Promotion, Production & Preservation of 
Filmic content - all under one management.  The Ministry have informed that no 
objectives of the closed Media Units have been affected adversely as these are being 
carried out by NFDC from 01.01.2023 and there is no retrenchment of human resources 
of the closed Film Media Units. Nevertheless, the Committee recommend the Minsitry to 
ensure that the objectives of all the four closed Media Units are carried out in their 
essence even after the merger of these four Units with NDFC and apprise about the 
hindrances in doing so. The Ministry may also be vigilant about the impact of the merger 
the four Media Units on their objectives and targets.  The Committee feel it would be 
prudent if the impact of the merger is analysed in the beginning itself so as to avoid any 
aftermath failure. The Ministry may also look into the grievances of the employees who 
have been affected by the aforesaid merger and apprise the Committee of the same, if 
any. Thus, now that the merger is completed, the Committee also  recommend the 
Ministry to apprise the physical and financial targets under NFDC and ensure that the 
target set for the year 2023-24 may be achieved as per the deadlines.  The Ministry 
may also apprise about the concerns expressed regarding merger alongwith the action 
taken by them on those concerns, if any. Further, in view of the submission of the 
Ministry that with the merger of NFDC they will be able to do some commercial 
utilization of archived films, the Committee desire to be apprised of the income so 
generated and the utilisation status of the same. The Committee may also be apprised 
of the creative and supportive role of the Ministry in films. 
 
Reply of the Government 
The ownership of all the assets of closed Film Media Units shall be with Ministry 
of I&B. The matter of Right to Use of the assets by NFDC is under submission to 

25 
 
IFD. The activities like International Film Festival of India (IFFI), Mumbai International 
Film Festival (MIFF), National Film Awards (NFA) have already been organized 
successfully by NFDC. The other activities transferred to NFDC are also being carried 
out efficiently. 
With regard to progress of physical and financial targets under NFDC set for the year 
2023-24 and explaining income from commercial utilization of archived films, necessary 
directions have been given to NFDC for compliance. 
The grievances received from the staff of these merged Film Media Units, who have 
now been  declared as Surplus and placed in Surplus Staff Establishment, have been 
resolved. 
Regarding concerns expressed relating to merger and the creative and 
supportive role of the Ministry in films, it is stated that it is the constant endeavour by 
this Ministry to revive the new role and responsibility of NFDC. Action on various issues 
including revision of MoAA of NFDC is under active consideration in this Ministry. 
 
[Ministry of Information and Broadcasting O.M. No. W-11/17/2023-PC Cell  
dated    .06.2023] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 16 of Chapter I) 
 
  
(Recommendation Sl. No. 13) 
 
Film Shooting in India 
The Committee note that Development Communication and Dissemination of 
Filmic Content (DCDFC) Scheme, is being implemented by the Ministry of Information 
and Broadcasting for promotion of Indian cinema and showcasing its soft power globally 
and one of the components of the Scheme is to provide incentives for shooting of 
foreign films in India. The Committee note that the Film Facilitation Office (FFO) website 
has dedicated pages for all the 36 States and UTs of India and this website allows the 
State Nodal Officer to promote their respective States as filming destination. The 
States/UTs where shooting of the foreign projects have been accorded permission 
through the FFO are Chandigarh, Delhi,Gujarat, Goa, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, 
Jammu and Kashmir, Kerala, Karnataka, Ladakh, Maharashtra , Madhya Pradesh, 
Odisha, Punjab, Rajasthan, West Bengal, Uttar Pradesh, Uttarakhand. Since 2017, the 
FFOs have helped States/UTs to set up their Film Offices and to connect them to the 
Industry and also enable them to showcase their incentives and policies. Continuous 
engagement with Nodal Officers through Workshops & Film Offices have resulted in 19 
States having a Film Policy; 17 States have an online Single Window Filming 
Ecosystem and 18 States have incentives for film makers.  

26 
 
 
With respect to hindrances witnessed in making India a preferred destination for 
shooting films, the Ministry informed that lack of a Central Incentives policy for filming 
was a major one. All the major competing destinations had a robust incentives policy 
that would either provide tax rebates or straight forward cash incentives to offset the 
production expenditure. In order to address this issue, the Ministry of Information and 
Broadcasting announced the scheme of incentives for foreign productions and official 
co-productions in May 2022. This scheme aims to reimburse 30% of the cost of 
production incurred in India by foreign films and official co-productions. The Committee 
really appreciate that the Ministry and FFO have also worked with many State 
Governments and encouraged them to have their own incentives policy. The Central 
incentive can be claimed over and above the incentives by the respective State 
Governments. The Ministry of I&B has worked closely with the Ministry of Home Affairs 
to introduce a special category of visa i.e the Film (F) Visa that would enable the cast 
and crew of productions which have been given permission by the Ministry of I&B for 
film in India to come to India.  The Committee also appreciate that the Ministry has set 
up a Film Facilitation Office which acts as a single window facilitation system for 
permissions by the Ministry of I&B as well as other central agencies like the ASI, 
Railways, etc. As a result of the efforts, 16 states have an online single window 
permissions eco system. Further, the Committee appreciate the initiative of instituting 
‘Most Film Friendly State Award’, under the National Film Awards to encourage States 
to create film friendly environment. The Committee hope that all the aforesaid initiatives 
would address the concerns of the foreign film makers. The Committee would like to be 
apprised w.r.t. feasibility of having a single window system in its true sense i.e. the 
system in all the States/UTs being linked to the Central Window System.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 Ministry of Information & Broadcasting set up Film Facilitation Office (FFO) with a 
view to promote and facilitate film shootings by foreign film makers in India. FFO is 
housed in and operated by National Film Development Corporation (NFDC), a Public 
Sector Enterprise of the Ministry of Information & Broadcasting. FFO acts as a single-
window facilitation point for the foreign film producers in assisting them to get requisite 
permissions, disseminates information on shooting locations and facilities available with 
the Indian Film Industry for production and post-production.FFO has also launched a 
website https://ffo.gov.in/enon 20th November, 2018 for making online applications for 
requisite permission to foreign film makers. This facility has been extended to Domestic 
Film makers. The website besides facilitating shooting permission also provides useful 
information about shooting locations, shooting incentives being given by various States, 

27 
 
International treaties for Co-production, Trade Association, film cities and many others.  
 
 FFO web portal has status integration with various Central Govt. agencies like 
Archaeological Survey of India, Ministry of Railways, Ministry of Environment, Forest 
and Climate Change and  Directorate General Civil Aviation. FFO is in discussion with 
Animal Welfare Board of India for status integration purpose 
 
[Ministry of Information and Broadcasting O.M. No. W-11/17/2023-PC Cell  
dated     .06.2023] 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 16) 
Central Bureau of Communication (erstwhile BOC) 
 
 
The Committee note that Central Bureau of Communication (CBC) [erstwhile 
called as Bureau of Outreach and Communication (BOC)] had started the automation 
process in November, 2020 and the targeted date for completion of the process was 
March, 2021. However, due to COVID-19 pandemic, operational difficulties being faced 
by CBC and regular consultation with stakeholders, the project could not be completed. 
Submitting the status of the automation, the Ministry informed that among the Core 
Modules, Print Media, Outdoor Media, Audio Visual Media, Website and Mobile 
Application have been completed. Whereas vendor billing module of these core 
modules are under progress. Under Non-Core Modules, Establishment Management, 
IVR based call center, Feedback management, Inventory management, assets 
management have been implemented. Further, Parliamentary question record and 
follow-up management, Grievance and complaint management, Transport and fleet 
management and financial accounting management are ready to be implemented. With 
respect to the target set for the year 2023-24, the Ministry has informed that during the 
year 2023-24, the new Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP) solution with website 
management and internal dashboard will be tested, put to use and made fully 
operational by 30th September, 2023.  The Committee, while noting that the project is 
already delayed for more than 2 years, recommend the Ministry to complete the entire 
automation process as per the revised timeline and apprise the Committee about the 
status of progress. 
Reply of the Government 
 
The observation and recommendation of the Committee on completing entire IT 
Modernization and Automation project as per the revised timeline' is noted. Presently, 

28 
 
different modules of IT Modernization and Automation project of CBC are under 
implementation. The testing with stakeholders is also being done simultaneously so that 
the transition to new system is smooth.  
 
 
[Ministry of Information and Broadcasting O.M. No. W-11/17/2023-PC Cell  
dated    .06.2023] 
 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 17) 
North Eastern Region (NER) 
 
The Committee note that the budgetary allocations for the year 2023-24, under 
10% Gross Budgetary Support (GBS) for the North Eastern Region, has been fixed at 
Rs. 110.50 crore. The budgetary allocations for NER during the year 2022-23 at BE and 
RE stage, were Rs.  63.00 crore and Rs. 63.90 crore respectively. Whereas the actual 
expenditure, till 31.01.2023, was Rs. 7.86 crore. The Committee note with concern that 
during the year 2022-23, the actual expenditure percentage was just 24.05% of RE 
allocations. Even during the year 2020-21, the actual expenditure had been low, which 
was just 54.69% of RE allocations. Regarding financial performance in North Eastern 
Region, the Committee had expressed concern while examining previous DFG. 
However, it has been observed that the situation instead of improving has deteriorated 
during the year 2022-23.  Reasons for under-utilizations by the Ministry were that under 
Development Communication & Information Dissemination [‘Information Sector] meant 
for People’s Empowerment through Integrated communication (CBC), maximum 
booking will be executed during the 4th quarter of the financial year 2022-23 and several 
programmes/ proposals are likely to be organized in the election states of North Eastern 
Region which will increase the expenditure during the last quarter.  Further, under 
Media Outreach Programme and Publicity (PIB), PIB Guwahati has informed that 
keeping in view of expenditure trends, they shall utilize the remaining funds in last 
Quarter.  Under Development Communication & Dissemination of Filmic Content [Film 
Sector] - meant for Promotion of Indian cinema through film festivals in India and 
abroad, the Ministry has envisaged various activities related to Promotion and 
Production of Filmic Content in North-Eastern Region during the last quarter of FY 
2022-23. Under ‘Broadcasting Sector’ - for Supporting Community Radio Movement in 
India (CRS) - No application was received from NER for release of financial assistance. 
Besides, awareness/ capacity building workshops couldn’t be held as the agency for 
organizing the workshops was not finalized. Under BIND Scheme, the expenditure of 

29 
 
Rs. 2.20 crore is likely to be completed under the ongoing AIR Projects like 
Procurement of Digital Audio Work Station, various Departmental works under 
Digitalization of Studio & Earthing, etc., in North Eastern Zone.  In the light of the 
aforesaid submissions of the Ministry, the Committee desire to be apprised of the 
physical and financial targets met by the end of the completion of the financial year 
2022-23. Further, in view of the continuing under-utilisation of fund and shortfall in 
physical targets in NER, the Committee recommend the Ministry to find solutions and 
take necessary timely measures to overcome the difficulties/deficiencies being faced in 
North Eastern Region. The Committee also recommend the Ministry to ensure that the 
budgetary allocation of Rs. 110.50 crore for the year 2023-24 are optimally utilized for 
implementation of the Schemes/Projects in NER and apprise the Committee about the 
concrete measures taken in this direction. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 In the North-Eastern Region, PIB Guwahati has been allocated with funds of Rs.1.00 
crore in BE 2022-23 during FY 2022-23. Out of these, PIB Guwahati has utilized funds 
of Rs.97.60 lakhs i.e. 97.6% utilizations of funds. There is marginal shortfall as the 
expenditure is satisfactory in so far as PIB is concerned. Further, the status of 
activities, other than translation of documents, allocated to PIB Guwahati is as under: 
Vartalaps Regional Editors Conference 
Target Achievement Target Achievement 
4 7 1 0 
 
 Since the Actual Expenditure during the year 2022-23 has been 65.02%, Central 
Bureau of Communication (CBC) has been advised to increase the activities in NE 
states and to ensure the utilization of funds under NER component of DCID scheme.  
For the FY 2023-24, CBC will conduct regular awareness generation campaigns about 
various schemes and policy announcements of the Government through various 
media vehicles such as Print Media (Newspapers & Periodicals), Private C&S TV 
Channels, Private FM Radio Stations, Outdoor Publicity, Exhibition and Social Media. 
Regular monitoring will also be done at the Ministry level to ensure full utilization of 
funds. 
 
 An allocation of Rs.13.0 crore was made for North Eastern Region under 
Development, Communication and Dissemination of Filmic Content (DCDFC) Scheme 
at Revised Estimates 2022-23. Out of the allocation of Rs.13.0 crore, an expenditure 

30 
 
of Rs.12.685 crore (97.58% of allocated RE 2022-23) was incurred towards various 
activities in the North Eastern Region. 
 
 Under the capital component of Central Sector Scheme of Doordarshan the 
allocated BE(2022-23) and RE(2022-23) for NER is Rs. 7.41 Crore and Rs. 5.66 Crore 
respectively. The expenditure incurred in NER in FY (2022-23) under capital 
component of Central Sector Scheme of Doordarshan is NIL. 
  
Reasons for NIL expenditure: 
 
Multiple attempts were made for tender procurement of 1,20,000 DTH sets for 
distribution in tribal, remote and LWE areas. Even in the 3rd re-tendering, after 
technical evaluation and price bid opening, the tender had to be cancelled due to 
limited participation of bidders, unreasonable higher price bids/quoted rates. Due to 
repeated failure of the tenders, matter was reviewed by the Prasar Bharati and 
Ministry. Prasar Bharati was requested to approach Centre for Development of 
Telematics (CDOT) for demo of their Conditional Access System (CAS) technology 
and take a decision on empanelment of CDOT. Accordingly, demo of C-DoT CAS, 
SMS and C-DoT CAS compliant STB was carried out by C-DoT in the presence of 
DD team and the demo report submitted to Prasar Bharati. M/o Information & 
Broadcasting gave approval to procure FTA DTH, non-CAS, non-RPD Receive sets 
(with STBs) with the provision of app based/ call based/ SMS based authorization 
and activation facility under the BIND Scheme. Accordingly, procurement of 1.2 
Lakh DTH Receive sets (Non-CAS) + 7.5 Lakh DTH receive sets envisaged to be 
procured under Project mode is initiated under proposed BIND scheme by 
Doordarshan. Draft technical Specification for procurement of 7.5 lakhs DTH 
Receive sets was uploaded on website and industry feedback is received which is 
being scrutinized by Design section. A portal has been developed by Prasar Bharti 
in consultation with Ministry of Home Affairs for collection of data of beneficiaries. 
  
The allocated BE(2023-24) in NER under the capital component of Central Sector 
Scheme of Doordarshan is Rs. 34.50 Crore and is likely to be utilized fully.   
 
 As far as Community Radio is concerned, the Ministry has planned to organize Community Radio Workshops especially in North East Regions. A total of 5 
workshops have been planned during 2023-24. Besides this 8 Webinars have been proposed. 
 
[Ministry of Information and Broadcasting O.M. No. W-11/17/2023-PC Cell  
dated   .06.2023] 

31 
 
CHAPTER- III 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO 
PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 
 
 
---NIL---

32 
 
CHAPTER IV 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND REQUIRE 
REITERATION 
 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 6) 
 
CONTENT CREATION AND CONTENT PROCUREMENT POLICY 
 
The Committee note that to streamline the process for acquisition of programmes, 
a comprehensive content procurement policy has now been notified by Prasar Bharati. 
The Committee note the submission of Ministry that they will focus on content which is 
very important in light of growing competition from private networks. The Committee 
hope that the Ministry and Prasar Bharati realize the importance of content and the 
need to avoid outgoes and losses. Further, the Committee note that Doordarshan is in 
the process of revamping the content of its channels according to need and taste of 
audience both at National and Regional levels.  The Committee also note and 
appreciate that the budget allocated to AIR and Doordarshan for content creation during 
the year 2023-24 is Rs. 498.32 crore which includes Rs. 353.32 crore from IEBR and 
Rs.145.00 crore under BIND. With respect to plans to be self-sufficient and steps taken 
to get more advertisements from private sector, the Committee are happy to note that 
the Ministry/Prasar Bharati is taking several measures which inter-alia include (i) Sales 
Division is approaching both government and private sector directly and also through 
agencies to get business; (ii) Programme Heads have been asked to make all efforts for 
revenue generation; (iii) Monitoring of Revenue is being done on a regular basis; (iv) 
Doordarshan sales Rate Card has been revised to remain competitive in the Market and 
(v) All producers are being asked to have the commercial angle in mind while 
conceiving the content and work in close coordination with sales division in 
monetization. The Committee appreciate the initiatives taken by the Ministry to increase 
the level of self sufficiency and for getting more advertisements. The Committee 
recommend the Ministry to utilize Rs. 498.32 crore allocated for content creation 
judiciously. Further, the Committee desire to be apprised about the financial targets set 
and achieved for content creation during 2023-24. The Ministry may also provide details 
of the targets for revenue generation and actual revenue generation through content 
during 2023-24.    The Committee recommend Ministry/Prasar Bharati to ensure both 
financial accountability and content performance. It goes without saying that if content is 
good and improved, it will automatically attract advertisements and commercials. The 
Committee feel that the initiatives for having good content is the need of the hour 

33 
 
particularly in light of emergence of Over-The-Top (OTT) Platforms which are providing 
myriad range of content/programme.  The Committee, therefore, recommend the 
Ministry to have professionalism in improving and procuring the content and to focus on 
creating and getting quality content so as to match the competitive market as well as for 
revenue generation. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 The actual revenue generation during 2023-24 will be available only after 
March 2024. However, the commercial revenue generation for the FY 2022-23 (upto 
February 2023) is 363.44 Crore. Calculation     sheet is as follows: 
 
Sl. No REVENUE OF AIR 
For the FY 2022-23 (Upto Feb 2023) 
REVENUE OF Doordarshan 
For the FY 2022-23 (Upto Feb 2023) 
Figures in crore 
1 Commercial revenue From CBS 
Centres and CSU 
182.02 Commercial revenue from channels 
including CRDs, DCD and Ministry of 
agriculture and farmer welfare 
177.91 
2 PB Resources (AIR Component ) 55.25 PB Resources (DD Component ) 37.06 
3 PB Archives 0.41 DTH Carriage fees 674.72 
4 Misc. deposits 0.36 Misc. deposits 0.56 
5 Total Revenue 238.04 Revenue from Digital operations 3.1 
Total 893.35 
 The commercial revenue of AIR is 182.02+0.41 = 182.43 Crore  
 The commercial revenue of Doordarshan is 177.91+3.1 = 181.01 Crore  
Total Commercial Revenue during FY 22-23(upto Feb 2023) = 363.44 Crore 
 
 
 
[Ministry of Information and Broadcasting O.M. No. W-11/17/2023-PC Cell  
dated   .06.2023] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 13 of Chapter I) 
 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 12) 
National Centre for Excellence for Animation, Visual effects, Gaming and Comics 
(NCOE-AVGC) 
 
The Committee note that to realize the potential of the Indian AVGC industry, 
announcement for formation of an Animation, Visual effects, Gaming, and Comic 
(AVGC) promotion Task Force was made in the Budget speech for the fiscal year 2022-
2023.  The AVGC Task Force was constituted on 08.04.2022. After having collated the 

34 
 
recommendations of the sub task force on subjects viz. policy formulation, skill 
development, education and gaming, a final report was prepared and was duly 
approved by the Secretary (I&B) on 15.12.2022. The Committee observe that the AVGC 
Task Force have broadly recommended for    (i) Market access and development 
through information, education, communication and outreach; (ii) Skilling and 
mentorship by defining AVGC related job roles, qualification packs and strong 
integration with the education framework; (iii) Standardization of education focused on 
AVGC sector; (iv) Enhancing accessibility to technology vis-à-vis creating financial 
viability; and (v) Promoting ‘Create in India’ initiative with exclusive focus on content 
creation while giving equal weightage to skilling, re-skilling and upskilling of people 
across gender, economic background and geography, thus, diversifying the sector 
through equity and inclusion.  The Ministry have informed that pursuant to the AVGC 
Task Force final recommendations, they have contemplated some key actions for the 
implementation of the recommendations of the Task Force which inter-alia include (i) 
need for creation of a National AVGC-XR Mission with a budget outlay for providing 
promotional funding and support infrastructure; (ii)  Need to establish a National Centre 
of Excellence (NCOE) for the AVGC sector to become an international reference point 
across Skilling, Education, Industry Development and Research & Innovation for the 
AVGC sector; (iii) To seek Cabinet approval on the Draft National Policy for AVGC 
Sector potential realization; (iv) Deliberations with State/UT Governments for adopting 
Model State Policy prepared by the task force for growth of AVGC sector in their 
respective State/UT. The Committee find that currently there is no Law/Rule with 
respect to AVGC sector and there is no concrete budgetary allocation provided for this 
sector. However, once the National and Model State Policy is approved, financial 
requirement for the same shall be drawn up. The Ministry have also informed that the 
Draft National Policy is still in consultation stage and the recommended State Model 
Policy for AVGC-XR Sector has been circulated to the States for consultation. Further, 
the Committee were informed that States like Karnataka, Telangana, Maharashtra and 
Tamil Nadu are advanced in the field of AVGC sector and most of the other States are 
behind in this sector. The Committee appreciate the fact that most of the issues related 
to non-development of AVGC sector, such as unavailability of infrastructures, 
technology access etc., have been addressed in the draft National and model State 
policy and once the policies are approved, the AVGC mission will encompass all of 
these issues and provide strategies on how to take this sector forward. With respect to 
rules and policy for gaming and gambling industry, the Ministry has informed that 
recently, the Government has decided that the MeitY will look into the online gaming 
and consequently frame rules and it will be dealt with by MeitY. On the concerns related 
to advertisements for betting and gambling, the Ministry has informed that some 

35 
 
commercials of betting and gambling still continue because there is a thin line between 
gaming and gambling advertisements. For example, the Supreme Court has called 
game like Rummy as a game of skill.  
 
The Committee appreciate all the aforesaid initiatives undertaken by the Ministry 
to realize the potential of the Indian AVGC industry. Nevertheless, the Committee feel 
that the Ministry will have to gear up the entire process of implementing the AVGC-XR 
Mission because India is still at a nascent stage in this sector and opportunities are 
galore in AVGC Sector. The Committee also feel that there is a need for facilitating 
infrastructure and accessibility to technology relating to the AVGC sector in States/UTs 
that are lagging behind as well as in tier-II and tier-III cities. The Committee, feel that 
the need of the hour is to have a coordinated effort with all the concerned Ministries 
alongwith the industry and other stakeholders. The Committee, therefore, recommend 
the following and desire to be apprised accordingly: 
(viii) To fix timeline and quarterly targets for creation of National AVGC-XR 
Mission and for establishing  the National Centre of Excellence 
(NCOE); 
(ix) To Complete the consultation process with States/UTs and other 
Stakeholders within the current financial year ; 
(x) Apprise the Committee about the decision for having specific budgetary 
allocations for this Sector; 
(xi) To fix the year-wise targets for each of the initiatives under AVGC 
Sector; 
(xii) To apprise the Committee about the main points proposed in the Draft 
National and model state policy alongwith the roadmap year-wise; 
(xiii) Measures taken for coordinated effort with MeitY w.r.t. regulating 
gambling and betting; and 
(xiv) Apprise the Committee about the plans for leveraging Indian comic 
characters and comic market under the Mission of promoting AVGC 
Sector in India.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 
To promote AVGC Sector in the country, an Animation, Visual Effects, Gaming 
and Comics (AVGC) Promotion Task Force was constituted on 8th April, 2022 headed 
by Secretary (I&B) and inter alia  include Secretary of relevant Ministries/Department 
with administrative secretaries handling AVGC policy in selected States, representative 
from Core Practitioners from AVGC Industry, FICCI, CII, etc.  
As decided in the first meeting of the AVGC Promotion Task Force held on 4th 
May, 2022, four Sub-Task Forces were also constituted namely, for Education, Skilling, 
Gaming and Industry & Policy. 

36 
 
After having collated the recommendations of the sub task force on subjects viz. policy 
formulation, skill development, education and gaming, a final report was prepared and 
was duly approved by the Secretary (1&B) on 15.12.2022. This Ministry has uploaded 
the AVGC Task Force’s Report including draft National Policy and draft Model State 
Policy on Ministry’s Website   on 23rd January, 2023 for offering comments. All the 
concerned Ministries/ Departments of Central Government, States, UTs and Industry 
stakeholders were also requested to offer their comments on the AVGC Task Force’s 
Report.   
A National Workshop and consultation on Draft National Policy and Draft Model 
State Policy has been organised on 18th April, 2023 to take view of States/UTs and 
Industry stakeholders.  Now further procedures of taking it to Cabinet is being initiated.  
Further, Ministry is in process of establishing the National Centre of Excellence 
(NCOE) for AVGC. NCoE has been proposed to be set up on Shareholder agreement 
basis as Section 8 company in collaboration of FICCI, CII and State Government of 
Maharashtra. In-principal decision has been taken to establish NCoE in the Ministry. 
The same has been submitted to the Committee of Establishment Expenditure (CEE). 
Subsequently, Cabinet approval will be sought. 
As this Ministry has to obtain Cabinet Approval on both National AVGC Policy 
and Setting of NCoE, it is not feasible to fix timelines creation of National AVGC-XR 
Mission and for establishing the National Centre of Excellence (NCOE). 
 
 
(Prithul Kumar) 
Joint Secretary to the Govt. of India 
 
[Ministry of Information and Broadcasting O.M. No. W-11/17/2023-PC Cell  
dated    .06.2023] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 19 of Chapter I) 
 

37 
 
CHAPTER V 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE INTERIM IN NATURE 
 
 
DOORDARSHAN 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 4) 
 
The Committee note that there are 36 satellite TV channels, of which 8 are All 
India channels and 28 are Regional/State channels (21 nos. of 24x7 channels and 7 
numbers of limited hours channels). Except Sikkim, all States have dedicated 
Doordarshan channels. As per the Broadcast Audience Research Council (BARC) data, 
overall viewership of Doordarshan Network Channels including regional/state is 1551 
lakhs in the year 2022. With respect to digitization of all the DD Kendras, the Ministry 
has informed that all DD channels of Doordarshan network are fully digitized. However, 
terrestrial transmission is being broadcast in analog mode. The Committee have also 
been informed that Studios and Satellite of DD network are already digitized and all 
DTT transmitters are switched off w.e.f. 31/10/2022. With respect to ‘Setting up of 100 
W FM transmitters at nearly 100 locations’ that will be commissioned by March 2023, 
the Committee note that  the approval date was 18/3/2014 and the target date set at the 
approval stage for completion for setting up of 100W FM transmitters was 31/03/2017.  
The Ministry have informed that the average (minimum and maximum) time taken to 
commission one 100W FM tower is 3 to 6 Months depending upon location of site and 
‘No’ FM tower has taken more than 5 years for commissioning. However, the 
Committee noted that 10 FM towers were not completed within the set timeline. When 
asked for measures taken to overcome the hindrances encountered in completion of 
automation of News production System, the Ministry informed that a dedicated IPMC 
(Integrated Project Monitoring Cell) has been created to closely monitor the progress as 
well as implementation of projects. 
 
Regarding procurement of 8.7 lakh non-CAS, non-RPD DTH Receiver Sets with 
STBs, the Committee note that approval was conveyed to Prasar Bharati on 13.09.2022 
and Prasar Bharati is issuing a tender with a condition of site installation of the Set Top 
Boxes (STBs) under Supply, Installation, Testing and Commissioning (SITC) mode. For 
this, it is essential that the addresses of nearly 8.7 lakhs beneficiaries are to be 
collected. However, it has been decided on 8.2.2023 that, in the coordination with 

38 
 
Ministry of Home Affairs, that a portal will be developed for collection of data of 
beneficiaries. MHA has informed that they will co-ordinate with the States for ensuring 
that data is collected, following which tender will be issued by Prasar Bharati for 
distribution of Set Top Boxes.    
 
Regarding capacity expansion of ‘DD Free Dish Platform’, the Committee note 
that the Government has recently allocated Rs. 114.50 crore under ‘BIND’ Scheme for 
2021-26. As per FICCI E&Y M&E Report of March 2022, total number of TV homes in 
India was 168 million in 2021 and 43 Million TV homes in India have DD Free Dish. Till 
date, 96,000 DD Free Dish sets have been distributed free across the country.  With 
respect to plans for upgradation and expansion of DD Free Dish Platform during 2023-
24, the Committee have been informed that the capacity of DD Free Dish Platform 
would be increased to 168 SDTV channel by up-gradation of remaining four 
compression chain and monitoring system of DD Free dish Platform to MPEG-4 
compression system in 2023-24. On being informed that in-built STB in TV will be 
available in the market, the Committee desired to know the timeline for the same. 
Responding to this, the Ministry informed that  Gazette Notification of BIS standard for 
built-in Satellite Tuner in place of Analog TV tuner in all TV sets (LED/LCD etc) has 
been issued by BIS, Department of Consumer Affairs on 21st  December, 2022.  To 
increase the Free Dish Platform in Southern India and States/UTs where it is less, the 
Ministry has informed that Prasar Bharati has revised DD Free Dish e-auction policy in 
February, 2023. As per the revised policy, 03 MPEG-2 slots of DD Free Dish have been 
earmarked for allotment to unrepresented languages channels in significantly lesser 
reserve price of Rs. 3.0 Crore per annum. All Southern India language channels are 
eligible to apply and bid for these slots to come on DD Free Dish.  In view of the 
aforesaid, the Committee recommend the following: 
(i) Since setting up of 100 W FM Transmitters, that were to be completed within 
March, 2023, have been delayed by more than six years from the targeted 
date, the Committee urge the Ministry to address the issues causing delay in 
setting up of these Transmitters that are to be completed within March, 2023. 
 
(ii) Noting that the South Indian language channels are eligible to apply and bid 
for the slots to come on Doordarshan free dish, the Committee would like to be 
apprised about the measures taken to expand DD Free Dish platforms in 
Southern India and the outcome of the same. 
 
(iii) In view of the decision of the Ministry with MHA, that a portal is developed for 
preparing the list of beneficiaries, and accordingly Set Top boxes will be 
purchased, the Committee recommend to finalize the list of beneficiaries on 

39 
 
time and the target of distributing around 9 lakh Set Top boxes be met within 
the financial year i.e. 2023-24. 
 
(iv) The Committee also recommend the Ministry to do the needful, in 
coordination, with the Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology for 
having in-built Set Top Boxes for TV in accordance to the new BIS standards. 
 
(v) The Committee would like to be informed whether the Ministry has had any 
discussion with respect to requirement of distributing the Set Top Boxes, once 
the new standard of BIS is implemented and if people would be able to watch 
DD free dish without having to buy/install STBs. 
 
(vi)  The Committee recommend the Ministry to do periodic analysis of the 
viewership of Doordarshan on the basis of the ratings available. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The point-wise comments of the Ministry are as follows: 
i. 91 numbers of 100W FM transmitters were inaugurated by Hon’ble Prime 
Minister on 28th April, 2023. The Integrated Project Monitoring Cell (IPMC) 
created under the chairmanship of CEO (PB) is monitoring the progress of 
projects and improvement in their implementation. 
ii. All Doordarshan channels including South Indian language channels are 
available on DD Free Dish. Further, as far as private channels are concerned, 
slots on DD Free Dish are allocated based on an annual e-auction. A separate 
bucket is kept during the e-auction as a category for Indian language channels 
that are not represented on DD Free Dish which makes it easier for them to have 
a slot allocated for themselves. 
iii. Prasar Bharati is taking steps for compliance of the instructions of the Committee 
regarding distribution of STBs. 
iv. ln this regard, it is informed that BIS on 21.12.2O22 had finalized Standard No. lS 
18112:2022 Digital Television Receivers for Satellite Broadcast Transmission- 
Specification. Thereafter, the Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology, 
through Gazette Notification dated 26.04.2023 made amendments to the 
"Electronics and lnformation Technology Goods (Requirements of Compulsory 
Registration) Order, 2021" mandating "Television Sets" to conform to the lndian 
Standard lS 18112:2022 Digital Television Receiver for Satellite Broadcast 
Transmission - Specification, of the Bureau of Indian Standards, on the expiry of 
two years from the date of publication of this Notification in the Official Gazette. 
v. As the new standard of BIS is only applicable to new TV sets being 
manufactured and imported in the country, penetration of the same, especially 
among the weaker section of the country will take considerable amount of time. 
Distribution plan for STBs is to be finalized in consultation with all the 
stakeholders concerned i.e. Ministry of Home Affairs, Prasar Bharati, State 
Govts./UTs etc. 

40 
 
vi. Prasar Bharati has informed that at present Doordarshan is subscribing for 
Viewership data relating to 21 channels with Broadcasting Audience Research 
Council (BARC). This viewership data is shared amongst concerned officials for 
monitoring and analysis purposes. 
 
 
[Ministry of Information and Broadcasting O.M. No. W-11/17/2023-PC Cell  
dated  .06.2023] 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 5) 
 
All India Radio (AIR) and FM 
 
The Committee note with concern that under AIR, during the year 2022-23   as 
against budgetary allocations of Rs. 160.51 crore (at BE stage) and Rs. 84.09 crore (at 
RE stage) the actual expenditure upto December, 2022 has been Rs. 35.91 crore which 
is 22.37% of BE and 42.70% of RE allocations respectively.   Further, with respect to 
digitization, the Committee note that AIR has 501 stations spread all over India 
comprising 229 stations with studio facilities for production of programme locally and 
272 Relay Stations. Total 653 transmitters were operational from these stations 
comprising 524 FM transmitters, 122 MW transmitters and 7 SW Transmitters. The 
Committee note that AIR has digitalized 127 studios of AIR stations by providing 
modern State-of-the-Art digital equipment for production, storage and reproduction of 
programmes. The new studios are being set up and partial digitalization of 90 studios 
has also been completed, which will be fully digitalized in coming years as per approval 
of schemes. With respect to digitalization of Transmitters, it has been noted that out of 
total 122 MW transmitters, AIR has 38 Digital Transmitters (DRM) and 84 analog 
transmitters. Out of 7 SW transmitters, AIR has 3 Digital Transmitters (DRM) and 4 
analog transmitters. The Ministry has informed that presently, there is an approved plan 
for complete digitalization of studios and production, storage and reproduction of 
programme at these studios are already being done digitally. The analog equipment like 
switching /announcer console, mixer, etc of these studios will be replaced by modern 
State of the Art equipment as per approved scheme in coming years. It is seen that the 
ecosystem for digital broadcasting in AM Band (MW & SW) is not favorable due to high 
cost of receivers and also better ecosystem in analog FM broadcasting, digitalization of 
MW, SW and FM transmitters has not been planned under BIND Scheme (2021-26). 
The Committee note that as far as the content on Education, Information and 
Entertainment are concerned, AIR is doing its job satisfactorily to a large extant. But as 
far as carriage is concerned, AIR is facing challenges due to technological 

41 
 
advancement and changes in method of broadcasting. The Ministry has also informed 
that Radio broadcasting is reshaping itself from MW broadcasting to FM broadcasting 
and the area of coverage by FM transmitters is limited to line of sight only. As a result, 
the reach of AIR has reduced drastically and AIR needs large scale FMisation to 
enhance its reach. At present, AIR is left with no other option, other than the large-scale 
placement of FM transmitters with power ranging from 1 KW to 20 KW depending on 
geographical location and population density of the area.  The Committee also note that 
a few projects of AIR, that are targeted to be completed during 2023-24, are infact carry 
over projects, that could not be completed during 2021-22 and 2022-23, like installation 
of 10 kW FM transmitters at Dahod where the matter is yet to be resolved and is being 
pursued with State Government on regular basis.   In view of the foregoing and poor 
achievement of targets under AIR, the Committee desire for the action taken alongwith 
the outcome on the following recommendations: 
(i) The Ministry should look into the factors causing delays in supply and 
installation of Transmitters/Towers and construction of Studios etc. and 
do timely intervention for early completion of these projects;  
(ii) The Ministry may chalk out suitable time-plan for digitization of all AIR 
stations and apprise the Committee about the  same; 
(iii)  The Ministry should improve the content of the AIR to attract the 
audience to listen to AIR and generate revenue; 
(iv) With respect to providing coverage in ‘Radio shadow areas’, the 
Ministry may coordinate with other Ministry/organisation like BSNL 
which is already working for Left Wing Extremism (LWE) affected areas. 
(v) The Ministry may look into the concerns that the content of regional FM 
stations are being mixed with languages other than the local language 
so as to protect the sanctity of regional radio channels and and if any 
measure has been brought in as part of COVID Action Plan for this 
needs to be done away. The Committee may be apprised about the 
action in this regard. 
 
Reply of the Government 
i.  In Akashvani, 41 Nos. of new FM transmitters of various capacities are to 
be setup under new approved scheme.  Tendering for purchase of transmitters 
and associated equipment has been done.  
ii. The digitalization of 127 studios has been achieved during the 2022-23.  
Digitalization of remaining studios will be done depending upon availability of 
funds. The new AIR studios being set up are born digital. Partial digitalization of 
90 studios has also been done and will be fully digitalized in coming years as per 
approval of schemes. 
iii. Prasar Bharati has informed that Akashvani is constantly re-calibrating its content 
in order to make it more attractive and listener friendly. The endeavor is to make 
the content more participatory to attract audience and also generate revenue. 

42 
 
Further,  Akashvani has recently introduced more News based Programmes/ 
News Bulletins in all the Channels operated by Akashvani (FM Gold, FM 
Rainbow, Vividh Bharati, Primary Channels) to attract the listeners and to give 
them the content which is not served to them by other Private FM Radio 
Channels. 
iv. BSNL & Power Grid have been approached for tower sharing for installation of 
antenna of FM transmitters.   
v. Prasar Bharati has informed that during COVID-19 pandemic, most of the 
programmes were either relayed from Delhi or State Capitals.  The normal 
broadcast was restored when the intensity of pandemic was reduced. Akashvani 
broadcasts programmes in National, regional and local dialects. Majority of 
National programmes are generally broadcast from National Capital Delhi, 
similarly State Capitals broadcast programmes for the state hook up. The local 
Akashvani Station relay programmes of National and State Capital, 
besides broadcast programme in its own local dialect where the station is located. 
The budgetary allocations for Akashvani during the year 2022-23 at BE and RE stage, 
were Rs.160.47 crore and Rs.71.65 crore respectively, whereas the actual expenditure, 
till 31.03.2023, was Rs.63.02 crore. The actual expenditure percentage is 39.27% of BE 
& 87.96% of RE allocation respectively. 
 
[Ministry of Information and Broadcasting O.M. No. W-11/17/2023-PC Cell  
dated  .06.2023] 
 
 
 (Recommendation Sl. No. 7) 
 
Human resource in Prasar Bharati 
 
 
The Committee note that the current vacancies in Prasar Bharati is 26,386. Of 
this, 12,420 are in Doordarshan and 13,966 in All India Radio (AIR). During examination 
of previous DFG (2022-23), the Ministry had informed that the vacancies in 
Doordarshan and AIR were 9,869 and 15,319 respectively.  The Committee note that 
the number of vacancies in AIR had reduced from 15,319 to 13,966. However, in case 
of DD it has increased from 9,869 to 12,420. The Committee take a note of the fact that 
inspite of repeated recommendation of the Committee to fill up these vacancies 
expeditiously, the vacancies instead of reducing have increased in DD.  As for the 
reasons for reduction in number of vacancies in All India Radio and increase of 
vacancies in Doordarshan, the Ministry informed that it is due to the fact that many 
officials were transferred from Doordarshan to All India Radio as Analog Terrestrial 
Transmitters (Doordarshan) were closed and spared manpower was redeployed in 

43 
 
newly installed / running establishment of All India Radio. The Ministry also informed 
that the cadre controller of most of the cadres of All India Radio and Doordarshan is, All 
India Radio. The Committee also note that as per the availability of resources 
(manpower), stations are operating optimally. It is a matter of concern to note that due 
to continuous retirement in various cadres under Doordarshan and AIR in Prasar 
Bharati and no fresh recruitment, there is a deficiency of skilled, professional and young 
manpower, which is a back bone of any organization. Talent Management & 
Specialized Outsourcing (TM&SO) division in PBS is mandated to meet the urgent need 
based requirement of skilled and professional manpower. Prasar Bharati is engaging 
professionals in various categories under Contractual Engagement Policy (CEP 2021) 
on short-term contracts ranging from 1 year to 3 years. These contracts are being 
renewed on yearly basis depending on the requirement of the organization in that skill 
set at a station and performance of contractual. It is a matter of concern, to learn that 
the requirement of manpower is being addressed by hiring persons on assignment 
basis for assisting in production and day-to-day work of the Kendra. Prasar Bharati is 
managing its functioning and operation with available human resources with re-skilling 
through short-term training programmes and engagement of short term contractual 
where rate of skill obsolescence is high and where skills are highly market driven.  
The Committee have been informed that the final report of Manpower Audit 
(MPA) has been accepted by Prasar Bharati wherein substantial restructuring in the 
organization has been recommended in view of changes in broadcast technology and 
business practices. Thus, the manpower requirement in Prasar Bharati may undergo 
substantial change.  The Ministry also informed that the Manpower audit 
recommendations envisage a revised strength considering obsolete technologies 
automation, IT enablement and outsourcing of non-core activities. Accordingly, the total 
vacancies would be 14824 (in DD-4338 and in AIR-8481).  As per the Ministry, the 
revised manpower model recommended by Manpower Audit has an increased focus on 
(i) Outsourcing of non-core Engineering activities to 3rd Party by having FTE driven 
contracts; (ii) Outsourcing of key non-core Administration activities like drivers, security, 
Assistants by bringing in automation platforms like e-office; (iii) Hiring of specialists on 
contract for new roles required by Prasar Bharati in line with proposed structure change 
and (iv) Building an effective mix of full time and contractual manpower. In view of the 
perennial problem of human resources in Prasar Bharati and considering the fact that 
the final report of Manpower Audit (MPA) has been accepted by Prasar Bharati, the 
Committee feel that the Ministry should take up the issue of filling up the vacancies on 
priority basis. Else, with fast changing technology and business practices even the 
recommendations of Man power Audit might become obsolete making the entire Audit 
exercise futile. The Ministry may provide details w.r.t. roadmap planned in accordance 

44 
 
to the suggestions made in the report of Manpower Audit (MPA) alongwith the targeted 
timeline for filling up all the vacancies of Prasar Bharati.   The Committee would also 
like to know in brief about the posts that have been considered as irrelevant as well as 
the plan of action envisaged for those posts alongwith the number of vacancies that are 
likely to be filled during the year 2023–24. The Ministry may provide details of the action 
taken for filling up the vacancies within three months of the submission of this Report. 
 
Reply of the Government 
The assessment of manpower as per recommendations of Manpower Audit (MPA) 
exercise is under process. It will not be out of place to mention here that Prasar Bharati 
has limited financial resources under IEBR which is not enough to shoulder the liabilities of 
the entire additional required manpower through recruitment of skilled, professional and 
young manpower. Accordingly, Prasar Bharati is managing its functioning and operation 
with available human resources with re-skilling through short-term training programmes 
and engagement of short term contractuals where rate of skill obsolescence is high and 
where skills are highly market driven. 
 
With rationalization of operations, reforming of work processes, automation etc, as 
per the recommendations of MPA exercise and assessment of manpower required, an 
optimum number of posts shall be filled up in due course as per the financial strength of 
Prasar Bharati. 
 
[Ministry of Information and Broadcasting O.M. No. W-11/17/2023-PC Cell  
dated    .06.2023] 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 9) 
Internal and Extra Budgetary Resources (IEBR) and self sufficiency 
 
 
The Committee note that the IEBR revenue projection, for the year 2023-24, is 
Rs. 1475.00 crore. During the year 2022-23, the revenue projection and generated by 
Prasar Bharati were Rs. 1380.00 crore and Rs. 977.01 crore respectively and the Net 
expenditure upto December 2022 has been Rs. 790.70 crore. The Committee express 
satisfaction at the level of self-sufficiency achieved by Prasar Bharati, with respect to 
IEBR, during the last few years and appreciate that Prasar Bharati is meeting its 
operational expenses from its IEBR and has some surplus too. The Committee, while 
applauding the efforts of Prasar Bharati to generate revenue under IEBR during 2022-
23, recommend the Ministry to continue their efforts in this regard during the year 2023-
24 also. The Committee would like to remind the Ministry about their assurance made 
during evidence with regard to focus on content and monetisation of assets like 
infrastructure, Archives, etc. The Committee express displeasure at the fact there is no 

45 
 
time-mannered action plan to digitise the content which can helps in 
monetisation/viewership. The Committee expect that as assured by Prasar Bharati, they 
would complete the remaining digitization at the earliest and come out  with a time-
bound action plan for the same. The Committee recommend the Ministry to focus on 
improving the quality of the content of the programmes, both in respect of DD and AIR. 
The Committee also recommend to complete digitization of remaining archives to 
facilitate monetization of the content.  The Committee also desire to be apprised of the 
study undertaken by Prasar Bharati with respect to its assets at various centres across 
the country for effective monetising of assets as well as details of the roadmap for 
monetising the same. The Committee may be kept apprised of the steps taken in this 
direction. 
Reply of the Government 
1.  The media assets available at Central Archives Prasar Bharati have already 
been digitized. 
2. Assessment of the media assets left for digitization at various Kendras across the 
country is underway. 
3. An advisory has been issued to the Stations/Kendras of AIR/DD in Prasar Bharati 
network in order to complete the digitization of legacy media in a time bound 
manner. Stations are approaching Central Archives for resource crunch in terms 
of manpower and equipment in completing the task.  
4. After gathering all relevant information from the network, Prasar Bharati will be 
able to complete the digitization by March 2025 in project mode. 
 
[Ministry of Information and Broadcasting O.M. No. W-11/17/2023-PC Cell  
dated  .06.2023] 
 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 11) 
Film and Television Institute of India (FTII) 
 
The Committee note that the Film Institute of India was setup in 1960. It was 
renamed as ‘Film and Television Institute of India (FTII)’ and was registered as a 
Society in October, 1974. FTII has two Wings, namely-Film and Television wings, which 
offers three-years and two-year Post Graduate Diploma courses and one-year PG 
certificate course. During the year 2022-23, the BE allocations was Rs. 55.39 crore and 
it was increased to Rs. 68.53 crore at RE stage and the actual expenditure till 31st 
January, 2023 was Rs. 50.71 crore which is 74.00 % w.r.t RE allocations. The Ministry 
has informed that major challenges being faced in FTII are budgetary expenditure and 
requirement of extra human resource for the student activities. The Committee note that 
FTII is running parallel batches on the campus to neutralize the academic backlogs and 

46 
 
delay in admissions. The Institute currently has 7 batches, ie 5 batches in Film Wing 
(against the normal of 3 batches) and 2 batches in TV Wing (against the normal of 1 
batch). The Ministry has informed that the resources like finance, HR, equipment and 
space are accordingly configured and the backlogs are expected to be neutralized in 
August 2025. About the plans to improve the performance under the FTII for the year 
2023-24, the Committee have been informed that Treasury Single Account (TSA) 
system is implemented for proper management of budgetary expenditure and 
continuous follow up of activities is done for timely completion of projects. Besides, the 
necessary approvals are also being taken up on priority basis to ensure utilization of 
allocated funds.  Further, the construction of Auditorium cum Knowledge Centre at Pune 
is proposed to be complted during the FY 2023-24 and the construction of two studios 
(at the extension campus of  FTII, at Kothrud) will be commencing during FY 2023-24. 
While appreciating the steps taken by MIB to take care of backlogs, the Committee 
recommend the Ministry to look into the feasibility of upgrading their infrastructure so as 
to make the FTII as State-of-the-art institution in real sense. The Committee urge the 
Ministry to complete the construction of Auditorium cum Knowledge Centre at Pune 
within the stipulated time frame i.e. within 2023-24 and apprise them about the status of 
commencement and the targeted timeline for completion of the construction of two 
studios (at the extension campus of FTII, at Kothrud) which is proposed to be started 
during 2023-24. 
 
Reply of the Government 
Original time-line for completion of the construction of Auditorium-cum-
Knowledge Centre at Pune was 08.09.2020, but is now expected to be completed by 
30.11.2023. The progress of the project was badly affected due to COVID-19 and other 
hindrances.  As of now, the work is in progress and 91% of civil work has been 
completed. 
Regarding construction of two studios (at the extension campus of FTII, at 
Kothrud), preliminary estimates have been submitted to Director, FTII. Administrative 
approval and Expenditure Sanction is yet to be approved. 
 
 
[Ministry of Information and Broadcasting O.M. No. W-11/17/2023-PC Cell  
dated   .06.2023] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

47 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 14) 
 
Indian Institute of Mass Communication (IIMC) and Upgradation of IIMC to 
International Standards 
The Committee note that the Indian Institute of Mass Communication (IIMC) 
came into existence on August 17, 1965 with the basic objectives of teaching, training 
and undertaking research in the areas of media and mass communication. The Plan 
Scheme ‘Upgradation of IIMC to international Standard’ was included in the 11th Five 
Year Plan and the proposals under the Scheme included upgradation of IIMC, i.e., 
construction of additional facilities at the IIMC Campus, New Delhi, as well as starting of 
four new Regional Campuses of IIMC in Maharashtra, Mizoram, Kerala and Jammu. 
The Southern Regional Campus in Kottayam, Kerala has already started functioning 
from the permanent campus since 2019. Even though the North East Regional Center 
of IIMC Aizawl was completed in 2019, the acquisition of the project got delayed due to 
the Covid-19 pandemic. The new Campus in AIzwal has been inaugurated on 3rd 
November, 2022, and the session 2022-23 has commenced in the new permanent 
Campus.  Though, the Northern Regional Campus of IIMC Jammu was also delayed 
due to the COVID-19 pandemic and some local issues, the project has been completed 
and the academic session 2022-23 has been started. However, the Western Regional 
Center of IIMC at Amravati has been delayed as representations were received for 
changing the location of the Western Regional Centre of IIMC, Amaravati.  The matter 
was considered and it was decided in 2021 to construct the Western Regional Centre of 
IIMC at Badhera, Amaravati.  The lease Agreement between IIMC & the Government of 
Maharashtra got ‘time-barred/lapsed’. Therefore, a fresh ‘Lease Agreement’ had to be 
signed, which has since been done, and the construction is likely to begin in FY 2023-
24. Further, with respect to ‘Up-gradation of IIMC to International standards’ the Ministry 
informed that the start of the project got delayed as IIMC had to obtain the necessary 
clearances from various regulatory authorities for the construction of the building and 
IIMC had to wait for the judgment of the Hon’ble Supreme Court of India in this matter, 
which has finally been given.  Now, IIMC has already cleared the formalities and 
obtained the necessary documents and the Letter of Intent (LoI) has already been sent 
to CPWD 5th December, 2022 for submitting the cost estimates, timelines & drawings 
for the construction of the new building. The construction is likely to begin in FY 2023-
24. 
 
The Committee, while noting the problems encountered in implementing the four 
Regional Campuses and in ‘Upgradation of IIMC to international Standard’, observe that 
it took more than a decade to complete three campuses (at Kottayam, Aizwal and 

48 
 
Jammu) and the campuses at Amravati and New Delhi are still to see the light of the 
day as the construction in both the places are likely to begin in 2023-24. The Committee 
cannot but express extreme concern over the inordinate delay with respect execution of 
projects under IIMC given the important role it plays in conducting a number of 
specialized courses to meet the diverse requirements of the ever expanding and 
changing media industry and in training and research. Now that all the necessary 
approvals have been received with respect to remaining Campuses, the Committee 
recommend that the Ministry take necessary steps for the expeditious completion of the 
project so as to avoid further cost and time overrun. The Committee desire to apprised 
of the timeline fixed for completion of new building at IIMC, Delhi and Amravati as well 
as about the progress made with respect to construction work at these Centres. 
 
Reply of the Government 
New Building at IIMC, New Delhi: 
Hon’ble Supreme Court has allowed IIMC to construct new additional Institutional 
Building at IIMC, New Delhi subject to the conditions imposed by the Central 
Empowered Committee (CEC) in its report No. 28 dated 22.10.2019. IIMC has sent 
Letter of Intent (LoI) to CPWD to submit the drawings, estimate and time line for 
completion of the project, which is awaited. Meanwhile, tender for Topographical Survey 
of the plot and necessary clearances works have been awarded by CPWD, New Delhi 
and the construction may begin in FY 2023-24. 
 
Western Regional Campus of IIMC at Amravati: 
The lease agreement between IIMC & the Govt. of Maharashtra got ‘time-
barred/lapsed’. Therefore, a fresh ‘Lease Agreement’ has been signed. Accordingly, the 
LoI has been sent to the CPWD Nagpur to submit the drawing and costs estimates for 
the proposed new building. IIMC has already deposited Rs. 1.30 Crore to CPWD 
Nagpur for construction of boundary wall, entrance gate and sentry post at IIMC 
Amravati. The construction of the Campus may begin in FY 2023-24. 
 
[Ministry of Information and Broadcasting O.M. No. W-11/17/2023-PC Cell  
dated    .06.2023] 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 15) 
Registrar of Newspapers for India (RNI) 
 
The Committee note that the Office of the Registrar of Newspapers for India 
(RNI) was set up in 1956, is an attached office with MIB and it executes statutory and 
non-statutory functions. RNI maintains a Register of Newspapers and Publications, 
published across the country, issues Certificate of Registration to newspapers and 
publications, informs District Magistrate (DM) concerned about availability of titles for 

49 
 
fresh newspapers and scrutinizes and analyzes the annual statements submitted by the 
publishers of newspapers and publications. Under its non-statutory functions, RNI 
authenticates self-declaration certificates for import of newsprint to actual user 
publications registered with RNI. The Committee note that at present, application for 
titles can be filled online and apart from computerized processing of title verification and 
registration, all the verified titles are put on RNI website and can be downloaded. With 
the introduction of this facility, any person/prospective publisher can access the existing 
title data base, which is available State/Language-wise. In the second phase of 
digitalization, various procedures of the office, including application for registration will 
be made completely online. The Phase-I of the automation project of RNI started in the 
year 2020 and the Phase-II of the project has commenced in January 2023. The final 
deployment for public usage is planned for July, 2023. As part of the Digitization, a total 
number of 960 Registers are to be digitized and this includes 1,56,000 register records. 
Out of 960 Registers, 619 Registers have been scanned and data mapping of 61,749 
register records have been completed as on date.    
 
With respect to automation process in RNI, the Committee, in their Thirty-fourth 
Report (on DFG 2022-23) had noted completion of only 35% of the automation project 
in RNI and had recommended the Ministry to streamline the entire process of 
registration for speedy automation process in RNI. The Committee had also 
recommended not to delay the amendment of the ‘Press and Registration of Books Act, 
1867’ (PRB Act) which is almost 160 years old. Further, the Committee had 
recommended to link the automation project to the payment system too so as to reduce 
the time. In this regard, the Committee are pleased to note that the online payment of 
penalty through BharatKosh has been enabled and Phase-II of the project has 
commenced in January 2023 and the final deployment for public usage is planned for 
July, 2023. When the matter of automation process in RNI was raised, the Ministry 
acknowledged the delay and informed that a portal has been created to address the 
delay. The Ministry also apprised the Committee that since ‘The Press and Registration 
of Books Act (PRB), 1867’ is very old, they have prepared a new Bill which is now at the 
Cabinet approval stage and if the new Act is passed, there will be some improvements 
in the system that is in place. The Committee note that the automated system which is 
to be integrated with the e-sign solution will offer the publishers and the authenticating 
authorities, ease of transaction and record management.  The Committee, however, 
disapprove the slow pace of automation of RNI. The Committee recommend that the 
entire process of registration be streamlined and fast track the automation process in 

50 
 
RNI. Further, the Committee recommend that the necessary amendments in the ‘Press 
and Registration of Books Act, 1867’ be made without any further delay. 
 
Reply of the Government 
Regular review of the progress of the Automation Project is being undertaken 
fortnightly/monthly by the Press Registrar in the Office of RNI and also in the Ministry. 
A fresh and simplified draft bill titled “Press and Registration of Periodicals Bill, 2022” 
has been prepared by the Ministry in consultation with Law Ministry after 
stakeholder/inter-ministerial consultation to replace the existing Press and Registration 
of Book Act, 1867. Presently, the draft Bill is at the stage of seeking Cabinet’s approval. 
 
[Ministry of Information and Broadcasting O.M. No. W-11/17/2023-PC Cell  
dated    .06.2023] 
 
   
 
      New Delhi; PRATAPRAO JADHAV, 
7 August, 2023  Chairperson, 
16 Sravana, 1945 (Saka) Standing Committee on 
Communications and Information Technology. 

51 
 
 Annexure-I 
  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON COMMUNICATIONS AND INFORMATION 
TECHNOLOGY 
(2022-23) 
MINUTES OF THE SEVENTEENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
----------- 
 The Committee sat on Monday, the 07 August, 2023 from 1500 hours to 1645 
hours in Committee Room ‘3’ Extention to Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
 
Shri Prataprao Jadhav- Chairperson 
 
 MEMBERS 
  
Lok Sabha 
 
2.  Shri Karti P. Chidambaram 
3.       Smt. Sunita Duggal 
4.  Shri Jayadev Galla 
5.  Smt. Raksha Nikhil Khadse 
6.  Shri Santosh Pandey 
7.  Shri Sanjay Seth 
8.       Dr. M.K. Vishnu Prasad 
 
Rajya Sabha 
9.  Dr. Anil Agrawal 
10.     Dr. John Brittas  
11.  Shri Syed Nasir Hussain 
12.  Shri Jawahar Sircar 
 
 
 
 
 
 

52 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Satpal Gulati  - Additional Secretary 
2. Smt. Jyothirmayi  - Director 
3. Shri Nishant Mehra  - Deputy Secretary 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee convened to consider and adopt three draft Action Taken Reports on 
Demands for Grants (2023-24) relating to the Ministries/Departments under their 
jurisdiction and to have a briefing by the representatives of Department of 
Telecommunications, Reliance Jio Infocomm Ltd, Bharti Airtel Ltd., Tele 
Communications Consultants India Ltd. and Bharti Hexacom Ltd. on the subject 
‘Review of the performance of schemes under Universal Service Obligation Fund 
(USOF) with special emphasis on North East and LWE affected areas’. 
 
3. The Committee, then, took up the following draft Reports for consideration 
and adoption. 
(i) Draft Action Taken Report on Forty Third Report on ‘Demands for Grants 
(2023-24)’ relating to the Ministry of Communications (Department of 
Telecommunications). 
(ii)    Draft Action Taken Report on Forty Sixth Report on ‘Demands forGrants 
(2023-24)’ relating to the Ministry of Information and                                           
Broadcasting. 
(iii)  Draft Action Taken  Report on   Forty Fourth Report on ‘Demands for 
 Grants (2023-24)’  relating to the Ministry of Communications                                            
 (Department of Posts) 
4. After due deliberations, the Committee adopted the Reports with some 
modifications. 

53 
 
5. The Committee authorized the Chairperson to finalize the draft Action Taken 
Reports and present the same to the House during the current Session of Parliament. 
6. The Committee then called the representative of Department of 
Telecommunications, Reliance Jio Infocomm Ltd, Bharti Airtel Ltd., Tele 
Communications Consultants India Ltd. and Bharti Hexacom Ltd.  to have briefing on 
the subject ‘Review of the performance of schemes under Universal Service 
Obligation Fund (USOF) with special emphasis on North East and LWE affected 
areas’. 
6. xxxxxxx……….xxxxxxx……..xxxxxxx* 
7. xxxxxxx……….xxxxxxx……..xxxxxxx 
 
     
 A copy of verbatim record of the proceedings was kept on record. 
The Committee, then, adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
_____________________________________________________________ 
* Matters not related to the Report 

54 
 
Annexure-II 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE OBSERVATIONS/ 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THEIR FORTY-SIXTH REPORT 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
[Vide Paragraph No. 5 of Introduction] 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government 
 
Rec. Sl. Nos.: 1, 2, 3, 8, 10, 13, 16 and 17 
Total     8 
Percentage 52.95 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the replies of the Government 
 
          
Total NIL 
Percentage 0.00 
 
 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and require 
reiteration 
 
        Rec. Sl. Nos.:  6 and 12  
Total     02 
Percentage 11.76 
 
 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the replies of the 
Government are of interim in nature 
 
         Rec. Sl. Nos.: 4, 5, 7, 9, 11, 14 and 15  
Total    07 
Percentage 35.29 
 
 