 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(2020-21) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF INFORMATION AND BROADCASTING 
 
 
 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the 
Committee contained in their Second Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on 
„Demands for Grants (2019-20)] 
 
 
FOURTEENTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
 
February, 2021/Magha, 1942 (Saka) 
 
 
14 
 

 
 
FOURTEENTH REPORT 
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(2020-21) 
 
 
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
MINISTRY OF INFORMATION AND BROADCASTING 
 
 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the 
Committee contained in their Second Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on 
„Demands for Grants (2019-20)] 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 08.02.2021 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 08.02.2021  
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
 
February, 2021/Magha, 1942 (Saka) 
 
 
 


 
 
CONTENTS 
 Page 
No. 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
(ii) 
INTRODUCTION 
 
(iii) 
CHAPTER I Report…………………………………………………………………………………………………. 
 
1 
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government………………………………………………………………………………………… 
 
19 
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of replies of the 
Government………………………………………………………………………………………… 
 
32 
CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and require 
reiteration …………………………………………………………………………………………… 
 
33 
CHAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies are of 
interim in nature………………………………………………………………………………….. 
39 
  
ANNEXURES 
 
 
I. Minutes of the Third sitting of the Committee held on 16 October, 2020. 
  
40 
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in their Second Report (Seventeenth Lok 
Sabha)  
 
           42    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(i) 

 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (2020-21) 
Dr. Shashi Tharoor - Chairperson 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Smt. Locket Chatterjee 
3. Shri Karti P. Chidambaram 
4. Shri Sunny Deol  
5. Dr. Nishikant Dubey  
6. Smt. Raksha Nikhil Khadse  
7. Dr. Sukanta Majumdar  
8. Shri Dhairyasheel Sambhajirao Mane 
9. Ms. Mahua Moitra 
10. Shri P. R. Natarajan 
11. Shri Santosh Pandey 
12. Shri Nisith Pramanik  
13. Col. Rajyavardhan Singh Rathore 
14. Dr. Gaddam Ranjith Reddy  
*15.  Shri Jayadev Galla 
16.   Shri Sanjay Seth  
   17.  Shri Chandan Singh 
   18.  Shri L.S. Tejasvi Surya 
   19.  Dr. T. Sumathy (A) Thamizhachi Thangapandian  
   20.  Shri Bhanu Pratap Singh Verma 
 #21. Smt. Sumalatha Ambareesh 
 
Rajya Sabha 
22. Dr. Anil Agrawal  
23. Dr. Subhash Chandra  
24. Shri Y. S. Chowdary  
25. Shri Shaktisinh Gohil 
26. Shri Suresh Gopi  
27. Shri Md. Nadimul Haque 
28. Shri Syed Nasir Hussain  
29. Shri Syed Zafar Islam 
30. Dr. Narendra Jadhav  
31. Shri Nabam Rebia 
Secretariat 
 
1. Shri Y.M. Kandpal   - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Geeta Parmar   - Additional Director 
3. Smt. Rinky Singh   - Assistant Executive Officer 
 
_____________________________________________________________________________________________ 
*Nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 15.10.2020 vide Bulletin Part-II dated 15.10.2020 
 
#Nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 28.12.2020 vide Bulletin Part-II dated 28.12.2020 
 
(ii) 

 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Information Technology    (2020 -21), 
having been authorised by the Committee, present  this Fourteenth Report on Action 
Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the Committee 
contained in their Second Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on „Demands for Grants       
(2019-20)‟ of the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting. 
 
2. The Second Report was presented to Lok Sabha and also laid on the Table of 
Rajya Sabha on 10 th December, 20 19.  The Ministry of Information and Broadcasting 
furnished their Action Taken Notes on the Observations/Recommendations contained in 
the Second Report on 9th March, 2020.  
 
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their sitting held on 
16 October, 2020. 
 
4. For facility of reference and convenience, Observations/Recommendations of the 
Committee have been printed in bold in Chapter-I of the Report.  
 
5. An analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Second Report of the Committee is 
given at Annexure-II. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iii)
      New Delhi;   DR. SHASHI THAROOR, 
04 February, 2021  Chairperson, 
15 Magha, 1942 (Saka) Standing Committee on 
Information Technology. 

 
1 
 
CHAPTER I 
REPORT 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Information Technology deals with the 
action taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the 
Committee contained in their Second Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on „Demands for 
Grants (2019-20)‟ relating to the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting. 
 
2. The Second Report was presen ted to Lok Sabha/laid in Rajya Sabha on                   
10 December, 2019.  It contained 20 Observations/Recommendations. Replies of the 
Government in respect of all the Observations/Recommendations have been received 
from the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting and are categorized as under:- 
 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by 
the Government 
Rec. Sl. Nos.:- 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 9, 10, 15, 17, 18, 19 and 20  
 
  Total -14 
Chapter-II 
 
 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the replies of the Government 
Rec. Sl. No.: NIL 
 
  Total - NIL 
Chapter-III 
 
 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and 
require reiteration 
Rec. Sl. Nos.:- 8, 11, 12, 13, 14 and 16 
 
  Total - 06 
Chapter-IV 
 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government are of interim in nature  
Rec. Sl. No.:- NIL 
 
  Total – NIL 
Chapter-V 
 
 
 
 
 

2 
 
3. The Committee trust that utmost importance would be given to 
implementation of the O bservations/Recommendations accepted by the 
Government. The Committee further desire that Action Taken Statement on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in Chapter -I and final action taken 
replies to the Observations/Recommendations contained in Chap ter-V of this 
Report should be furnished to them at an early date. 
 
4. The Committee will now deal with action taken by the Government on some of 
their recommendations.   
 
Prasar Bharati/DD Kisan Channel 
(Recommendation Sl. Nos. 4 and 5) 
5. The Committee  in thei r Report  on DFG(2019 -20) of the Ministry of I & B had 
expressed their displeasure to  note that d uring 2017-18 and 2018 -19, against BE of 
Rs.63 crore and 45.16 crore, resp . allocated to DD Kisan Channel contents  and RE of 
Rs.46.58 crore and Rs.34.51 crore,  resp. only 74% and 56% of the funds,  resp. were 
utilised. Though, a decision was taken for in-house production of the programmes, DD 
Kisan d id not have adequate manpower to do so  and a s a result,  many of the 
travelogue based programs could not be produced  and the reality show was deferred .  
Besides, there were  logistic issues in finalizing the reality show “Mahilakisan Awards”, 
shortage of staff in programmes wing of  many Kendras , insufficient prescribed fee 
structure for Artists, Producer s, Casuals, Resou rce Persons, etc. to engage talent for 
production of programmes for DD Kisan. Considering that planning & coordination in the 
Ministry was not optimal and required improvement, t he Committee had h oped that 
Prasar Bharati  would learn from their past experie nce and take adequate corrective 
measures to optimally utilise the funds of  Rs. 29.72 crore allocated during 2019 -20 for 
DD Kisan and recommended that in -house production o f programmes at DD Kisan 
should be commensurate with the available manpower. 
 
6. The Ministry o f Information and Broadcasting in their Action Taken Reply has 
submitted as under:- 
 
“(i)   DD Kisan sources content through the scheme of Self -Financed 
Commissioning (SFC) apart from developing content in -house. The bulk of the 
sanctioned budget i s utilized for the SFC programmes. A review of the low 
budget utilization revealed shortcomings in the scheme, which led to litigations 
on account of which payments had been held up, as matters were sub-judice.  

3 
 
 
(ii)  In the interim, Prasar Bharati upon r eview, amended the 
scheme/guidelines recently (158 th meeting of the Prasar Bharati Board in 
November 2019) to overcome the shortcomings, based on learnings. The 
amended scheme has since been implemented.  
 
(iii)  As regards in -house production, more than 2 00 episodes of the 
Travelogue based programs in collaboration with all Kendras of Doordarshan 
were produced in 2018 -19 and 2019 -20. Reality Show “Mahila Kisan Awards” 
was recorded and telecast in the FY 2018 -19. As it was the first reality based 
program of DD Kisan with women farmers representing all States and UT‟s of 
India, the  planning and production required lot of detailing. The production 
operations were spread over nine months. Fifty five programs of one hour 
each were produced and telecast. 
 
iv)       Expenditure of Rs.13 Crore have already been made, it is expected that 
Rs. 20 Crores allocated for DD Kisan will be spent by the end  of the current 
financial year.” 
 
 
7. The Committee have been informed that DD Kisan sources content through 
Self-Financed C ommissioning (SFC) scheme apart from developing content in -
house and the bulk of the sanctioned budget is utilized for the SFC programmes. 
A review of the low budget utilization revealed shortcomings in the SFC scheme, 
which led to litigations on account o f which payments were held up, as matters 
were sub-judice. The Committee note with satisfaction that Prasar Bharati, in the 
interim, upon review has amended the scheme/guidelines which has since been 
implemented. The Committee would like to be informed of the important features 
incorporated in  amended sch eme/guidelines in comparison to the old SFC 
scheme. 
 
8.  As regards in -house production, the Committee note more than 200 
episodes of the Travelogue based programs in collaboration with all Kendras of 
Doordarshan have been produced during the years 2018-19 and 2019-20. Further, 

4 
 
out of Rs. 29.72 crore allocated during 2019 -20, DD-Kissan could utilise  13 crore 
and the likely expenditure up to 31 March is Rs. 20 crore. The Committee do not 
find it a very happy sit uation, if compared with the budgetary allocation s for DD 
Kisan at RE, 2017-18 and 2018-19 which were on the higher side at  Rs.46.58 crore 
and Rs.34.51 crore , respectively. The Committee hope that the problems 
confronted by DD-Kissan during 2018-19 that led to under-utilisation of funds like 
problem of shortage of staff in programmes wing in many Kendras to produce 
any programmes for DD Kisan, insufficient prescribed fee structure for Artists, 
Producers, Casuals, Resource Persons, etc. would have been resolved and funds 
allocated in the succeeding years  would be optimally utilised. Further, with 
regard to 200 episodes of the travelogue based programs produced during the 
years 2018 -19 and 2019 -20, the Committee would like to be a pprised about the 
status of the Programmes that were actually telecast. 
 
Capital Assets (incl. Kisan Channel) 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 6) 
 
9. The Committee had noted that during 2017 -18 and 2018-19, budget provision of 
Rs. 213 crore and Rs.141.50 crore, respectively made for DD Capital Ass ets (incl. 
Kisan Channel) was reduced to Rs.118.34 crore and Rs.112.17 crore, respectively at 
RE stage  and the utilization was only Rs. 52.02 crore (44 percent) and Rs.80.08 crore 
(71 percent), respectively. The Committee were not convinced with oft-repeated 
reasons for the shortfall viz. GST related issues while processing of sanctions; delays in 
obtaining WPC clearance in some projects;  delays in some Earth station projects on 
account of tender opening date‟s extension due to non -receipt of sufficient bids/bidders 
quarries; delays in supply of equipmen t by firms for certain projects;  etc. While taking a 
serious note of the manner in which the budgetary allocations were being reduced each 
year for creation of DD Capital Assets (incl. Kisan Channel) at RE s tage and the actual 
expenditure was even lesser, the Committee had desired the Ministry to give serious 
consideration to the   implementation of the ir infrastructural projects which were 

5 
 
instrumental in ensuring the performance of the Public electronic medi a and fulfilling its 
obligations to the nation, by taking timely corrective measures for anticipated delays. 
 
10. The Ministry of Information and Broadcasting  in their Action Taken Reply ha s 
submitted as under:- 
“As regards to Capital Assets, as has been state d above, regular monitoring 
mechanism at the highest level of management has been put in place by 
Prasar Bharati. Procurement procedures have been streamlined. Project 
review meetings are being held regularly at Zonal level, H Q level and Prasar 
Bharati Secretariat level. Various activities involved in procurement of capital 
equipment and execution of works are being critically assessed against 
targets and milestones that have been fixed by the management.  
 
Regular interaction is being done with WPC authori ties for obtaining their 
clearance in time. Advance tendering action has also been taken for next 
year‟s projects.” 
 
11. The Commit tee had noted that Prasar Bharati could utilise only 44% and 
71% of the funds allocated  for DD Capital Assets  at RE, 2017 -18 and 2018-19. 
From Action Taken Reply, the Committee note that Prasar Bharati has taken 
various corrective measures to avoid procedural delays in implementation of 
infrastructural projects as recommended like  regular monitoring mechanism at 
the highest level of  management has been put in place, procurement procedures 
have been streamlines, project review meetings are being held regularly at Zonal, 
HQ and Prasar Bharati Secretariat levels, various activities involved in 
procurement of capital equipment and execut ion of works are being critically 
assessed against targets and milestones that have been fixed by the 
management, regular interaction is being done with WPC authorities for obtaining 
their clearance in time and advance tendering action has also been taken for next 
year‟s projects.   The Committee suggested that steps should be taken to 
monetize existing archival material and footage by placing them in revenue 
generating mode on YouTube and other similar facilities.   

6 
 
 In view of the foregoing, t he Committee draw some satisfaction that Prasar 
Bharati have analysed their shortcomings and taken remedial steps accordingly . 
The Committee hope that these measures would improve the pace of 
implementation of projects of national importance. The y would further like to  
know that how these steps have impacted the physical and financial performance  
of Prasar Bharati in respect of DD Capital Assets during 20 19-20. The Committee 
also recommend that steps should be taken to monetize existing archival material 
and footage by placing them in revenue generating mode on YouTube and similar 
facilities.   
All India Radio (AIR) 
(Recommendation Sl. No.8) 
12. In their Report, the Committee had noted that during 2019-20, BE of Rs.187.40 
crore was kept for creation of Capital Assets in AIR . It was informed that the extension 
of Scheme „Broadcasting Infrastructure & Network Development‟ for 3 years (2017 -20) 
was approved in the middle of FY 2018 -19 resulting in under -utilization of funds during 
the year and hence allocation during the year 2019-20 also included provision for the 
projects not c ompleted in the previous year. These projects included Mast 
strengthening works of high power MW Transmitters, SITC of Servers and Radio Studio 
Automation, Procurement of digital audio consoles, Procureme nt of 5 TV Transmitters, 
Erection of 100 M Self Supporting Towers, Construction of buildings or FM transmitter 
along Indo -Nepal Border (5 Nos.), VPN Connectivity at 47 Stations, Renovation of 
Auditorium at BH, Delhi and Creation of Arch ival facility at Guw ahati. The C ommittee, 
however had hoped that Ministry of I & B/Prasar Bharati would make concerted efforts 
to complete the projects within fixed timelines to improve AIR services. 
 
13. The Ministry of Information and Broadcasting in the ir Action Taken Reply ha s 
submitted as under:- 
 "The progress of various projects is submitted hereunder: 
“ i.  Mast strengthening works at 39 places were to be carried o ut from the 
allocated funds of 2019-20.  Work has been completed at 20 places and is 
in progress at 16 other places.  

7 
 
  ii. Servers for studio automation have been ordered. Delivery period for 
these equipment is 18 months.  
 iii. Tender processing for the erection of 100M Towers is in advanced 
stage for different places. 
iv. Building work for the INDO -NEPAL border  projects has been 
completed. 
v.  Auditorium work at Broadcasting House, Delhi has been completed. 
Funds will be booked before March 2020.” 
 
14. The Committee are not satisfied with the manner in which the Ministry have 
furnished the Action Taken Replies to their recommendation. The Committee note 
that the status of all the projects for which a provision was made in the budgetary 
allocation for the year 2019 -20 has not been furnished. Though the progress with 
respect to projects viz. Mast strengthening works of  high power MW 
Transmitters, SITC of Servers and Radio Studio Automation, Erection of 100 M 
Self Supporting Towers and construction of buildings or FM transmitter along 
Indo-Nepal Border (5 Nos.) has  been provided, the reply is silent with regard to 
the status of projects  viz. Procurement of digital audio consoles, Procurement of 
5 TV Transmitters, VPN Connectivity at 47 Stations, Creation of Archival facility at 
Guwahati. In this background, the Committee would like to know the projects 
which remained inc omplete and also the reasons for their slow progress. The 
Committee have been informed that funds would be booked before March 2020. In 
such case, the reasons for mismatch of physical and financial targets may also 
be apprised, in case of shortfall in physical targets.  
 
(Recommendation Sl. No.9) 
15. One of the thrust areas of the Ministry of I&B, during the year 2019 -20, was the 
physical coverage in terms of FM Radio and Television.  It was informed that A IR had 
495 FM transmitters . The uncovered areas were located to cover with appropriate FM 
Stations, particularly in view of the fact that the neighboring countries m ight have  
stronger FM stations an d might  indulge in activities which would not be conducive to 

8 
 
India‟s interests.  In this regard, the Committee had desired to be apprised of the 
planning of Ministry of I&B/Prasar Bharati for installing AIR/TV transmitters to cover th e 
border areas of the country. Transmitters of adequate power should be set up in 
sensitive border areas to effectively counter anti-India propaganda by the neighboring 
countries. Besides, a thought should be given to shortwave radio transmissions utilizing 
DTH technology for the benefit of Diaspora population. 
 
16. The Ministry of Information and Broadcasting in their Action Taken Reply ha s 
submitted as under:- 
“i.  AIR has 501 FM transmitters functional at 458 locations across the country 
and presently reaching about 54 % of the area and about 64 % of the total 
population of the country.  In order to further augment the FM terrestrial 
coverage, projects for setting up of 143 FM transmitters including 112 nos. of 
100 W FM transmitters are under implementation in the country. After 
commissioning of these transmitters, AIR coverage in FM mode is likely to 
increase to about 74% population of the country. AIR is regularly 
strengthening FM coverage along border areas.  Out of 143 FM transmitters, 6 
nos. of 10 kW & one 1 kW FM Transmitters along Indo -Nepal border, 2 nos. of 
10 kW FM Transmitters along Indo -Pak border and 8 nos. 1 kW FM 
transmitters in North East Regions are under implementation. 
 
Prasar Bharati has modernized Short Wave transmitters with latest DRM 
Digital Radio technology at its Delhi and Bengaluru facilities. Further plan for 
modernization of Short Wave in DRM Digital Radio mode is approved and 
being implemented at Kurseong facility while obsolete analog transmitters are 
being phased out. 
 
Prasar Bharati is also extensively exploring other digital means for carrying 
AIR channels as an alternative. Various AIR channels are available o n internet 
through Prasar Bharati website, and on NewsonAir app on Android and iOS 
mobile platform for global audiences. Several Radio Channels have also been 
made available on satellite using the DD Free Dish DTH infrastructure. 
 
As regards Doordarshan, i n view of multi -channel TV coverage through its  
free-to-air DTH service “DD FreeDish”, new transmitters for expansion of 
terrestrial coverage are now not envisaged, except a few in border areas of 
J&K.  For strengthening terrestrial TV coverage in border areas, projects for 
setting up the following five new High Power TV transmitters in J&K are under 
implementation. 
 
HPT, Green Ridge 
HPT, Himbotingla 
HPT, Natha Top (Patnitop) 
HPTs, Rajouri (DD National & DD News) 

9 
 
 
These HPTs are presently at various stages  of implementation. Further, It is 
submitted that Doordarshan‟s “DD FreeDish” service can be received 
anywhere in the country including border areas with the help of small sized 
dish receive units. Prasar Bharati has recently distributed 30,000 DTH receive  
Set in Jammu and Kashmir. Further, Prasar Bharati is in the process of 
procuring 1,20,000 receive sets for further distribution in the country including 
J&K.” 
 
17. The Committee have been informed that AIR has 501 FM transmitters 
reaching about 54 % of the are a and about 64 % of the total population of the 
country.  Further, in order to augment the FM terrestrial coverage, projects for 
setting up of 143 FM transmitters including 112 nos. of 100 W FM transmitters are 
under implementation in the country. With rega rd to install ation of AIR/TV 
transmitters to cover the border areas of the country, the Committee find that 
very few FM transmitters are proposed to be installed as out  of 143 FM 
transmitters, 6 nos. of 10 kW & one 1 kW FM Transmitters along Indo -Nepal 
border, 2 nos. of 10 kW FM Transmitters along Indo-Pak border and 8 nos. KW FM 
transmitters in North East Regions are unde r implementation. In view of the 
hostile activities on borders, these areas are vulnerable and t herefore in order to 
strengthen them , the  number of High Power FM transmitters need to be 
increased.  The Committee also reminded the Ministry of its undertaking to 
restore AIR‟s FM Gold radio transmissions to their former patterns.  
 
18. The Committee draw some satisfaction to note that f or strength ening 
terrestrial TV coverage in border areas, setting up th e five new High Power TV 
transmitters in J&K are at various stages of implementation.  The Committee are 
hopeful that the proposed HPTs in J & K would be effective enough to curb anti -

10 
 
India propaganda on TV from across the border and the work would be completed 
within specific timeframe . The Committee would like to be kept informed of the 
progress in this regard. 
FILM SECTOR 
 
National Film Heritage Mission (NFHM) 
 
(Recommendations Sl. Nos.11 and 12) 
 
19. The Committee had noted that non-implementation of the NFHM Scheme under 
„Film‟ Wing led to shortfall in financial targets of the Ministry of I&B  during the last three 
years. During 2016-17, 2017 -18 and 2018 -19, against BE of Rs. 30 crore, Rs. 50.00 
crore and Rs. 57.78 crore, respectively  and RE of Rs. 16 crore, Rs. 6.02 crore and Rs. 
15.00 crore, the actual expenditure was Rs. 10.84 crore, Rs. 6.02 crore and Rs. 10.51 
crore, respectively. Again during 2019 -20, the Ministry of I & B had  proposed to the 
Ministry of Finance to reduce the budgetary allocation of Rs. 22.48 crore  to Rs. 5 crore 
at RE stag . While considering it a poor commentary on the functioning of the Ministry, 
the Committee had desired that the Ministry should undertake its budgetary exerc ise 
with seriousness and urged to gear up the implementation of various important activities 
under the NHFM scheme. 
 
20. The Ministry of Information and Broadcasting, in the Action Taken Reply  to 
Recommendation No. 11 has submitted as under:- 
 
“At the commence ment of the NFHM Scheme, it was assessed that the 
Executing agencies for the works like Film condition assessment of the film 
reels, Preventive Conservation of film reels and Digitization of Film reels would 
be in place during 2016 -17. However, the executi ng agency could be engaged 
for the work of „Film condition assessment of the film reels‟  after due procedure 
during 2016 -17, while the tender process for other activities could not be 
initiated. This led to less utilization of allotted funds under RE 2016-17. 
The entire scheme was put under review in 2017 and all tender processes 
under NFHM were put on hold until the review. This included „Condition 
assessment‟ for which the executing agency was already engaged and for 
which work had begun. The other tender s viz. digitization and restoration of 
filmic material, creation of IT infrastructure at NFAI, etc., which were at various 
stages of tendering, were also stalled. This led to downsizing of funds in 2017 -
18 and 2018-19.  

11 
 
The work under „Preventive Conservat ion‟ could only commence on completion 
of work under „Collection Assessment‟. As the work under collection 
assessment could not be completed in time due to the review, the work under 
preventive conservation could not be initiated in time even though the ex ecuting 
agency was selected, which led to underutilization of funds in 2018-19. 
Further, a n agency for undertaking the infrastructure development work for 
creation of storage facilities at NFAI could not be finalized during this time which 
led to reduction of RE in 2017-18 and in 2018-19.” 
 
21. The Ministry of Information and Broadcasting in the Action Taken Reply to 
Recommendation No. 12 has submitted as under:- 
 
“During the year 2017 -18, the entire scheme was put under review and all 
tender processes under NF HM were put on hold until the review. This included 
„Condition assessment‟ for which the executing agency was already engaged 
and for which work had begun. The other tenders viz. preventive conservation 
of film content at NFAI, digitization and restoration  of filmic material, creation of 
IT infrastructure at NFAI, etc., which were at various stages of tendering, were 
also stalled.  
The work under „Preventive Conservation‟ could only commence on completion 
of work under „Collection Assessment‟. As the work u nder collection 
assessment could not be completed in time due to the review, the work under 
preventive conservation could not be initiated in time even though the executing 
agency was selected. Now, the work under collection assessment has 
completed. Basis the work output of collection assessment, the selected agency 
for preventive conservation is set to initiate resource mobilization and 
commence work. Also, the executing agency for construction of storage 
facilities is now in place and it is being ensured to regularly review the work. 
It is being ensured to speed up the various tender processes, viz. „Digitization of 
Film Content‟, „Restoration of Film Content‟ and „IT Solutions‟, such that the 
executing agencies are engaged in timely manner as per extant procedure for 
effective implementation of the NFHM Scheme and proper utilization of the 
allotted funds.  
Frequent reviews by the Technical Committee of NFHM has been initiated for 
optimally utilizing the allocated funds. The High Level Committee meetings a re 
being regularly held which is reviewing the project for effective implementation.  
It is being ensured to speed up the various tender processes for appointment of 
executing agencies in timely manner as per extant procedure for effective 
implementation of the NFHM Scheme and proper utilization of allotted funds.  
An amount of Rs.22.48 crore was allocated for NFHM during 2019 -20, which 
was reduced to Rs.3.61 crore at RE stage. The final grant has been fixed at 
Rs.8.11 crore and the expenditure incurred is Rs.5.40 Crore, as on date.” 

12 
 
22. The Committee have been told that though it was assessed that the 
executing agencies for the works like Film condition assessment, Preventive 
Conservation and Digitization of Film reels would be in  place during 2016-17, the 
executing agency could be engaged for the work of „Film condition assessment 
of the film reels‟ after due procedure during 2016-17, while the tender process for 
other activities could not be initiated which led to less utilization of allotted funds 
under RE 20 16-17. Further, the entire scheme was put under review in 2017 and 
all tender processes under NFHM were put on hold until the review. This included 
„Condition assessment‟ for which the executing agency was already engaged and 
for which work had begun. The other tenders viz. digitization and restoration of 
filmic material, creation of IT infrastructure at NFAI, etc., which were at various 
stages of tendering, were also stalled which led to downsizing of funds in 2017-18 
and 2018 -19. Also, a s the work under c ollection assessment could not be 
completed in time due to the review, the work under preventive conservation 
could not be initiated in time even though the executing agency was selected, 
which led to underutilization of funds in 2018-19. 
 
In this backgrou nd, t he Committee note that though budgetary allocation 
Rs.22.48 crore for NFHM during 2019 -20 was reduced to Rs.3.61 crore at RE 
stage, the final grant was fixed at Rs.8.11 crore. The Committee note that as on 9 
March, 2020, the expenditure incurred is Rs .5.40 Crore (66.58%), which cannot be 
termed a  satisfactory performance.  The Committee urge the Ministry to take 
urgent steps to evaluate reasons for dismal performance all these years to 
ensure better performance in the succeeding years.  
 

13 
 
23. The Committee n ote with some satisfaction that the work under collection 
assessment has now been completed and the selected agency for preventive 
conservation is set to initiate resource mobilization and commence work. Also, 
the executing agency for construction of storage facilities is now in place and it is 
being ensured to regularly review the work. It is also being ensured to speed up 
the various tender processes. T he executing agencies are engaged in timely 
manner as per extant procedure for effective implementation of the NFHM 
Scheme and proper utilization of the allotted funds. Frequent reviews by the 
Technical Committee of NFHM has been initiated for optimally utilizing the 
allocated funds. The High Level Committee meetings are being regularly held 
which is reviewi ng the project for effective implementation.  In view of the 
forgoing, the Committee trust that one of the important projects of the Ministry of 
I & B viz. NFHM for preserving and conserving country‟s cinematic heritage 
would not be allowed to suffer for i nefficiency on the part of the Ministry and 
henceforth physical and financial targets under the project would be  optimally 
achieved.  
 
National Centre for Excellence for Animation, Visual Effects, Gaming and Comics 
(NCoE) 
(Recommendation Sl. No.13) 
 
24. The Committee had learnt that the Planning Commission had given in -principle 
approval to the NCoE, a 12 th plan project which was based on Public Private 
Partnership model. The administrative approval for NCoE were issued with a total 
outlay of Rs. 167.70 crore a nd it was to be implemented in four year period from 2016 -
17 to 2019 -20. The Committee were disappointed to note that during 2016 -17 and 
2018-19, only Rs.0.39 crore and Rs. 1.63 crore , respectively were utilized under the 
project whereas there was NIL expe nditure in  2017-18. It was informed that Indian 
Institute of Mass Communication (Executing partner)  had released RFP on 03.02.2017 

14 
 
for selection of Operating Partner for NCoE  and the  Ministry was in the process of 
identifying the operating and academic partner for the Centre nearly three years later.   
While considering that in the changing scenario where Animation, Visual Effects, 
Gaming and Comic are the new emerging technologies in media, the Committee had 
desired the Ministry to make concerted efforts to  find out and finalise the operating and 
academic partner for the NCoE project and ensure that the funds of Rs. 20.50 crore 
earmarked for the NCoE project are not left unutilized. 
 
25. The Ministry of Information and Broadcasting , in the Action Taken Reply , have 
submitted as under:- 
 
“A Committee consisting of Additional Secretary & FA, Additional Secretary and 
Joint Secretary (Films) of the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting was 
constituted in August, 2019 to supervise the selection of Operating Partner for 
setting up the institute. The Committee observed that a considerable time has 
passed since tender documents were submitted and scrutinized in the year 
2017. During the time, a lot of technological improvements, curriculum 
modifications, changes in prop osed fees, etc. have occurred in the AVGC 
sector. The Committee has accordingly suggested that it would be desirable to 
consider the changes in the sector since the year 2017, in wider consultations 
with key players in AVGC sector. After due deliberations,  it has been decided 
that the present RFP should be terminated and a fresh RFP be drawn for 
selection of operating partner. 
 
26. The Committee in their earlier Report had noted that Indian Institute of 
Mass Communication (Executing partner) had released RFP on  03.02.2017 for 
selection of Operating Partner for NCoE and the Ministry was in the process of 
identifying the operating and academic partner for the Centre and earnestly 
desired the  Ministry to make concerted efforts to find out and finalise the 
operating and academic partner for the NCoE project and ensure that the funds of 
Rs. 20.50 crore earmarked for the NCoE project are not left unutilized. The 
Committee note from action taken reply that in August, 2019, a committee was 
constituted consisting of AS & FA, AS and JS (Films) of the Ministry to supervise 
the selection of Operating Partner for setting up the institute which  observed that 

15 
 
a considerable time has passed since tender documents were submitted and 
scrutinized in the year 2017. As a lot of techn ological improvements, curriculum 
modifications, changes in proposed fees, etc. have occurred in the AVGC sector , 
the committee has suggested to consider the changes in the sector since the 
year 2017, in wider consultations with key players in AVGC sector.  After due 
deliberations, it has been decided to terminate the present RFP and a fresh RFP 
would be drawn for selection of operating partner.  
 
The Committee are aware since 03.02.2017 when RFP was first drawn for 
selection of operating partner , a lot have  changed in the AVGC sector and 
therefore there is  a need that a  fresh RFP  should be drawn in this regard . 
However, the Committee strongly deprecate the manner in which NCoE  project 
which is a 12th Plan project and proposed to be implemented in four year p eriod 
from 2016-17 to 2019 -20 allowed to suffer, certainly put a question mark on the 
working of the organisation. Evidently, the project has suffered due to  
inefficiency and complacency on the part of the Ministry. Needless to mention the 
project implementation within timelines is required to be adhered more seriously 
than done hitherto. 
 
Upgradation, Modernisation and Expansion of CBFC 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No.14) 
 
27. The Committee had note d that there was u nder-utilisation of funds under the 
scheme „Upgradation, Modernisation and Expansion of CBFC‟ during 2016-17, 2017-18 
and 2018 -19. The shortfall in ac hievement of financial targets attributed to constraint 
like shortage of space in  CBFC office for not procuring/ installing Digital Projection 
System and Digital Theatres as planned, was hardly convincing. Again, during 2019-20, 
the Ministry had proposed to reduce BE of Rs. 2.50 crore to Rs. 1.30 crore at RE stage. 

16 
 
The Committee had deprecated such a casual approach of the Ministry of I&B to find an 
amicable solution to such a trivial issue of shortage of space in CBFC office and desired 
to take necessary steps in  this regard urgently. The Committee had also desired that 
the recommendations of the Benegal Committee on the broader issue of film 
certification be reviewed and acted upon without further delay. 
 
28. In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting have 
submitted as under:- 
 
“There was shortage of space in CBFC office due to which CBFC could not 
procure/ install Digital Projection S ystem and Digital Theatres as planned. 
Therefore, the funds allocated for the said purposes could not be utilized which 
led to shortfall in financial targets. 
Continuous follow-up of the activities is being taken up with CBFC to complete 
the activities as per schedule. The necessary approvals are also being taken up 
on priority basis to ensure the optimal utilization of allocated funds. 
 
29. The Committee had noted the under -utilisation of funds 2016-17, 2017 -18 
and 2018 -19 under the scheme „Upgradation, Modern isation and Expansion of 
CBFC‟  for shortage of space in CBFC office due t o which CBFC could not 
procure/install Digital Projection System a nd Digital Theatres as planned.  The 
Committee were unhappy with reduction of allocation during 2019 -20 at BE of Rs. 
2.50 crore to Rs. 1.30 crore at RE stage and take necessary steps in  this regard 
urgently. The Committee note from action taken reply that c ontinuous follow-up 
of the activities is being taken up with CBFC to complete the activities as per 
schedule. The ne cessary approvals are also being taken up on priority basis to 
ensure the optimal utilization of allocated funds.  The Committee would like to be 
apprised of the utilisation of funds for the activity during 2019-20.  
 
 
 

17 
 
30. The Committee further note that Ministry‟s reply is silent  on their  
recommendation to review and act upon the Benegal Committee 
recommendations on the broader issue of film certification without further  delay. 
The Committee reiterate their recommendation and desired to initiate required 
steps promptly.   The Committee  also reiterate their recommendation regarding 
comprehensive review and updating of the Cinematograph Act, 1952. 
Production of films and documentaries in various Indian Languages 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No.16) 
 
31. The Committee were not convinced with the reasons adduced by the Ministry for 
under-utilisation of funds allocated under the scheme „Production of films and 
documentaries in various Indian Languages‟ during 2018-19, like the funds were 
earmarked for production of film „Bangaban dhu‟ in Audio -Visual Co -production 
agreement with Bangladesh and the film was at research and scripting stage under the 
direction of eminent filmmaker Sh ri Shyam Benegal . The Committee desired to know 
the reasons for making a provision of  Rs. 14 crore during 2017-18 for production of film 
„Bangabandhu‟ when the film was at research and scripting stage  only. The Committee 
urged the Ministry to take utmost care while preparing the budget estimates.  
 
32. The Ministry of Information and Broadcasting, in the ir Action Taken Reply, have 
submitted as under:- 
 
“It was expected that the research and scripting for the film „Bangabandhu‟ 
would be complete d during first half of 2017 -18 and that the production would 
commence during the second half of the financial year. Henc e, a fund allocation 
of Rs.14 crores was made for production of the film during the year 2017-18. 
The co -production ag reement for production of film „Bangabandhu‟  between 
National Film Development Corporation (NFDC) and Film Development 
Corporation (FDC), Bangladesh was signed on 14.01.2020. The script for the 
film has now been finalized and the shooting will start in March, 2020. It is 
expected that the film will be completed by March, 2021. 
As on date, a total amount of Rs.8.50 crore has been released towards 
production of the film.” 
 

18 
 
33. The Committee in their earlier Report had desired to know the reasons for 
making a provision of Rs. 14 crore during 2017 -18 for production of film 
„Bangabandhu‟ when the film was at research and scripting stage only. In their  
reply, the Ministry have clarified that th e allocation was made as it was expected 
that the research and scripting for the film „Bangabandhu‟ would be completed 
during first half of 2017 -18 and the production would commence during the 
second half of the f inancial year. In this regard, the Committee would reiterate 
their earlier recommendation to the Ministry to take utmost care while preparing 
the budget estimate. 
34. The Committee note that the co -production agreement for production of 
film „Bangabandhu‟ between National Film Development Corporation (NFDC) and 
Film Development Corporation (FDC), Bangladesh was signed on 14.01.2020  and 
the script for the film has  also been finalized. However, the Committee take a  
serious note of the fact that production of the film „Bangabandhu‟ which was 
expected to start in second half of 2017 -18 have met with inordinate delays. 
Whatever might be the reasons, it reflects on the inefficiency of NFDC to sort out 
the issues that led to delays in Production of feature film “Bangab andhu” on the 
life of Sheikh Mujibur Rehman, which is significant in betterment of the 
relationship with the neighboring country.  
35. The Committee are aware due spread of Coronavirus in the country and 
resulting lockdown in various States in the month of Mar ch, 2020, the shooting of 
the film would have been interrupted. However, the Committee would like the 
Ministry/NFDC to ensure to make up the delays and  complete the Film within the 
timelines i.e. March, 2021. 

19 
 
CHAPTER II 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN 
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT  
 
Budget Proposals and Thrust Areas 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No.1) 
 
The Committee note that the thrust areas of the Ministry of Information and 
Broadcasting for the current fiscal year 2019-20 are Digitalization of Prasar Bharati (AIR 
&Doordarshan), Accelerated investment on Content Development of Prasar Bharati, 
Expanding Community Radio Stations in the country, Integrated approach to media 
campaign for better impact of Government messaging and its visibility on the field, 
Implementation of National Film Heritage Mission and Organization of National / 
International Film Festivals, Setting up of Film and Television Institute, Arunachal 
Pradesh, Golden Jubilee Edition of the International Film Festival of India, Production of 
feature film “Bangabandhu” on the life of Sheikh Mujibur Rehman, Promotion of Film 
Sector in India and making India a preferred shooting destination for Film and Television 
producers around the world under the umbrella of Champion Sector Scheme. To 
achieve these objectives, the Ministry had proposed an outlay of Rs.1068.05 crore for 
their Central Sector Schemes for the year 2019 -20, however, it was downsized by the 
Ministry of Finance to Rs.900.00 crore. Further, out of the same, a major chunk of Rs. 
473 crore has been allocated to Prasar Bharati, Rs.238 crore to Film Sector and Rs.165 
crore to Information Sector and Rs.24 crore to Broadcasting Sector (Other than Prasar 
Bharati).The Committee find that the financial performance of the Ministry during the 
current fiscal year so far does not augur well. The utilization of funds in respect of the 
schemes under Prasar Bharati and Film Sector is far below the targets. In case of 
Prasar Bharati, out of an allocation of Rs.473.00 crore, Rs.26.83 crore (5.6 percent) 
could be spent up to July, 2019. Same is the case with Film Sector, where out of an 
allocation of Rs.156 crore, only Rs.16.79 crore (10.17 percent) have been spent. 
 The Committee desire the Ministry/Prasar Bharati to look into the reasons, for the 
meager utilization of funds more meticulously and take corrective measures urgently so 
that no major schemes suffer due to underutilization and adequate funds are made 
available to the Ministry in next financial year based on their performance this year. 
Review of the Past Performance 
(Recommendation Sl. No.2) 
 
The Committee note with concern that during 2017 -18 and 2018 -19, BE of 
Rs.840 crore and Rs.735.05 crore, respectively kept for the Central Sector Schemes of 
the Ministry of I & B, was reduced to Rs.597.77 crore and Rs.712.66 crore, respectively, 
at RE stage. Obviously, the reduced allocations would have resulted in downsizing of all 
the major schemes undertaken during these years. The Ministry of I & B has submitted 
that the Ministry of Finance do not elabora te the reasons for reduction of funds, though 

20 
 
generally it is related to pace of expenditure. Hence, reduction of allocations at RE 
stage certainly reflects the inability of the Ministry to implement their schemes in a 
timely manner. The Committee, therefo re strongly feel that reduction in the allocations 
puts the priorities of the Ministry out of gear and results in under-achievement of targets. 
Hence, this must be avoided. 
(Recommendation Sl. No.3) 
 
The Committee regret to note that Ministry of I & B was not able to utilize even the 
reduced allocation during the 2017 -18 and 2018 -19.Out of RE of Rs.597.77 crore and 
Rs.712.66 crore, respectively, the actual expenditure was Rs.501.42 Cr (83.88 percent) 
and Rs.656.78 crore (92.16 percent), respectively. Whatev er might be the constraints, 
they were not new to the Ministry/Prasar Bharati and being faced by them year after 
year. 
 The Committee are sure that all such aspects are taken into consideration while 
sanctioning of a scheme/project. The Committee would, th erefore, like to be assured 
that the Ministry would remain prepared and take all necessary steps to resolve such 
problems in order to implement their schemes while using the allocated funds optimally. 
Reply of the Government 
In order to make implementation  more effective and to improve plan expenditure, 
various measures have been taken by the Ministry which include: periodic review, mid -
term appraisal of all major schemes and regular monitoring of expenditure.  
For effective and better utilization of resour ces, a comprehensive 
rationalization and restructuring of the Plan Schemes has been carried out by the 
Ministry of Information & Broadcasting in 2019-20 which will be implemented from 2020-
21. It was aimed to consolidate fragmented schemes to avoid thin sp read of resources 
for optimal output and outcome. Various small schemes/programmes with similar 
objectives and activities spread across different media units have been merged together 
under umbrella schemes. New sub -schemes required for further strengtheni ng of 
different activities are also clubbed under these comprehensive schemes.  Further, the 
schemes having purely administrative nature have been shifted to the category - 
Establishment Expenditure and Other Central Expenditure. The consolidation of 
resources will provide flexibility in use, leading to better utilization of funds benefiting 
each sector. Also, with rationalization of ongoing schemes, the media units have been 
delegated with powers to take decisions in view of their functionality and its impac t on 
its other components which inter -alia will be helpful for effective supervision and 
implementation of the projects under the schemes. After the rationalization of 14 Central 
Sector Schemes, Ministry now has only 5 Central Sector Schemes. This would en sure 
better and effective monitoring of Schemes at various implementation stages. 
  
Review of the progress of physical and financial targets in respect of the schemes is 
regularly held at the meetings of the Senior Officers of the Ministry chaired by Secre tary 
(I&B).  The concerned Additional Secretary/Joint Secretaries also regularly monitor the 
implementation of various schemes under their charge. The media units are directed to 

21 
 
pinpoint the obstacles/hurdles in implementing their projects.  The issues ar e addressed 
in the meetings held in the Ministry and resolved with consultations with all 
stakeholders. The media units also deploy their teams in the field to monitor  physical 
progress of the projects. 
With regard to Prasar Bharati, following steps have been taken by Ministry/Prasar 
Bharti:  
i)  It is submitted that one of the reasons for seeking reduction of allocation and its 
insufficient utilization was also that the extension of scheme “Broadcast Infrastructure 
and Network Development‟ for the period 2017-20, was approved only in February, 
2019. Majority of the projects are targeted for completion in the last quarter of FY 2019 -
20. Supply orders for significant number of tenders have already been awarded. 
 
In order to enhance participation of the bidde rs and to further improve the process of 
tendering, a Standard Operating Protocol (SOP) has been formulated which addresses 
issues like Estimation of Cost, Preparation of Specifications with Industry feedback, 
queries from the bidders, Extension of tender opening date etc. Interaction with vendors 
and regular monitoring is being done to resolve issues in a timely manner. It is expected 
that these measures would step -up budget utilization facilitated by effective tender 
processes. 
ii)  Prasar Bharati has giv en an assurance that keeping in mind of the low 
expenditure trend of the past years, they are closely monitoring Budget and Spends 
across its networks of DD and AIR. Regular monitoring at the highest levels of 
Management is undertaken for early identificat ion of bottlenecks and their resolution, 
timely execution of projects, which is likely to improve pace of expenditure and full 
utilization of Grants.   
iii)  Ministry has rationalized Broadcast Infrastructure and Network Development 
which help in rolling s avings from one sub head to another within the overall framework 
of the scheme. 
iv)  To promote content spending on quality programming, the Prasar Bharati Board 
in its 158th meeting in November 2019 has accorded approval to revised guidelines for 
content procurement based on past learnings. The revised guidelines will help 
overcome past challenges in timely procurement of content and will ensure quality 
content is sourced effectively. 
These steps along with close monitoring are expected to ensure improveme nt in 
utilization of allocated resources thereby Ministry will be able to exhaust its resources 
up to optimal level during  2019-20.   
(Ministry of Information and Broadcasting O.M. No. W -11/33/2019-PC Cell dated 
09.03.2020) 
Prasar Bharti/DD Kisan Channel 
(Recommendation Sl. No.4) 
The Committee are displeased to note the lagging performance of Prasar Bharati 
during the last two years.  Prasar Bharati was allocated Budget outlay of Rs.430 crore 
during 2017 -18 for All India Radio and Doordarshan. However, the  allocation was 
drastically reduced at RE stage to Rs.282 crore. Even the reduced allocation was not 

22 
 
optimally utilised and the actual expenditure was Rs.201.57 crore (71.47%). Similarly, 
during 2018-19, out of an allocation of Rs.326.74 crore which was on  a even less as 
compared to the previous year, only Rs.280.70 crore (85.90 percent) could be utilised. 
The shortfall was attributed to less expenditure during the years in respect of DD 
Kisan channel, where during 2017 -18 and 2018-19, BE of Rs.63 crore and  45.16 crore, 
respectively allocated as Grants -in-aid to DD Kisan Channel contents, was reduced at 
RE stage to Rs.46.58 crore and Rs.34.51 crore, respectively. These substantial 
reductions in the allocations, which was assessed as necessary by the Prasar B harati 
for DD Kisan Channel content development, have resulted in delays in execution of the 
schemes proposed during these years. The Committee find it unfortunate that even the 
reduced allocation were not utilised and the actual expenditure was far below the 
targets and was Rs.34.47 crore only (74 percent) and Rs.19.35 crore only (56 percent), 
respectively. The funds remained under -utilized as a decision was taken that DD Kisan 
would make the programmes through in -house production, thus putting on hold the  
commissioning of programmes through Self Financing Commissioning (SFC) mode. As 
DD Kisan does not have adequate manpower resources to make in-house programmes, 
many of the travelogue based programs could not be produced and the reality show 
was deferred for the next financial year. 
The Committee find it strange that a decision was taken without giving a thought 
to the need for availability of adequate manpower for commissioning of programmes. 
The Committee are of the opinion that whole budgetary exercise d one by the 
Ministry/Prasar Bharati is meaningless if the implementation of their 
schemes/programmes is not taken seriously. The Committee strongly recommend that 
in-house production of programmes at DD Kisan Channel should be commensurate with 
the available manpower resources. 
(Recommendation Sl. No.5) 
Other reasons for under utilization of funds during the last two years are stated to be the 
logistic issues for non -finalization of the reality show “Mahilakisan Awards”, problem of 
shortage of staff in progr ammes wing in many Kendras resulting in their inabilities to 
produce any programmes for DD Kisan, insufficient prescribed fee structure for Artists, 
Producer, Casuals, Resource Person, etc. to engage talent for production of any 
programme for DD Kisan. 
The Committee find these reasons as unconvincing as many of all these aspects 
could have been anticipated and taken care of by Prasar Bharati well in advance. All 
these reasons adduced by the Ministry/Prasar Bharati for under -utilisation of funds 
speaks volumes about the functioning of Prasar Bharati and the Committee are of the 
considered opinion that planning & coordination in the Ministry is not optimal and 
requires improvement. 
The Committee earnestly hope that the Prasar Bharati, while learning from their  
past, would take adequate corrective measures so as to optimally utilise the funds of 
Rs. 29.72 crore allocated during 2019 -20, for DD Kisan channel and the same grounds 
will not be cited by them again for under utilisation. The farmers, who are the targe t 

23 
 
viewers in this case, should not remain deprived of the services of the DD Kisan 
Channel because of the non-performance of Prasar Bharati. 
Reply of the Government 
i)   DD Kisan sources content through the scheme of Self -Financed Commissioning 
(SFC) apart  from developing content in -house. The bulk of the sanctioned budget is 
utilized for the SFC programmes. A review of the low budget utilization revealed 
shortcomings in the scheme, which led to litigations on account of which payments had 
been held up, as matters were sub-judice.  
ii)  In the interim, Prasar Bharati upon review, amended the scheme/guidelines 
recently (158th meeting of the Prasar Bharati Board in November 2019) to overcome 
the shortcomings, based on learnings. The amended scheme has since be en 
implemented.  
iii)  As regards in -house production, more than 200 episodes of the Travelogue 
based programs in collaboration with all Kendras of Doordarshan were produced in 
2018-19 and 2019 -20. Reality Show “Mahila Kisan Awards” was recorded and teleca st 
in the FY 2018 -19. As it was the first reality based program of DD Kisan with women 
farmers representing all States and UT‟s of India,the planning and production required 
lot of detailing. The production operations were spread over nine months. Fifty fi ve 
programs of one hour each were produced and telecast. 
iv) Expenditure of Rs.13 Crore have already been made, it is expected that Rs. 20 
Crores allocated for DD Kisan will be spent by the end of the current financial year.  
 
 (Ministry of Information and  Broadcasting O.M. No. W -11/33/2019-PC Cell dated 
09.03.2020) 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para Nos. 7&8 of Chapter I) 
 
Capital Assets (incl. Kisan Channel) 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 6) 
The Committee further observe that during the financial year 2 017-18 and 2018-
19, a provision of Rs.213 crore and Rs.141.50 crore, respectively was made at BE 
stage in respect of Grants for creation of Capital Assets (incl. Kisan Channel), which 
was, however reduced to Rs.118.34 crore and Rs.112.17 crore, respectivel y at RE 
stage and out of the same, only 52.02 crore (44 percent) and Rs.80.08 crore (71 
percent), respectively could be utilized.  The Committee take a serious note of the 
manner in which the budgetary allocations each year are being reduced at RE stage 
and the actual expenditure is even lesser. 
The Committee are not convinced by the oft repeated excuses given by the 
Ministry/Prasar Bharati for non -execution of their projects like GST related issues while 
processing of sanctions, delays in obtaining WPC cle arance in some projects, delays in 
some Earth station projects on account of tender opening date‟s extension due to non -
receipt of sufficient bids/bidders quarries, and delays in supply of equipment by firms for 
certain projects, etc. The Committee view th at these infrastructural projects are 

24 
 
instrumental in ensuring the performance of the Public electronic media and fulfilling its 
obligations to the nation.  They therefore desire that the ministry should give serious 
considerations to their implementations  by taking timely corrective measures for 
anticipated delays. 
 
Reply of the Government 
As regards to Capital Assets, as has been stated above, regular monitoring 
mechanism at the highest level of management has been put in place by Prasar 
Bharati. Procurement procedures have been streamlined. Project review meetings are 
being held regularly at Zonal level, HQ level and Prasar Bharati Sectt. level. Various 
activities involved in procurement of capital equipment and execution of works are being 
critically ass essed against targets and milestones that have been fixed by the 
management.  
Regular interaction is being done with WPC authorities for obtaining their clearance in 
time. Advance tendering action has also been taken for next year‟s projects. 
 
(Ministry of  Information and Broadcasting O.M. No. W -11/33/2019-PC Cell dated 
09.03.2020) 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No. 11 of Chapter I) 
 
 (Recommendation Sl. No.7) 
A budgetary provision of Rs. 97.28 crore has been made during 2019-20 for Arun 
Prabha Channel as there are 111 projects which are for commissioning programme for 
DD Arun Prabha during the year.  CEO, Prasar Bharati have submitted that with the 
Prasar Bharati recently changed content policy, payment to the produces would be 
made in advance enabling them to invest and do a good job.  The committee are 
hopeful that all the projects in respect of Arun Prabha Channel, proposed during the 
current year would be executed well within the timelines and the allocations thus made 
would be optimally utilized. 
Reply of the Government 
DD- ArunPrabha was launched on 09.02.2019 by Hon‟ble Prime Minister, Shri 
Narendra Modi and 24x7 telecast has been started. The commissioning for creation of 
content started in the last month of Financial Year 2018 -19 i.e. Ma rch 2019. There are 
111 projects under commissioning in different genres i.e. Travelogue, Magazine, Quiz, 
Thriller, Mythology, Documentary, Telefilm and Daily Soap. Around Rs 52.64 crore has 
been utilized. The progress is being monitored on weekly basis by  CEO Prasar Bharati 
and it is anticipated that the full amount is likely to be spent during the financial year. 
 
(Ministry of Information and Broadcasting O.M. No. W -11/33/2019-PC Cell dated 
09.03.2020) 

25 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No.9) 
The Committee are informed that in the current fiscal 2019 -20, one of the thrust 
areas of the Ministry of I&B is the physical coverage in terms of FM Radio and 
Television.  Secretary, I&B informed the Committee that as on date, All India Radio has 
495 FM transmitters.  The uncovered  areas have been located that should be covered 
with appropriate FM Stations, particularly in view of the fact that the neighboring 
countries may be having FM stations which are much stronger and indulging in activities 
which are not conducive to India‟s interests. 
 In this regard, the Committee would like to be apprised of the planning of 
Ministry of I&B/Prasar Bharati for installing AIR/TV transmitters to cover the border 
areas of the country.  The Committee are of the opinion that transmitters of adequat e 
power should be set up in sensitive border areas so that anti -India propaganda by the 
neighboring countries is effectively countered.  Thought should also be given to 
shortwave radio transmissions utilizing DTH technology for the benefit of Diaspora 
populations. 
Reply of the Government 
 
AIR has 501 FM transmitters functional at 458 locations across the country and 
presently reaching about 54 % of the area and about 64 % of the total population of the 
country.  In order to further augment the FM terrestria l coverage, projects for setting up 
of 143 FM transmitters including 112 nos. of 100 W FM transmitters are under 
implementation in the country. After commissioning of these transmitters, AIR coverage 
in FM mode is likely to increase to about 74 % populatio n of the country.  AIR is 
regularly strengthening FM coverage along border areas.  Out of 143 FM transmitters, 6 
nos. of 10 kW & one 1 kW FM Transmitters along Indo -Nepal border, 2 nos. of 10 kW 
FM Transmitters along Indo -Pak border and 8 nos. 1 kW FM tran smitters in North East 
Regions are under implementation. 
Prasar Bharati has modernized Short Wave transmitters with latest DRM Digital 
Radio technology at its Delhi and Bengaluru facilities. Further plan for modernization of 
Short Wave in DRM Digital Radio  mode is approved and being implemented at 
Kurseong facility while obsolete analog transmitters are being phased out. 
Prasar Bharati is also extensively exploring other digital means for carrying AIR 
channels as an alternative. Various AIR channels are ava ilable on internet through 
Prasar Bharati website, and on NewsonAir app on Android and iOS mobile platform for 
global audiences. Several Radio Channels have also been made available on satellite 
using the DD Free Dish DTH infrastructure. 
As regards Doordarshan, in view of multi -channel TV coverage through its  free -
to-air DTH service “DD FreeDish”, new transmitters for expansion of terrestrial coverage 
are now not envisaged, except a few in border areas of J&K.  For strengthening 
terrestrial TV coverage in border areas, projects for setting up the following five new 
High Power TV transmitters in J&K are under implementation. 
 
HPT, Green Ridge 
HPT, Himbotingla 
HPT, Natha Top (Patnitop) 

26 
 
HPTs, Rajouri (DD National & DD News) 
 
These HPTs are presently at various  stages of implementation. Further, It is submitted 
that Doordarshan‟s “DD FreeDish” service can be received anywhere in the country 
including border areas with the help of small sized dish receive units. Prasar Bharati has 
recently distributed 30,000 DTH receive Set in Jammu and Kashmir. Further, Prasar 
Bharati is in the process of procuring 1,20,000 receive sets for further distribution in the 
country including J&K. 
 
(Ministry of Information and Broadcasting O.M. No. W -11/33/2019-PC Cell dated 
09.03.2020) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No. 17 of Chapter I) 
 
 (Recommendation Sl. No.10) 
In view of the unsatisfactory performance of Prasar Bharati during 2017 -18, 
2018-19 and 2019-20 (up to July, 2019) the Committee would like to be informed of th e 
revised procedure, if any, being implemented by the Ministry of I&B/ Prasar Bharati to 
improve its budgetary performance. 
Reply of the Government 
 
i. Prasar Bharati has taken initiatives for timely booking of allocated funds by 
revising the procurement proc edure with time targets for each task. Prasar Bharati has 
assigned the task to one dedicated ADG level officer for the procurement related 
activities.  
 
ii. In order to enhance better participation of the bidders and to further improve the 
process of tendering, a Standard Operating Protocol (SOP) has been formulated and is 
being followed. This addresses issues like Estimation of Cost, Preparation of 
Specifications with Industry feedback, queries from the bidders, Extension of tender 
opening date etc.  
 
iii. Monthly budget review meeting is being conducted to speed up the 
implementation of all the projects and for the satisfactory booking of funds. 
 
iv. All the above activities are being personally reviewed by both CEO Prasar 
Bharati and Member (Finance) on a regular basi s with all the key department heads for 
Engineering and Content Procurement. 
v. A dashboard is also being developed for the same to ensure accurate reporting 
and visibility to progress across the network to facilitate senior management reviews. 
 
(Ministry of Information and Broadcasting O.M. No. W -11/33/2019-PC Cell dated 
09.03.2020) 

27 
 
Production of films and documentaries in various Indian Languages 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No.15) 
 The scheme “Production of Films and Documentaries in various Indian 
Languages” with a mandate to encourage production of good quality movies in various 
Indian languages which are socially relevant to the Indian Society includes production of 
documentaries, children‟s films, short films, animation films and news magazines. The 
scheme supports production of films with cinematic, thematic and aesthetic excellence 
catering to cinema theatres all across the country for supplying public service 
awareness films for screening before main feature films. The Committee are, however, 
not happy to note  that the performance of the Ministry in respect of the scheme during 
the last two years have been abysmally low as the actual expenditure against the 
budgetary allocations of Rs. 16.00 crore and Rs. 14.00 crore during 2017 -18 and 2018-
19, for the scheme h ave been very less and remained at the level of Rs. 09.41 crore 
(58.81 %) and Rs.09.91 crore (70.78%), respectively. The Committee are not convinced 
by the reasons for under-utilisation of funds during 2017-18 that no funds were released 
to NFDC as a clause was inserted in the guidelines that NFDC will not be considered as 
an implementing agency under the scheme. What the Committee gathered is that the 
said clause/ note was inserted in the relative guidelines on 16.04.2018 and hence 
conclude that this cannot  be the reason for under-utilisation of funds during 2017-18. 
Hence, the Committee would like the Ministry to ascertain the factual position and 
inform them accordingly. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
No funds were released to NFDC during the Financial year 201 7-18 as a 
proposal for merger of NFDC with other film units is under consideration in the Ministry.  
 
(Ministry of Information and Broadcasting O.M. No. W -11/33/2019-PC Cell dated 
09.03.2020) 
Information Sector 
Up-gradation of IIMC to International Standards 
(Recommendation Sl. No.17) 
The Committee are informed that there had been major short -fall in respect of „Up -
gradation of IIMC to International Standards‟ scheme. However, the Committee are 
distressed to note that a provision of Rs. 3 crore was made at BE, 2018-19 merely on the 
presumption that approval from Ridge Management Board and other Civic authorities of 
Delhi Government would be obtained for construction of guest house, hostel building and 
academic block of IIMC at New Delhi. The Committee note t hat till date IIMC is not in a 
position to start construction activities. Though, IIMC is now in possession of the 
Environment Clearance issued by the State Level Expert Appraisal Committee (SLEAC) 
and height clearance from the Airport Authority of India, the clearance from the Ridge 
Management Board has been referred to the Supreme Court appointed Central 
Empowered Committee (CEC). On 24.09.2019, IIMC made a detailed presentation 

28 
 
before the Three Member CEC. On 15.10.2019, the CEC visited IIMC for site ins pection 
and with these developments, IIMC is hopeful of getting required clearance and 
permission from the DDA to begin construction during 2019-20. 
 
The Committee are at loss to understand that the project which was included in 
11th Five Year Plan has not  yet taken off. Moreover, when the project had to pass 
through so many procedural requirements before the construction work is started, then 
why a provision was made for this activity during 2018 -19. The Committee owe an 
explanation in this regard. 
Reply of the Government 
 
i. Under the Plan Scheme (now Central Sector Scheme) "Upgradation of IIMC to 
International Standards” there is a proposal to construct an academic block, hostel 
block and a guest house admeasuring 12,933 sqm at the 16.22 acres in Delhi campu s. 
This proposal was held up since 2012 for want of necessary clearances from civic and 
other regulatory authorities as the campus is located in the Ridge Area of Delhi. 
ii. It is submitted that IIMC has made continuous efforts to obtain the necessary 
clearances which have been fruitful. On 24.09.2019 IIMC was asked to appear for a 
hearing before the Supreme Court appointed Central Empowered Committee (CEC). 
The Institute made a presentation before the three member CEC, following which, the 
Chairman, CEC asked IIMC to carry out certain modifications in building plans insisting 
upon going vertical to the extent permissible and reduce ground area coverage. After 
consulting the architect, it was found feasible to co -locate the guest house in the 
proposed hostel blo ck, freeing up 1,560 sqm plinth area. Accordingly, the building 
designs were modified and submitted to the CEC. 
iii. As a result of these efforts the Central Empowered Committee (CEC) of the 
Supreme Court has recommended in its report to the Supreme Court dated  22.10.2019 
that DG, IIMC may be permitted to construct the proposed new Hostel cum Guest 
House block and the Administrative block within the Ridge Area subject to certain 
conditions. As per the advice of Hon‟ble Supreme Court, IIMC has filed an affidavit on 
26.11.2019 stating that IIMC will abide by the conditions laid down in the 
recommendation. The matter is yet to be listed for hearing. 
iv )Accordingly, the BE of Rs. 3.00 Crores was sought under the scheme in FY 2018 -19 
on the reasonable assumption that  approval of Building Plans would be obtained soon. 
The funds were sought on the assumption that they will receive the clearance well 
within 2018-19. 
(Ministry of Information and Broadcasting O.M. No. W -11/33/2019-PC Cell dated 
09.03.2020) 
Supporting Community Radio Movement in India 
(Recommendation Sl. No.18) 
 The Committee regret to note the underutilization of funds for the scheme 
“Supporting Community Radio Movement in India” during the last three years. During 
2016-17, 2017 -18 and 2018 -19, against redu ced allocation at RE stage of Rs. 3.63 

29 
 
crore, Rs. 1 crore and Rs. 2.60 crore, respectively, only Rs.1.36 crore, Rs. 0.34 crore 
and Rs. 1.26 crore had been utilised. 
The Committee are not happy with the casual reply of the Ministry for under -
utilisation of funds under the scheme like only 8 workshops were held for capacity -
building and raising awareness for Community Radio in 2016 -17, and during 2018 -19, 
six awareness workshops were conducted, the other activities planned such as 
National and Regional Sammel ans could not be held and the allocation remained 
unutilized. The Committee are inclined to believe that the physical and financial targets 
under the scheme are not taken seriously by the Ministry. 
The Committee urge the Ministry to look into the activitie s under the scheme in 
the right perspective, as this is an area which needs Ministry‟s consideration to promote 
growth of Community Radio Stations, especially in remote and rural areas. The 
Committee therefore like the Ministry to ensure that physical targ ets planned during 
2019-20 under the scheme are fully achieved and the funds of Rs. 3.80 crore optimally 
utilised. 
Reply of the Government 
To ensure physical target planned under the scheme are fully achieved various 
activities are planned. National Commun ity Radio Sammelan was organized in the 
month of August 2019. Now, process has been simplified to release the grants for 
purchase of equipment. Funds allocated for Grants -in-Aid have been fully utilized. Extra 
budget was demanded for this purpose. 8 Commun ity Radio Awareness workshops 
were planned to be conducted. So far 6 workshops have been conducted; the remaining 
2 workshops will be conducted in the month of March 2020. It is expected that the funds 
would be utilized completely under the scheme.  
The Ministry I&B have also taken several measures for expanding the reach of 
Community Radio Stations, preferably in CR dark districts and Aspirational Districts.  
The Ministry is also having regular meetings with the concern Ministries to expedite the 
process.                              
(Ministry of Information and Broadcasting O.M. No. W -11/33/2019-PC Cell dated 
09.03.2020) 
 
 
Implementation of Central Sector Schemes in North Eastern Region 
(Recommendation Sl. No.19) 
 The Committee regret to note that the budg etary provisions for 
implementation of the CSS of the Ministry of I & B/Prasar Bharati in the North Eastern 
Region remained under -utilised during the last two years. Out of the financial outlay of 
Rs. 60.63 crore and Rs. 122.21 crore during 2017 -18 and 201 8-19, respectively, the 
actual expenditure remained Rs. 52.02 crore(85.79%) and Rs. 65.24 crore (53.38%), 
respectively. It is evidently clear that the North Eastern Region is not being paid the due 
attention that it deserves. The Committee desire that the Ministry of I & B/Prasar Bharati 
should take effective and urgent measures to overcome the difficulties/deficiencies 

30 
 
being faced in the implementation of various Central Sector Schemes in NER in order to 
bring the people of these areas in the mainstream so  that they do not feel alienated and 
neglected, because of the lack of responsive attitude of the Ministry/Prasar Bharati. 
Utmost care, therefore needs to be taken to ensure that the budgetary allocation of Rs. 
115.00 crore under Prasar Bharati and Rs. 47. 65 crore under the Ministry of I & B, for 
implementation of their schemes in NER during 2019-20 are optimally utilized. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
As against the BE 2019 -20 of Rs.162.50 crore for expenditure in North East 
Region, the RE fixed for the year w as Rs.105.15 crore. The expenditure in North East 
Region upto February 2020 is Rs. 88.41 crore. Prasar Bharati has informed that an 
amount of Rs.60.39 crore has already been incurred (upto February 2020).Major portion 
of funds has been incurred for content  creation in DD Arun Prabha Channel. The other 
important projects in Northeast include new Film Institute at Arunachal Pradesh and 
New campus for IIMC centre at Aizawal. Expenditure incurred under NE component for 
Mumbai International Film Festival (MIFF) 2020 (organised from 28 th January to 3 rd 
February, 2020) are being booked. Rs. 15 lakh has been sanctioned for Global Cinema 
Festival 2020, Gangtok Sikkim held from 28 th February to 1 st March, 2020. Also, 
Community Radio Awareness Workshops are planned to be scheduled in March, 2020. 
It is expected that the Ministry will be able to utilize earmarked funds for NER.  
(Ministry of Information and Broadcasting O.M. No. W-11/33/2019-PC Cell dated 
09.03.2020) 
Performance of National Film Development Corporation (NFDC) 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 20) 
 
The Committee would appreciate having information with regard to the 
performance of NFDC during 2017 -18, 2018 -19, and 2019 -20 and shortfall in 
achievement of its physical and financial targets, if any, during these years  along with 
the reasons, thereof. 
 
Reply of the Government 
Performance of National Film Development Corporation Ltd. 
A. Production of Films in various Indian languages – 
Year Financial Physical Reasons for Shortfall 
 Target Achieve
ment 
Target Achieve
ment 
 
2017-
18 
Rs.24 
Cr. 
Nil Nil Nil No funds were given to NFDC 
as the competent authority 
decided to wait for finalization of 

31 
 
merger proposal of NFDC.  
2018-
19 
Rs.21 
Cr. 
Rs.8.45 
Cr. 
5 2 films 
under 
productio
n 
 Initially, NFDC has submitted 
the proposal for p roduction of 
five films i.e Laal Maati 
(Marathi), Chaman 
Bahaar(Hindi), KD - 
KaruppuDurai (Tamil), 
Lonak(Hindi), A painful 
case(Malyalam). Later NFDC 
informed that  “A Painful case”  
is not eligible for funding as the 
director has already directed its 
first film.  Further NFDC 
informed that films namely 
“Chaman Bahaar” and KD -
Karuppu Durai have not 
received suitable response from 
the producer and therefore 
funds sanctioned for these films 
was not utilized.  NFDC only 
produced two films i.e “laal 
Maati” and “ Lonak” which are 
under production.   
2019-
20 
Rs.57 
Cr.** 
Rs.10 Cr. 5  1 film 
complete
d 
2 films 
under 
productio
n 
 Funds were released to NFDC 
for production of 5 films namely 
Korangi Nunchi (Who Will Marry 
Thomas),   Chaad (The Roof), 
Joseph ki Macha (Jose ph's 
Son), Ped Pe Kamra (Kangri), 
Ek Laal Kameej (A Red Shirt). 
Rs. 3 crore has been released 
to NFDC for production of these 
five films.  Rs. 7 crore has been 
released to NFDC for production 
of film “Bangabandhu”.  
** Due to revision of budget of film “B angabandhu” from Rs.35.00 crores to Rs.70.00 
crores therefore 40% Indian contribution is  also revised from Rs.19.00 crores to 
Rs.37.00 crores (including GST & NFDC Production fees) and Rs.20.00 crores for the 
scheme “Production of  films in various Indian  languages” hence total Revised 
Estimate in the year 2019 -20 will be Rs. 57.00 crores. (Rs.37.00 crores + 
Rs.20.00crores = Rs.57.00 crores) 
(Ministry of Information and Broadcasting O.M. No. W -11/33/2019-PC Cell dated 
09.03.2020) 
 

32 
 
CHAPTER III 
 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE 
TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 
-NIL- 

33 
 
CHAPTER IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND WHICH 
REQUIRE REITERATION 
 
All India Radio (AIR) 
(Recommendation Sl. No.8) 
The Committee note that during 2019-20, BE of Rs.187.40 crore has been kept for 
creation of Capital Assets in AIR.  The Committee are informed that the extension of 
Schemes „Broadcasting Infrastru cture & Network Development‟ for 3 years (2017 -20) 
was approved in the middle of FY 2018 -19 resulting in under -utilization of funds during 
2018-19 and therefore allocation during the current year also includes provision for the 
projects not completed in th e previous year.  These projects are Mast strengthening 
works of high power MW Transmitters, SITC of Servers and Radio Studio Automation, 
Procurement of digital audio consoles, Procurement of 05 nos. of TV Transmitters, 
Erection of 100 M Self Supporting To wers, Construction of buildings or FM transmitter 
along Indo -Nepal Border (5 Nos.), VPN Connectivity at 47 Stations, Renovation of 
Auditorium at BH, Delhi and Creation of Archival facility at Guwahati. The committee 
hope that Ministry of I & B/Prasar Bhara ti would make concerted efforts to complete 
these projects within fixed timelines to improve AIR services. 
Reply of the Government 
 
The progress of various projects is submitted hereunder: 
i. Mast strengthening works at 39 places were to be carried out from t he allocated 
funds of  2019 -20.  Work has been completed at 20 places and is in progress at 
16 other places.  
ii. Servers for studio automation have been ordered. Delivery period for these 
equipment is 18 months.  
iii. Tender processing for the erection of 100M Tow ers is in advanced stage for 
different places. 
iv. Building work for the INDO-NEPAL border projects has been completed. 
v. Auditorium work at Broadcasting House, Delhi has been completed. Funds will 
be booked before March 2020. 
 
(Ministry of Information and Broad casting O.M. No. W -11/33/2019-PC Cell dated 
09.03.2020) 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No. 14 of Chapter I) 
 
 
 
 

34 
 
FILM SECTOR 
 
National Film Heritage Mission (NFHM) 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No.11) 
 
 One of the reasons for shortfall in financial targ ets during the last three years in 
respect of the Film Wing of the Ministry of I&B is stated to be non -implementation of the 
NFHM Scheme.  The Committee observe that during 2016 -17, 2017-18 and 2018 -19, 
BE of Rs. 30 crore, Rs. 50.00 crore and Rs. 57.78 cro re, respectively was kept for the 
scheme.  The same was reduced to Rs. 16 crore, Rs. 6.02 crore and Rs. 15.00 crore, 
respectively at RE stage and the actual expenditure remained Rs. 10.84 crore, Rs. 6.02 
crore and Rs. 10.51 crore, respectively.  The plea o f the Ministry of I&B for less 
utilization of funds that the entire scheme was put under review in 2017 and all tender 
processes under NFHM were put on hold until the review was done, is hardly 
convincing.  In such a case, the Committee would like to be ap prised of the reasons for 
financial shortfall in 2016 -17 and 2018 -19.  The Committee earnestly desire that the 
Ministry of I&B should make realistic estimates for better utilization of funds. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 At the commencement of the NFHM Scheme, it was assessed that the Executing 
agencies for the works like Film condition assessment of the film reels, Preventive 
Conservation of film reels and Digitization of Film reels would be in place during 2016 -
17. However, the executing agency could be eng aged for the work of „Film condition 
assessment of the film reels‟  after due procedure during 2016 -17, while the tender 
process for other activities could not be initiated. This led to less utilization of allotted 
funds under RE 2016-17. 
The entire scheme was put under review in 2017 and all tender processes under 
NFHM were put on hold until the review. This included „Condition assessment‟ for which 
the executing agency was already engaged and for which work had begun. The other 
tenders viz. digitization an d restoration of filmic material, creation of IT infrastructure at 
NFAI, etc., which were at various stages of tendering, were also stalled. This led to 
downsizing of funds in 2017-18 and 2018-19.  
The work under „Preventive Conservation‟ could only commen ce on completion 
of work under „Collection Assessment‟. As the work under collection assessment could 
not be completed in time due to the review, the work under preventive conservation 
could not be initiated in time even though the executing agency was sel ected, which led 
to underutilization of funds in 2018-19. 
Further, a n agency for undertaking the infrastructure development work for 
creation of storage facilities at NFAI could not be finalized during this time which led to 
reduction of RE in 2017-18 and in 2018-19.  
Ministry of Information and Broadcasting O.M. No. W -11/33/2019-PC Cell dated 
09.03.2020 

35 
 
National Film Heritage Mission (NFHM) 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No.12) 
 Further, a budgetary provision of Rs. 22.48 crore has been made under NFHM 
scheme during 2019-20.  As earlier informed, it was being ensured by the Ministry of 
I&B to speed up various tender processes for appointment of executing agencies as per 
extant procedure for effective implementation of the NFHM scheme.  However, the 
Committee note to their dismay that the Ministry of I&B has failed in their efforts to 
utilize allocated funds for NFHM scheme during 2019 -20 and has proposed to the 
Ministry of Finance to reduce allocation to Rs. 5  crore, at RE stage. This is a poor 
commentary on the functioning of the Ministry of I & B. The Committee, however, feel 
that adequate attention has not been given to the scheme and the Ministry have either 
not acted timely or prudently. 
 
The Committee, earnestly desire that the budgetary exercise should be 
undertaken with seriousness so that the NFHM scheme does not get hampered and 
there is proper utilization of funds. The Committee also urge the Ministry to gear up the 
implementation of various important activities under the NHFM scheme. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 During the year 2017 -18, the entire scheme was put under review and all tender 
processes under NFHM were put on hold until the review. This included „Condition 
assessment‟ for which the executing agency was already engaged and for which work 
had begun. The other tenders viz. preventive conservation of film content at NFAI, 
digitization and restoration of filmic material, creation of IT infrastructure at NFAI, etc., 
which were at various stages of tendering, were also stalled.  
The work under „Preventive Conservation‟ could only commence on completion 
of work under „Collection Assessment‟. As the work under collection assessment could 
not be completed in time due to the review, the work under preventive conservation 
could not be initiated in time even thou gh the executing agency was selected. Now, the 
work under collection assessment has completed. Basis the work output of collection 
assessment, the selected agency for preventive conservation is set to initiate resource 
mobilization and commence work. Also,  the executing agency for construction of 
storage facilities is now in place and it is being ensured to regularly review the work. 
It is being ensured to speed up the various tender processes, viz. „Digitization of 
Film Content‟, „Restoration of Film Conte nt‟ and „IT Solutions‟, such that the executing 
agencies are engaged in timely manner as per extant procedure for effective 
implementation of the NFHM Scheme and proper utilization of the allotted funds.  
Frequent reviews by the Technical Committee of NFHM  has been initiated for 
optimally utilizing the allocated funds. The High Level Committee meetings are being 
regularly held which is reviewing the project for effective implementation.  It is being 
ensured to speed up the various tender processes for appoi ntment of executing 
agencies in timely manner as per extant procedure for effective implementation of the 
NFHM Scheme and proper utilization of allotted funds.  

36 
 
An amount of Rs.22.48 crore was allocated for NFHM during 2019-20, which was 
reduced to Rs.3.61  crore at RE stage. The final grant has been fixed at Rs.8.11 crore 
and the expenditure incurred is Rs.5.40 Crore, as on date. 
 
(Ministry of Information and Broadcasting O.M. No. W -11/33/2019-PC Cell dated 
09.03.2020) 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para Nos. 22 and 23 of Chapter I) 
 
National Centre for Excellence for Animation, Visual Effects, Gaming and Comics 
(NCoE) 
(Recommendation Sl. No.13) 
 
 Another area of shortfall under the Film Wing during the last three years was the 
project for setting up  a National Centre of Excellence (NCoE) for Animation, Visual 
Effects, Gaming & Comics.  The Committee learn that the Planning Commission has 
given in-principle approval to the NCoE, which is a 12 th plan project and it is based on 
Public Private Partnershi p model.  The basic idea was to rope in private players to 
partner with Government to run the project.  Further, the administrative approval for 
NCoE had been issued with a total outlay of Rs. 167.70 crore, to be implemented in a 
four year period from 2016-17 to 2019-20. 
The Committee are, however, disappointed to note that during 2016 -17 and 
2018-19, there was under-utilisation of funds and Rs.0.39 crore and Rs. 1.63 crore was 
utilized under the project. During 2017 -18, there was NIL expenditure. The less 
utilization of funds for the scheme is stated to be on account of review of the activities of 
NCOE in the Ministry. Indian Institute of Mass Communication (Executing partner) 
released RFP on 03.02.2017 for selection of Operating Partner for NCoE. The Minis try 
is in the process of identifying the operating and the academic partner for the Centre 
nearly three years later. 
 
The Committee express their concern over the delays in implementation of NCoE 
project during all these years. It is a matter of serious co ncern that no dedicated officer 
has been appointed by the Ministry of I & B to oversee this project. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend to the Ministry to take immediate corrective action in this regard. 
The Committee are of the considered opinion that wh en the animation sector is growing 
fast in the country and in the changing scenario, Animation, Visual Effects, Gaming and 
Comic are the new emerging technologies in media, the Ministry should make 
concerted efforts to find and finalise the operating and a cademic partner for the NCoE 
project to fulfil its objective to be a Centre for excellence at the national level to impart 
world class talent pool in India to cater to the needs of the Indian industry and global 
players. The Committee expect that the Ministry would soon make sincere efforts to find 
the operating and academic partners for the project and the funds of Rs. 20.50 crore 
earmarked for the NCoE project are not left unutilized. 
 
 
 

37 
 
Reply of the Government 
 A Committee consisting of Additional Secret ary & FA, Additional Secretary and 
Joint Secretary (Films) of the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting was constituted 
in August, 2019 to supervise the selection of Operating Partner for setting up the 
institute. The Committee observed that a considera ble time has passed since tender 
documents were submitted and scrutinized in the year 2017. During the time, a lot of 
technological improvements, curriculum modifications, changes in proposed fees, etc. 
have occurred in the AVGC sector. The Committee has a ccordingly suggested that it 
would be desirable to consider the changes in the sector since the year 2017, in wider 
consultations with key players in AVGC sector. After due deliberations, it has been 
decided that the present RFP should be terminated and a fresh RFP be drawn for 
selection of operating partner. 
(Ministry of Information and Broadcasting O.M. No. W -11/33/2019-PC Cell dated 
09.03.2020) 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No. 26 of Chapter I) 
 
Upgradation, Modernisation and Expansion of CBFC 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No.14) 
 
 The Committee note that there has been under -utilisation of funds for the 
scheme „Upgradation, Modernisation and Expansion of CBFC‟ during the last three 
years. During 2016 -17, 2017-18 and 2018 -19, against RE of Rs. 3.51 c rore, Rs. 2.50 
crore and Rs. 1.30 crore, respectively, Rs. 3.09 crore, Rs. 1.49 crore and Rs. 0.94 crore 
was utilised. The shortfall in achievement of financial targets is attributed to constraint 
like shortage of space in CBFC office for not procuring/ in stalling Digital Projection 
System and Digital Theatres as planned which is hardly convincing. 
 
The Committee regret to further note that keeping in view the likely expenditure, 
Ministry has now proposed to reduce BE, 2019 -20 of Rs. 2.50 crore kept for the  activity 
to Rs. 1.30 crore at RE stage. Obviously, the Ministry is not able to find an amicable 
solution to such a trivial issue of shortage of space in CBFC office in the fourth 
consecutive year so that CBFC could procure and install Digital Projection S ystem and 
Digital Theatres as planned. The Committee deprecate such a casual approach of the 
Ministry in implementation of their scheme and call upon the Ministry of I & B to take 
necessary steps in  this regard urgently. The Committee also desire that the 
recommendations of the Benegal Committee on the broader issue of film certification be 
reviewed and acted upon without further delay. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 There was shortage of space in CBFC office due to which CBFC could not 
procure/ install Digital Projection System and Digital Theatres as planned. Therefore, 
the funds allocated for the said purposes could not be utilized which led to shortfall in 
financial targets. 

38 
 
Continuous follow -up of the activities is being taken up with CBFC to complete the 
activities as per schedule. The necessary approvals are also being taken up on priority 
basis to ensure the optimal utilization of allocated funds. 
(Ministry of Information and Broadcasting O.M. No. W -11/33/2019-PC Cell dated 
09.03.2020) 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para Nos. 29 and 30 of Chapter I) 
 
 
Production of films and documentaries in various Indian Languages 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No.16) 
 
 Further, the reason for under -utilisation of funds allocated in the FY 2018 -19 like 
the funds were earmar ked for production of film „Bangabandhu‟ in Audio -Visual Co -
production agreement with Bangladesh and the film was at research and scripting stage 
under the direction of eminent filmmaker Sh. Shyam Benegal is not acceptable to the 
Committee. The Committee would like to know why at the first place allocation of Rs. 14 
crore was made during 2017 -18, for production of film „Bangabandhu‟ when it was at 
research and scripting stage. The Committee desire that the Ministry should take utmost 
care to prepare the budget estimates. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 It was expected that the research and scripting for the film “Bangabandhu” would 
be complete during first half of 2017-18 and that the production would commence during 
the second half of the financial year. Hence, a fund allocation of Rs.14 crores was made 
for production of the film during the year 2017-18. 
 
The co -production agreement for production of film “Bangabandhu” between 
National Film Development Corporation (NFDC) and Film Development Corporation 
(FDC), Ba ngladesh was signed on 14.01.2020. The script for the film has now been 
finalized and the shooting will start in March, 2020. It is expected that the film will be 
completed by March, 2021. 
 
As on date, a total amount of Rs.8.50 crore has been released towa rds production of 
the film.  
 
(Ministry of Information and Broadcasting O.M. No. W -11/33/2019-PC Cell dated 
09.03.2020) 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para Nos. 33, 34 and 35 of Chapter I)

39 
 
 
CHAPTER V 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
REPLIES ARE OF INTERIM IN NATURE 
-NIL- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi;   DR. SHASHI THAROOR, 
04 February, 2021  Chairperson, 
15 Magha, 1942 (Saka) Standing Committee on 
Information Technology. 

40 
 
Annexure-I 
MINUTES OF THE THIRD SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (2020-21) HELD ON 16th OCTOBER, 2020 
----------- 
 
 The Committee sat on Friday, the 16 th October, 2020 from 1100 hours to 1300 
hours in Committee Room ‘B’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Dr. Shashi Tharoor – Chairperson 
 
 MEMBERS 
  
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri Karti P. Chidambaram  
3. Shri Santosh Pandey 
4. Sanjay Seth 
5. Shri L.S. Tejasvi Surya 
6. Shri Bhanu Pratap Singh Verma 
 
Rajya Sabha 
  
7. Dr. Anil Agrawal 
8. Shri Y.S. Chowdary 
9. Shri Syed Zafar Islam 
10. Shri Nabam Rebia 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Y.M. Kandpal   - Joint Secretary 
2. Dr. Sagarika Dash   - Additional Director 
3. Smt. Geeta Parmar   - Additional Director 
4. Shri Shangreiso Zimik  - Deputy Secretary 

41 
 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee convened to  consider and adopt four Draft Action Taken Reports on 
Demands for Grants (2019-20).....xxxxx….xxxxx…..   
 
3. The Committee took up the following draft Reports for consideration:- 
(i)  ....xxxxx….xxxxx…......xxxxx….xxxxx…......xxxxx….xxxxx…......xxxxx….     
(ii)  Draft Action Taken Report on Demands for Grants (2019 -20) of 
 Ministry of Information and Broadcasting,  
(iii) ....xxxxx….xxxxx…......xxxxx….xxxxx…......xxxxx….xxxxx…......, and  
(iv) ....xxxxx….xxxxx…......xxxxx….xxxxx…......xxxxx….xxxxx…......xxxxx….     
 
4. After due deliberations, the Committee adopted the above Report with slight 
modifications. 
 
5. The Committee, then, authorized the Chairperson to finalize the Report and 
present the same to the House during the next session of Parliament. 
 
(....xxxxx….xxxxx…..) 
6. ....xxxxx….xxxxx…......xxxxx….xxxxx…......xxxxx….xxxxx…......xxxxx….      
7. ....xxxxx….xxxxx…......xxxxx….xxxxx…......xxxxx….xxxxx…......xxxxx….     
8. ....xxxxx….xxxxx…......xxxxx….xxxxx…......xxxxx….xxxxx…......xxxxx….     
9. ....xxxxx….xxxxx…......xxxxx….xxxxx…......xxxxx….xxxxx…......xxxxx….     
10. ....xxxxx….xxxxx…......xxxxx….xxxxx…......xxxxx….xxxxx…......xxxxx….     
 
....xxxxx….xxxxx….. 
   
Verbatim proceedings of the sitting have been kept on record. 
 
The Committee, then, adjourned. 
 
....xxxx....Matters not related to Report. 

42 
 
Annexure-II 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THEIR SECOND REPORT 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
[Vide Paragraph No. 5 of Introduction] 
 
(i)  Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted 
by the Government 
 
 Rec. Sl. Nos.:- 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 9, 10, 15, 17, 18, 19 and 20  
  Total - 14 
 Percentage 70 
(ii)  Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of the replies of the Government 
 
 Rec. Sl. No.: Nil  
  Total - Nil 
 Percentage 0.00 
(iii)  Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies 
of the Government have not been accepted by the 
Committee and require reiteration 
 
 Rec. Sl. Nos.:- 8, 11, 12, 13, 14 and 16  
  Total - 06  
 Percentage 30 
(iv)  Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the  
replies of the Government are of interim in nature 
 
 
 Rec. Sl. No.:- NIL  
  Total - Nil 
 Percentage 0.00 
 
 