STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
COMMUNICATIONS AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(2022-23) 
 
 
SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
MINISTRY OF COMMUNICATIONS 
(DEPARTMENT OF POSTS) 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
of the Committee contained in their Forty-fourth Report (Seventeenth Lok 
Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants’ (2023-24)] 
 
FIFTY-FIRST REPORT 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
 
 
August 2023/ Sravana 1945 (Saka) 
 
 
51 
 


 
FIFTY - FIRST REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
COMMUNICATIONS AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(2022-23) 
 
 
SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
MINISTRY OF COMMUNICATIONS 
(DEPARTMENT OF POSTS) 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
of the Committee contained in their Forty-fourth Report (Seventeenth Lok 
Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants (2023-24)] 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on  10.8.2023 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on      10.8.2023 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
August, 2023/Sravana,1945 (Saka) 


 
CONTENTS 
 Page 
No. 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
(ii) 
INTRODUCTION (iii) 
CHAPTER I Report………………………………………………………………………  
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government…………………………………………………………………… 
 
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of replies of the Government……………………………… 
 
CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and require 
reiteration ……………………………………………………………………. 
 
CHAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies are of 
interim in nature……………………………………………………………… 
 
 ANNEXURES  
I. Minutes of the Seventeenth sitting of the Committee held on 7 August, 
2023  
 
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in their Forty-fourth Report (Seventeenth 
Lok Sabha)  
 
             
 
(i) 
 

4 
 
Composition of the Standing  Committee on Communications and  
Information Technology (2022-23) 
 
Shri Prataprao  Jadhav - Chairperson 
 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Smt. Sumalatha Ambareesh 
3. Shri Karti P. Chidambaram 
4. Dr. Nishikant Dubey 
5. Smt. Sunita Duggal 
6. Shri Jayadev Galla 
7. Smt. Raksha Nikhil Khadse 
8. Dr. Sukanta Majumdar 
9. Smt. Mahua Moitra 
10. Shri P. R. Natarajan 
11. Shri Santosh Pandey 
12. Col. Rajyavardhan Singh Rathore 
13. Dr. Gaddam Ranjith Reddy 
14. Shri Sanjay Seth 
15. Shri Ganesh Singh 
16. Shri Parvesh Sahib Singh 
17. Shri Shatrughan Prasad Sinha 
18. Shri L.S. Tejasvi Surya 
19. Dr. T. Sumathy (A) Thamizhachi Thangapandian 
20 Dr. M. K. Vishnu Prasad@ 
21. Shri S. Jagathrakshakan$ 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
22. Dr. Anil Agrawal 
23. Shri V. Vijayendra Prasad# 
24. Dr. John Brittas 
25. Shri Syed Nasir Hussain 
26. Shri Ilaiyaraaja 
27. Shri Jaggesh 
28. Shri Praful Patel 
29. Shri Kartikeya Sharma 
30. Shri Jawhar Sircar 
31. Shri Lahar Singh Siroya 
 
Secretariat 
 
1. Shri Satpal Gulati     - Additional Secretary 
2. Smt. A. Jyothirmayi     - Director 
3. Smt. Rinku Awasthi                       - Executive Officer 
____________________________________________________________________________ 
Committee constituted w.e.f. 13th September, 2022 vide Para No.5288 of Bulletin Part-II dated                  
4th October, 2022. 
@   Dr. M. K. Vishnu Prasad has been nominated vice Dr. Shashi Tharoor vide Para No. 5311 of Bulletin 
Part-II dated 12th October, 2022. 
$    Shri S. Jagathrakshakan has been nominated vide Para No. 5580 of Bulletin Part –II dated 8th 
December, 2022.  
# Shri V. Vijayendra Prasad has been nominated vice Dr. Laxmikant Bajpayee  vide Rajya Sabha Bulletin 
No. 63085 dated 12th April, 2023 of Parliamentary Bulletin Part II. 

5 
 
INTRODUCTION 
I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Communications and Information 
Technology (2022-23), having been authorised by the Committee, present this Fifty-first 
Report on Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of 
the Committee contained in their Forty-fourth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on 
‘Demands for Grants (2023-24)’ of the Ministry of Communications (Department of 
Posts). 
2. The Forty-fourth Report was presented to Lok Sabha and also laid on the Table 
of Rajya Sabha on 21 March, 2023.  The Ministry of Communications (Department of 
Posts) furnished their Action Taken Notes on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Forty-fourth Report on 21 June, 2023.  
 
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their Sitting held 
on 7 August, 2023. 
 
4. For facility of reference and convenience, Observations/Recommendations of the 
Committee have been printed in bold in Chapter-I of the Report.  
 
5. An analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Forty-fourth Report of the Committee 
is given at Annexure-II. 
 
 
 
 
  
New Delhi;    PRATAPRAO  JADHAV, 
 …7.…August, 2023 Chairperson, 
 …16 Sravana, 1945 (Saka) Standing Committee on  
Communications and Information Technology. 

6 
 
 
CHAPTER I 
REPORT 
  This Report of the Standing Committee on Communications and  Information 
Technology deals with action taken by Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Forty- fourth  
Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on Demands for Grants (2023-24) relating to the Ministry 
of Communications (Department of Posts). 
2. The Forty-fourth Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 21 March, 2023 and also laid in 
Rajya Sabha, the same day. It contained 11 Observations/ Recommendations. Replies of 
the Government in respect of all the Observations/Recommendations have been received 
from the Department of Posts and are categorized as under:- 
(i) Observations/ Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government:- 
Para Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 8, 10,  
         Total :8   
            Chapter II 
 
(ii) Observations/ Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue 
in view of the Government’s replies:- 
Para Nos. NIL 
        Total : 0 
                Chapter III 
(iii) Observations/ Recommendations in respect of which replies of the Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee and which require reiteration:- 
  

7 
 
Para No.  6 
        Total :1   
Chapter IV 
      
(iv) Observations/ Recommendations in respect of which replies are interim in nature 
 Para No.  9,11        
           Total : 2 
                   Chapter V 
 
3. The Committee trust that utmost importance would be given to 
implementation of the Observations/Recommendations accepted by the Government. 
The Committee further desire that Action Taken Notes on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in Chapter-I of this Report should be 
furnished to them at an early date. 
 
4. The Committee will now deal with action taken by the Government on some of 
their Recommendations.   
Recommendation No.2 
Revenue Receipts 
5. The Committee, in their Original Report, had recommended as under: 
 
“The Committee note that the Revenue Receipts of the Department were Rs. 
10632.50 crore in 2020-21 which marginally increased to Rs. 10860.80 crore in 
2021-22. For the year 2022-23, the revenue receipts have been pegged at Rs. 
7948.39 crore till December, 2022. The Department has set ambitious targets 
for the year 2023-24 and the BE for 2023-24 stands at Rs. 13439.38 crore. The 
Committee note that the Department is earning revenue from Speed Post, 
Business Post, Business Parcel, postage through franking machines, sale of 

8 
 
stamps, philatelic ancillaries, Money Order (MO) and Indian Postal Orders 
(IPO), retail post, logistic post, e-bill collection, G2C services such as Post Office 
Passport Seva Kendra (POPSK), Aadhaar services, etc, receipts from other 
postal Administrations, savings bank and cash certificate remuneration etc. 
Further, it is seen that several measures have been taken by the Department 
to achieve the targets during 2022-23 such as focus on Post Office Savings 
Bank (POSB) account opening; thrust on parcel business with tie-ups with 
Tribal Cooperative Marketing Development Federation (TRIFED), GeM, private 
e-commerce players; focus on IPPB, technology initiatives like ATM, E-banking, 
M-banking, National Electronic Funds Transfer (NEFT), Core Banking 
Solution(CBS), CBS-CTS (Cheque Truncation System) integration,  e-PAN 
validation, account opening and closure facility for National Savings Certificate, 
KisanVikas Patra, Recurring Deposit, Term Deposit and Public Provident Fund 
through internet banking, monitoring of targets, etc. Furthermore, the 
Department has adopted a three pronged strategy for increasing parcel 
business that includes improving the infrastructure and parcel handling 
capacity for smooth handling of the increased parcel volume, upgradation of 
the technology platform for improving the operational efficiency and meeting 
the customer expectations. Apart from the above, a number of measures have 
been taken by the Department of Posts to achieve the revenue targets during 
FY 2022-23. These include establishment of four parcel hubs for exclusive and 
expeditious processing of parcels, four nodal delivery centres have been 
operationalised for expediting door step delivery of parcels in 2022-23 and 4 
routes of postal road transport network have been operationalised. Additional 
parcels handling capacity of 14.35 lakh parcel per annum has been created 
bringing the total capacity to 12.75 crore parcels per annum. Payment through 
UPI QR code has been implemented at all post offices counters. Cash on 
Delivery and Insurance charges have been reviewed and revised to meet the 
Courier, Express and Parcel Market Standards. 605 Parcel Packaging units have 

9 
 
been established in selected post offices across the country and customer 
interface has been improved through MIS and Customer Relationship 
Management Portal. 
The Committee observe that the focus areas in FY 2023-24 are doorstep  pick-
up and delivery services of parcels , agreement signed with GeM for pick up of 
consignments, agreement with National Handloom Development Corporation 
for providing them logistics support for supply of yarns, agreement with Tribal 
Co-operative Marketing Development Federation of India and tie-up with Open 
Network for Digital Commerce for providing logistics solutions. Further steps 
have been taken for technology integration  including 1.45 lakh mobile phones 
for delivery staff, new Application Programme Interface Integration facility, 
monitoring of performance of Speed Post , corporate customer specific MIS, 
CRM for bulk customers and so on. Single points of contact have been 
designated for corporate customers having monthly business of Rs. 10 lakh and 
above, registration process of bulk customer under Buy Now Pay Later (BNPL) 
and National Account Facility (NAF) has been revised. There have been tie ups 
with the Election Commission of India and UIDAI, with Department of 
Empowerment of Persons with Disabilities for delivery of Unique Disability ID 
cards, with LIC, Govt of Rajasthan, delivery of Driving License, Registration 
Certificates, Traffic Challans and notices and so on. Given the credibility which 
the Department enjoys, the Committee opine that the initiatives w.r.t. 
doorstep pick- up and delivery services of parcels will definitely bring about 
significant changes in the Indian economy, apart from boosting the revenues to 
the Department. The Committee appreciate the initiative of the Department in 
launching the new Parcel product ‘Rail Post Gati Shakti Express Cargo Service’ 
in collaboration with the Indian Railways. This is to attract the new business for 
parcels weighing more than 35 kg in which the booking and delivery of the 
parcels will be undertaken by the Department of Posts whereas transmission 
of the parcels will be performed by Indian Railways. Further, the initiative 

10 
 
taken w.r.t. packaging of parcels at the post office is praiseworthy and needs to 
be expanded to cover more post offices. The word of caution here is that the 
quality of packaging is to be ensured so as to have a sustainable consumer 
base, especially w.r.t. fragile items. The Department may also examine the 
feasibility of opening parcel booking counters at airports which could facilitate 
passengers to book their excess baggage at these counters instead of paying 
heavy costs for excess baggage that are currently being charged by the 
Airlines.” 
6. The Department of Posts , in the Action Taken Note, have stated as under: 
“The availability of Parcel packaging services has now been further extended 
to more locations and is currently available at 697 Parcel Packaging Units 
(PPUs) in comparison to the earlier 605 PPUs. The Parcel Packaging materials 
of industry standards have been prescribed under the Parcel Packaging Policy 
and the procurement of prescribed quality is emphasized upon by the 
Department. Among other packaging materials such as corrugated boxes and 
flyers, inner filling materials such as bubble wrap, airbags, foam 
peanuts/pellets & shredded cardboard fillers have been prescribed under the 
Policy for keeping goods safe especially in respect of fragile items. 
• Feasibility of opening of parcel booking counters at Airport to facilitate 
passengers to book their excess baggage was explored by Delhi Postal Circle. 
One counter is being operated by Delhi Postal Circle at IGI Airport, New Delhi 
and a parcel business of around Rs. 80 Lakh has been generated during the FY 
2022-2023. In this respect, all Postal Circles where post offices are located in 
the departure halls / airport terminal buildings are being addressed to 
examine the feasibility of providing this service.” 
 
 
 
 

11 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
7. In the Original Report, the Committee had opined that the initiatives of 
doorstep pick-up and delivery services of parcels will be beneficial to the economy and 
bring increased revenues to the Department. The Committee had cautioned that the 
quality of packaging is to be ensured so as to have a sustainable consumer base. The 
Committee were of the view that the Department may also examine the feasibility of 
opening parcel booking counters at airports instead of paying heavy costs for excess 
baggage that are currently being charged by the Airlines. In their reply, the Department 
have stated that the availability of Parcel packaging services has now been further 
extended to more locations and is currently available at 697 Parcel Packaging Units 
(PPUs) in comparison to the earlier 605 PPUs and the procurement of prescribed quality 
of packaging material of industry  standards have been emphasized upon. Further, one 
parcel booking counter is being operated by the Delhi Postal Circle at the IGI Airport, 
New Delhi and has generated a revenue of Rs. 80 lakh in FY 2022-23. The Committee are 
of the view that considering the behemoth size of the Department of Posts, this facility 
could be extended to other Airports in the country. Further, the Department could also 
explore the possibility of using biodegradable materials in its packaging to reduce the 
carbon footprint. The Committee may be apprised of the progress made in this regard. 
Further, the Department may also provide the statistical projections for the increase in 
revenue aimed for the current FY and highlight the concrete steps that are being taken 
for the same. 
 
Recommendation No. 4 
 
IT Induction and Modernisation 
8. The Committee, in their Original Report, had recommended as under: 
“The Committee note that IT Modernization Project of Department of Posts is being 
undertaken with a total outlay of Rs. 4909 crores. The Project involves 

12 
 
computerization and Modernization and networking of ~ 1, 59,000 Post Offices in 
the country, including ~ 1, 44,000 Branch Post Offices in rural areas run by the 
GraminDakSevaks. The project involves providing Central Server based integrated, 
modular and scalable solution for all the operations of Department of Posts 
including Mails, Human Resource, Banking, Insurance and Finance & Accounts. It 
also involves creation of IT Infrastructure like Data Centre, Disaster Recovery 
Centre, setting up of a Wide Area Network (WAN) and providing solar powered and 
portable hand-held computing devices (Micro ATM compliant) to all the Branch 
Post Offices. The Committee note that the actual expenditure during 2022-23 on 
the project is Rs. 567.90 crore on IT 1.0 and Rs. 8.64 crore on IT 2.0. An amount of 
Rs. 275.65 crore has been allocated to IT 1.0 and Rs. 653.02 crore has been 
allocated to IT 2.0 in BE 2023-24. The objectives of the IT modernization project of 
Department of Posts are modernization and computerization of all the non-
computerized Post offices in the country including GraminDakSevak (GDS) Branch 
Post offices in rural areas, mail offices, administrative and other offices; 
Development of scalable, integrated and modular software covering all operations 
of the Department of Posts; Establishment of required IT Infrastructure including 
Data Centre, Wide Area Network (WAN) based networking of the departmental 
post offices; and DARPAN - RICT (Digital Advancement of Rural Post Offices for a 
New India-Rural Information Communication Technology (Rural ICT) 
infrastructure. The Project is implemented through eight different segments: Data 
Centre Facility (DCF), Network Integrator (NI), Financial Services System Integrator 
(FSI), Core System Integrator (CSI), Digital Advancement of Rural Post Office for A 
New India (DARPAN) - Rural System Integrator (RSI) and Rural Hardware (RH), Mail 
Operations Hardware (MOH), and Change Management (CM). 
  With the implementation of IT Modernisation project, all Post Offices 
will be able to improve their quality of services and increase their productivity on 
account of improved IT system. Increase in access to the post office through web 
portal, mobile and call centers would give better services to the customers. Number 

13 
 
of transactions in postal, banking, insurance and retail activities of the post office 
are likely to increase as the reach of these services will be extended through IT 
Modernisation. Computerization of all the post offices with central data 
architecture will create an enabling environment for mail track and trace and other 
web based and mobile based services. Reduction in paper work, particularly in 
administrative and accounts offices and accessibility of information from 
centralized database will enable improved decision making and responsive 
 administration. The main activities prioritized by the Department under the 
scheme are Postal and Logistics, IT infrastructure, Network (inclusive of the North 
East component), Data Center and disaster recovery system, Security, Field infra 
(inclusive of the North East component), Enterprise Fraud Risk Management etc. 
Appreciating the efforts being made by the Department, the Committee would like 
to emphasise that the works undertaken in this regard may be completed as 
envisaged and in a time bound manner.  
  Further, the Committee find that the objective of DOP IT 2.0 is to 
provide inclusive, integrated single-window view of postal and financial services to 
its stakeholders through multiple delivery channels using re-engineered 
 processes and cutting-edge Information Technologies, leading towards an era 
of e-Governance. Overall benefit   will   be to the customers and stake holders 
through more reliable, speedy operations and transparent availability of 
information to the customers.  
 
 The Committee are of the view that IT modernization has indeed become a vital 
and integral part of every business plan of any Department or Organization. For the 
Department of Posts with its vast network and multifarious services, the 
importance of IT Induction and Modernisation can hardly be overemphasized. The 
Committee desire that the Department ensures proper implementation of this 
Scheme and improves operational efficiencies.” 
 

14 
 
9. The Department of Posts, in the Action Taken Note, have stated as under: 
 
“The objective of DoP IT 2.0 is to provide inclusive, integrated single-window view 
of postal and financial services to its stakeholders through multiple delivery 
channels using re-engineered processes and cutting –edge Information 
Technologies, leading towards an era of e-Governance.  Overall benefit will be to 
the customers and stake holders through more reliable, speedy operations and 
transparent availability of information to the customers.” 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
10. The Committee had noted that the IT modernization had indeed become a vital and 
integral part of every business plan of any Department and was foundational to the 
functioning of the Department. The Committee had desired that the Department 
should ensure proper implementation of this Scheme and improve operational 
efficiencies. The Department in their reply have stated that the objective of the IT 2.0 
project is to benefit customers and stakeholders through more reliable, speedy 
operations and transparent availability of information to the customers leading to an 
era of e-Governance.  The Committee expect the Department to provide current 
status of IT Modernization project, total amount spent so far on it, and reasons of 
delays in adhering to the timelines. The Committee, therefore, reiterate their 
recommendation and expect the Department to implement the IT project with 
utmost dedication.  The Department may also inform the Committee with the 
quantifiable physical targets achieved.  
 
Recommendation no. 5 
Estates Management – pending projects, accessibility issues and gender concerns 
11.  The Committee, in their Original Report, had recommended as under: 
 

15 
 
“The Committee note that the key objective of the Estates Management 
Scheme is to ensure development of an appropriate infrastructure to provide a 
congenial work environment and improve the delivery of postal services in a 
cost effective way for the benefit of the customers.  The Scheme includes 
construction of postal buildings including Post Offices, mail offices, 
administrative offices, staff quarters, besides preservation and conservation of 
heritage buildings and reconstruction of dilapidated buildings. The Scheme also 
includes construction of additional toilets in existing buildings, installation of 
Roof Top Solar Power Packs and Rain Water Harvesting structures to 
contribute towards Sustainable Development Goals. Providing ramps and rails 
under the Sugamya Bharat Abhiyan for improving the accessibility of Post 
Offices for differently abled persons is also a part of this scheme.  The actual 
utilization during 2022-23 has been Rs. 22.32 crores which is less than a third 
of the RE of Rs. 70.10 crores. This is indicative of lack of proper planning and 
implementation. 
  The Committee further note that the major impediments being 
encountered in the implementation of the Scheme include not getting timely 
approval from Municipal Corporations and other State Government authorities 
for starting construction process, cancellation of tendering process due to 
single/high bidding, non-settlement of litigation process/court cases pertaining 
to the land owned by the Department and encroachment on Departmental 
vacant lands. The Committee doappreciate the efforts made by the 
Department to address these problems. These inter alia include preparation of 
a list of projects for construction and renovation of postal buildings to be taken 
up in FY 2023-24 which has been shared with all the Circles with the instruction 
to complete all the preconstruction formalities by 31.03.2023 so that work can 
be awarded in April 2023 itself, thereby ensuring optimum utilization of funds. 
The Circles have also been advised to depute officers to liaise with the local 
authorities and State Government authorities to expedite requisite approval. 

16 
 
Priority is being given for completion of pending projects. The Committee 
further note that the Department had submitted its proposal to Ministry of 
Statistics and Programme implementation (MOSPI) vide DO letter dated 
26.12.2022 to allow the MPLAD funds to be used for estate management of 
Department of Posts. The same has been approved by Mo SPI in the revised 
guidelines on MPLADS issued on 22nd February, 2023. The Committee would 
like to be apprised in this regard.  
 Further, the Committee note that presently Department is not earning 
any rentals for its estates. The Committee would like to draw the attention of 
the Department w.r.t. existing  guidelines of the Department of Posts which 
deals with renting out excess built up space wherein rent revision is provided 
for at the rate of 10% per annum after every 03 years. The Committee would 
like to urge the Department to explore this wherever feasible.  
  With respect to pending projects, the Committee note that work 
has commenced on Poojappura and Karamana post offices but the work on 
Sasthamangalam post office in Kerala is yet to begin. The Committee had 
advised the Department to speed up work on the three projects in their 22nd, 
28th, 33rd and 40th Reports and note that the post offices have not been 
made operational as yet. The Committee therefore emphasise that the 
Department must make all efforts to complete the work in the next FY. The 
Committee would like to prevail on the Department to expedite the works 
w.r.t. these pending projects.  
  Regarding the facilities for new post office buildings, one of the 
mandatory provisions has been the construction of ladies toilets. It is seen that 
in 2022-23(upto December, 2022), a total of 36 ladies toilets had been 
constructed in new postal buildings and 21 had been constructed in old 
buildings where separate facilities were not available for the ladies. These 
figures reflect very poorly with respect to providing basic amenities to the vast 
work force. It is seen that funds have been allocated to Estates Division under 

17 
 
Gender Concern. Further, with regard to providing other facilities, the 
Committee found that during the last three years, 383 ramps/railings, 80 
adaptive rest rooms and only 1 Braille signage were constructed. The 
Committee note that only 21 Access Audits have been conducted in the last 
five years. From the foregoing, the Committee find that the progress made by 
the Department in addressing gender concerns and inclusive buildings is 
minuscule when compared to the mammoth size of the Department. The funds 
allocated to address Gender concern must be utilized optimally and judiciously. 
The Department ought to strive to provide facilities to their women workforce 
which inter- alia include separate ladies toilets, provision for crèches in the 
post office and so on. The Committee recommend that inclusiveness may be 
made mandatory for the design of all post office buildings in future and the 
guidelines for the design of all new buildings may be revised to aim at access 
for the differently abled to fulfil the objectives of the Sugamya Bharat Abhiyan. 
The post office personnel may be sensitized to their specific needs and 
retrofitting of the existing buildings may be done on a regular basis. The 
Committee stress that access audits may be conducted periodically for the post 
offices and the Committee be informed of the progress in the matter.  
 The Committee recommend that priority may be accorded to the projects 
that have been pending for a long time and to those which cater to population 
still not covered by the reach of a post office. The efforts made by the 
Department for acquiring funds from the MPLAD are praiseworthy and the 
Committee hope that the MPLAD funds will be utilised in order to expedite 
pending projects and start new ones. The Department may also consider the 
feasibility of renting out its estates and utilizing vacant land through Build-
Operate-Transfer Model and earn revenue in the process. The Committee may 
be apprised of the progress in this regard.” 
 
12. The Department of Posts, in the Action Taken Note, have stated as under: 

18 
 
 “Actual utilization of funds under Estates Management Scheme during the year 
2022-23 has been Rs.68.62 Crore out of Rs. 70.10 Crore allotted in the year and not 
Rs. 22.32 Crore. The percentage utilization comes to 97.8%. 
 
 In view of the revised guidelines on MPLADS issued by Ministry of Statistics and 
Programme Implementation (MOSPI)  which has come into effect from 1.4.2023, 
Department of Posts has been included therein. 
 
 The present status of post office building construction project at Poojappura, 
Karmana and Sasthamangalam and their likely dates of completion are as under: 
 
Sr. No. Project Present Status 
1 Karamana External plastering and work of back side 
retaining wall in progress. Project likely to 
be completed in current financial year. 
2 Poojappura Plinth beam reinforcement and shuttering 
work over. Project likely to be completed by 
September, 2024. 
3 Sasthamangalam Foundation earth work in progress. Project 
likely to be completed by December, 2024. 
 
Provision of separate ladies toilets has been made an integral part of the design of 
new post offices being constructed.  In Financial Year 2022-23 50 ladies toilets have 
been constructed in new postal buildings. 57 ladies toilets and 2 retiring rooms 
were also constructed during FY 2022-23 in old buildings where separate facilities 
were not available for the ladies. Funds ofRs. 1.20 Crore have been allotted for 
construction of 60 ladies toilets and Rs. 30 Lakh for construction of 30 feeding 
rooms for ladies during the year 2023-24.  
  
Construction of rails and ramps are mandatory for all new buildings being 
constructed in the Department of Posts to ensure easy accessibility for differently-
abled persons and senior citizens. Rs.1 Crore have been allotted for retrofitting in 

19 
 
50 post offices with ramps & rails during the current financial year. Directions have 
been issued to make braille signages integral part of new buildings being 
constructed. Funds of Rs. 50 lakh have been allotted to install braille signages in 
500 post offices in the year 2023-24.  
 
 Instructions have been issued to all the Circles to conduct bi-annual access audits 
of all the post offices and to set up a monitoring committee for the implementation 
of the accessibility norms in accordance with the Rights of Person With Disabilities 
Act, 2016 vide letter dated 12.05.2022 and reiterated vide 03.05.2023.” 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
13.  The Committee had, inter alia, recommended that the Department may also 
consider the feasibility of renting out its estates and utilizing vacant land through BOT 
model and earn revenue.  The Department is silent on this issue in their reply. Further 
the Committee had desired that the work of Karamana, Poojapura and 
Sasthamangalam projects which had not been completed in a long time be expedited. 
The Department has informed that the work on Karamana post office was expected to 
be completed in the current FY while the work on other two would be completed by 
2024. The Committee would like to emphasise that the projects have been much 
delayed and the Department needs to adhere to its timelines in order to complete the 
projects. Further, the Committee had recommended that the Department may accord 
priority to the projects that have been pending for a long time especially for the  
population not covered by a post office.  The Department has not responded to this 
direction and the Committee reiterate their recommendation to focus on  completion 
of pending projects and use of vacant land. 
 
 
 
 

20 
 
 Recommendation no. 6 
India Post Payments Bank 
14.  The Committee, in their Original Report, had recommended as under: 
 
“According to the budgetary allocations, the Committee note that the BE for 
2022-23 was Rs. 200 crore for IPPB and the RE was double that of the BE i.e. Rs. 
400 crore. For the 2023-24, the BE is Rs. 250 crore. The Committee note that 
India Post Payments Bank (IPPB) has been setup with the vision to build the most 
accessible, affordable and trusted bank for the common man in India, leveraging 
the last mile reach and penetration of the Postal network. IPPB has 650 
branches/controlling offices, almost one in each district in the country. IPPB has 
enabled 1.38 lakh Post Offices (including 1.10 lakh in rural areas) to provide 
Banking services at the counters. IPPB has also equipped nearly 1.89 lakh 
Postmen and GraminDakSevaks with smartphone and biometric device to 
provide Doorstep Banking Services. 
        The Committee observe that IPPB has established an interoperable banking 
infrastructure for the public good contributing towards changing the financial 
inclusion landscape in India and address the last mile needs of the banking 
industry at large to provide doorstep services to the customers of ANY BANK 
through the Postmen and Gramin Dak Sevaks, leading to an increase in rural 
banking infrastructure by almost 2.5 times. The Bank has a customer base of 6.2 
Cr customers, of which 75% are in Rural areas and 47% of the customers are 
Women. 
      The Committee note that powered by Aadhaar based eKYC., IPPB has ensured 
instant account opening with no manual intervention, especially for the rural 
population who may not possess the required documents prescribed by the 
Banking ecosystem to become part of the formal financial ecosystem. The IPPB-
DoP combine has created a Physical Platform for Rural India enabled to provide 
Universal Services that has embedded Financial Services with Govt. Services 
through collaboration of Fintechs, Government and institutions in banking 

21 
 
ecosystem, thus providing a multitude of Citizen relevant services at the last 
mile. 
      The Committee understand that the IPPB has an Objective of Financial 
Inclusion in a cost effective way and to remove barriers to access basic financial 
services by the common man especially in the unbanked and underbanked areas. 
The IPPB have set ambitious targets (for 2023-24) of 1.59 lakh IPPB Access Points 
and 7.2 crore Cumulative Account Acquisition with measures like increased 
linkage of IPPB and POSA accounts to promote acquisition and customer 
balances. India Post Payments Bank (IPPB) has enabled 1.38 lakh Post Offices to 
provide Banking services and has equipped nearly 1.89 lakh Postmen and 
GraminDakSevaks with a Smartphone and biometric device to provide doorstep 
banking services. 
      The Committee note that Department has approached RBI seeking relaxation 
for rolling out IPPB services in remaining post offices without submitting 
proposal under Annual Banking Outlet Expansion Plan to RBI. Apart from this, 
hiring for vacant post of Gramin Dak Sevak Branch Postmasters (GDS BPMs) have 
been expedited which would enable IPPB to roll out IPPB services in these 
Branch Post Offices. Regular interaction with all telecom service providers 
including BSNL is being undertaken to provide mobile connectivity in the 
technically not feasible locations. As a result, IPPB services have been provided in 
more than 2600 post offices in 2022-23. IPPB services will be enabled in 
remaining 21000 post offices by 2023-24. 
        Apparently, the Payment Bank business model provides limited avenues for 
revenue generation. The Committee find it encouraging that the IPPB has 
identified alternate revenue streams like G2C services to balance the revenue 
mix. There has been a consistent increase in the Bank’s revenue in the past 2 
years in spite of the onset of the pandemic. There has been a reduction in the 
net loss over the quarters through control of fixed expenses and discretionary 
expenditure. 

22 
 
  The Committee have been informed that the Department vide 
D.O. letter dated 16.06.2021 had requested RBI to examine the possibility of 
relaxing the eligibility conditions for Small Finance Bank licensing. However, RBI 
expressed its inability to accede to Department’s request. Department has once 
again approached RBI to reconsider conversion of IPPB into Small Finance Bank 
and the response from RBI is awaited. 
  The Committee observe that the key to revenue is enhanced CASA 
(Current Account & Savings Account) balance as IPPB earn direct revenue on 
CASA balance. Fresh acquisition along with Post Office Savings Accounts (POSA) 
linkage is key to improve CASA Balance. Further Premium Acquisition, Aadhaar 
Seeded Acquisition, Child Enrolment Lite Client (CELC) and Life & General 
Insurance lead generation/sell are the other sources of revenue generation in 
IPPB.  Lauding the efforts of the Department, the Committee urge the 
Department to make concerted efforts to remove all restrictions on the revenue 
streams and widen the scope of IPPB into a Small Finance bank. This would 
enable it to offer loans and increase its revenue and thereby increase its 
profitability. The Committee may be informed of the progress made in the 
direction.” 
 
15. The Department of Posts, in the Action Taken Note, have stated as under: 
 “As desired by the Committee, the progress made by India Post Payments Bank 
as on date are as under:- 
a) IPPB has enabled 1.43 lakh Post Offices (including 1.27 lakh in rural areas) to 
provide Banking services at the counters. IPPB has also equipped nearly 1.89 lakh 
Postmen and GraminDakSevaks with smartphones and biometric devices to 
provide Doorstep Banking Services. 
 
b) Key achievements: 
 More than 6.76 Cr customers have opened accounts with IPPB 
 78% of customers are in Rural areas  

23 
 
 47% of customers are women 
 9.5+ Cr customers of ANY Bank provided cash delivery at their doorstep 
 More than ₹ 6200 Crs customer deposits 
 Enabled more than 17 Cr UPI transactions per month 
 2.79 Cr+ Customers with Aadhaar seeding in IPPB a/c to receive DBT benefits 
 More than 1.91 Cr customers received DBT/Social Welfare benefits 
 More than ₹ 14000 Cr Social Benefits disbursed to customers 
 More than 5.75 Cr customers provided with Aadhaar-based Government to 
Citizen services e.g., Child enrolment, Mobile number update & Doorstep Jeevan 
Praman Patra. 
 Bank covered more than 25 Lac individuals under ‘Insurance for All’ by enabling 
them with Group Accidental Guard General Insurance. 
 More than 15 Lac PM KISAN beneficiary account has been opened in this FY 2022-
23. More than 34 Lakh PM KisanSamman Nidhi disbursement with IPPB.  
 IPPB and DoP in coordination with IEPFA have launched the NiveshakDidi 
program on 28th Oct, 2022 in J&K.  
 
c) DoP-IPPB is able to provide Financial Banking coverage to over 5.50-Lac villages 
basis out of the approx 6 lacs villages. 
 
d) IPPB has collaborated with various ministries and State Govts for providing citizen 
centric services like Digital Life Certificates, Aadhaar services (Mobile Number 
update). In addition, IPPB is working towards onboarding street vendors under 
the PMSVANIDHI program with MoHUA, providing Aadhaar based verification for 
PM KISAN beneficiaries with Ministry of Agriculture. 
 
e) Business Performance YoY Growth  
Particulars FY 2019-20 FY 2020-21 FY 2021-22 FY 2022-23 
Customer Accounts 
(cumulative) 
2.37 Cr 4.29 Cr 5.18 Cr 6.63 Cr 
Customer Deposits 
Rs(cumulative) 
855.05 Cr 2300 Cr 3692 Cr 6292 Cr 
Financial txn  No. 5.14 Cr 21.01 Cr 67.11 Cr 144.67 Cr 
Financial Txns Value 
(Rs) 
14,152 Cr 59,299 Cr 100,939 Cr 164,327 Cr 

24 
 
Average Balance 
per customer (Rs) 
360.78 536 713 949 
 
f) IPPB has shown substantial growth on a YoY basis registering a growth of 63%.  Bank 
will break even within 7 years by FY 2024-25. 
 
 
Particulars 
 
FY 2019-20 
(Audited) 
FY 2020-21 
(Audited) 
FY 2021-22 
(Audited) 
FY 2022-23 
(Provisional) 
% Increase FY 22-
23 over FY 21-22 
Interest Income 45.76 80.44 128.46 278.87 117% 
Transactional Income 7.06 129.62 329.87 464.73 41% 
Other Income 1.94 2.98 2.87 7.39 157% 
Total Revenue 54.76 213.04 461.20 750.99 63% 
Interest Expenses 13.6 45.91 71.12 94.01 32% 
Salary 264.29 283.22 296.35 269.40 -9% 
Operating Expenses 223.23 210.8 263.20 361.91 38% 
Total Expenses 501.12 539.93 630.67 725.32 15% 
Operating Profit/ Loss -446.36 -326.89 -169.47 25.67 -115% 
 
 Growth Factors  
1. Enhanced Business lines leading to stable revenue streams   
2. Focused approach towards Revenue earning services  
3. Resource Productivity through constant engagement & training  
4. Expense control for Bottom line improvement” 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
16. The Committee had inter-alia noted in the 44th Report that the Department of Posts 
had requested RBI to examine the possibility of relaxing the eligibility conditions for 
Small Finance Bank licensing but RBI had not acceded to the said request. The 
Department had once again approached the RBI to reconsider its decision and the 
response was awaited. The Committee had urged the Department to make all efforts to 

25 
 
remove all restrictions on the revenue streams and widen the scope of IPPB into a small 
finance bank in order to enable it to offer loans and increase its revenue and thereby 
increase its profits. The Committee express their dissatisfaction that the Department is 
silent on the issue in their reply. The Committee reiterate their recommendation and 
wish to be updated of the action taken in this regard. 
 
 
 Recommendation no. 8 
Post Office Common Service Centres 
 
17. The Committee, in their Original Report, had recommended as under: 
 
“The Committee note that Common Service Centre (CSC) services in the country are 
being provided in 1,21,133 post offices, which includes 22,382 departmental post 
offices and 98,751 branch post offices in rural areas. The Committee have also been 
informed that 1,38,906 postal employees (35,162 Departmental employees and 
1,03,744 GraminDakSevaks) have been trained to provide CSC Services through 
Post Offices. Incentives payable to Post Office staff and GDS is linked with revenue 
generated on the transactions made by them on CSC platform. Existing 
infrastructure of the Post Office is used for providing CSC services whereas in the 
rural Branch Post Offices, employees have option either to use Departmental 
infrastructure or bring their own infrastructure for providing CSC services. In case 
employee provides infrastructure, he is paid double the incentive as applicable in 
other case i.e. when infrastructure is provided by the Department. 
  The Committee also note that in Post Offices, CSC Services are 
provided by the postal staff in addition to their own duties and by utilizing existing 
infrastructure. No additional expenditure is incurred by the Department of Posts in 
providing CSC services at Post Office counters. Revenue earned for transactions 
conducted on CSC platform related to Common Service Centre services is shared 
between CSC-SPV and Department of Posts in the ratio of 20:80.  The revenue 

26 
 
earned by the Department during 2020-21 was Rs. 7,45,351.39 which increased to 
Rs. 38,87,621.46 in 2021-22.During 2022-23, the amount had risen to Rs. 
59,23,788.58 till December, 2022. The Department have submitted that 81 services 
are being provided that are related to Digital Seva Portal, election, labour service, 
pension, employment service, e-District, Bharat Bill Payment system, G2C and B2C 
services like Tour and Travels, FASTag, educational, financial services and utility 
services.    
  The Committee also note that in case of deficiency in the quality of 
CSC Services or any other issues  related to CSC services in Post Offices viz. 
overcharging etc, customers can complain to the Postmaster/ Divisional Heads for 
redressal of their grievances, in a manner similar to other postal services provided 
at Post Offices.  
  The Committee have also been informed that the CSC services 
provided through Post Offices are dependent upon a number of factors viz. power 
supply, internet connectivity, demand for such services and availability of service 
providers on CSC platform to offer their services. CSC Services in Post Offices are 
provided through existing infrastructure of the Post Offices. In departmental post 
offices the existing Desktop PC, Printer, Scanner and Internet Connectivity are used 
for providing CSC Services where as in Branch Post Offices, the mobile handset 
given to the Postmaster by Department or Postmaster’s own device is used for 
providing CSC Services.  CSC – SPV provides access to their online portal 
(digitalseva.csc.gov.in) for delivery of CSC Services through Post Offices.  CSC also 
provides training to postal staff and other backend technological support required 
for delivery of CSC Services.  
  The Committee note that during April to December, 2022, 9,30,322 
transactions were carried out at PO-CSCs. The Committee understand that the post 
offices have utilized their existing manpower and infrastructure to provide the 
much needed services to the remote areas of the country thereby earning revenue 
in the process. The Committee desire that monitoring of the display /notice 

27 
 
boards/rate-charts at PO-CSCs may be micro-managed at the post office level and 
the Branch Postmaster may be responsible for the same. Notwithstanding, CSC e-
governance private Limited Company can not absolve itself of the responsibility. 
The Committee find this aspect baffling and impress upon the Ministry to fix 
accountability of CSC company as well. The Committee also find that data related to 
number of services provided by PO-CSCs appear to be inconsistent, given the fact 
that the Department has submitted different figures before the Committee in their 
written replies on different occasions. The Department may, therefore, collate the 
information about the exact quantum of services provided by the PO-CSCs as 
compared to what is enumerated in the MoU and Report any glaring disparities to 
the Committee.  
  Besides, a dedicated helpline along with an email ID with a customer 
service team may be deployed for grievance redressal where the complaints lodged 
may be connected to a complaint management system with a turnaround time of 7 
days. The Committee recommend that an appellate authority with an ombudsman 
at the helm may be appointed for monitoring the grievance redressal.  The 
Committee further note with the concern that  CSC is a private limited company 
having one golden share of the Government, has been gaining works purely on the 
basis of nomination and not on competitive bidding.    
  The Committee note that the services provided by CSC are primarily 
focused on Mobile recharge and electricity bill payments which reflects the myopic 
view of the CSC management. The share of the transactions of G2C services like 
agriculture insurance, filing of income tax returns and land record forms etc. is 
abysmally low and apparently points to the lack of promotion on part of CSC and 
the resultant lack of awareness of the target populace. The Committee have also 
learned that the CSC company has only focused on providing online training to the 
operators.  The Committee, therefore, emphasise that the CSC should 
conspicuously display the full list of services provided and provide hands on training 
in both online and physical mode to the operators on a regular basis. The 

28 
 
Committee further note that the revenue earned by the PO-CSCs is approximately 
Rs. 48.90 per CSC during the FY 2022-23 which is astoundingly low and necessitates 
that the PO-CSCs should widen their ambit to cover more services for revenue. The 
Committee further recommend that the CSC should play a wider role in spread of 
internet connectivity to the Gram Panchayats and inform the Committee of the 
progress made in terms of connections provided.  
 
  The Committee conclude that the Department of Posts are self –
sufficient in terms of human resource and may examine the feasibility of managing 
the entire ecosystem of CSC in the country. The infrastructure of the Gram 
Panchayats may be utilized and the DakKarmayogi portal may be used for providing 
training on CSC services to the postal employees. The amalgamation would result in 
increased reach of the post offices by utilizing the doorstep service model of the 
IPPB and would prove gainful to the Department. The Committee emphasise the 
Department to explore this possibility and apprise them of the progress in this 
regard.” 
 
18.  The Department of Posts, in the Action Taken Note, have stated as under: 
 
“E-learning content is being developed for enrichment of knowledge of postal officials for 
better implementation of Common Service Centre services through postal network. 
Presently, Common Service Centre (CSC) related services are being provided through 
1,25,640 post offices in the country, which includes 23,077 Departmental Post Offices 
and 1,02,563 Branch Post Offices. A total of 1,46,154 postal employees (36,972 
Departmental Employees and 1,09,182 GraminDakSevaks) have been trained to provide 
CSC services through post offices. During FY 2022-23, 11,85,432 CSC transactions were 
carried out through post offices resulting in revenue generation of Rs.76,86,912 for 
Department of Posts. 

29 
 
Postal Circles have been instructed to display notice boards indicating provision of 
CSC related services in post offices where CSC services are being provided. Monitoring of 
the notice boards depicting the details of CSC Services being provided at post office 
counters is done at the Postmaster and Divisional Superintendent level. Field units of 
CSC-SPV and Postal Circles have been instructed to promote and publicize citizen-centric 
CSC services being provided through post offices, with special focus on Government-to-
Customer (G2C) services provided through post offices. Training to post office staff on 
CSC related services is being provided on regular basis through physical as well as online 
mode by CSC-SPV.  
 
Customers can register their grievances with the Postmaster/ Divisional Heads for 
redressal of their CSC related grievance, in a manner similar to other postal services 
being provided through post offices. There is provision of a toll free number and raising 
tickets on Digital Seva Portal of CSC for grievance handling.  
 
A total of 80 CSC services are being provided through post offices (Annexure-I).  
The number of CSC citizen centric services provided through post office counters is 
dynamic, wherein the number of CSC services will increase or decrease in the Digital Seva 
Portal, as and when CSC expands or curtails its tie-up with Government to Citizen(G2C) 
and Business to Citizen(B2C) service providers.  
 
G2C services comprising of Pradhan MantriFasalBimaYojana (PMFBY), Pradhan 
Mantri Jan ArogyaYojana (Ayushman Bharat), Pradhan MantriShram Yogi Maan-
dhanYojana (PM-SYM), e-shram registrations, passport services, National Pension 
Scheme, FASTAG, PAN Card etc. are available in all the post offices providing CSC related 
services.  During FY 2022-23, a total of 11.85 lakhs CSC related transactions were done in 
post offices, out of which 24% of the transactions pertained to services like insurance 
renewals, PAN applications, passport applications, farmer registrations under PM-KISAN 

30 
 
and PMFBY and e-shram registrations. Other CSC services like mobile recharge and bill 
payments, being recurring in nature, constituted for around 60% of total transactions. 
 
Under IT Modernization Project 2.0 of Department of Posts, One User Interface 
(One UI) will be developed, which will be the integrated front end interface for all users 
of department. The One UI along with the doorstep service delivery model of India Post 
Payment Bank (IPPB) will be utilized for providing G2C and B2C services to citizens, 
particularly in rural areas. 
 
 
List of CSC Services provided through Post Office 
Digital Seva Portal 1.  PAN card 
2. Passport 
3. Swachh Bharat Abhiyan 
4. PM AwasYojana 
5. Soil Health Card  
6. Pradhan MantriFasalBimaYojna 
7. PDS 
8. FSSAI License Application 
9. FSSAI Registration Certificate 
10. Birth/ Death Certificate 
11. Ayushman Bharat Yojna 
12. PM Shram Yogi Maan-dhan Pension Yojana 
13. Jeevan Pramaan 
14. IRCTC ticket Booking 
Election 15.  Voter Registration Form-6 
16. deletion of Name Form-7 

31 
 
17. Modifications or Corrections Form-8, 8A 
18. Voter PVC Card Print 
19. Modification to  Voter details 
Labour Service 20.  Labour Services 
21. Labour Certificate 
22. Labour Registration 
Pension  23. National Pension Scheme (NPS) 
24. Swavalamban Contribution 
Employment Service 
25. Navy Recruitment 
26. Job Seekers Registration 
27. Application Form Submission 
State Government Services 
 e-District /SSDG (State) 
28. Haryana eDistrict Services  
29. MP State Services  
30. West Bengal eDistrict Services  
31. Maharashtra State Services  
32. Karnataka eDistrict Services  
33. Jharkhand eDistrict Service  
34. UttarakhandeDistrict Service  
35. Chhattisgarh eDistrict Services  
36. Puducherry eDistrict Services  
37. Himachal Pradesh PanchParaman 
38. Daman & Diu  
39. Dadra & Nagar Haveli  
40. AP RTA Services 
41. eVahan Jammu & Kashmir 
42. Himachal SwasthyaBimaYojana (HIMCARE) 
43. Tamil Nadu PDS Card Printing 

32 
 
Other G2C Services 
44. Sarthi 
45. E-Challan 
46. eStamp 
47. E-Vahan – Transport Services 
Bharat Bill Payment System  48. BBPS Mobile Postpaid 
49. BBPS DTH 
50. BBPS Landline Postpaid 
51. BBPS Electricity 
52. BBPS Broadband Postpaid 
53. BBPS Water 
54. BBPS Gas 
B2C 
Tour & Travels 
55. Flight Ticket  
56. Bus Ticket 
57. e- Recharge (Mobile &DTH)  
58. SBIePay Maharashtra Transport 
59. SBIePay Maharashtra eGRAS 
60. SBIePay Maharashtra Nursing 
61. RashtrapathiBhavan Museum Ticket 
FASTag 
62. FASTAG Issuance  
63. FASTAG Purchase 
64. FASTAG Top up 
65. FASTAG Service 
Educational Services 66. NIELIT Facilitation Centre 
67. Tally Software Registration 

33 
 
68. ITI Registration 
69. Course Registration 
70. Online Admission 
71. CAD Registration 
72. Scholarships 
Financial Services 
Banking Services 73. Acceptance of Loan applications 
74. EMI collections 
Insurance  75. Life Insurance (Renewal) 
76. General Insurance (Renewal) 
Utility Services 
IT Return 
77. GST Return 
78. TDS Return 
79. DSC 
80. LLP Registration 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
19.  The Committee had recommended that the CSC should play a wider role in spread of 
internet connectivity to the Gram Panchayats and inform the Committee of the 
progress made in terms of connections provided. The Committee had emphasized 
that the Department should explore the possibility of increasing the reach of post 
offices by using doorstep service model of IPPB and apprise them of the progress in 
this regard.  In their reply, the Department have informed that the training to post 
office staff on CSC related services is being provided on regular basis through physical 
as well as online mode by CSC-SPV. The Committee would like to be informed about 
the tangible outcomes of the measures taken by the Department. 
Recommendation no. 9 

34 
 
 
Monthly Income Scheme and Senior Citizens Savings Scheme 
 
20. The Committee, in their Original Report had recommended as under- 
 
“The Committee note that as per the Budget Announcement of 2023-24, the 
maximum deposit limit for Monthly Income Scheme will be enhanced from Rs 4.5 
lakh to Rs 9 lakh for single account and from Rs 9 lakh to Rs 15 lakh for joint account.  
The maximum deposit limit for Senior Citizen Savings Scheme will be enhanced from 
Rs 15 lakh to Rs 30 lakh. As per the provisions under Rule 3 of SCSS 2019, voluntarily 
retired or retired on superannuation persons of 55 years of age and above can invest 
in SCSS, their retirement benefits, subject to a maximum of Rs 15 lakh. Further, 
retired personnel of Defence Services (excluding Civilian Defence Employees) on 
attaining the age of 50 years are also eligible to invest in SCSS. The Committee note 
that benefit under SCSS is already available to Government employees retiring at the 
age of 55 years and above and SCSS account can be extended for a further period of 
three years once only. The Department have informed that interest at the 
rate applicable to the Post Office Savings Account shall be payable on deposits in the 
SCSS account which are not extended on maturity. 
  Noting that the retirement benefits may be significantly larger than the 
amount of Rs. 30 lakh which is permitted under the SCSS, the Committee 
recommend that the Department should put forth a proposal to remove the limit on 
SCSS to enable the retired persons to invest a larger portion of their savings in post 
offices. The age limit of 55 years may also be relaxed for persons who take voluntary 
retirement at an earlier age. The Committee further recommend that the limitation 
on renewal of SCSS account may be removed.  
  It is apparent that MIS provides a steady monthly income to the retired 
account holders/housewives. The Department may also consider increasing the limit 
on MIS for single account and for joint account. The Department should also 
consider the possibility of sending reminders through SMS and emails to the SCSS 

35 
 
account holders on completion of term of the SCSS. The Committee are of the view 
that the subscriber base of the post office will increase substantially and the amount 
invested will increase commensurately. The Committee may be apprised of the 
progress made in this regard.” 
 
21. The Department in their Action taken replies, had stated as under- 
 
“Removing the limit on SCSS, relaxing age limit of 55 years for person taking 
voluntary retirement, increasing the limit on MIS for single and joint account 
holders etc. comes under the purview of DEA, MoF.  DoP is only implementing 
organization for the POSB schemes.  DoP will convey the advise of the 
Committee to the nodal ministry for next course of action. 
 
SMS messages are sent to all the account holders including SCSS account holders 
in advance a month prior to the maturity of the account.” 
 
Comments of the Committee 
22. The Committee had recommended that the Department should put forth a proposal 
to remove the limit on SCSS to enable the retired persons to invest a larger portion of 
their savings in post offices. It was also recommended that age limit of 55 years may 
also be relaxed for persons who take voluntary retirement at an earlier age. The 
Committee had further recommended that the limitation on renewal of SCSS account 
may be removed. The Department have stated in their reply that the matter 
regarding removing the limit on SCSS, relaxing age limit of 55 years for person taking 
voluntary retirement, increasing the limit on MIS for single and joint account holders 
etc. comes under the purview of DEA, MoF. DoP is only an implementing organization 
for the POSB schemes. Further, it was added that the DoP will convey the advice of 
the Committee to the nodal Ministry for the next course of action. In this regard, the 
Committee would like to be apprised of the outcome. 

36 
 
 
Recommendation no. 11 
Widening of the ambit of Post Office Savings Bank 
23. The Committee, in their Original Report had recommended as under- 
 
 
“The Committee note that the Post Office Savings Bank has time Deposits scheme 
with the maturity period of 1 year / 2 year / 3 year and 5 year, National Savings 
Certificates and KisanVikas Patra.  Loan facility is not available on these deposits. The 
Department have also informed that the customer can avail loan from banks by 
pledging these deposits in the bank branch. In respect of Recurring Deposits, 
account holders can avail loan from the post office to the extent of 50% of balance 
in the RD account.   
  The Committee find it encouraging that Department of Posts has received 
a mandate from Department of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare for opening approx 
1.46 Crore accounts of PM KisanSamman Nidhi beneficiaries who are not able to 
receive Direct Benefit Transfer due to non-availability of Aadhaar seeded accounts. 
The mandate is received due to vast Distribution network of DOP along with trust on 
Postmen/GDS of the public in large. The Committee appreciate the efforts of IPPB 
with regard to opening up of more than 5 lakh PM KisanSamman Nidhi Beneficiary 
Accounts.Department of Financial Services (DFS), MOF, is the nodal Department/ 
Ministry for PMSBY (Pradhan Mantri Suraksha BimaYojana) and PMJJBY (Pradhan 
Mantri Jeevan JyotiBimaYojana) Schemes. These schemes are available through 
Banks and Post Offices. The eligible Post Office Savings Account holders can enrol 
under PMSBY and PMJJBY Schemes. 21.32 lakh have enrolled in PMSBY and 1.44 
lakh in PMJJBY.  
The Committee recommend that the Department may initiate the process of 
providing loan facility on term deposits and Monthly Income Scheme deposits which 
would provide additional flow of revenue to the Post office.  The Department may 
examine the possibilities to work in coordination with Ministry of Agriculture & 

37 
 
Farmers Welfare to provide the services of Primary Agriculture Credit Society to the 
farmers at grass root level through the unparalleled reach and trust enjoyed by the 
Post Offices. The Department may also explore ways to popularize the PM 
KisanSamman Nidhi, PMSBY and PMJJBY to increase the subscriber base.” 
 
24. The Department in their Action Taken Notes, had submitted as under- 
 
“Term Deposits (TD), Monthly Income Scheme (MIS) and other POSB schemes come 
under the jurisdiction of DEA, MoF.  DoP is only an implementing organization for 
the POSB schemes.  Action, if any, regarding provision of loan facility on TD or MIS, 
comes entirely under the purview of DEA, MoF.  Advise of the Committee will be 
shared with the nodal ministry for next course of action.   
 
PM Kisan Samman Nidhi is being popularized by opening Savings Account of the 
beneficiaries through both IPPB and Post Office Savings Accounts.  PMSBY and 
PMJJBY schemes are available to all Post Office Savings Accounts (POSA) holders.  
These schemes are being popularized in coordination with Department of Financial 
Services, the nodal ministry.” 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
25. The Committee had recommended that the Department may initiate the process of 
providing loan facility on term deposits and Monthly Income scheme Deposits which 
would provide additional flow of revenue to the Post office. The Committee had 
recommended that  the Department in coordination with the Ministry of Agriculture 
and Farmers Welfare to provide the services of Primary Agriculture Credit Society to 
the farmers at grass root level through the unparalleled reach and trust enjoyed by 
the post offices. The Department has replied that it is only an implementing 
organization for the POSB schemes. Action, if any, regarding provision of loan facility 

38 
 
on TD or MIS, comes entirely under the purview of DEA, MoF. Department has also 
stated that advice of the Committee would be shared with the nodal ministry for next 
course of action. The Committee call upon the Department to update them in this 
regard.  
 
 
 
CHAPTER II 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN 
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
( Recommendation no. 1) 
Budgetary Analysis 
The Department of Posts (DoP) have laid the Demands for Grants (2023-24) in Lok Sabha 
on 8 February, 2023 for a total amount of Rs. 40533.38 crores consisting of Rs. 39156.43 
crores under Revenue and Rs. 1396.96 crores under Capital. An analysis of the budgetary 
allocation during 2022-23 indicates that under Gross Expenditure, an amount of Rs. 
35507.27 crore had been set at BE which was increased to Rs. 35592.83 crore at RE stage 
and the actual expenditure upto December 2022 has been Rs. 26212.85 crore. Under the 
Capital section, during the same period, an amount of Rs. 888.62 crore had been 
allocated at BE which was increased to Rs. 1494.02 crore and the actual utilization upto 
December 2022 has been Rs. 681.24 crore only. The Committee note that the gross 
expenditure of the Department has been gradually increasing over the years. The 
revenue expenditure was Rs. 29139.74 crore in 2019-20, Rs. 29261.46 crore in 2020-21 
and Rs. 30924.06 crore in 2021-22. The capital expenditure was Rs. 730.56 crore in 2019-
20, Rs. 897.41 crore in 2020-21 and Rs. 885.55 crore in 2021-22. Since the figures are till 
December, 2022, the Committee apprehend that the expenditure is likely to go up 
further as the financial year comes to a close. The Committee expect the Department to 
implement austerity measures which will ensure in bringing down the expenditure. The 

39 
 
Department may explore the possibility of acting as a facilitator for local level Self Help 
Groups and artisans and supplying theirproducts to far flung areas to maximize the 
revenue and sustain itself in the long run.  
Para 1 of 44th Report of the Standing Committee on Communications and Information 
Technology (17thLok Sabha). 
 
Reply of the Government 
Keeping in view the objective of increasing the revenue, Department of Posts has 
entered into agreement with Government e-Market (GeM) whereby Department will 
pick-up the consignments from the door-steps of the GeM Sellers and transport it for 
delivery across the country.  Department has also entered into agreements with 14 
regional offices of Tribal Cooperative Marketing Development Federation of India Limited 
(TRIFED) to pick-up the products made by the tribals in various parts of the country and 
deliver it to the buyers across the country.  These business tie-ups will result in opening a 
pan India market for the small and medium traders and tribal artisans residing in remote 
rural areas and will also bring substantial revenue for Department of Posts. 
Presently 122 DakNiryatKendras (DNKs) have been set up in the country which are 
proposed to be extended to 1000 locations in a phased manner.  This step of the 
Department will lead in supporting export activities and generating revenue for the 
Department of Posts.  Its specialized services, document processing, logistics support, 
customs collaboration and value added offerings may contribute to the financial 
sustainability of the Department while facilitating and promoting export trade. 
 
(Department of Posts, Ministry of Communications OM No. 28-5/2023/Bgt dated 
08.06.2023) 
(Recommendation no. 2) 
Revenue Receipts 

40 
 
The Committee note that the Revenue Receipts of the Department were Rs. 10632.50 
crore in 2020-21 which marginally increased to Rs. 10860.80 crore in 2021-22. For the 
year 2022-23, the revenue receipts have been pegged at Rs. 7948.39 crore till December, 
2022. The Department has set ambitious targets for the year 2023-24 and the BE for 
2023-24 stands at Rs. 13439.38 crore. The Committee note that the Department is 
earning revenue from Speed Post, Business Post, Business Parcel, postage through 
franking machines, sale of stamps, philatelic ancillaries, Money Order (MO) and Indian 
Postal Orders (IPO), retail post, logistic post, e-bill collection, G2C services such as Post 
Office Passport Seva Kendra (POPSK), Aadhaar services, etc, receipts from other postal 
Administrations, savings bank and cash certificate remuneration etc.  
 Further, it is seen that several measures have been taken by the Department to 
achieve the targets during 2022-23 such as focus on Post Office Savings Bank (POSB) 
account opening; thrust on parcel business with tie-ups with Tribal Cooperative 
Marketing Development Federation (TRIFED), GeM, private e-commerce players; focus 
on IPPB, technology initiatives like ATM, E-banking, M-banking, National Electronic 
Funds Transfer (NEFT), Core Banking Solution(CBS), CBS-CTS (Cheque Truncation 
System) integration,  e-PAN validation, account opening and closure facility for National 
Savings Certificate, KisanVikas Patra, Recurring Deposit, Term Deposit and Public 
Provident Fund through internet banking, monitoring of targets, etc. Furthermore, the 
Department has adopted a three pronged strategy for increasing parcel business that 
includes improving the infrastructure and parcel handling capacity for smooth handling 
of the increased parcel volume, upgradation of the technology platform for improving 
the operational efficiency and meeting the customer expectations.  
 
 Apart from the above, a number of measures have been taken by the 
Department of Posts to achieve the revenue targets during FY 2022-23. These include 
establishment of four parcel hubs for exclusive and expeditious processing of parcels, 
four nodal delivery centres have been operationalised for expediting door step delivery 
of parcels in 2022-23 and 4 routes of postal road transport network have been 

41 
 
operationalised. Additional parcels handling capacity of 14.35 lakh parcel per annum has 
been created bringing the total capacity to 12.75 crore parcels per annum. Payment 
through UPI QR code has been implemented at all post offices counters. Cash on 
Delivery and Insurance charges have been reviewed and revised to meet the Courier, 
Express and Parcel Market Standards. 605 Parcel Packaging units have been established 
in selected post offices across the country and customer interface has been improved 
through MIS and Customer Relationship Management Portal. 
 
 The Committee observe that the focus areas in FY 2023-24 are doorstep  pick-up 
and delivery services of parcels , agreement signed with GeM for pick up of 
consignments, agreement with National Handloom Development Corporation for 
providing them logistics support for supply of yarns, agreement with Tribal Co-operative 
Marketing Development Federation of India and tie-up with Open Network for Digital 
Commerce for providing logistics solutions. Further steps have been taken for 
technology integration  including 1.45 lakh mobile phones for delivery staff, new 
Application Programme Interface Integration facility, monitoring of performance of 
Speed Post , corporate customer specific MIS, CRM for bulk customers and so on. Single 
points of contact have been designated for corporate customers having monthly 
business of Rs. 10 lakh and above, registration process of bulk customer under Buy Now 
Pay Later (BNPL) and National Account Facility (NAF) has been revised. There have been 
tie ups with the Election Commission of India and UIDAI, with Department of 
Empowerment of Persons with Disabilities for delivery of Unique Disability ID cards, with 
LIC, Govt of Rajasthan, delivery of Driving License, Registration Certificates, Traffic 
Challans and notices and so on. Given the credibility which the Department enjoys, the 
Committee opine that the initiatives w.r.t. doorstep pick- up and delivery services of 
parcels will definitely bring about significant changes in the Indian economy, apart from 
boosting the revenues to the Department.  
 The Committee appreciate the initiative of the Department in launching the new 
Parcel product ‘Rail Post Gati Shakti Express Cargo Service’ in collaboration with the 

42 
 
Indian Railways. This is to attract the new business for parcels weighing more than 35 kg 
in which the booking and delivery of the parcels will be undertaken by the Department 
of Posts whereas transmission of the parcels will be performed by Indian Railways. 
Further, the initiative taken w.r.t. packaging of parcels at the post office is praiseworthy 
and needs to be expanded to cover more post offices. The word of caution here is that 
the quality of packaging is to be ensured so as to have a sustainable consumer base, 
especially w.r.t. fragile items. The Department may also examine the feasibility of 
opening parcel booking counters at airports which could facilitate passengers to book 
their excess baggage at these counters instead of paying heavy costs for excess baggage 
that are currently being charged by the Airlines.  
 
Reply of the Government 
The availability of Parcel packaging services has now been further extended to more 
locations and is currently available at 697 Parcel Packaging Units (PPUs) in comparison 
to the earlier 605 PPUs. The Parcel Packaging materials of industry standards have been 
prescribed under the Parcel Packaging Policy and the procurement of prescribed quality 
is emphasized upon by the Department. Among other packaging materials such as 
corrugated boxes and flyers, inner filling materials such as bubble wrap, airbags, foam 
peanuts/pellets & shredded cardboard fillers have been prescribed under the Policy for 
keeping goods safe especially in respect of fragile items. 
 Feasibility of opening of parcel booking counters at Airport to facilitate passengers to 
book their excess baggage was explored by Delhi Postal Circle. One counter is being 
operated by Delhi Postal Circle at IGI Airport, New Delhi and a parcel business of around 
Rs. 80 Lakh has been generated during the FY 2022-2023. In this respect, all Postal 
Circles where post offices are located in the departure halls / airport terminal buildings 
are being addressed to examine the feasibility of providing this service. 
 
 

43 
 
(Department of Posts, Ministry of Communications OM No. 28-5/2023/Bgt dated 
08.06.2023) 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para no. 7 of Chapter-I) 
( Recommendation no. 3) 
Revenue Deficit 
The Committee note that the deficit of the Department has risen from Rs. 17695. 09 
crores in 2020-21 to Rs. 18860.63 crore in 2021-22 . The deficit for the 2022-23 stands at 
Rs. 17423.69 crore till December, 2022. The Committee note that DOP has primarily two 
major components of gross expenditure: Salaries and Pensions, which constitute almost 
92.34% of the gross expenditure. As seen, the expenditure pertaining to salary (Pay and 
allowances) is on the higher side due to implementation of revised pay and allowances as 
per 7th Pay Commission. Pensionary charges have also increased due to revision of 
pension of pre- 2006/ 2016 as per 7th pay commission. Number of pensioners has also 
increased during last few years.  There is increase on account of Dearness 
Allowance/Dearness Relief (DA/DR). Further, in order to fulfill Universal Service 
Obligation, Post Offices in Rural areas are considered justified if they are able to cover 
33.33% of the expenditure (15% in hilly/tribal areas) and in order to keep these offices 
operational, the necessary cost has to be incurred by the Department. 
        The Committee recognize that the post office brings a connect between Government 
objectives and banks’ inabilities. The post office with its existing branch infrastructure 
extend complete banking solutions at almost negligible additional costs. The Universal 
Service Obligation of the Department translates that the Department has to carry out 
operations in rural and hilly/tribal areas by bearing its cost thus leading to high deficit.  
  It is apparent to the Committee that the post offices do enjoy a vital element of 
trust that is needed in ensuring usage of formal banking channel by the unbanked 
population that could be leveraged upon by the Government to obtain higher 

44 
 
effectiveness of the financial inclusion drive. The trust built up can also be helpful in 
selling micro credit and investments like recurring deposits and micro SIP (Systematic 
Investment Plan) in mutual funds. The importance of post office in executing 
Government’s financial initiatives cannot be debated. The Committee recommend that 
the Department implement measures which would enable it to decrease the revenue 
deficit to the extent possible.  
Reply of the Government 
 
 
Department has introduced various Citizen Centric Services in last few years such as 
Aadhaar Enrolment/Updation facility in Post Offices, Post Office Passport Seva Kendras 
(POPSKs) and India Post Passenger Reservation System which has not only provided 
convenience to the citizens but also increased DoP’s revenue.  Further, a new service has 
recently been introduced by the Department of Posts under the name Magazine 
Postw.e.f. 01.04.2022 where features such as track and trace facility is provided for all 
magazines posted through the Postal channel. 
Department is making all efforts through postal circles to open maximum number of 
POSB accounts so as to provide customer centric services to account holders all over the 
country, which will also generate revenue for the Department. 
 
(Department of Posts, Ministry of Communications OM No. 28-5/2023/Bgt dated 
08.06.2023) 
( Recommendation no. 4) 
IT Induction and Modernisation 
The Committee note that IT Modernization Project of Department of Posts is being 
undertaken with a total outlay of Rs. 4909 crores. The Project involves computerization 

45 
 
and Modernization and networking of ~ 1, 59,000 Post Offices in the country, including ~ 
1, 44,000 Branch Post Offices in rural areas run by the GraminDakSevaks. The project 
involves providing Central Server based integrated, modular and scalable solution for all 
the operations of Department of Posts including Mails, Human Resource, Banking, 
Insurance and Finance & Accounts. It also involves creation of IT Infrastructure like Data 
Centre, Disaster Recovery Centre, setting up of a Wide Area Network (WAN) and providing 
solar powered and portable hand-held computing devices (Micro ATM compliant) to all 
the Branch Post Offices. The Committee note that the actual expenditure during 2022-23 
on the project is Rs. 567.90 crore on IT 1.0 and Rs. 8.64 crore on IT 2.0. An amount of Rs. 
275.65 crore has been allocated to IT 1.0 and Rs. 653.02 crore has been allocated to IT 2.0 
in BE 2023-24. The objectives of the IT modernization project of Department of Posts are 
modernization and computerization of all the non-computerized Post offices in the 
country including GraminDakSevak (GDS) Branch Post offices in rural areas, mail offices, 
administrative and other offices; Development of scalable, integrated and modular 
software covering all operations of the Department of Posts; Establishment of required IT 
Infrastructure including Data Centre, Wide Area Network (WAN) based networking of the 
departmental post offices; and DARPAN - RICT (Digital Advancement of Rural Post Offices 
for a New India-Rural Information Communication Technology (Rural ICT) 
infrastructure. The Project is implemented through eight different segments: Data Centre 
Facility (DCF), Network Integrator (NI), Financial Services System Integrator (FSI), Core 
System Integrator (CSI), Digital Advancement of Rural Post Office for A New India 
(DARPAN) - Rural System Integrator (RSI) and Rural Hardware (RH), Mail Operations 
Hardware (MOH), and Change Management (CM). 
  With the implementation of IT Modernisation project, all Post Offices will 
be able to improve their quality of services and increase their productivity on account of 
improved IT system. Increase in access to the post office through web portal, mobile 
and call centers would give better services to the customers. Number of transactions in 
postal, banking, insurance and retail activities of the post office are likely to increase as 
the reach of these services will be extended through IT Modernisation. Computerization 

46 
 
of all the post offices with central data architecture will create an enabling environment 
for mail track and trace and other web based and mobile based services. Reduction in 
paper work, particularly in administrative and accounts offices and accessibility of 
information from centralized database will enable improved decision making and 
responsive  administration. The main activities prioritized by the Department under 
the scheme are Postal and Logistics, IT infrastructure, Network (inclusive of the North 
East component), Data Center and disaster recovery system, Security, Field infra 
(inclusive of the North East component), Enterprise Fraud Risk Management etc. 
Appreciating the efforts being made by the Department, the Committee would like to 
emphasise that the works undertaken in this regard may be completed as envisaged and 
in a time bound manner.  
  Further, the Committee find that the objective of DOP IT 2.0 is to provide 
inclusive, integrated single-window view of postal and financial services to its 
stakeholders through multiple delivery channels using re-engineered  processes and 
cutting-edge Information Technologies, leading towards an era of e-Governance. Overall 
benefit   will   be to the customers and stake holders through more reliable, speedy 
operations and transparent availability of information to the customers.  
 
 The Committee are of the view that IT modernization has indeed become a vital and 
integral part of every business plan of any Department or Organization. For the 
Department of Posts with its vast network and multifarious services, the importance of IT 
Induction and Modernisation can hardly be overemphasized. The Committee desire that 
the Department ensures proper implementation of this Scheme and improves operational 
efficiencies. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 The objective of DoP IT 2.0 is to provide inclusive, integrated single-window view of postal 
and financial services to its stakeholders through multiple delivery channels using re-
engineered processes and cutting –edge Information Technologies, leading towards an 

47 
 
era of e-Governance.  Overall benefit will be to the customers and stake holders through 
more reliable, speedy operations and transparent availability of information to the 
customers. 
 
 (Department of Posts, Ministry of Communications OM No. 28-5/2023/Bgt dated 
08.06.2023) 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para 10 of Chapter-I) 
  

48 
 
( Recommendation no. 5) 
 
Estates Management – pending projects, accessibility issues and gender concerns 
The Committee note that the key objective of the Estates Management Scheme is to 
ensure development of an appropriate infrastructure to provide a congenial work 
environment and improve the delivery of postal services in a cost effective way for the 
benefit of the customers.  The Scheme includes construction of postal buildings including 
Post Offices, mail offices, administrative offices, staff quarters, besides preservation and 
conservation of heritage buildings and reconstruction of dilapidated buildings. The 
Scheme also includes construction of additional toilets in existing buildings, installation of 
Roof Top Solar Power Packs and Rain Water Harvesting structures to contribute towards 
Sustainable Development Goals. Providing ramps and rails under the Sugamya Bharat 
Abhiyan for improving the accessibility of Post Offices for differently abled persons is also 
a part of this scheme.  The actual utilization during 2022-23 has been Rs. 22.32 crores 
which is less than a third of the RE of Rs. 70.10 crores. This is indicative of lack of proper 
planning and implementation. 
  The Committee further note that the major impediments being encountered in 
the implementation of the Scheme include not getting timely approval from Municipal 
Corporations and other State Government authorities for starting construction process, 
cancellation of tendering process due to single/high bidding, non-settlement of litigation 
process/court cases pertaining to the land owned by the Department and encroachment 
on Departmental vacant lands. The Committee doappreciate the efforts made by the 
Department to address these problems. These inter alia include preparation of a list of 
projects for construction and renovation of postal buildings to be taken up in FY 2023-24 
which has been shared with all the Circles with the instruction to complete all the 
preconstruction formalities by 31.03.2023 so that work can be awarded in April 2023 
itself, thereby ensuring optimum utilization of funds. The Circles have also been advised 
to depute officers to liaise with the local authorities and State Government authorities to 
expedite requisite approval. Priority is being given for completion of pending projects. 

49 
 
The Committee further note that the Department had submitted its proposal to Ministry 
of Statistics and Programme implementation (MOSPI) vide DO letter dated 26.12.2022 to 
allow the MPLAD funds to be used for estate management of Department of Posts. The 
same has been approved by Mo SPI in the revised guidelines on MPLADS issued on 22nd 
February, 2023. The Committee would like to be apprised in this regard.  
 Further, the Committee note that presently Department is not earning any 
rentals for its estates. The Committee would like to draw the attention of the 
Department w.r.t. existing  guidelines of the Department of Posts which deals with 
renting out excess built up space wherein rent revision is provided for at the rate of 10% 
per annum after every 03 years. The Committee would like to urge the Department to 
explore this wherever feasible.  
  With respect to pending projects, the Committee note that work has 
commenced on Poojappura and Karamana post offices but the work on Sasthamangalam 
post office in Kerala is yet to begin. The Committee had advised the Department to speed 
up work on the three projects in their 22nd, 28th, 33rd and 40th Reports and note that the 
post offices have not been made operational as yet. The Committee therefore emphasise 
that the Department must make all efforts to complete the work in the next FY. The 
Committee would like to prevail on the Department to expedite the works w.r.t. these 
pending projects.  
  Regarding the facilities for new post office buildings, one of the mandatory 
provisions has been the construction of ladies toilets. It is seen that in 2022-23(upto 
December, 2022), a total of 36 ladies toilets had been constructed in new postal 
buildings and 21 had been constructed in old buildings where separate facilities were not 
available for the ladies. These figures reflect very poorly with respect to providing basic 
amenities to the vast work force. It is seen that funds have been allocated to Estates 
Division under Gender Concern. Further, with regard to providing other facilities, the 
Committee found that during the last three years, 383 ramps/railings, 80 adaptive rest 
rooms and only 1 Braille signage were constructed. The Committee note that only 21 
Access Audits have been conducted in the last five years. From the foregoing, the 

50 
 
Committee find that the progress made by the Department in addressing gender 
concerns and inclusive buildings is minuscule when compared to the mammoth size of 
the Department. The funds allocated to address Gender concern must be utilized 
optimally and judiciously. The Department ought to strive to provide facilities to their 
women workforce which inter- alia include separate ladies toilets, provision for crèches 
in the post office and so on. The Committee recommend that inclusiveness may be made 
mandatory for the design of all post office buildings in future and the guidelines for the 
design of all new buildings may be revised to aim at access for the differently abled to 
fulfil the objectives of the Sugamya Bharat Abhiyan. The post office personnel may be 
sensitized to their specific needs and retrofitting of the existing buildings may be done on 
a regular basis. The Committee stress that access audits may be conducted periodically 
for the post offices and the Committee be informed of the progress in the matter.  
 The Committee recommend that priority may be accorded to the projects that 
have been pending for a long time and to those which cater to population still not 
covered by the reach of a post office. The efforts made by the Department for acquiring 
funds from the MPLAD are praiseworthy and the Committee hope that the MPLAD 
funds will be utilised in order to expedite pending projects and start new ones. The 
Department may also consider the feasibility of renting out its estates and utilizing 
vacant land through Build-Operate-Transfer Model and earn revenue in the process. The 
Committee may be apprised of the progress in this regard.  
 
 
Reply of the Government 
Actual utilization of funds under Estates Management Scheme during the year 2022-23 
has been Rs.68.62 Crore out of Rs. 70.10 Crore allotted in the year and not Rs. 22.32 
Crore. The percentage utilization comes to 97.8%. 
 

51 
 
 In view of the revised guidelines on MPLADS issued by Ministry of Statistics and 
Programme Implementation (MOSPI) which has come into effect from 1.4.2023, 
Department of Posts has been included therein. 
 
 The present status of post office building construction project at Poojappura, 
Karmana and Sasthamangalam and their likely dates of completion are as under: 
 
Sr. 
No. 
Project Present Status 
1 Karamana External plastering and work of back side retaining wall in 
progress. Project likely to be completed in current 
financial year. 
2 Poojappura Plinth beam reinforcement and shuttering work over. 
Project likely to be completed by September, 2024. 
3 Sasthamangalam Foundation earth work in progress. Project likely to be 
completed by December, 2024. 
 
Provision of separate ladies toilets has been made an integral part of the design of new 
post offices being constructed.  In Financial Year 2022-23 50 ladies toilets have been 
constructed in new postal buildings. 57 ladies toilets and 2 retiring rooms were also 
constructed during FY 2022-23 in old buildings where separate facilities were not 
available for the ladies. Funds ofRs. 1.20 Crore have been allotted  for construction of 60 
ladies toilets and Rs. 30 Lakh for construction of 30 feeding rooms for ladies during the 
year 2023-24.  
  
Construction of rails and ramps are mandatory for all new buildings being constructed in 
the Department of Posts to ensure easy accessibility for differently-abled persons and 
senior citizens. Rs.1 Crore have been allotted for retrofitting in 50 post offices with 
ramps & rails during the current financial year. Directions have been issued to make 
braille signages integral part of new buildings being constructed. Funds of Rs. 50 lakh 
have been allotted to install braille signages in 500 post offices in the year 2023-24.  
 

52 
 
 Instructions have been issued to all the Circles to conduct bi-annual access audits 
of all the post offices and to set up a monitoring committee for the implementation of 
the accessibility norms in accordance with the Rights of Person With Disabilities Act, 
2016 vide letter dated 12.05.2022 and reiterated vide 03.05.2023. 
 
(Department of Posts, Ministry of Communications OM No. 28-5/2023/Bgt dated 
08.06.2023) 
Comments of the Committee 
( Please see Para 13 of Chapter I) 
 ( Recommendation no. 7) 
 
Dormant Accounts 
The Committee note that 136.96 crore mature unclaimed certificates were lying with the 
Department with a value of Rs. 7703.34 crores in 2020-21. During 2021-22, 155.84 lakh 
such certificates were lying unclaimed with a value of Rs. 9239.20 crores.  The Committee 
also note that the Department takes  proactive measures to contact the beneficiaries of 
such unclaimed/ dormant saving certificates and the number of beneficiaries/legal 
heirs/nominees contacted during the last three years and the amount repaid to them. In 
accordance with the instructions contained in SB order No. 8/2019 dated 13.09.2019, all 
types of unclaimed accounts/certificates in small savings schemes are identified centrally 
and freezed. Circles then download list of such accounts pertaining to the Post Offices 
falling under their jurisdiction and shares the same with the concerned Post Offices. The 
concerned Post Office places the list on the Notice Board meant for public and tries to 
contact each of the account holder of the unclaimed account by all reasonable means at 
least two times within a span of sixty days of placing the list on the notice board. Door to 
door campaign and special drives are carried out at Divisional/Regional/Circle level for 
settlement of such unclaimed accounts. Periodical monitoring through Video 
Conferencing is also being done at Directorate level. With the combined effort by all 

53 
 
Circles 2142923 accounts with an amount of Rs. 1206.73 Cr have been settled till Dec-
2022.  
 
 The Committee note that nomination has been made mandatory w.e.f. 
18.12.2019 for all the accounts being opened and restriction in system has also been 
implemented for opening account without nomination. The Committee are all praises 
for the efforts undertaken by the Department in settlement of dormant accounts and 
exhort that they should continue their efforts with renewed vigor so as to find the legal 
heirs of the deceased persons. Following the practice of nomination at the time of 
opening of accounts and renewing the KYCs every other year will ensure to keep the 
number of dormant accounts to a minimum. Restoring the amounts to the legal 
heirs/nominees will lead to restoration of faith and credibility in the organization. It is 
apparent that there may be a large number of accounts in POSB opened prior to 
December, 2019 without any nomination. The post office needs to assume a proactive 
role and encourage these account holders through push notifications via SMS, email and 
ensure that no account remains without a nomination. The progress made in 
quantifiable terms may be apprised to the Committee.  
 
 
Reply of the Government 
When the account holder of an account without nomination approaches a Post Office for 
any transaction in the account, the account holder is encouraged by the concerned Post 
Office to submit his/her nomination for the account.  All possible steps are being taken to 
ensure no account remains without a nomination.  The number of accounts with 
nomination as on 31.12.2019 was 12.24 crore, which as on 31.03.2023 has increased to 
23.85 crore, which is a coverage of more than 92% of the total live accounts of 25.85 
crore as on 31.03.2023.  During the Financial Year 2022-23 i.e. from 01.04.2022 to 
31.03.2023, nominations were registered in 4.61 crore accounts. 
 

54 
 
(Department of Posts, Ministry of Communications OM No. 28-5/2023/Bgt dated 
08.06.2023) 
(Recommendation no. 8) 
 
Post Office Common Service Centres 
The Committee note that Common Service Centre (CSC) services in the country are being 
provided in 1,21,133 post offices, which includes 22,382 departmental post offices and 
98,751 branch post offices in rural areas. The Committee have also been informed that 
1,38,906 postal employees (35,162 Departmental employees and 1,03,744 Gramin Dak 
Sevaks) have been trained to provide CSC Services through Post Offices. Incentives payable 
to Post Office staff and GDS is linked with revenue generated on the transactions made by 
them on CSC platform. Existing infrastructure of the Post Office is used for providing CSC 
services whereas in the rural Branch Post Offices, employees have option either to use 
Departmental infrastructure or bring their own infrastructure for providing CSC services. In 
case employee provides infrastructure, he is paid double the incentive as applicable in other 
case i.e. when infrastructure is provided by the Department. 
  The Committee also note that in Post Offices, CSC Services are provided by the 
postal staff in addition to their own duties and by utilizing existing infrastructure. No 
additional expenditure is incurred by the Department of Posts in providing CSC services 
at Post Office counters. Revenue earned for transactions conducted on CSC platform 
related to Common Service Centre services is shared between CSC-SPV and Department 
of Posts in the ratio of 20:80.  The revenue earned by the Department during 2020-21 
was Rs. 7,45,351.39 which increased to Rs. 38,87,621.46 in 2021-22.During 2022-23, the 
amount had risen to Rs. 59,23,788.58 till December, 2022. The Department have 
submitted that 81 services are being provided that are related to Digital Seva Portal, 
election, labour service, pension, employment service, e-District, Bharat Bill Payment 
system, G2C and B2C services like Tour and Travels, FASTag, educational, financial 
services and utility services.    

55 
 
  The Committee also note that in case of deficiency in the quality of CSC Services 
or any other issues  related to CSC services in Post Offices viz. overcharging etc, 
customers can complain to the Postmaster/ Divisional Heads for redressal of their 
grievances, in a manner similar to other postal services provided at Post Offices.  
  The Committee have also been informed that the CSC services provided through 
Post Offices are dependent upon a number of factors viz. power supply, internet 
connectivity, demand for such services and availability of service providers on CSC 
platform to offer their services. CSC Services in Post Offices are provided through existing 
infrastructure of the Post Offices. In departmental post offices the existing Desktop PC, 
Printer, Scanner and Internet Connectivity are used for providing CSC Services where as 
in Branch Post Offices, the mobile handset given to the Postmaster by Department or 
Postmaster’s own device is used for providing CSC Services.  CSC – SPV provides access to 
their online portal (digitalseva.csc.gov.in) for delivery of CSC Services through Post 
Offices.  CSC also provides training to postal staff and other backend technological 
support required for delivery of CSC Services.  
  The Committee note that during April to December, 2022, 9,30,322 transactions 
were carried out at PO-CSCs. The Committee understand that the post offices have 
utilized their existing manpower and infrastructure to provide the much needed services 
to the remote areas of the country thereby earning revenue in the process. The 
Committee desire that monitoring of the display /notice boards/rate-charts at PO-CSCs 
may be micro-managed at the post office level and the Branch Postmaster may be 
responsible for the same. Notwithstanding, CSC e-governance private Limited Company 
can not absolve itself of the responsibility. The Committee find this aspect baffling and 
impress upon the Ministry to fix accountability of CSC company as well. The Committee 
also find that data related to number of services provided by PO-CSCs appear to be 
inconsistent, given the fact that the Department has submitted different figures before 
the Committee in their written replies on different occasions. The Department may, 
therefore, collate the information about the exact quantum of services provided by the 

56 
 
PO-CSCs as compared to what is enumerated in the MoU and report any glaring 
disparities to the Committee.  
  Besides, a dedicated helpline along with an email ID with a customer service 
team may be deployed for grievance redressal where the complaints lodged may be 
connected to a complaint management system with a turnaround time of 7 days. The 
Committee recommend that an appellate authority with an ombudsman at the helm may 
be appointed for monitoring the grievance redressal.  The Committee further note with 
the concern that  CSC is a private limited company having one golden share of the 
Government, has been gaining works purely on the basis of nomination and not on 
competitive bidding.    
  The Committee note that the services provided by CSC are primarily focused on 
Mobile recharge and electricity bill payments which reflects the myopic view of the CSC 
management. The share of the transactions of G2C services like agriculture insurance, 
filing of income tax returns and land record forms etc. is abysmally low and apparently 
points to the lack of promotion on part of CSC and the resultant lack of awareness of the 
target populace. The Committee have also learned that the CSC company has only 
focused on providing online training to the operators.  The Committee, therefore, 
emphasise that the CSC should conspicuously display the full list of services provided and 
provide hands on training in both online and physical mode to the operators on a regular 
basis. The Committee further note that the revenue earned by the PO-CSCs is 
approximately Rs. 48.90 per CSC during the FY 2022-23 which is astoundingly low and 
necessitates that the PO-CSCs should widen their ambit to cover more services for 
revenue. The Committee further recommend that the CSC should play a wider role in 
spread of internet connectivity to the Gram Panchayats and inform the Committee of the 
progress made in terms of connections provided.  
 
  The Committee conclude that the Department of Posts are self –sufficient in 
terms of human resource and may examine the feasibility of managing the entire 
ecosystem of CSC in the country. The infrastructure of the Gram Panchayats may be 

57 
 
utilized and the DakKarmayogi portal may be used for providing training on CSC services 
to the postal employees. The amalgamation would result in increased reach of the post 
offices by utilizing the doorstep service model of the IPPB and would prove gainful to the 
Department. The Committee emphasise the Department to explore this possibility and 
apprise them of the progress in this regard.  
 
Reply of the Government 
E-learning content is being developed for enrichment of knowledge of postal officials for 
better implementation of Common Service Centre services through postal network. 
Presently, Common Service Centre (CSC) related services are being provided through 
1,25,640 post offices in the country, which includes 23,077 Departmental Post Offices 
and 1,02,563 Branch Post Offices. A total of 1,46,154 postal employees (36,972 
Departmental Employees and 1,09,182 GraminDakSevaks) have been trained to provide 
CSC services through post offices. During FY 2022-23, 11,85,432 CSC transactions were 
carried out through post offices resulting in revenue generation of Rs.76,86,912 for 
Department of Posts. 
Postal Circles have been instructed to display notice boards indicating provision of 
CSC related services in post offices where CSC services are being provided. Monitoring of 
the notice boards depicting the details of CSC Services being provided at post office 
counters is done at the Postmaster and Divisional Superintendent level. Field units of 
CSC-SPV and Postal Circles have been instructed to promote and publicize citizen-centric 
CSC services being provided through post offices, with special focus on Government-to-
Customer (G2C) services provided through post offices. Training to post office staff on 
CSC related services is being provided on regular basis through physical as well as online 
mode by CSC-SPV.  
 
Customers can register their grievances with the Postmaster/ Divisional Heads for 
redressal of their CSC related grievance, in a manner similar to other postal services 

58 
 
being provided through post offices. There is provision of a toll free number and raising 
tickets on Digital Seva Portal of CSC for grievance handling.  
 
A total of 80 CSC services are being provided through post offices (Annexure-I).  
The number of CSC citizen centric services provided through post office counters is 
dynamic, wherein the number of CSC services will increase or decrease in the Digital Seva 
Portal, as and when CSC expands or curtails its tie-up with Government to Citizen(G2C) 
and Business to Citizen(B2C) service providers.  
 
G2C services comprising of Pradhan Mantri Fasal Bima Yojana (PMFBY), Pradhan 
Mantri Jan Arogya Yojana (Ayushman Bharat), Pradhan Mantri Shram Yogi Maan-dhan 
Yojana (PM-SYM), e-shram registrations, passport services, National Pension Scheme, 
FASTAG, PAN Card etc. are available in all the post offices providing CSC related services.  
During FY 2022-23, a total of 11.85 lakhs CSC related transactions were done in post 
offices, out of which 24% of the transactions pertained to services like insurance 
renewals, PAN applications, passport applications, farmer registrations under PM-KISAN 
and PMFBY and e-shram registrations. Other CSC services like mobile recharge and bill 
payments, being recurring in nature, constituted for around 60% of total transactions. 
 
Under IT Modernization Project 2.0 of Department of Posts, One User Interface 
(One UI) will be developed, which will be the integrated front end interface for all users 
of department. The One UI along with the doorstep service delivery model of India Post 
Payment Bank (IPPB) will be utilized for providing G2C and B2C services to citizens, 
particularly in rural areas. 
 
Annexure-I 
List of CSC Services provided through Post Office 
Digital Seva Portal 81.  PAN card 

59 
 
82. Passport 
83. Swachh Bharat Abhiyan 
84. PM AwasYojana 
85. Soil Health Card  
86. Pradhan MantriFasalBimaYojna 
87. PDS 
88. FSSAI License Application 
89. FSSAI Registration Certificate 
90. Birth/ Death Certificate 
91. Ayushman Bharat Yojna 
92. PM Shram Yogi Maan-dhan Pension Yojana 
93. Jeevan Pramaan 
94. IRCTC ticket Booking 
Election 95.  Voter Registration Form-6 
96. deletion of Name Form-7 
97. Modifications or Corrections Form-8, 8A 
98. Voter PVC Card Print 
99. Modification to  Voter details 
Labour Service 100.  Labour Services 
101. Labour Certificate 
102. Labour Registration 
Pension  103. National Pension Scheme (NPS) 
104. Swavalamban Contribution 
Employment Service 
105. Navy Recruitment 
106. Job Seekers Registration 
107. Application Form Submission 
State Government Services 
 e-District /SSDG (State) 108.  Haryana eDistrict Services  

60 
 
109. MP State Services  
110. West Bengal eDistrict Services  
111. Maharashtra State Services  
112. Karnataka eDistrict Services  
113. Jharkhand eDistrict Service  
114. UttarakhandeDistrict Service  
115. Chhattisgarh eDistrict Services  
116. Puducherry eDistrict Services  
117. Himachal Pradesh PanchParaman 
118. Daman & Diu  
119. Dadra & Nagar Haveli  
120. AP RTA Services 
121. eVahan Jammu & Kashmir 
122. Himachal SwasthyaBimaYojana (HIMCARE) 
123. Tamil Nadu PDS Card Printing 
Other G2C Services 
124. Sarthi 
125. E-Challan 
126. eStamp 
127. E-Vahan – Transport Services 
Bharat Bill Payment System  128. BBPS Mobile Postpaid 
129. BBPS DTH 
130. BBPS Landline Postpaid 
131. BBPS Electricity 
132. BBPS Broadband Postpaid 
133. BBPS Water 
134. BBPS Gas 

61 
 
B2C 
Tour & Travels 
135. Flight Ticket  
136. Bus Ticket 
137. e- Recharge (Mobile &DTH)  
138. SBIePay Maharashtra Transport 
139. SBIePay Maharashtra eGRAS 
140. SBIePay Maharashtra Nursing 
141. RashtrapathiBhavan Museum Ticket 
FASTag 
142. FASTAG Issuance  
143. FASTAG Purchase 
144. FASTAG Top up 
145. FASTAG Service 
Educational Services 
146. NIELIT Facilitation Centre 
147. Tally Software Registration 
148. ITI Registration 
149. Course Registration 
150. Online Admission 
151. CAD Registration 
152. Scholarships 
Financial Services 
Banking Services 153. Acceptance of Loan applications 
154. EMI collections 
Insurance  155. Life Insurance (Renewal) 
156. General Insurance (Renewal) 
Utility Services 
IT Return 157. GST Return 

62 
 
158. TDS Return 
159. DSC 
160. LLP Registration 
 
(Department of Posts, Ministry of Communications OM No. 28-5/2023/Bgt dated             
08.06.2023) 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para 19 of Chapter-I) 
 ( Recommendation no. 10) 
 
Expansion of role of postmen 
During the examination of the Demands for Grants (2023-24), a concern was raised by 
the Committee that the Jan Dhan account holders covered by an insurance of Rs. 2 lakhs 
are not receiving the amount that is due to them in case of any claims arising. The 
Committee also flagged the issue that no receipt is provided for the premium paid by the 
account holders who then face problems in insurance claims.  
The Committee note that the Department of Financial Services (DFS) is the nodal 
Department for Jan Dhan Accounts and infer that the DFS can collaborate with 
Department of Posts for facilitation of insurance claim settlement of the Jan Dhan 
Account holders through nearby post offices. The postmen who are entrusted with 
delivery in the rural post offices may be given additional responsibility of reaching out to 
families who are the beneficiaries of insurance by virtue of being Jan Dhan Account 
holders. The Department may look into ways to facilitate the insurance claims related to 
PLI/RPLI through postmen as they enjoy unparalleled reach with the local population.  
The Committee call upon the Department to see the feasibility of mandatorily posting 
postmen with the requisite skills in the local dialect/language in remote areas so as to 
preclude any language conflicts.The Committee emphasise that the Department may 

63 
 
collaborate with the Gram Panchayats and collate the data of insured Jan Dhan Account 
holders to further streamline the claim process.  
 
Reply of the Government 
The Department of Posts provides facilities for convenient payment of PLI/RPLI 
claim amount to the insurant or claimant in both urban and rural areas.  
 
2.  The amount of claim is credited directly into the Post Office Savings Bank 
(POSB) accounts of the policyholders. It can subsequently be withdrawn at their doorstep 
through DARPAN device (Digital Advancement of Rural Post-Office for A New India 
device) brought by GraminDakSevaks/Branch Postmasters.  
 
3.  In addition, the Branch Post Office itself is located within the village, and 
is thus easily accessible to all the residents of that particular village as well as 
neighbouring villages. In India, there are around 1.5 lakh post offices serving 6 lakh 
villages, ie one Post Office for every 20.64 sq. km.  
 
4.  Moreover, the said services have been further strengthened and 
improved in the following ways: - 
 
a. The PLI (Postal Life Insurance) CPC (Central Processing Centre), which is generally 
located at the Head Post Office are processing PLI/RPLI maturity as well as death claim 
cases. The claim amount through cheque is then sent through Registered Post to the 
insurant/claimant at no additional cost. 
 
b. Thereafter an insurant/claimant directly can withdraw the same in cash through 
postman at their doorstep by AEPS (Aadhar Enabled Payment System) facility or get the 
amount transferred anywhere in India through e-banking and m-banking facilities.   
 

64 
 
c. PLI/RPLI maturity or death claim forms can also be submitted by an insurant/claimant 
through any of the Branch Post Offices in the country or indexed through DARPAN device 
and these are sent the same day to the Head Post Office/Account Office for further 
processing.  
 
d. There is a provision for sending a notification two months before the date of maturity 
of a policy to the policy holder, either through sms or as a letter delivered by the 
postman to the insurant, to enable him/her to submit the claim documents in advance 
and receive the maturity amount on time. 
 
Knowledge of local language of the concerned State or Union Territory is one of the 
educational qualification required for appointment to the post of Postmen as per the 
provisions of the recruitment rules. 
 
The Department of Financial Services (DFS), MoF, is the Nodal Department for Jan Dhan 
Accounts.  Action, if any, regarding collaboration with Department of Posts comes 
entirely under the purview of DFS, MoF.  It is also added that DFS has not made provision 
for providing Jan Dhan Accounts through Post Offices and the same is available through 
banks only. 
 
 
(Department of Posts, Ministry of Communications OM No. 28-5/2023/Bgt dated 
08.06.2023) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

65 
 
CHAPTER- III 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF 
THE REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 
-NIL- 
  

66 
 
CHAPTER IV 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN  RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND REQUIRE REITERATION 
 
( Recommendation no. 6) 
India Post Payments Bank 
According to the budgetary allocations, the Committee note that the BE for 2022-23 was 
Rs. 200 crore for IPPB and the RE was double that of the BE i.e. Rs. 400 crore. For the 
2023-24, the BE is Rs. 250 crore. The Committee note that India Post Payments Bank 
(IPPB) has been setup with the vision to build the most accessible, affordable and trusted 
bank for the common man in India, leveraging the last mile reach and penetration of the 
Postal network. IPPB has 650 branches/controlling offices, almost one in each district in 
the country. IPPB has enabled 1.38 lakh Post Offices (including 1.10 lakh in rural areas) to 
provide Banking services at the counters. IPPB has also equipped nearly 1.89 lakh 
Postmen and GraminDakSevaks with smartphone and biometric device to provide 
Doorstep Banking Services. 
        The Committee observe that IPPB has established an interoperable banking 
infrastructure for the public good contributing towards changing the financial inclusion 
landscape in India and address the last mile needs of the banking industry at large to 
provide doorstep services to the customers of ANY BANK through the Postmen and 
GraminDakSevaks, leading to an increase in rural banking infrastructure by almost 2.5 
times. The Bank has a customer base of 6.2 Cr customers, of which 75% are in Rural areas 
and 47% of the customers are Women. 
      The Committee note that powered by Aadhaar based eKYC., IPPB has ensured instant 
account opening with no manual intervention, especially for the rural population who 
may not possess the required documents prescribed by the Banking ecosystem to 
become part of the formal financial ecosystem. The IPPB-DoP combine has created a 
Physical Platform for Rural India enabled to provide Universal Services that has 
embedded Financial Services with Govt. Services through collaboration of Fintechs, 

67 
 
Government and institutions in banking ecosystem, thus providing a multitude of Citizen 
relevant services at the last mile. 
      The Committee understand that the IPPB has an Objective of Financial Inclusion in a 
cost effective way and to remove barriers to access basic financial services by the 
common man especially in the unbanked and underbanked areas. The IPPB have set 
ambitious targets (for 2023-24) of 1.59 lakh IPPB Access Points and 7.2 crore Cumulative 
Account Acquisition with measures like increased linkage of IPPB and POSA accounts to 
promote acquisition and customer balances. India Post Payments Bank (IPPB) has 
enabled 1.38 lakh Post Offices to provide Banking services and has equipped nearly 1.89 
lakh Postmen and GraminDakSevaks with a Smartphone and biometric device to provide 
doorstep banking services. 
      The Committee note that Department has approached RBI seeking relaxation for 
rolling out IPPB services in remaining post offices without submitting proposal under 
Annual Banking Outlet Expansion Plan to RBI. Apart from this, hiring for vacant post of 
GraminDakSevak Branch Postmasters (GDS BPMs) have been expedited which would 
enable IPPB to roll out IPPB services in these Branch Post Offices. Regular interaction 
with all telecom service providers including BSNL is being undertaken to provide mobile 
connectivity in the technically not feasible locations. As a result, IPPB services have been 
provided in more than 2600 post offices in 2022-23. IPPB services will be enabled in 
remaining 21000 post offices by 2023-24. 
        Apparently, the Payment Bank business model provides limited avenues for revenue 
generation. The Committee find it encouraging that the IPPB has identified alternate 
revenue streams like G2C services to balance the revenue mix. There has been a 
consistent increase in the Bank’s revenue in the past 2 years in spite of the onset of the 
pandemic. There has been a reduction in the net loss over the quarters through control 
of fixed expenses and discretionary expenditure. 

68 
 
  The Committee have been informed that the Department vide D.O. letter dated 
16.06.2021 had requested RBI to examine the possibility of relaxing the eligibility 
conditions for Small Finance Bank licensing. However, RBI expressed its inability to 
accede to Department’s request. Department has once again approached RBI to 
reconsider conversion of IPPB into Small Finance Bank and the response from RBI is 
awaited. 
  The Committee observe that the key to revenue is enhanced CASA (Current 
Account & Savings Account) balance as IPPB earn direct revenue on CASA balance. Fresh 
acquisition along with Post Office Savings Accounts (POSA) linkage is key to improve 
CASA Balance. Further Premium Acquisition, Aadhaar Seeded Acquisition, Child 
Enrolment Lite Client (CELC) and Life & General Insurance lead generation/sell are the 
other sources of revenue generation in IPPB.  Lauding the efforts of the Department, the 
Committee urge the Department to make concerted efforts to remove all restrictions on 
the revenue streams and widen the scope of IPPB into a Small Finance bank. This would 
enable it to offer loans and increase its revenue and thereby increase its profitability. The 
Committee may be informed of the progress made in the direction.  
Reply of the Government 
As desired by the Committee, the progress made by India Post Payments Bank as on date 
are as under:- 
c) IPPB has enabled 1.43 lakh Post Offices (including 1.27 lakh in rural areas) to provide 
Banking services at the counters. IPPB has also equipped nearly 1.89 lakh Postmen 
and GraminDakSevaks with smartphones and biometric devices to provide Doorstep 
Banking Services. 
 
d) Key achievements: 
 More than 6.76 Cr customers have opened accounts with IPPB 
 78% of customers are in Rural areas  
 47% of customers are women 
 9.5+ Cr customers of ANY Bank provided cash delivery at their doorstep 
 More than ₹ 6200 Crs customer deposits 

69 
 
 Enabled more than 17 Cr UPI transactions per month 
 2.79 Cr+ Customers with Aadhaar seeding in IPPB a/c to receive DBT benefits 
 More than 1.91 Cr customers received DBT/Social Welfare benefits 
 More than ₹ 14000 Cr Social Benefits disbursed to customers 
 More than 5.75 Cr customers provided with Aadhaar-based Government to Citizen 
services e.g., Child enrolment, Mobile number update & Doorstep Jeevan Praman 
Patra. 
 Bank covered more than 25 Lac individuals under ‘Insurance for All’ by enabling 
them with Group Accidental Guard General Insurance. 
 More than 15 Lac PM KISAN beneficiary account has been opened in this FY 2022-23. 
More than 34 Lakh PM KisanSamman Nidhi disbursement with IPPB.  
 IPPB and DoP in coordination with IEPFA have launched the NiveshakDidi program 
on 28th Oct, 2022 in J&K.  
 
g) DoP-IPPB is able to provide Financial Banking coverage to over 5.50-Lac villages basis 
out of the approx 6 lacs villages. 
 
h) IPPB has collaborated with various ministries and State Govts for providing citizen 
centric services like Digital Life Certificates, Aadhaar services (Mobile Number 
update). In addition, IPPB is working towards onboarding street vendors under the 
PMSVANIDHI program with MoHUA, providing Aadhaar based verification for PM 
KISAN beneficiaries with Ministry of Agriculture. 
 
i) Business Performance YoY Growth  
Particulars FY 2019-20 FY 2020-21 FY 2021-22 FY 2022-23 
Customer Accounts 
(cumulative) 
2.37 Cr 4.29 Cr 5.18 Cr 6.63 Cr 
Customer Deposits 
Rs(cumulative) 
855.05 Cr 2300 Cr 3692 Cr 6292 Cr 
Financial txn  No. 5.14 Cr 21.01 Cr 67.11 Cr 144.67 Cr 
Financial Txns Value 
(Rs) 
14,152 Cr 59,299 Cr 100,939 Cr 164,327 Cr 
Average Balance per 
customer (Rs) 
360.78 536 713 949 
 

70 
 
j) IPPB has shown substantial growth on a YoY basis registering a growth of 63%.  Bank 
will break even within 7 years by FY 2024-25. 
 
Particulars 
 
FY 2019-20 
(Audited) 
FY 2020-21 
(Audited) 
FY 2021-22 
(Audited) 
FY 2022-23 
(Provisional) 
% Increase FY 22-
23 over FY 21-22 
Interest Income 45.76 80.44 128.46 278.87 117% 
Transactional Income 7.06 129.62 329.87 464.73 41% 
Other Income 1.94 2.98 2.87 7.39 157% 
Total Revenue 54.76 213.04 461.20 750.99 63% 
Interest Expenses 13.6 45.91 71.12 94.01 32% 
Salary 264.29 283.22 296.35 269.40 -9% 
Operating Expenses 223.23 210.8 263.20 361.91 38% 
Total Expenses 501.12 539.93 630.67 725.32 15% 
Operating Profit/ Loss -446.36 -326.89 -169.47 25.67 -115% 
 
 Growth Factors  
1. Enhanced Business lines leading to stable revenue streams   
2. Focused approach towards Revenue earning services  
3. Resource Productivity through constant engagement & training  
4. Expense control for Bottom line improvement 
 
(Department of Posts, Ministry of Communications OM No. 28-5/2023/Bgt dated 
08.06.2023) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para 16 of Chapter-I) 
  

71 
 
 
CHAPTER V 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE INTERIM IN NATURE 
 
(Recommendation no. 9) 
Monthly Income Scheme and Senior Citizens Savings Scheme 
The Committee note that as per the Budget Announcement of 2023-24, the maximum 
deposit limit for Monthly Income Scheme will be enhanced from Rs 4.5 lakh to Rs 9 lakh 
for single account and from Rs 9 lakh to Rs 15 lakh for joint account.  The maximum 
deposit limit for Senior Citizen Savings Scheme will be enhanced from Rs 15 lakh to Rs 30 
lakh. As per the provisions under Rule 3 of SCSS 2019, voluntarily retired or retired on 
superannuation persons of 55 years of age and above can invest in SCSS, their retirement 
benefits, subject to a maximum of Rs 15 lakh. Further, retired personnel of Defence 
Services (excluding Civilian Defence Employees) on attaining the age of 50 years are also 
eligible to invest in SCSS. The Committee note that benefit under SCSS is already 
available to Government employees retiring at the age of 55 years and above and SCSS 
account can be extended for a further period of three years once only. The Department 
have informed that interest at the rate applicable to the Post Office Savings Account shall 
be payable on deposits in the SCSS account which are not extended on maturity. 
  Noting that the retirement benefits may be significantly larger than the amount 
of Rs. 30 lakh which is permitted under the SCSS, the Committee recommend that the 
Department should put forth a proposal to remove the limit on SCSS to enable the 
retired persons to invest a larger portion of their savings in post offices. The age limit of 
55 years may also be relaxed for persons who take voluntary retirement at an earlier age. 
The Committee further recommend that the limitation on renewal of SCSS account may 
be removed.  
  It is apparent that MIS provides a steady monthly income to the retired account 
holders/housewives. The Department may also consider increasing the limit on MIS for 

72 
 
single account and for joint account. The Department should also consider the possibility 
of sending reminders through SMS and emails to the SCSS account holders on completion 
of term of the SCSS. The Committee are of the view that the subscriber base of the post 
office will increase substantially and the amount invested will increase commensurately. 
The Committee may be apprised of the progress made in this regard. 
 
Reply of the Government 
Removing the limit on SCSS, relaxing age limit of 55 years for person taking voluntary 
retirement, increasing the limit on MIS for single and joint account holders etc. comes 
under the purview of DEA, MoF.  DoP is only implementing organization for the POSB 
schemes.  DoP will convey the advise of the Committee to the nodal ministry for next 
course of action. 
 
SMS messages are sent to all the account holders including SCSS account holders in 
advance a month prior to the maturity of the account. 
 
(Department of Posts, Ministry of Communications OM No. 28-5/2023/Bgt dated 
08.06.2023) 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para 22 of Chapter I) 
 
(Recommendation no. 11) 
Widening of the ambit of Post Office Savings Bank 
The Committee note that the Post Office Savings Bank has time Deposits scheme with 
the maturity period of 1 year / 2 year / 3 year and 5 year, National Savings Certificates 
and KisanVikas Patra.  Loan facility is not available on these deposits. The Department 
have also informed that the customer can avail loan from banks by pledging these 

73 
 
deposits in the bank branch. In respect of Recurring Deposits, account holders can avail 
loan from the post office to the extent of 50% of balance in the RD account.   
  The Committee find it encouraging that Department of Posts has received a 
mandate from Department of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare for opening approx 1.46 
Crore accounts of PM KisanSamman Nidhi beneficiaries who are not able to receive 
Direct Benefit Transfer due to non-availability of Aadhaar seeded accounts. The mandate 
is received due to vast Distribution network of DOP along with trust on Postmen/GDS of 
the public in large. The Committee appreciate the efforts of IPPB with regard to opening 
up of more than 5 lakh PM KisanSamman Nidhi Beneficiary Accounts.Department of 
Financial Services (DFS), MOF, is the nodal Department/ Ministry for PMSBY (Pradhan 
Mantri Suraksha BimaYojana) and PMJJBY (Pradhan Mantri Jeevan JyotiBimaYojana) 
Schemes. These schemes are available through Banks and Post Offices. The eligible Post 
Office Savings Account holders can enrol under PMSBY and PMJJBY Schemes. 21.32 lakh 
have enrolled in PMSBY and 1.44 lakh in PMJJBY.  
The Committee recommend that the Department may initiate the process of providing 
loan facility on term deposits and Monthly Income Scheme deposits which would provide 
additional flow of revenue to the Post office.  The Department may examine the 
possibilities to work in coordination with Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare to 
provide the services of Primary Agriculture Credit Society to the farmers at grass root 
level through the unparalleled reach and trust enjoyed by the Post Offices. The 
Department may also explore ways to popularize the PM KisanSamman Nidhi, PMSBY 
and PMJJBY to increase the subscriber base.  
 
Reply of the Government 
Term Deposits (TD), Monthly Income Scheme (MIS) and other POSB schemes come under 
the jurisdiction of DEA, MoF.  DoP is only an implementing organization for the POSB 
schemes.  Action, if any, regarding provision of loan facility on TD or MIS, comes entirely 
under the purview of DEA, MoF.  Advise of the Committee will be shared with the nodal 
ministry for next course of action.   

74 
 
 
PM KisanSamman Nidhi is being popularized by opening Savings Account of the 
beneficiaries through both IPPB and Post Office Savings Accounts.  PMSBY and PMJJBY 
schemes are available to all Post Office Savings Accounts (POSA) holders.  These schemes 
are being popularized in coordination with Department of Financial Services, the nodal 
ministry.  
 
 (Department of Posts, Ministry of Communications OM No. 28-5/2023/Bgt dated 
08.06.2023) 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para 25 of Chapter I) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      New Delhi;   PRATAPRAO JADHAV,  
  7    August, 2023  Chairperson,  
    16  Sravana, 1944 (Saka) Standing Committee on  
Communications and Information Technology. 

75 
 
Annexure-I 
  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON COMMUNICATIONS AND 
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(2022-23) 
MINUTES OF THE SEVENTEENTH SITTING OF THE 
COMMITTEE 
----------- 
 The Committee sat on Monday, the 07 August, 2023 from 1500 hours to 1645 
hours in Committee Room ‘3’ Extention to Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
 
Shri Prataprao Jadhav- Chairperson 
 
 MEMBERS 
  
Lok Sabha 
 
2.  Shri Karti P. Chidambaram 
3.       Smt. Sunita Duggal 
4.  Shri Jayadev Galla 
5.  Smt. Raksha Nikhil Khadse 
6.  Shri Santosh Pandey 
7.  Shri Sanjay Seth 
8.       Dr. M.K. Vishnu Prasad 
 
Rajya Sabha 
9.  Dr. Anil Agrawal 
10.     Dr. John Brittas  
11.  Shri Syed Nasir Hussain 
12.  Shri Jawahar Sircar 
 
 
 
 

76 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Satpal Gulati  - Additional Secretary 
2. Smt. Jyothirmayi  - Director 
3. Shri Nishant Mehra  - Deputy Secretary 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee convened to consider and adopt three draft Action Taken Reports on 
Demands for Grants (2023-24) relating to the Ministries/Departments under their 
jurisdiction and to have a briefing by the representatives of Department of 
Telecommunications, Reliance Jio Infocomm Ltd, Bharti Airtel Ltd., Tele 
Communications Consultants India Ltd. and Bharti Hexacom Ltd. on the subject 
‘Review of the performance of schemes under Universal Service Obligation Fund 
(USOF) with special emphasis on North East and LWE affected areas’. 
 
3. The Committee, then, took up the following draft Reports for consideration and 
adoption. 
(i) Draft Action Taken Report on Forty Third Report on ‘Demands for Grants 
(2023-24)’ relating to the Ministry of Communications (Department of 
Telecommunications). 
(ii)    Draft Action Taken Report on Forty Sixth Report on ‘Demands forGrants 
(2023-24)’ relating to the Ministry of Information and                                                
Broadcasting. 
(iii)  Draft Action Taken  Report on   Forty Fourth Report on ‘Demands for 
 Grants (2023-24)’  relating to the Ministry of Communications                                            
 (Department of Posts) 
4. After due deliberations, the Committee adopted the Reports with some 
modifications. 

77 
 
5. The Committee authorized the Chairperson to finalize the draft Action Taken 
Reports and present the same to the House during the current Session of Parliament. 
6. The Committee then called the representative of Department of 
Telecommunications, Reliance Jio Infocomm Ltd, Bharti Airtel Ltd., Tele 
Communications Consultants India Ltd. and Bharti Hexacom Ltd.  to have briefing on 
the subject ‘Review of the performance of schemes under Universal Service 
Obligation Fund (USOF) with special emphasis on North East and LWE affected 
areas’. 
6. xxxxxxx……….xxxxxxx……..xxxxxxx* 
7. xxxxxxx……….xxxxxxx……..xxxxxxx 
 
     
 A copy of verbatim record of the proceedings was kept on record. 
The Committee, then, adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
_____________________________________________________________ 
* Matters not related to the Report 
 
 

78 
 
Annexure-II 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE OBSERVATIONS/ RECOMMENDATIONS 
CONTAINED IN THEIR FORTY FOURTH REPORT 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
[Vide Paragraph No. 5 of Introduction] 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the Government 
 Rec. Sl. Nos.:- 1,2,3,4,5,7,8,10  
 Total  8 
 Percentage  72.72 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in view 
of the replies of the Government 
 Rec. Sl. No.: Nil  
 Total  Nil 
 Percentage  0.00 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the Government have 
not been accepted by the Committee and require reiteration 
 Rec. Sl. Nos.:-  6   
 Total   01 
 Percentage  9.09 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the replies of the Government 
are of interim in nature 
 Rec. Sl. Nos.:- 9,11  
 Total  2 
 Percentage  18.18 
 
 
 