 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
COMMUNICATIONS AND 
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(2023-24) 
 
SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
MINISTRY OF INFORMATION AND BROADCASTING 
 
 
„REGULATION OF CABLE TELEVISION IN INDIA‟ 
 
 
FIFTY-SIXTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
 
February, 2024/ Magha, 1945 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 
 
56 


 
FIFTY SIXTH  REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
COMMUNICATIONS AND  
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(2023-24) 
 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF INFORMATION AND BROADCASTING 
 
 
 
„REGULATION OF CABLE TELEVISION IN INDIA‟ 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 8th February, 2024 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 8th February, 2024 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
February, 2024/ Magha, 1945 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
CCIT No. 400 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2024 By LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of  Procedure and Conduct of Business in  
Lok Sabha (Sixteenth Edition) and Printed by Lok Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi-110001 

 
 
 
CONTENTS 
 Page 
No. 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ii 
ABBREVIATION iii 
INTRODUCTION iv 
REPORT  
PART I  
I.  INTRODUCTORY  
II.  REGULATION OF CABLE TELEVISION IN INDIA 
 
 
 A. ACT AND RULES - ADMINISTERED BY THE MIB  
 B. TRAI‟S REGULATORY FRAMEWORK FOR BROADCASTING & 
CABLE TV SECTOR 
 
 
III.  CONSTRAINTS/CHALLENGES FACED WITH RESPECT TO CABLE TV 
REGULATION IN INDIA 
 
 
IV.  PRICING POLICY OF CABLE TV AND ROLE OF TRAI 
 
 
V.  ISSUES RELATED TO AGR DEMAND 
 
 
VI.  ISSUE OF EMPLOYMENT 
 
 
VII.  IMPACT OF OTT PLATFORMS ON CABLE TV 
 
 
VIII.  ISSUES AFTER DIGITIZATION AND MEASURES TAKEN 
 
 
IX.  GRIEVANCE REDRESSAL MECHANISM 
 
 
Part-II  
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS  
 
ANNEXURES 
 
 
I.  KEY RECOMMENDATIONS OF TRAI FOR CABLE TELEVISION 
 
 
APPENDICES  
  
I.  Minutes of the Third Sitting held on 14.12.2023   
II.  Minutes of the Fourth Sitting held on 06.02.2024  
 
 
 
 

 
 
Composition of the Standing  Committee on Communications and  
Information Technology (2023-24) 
 
Shri Prataprao  Jadhav - Chairperson 
 
Lok Sabha 
  
2. Smt. Sumalatha Ambareesh 
3. Shri Karti P. Chidambaram 
4. Dr. Nishikant Dubey 
5. Smt. Sunita Duggal 
6. Shri Jayadev Galla 
7. Shri S. Jagathrakshakan 
8. Smt. Raksha Nikhil Khadse 
9. Dr. Sukanta Majumdar 
10. Shri P. R. Natarajan 
11. Shri Santosh Pandey 
12. Dr. Gaddam Ranjith Reddy 
13. Shri Sanjay Seth 
14. Shri Ganesh Singh 
15. Shri Parvesh Sahib Singh 
16. Shri Shatrughan Prasad Sinha 
17. Shri L.S. Tejasvi Surya 
18. Dr. T. Sumathy (A) Thamizhachi Thangapandian 
19. Dr. M. K. Vishnu Prasad 
20. VACANT* 
21. VACANT** 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha 
22. Dr. Anil Agrawal 
23. Dr. Laxmikant Bajpayee 
24. Dr. John Brittas 
25. Shri Syed Nasir Hussain 
26. Shri Ilaiyaraaja 
27. Shri Jaggesh 
28. Shri Praful Patel 
29. Shri Kartikeya Sharma 
30. Shri Jawhar Sircar 
31. Shri Lahar Singh Siroya 
Secretariat 
 
1. Shri Satpal Gulati     - Additional Secretary 
2. Smt. A. Jyothirmayi     - Director 
3. Smt. Rinky Singh                       - Executive Officer 
_____________________________________________________________________ 
Committee constituted w.e.f. 13 th September, 2023 vide Para No.7371 of Bulletin P art-II dated                  
16th September, 2023. 
* Col. Rajyavardhan Singh Rathore resigned from Lok Sabha w.e.f. 06th December, 2023.  
** Smt. Mahua Moitra ceased to be a Member of the Lok Sabha w.e.f. 08th December, 2023. 

 
 
INTRODUCTION 
  I, the Chairp erson, Standing Committee on Communications and Information 
Technology (2023-24), having been authorized by the Committee do present the Fifty -
sixth Report on the Subject ―Regulation of Cable Television in India‖  relating to the 
Ministry of Information and Broadcasting.  
2.  The Standing Committee on Communications and Information Technology 
(2023-24) selected this subject for detailed examination and Report to the Parliament. 
The representatives of the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting tendered  evidence 
before the Committee on the subject on 14th December, 2023. 
3.  The Comm ittee at their Sitting held on 06 February, 2024  considered and 
adopted the Report. The Committee wish to express their thanks to the representatives 
of the Ministry of Informatio n and Broadcasting, Department of Telecommunications, 
Telecom Regulatory Authority of India (TRAI) and All India Digital Cable Federation 
(AIDCF) who tendered their evidence before the Committee and furnished valuable 
information. 
4.  The Committee also pl ace on record their appreciation for the invaluable 
assistance rendered by the officials of Lok Sabha Secretariat attached to the 
Committee.   
5.  For facility of reference and convenience the Observations/Recommendations of 
the Committee have been printed in bold in Part-II of the Report. 
 
 
 
New Delhi;    PRATAPRAO  JADHAV, 
       06  February, 2024 Chairperson, 
       17  Magha, 1945 (Saka) Standing Committee on  
Communications and Information Technology. 

 
 

1 
 
REPORT 
PART - I 
I. INTRODUCTION 
 
The Media and E ntertainment (M&E) sector in India includes cable Television 
(TV), broadcasting, film, print, digital media, and advertising and this sector has 
witnessed significant growth over the years. According to a report by the Federation of 
Indian Chambers of Commerce and Industry (FICCI) and consulting firm Ernst & young 
(EY), the M&E sector is expected to reach Rs. 2.83 trillion by 2025. The cable TV 
industry has played a crucial role in this growth. Moreover, as stated by TRAI in its 
Annual Report, the Indian Ca ble industry has roughly grown about 5% i.e. from INR 
68,500 crores in 2020 -21 to INR 72,000 crores in 2021 -22. This growth is due to 
increase in advertisement revenue. The subscription revenue on the other hand has 
seen a decline from INR 43,400 crores in  2020-21 to 40,700 crores in 2021 -22. This 
decline is mainly attributable to the advent of newer technologies like OTT platforms. 
2. The cable TV industry in India has been an  integral part of the M&E sector and 
has made a significant contribution to the country's GDP. As per Annual Report of TRAI, 
the year-wise subscriber base of Cable TV for the past few years is as follows:  
Year Subscribers (in millions)  
2018 98.5 
2019 103 
2020 100.9 
2021 67 
 
3. The components of the Cable TV industry in India, as provi ded by the Ministry of 
Information and Broadcasting, are as follows:- 
(i) Cable Operators : Cable operators are the primary providers of cable TV 
services in India. They operate cable networks that transmit television signals to 
homes and other establishments. Cable operators are responsible for laying the 
cables, maintaining the network infrastructure, and providing customer support. 
 
(ii) Multi-System Operators (MSOs) : MSOs are companies that operate cable 
networks in multiple locations or cities. They ser ve as intermediaries between 
content providers and cable operators, providing programming to cable 
operators for distribution to their customers. MSOs also provide value -added 
services such as broadband and digital services to their customers. 

2 
 
 
(iii) Broadcasters: Broadcasters are companies that create and produce 
television programming. They sell their content to cable operators and MSOs for 
distribution to viewers. Broadcasters may also own and operate their own cable 
networks. 
 
(iv) Set-Top Box (STB) Man ufacturers: Set-top box manufacturers produce the 
hardware devices that decode cable signals and display television programming 
on TV screens. STBs are typically leased to customers by cable operators or 
MSOs. 
 
(v) Regulatory Bodies : Regulatory bodies such  as the Telecom Regulatory 
Authority of India (TRAI) and the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting (MIB) 
regulate the cable TV industry in India. The registration of MSOs and LCOs are 
done under the Cable Television Networks (Regulation) Act, 1995.  
 
4. The Broadcasting and Cable sector comprises of Broadcasters, Distribution 
Platform Operators (DPOs), and Local Cable Operators (LCOs) to provide satellite 
television services to the consumers.  As on 01.01.2022 , there were 995 MSOs 
registered with the Minist ry and as per data of Department of Posts, there are 81,706 
LCOs operating in the country. An overview of the Broadcasting and Cable TV sector is 
as under:-  
Snapshot of Broadcasting Sector 
S.NO Particulars As on September 
2023 
1 Number of Private Satell ite TV Channels permitted 
by Ministry of Information and Broadcasting(MIB) 
i) Uplinking only -11 
ii) Downlinking only -67 
iii) Both Uplinking & downlinking -837 
915 
2 Number of Pay Channels 
i) SD Pay Channels -257 
ii) HD Pay Channels -104 
361 
3 Number of FTAChannels 543 
4 Number of Broadcasters (approximately) 332 
5 Number of Pay Broadcasters 42 
6 Number of FTA Broadcasters (approximately) 290 
7 Number of FM Radio Service Providers 36 
8 Number of private FM Radio Stations 
(Operational) 
388 

3 
 
9 Advertisement Revenue of F M Radio Service 
Providers 
408.37 crore 
10 Number of Community RadioStations 
(Operational) 
465 
11 Number of Pay DTH Operators 4 
12 Number of Multi-System Operators registered with 
MIB 
998 
13 Number of Cable Operators 81706 
14 Total Active DTH Subscribers 64.18 million 
15 IPTV Subscribers 5,88,138 
 
Other Particulars March 2023* 
Cable TV Households* 64 million 
HITS Subscribers* 02 million 
DD Free Dish households 50 million** 
TV Revenue in the year 2022* 70,900 Crores 
Subscription Revenue in the year 2022* 39, 200 Crores 
Advertisement Revenue in the year 2022*  31,800 Crores 
* As per the Industry Report - FICCI EY Report (April 2023) titled ―Windows of opportunity -
India‘s media & entertainment sector – maximizing across segments‖ 
** As per Industry Estimates 
5. In a TV service value chain, the broadcaster is responsible for uplinking the 
signals of their television channel to a satellite in an encrypted form. The distributor then 
receives these signals from the satellite and decodes them using the dec oder provided 
by the broadcaster. The distributor is typically a company such as a Multiple System 
Operator (MSO), a Direct -to-Home (DTH) operator, a Headend -In-The-Sky (HITS) 
operator, or an Internet Protocol Television (IPTV) operator. Once the distribut or has 
received and decoded the signals, they process and merge the TV channel signals of 
multiple broadcasters and platform services. After merging these signals, the distributor 
encrypts the combined signals and retransmits them further, either directly or through 
the local cable operator (LCO), to the customer. This process ensures that the customer 
receives a clear and uninterrupted signal from the television channel. 
6. An MSO receives the signals of different television channels, combines the same 
and transmits this combined feed to multiple Local Cable Operators. MSOs stand at the 
middle point in the hierarchy of the cable services sector between the broadcasters on 
one side and local cable operators on the other. The MSOs established head -ends in 

4 
 
metros and major towns to receive TV signals from different TV broadcasters, 
aggregate and distribute these signals to LCOs, who further transmit it to subscribers 
through cables. In some instances, MSOs also provide the services directly to their 
consumers. Following is a pictorial representation of the Cable TV Network. 
 
Fig-1: Network diagram of Cable TV Network 
 
 
II. REGULATION OF CABLE TELEVISION IN INDIA 
 
A. Act and Rules - Administered by the MIB 
7. For regulating the cable television, the Ministry of Information a nd Broadcasting 
(MIB) has enacted the following Act and Rules and administering the same.  
(i) Cable Television Networks (Regulation) Act 1995  
(ii) Cable Television Network Rules 1994  
 
 
8. ‗The Cable Television Networks (Regulation) Act, 1995‘, comprising five chapters 
and 24 sections, includes guidelines for cable networks operating within the country. 
The Act outlines provisions for mandatory registration of cable operators, categorizing 
them into Multi -System Operators and Local Cable Operators. The Ministry of 
Information and Broadcasting serves as the registering authority for Multi -System 
Operators whereas registering authority for Local Cable Operators (LCOs) is the Head -
Post office of the area in which LCOs intend to operate. The specific eligibility criterion  

5 
 
for these operators has been included in the Cable Television Networks Rules, 1994.  A 
significant aspect of the Cable Television Networks (Regulation) Act, 1995 is the 
regulation of content through the Programme and Advertisement Codes. 
9. Initially enacted to safeguard subscriber interests and prevent the transmission of 
content against national interests, the Act has undergone amendments to adapt to 
evolving technologies and industry dynamics. One crucial amendment in 2011 
introduced Section 4A, empowering the Central Government to mandate cable 
operators to transmit or re -transmit programs in an encrypted form through digital 
addressable systems (DAS). This led to the phased implementation of digitization in 
cable networks, concluding successfully in 2017. 
10. The CTN Act, 1995 has  also undergone amendments through the Jan Vishwas 
Act, 2023. These amendments have replaced the previous stringent measures of 
imprisonment and fixed fines with a more flexible approach, allowing for warnings, 
advisories, or fines up to INR 20,000 for the first offense. The Act further adopts a 
progressive penalty system, imposing escalating fines, up to INR 1 lakh, for repeated 
offenses within a three -year period. In cases of persistent violations, the designated 
officer is empowered to cancel registration, albeit after providing a fair opportunity for a 
hearing. This comprehensive set of reforms reflects a commitment to modernize CTN 
enforcement, adapting to the evolving television landscape while safeguarding 
individual rights throughout the process. 
11. On the need for amendment of the CTN Act, 1995, the Ministry of information 
and Broadcasting replied as under:- 
―Parity with other emerging technologies such as OTT has been the constant 
demand of the cable TV industry. The differential t reatment of the content over 
different platforms (such as Programme Code and Advertisement Code for TV 
channels and IT Rules, 2021 for content over internet) is one of the primary 
reasons for distinctive features for each of the broadcasting services.  
The Cable Television Networks (Regulation) Act, 1995 may be amended 
primarily focusing on creating a level playing field for all broadcasting service. 
There is need to address the needs of satellite based technologies which are 
being regulated through the old  legislation. This Ministry has prepared a draft 
Broadcasting Services (Regulation) Bill, 2023 which is currently present in 
public domain for comments of stakeholders/general public. This proposed 
legislation aims to serve as a comprehensive framework gov erning various 

6 
 
broadcasting services and emerging technologies‖.  
12. It has been noted from the website of the Ministry of Information and 
Broadcasting the last date for seeking suggestions/feed back/comments/inputs/views 
from general public/ stakeholders on t he draft ‗Broadcasting Services (Regulation) Bill, 
2023‘ was 15.01.2024. 
 
B. TRAI‟s Regulatory Framework for Broadcasting & Cable TV Sector 
13. On 9th January 2004, t he Government notified ‗Broadcasting services and cable 
services to be telecommunications service ‘ in accordance with the proviso to clause (k) 
of Sub-section (1) of Section 2 of the Telecom Regulatory Authority of India Act, 1997 
(TRAI Act). This notification enabled Telecom Regulatory Authority of India (TRAI) to 
regulate the Broadcasting and Cable Services. As per the provisions of the TRAI Act (as 
amended) TRAI has two types of functions, that is Regulatory and Recommendatory.   
TRAI has issued several recommendations for the orderly growth o f the Cable 
Television industry and has notified several r egulations and Tariff Order from time to 
time for enabling growth of the b roadcasting and cable TV sector. Telecom Regulatory 
Authority of India (TRAI)  is the authority which  oversees issues pertaining to tariff, 
quality of service (QoS), and interconnecti on arrangements among different service 
providers in accordance with the TRAI Act of 1997.  
14. The Cable Television sector underwent transformation to Digital Addressable 
System that was completed in March 2017. Therefore, TRAI notified the Regulatory 
Framework for ‗Digital Addressable Systems‘ in March 2017 after due consultations that 
lasted for more than one and half years. This framework was duly implemented on 29 
December 2018 after satisfying the legal challenges. The framework (as amended) 
comprised the following Tariff Order and Regulations: 
i. The Telecommunication (Broadcasting and Cable) Services (Eighth) 
(Addressable Systems) Tariff Order (Tariff Order); 
ii. The Telecommunication (Broadcasting and Cable) Services 
Interconnection (Addressable Systems) Regul ations, (Interconnection 
Regulations); 

7 
 
iii. The Telecommunication (Broadcasting and Cable) Services Standards 
of Quality of Service and Consumer Protection (Addressable Systems) 
Regulations, (QoS Regulations). 
[Hereinafter, the two Regulations & the Tariff orde r are collectively referred to as ‘the 
Regulatory Framework]: 
15. Primary objectives of the regulatory framework are to ensure- 
(i) Transparency, non-discrimination, non-exclusivity for all stakeholders 
in value chain; 
(ii) Adequate and real choice to subscribers/customers and; 
(iii) Alignment of commercial interests of broadcasters and distributors of 
television channels to enable the distributors of television channels to 
recover their network and distribution cost and the broadcasters to 
monetize their channel prices; and 
(iv) Reduction in disputes among stakeholders. 
16. Salient features of the above three extant regulatory framework are as follows: 
(i) Telecommunication (Broadcasting and Cable Services) (Eighth) 
(Addressable Systems) Tariff Order, 2017 [aka Tariff Order] 
 A common tari ff framework for all addressable systems namely 
DTH, Digital Cable TV (DAS), HITS and IPTV. 
 Broadcasters to declare maximum retail price(MRP)(excluding 
taxes)of their a-la-carte pay channels for subscribers. No ceiling 
on the MRP of a channel. 
 A broadcaster can also offer bouquets of its pay channels and 
declare MRP (excluding taxes) of bouquets for subscribers. 
However, MRP of such bouquet(s) of pay channels will not be 
less than 55% of the sum of maximum retail price of the a -la-
carte pay channels forming part of the bouquet. 
 No channels with MRP more than Rs. 19/- is permitted to be put 
in a bouquet 
 Separate bouquet for Pay and Free to Air channels. 
 Charges payable by a subscriber for network capacity and 
content have been separated. 
 Monthly Network Capac ity Fee (NCF) of maximum Rs. 130 
(excluding taxes) per set top box, to be paid by a subscriber to 
the distributor of television channels for a capacity of 200 SD 
channels. 
 NCF of maximum Rs. 160/- for more than 200 SD channels 
 NCF for 2nd & subsequent TV c annot be more than 40% of 
declared NCF for 1st TV connection. 
 Subscribers can choose different sets of channels for each TV 
connection in a multi-TVhome. 

8 
 
 Flexibility for DPOs to declare different NCFs for different 
geographical regions/areas within its servicearea. 
 DPOs may offer discounts on NCF and DRP on long term 
subscriptions. 
 Any bouquet, formed by either the broadcaster or the distributor 
of television channels will not contain HD and SD variants of the 
same channel as well as any premium channel. 
(ii) Telecommunication (Broadcasting and Cable Services) 
Interconnection (Addressable Systems) Regulations, 2017 – [aka 
Interconnection Regulations] 
 A common interconnection framework for all addressable 
systems namely DTH, HITS, DAS andIPTV. 
 ―Must carry‖ provision for all addressable systems, on first come 
first serve basis. Distributor of television channels to publish 
information about its platform including available capacity and 
declare the rate of carriage fee. 
 The interconnection agreements to be signed in accordance 
with the reference interconnection offer(RIO). 
 Reduced amount of carriage fee - 20 paise per subscriber per 
month for SD channels with a cap of Rs. 4 lakh per month 
payable by a broadcaster to  a DPO in a month for carrying a 
channel in the country. 
 Broadcaster to offer to a distributor, a minimum of 20% of the 
maximum retail price of its pay channel(s) or bouquet(s) of pay 
channels as distribution fee. 
 Broadcaster to offer discounts on the maximum retail price 
provided that the sum of discounts a nd distribution fee in no 
case shall exceed 35% of the maximum retail price, so 
declared. 
 DPOs to provide Monthly Subscribers Report to broadcasters 
on weekly basis. 
 Standard format of application for distributor of television 
channels for obtaining signal s of television channel(s) from 
broadcaster and standard format of application for a 
Broadcaster for access of network from distributor for re -
transmission of a television channel(s). 
 Format of subscription report to be provided by a distributor of 
television channels to a Broadcaster including free to air 
channels. 
 The framework for subscription audit &technical audits. 
 Extension of Model Interconnection Agreement (MIA) and 
Standard Interconnection Agreement (SIA) framework 
applicable for MSOs to HITS and IPTV operators. 

9 
 
(iii) Standards of Quality of Service and Consumer Protection (Digital 
Addressable Systems) Regulations, 2017 – [aka Quality of service & 
Consumer Protection Regulations] 
 Common framework for standard of QoS and consumer 
protection across digital  addressable platforms viz DTH,DAS, 
IPTV,HITS. 
 Choice of subscription to a -la-carte channels and bouquets of 
channels by subscribers have been simplified. 
 Simplification of consumer premises equipment /Set top Box 
schemes. 
 Publicity of services using a des ignated link on the website of 
the DPOs called ―Consumer Corner‖. 
 Simplification of Consumer Application Form (CAF)and 
encouraging use of electronic CAF. 
 Subscribers can get services temporarily suspended for up to 
three months in a year. 
 Mandatory provision to record the consent of the subscribers for 
any change in the subscribed packages. 
 Protection of consumer interest in case of prolonged and 
continued disruption in service beyond 72hrs. 
 As per data provided by some DPOs, the average consumer 
price increase from 2019 to 2023 is not more than 4% on annual 
basis. 
17. Some of the salient aspects of the Interconnection Regulations 2017 and the 
Tariff Order 2017 relating to Broadcasters, DPOs and for consumers are as follows:- 
For Broadcasters 
 For the first time since 2004, Broadcasters had full flexibility to price 
their TV channels. Broadcasters could now fix the Maximum Retail 
Price (MRP) of a pay channel for consumers.  
 Price caps which were introduced in 2004 as an ad-hoc measure in the 
analogue mode and fixi ng of rates of channels by broadcasters 
keeping frozen analogue rates as the basis in the addressable system 
were removed. A broadcaster could price its channels and fix MRP for 
the consumer under complete forbearance. 
 Flexibility was also provided to a br oadcaster to offer bouquet of 
channels for the consumers and prescribe MRP of the same.  
 The bouquets offered by the broadcasters to consumers would be 
provided by the DPOs to the consumers without any alteration in 
composition of the bouquets.  
 For Channels a ―Must carry‖ provision was prescribed for all types of 
distribution platforms, thereby removing entry barrier for any 
broadcaster. All DPOs were required to publish an RIO giving details of 
carriage fee. Transparent and slab-wise pricing of channel carriage fee 

10 
 
was mandated, thereby benefitting a broadcaster who got more eye -
balls. 
 Mandatory provision of Electronic Program Guide (EPG) to ensure that 
prices and other details of all the channels were available to the 
consumers transparently. 
 To ensure th e smooth revenue flow in the value chain and thereby 
reducing the disputes, a provision of mandatory and transparent third 
party audits of DPOs to ensure true reporting of subscriber base was 
provided.  
 
For DPOs 
 Broadcasters were mandated to publish a RIO  giving transparent and 
non-discriminatory terms including discounts (if any) based on 
measurable parameters. This would enable DPOs in getting non -
discriminatory deals on a transparent basis and scope of disputes 
would be reduced. 
 DPOs were empowered as t hey could now sign and send the RIO 
published by any broadcaster and it is treated as a binding agreement.  
 Standard format for subscription reports by DPOs and Audit 
mechanism was provided. 
 Independent source of revenue for DPOs in form of Network Capacit y 
fee included so that they could upgrade their network and services. 
 It is pertinent to note that the cost of channel and cost of network had 
been made independent of each other. 
 
 
 
For Consumers 
 The consumer became the real decision maker of what she/he views 
and had complete freedom to choose what he/she wished to watch 
and pay only for that. It was mandated that all channels had to be 
offered on a -la-carte basis and the MRP has to be declared. Same 
way, the MRP of the Bouquet had to be published. 
 Flexibility had been given to the DPOs to drop such channels which did 
not command reasonable subscription thereby increasing the capacity 
to carry more channels of the consumer‘s choice. 
 Consumer was not required to pay any subscription fee for a FTA 
channel if he subscribed to one. 
 The service providers were mandated to give full information regarding 
channel prices on Electronic Program Guide.  
 Consumer would get clarity of the product offered and was not fleeced 
by smart packaging. It was mandated that FTA ch annels can‘t be 
clubbed with Pay channels in a Bouquet. Further, HD channels can‘t 
be clubbed with the SD version of the same channel, so that the 
consumer had complete clarity with respect to what is on offer. 
 A transparent and rationalized pricing struct ure for the consumers: In 
the new framework, the pricing of TV channels has been separated 

11 
 
from the distribution cost incurred by DPO. The broadcaster would now 
fix the maximum retail price of its TV channels for the consumers. The 
DPOs could not now sell the TV channels to consumer above the MRP 
fixed by the broadcasters. The Free -to-air channels would now be 
actually free for the consumers as he/she would not be required to pay 
any subscription fee for FTA channels. It is to be noted that the retail 
price forbearance for TV channels has been continued in this model 
also, the only difference is that instead of fixing of the MRP by DPO in 
the old regime, the MRP would now be fixed by the broadcaster in the 
new regime. Further, the DPO is to recover its distr ibution costs, it 
would now charge the network capacity fee from the consumer 
separately. Therefore, each stakeholder in the value chain has been 
made the master of its own product. Broadcaster has been made the 
master of its channel while DPO has been mad e master of its network. 
In this fashion, this model addressed the malaise of irrationality and 
opaqueness in the pricing of TV channels to consumers, and at the 
same time, it ensures independent revenue streams for both DPOs 
and Broadcasters. 
 Real and mea ningful choice for consumers:  The new framework 
provides for various safeguards for consumers against illusory pricing 
and gives the freedom to the consumer to choose the channels that he 
wishes to see and pay only for that.  
 Non-discrimination and transpa rency :In the new framework, 
broadcaster has been mandated to publish on its website a Reference 
Interconnect Offer (RIO) for providing signals of its channels to the 
DPOs. This RIO would be the basis of all the interconnection 
agreements to be signed betw een broadcaster and DPOs. The 
discount (if any) has to be offered in the RIO itself based on objective, 
transparent and measurable parameters. This would enable DPOs in 
getting a non -discriminatory deal and it would infuse transparency in 
the sector and re duce the litigations/disputes. The mandate under the 
impugned regulations that all the interconnection agreement between 
the broadcaster and distributor would be signed on the basis of 
Reference Interconnect Offer (RIO) and the discount offered in RIO 
has to be objective, transparent and measurable parameters, would 
ensure transparency and reduce litigations that have plagued the 
sector since long. Thus the new framework provides for clarity, 
transparency, non -discrimination and gives the power to select an d 
decide to the consumer. The new framework creates a balance 
wherein, must provide provisions ensure that a broadcaster has to 
mandatorily give channel to each DPO, must carry provision ensures 
that no DPO denies carrying any broadcasters‘ channel and 
transparent MRP declaration for the benefit of consumers‖. 
 
III. CONSTRAINTS/CHALLENGES FACED WITH RESPECT TO CABLE TV 
REGULATION IN INDIA 

12 
 
18. Asked about the constraints/challenges faced by the Ministry of Information and 
Broadcasting with respect to cable TV regulat ion in India and action taken to address 
them, they informed as under:-  
(i) Under-reporting of subscribers by cable operators : The cable operators' 
practice of under -reporting their subscriber numbers has posed a significant 
challenge to the effective reg ulation of the industry. This behavior has led to 
various issues, including tax evasion and the submission of inaccurate financial 
returns. The number of subscribers can be verified from the audit mechanism 
stipulated under Regulation 15(1) of TRAI‘s Inter connection Regulations, 2017. 
Based on the reports from TRAI, the Ministry has identified Non -Compliant 
MSOs who have failed to get their annual audit done. The MSO registrations of 
over 700 MSOs have been cancelled after giving an opportunity of hearing.  
(ii) Absence of oversight mechanism : Absence of robust oversight mechanism 
at the ground level serve as major roadblock in ensuring compliance to the 
relevant regulations/guidelines. The monitoring of content transmitted by cable 
operators is essential to  ensure compliance to the provisions of the Cable 
Television Networks (Regulation) Act, 1995. To ensure monitoring at ground 
level, Prasar Bharati has been entrusted to observe the carriage of mandatory 
channels (as per Section 8 of the Cable Television Ne tworks (Regulation) Act, 
1995) by MSOs. Prasar Bharati shares reports of over 100 MSOs monthly and 
based on these reports, Ministry takes action against the violators.  
Absence of central database for Local Cable Operators : Local Cable Operators 
(LCOs) are  currently registered at the local head post office of their area of 
operations. The registration process is offline/manual. Due to this, there is no 
central database for them. This has resulted as a major constraint in initiating 
action against any reported contravention by them. This Ministry is in process of 
amending the Cable Television Networks Rules, 1994 to make the LCO 
registration process online with this Ministry as the registering authority. This 
step is expected to streamline the LCO registration process.  
19. TRAI while making its submissions about the concerns that were raised by 
various stakeholders under the old regulatory framework stated that:- 
(i) Concerns raised by Broadcasters 
• There was a Freeze/ cap on wholesale rate(s) of the channels 
between broadcasters and distributors (B2B) since 2004. This led to 
distortions in pricing of channels. Another factor impinging the sector 
was the non -addressable systems for Cable Television causing 
unreliable reporting of subscription data. The price freeze a nd 
unreliable subscription data was impinging the growth of sector. As 
there was a provision for mutually negotiated deals, most of the 
industry was operating on negotiated deals between broadcasters and 
distribution platform owners.  

13 
 
• Broadcasters were p ricing their channels for DPOs at whole -sale 
levels and that too at 35% of the analogue rates (42% under orders of 
Hon‘ble Supreme Court). The DPOs would retail them under 
forbearance and give it to customers at their own prices. Even Free 
To Air (FTA) cha nnels were being sold at certain price as Pay 
channels by DPOs. 
• Price ceiling of the channels was based on the analogue era, which 
was about to come to an end. Prices so arrived at were unrealistic 
and mainly based on undeclared number of subscribers. Th is was 
required to be corrected properly in the Digital Addressable System. 
• There was entry barrier for new channels/ broadcasters, as DPOs 
used to demand exorbitant carriage fees. Transparent carriage regime 
did not exist. TRAI 2017 Framework introduced  Must carry provision, 
thereby ensuring transparency.   
• There was an irrational retail pricing structure where in some cases, 
FTA channels were offered to consumers at a price more than the 
price of a pay channel. Pricing of FTA channels was affecting 
acceptability by the consumers and thereby impacting eyeballs and 
advertisement revenue of broadcasters. 
• An adequate mechanism was absent for subscription report and audit. 
As such even though the system was addressable, implementation 
was difficult. 
• Lack of adequate investment in the distribution infrastructure was 
limiting the growth of the broadcasters and consumers viewing 
experience. 
• Non-level playing field for new and small broadcasters. 
(ii) Concerns raised by Distribution Platform Operators (DPOs) 
• In spite of making huge investments in the up -gradation/ expansion of 
the distribution networks to make everything digital there was lack of 
independent business model/ source of revenue and return on 
investment made. 
• There was no independent source of r evenue for DPOs to recover 
their distribution costs, which was affecting business viability of the 
DPOs. As a result, growth was stifled and quality of networks also 
suffered. The lack of revenue realization did not allow introduction of 
new services which  were expected from the digitalization of the 
network. 
• There was variation in average payout per subscriber to broadcasters 
by various DPOs. Example: net payment per subscribers to 
broadcasters by MSOs was lesser than by DTH operators.  
• Rampant discrim ination existed in deals/ agreements for availing 
channels from broadcasters. Broadcasters discriminated between 
similarly placed DPOs. Mutual negotiations completely dehors the 
Reference Interconnect Offer (RIO) were entered into which were not 
known to o ther similarly placed DPOs. Thus, there was non -
transparency and non -discrimination in provisioning of channels by 

14 
 
Broadcasters. Failure to enter into mutual negotiations forced DPOs 
to take channels on RIO rates which had unrealistic rates. Thus, 
Mutual n egotiations and exorbitantly high RIO prices of a -la-carte 
channels vis -à-vis the negotiated cost per subscriber (CPS) were 
used as a tool by broadcasters to discriminate among DPOs. 
• Non-transparency in offering of value and parameters of discounts by 
Broadcasters. 
• Imposition of unreasonable conditions by broadcasters on DPOs 
thereby impacting level playing field and resulting in huge number of 
litigation. 
• Discrimination by Broadcasters was leading to the creation of a 
monopoly in favour of a few DPOs, hurting small and new DPOs. 
• In spite of having the permission from the Government, it was very 
difficult for a DPO to expand its area of operations due to delays/ 
obstacles in signing of the interconnection agreements with 
broadcasters. 
(iii) Concerns of Consumers  
• Lack of freedom to select channels either on a -la-carte basis or on 
bouquet basis due to illusory, unrealistic and exorbitantly high prices, 
thereby discouraging the consumers from choosing them. The same 
channels along with certain unwanted chan nels would be offered in a 
bouquet at extremely low prices. Thus, Consumers were indirectly 
forced to subscribe unwanted channels and the practice of taking 
channels on a -la-carte was discouraged. The real objective of 
addressability that consumers can get  channels on a -la-carte basis 
and pay only for what they wish to subscribe was defeated. 
• The consumer was taken for a ride by creating mixed packs of free-to-
air channels and pay channels in one bouquet. 
• Similarly by adding HD and SD version of same ch annel in one 
bouquet an illusory benefit is created, as a customer watches only 
one version i.e. either SD or HD but would land up paying for both the 
versions of the same channel. 
• Information deficit regarding pricing of the TV Channels. 
• No uniformity  in the quality -of-service parameters among different 
platforms. 
• Near monopolistic behavior by the existing broadcasters led to 
restrictive choice of channel to the consumers. 
20. However, when asked about the constraints/challenges faced with respect to 
cable TV regulation in India TRAI, in their written reply they submitted as under:-  
―No constraints/challenges are being faced with respect to regulation of Cable 
TV in India. 
In January 2004, regulation of Broadcasting and Cable Services came under 
the ambit of TRAI. Since then, TRAI has notified several Regulations and Tariff 
Orders from time to time. These Regulations and Orders have enabled 

15 
 
harmonization, transparency, level playing field and growth of the sector. 
Consumers have also benefitted from these  regulations and Orders resulting in 
effective reduction in tariff and enhanced choice for selection of desired 
channels‖. 
21. Further, with respect to the major issues concerning various players of Cable TV 
industry viz. broadcasters, MSOs, LCOs, consumers etc., TRAI replied that they engage 
with all the stakeholders on regular basis from time -to-time to identify and address the 
issues. All the issues identified are duly analyzed for wider impact on the sector. The 
issues requiring changes in policy/ regulatio ns are also examined in -depth. They follow 
an elaborate consultation process before issuing any recommendation/ regulations. The 
issues are submitted by the stakeholders from time -to-time. In addition, TRAI 
constituted a committee to deliberate on the issu es relating to sector in November 2021 
comprising of all stakeholders including representatives of MSOs, DTH service 
providers and Broadcasters. The issues identified by the committee are enumerated in 
the Record of Discussions.  Major issues are listed below:  
a. Revision in the ceiling of Network Capacity Fee (NCF) of Rs 130/-. 
b. In case of multi -TV home, broadcaster should also offer MRP of their 
channels for each additional TV connection, beyond the first TV connection, 
@ 40% of the MRP declared for the firs t TV connection. This will help 
consumers in saving cost of subscribing pay channels on multiple 
televisions.  
c. Removal of bundling restrictions, for example, offering of Pay and FTA 
channels in one bouquet.  
d. The minimum subscription period for a channel by  a subscriber should be a 
month, as the published MRP are per month.  
e. Provide an effective solution to the problem of rampant under reporting. 
Need to include CAS, SMS & Mux vendors under the ambit of TRAI.  
f. Provision of DPO caused Subscriber Audit as per Regulation 15(1) of 
Interconnection Regulations 2017 should be scrapped and only Broadcaster 
Caused Audit as per Interconnection Regulations 2017should be allowed.  
g. When MSOs form bouquets, they are costlier as compared to bouquets 
formed by broadcasters a s they get channels on a -la-carte price or MRP. 
Hence, there is no parity in bouquets formed by broadcasters and MSOs. It 
was suggested that the issue of ‗Re -introduction of Multi Broadcaster 
Bouquet‘ may not be considered. 

16 
 
h. MSOs should have the power to br eak the bouquets made by broadcasters 
and offer combination of such channels to consumers after breaking of 
bouquets.  
i. De-linking of DRP from MRP. MSOs should be authorized to charge higher 
price than MRP fixed by the broadcasters. 
j. The extent of discount ( 45%) permitted to broadcasters while forming 
bouquets provided should be reduced.  
k. RIOs between broadcasters and MSOs should be standardised. RIOs 
between DPOs and LCOs are already standardised. 
l. Review of provisions relating to audit and cancellation of li censes of DPO 
not conducting audit. 
m. Different NCF for different regions/subscribers. 
n. Review of the relation between HD and SD channels.  
o. Removing the concept of itemised bill (i.e. split of NCF, price of pay 
channels price and GST). 
p. Annual audits should not be mandatory for small MSOs. 
q. Some pay channels in the MSO platform are available free of cost on the 
free dish, due to this, customers are migrating from the cable connection to 
the DD free dish. Stakeholders demanded parity in both the platforms.  
r. Lower price on DTH services as compared with MSO services which affects 
their business. It was stated that in DTH service, the NCF part is very low 
as compared to NCF charged by the regional MSOs. 
s. Smaller MSOs are not capable enough to comply with requirements such 
as maintaining website or toll-free number. 
t. Rate of monthly subscription is same in urban as well as in rural areas 
irrespective of paying capacity of subscribers. In the Covid pandemic 
situation, the economical divide among Urban and Rural belt was m ore 
visible. Different Subscription rates within a Panchayat or Municipal Area 
may benefit the low-paying subscribers. 
u. There are challenges in strict ‗Genre‘ wise placement of channels, 
especially with respect to television channels showing multiple langua ge 
programs. 
v. Current model of revenue share between LCOs and MSOs needs review to 
ensure viability of LCOs.  
w. Some stakeholders have submitted issues related to content/ regulatory 
parity with OTT, cross-media ownership and license scrutiny of LCOs.  

17 
 
x. Increased cost of putting equipment on pole by LCOs due to high charges 
being levied by local authorities. 
22. ‗All India Digital Cable Federation (AIDCF)‘,  an association of major Multi-system 
Operators functioning in India  submitted the following concerns related  to the Cable 
industry:-  
(i) Cable TV Industry has lost approximately 45million subscriber base 
in last 5years i.e. from (110million in 2018 to 65 million in 2023) and, 
at present, it is witnessing a churn rate of 25% per year. 
(ii) Consumer interest & choice is g etting hindered due to Steep 
Increase (by400%) in satellite channel prices by broadcasters. 
(iii) Broadcasters are exponentially increasing the channel prices by 
misusing their channel pricing freedom, thereby forcing customers to 
opt for other internet platforms & Free Dish etc. 
(iv) Approximately 3lakh employees have already lost their livelihood in 
the last 4years due to the massive reduction in cable TV base. 
(v) Additionally, around 3 lakh work force is on the verge of losing their 
livelihood in cable TV industry acr oss India, if suitable measures 
were not taken 
(vi) Out of 1752 licensed MSOs, nearly 1000 MSOs have become non -
operational. LCO count has reduced from earlier 2lakhs to 1.5lakhs. 
(MIB has recently cancelled licenses of 885 MSOs, out of 1000 non -
operational MSOs) 
(vii) Industry is facing severe unfair competition from Free Dish and 
mushrooming OTT content platforms which are providing services 
almost free and are not regulated by any regulatory framework. 
(viii) 6,000 crore capital investment by MSOs in last 4years has alrea dy 
got wasted: Around 40 million set top boxes deployed by industry has 
been reduced to waste in the last 4 years @ 1500 Rs per box. 
(ix) The Cable TV industry will get extinct in next 5 years, if this trend 
continues. 
23. According to AIDCF, following key reforms were required for Cable TV for its 
survival:- 
(i) Restoration of DPOs (MSOs/DTH/HITS/IPTV) right to offer channels 
by choosing any channel from broadcaster‘s bouquets, which will 
reduce consumer subscription price by 20%.  
(ii) Content Parity should be established between Cable TV Platform and 
other platforms, wherein content must be available to DPOs on non -
discriminatory basis  
a. All the Content provider platforms should be covered under the 
ambit of Cable TV Act & TRAI regulations.  
b. Programming code should be  amended to include features like 
―Time Shift‖ and ―Parental Control‖ for Cable TV operators 

18 
 
(iii) Erroneous demand raised by DOT on multisystem /local cable 
operators (MSO‘s/LCO‘s) to the tune of 6600 Crs. on their cable 
revenue should be withdrawn.  
(iv) Erroneous GST demands, raised by DGGI, on MSOs regarding GST 
charges on the LCO‘s revenues shall be withdrawn.  
(v) If this trend continues the cable industry will get extinct in next 5 year   
24. When TRAI was a sked about the measures/initiatives taken by them to address 
the issues concerning various players of Cable TV industry, they replied as under:-  
―In order to address the critical issues as identified by the stakeholders‘ 
committee; TRAI issued the consultation paper on ‗Issues related to New 
Regulatory Framework for  Broadcasting and Cable services‘ on 7th May 2022 
for seeking stakeholders‘ comments. On the basis of this consultation TRAI, on 
22nd November 2022, notified the Telecommunication (Broadcasting and Cable) 
Services (Eighth) (Addressable Systems) Tariff (Third Amendment) Order, 2022 
and the Telecommunication (Broadcasting and Cable) Services (Addressable 
Systems) Interconnection Regulations (Third Amendment) Order, 2022. 
Further, in order to address various issues, TRAI has issued consultation paper 
titled ‗Review of Regulatory Framework for Broadcasting and Cable services‘ on 
23rd August 2023 seeking stakeholders‘ comments. The comments/ counter -
comments are being analyzed by TRAI‖. 
 
25. Some of the initiatives take by this Ministry of Information and Broadcastin g to 
ensure the growth of cable TV sector are as under:-  
(I) Renewal procedure for Multi -System Operators (MSOs) : The Cable 
Television Networks Rules, 1994 have been amended to provide streamlined 
procedures for Multi -System Operator (MSO) registration re newal, extending 
the period to ten years. This shall ensure the continuity of business for MSOs 
and services to consumers.   
 
(II) Last Mile Access to Broadband service providers : The above 
amendments include provisions for last mile access for broadband s ervice 
providers. This aims to enhance internet penetration, encouraging dual -use of 
infrastructure for cable TV and broadband services. Infrastructure sharing for 
broadband penetration shall result in additional rental revenues for the Local 
Cable Operators.  
 
(III) Regulatory Framework for Platform Services: Ministry of Information and 
Broadcasting has issued guidelines on platform services by Multi -System 
Operators (MSOs) on 30.11.2022. This initiative aims to enhance service 
quality, expand channel offerings, and encourage bundled packages, optimizing 
the cable TV and broadband service market. This initiative provides the twin 
benefits of recognition of PS channels as well as promotion regional content. 
 

19 
 
(IV) Sharing of Infrastructure: The Ministry issued guidelines on infrastructure 
sharing on 29.12.2021, permitting Multi -System Operators (MSOs) to share 
infrastructure, including headends and networks, under specific conditions. This 
shall promote ease of doing business by reducing the need of hefty inve stments 
in cable infrastructure.   
In addition some of the steps being undertaken to ensure sector‘s growth are as 
follows: 
 
(I) The draft Broadcasting Services (Regulation) Bill, 2023 : A consolidated 
legislation aimed to create a level -playing field for a ll broadcasting service 
providers has been framed by the Ministry and is currently undergoing public 
consultation.  
 
(II) Online registration for Local Cable Operators (LCOs) : Currently, LCO 
registration is done at the local head post office of the area of  operations of the 
LCO through offline/manual process.. The Ministry is developing an online 
portal for registration of LCOs. This will streamline the registration procedure for 
LCOs 
 
 
IV. PRICING POLICY OF CABLE TV AND ROLE OF TRAI 
26. Elaborating on the business model, sources of revenue and the size of human 
resources employed, the Ministry informed as under:- 
―The predominant business model used in the Indian Cable TV Industry is 
based on the subscription model. This means that customers are required to 
pay a subscription fee to access a range of TV channels and programs. This fee 
is collected by Local Cable Operators (LCOs) or Multi -System Operators 
(MSOs) who then distribute the revenue generated to various parties as per the 
terms agreed upon in interconnecti on agreements.  The interconnection 
agreements are contracts executed between the MSOs, LCOs, and 
broadcasters. These agreements outline the terms of service delivery, revenue 
sharing, and other related terms and conditions. The revenue generated from 
the subscription fees is distributed among the MSOs, LCOs, and broadcasters 
in accordance with these agreements. The revenue distribution is based on a 
pre-agreed percentage split, which is typically determined based on various 
factors such as the number and t ype of channels offered, the customer base, 
and other related factors. The revenue share is typically distributed in proportion 
to the value provided by each party in the delivery of TV services.  Some other 
sources of revenue available with these service providers include value -added 
services, revenue from advertisements, channel placement fee, hardware 
installation fee, etc. According to a report by the Federation of Indian Chambers 
of Commerce and Industry (FICCI), the cable TV industry in India employs 
approximately 15 lakh people directly and indirectly‖.  
 

20 
 
27. Asked about the perspective of the Ministry with respect to  levying of a license 
fee on the Annualized Gross R evenue associated with Cable TV alongwith the affect of 
this policy on the industry, they replied as under:- 
―In so far as Multi -System Operators (MSOs) and Local Cable Operators 
(LCOs) are concerned, there is only one time processing fee of Rs. 1,00,000/ - 
for MSOs and Rs. 500/ - for LCOs at the time of registration or renewal of 
registration. The Ministry has no intention of imposing a license fee that is 
anyhow related to the Annualized Gross Revenue associated with Cable TV 
industry‖. 
28. On the existing pricing policy of Cable TV and the role of TRAI with respect to the 
same, the Ministry replie d that in India, cable TV pricing is regulated by the Telecom 
Regulatory Authority of India (TRAI) under the framework known as the ‗New Tariff 
Order‘ (NTO). The latest order i.e. NTO 3.0 was introduced in 2022 to bring 
transparency and flexibility to cabl e TV pricing for consumers.  Under the NTO, the key 
points of the pricing policy are as follows:- 
a. Channel Pricing: Channels are categorized into two types: 
 
Free-to-Air (FTA) Channels: These channels are offered to viewers free of 
charge, and cable operators cannot charge any fee for them. 
 
Pay Channels: These channels are offered on a subscription basis, and viewers 
need to pay for individual channels or bouquets of channels. 
 
b. Channel Bouquet Pricing: Broadcasters and distribution platform operators 
(DPOs), such as cable and DTH service providers, are required to offer channel 
bouquets, which are bundles of channels grouped together. 
 
c. Network Capacity Fee (NCF) : DPOs can charge subscribers a Network 
Capacity Fee, which is the cost for the basic inf rastructure and delivery of 
channels. This fee is capped by TRAI to ensure affordability. 
 
d. MRP (Maximum Retail Price): Each pay channel and bouquet must have an 
MRP that is set by the broadcaster. Subscribers can select and pay for 
channels or bouquets based on these MRPs. 
29. Regarding the role of Telecom Regulatory Authority of India in pricing policy of 
Cable TV, the Ministry stated that (TRAI) is responsible for regulating and overseeing 
the telecommunications and broadcasting sectors in India. Its role includes formulating 
policies and regulations, ensuring fair competition, protecting consumer interests, 
setting pricing guidelines, and promoting transparency in telecommunications and cable 

21 
 
TV services. TRAI plays a crucial role in maintaining a healthy and competitive 
telecommunications and broadcasting ecosystem in the country. 
30. When asked about the measures taken by TRAI to control and monitor pricing 
and tariffs for cable TV subscribers, following was submitted- 
―The framework was quite successful in e stablishing harmonized business 
processes in the sector, level -playing-field, bringing -in transparency in TV 
channel pricing, reducing litigations among stakeholders and providing equal 
opportunities to smaller Multi System Operators (MSOs). However, after  a 
market survey in July -August 2019, the Authority considered it expedient to 
review some provisions. In order to address the identified issues of ‗the 
Regulatory Framework‘, the Authority, after due consultation, notified the 
amendments to the Regulatory  Framework 2017, on 1 st January 2020.  
However, some stakeholders challenged provisions of Tariff Amendment Order 
2020, Interconnection Amendment Regulations 2020 and QoS Amendment 
Regulations 2020 in various High Courts including in the Hon‘ble High Court  of 
Bombay and Kerala. Hon‘ble High Courts upheld the validity of Regulatory 
framework 2020 except for a few provisions. 
The provisions related to Network Capacity fee (NCF), multi-TV homes and long 
term subscriptions of amended Regulatory framework 2020, were implemented 
in April/ May 2020. The consumers started benefiting from the provision of a 
higher number of television channels in basic NCF and also the reduced NCF 
on second and subsequent television.  However, the provisions related to 
revision of te levision channels‘ prices in compliance with the January 2020 
amendments could not be implemented due to the legal challenge in Hon‘ble 
High Court of Bombay. The Hon‘ble High Court of Bombay upheld the 
amendment (except one of the provisions related to ave rage price in bouquets) 
in June 2021. However, the broadcasters filed an appeal in Hon‘ble Supreme 
Court. Hon‘ble Supreme Court after due consideration admitted the appeal but 
did not issue any interim order. Considering that no interim relief was granted by 
Hon‘ble Supreme Court on the judgment of Hon‘ble Bombay Court, the 
Authority issued a letter dated 12th October 2021 to the broadcasters seeking 
compliance with all the provisions of amended Regulatory Framework 2020 as 
upheld by Hon‘ble Court of Bombay  within 10 days. Consequently, most of the 
broadcasters submitted their Reference Interconnect Offer (RIOs) to TRAI in 
line with amended Regulatory Framework 2020 and also published these on 
their websites in November 2021. 
As per RIOs filed by the broadca sters in November 2021, the new tariffs 
reflected a common trend i.e., the prices of their most popular channels 
including sports channels were enhanced beyond Rs. 19/ - per month. 
Immediately after new tariffs were announced by the broadcasters, TRAI 
received representations from Distribution Platform Operators (DPOs), 
Associations of Local Cable Operators (LCOs) and Consumer Organisations 
stating that the new tariffs as announced by broadcasters would cause a huge 

22 
 
increase in consumer payout and will also entail wide scale changes 
necessitating large scale implementation efforts.  
DPOs (including All India Digital Cable Federation) highlighted difficulties likely 
to be faced by them in implementing new rates in their IT systems and migrating 
the consumers in bulk to the new tariff regime through the informed exercise of 
options, impacting almost all bouquets, due to upward revision in the rates of 
pay channels and bouquets. To deliberate on the various issues related to 
implementation of amended Regulatory f ramework 2020 and suggest a way 
forward, a committee consisting of members from Indian Broadcasting & Digital 
Foundation (IBDF), All India Digital Cable Federation (AIDCF) & DTH 
Association was constituted under the aegis of TRAI. The committee held 
discussions on 23rd December 2022. Stakeholders listed many issues which in 
their opinion required review. The Stakeholders‘ Committee, however, 
requested TRAI to immediately address critical issues which could remove the 
impediments for smooth implementation of  Tariff Amendment Order 2020. 
Stakeholders also listed other issues for subsequent consideration by TRAI. 
To address the critical issues as identified by stakeholders in Record of 
Discussion3, a consultation process was undertaken in May 2022. The 
Authority, after due consultation, notified the amendments, on 22nd November 
2022. The amendments have been duly implemented in January/ February 
2023. The said amendments dated 22nd November 2022 were challenged by 
one of the stakeholders in Hon‘ble High Court of  Kerala. The amendments were 
upheld by the Hon‘ble Court. 
As mentioned in Record of Discussions (RoD), the Stakeholders‘ Committee 
also listed other issues for subsequent consideration by TRAI. In addition, the 
Authority held multiple meetings with represe ntatives of broadcasters, MSOs, 
DTH operators and LCOs. Several issues were put forward during these 
meetings. In order to address the remaining issues, the Authority, has issued 
the consultation paper on "Review of Regulatory Framework for Broadcasting 
and Cable services" on 8thAugust 2023 seeking stakeholders' comments. 
With the Regulatory Framework in place, the DPOs are empowered as they can 
now sign and send the RIO published by any broadcaster and it is treated as a 
binding agreement. Broadcasters have been mandated to publish an RIO giving 
transparent and non -discriminatory terms including discounts (if any) based on 
measurable parameters. This enables DPOs in getting non -discriminatory deals 
on a transparent basis, thereby reducing the scope of dispu tes. Independent 
source of revenue for DPOs in form of Network Capacity fee brings business 
certainty and enables investment for upgradation of network. 
Consumers are greatly empowered by the Regulatory Framework. A consumer 
becomes the real decision maker  of what she/he views and has complete 
freedom to choose what he/she wishes to watch and pay only for that. Price of 
every television channel is clearly visible on the Electronic Program Guide on 
television. The consumer is not required to pay any subscrip tion fee for an FTA 
channel if she/ he subscribes to one. The amendments of January 2020 have 

23 
 
increased the number of SD channels from 100 to 200 in the Network Capacity 
fee (NCF) of maximum Rs. 130/- per month. Now NCF for 2ndTV connection (or 
subsequent connections) is not more than 40% of declared NCF per additional 
TV. 
For the Broadcasters, the Regulatory Framework provides for a reduced 
amount of carriage fee - 20 paise per subscriber per month for SD channels 
with a cap of Rs. 4 lakh per month payable  by a broadcaster to a DPO in a 
month for carrying a channel. Broadcasters get third party audited information 
on actual number of subscribers of their channels/ bouquets thereby increasing 
transparency and revenue assurance. Flexibility has also been prov ided to 
broadcasters to offer bouquet of channels for the consumers and prescribe 
MRP of the same. There is certainty in placement of channel (EPG)‖. 
31. However, a ccording to AIDCF, 30-year-old Cable TV Industry had a Negative 
35% growth in 4 years (from 190 Mn to 130 Mn including DTH), while India‘s GDP is 
growing 8% p.a. They also submitted that the industry that has 1 lakh self -employed 
LCOs and 10 la kh people is in dire situation. The Cable and Satellite industry invested 
over Rs 50,000 Cr. to convert all homes to digital TV and 35% of this investment has 
gone waste as subscribers can‘t afford the price hikes. All this was attributed to:-  
a. While TRAI implemented New Tariff Order Regulation 2017, to allow 
subscribers to pay only for the channels they watch a nd control their bills, 
however, with the subsequent amendments in 2020 & 2022, i.e. (NTO 2.0& 
NTO 3.0), TRAI has given complete forbearance to Broadcasters to price 
their channels at any level (except for a notional capping at Rs. 19, if the 
channels are to be included in Bouquet). 
b. The above forbearance is being misused by Broadcasters, as they have 
significantly increased their Pay TV channel Prices by up to 600% after 
implementation of New Tariff Order in 2019 and a further hike of up to 
200% in some cases after implementation of NTO 3.0, by force bundling all 
their channels, which is eventually becoming a burden on Pay TV 
subscriber.  
c. The broadcaster makes bouquet of channels (which include one or two 
driver channels and about 7 -8 unpopular channels) and  demands MSOs 
and DTH players to sell the same bouquet to minimum 90% of the 
subscriber base without breaking the bouquet.  MSO does not get the 
incentive if 90% of subscribers do not subscribe to the bouquet intact. This 
means a common man pays for 7 -8 un wanted channels which include 
English channels, sports channels (which have important events only 2 -3 
months in a year). 
32. Further, a ccording to AIDCF, the increase in prices of the channels was as 
illustrated below:- 

24 
 
Channel name Price on 31 st Jan 
2019 
Price on 1 st Feb 
2019 
% Increase 
Vijay TV Rs 2.25 Rs 17 655% 
Zee Marathi Rs 4.5 Rs 19 322% 
Zee Kannada Rs 4.19 Rs 19 353% 
Zee Bangla Rs 4.55 Rs 19 317% 
Zee Café Rs 4.5 Rs 15 233% 
Ten 1 Rs 8.43 Rs.19 125% 
KTV Rs 8.44 Rs 19 125% 
Zee Telugu Rs 5.84 Rs 19 225% 
Star Jalsha Rs 6.3 Rs 19 201% 
Gemini TV Rs5.79 Rs 19 228% 
Colors Kannada Rs 5.84 Rs 19 225% 
EV Rs5.61 Rs 17 202% 
Star world Rs 2.56 Rs.8 212% 
Zee Sarthak Rs4.99 Rs.19 280% 
Nick Rs 3.38  Rs 6 78% 
33. AIDCF, in their written submission , also stated that (i) the Cable TV monthly 
prices for the consumers have significantly increased from Rs. 200 -300 in 2017 -18 to 
Rs. 350-450 in 2022 -23; (ii) DPOs are forced to sell broadcaster‘s bouquets and A -la-
carte prices of the channel are artificially hiked, so t hat consumer is also forced to 
purchase bouquets only. They have also stated that TRAI consultation paper in 2019 
have pointed out this, but no action was taken to correct it. Providing reasons for their 
submission, following were submitted by AIDCF:- 
a. TRAI vide its regulations have created a bias by allowing broadcasters to 
provide 45% discount on channel prices on formation of bouquets , whereas 
there is no discounting on ala carte channels. DPOs are forced to sell those 
bouquets to the customers on as it i s basis, wherein the non -popular 
channels of the broadcasters are also provided to customers. This defeats 
the very purpose of digitalization. 
b. While a common man wants to watch an entertainment channel costing 
Rs.19, because of the bouquet, he is forced to  pay Rs 50-Rs 60 for a single 
broadcaster bouquet. For 4 broadcasters, the pay channel price alone is 
anywhere between Rs 200 - Rs300. This is in addition to the Network 
capacity fee which was reduced by 50% by allowing 200 channels instead 
of 100 channels for Rs 130. 
c. By allowing bundling of unpopular channels in bouquets and linking the 
distributor incentives to penetration of bouquets in the regulation by TRAI 
has increased the subscriber burden as subscribers are forced to pay for 
unwanted channels. 
34. During cross-examination by the Committee, AIDCF  submitted as under: 

25 
 
―These are just another couple of examples where we have taken that if a 
consumer was paying Rs. 250 previously, what has been the impact on 
him as far as the new regulation goes. If he is ta king the broadcaster‘s 
bouquets and paying the amount, it is at least a 50 per cent to 55 per cent 
increase in subscription cost and with a 27 per cent lesser number of 
channels. This is live data from what we were offering earlier and what we 
are offering today to the same consumer. It is there on the record. So, a 
person who was earlier paying Rs. 250 is now paying Rs. 375 for 27 per 
cent less number of channels‖. 
35. When asked for the reasons for allowing a 45% discount to broadcasters for the 
formation of bouquets and about its impact on the market, TRAI responded as under:- 
a. In the Tariff Order 2017, the Authority had prescribed a maximum discount 
of 15% that a broadcaster could offer while forming its bouquet of pay 
channels over the sum of MRPs of all the pay channels in that bouquet.  
b. Hon‘ble High Court of Madras  in its  judgement dated  02.03.2018 declared 
the prescribed limit of 15% on the permissible discount on the sum of the a -
la-carte price of constituent channels for a bouquet as ‗arbitrary and un -
enforceable‘. 
c. Hon‘ble Supreme court  in its  judgement dated 30.10.2018  recognized the 
need for prescribing a cap on the sum of the a-la-carte price of the channels 
forming part of the bouquet. 
d. TRAI in 2019, analyzed the data submitted by the service providers  post 
implementation of the new regime and observed that some bouquets  were 
being offered at a discount as high as 60% of the sum of a -la-carte rates of 
pay channels constituting these bouquets. 
e. TRAI in the Tariff Order 2020 prescribed a relationship betwe en sum of a -
la-carte price of channels and bouquet prices in form of the twin conditions: 
f. ―(a) the sum of maximum retail prices per month of the a -la-carte pay 
channels forming part of a bouquet shall in no case exceed one and half 
times of the maximum retail price per month of such bouquet; and 
g. (b) the maximum retail price per month of any a -la-carte pay channel, 
forming part of such a bouquet, shall in no case exceed three times the 
average maximum retail price per month of a pay channel of that bouquet‖ 
h. Hon‘ble High Court of Judicature at Bombay, vide its Judgement dated 
30th June 2021 upheld the validity of Regulatory Framework 2020  and set 
aside the condition of average test provided as the second condition of the 
Twin Conditions. 
i. Data provided by broad casters indicated that  the maximum  number of 
bouquets falls under the discount range of 40-50%. 
j. TRAI considered an article, ‗Preference between Individual Products and 
Bundles: Effects of Complementary, Price, and Discount Level in Portugal‘ 
by Mr. Paulo M artins and others  which indicates that  in case of 
discounts upto 20% on bundling, individual products are preferred. 
However, at a discount level of more than 45%, bundles are preferred over 
individual products. 

26 
 
36. The Committee sought to know  the rationale b ehind allowing a 15% discount to 
Distribution Platform Operators (DPOs) in the formation of bouquets and how the 
ambiguity created by this policy was addressed.  Further, they wanted to know the logic 
behind decision of  TRAI to withdraw DPOs' right to form  bouquets by breaking 
broadcasters' bouquets and its implications on consumer choice. At  this, TRAI replied 
as under:- 
(i) In Tariff Order 2017  a maximum discount of 15% while offering its 
bouquet of channels over the sum of MRP of all the pay channels in that  
bouquet was permitted to broadcasters as well as DPOs  so as to  enable 
customer choice through a -la-carte offering and also prevent skewed a -
la-carte and bouquet pricing. 
(ii) Hon‘ble High Court of Madras  in its  judgement 
dated 02.03.2018 declared the prescribed limit of 15% on the permissible 
discount for broadcasters on the sum of the a-la-carte price of constituent 
channels for a bouquet as ‗arbitrary and un-enforceable‘. 
(iii) TRAI on 8th August 2023 has issued a Consultation Paper on ‗Review of 
Regulatory Framewo rk for Broadcasting and Cable services‘  and has 
flagged the issue of 15% discount to Distribution Platform Operators 
(DPOs) for the formation of bouquets and has  sought stakeholders‘ 
comments. Based on the stakeholders‘ comments and further analysis 
TRAI will take suitable measures to address this issue. 
(iv) In the Regulatory framework prior to 2017, there was no provision 
allowing DPOs to form bouquets by breaking broadcasters' bouquets. 
37. Regarding reasons for  prescribing a capping of Rs. 19 for channel pricing 
inclusion in bouquets instead of the previously set Rs. 12, it was submitted by TRAI  as : 
(i) Broadcasters in compliance with the amended Framework 
2020 declared MRP of seventy-two (72) television channels above Rs.12/- 
(ii) These 72 seventy-two channels could no t be included in  a bouquet owing 
to the amended tariff order clause of cap of Rs. 12/-.   
(iii) Forty-five (45) such television channels belong to the GEC genre. 
Nineteen (19) such television channels belong to the Sports genre and six 
(6) television channels be long to the Movies genre. One  channel 
each belongs to News and Miscellaneous Genre. 
(iv) Almost all the DPOs form bouquets/ subscription packages in such a way 
that every subscriber gets television channels of most of the genres.  

27 
 
(v) Subscribers who prefer bouquets will not be able to watch these channels 
and would necessarily be required to choose all such popular channels 
on a-la-carte basis only. 
(vi) TRAI also undertook an exercise to estimate a Consumer Price Index for 
Transport and Communication services. A compre hensive application of 
different indices at the current prescribed price ceiling of Rs 12/ - reflects a 
revised price cap in the range of Rs. 16/- to Rs. 17/-. 
(vii) In case the price-cap is too low more and more channels will not be part of 
bouquet offerings. In  case the price -cap is too high, there may be a 
tendency to enhance a -la-carte price near to the maximum permissible 
limit. The regulatory framework should be neutral to the choice of a 
consumer on selecting channels on a-la-carte basis or in bouquet.  
(viii) The consumers who prefer  bouquets, should not be deprived of viewing 
channels of their choice for not being available in bouquets. 
(ix) In case the ceiling on the MRP of a channel to be part of a bouquet is 
below reasonable level, then some television channels may  not be 
included in the bouquets  at all. Such offerings may result in a change of 
current plans for a very large section of consumers. Such a situation may 
entail huge efforts in obtaining revised choices from consumers. Large 
number of consumers still exe rcise their choices manually and therefore 
such consumers may face inconvenience and service blackout owing to 
non-submission of fresh choices.  
(x) The prevailing market in terms of offerings and availing of consumer 
choices is reasonably implemented and settled. 
(xi) It was done to balance the interests of service providers (broadcasters and 
DPOs) and consumers. 
(xii) Further, one of the stakeholders challenged the revision of the prescribed 
ceiling of television channel price for inclusion in bouquet(s) in Hon‘ble 
High Court of Kerala. The court has upheld the said amendment.  
38. On the decision of TRAI to not  place a cap on channel pricing based on derived 
costing methodology for the benefit and protection of consumers, TRAI submitted as 
under:- 
(i) A channel consists of  a nu mber of the programs. The cost of the 
production of different programs drastically varies based on the actors, 
setup cost, script, copy rights, and other miscellaneous factors. The 
various programs  in a given  channel also frequently change based on 
their T elevision Rating Points (TRP), advertisement potential and other 
ground reports. Hence, determining the cost of production of a channel at 
all times  is an extremely difficult process, perhaps almost impossible. 

28 
 
Moreover, such determination of price would b e dynamic in nature and 
may vary with change in programs in a channel. Programs on television 
channels change dynamically and as such it is impractical to determine 
the price of a television channel on cost plus. 
(ii) Defining a ceiling price of television chan nel may impinge on ability to 
produce better content, more so for niche category of channels. 
(iii) There can be some channels with unique content for niche  category of 
viewers. Such niche category channel desire freedom for pricing their 
channel as their target audience segment may be small. 
(iv) Broadcasters should be given business flexibility to monetize 
their channels. 
39. Dwelling on the evolution of the New Tariff Order 2017 and its original objective 
of empowering consumers to select channels on an a -la-carte basis, TRAI was asked 
as to why this objective appears to have been discouraged going by deep discounting 
that was allowed on bouquets to Broadcasters in subsequent amendments. To this, 
they stated that it was correct that the Regulatory Framework empowered consumers to 
exercise choice of television channels or bouquets. The objective has been the fulcrum 
of the Regulatory Framework and remains so even today. Following are the benefits of 
the Regulatory Framework for Consumers:  
(i) A consumer becomes real decision maker of what she/he views and has 
complete freedom to choose what he/she wishes to watch and pay only 
for that. It is mandated that all channels  have to be offered on  a-la-carte 
basis and the MRP has to be declared. Same way, the MRP of the 
Bouquet has to be published. 
(ii) Consumers can subscribe to channels of their choice.  Provisions have 
been made that information regarding FTA and MRP of all pay 
channels has to be displayed in EPG to enable the consumers to make 
informed choice. provisions relating to co nsumer premises equipment / 
STBs have been simplified and streamlined. 
(iii) It has been mandated that FTA channels can‘t be clubbed with Pay 
channels in a Bouquet. Further, HD channels can‘t be clubbed with the 
SD version of the same channel, so that the consum er has complete 
clarity with respect to what is on offer. 
(iv) Consumer is not required to pay any subscription fee for  an FTA channel 
if she/ he subscribes to one. 
(v) Installation and activation charges for a connection have been 
rationalized. 

29 
 
(vi) For the purpose of  generating consumer awareness and to provide all 
required information at one place, the provision of consumer corner 
subscriber corner and consumer care channel has been mandated.   
40. While referring to a substantial  increase in subscriber prices over the pa st 4 
years i.e. about 70% , TRAI was asked to share the potential remedies or interventions 
that they were considering to alleviate the issue. To this, they replied as under:- 
“The Authority has not observed such large scale increase in consumer prices, 
in general. Table 1 provides comparison of prices of bouquets offered by 
some DPOs during last 4 years.  It indicates a maximum increase of  20% in the 
prices whereas the average price increase is approximately  12%. Over the 
period of four years, this is much less than the inflation indices. 
Comparison of DRPs of Bouquets offered by DPOs to consumers 
Name of DPO Name of 
Bouquet DRP of Bouquet % Variation in 
DRP 
    Sep-19 Sep-23   
DPO1  Bouquet 1 259.2 284.91 9.92 
  Bouquet 2 319.55 344.41 7.78 
DPO2 Bouquet 3 350 375 7.14 
  Bouquet 4 285 325 14.04 
DPO3 Bouquet 5 208.14 251 20.59 
  Bouquet 6 251.36 273 8.61 
Previously, in the year 2019, after six months of the implementation of the 
Regulatory Framework, TRAI had conducted a survey through an independent 
agency to assess consumers‘ view. The survey confirmed that  the Regulatory 
Framework 2017 has been good for different stakeholders including consumers. 
Some salient findings of the survey are given below: 
(i) Four in every five consumers appreciated transparenc y in TV 
channel prices and have confirmed that TV channel prices are clearly 
visible at the time of selection of TV channels. 
(ii) Approx. 3/4 thof the consumers were aware about TRAI‘s regulatory 
framework. They appreciated flexibility given to subscribers to 
choose channels of their choice. 
(iii) More than half of the consumers were happy with the consumer -
friendly provisions in the regulatory framework 2017. 
(iv) Prices of those subscribers, who have exercised their choice for 
selection of TV channels, have reduced. 
(v) In g eneral, the impact on monthly payout by consumer had an 
average increase of 10%.  

30 
 
 Further, TRAI is in process to carry out a Regulatory Impact Assessment of the 
Regulatory regime in Broadcasting sector. TRAI has issued  an Expression of 
Interest (EoI) in O ctober 2023  for Empanelment of Agencies to carry out 
Regulatory Impact Assessment.  
TRAI has also issued a consultation  paper on ―Review of Regulatory 
Framework for Broadcasting and Cable services‖  on 8 th August 2023 seeking 
comments of the stakeholders on the issues pertaining to Tariff, Interconnection 
and QoS‖. 
41. When TRAI was asked to respond to the discrepancies in pricing policy of 
channels, as pointed out by AIDCF, during evidence, the representative of TRAI 
submitted as under:- 
Sir, with your permissi on, I would like to reiterate what was discussed in 
our previous meeting. Immediately after that meeting, we had sent an 
email because the ongoing discussion here revolves around the fact that 
our information is different from theirs. That's why we suggest ed that they 
provide us with all those statistics, and then immediately after that, we 
would sit down with you for a meeting. Following that, our second issue 
was proceeding separately. On the broadcasting policy, we wanted to 
consult them. For that, we had scheduled a separate meeting on the 12th. 
They expressed a preference for the meeting on the 15th instead. We 
have agreed to their proposal. Today, the committee is discussing a 
matter, and if we need to move forward on it, we need information from 
them. Otherwise, I am sorry if I sounded a bit harsh. I request that the 
information be made available to us. If not, we will continue to say that a 3 
percent increase is there, claiming a 300 percent increase. To reconcile, 
we need information. I humbly reques t that if the Federation can provide 
us the information, they can take whatever time they need —whether it's 
three days later, four days later—we will have a meeting immediately after 
that. We are not going to sit over those statistics". 
42. Further, when asked  about the  steps that were  taken to resolve the issue of 
difference in pricing poilcy, TRAI during evidence submitted as under: 
―immediately after that meeting, we had sent a request to the AIDCF and 
because the entire issue was about the numbers not match ing, we had 
requested them to provide the numbers. They came back to us that they 
will like to meet and they did not provide us any numbers to us. Without 
the numbers, how do we reconcile? We have no problems in accepting it. 
Whatever numbers are right wou ld finally become the right numbers but 
somebody has to provide us the numbers …xxx..xxx…xxx……..xxxxxx…. 

31 
 
 I would like to humbly submit that we are not saying that we do not have 
the numbers. Sorry, I will be using that word again. Post2017, some 
reporting mechanisms came into existence and TRAI does get regular 
information from the broadcasters and some other stakeholders. Whatever 
numbers my colleague had presented to you in these slides, they have 
emanated out of those statistics that comes to us as part  of regular 
reporting. What I was submitting last time was that what we are saying is 
at variance with the numbers which our friends are mentioning. So, if there 
are two sets of numbers, we will have to sit down and reconcile 
43. The Committee wanted TRAI to e xplain the rationale behind their approach to 
linking the penetration of broadcaster's bouquets with the discount provided to DPOs, 
and investigate whether this approach could create a bias in the regulatory mechanism. 
In response to this, TRAI stated that  it can be seen that the following provisions 
balances the interest of stakeholders to enable orderly growth of the sector: 
i) The relevant provisions sub -regulations 3 & 4 of regulation 7 of the 
Telecommunications (Broadcasting & Cable) Services Interconnect ion 
(Addressable System) Regulation 2017, as amended from time to time, is 
as below: 
“7. (3) Every broadcaster shall declare a minimum twenty percent of 
the maximum retail price of pay channel or bouquet of pay channels, 
as the case may be, as the distribution fee:  
Provided that the rate of distribution fee declared by the broadcaster 
shall be same for pay channel and bouquet of pay channels and 
shall be uniform across all the distribution platforms. 
(4) It shall be permissible to a broadcaster to offer di scounts, on the 
maximum retail price of pay channel or bouquet of pay channels, to 
distributors of television channels, not exceeding fifteen percent of 
the maximum retail price: 
Provided that the sum of distribution fee declared by a broadcaster 
under sub -regulation (3) and discounts offered under this sub -
regulation in no case shall exceed thirty five percent of the maximum 
retail price of pay channel or bouquet of pay channels, as the case 
may be: 
..….. 
Provided also that offer of discounts, if any, to d istributors of 
television channels shall be on the basis of fair, transparent and 
non-discriminatory terms: 
Provided also that the parameters of discounts shall be measurable 
and computable.” 

32 
 
 
ii) The relevant provisions sub -regulations 12 of regulation 10 of the 
Telecommunications (Broadcasting & Cable) Services Interconnection 
(Addressable System) Regulation 2017, as amended from time to time, is 
as below: 
10.(12) A broadcaster shall not incorporate any provision, directly or 
indirectly in its interconnection  agreement with a distributor of 
television channels which requires such distributor of television 
channels to give a guarantee for a minimum subscriber base or a 
minimum subscription percentage for the channels offered by the 
broadcaster and any agreement to contrary shall be void.  
Explanation: For removal of doubt, it is clarified that any discount, 
offered as an incentive by a broadcaster on the maximum retail price 
of the pay channel or the bouquet of pay channels, based on actual 
number of subscribers  or actual subscription percentage, recorded 
in a month shall not amount to guarantee for a minimum subscriber 
base or a minimum subscription percentage for its channel.  
 
iii) Reasons for sub-regulation 12 of regulation 10 has been mentioned in the 
para 63 of Explanatory Memorandum of the Telecommunication 
(Broadcasting and Cable) Services Interconnection (Addressable 
Systems) Regulations, 2017 dated 03/03/2017, which is reproduced 
below: 
63. As far as the issue of prescription of guarantee of a minimum 
number of subscribers or subscriber base is concerned, the 
Authority was of the view that for ensuring competitiveness in the 
market and to remove entry barrier for new entrants, no service 
provider should be allowed to stipulate a pre condition for guarantee 
of minimum subscriber base or minimum subscription percentage of 
its channel(s). However, the Authority was also conscious of the fact 
that many service providers, in order to promote their channels, may 
like to provide discounts, within the prescribed limits  in non -
discriminatory manner, to other service providers on their fulfilling of 
certain target of the subscriber base or subscription percentage of 
its channel(s). In such a situation, to ensure the orderly growth of the 
sector, the Authority was of the v iew that it would be unfair to 
prohibit offering of such discounts. However in no case, such 
prescription should transcend to the denial of signals or 
discontinuation of signals or a pre-condition for giving the channel”. 
44. On the issue of  Content Parity and  Disparity in Regulations , AIDCF in their 
written submission stated as under:-: 

33 
 
“4(1) Content Parity  
a. Content delivery through online streaming platforms has expanded by leaps and 
bounds over the past few years and there will be an estimated 470 million di gital 
video viewers by end of 2023 ( as per the Magnite India Research Report ). The 
continuous and unrelenting penetration by online streaming has resulted in a huge 
negative impact on the regulated platforms (MSOs, DTH and HITS ) offering cable 
TV services since there is a great disparity in the price as well as quality of content. 
 
b. Meanwhile, broadcasters are not providing all the content available with them 
to the DPOs, which is creating the cable TV platform less attractive in terms of 
content for the customers. 
 
c. Therefore, for the benefit of Cable TV consumers, we request hon‟ble 
Parliament committee to direct TRAI to mandate broadcasters that: 
 
i. All the Content, which is being made available by the broadcasters on their 
online streaming platforms, should also be provided to Cable TV Platforms. 
The Content and price disparity between the cable television and OTT 
platforms should be completely removed, and Cable TV operators should be 
enabled to provide OTT like content on their Cable TV platforms. 
 
ii. “Programme code” shall be suitably amended and Cable TV should also be 
allowed to provide diverse content freely since MSOs have the capability to 
put parental control through the digital STBs. 
 
iii. As broadcasters are already charging subscription fees for their Pay TV 
channels from the customers, no advertisements shall be allowed on any 
“Pay Channel”. Therefore, the Honorable Ministry of Information and 
Broadcasting should amend the “Advertising Code” in this regard 
accordingly. 
 
4(2) Same Service Different Rules: R egulatory disparity between Cable TV, Free 
dish & Online Streaming Platforms (OTT applications like Amazon, Netflix, 
Sonyliv, Hotstar, Zee5 etc.) 
 
d. Presently, in India, content is distributed via different medium like DPOs (DTH, 
HITS, IPTV, and MSO), Free Dish and OTT applications. The distribution of Content 
is a similar service, however the same is regulated differently by the licensing and 
regulating Authority. The basic differences are highlighted below for Honorable 
Committee for its kind reference &perusal. 
 
S. 
No. 
Particulars Cable TV/DTH Free Dish OTT Applications 
1 Provision of Channels Linear Linear Linear & Non-Linear 
2 Regulation by TRAI Highly 
Regulated 
Not 
Regulated 
Not Regulated 
3 Regulated by Cable 
TV Act/Programming 
Code 
Yes No No 
4 Uncensored Content 
restriction 
Yes  Yes No 

34 
 
5 Encryption Encrypted No 
Encryption 
Not applicable 
6 Mandatory DD 
channels 
Yes. Mandatory Yes  No 
7 Advertisements Yes            Yes No 
8 Pay Channels Yes. Pay TV 
channel are 
available on 
Paid basis 
Pay 
Channels 
are Free 
here 
No concept of Pay 
Channels 
9 Network Capacity 
Fees (NCF) 
Fixed Nil Nil 
10 Capping on 
Incentives by 
Broadcasters. 
 
15% 
Channel 
slots are 
auctioned 
No such capping as 
Broadcaster are 
direct distributors 
11 Mandatory Sharing of 
Sports of Nati onal 
Importance 
No Yes Not applicable 
e. For a Justifiable and Equal treatment between all the three kinds of Platforms, 
OTT and Free Dish shall also be covered under the ambit of TRAI regulations which 
are applicable on DPOs like MSOs, DTH, IPTV and HITS‖. 
45. When TRAI was asked to enumerate the measures taken for  the revival of the 
Cable TV industry , and to address regulatory disparities between similar platforms, 
such as Distribution Platform Operators (DPOs), Free Dis h, and OTT content 
applications, their response was as under:- 
―TRAI has given various recommendations to the Government from time 
to time for an orderly growth of the Cabe TV industry in the country. A list 
of such recommendations is placed at Annexure-I. 
 
The regulatory framework  2017 is applic able to all the Distribution 
Platform Operators (DPOs). The new framework brings clarity and 
transparency in pricing by separating the network capacity fee and pay 
channel price. The new framework provides for complete transparency on 
pay channel pricing s tructure whereby no distributor can charge above 
the MRP declared by a broadcaster.  The subscriber  may choose 
channels from the distributor either in a -la-carte form or bouquet or 
combination of both. The MRP declared by 
the broadcasters are available on the Electronic Program Guide (EPG) of 
each DPO.  
  
 With regards to DD Free Dish, it is a non -addressable 
platform governed under the provisions of  Prasar Bharati Act 
1990. 
 TDSAT in para 29 of its judgement dated 15th December 2008 
mentioned the following:  

35 
 
 it is clear that having  obtained an in principle allocation of 
Frequency (akin to a letter of intent), the Respondent, Prasar 
Bharati is, by this measure alone, a licensee u/s 4 of the Indian 
telegraph Act and hence a ‗service provider‘ under the TRAI Act.‖ 
 The regulatory framework 2017  is applicable for addressable 
systems only. However, DD Free dish is a non -addressable 
platform, therefore provisions of  the regulatory framework 
2017 are not applicable for it.  
 Accordingly, following questions related to  DD Free Dish  have 
been asked in the TRAI‘s consultation paper dated 08th  August 
2023: 
a. Should Tariff Order 2017, Interconnection Regulations 
2017 and Quality of Service Regulations 2017 be made 
applicable to non -addressable distribution platforms such as 
DD Free Dish also? 
b. Should the channels available on DD Free Dish platform 
be mandatorily made available as Free to Air Channels for all 
the platforms including all the DPOs?  
c. Whether there is a need to consider  upgradation of  DD 
Free Dish as an addressable p latform? If yes, what 
technology/ mechanism is suggested for making all the STBs 
addressable? What would be the cost implications for existing 
and new consumers? Elaborate the suggested migration 
methodology with suggested time -period for proposed plan. 
Please provide your response, with justification. 
 • As far as OTT is concerned, TRAI  does not regulate OTT 
services as of now‖.  
46. The Committee sought to know  the number of audits conducted by TRAI on Multi 
System Operators (MSOs) over the past 5 years, and a detailed breakdown of these audits on a 
yearly basis.  TRAI submitted as under:- 
i) TRAI itself does not conduct audits of Multi System Operators (MSOs).   
ii) Provisions of Interconnection Regulation 2017 (as amended) 
a. Sub-regulation 7 of regulation 10 and Regu lation 15 of the 
Interconnection Regulation prescribes the provisions regarding audits 
of system of DPOs by the DPOs and/or by the Broadcasters.  
 
b. Sub-regulation 7 of regulation 10 is, inter-alia, reproduced as under: 
(7) If a broadcaster, before providing  signals of television channels, is of 
the opinion that the addressable system, being used by the distributor for 
distribution of television channels, does not meet the requirements 
specified in the Schedule III or the Schedule X or both, as the case may 
be, it may, without prejudice to the time limit specified in sub -regulation (2) 

36 
 
of the regulation 3, cause audit of the addressable system of the distributor 
by M/s. Broadcast Engineering Consultants India Limited, or any other 
auditor empanelled by the Aut hority for conducting such audit and provide 
a copy of the report prepared by the auditor to the distributor: 
Provided that unless the configuration or the version of the addressable 
system of the distributor has been changed after issuance of the report b y 
the auditor, the broadcaster, before providing signals of television channel 
shall not cause audit of the addressable system of the distributor if the 
addressable system of such distributor has been audited during the last 
one year by M/s. Broadcast Engi neering Consultants India Limited, or any 
other auditor empanelled by the Authority and the distributor produces a 
copy of such report as a proof of conformance to the requirements 
specified in the Schedule III or the Schedule X or both, as the case may 
be. 
 
c. The regulation 15 is, inter-alia, reproduced as under: 
15.  Audit. — (1) Every distributor of television channels shall, once in a 
calendar year, cause audit of its subscriber management system, 
conditional access system and other related systems by an a uditor to 
verify that the monthly subscription reports made available by the 
distributor to the broadcasters are complete, true and correct, and issue an 
audit report to this effect to each broadcaster with whom it has entered into 
an interconnection agreement:  
Provided that the Authority may empanel auditors for the purpose of such 
audit and it shall be mandatory for every distributor of television channels 
to cause audit, under this sub -regulation, from M/s Broadcast Engineering 
Consultants India limited, or any of such empanelled auditors; 
Provided further that any variation, due to audit, resulting in less than zero 
point five percent of the billed amount shall not require any revision of the 
invoices already issued and paid. 
(1A) If any distributor fai ls to cause audit once in a calendar year of its 
subscriber management system, conditional access system and other 
related systems, as specified under sub -regulation (1), it shall, without 
prejudice to the terms and conditions of its license or permission or 
registration, or the Act or rules or regulations or order made or direction 
issued there under, be liable to pay, by way of financial disincentive, an 
amount of rupees one thousand per day for default up to thirty days 
beyond the due date and an additional amount of rupees two thousand per 
day in case the default continues beyond thirty days from the due date, as 
the Authority may, by order, direct: 
Provided that the financial disincentive levied by the Authority under this 
sub-regulation shall in no case exceed rupees two lakhs: 
Provided further that no order for payment of any amount by way of 
financial disincentive shall be made by the Authority unless the distributor, 
has been given a reasonable opportunity of representation against the 
contravention of the regulations observed by the Authority. 

37 
 
(2) In cases, where a broadcaster is not satisfied with the audit report 
received under sub-regulation (1) or, if in the opinion of a broadcaster the 
addressable system being used by the distributor does not me et 
requirements specified in the Schedule III or the Schedule X or both, as 
the case may be, it shall be permissible to the broadcaster, after 
communicating the reasons in writing to the distributor, to audit the 
subscriber management system, conditional a ccess system and other 
related systems of the distributor of television channels, not more than 
once in a calendar year: 
Provided that the Authority may empanel auditors for the purpose of such 
audit and it shall be mandatory for every broadcaster to cause audit, under 
this sub -regulation, from M/s Broadcast Engineering Consultants India 
limited, or any of such empanelled auditors: 
Provided further that if such audit reveals that additional amount is payable 
to the broadcaster, the distributor shall pay suc h amount, along with the 
interest at the rate specified by the broadcaster in the interconnection 
agreement, within ten days and if such amount including interest due for 
any period exceed the amount reported by the distributor to be due for 
such period by  two percent or more, the distributor shall bear the audit 
expenses, and take necessary actions to avoid occurrence of such errors 
in the future:  
Provided also that it shall be permissible to the broadcaster to disconnect 
signals of television channels, a fter giving written notice of three weeks to 
the distributor, if such audit reveals that the addressable system being 
used by the distributor does not meet the requirements specified in the 
Schedule III or the Schedule X or both, as the case may be”. 
 
d. As per monthly reports received from empanelled auditors and BECIL, 
calendar year wise statistics of DAS audits undertaken under the 
provisions of Interconnection regulation is as under: 
 
Category 
Number 
of DAS 
audits in 
Calendar 
year 
2019 
 
Number 
of DAS 
audits in 
Calendar 
year 
2020 
Number 
of DAS 
audits in 
Calendar 
year 
2021 
Number 
of DAS 
audits in 
Calendar 
year 
2022 
Number of 
DAS audits 
in Calendar 
year 2023    
 (Jan23-Oct 
23) 
DPO-caused 
Audits  30 171 316 409 264 
Broadcaster-
caused 
Audits  
57 187 161 367 297 

38 
 
Total 
number of 
DAS Audits 
87 358 477 776 561 
 
e. Audits in the Broadcasting and cable TV sector are necessary to 
maintain regulatory compliance, ensure quality standards, promote fair 
competition, protect consumer interests, and uphold financial 
transparency. They serve as a mechanism to uphold standards and 
accountability within this dynamic and influentialindustry. TRAI has 
taken a number of initiatives to improve compliance by the DPOs 
including issue of show cause notices, levying financial disincenti ves, 
writing to MIB for taking suitable action against erring DPOs‖. 
 
V. Issues related to Adjusted Gross Revenue Demand: 
47. Regarding the AGR Demand, AIDCF submitted are as under:- 
―With respect to AGR Demand: 
a. DOT has raised wrongful demand to the tune of Rs.7, 000 Crore on 
Cable TV operators /MSOs by computing license fee on their Cable TV 
revenues (which do not come under the ISP license as MSOs operate 
under registration from Ministry of Information and Broadcasting), while 
license fee on the pure internet ser vices itself was exempt under DOT 
License. 
b. Several MSOs received the demand retrospectively with huge penalty 
and interest on Penalty based on wrong interpretation of the Hon‘ble 
Supreme Court order delivered on 24.10.2019, in Union of India v. 
Association of Unified Telecom Service Providers of India , (2020) 3 
SCC 525 (hereinafter referred to as ― AGR Judgment‖) in which MSOs 
are not at all parties and the ISP license /Unified License under which 
they operate is different from UASL license. The amounts are so large 
that the MSOs will be pushed to bankruptcy. 
c. The core business of MSOs is providing Digital Cable Services  
while broadband services was a small percentage initially which has 
been growing of late - especially after COVID Pandemic.  
d. On 17.02.2021, M inistry of Information and Broadcasting (MIB) 
addressed an Office Memorandum to the Secretary, Department of 
Telecommunication (DoT) seeking withdrawal of demands of license 
fee made by DoT on revenue from MSOs and informed DoT that MIB 
grants permission t o MSO for cable television network operations and 
does not levy any license fee on the revenue. Therefore, the revenue 
earned by MSOs may not be clubbed with the revenue earned by them 
under ISP license for computation of license fee. It further stated tha t 
operations of both the services, i.e., broadcasting and ISP work on 

39 
 
different guidelines issued by the concerned Ministries, therefore, 
these two services need to be considered differently for computation of 
license fee. 
e. DOT vide its amendment dated 27 th May 2022 has itself specifically 
clarified that, the revenue from cable TV operations will be exempted for 
computing AGR prospectively, which categorically clarifies that Cable 
TV revenues cannot be computed for the calculation of AGR. 
f. The demands are erroneous for the following reasons: 
i.  The demands raised by the DoT are unsustainable because 
the ISP licenses issued to MSOs are different from the UAS 
License considered by the Hon‘ble Supreme Court in the AGR 
Judgment. In 1999, UAS license holders requested th Government 
for a migration package from Fixed license fee to license fee as a 
revenue share as they were not able to pay huge, fixed fee. MSOs 
are not covered by such a migration package. MSOs were never 
in the actual business of providing mobile serv ices to the public 
like the parties before the Hon‘ble Supreme Court. 
ii.  Two businesses - cable TV and Internet Services - are under 
two different ministries, i.e., Ministry of Information and 
Broadcasting and Department of Telecommunication, 
respectively and under different licenses. 
iii.  The Unified License under Condition 2, i.e., Scope of License, sub-
condition 2.2 (iv) in Chapter I clearly provides that the Licensee 
shall not provide broadcasting services under the Unified 
License, for which a separate Licen se/registration is required 
as per Cable TV Networks (Regulation) Act 1955. 
iv. The definition of Gross Revenue (GR) & AGR under the Unified 
Access Service Licenses (UASL) is materially different from 
the definition of GR & AGR under the ISP Licenses. 
v. By Order dated 11.06.2020 passed by the Hon‘ble Supreme Court 
in SMC (C) No. 1 of 2020recorded that: 
“It is apparent that the licenses are different and our 
judgement in this case could not have been made the basis 
for raising the demand against Public Sector Unde rtakings. 
Even otherwise, the Public Sector Undertakings are not in 
the actual business of providing mobile services to the 
general public.”  
vi. By a subsequent order dated 18.06.2020, it was recorded by the 
Hon‘ble Supreme Court that DoT had decided to withd raw 
demands on PSUs constituting 96% of the demand. 
vii. Hon‘ble Supreme Court, vide its order dated 01.09.2020, while 
deciding the plea of the DoT for extension of time to the TSPs to 

40 
 
pay the dues arising from the AGR judgment, reiterated that the 
non-telecom PSUs were not in the business of providing mobile 
services to the public and that they are holding Access Service 
License. 
g. Like these PSUs, MSOs also do not provide mobile services to public, and our 
cable TV revenues are not governed by ISP license.  Ther efore, we humbly 
request that these erroneous retrospective demands raised by DOT on MSOs 
on Cable TV revenues are withdrawn. If not withdrawn, the demands will push 
several MSOs into insolvency for no fault of theirs and this Parliamentary 
Standing Commit tee is humbly requested to intervene immediately and save 
the MSOs from bankruptcy. 
48. When the DoT were asked to provide a detailed account of the demands for 
license fees raised by the DoT on Multi System Operators (MSOs) for simultaneously 
offering interne t services under Internet service provider license s and the reasons for 
the demands, they have submitted as under:- 
―Department of Telecommunications grants licenses under section 4 of Indian 
Telegraph Act 1885 to offer various telecommunication services i ncluding 
Internet services. Any company which proposes to offer internet services is 
required to obtain the Internet Service provider license granted by DoT. 
 
 
I. License agreement conditions: 
a.The License agreement of DoT prescribes that license fees is to be paid 
based on Gross revenue of the licensee entity. Revenue earned from telecom 
operations and revenue from all non -licensed activities are included during 
calculation of license fee. Presently license fee is charged at 8 % of Adjusted 
Gross Revenue (AGR) of the licensee entity. 
b. Licensees are required to make payment of license fee every quarter on 
self-assessment basis by declaring their revenue in format specified in license 
agreement. At the end of the financial year licensees are also required to 
submit their Quarterly audited statement of revenue, annual audited accounts 
and Reconciliation Statement duly certified by Statutory auditors for difference 
between figures appearing in quarterly statements of Revenue and Annual 
audited accounts. In case of any difference between the total revenue in the 
quarterly statements and Profit & Loss account of the licensee entity the 
same is added back and license fee demands are raised by DoT annually. 

41 
 
c. Adjusted Gross Revenue is calculated as below: 
Period Method of Calculation  
Prior to 
01.10.2021 
Gross Revenue -Deductions = Adjusted Gross Revenue 
(AGR). 
From 
01.10.2021 
 
(License 
conditions 
amended as 
part of 
Telecom 
reforms 2021) 
Gross Revenue (GR) – Exemptions* = Applicable Gross 
Revenue (ApGR) 
ApGR- Deductions = AGR 
* Exemptions include Revenue from non -telecom 
operations, Revenue from operations under I&B license, 
Receipts from Universal Service Obligation Fund (USOF) 
and other items of other income specified by DoT. 
 Deductions have been well establis hed and defined in each license 
authorisation in the license agreement. 
II. Judgements by Hon‟ble Supreme Court on AGR issues:  
a. The matter of definition  of Gross Revenue in license agreement was 
litigated by different licensees including internet servic e providers from 2003 
in Hon‘ble TDSAT and Hon‘ble Supreme Court.  Hon‘ble Supreme Court has 
upheld the inclusion of Revenue from both telecom operations and non -
telecom operations for calculation of license fee in following judgements. 
i. Judgement dated 11.10.2011 in CA 5059 of 2007. 
ii. Judgement dated 24.10.19 in CA 6328-6399 of 2015 . 
b. Brief of the judgments are provided below  
CA 5059 of 2007 : 
i. Hon‘ble Supreme Court in its order dated 11.10.2011 in CA 5059 of 2007 
set aside the Hon‘ble TDSAT order dated 07.07.2006 which held that revenue 
realized by the licensee from activities beyond the license will be excluded 
from Adjusted Gross Revenue . It also held that TDSAT had no jurisdiction to 
decide on the validity of the terms and conditions of the license i ncluding the 
definition of Adjusted Gross Revenue incorporated in the licenseagreement. 
ii. In para 34 of the above judgment Hon‘ble SC also observed that ― If the 
wide definition of Adjusted Gross Revenue so as to include Revenue beyond 
the license was in any was going to affect the licensee, it was open for the 
licensee not to undertake activities for which they do not require license under 
clause 4 of the telegraph act and transfer these activities to any other person 
or firm or company‖. 

42 
 
iii. Further Hon ‘ble Supreme Court mentioned that it did not go into the 
specifics of the DoT's demands but empowered Hon‘ble TDSAT to look into 
the legality of  demands within the purview of the license agreement. 
CA 6328-6399/2015 : 
i. Hon‘ble Supreme Court delivered th e final judgement on 24.10.2019 in CA 
6328-6299/2015 wherein the appeals filed by DoT against Hon‘ble TDSAT 
orders on AGR matter were allowed. Hon‘ble Supreme Court reiterated its 
earlier stand taken in CA 5059/2007 and also gave its findings against 
individual items of Revenue which were disputed by licensees . The court held 
that Revenue earned from telecom operations and Revenue from all non -
licensed activities are to be included during calculation of license fee. 
Demands of DoT : 
Demands are raised by Do T based on terms and conditions of the license 
agreement entered between the licensee and DoT. The terms and conditions 
of license agreement have been upheld by the Hon‘ble Supreme Court also 
as stated above. The licensees were already aware, as to the ben efits and 
corresponding liabilities associated while providing internet services under the 
licenses, before executing the license agreement with DoT. 
 
IV. Telecom Reforms 2021: 
In September 2021 as part of Telecom Reforms 2021 DoT has excluded 
Revenue from  activities earned under licenses issued by Ministry of 
Information and Broadcasting from calculation of AGR. This is applicable 
prospectively from 01.10.2021. 
V. Present litigation on the matter: 
After the judgement of Hon‘ble Supreme Court in AGR matter multiple 
petitions have been filed by telecom licensees in TDSAT seeking the 
exclusion of revenue earned under the License granted by Ministry of 
Information and Broadcasting from computation of Adjusted Gross Revenue 
for the purpose of calculation of License Fee by DoT. All India Digital Cable 
Federation (AIDCF) also has got itself impleaded in petition TP 54/2020 filed 
by M/s Asianet Satellite Communications limited. The matter is still subjudice 
and next hearing of the case is on 23.01.2024‖. 
49. To a specific query by the Committee regarding explicit definition and clarification 
of what was categorized as  "miscellaneous revenue‖  DoT replied as under:- 

43 
 
―In addition to what has already been explained in earlier paras it is submitted 
that revenue from all non  telecom activities will be considered as 
miscellaneous revenue. License agreement provides for a format of 
Statement of Revenue and the same is submitted by the licensee duly 
certified by the statutory auditor. The format provides a breakup of revenue 
earned from different services offered under the license and certain other 
items like income from investments etc. The format also provides a column to 
declare miscellaneous revenue‖. 
50. On the rationale behind the inclusion of Cable TV revenues in the computati on of 
license fees for Multi System Operators (MSOs) holding Internet service provider 
licenses issued by the Department, DoT has replied as under:- 
―License fee computation is done as per license agreement signed by the 
companies with DoT. Revenue  earned from telecom operations and revenue 
from all non-licensed activities of the company are included during calculation 
of license fee. Prior to 01.10.2021, there were no provisions available in the 
license agreement to exclude Revenue from cable TV in the com putation of 
license fees and hence demands have been raised accordingly‖. 
51. With respect to GST demand, AIDCF has submitted the following: 
a. DGGI authorities across various states have started investigations and issued 
show cause notice on the MSOs, for the GS T liability on the revenues accrued to 
LCOs from their subscribers. 
 
b. MSOs are cable operators who receive programming service from broadcasters 
and further provide the same or transmit their own programming service for 
simultaneous reception by the Local Cable Operators (LCOs) or to the subscribers 
directly. 
 
c. Local Cable Operator (LCOs) means is a person registered under Rule 5 of Cable 
Television Network Rules, 1994 and provides last mile connectivity to the end 
customers. LCOs re -transmit the signals rece ived from MSO to its subscribers 
through its own fibre/ coaxial cables and own infrastructure with various value -
additions. 
 
d. Members of the federation are currently receiving notices for investigation from 
DGGI Authorities on the basis of interpretation th at LCO is not a service provider 
and MSOs are providing services to subscribers. Given the same, MSOs are 
required to discharge GST on the gross amounts collected by LCOs from 
subscribers.  
 
e. This is in violation of the circulars issued by Ministry of Finance -F No.B.11/1/2002-
TRU dated 1.8.2002 (―2002 circular‖) which states that the Service Tax is liable to 

44 
 
be paid by the cable operator providing service to ultimate subscriber of cable 
service.  
 
f. As per another circular 80/2004 dated 17.9.2004(―2004 circul ar‖), the services 
provided by the MSOs to the cable operators have been made taxable. 
 
g. These two circulars have been followed by industry for the past 20 years. Now, 
violating the same circulars, the DGGI is raising demands on MSOs for amounts 
billed and collected by the LCOs from subscribers. 
 
h. For provision of cable TV services, under Interconnection regulations prescribed 
by the Ministry of Broadcasting (‗MIB‘), two types of contracts or agreements can 
be entered into between MSO and LCO namely, Standard  Interconnection 
Agreement (‗SIA‘) and Model Interconnection Agreement (‗MIA‘). Both MIA and 
SIA prescribe the relationship between MSO and LCO as Principal to Principal. 
 
i. MSOs and LCOs have the option to sign either a MIA by deciding roles and 
responsibilities of each of the parties mutually for the purpose of provisioning of 
cable TV services to subscribers. In case the same cannot be arrived at, parties 
(MSOs and LCOs) are then bound to sign SIA. However, practically on ground, 
only MIA is prevalent between MSOs and LCOs, as they mutually agree the terms.   
 
j. Herein, it is important to mention that MIA is the preferred and prevailing model for 
both LCOs and MSOs in the industry. In other words, LCOs raise their invoices on 
subscribers towards provision of their own cable TV services while MSOs raise 
invoice on LCOs for its own services. Mechanics of the MIA model is depicted with 
the help of following diagrammatic representation for ease of reference:   
 
k. However, the MO Circular dated 02/2019 has been issued based on incorrect facts 
related to the operation of business, namely: 
 That only MSOs, and not LCOs can provide service to a subscriber 
(which is against the definition of Service Provider under TRAI 
Regulations which includes LCOs also. ) 
 That MSO provides services to subscribers directly through Set Top Box 
(STB). Subscriber Management System (SMS) of MSO maintains details 
of subscribers and channels/ packages subscribed.   
 That LCO is not a service provider and MSOs are providing services to 
subscribers directly and they are required to discharge Service Tax / 

45 
 
GST on the gross amounts collected by the LCOs from the subscribers 
and not on the amounts charged by MSOs to the LCOs. 
 
l. Further, we would also like to highlight the recent judgement pronounced b y the 
Hon‘ble Supreme Court in a similar set of facts in the case of M/s Hathway 
Sukhamrit Cable and Datacom (P) Ltd. In the said case, Hon‘ble Supreme Court 
dismissed the Appeal filed by the department against the Order of CESTAT in 
favor the Appellant. Key findings of the CESTAT upheld by the Hon‘ble Supreme 
Court has been summarized below: 
 LCO received signals from MSOs and ultimate consumers/subscribers 
received signals from LCOs. 
 Service recipient for MSO is the LCO and for LCO it is the ultimate 
subscribers; and 
 Although access to broadcast through set top boxes was provided by 
MSO but interface between ultimate consumers and cable signals 
remained with LCOs only 
 
m. Though the above ruling was in the context of the Service Tax era, we wish to 
bring to yo ur kind notice that the facts in the above case decided by Hon‘ble 
Supreme Court are identical and directly applicable to the members of AIDCF. 
 
n. In the light of the above, there is an urgent need for issuance of a clarification 
stating that LCOs are liable to discharge applicable Service Tax/GST liability for 
the payments received by them from subscribers for the cable TV services and not 
MSO, which will also be in alignment with the intent of 2002 circular. MSOs are 
liable to discharge applicable Service Tax/GST only on the invoice value raised on 
LCO for services provided to LCO which will be in alignment with 2004 circular. 
 
o. We therefore request Hon‘ble Parliament committee to direct Hon‘ble Ministry of 
Finance to fairly resolve the issues and withdraw the 02/2019 DGGI circular‖. 
 
VI. ISSUE OF EMPLOYMENT 
52. When asked to provide the data related to number of job losses that have 
occurred in the past 5 years due to the declining subscriber base in the Cable TV 
industry, the Ministry has submitted as under:-  
―The employment landscape in the cable TV sector is predominantly informal 
and lacks a standardized record -keeping and reporting system. Unlike 
industries with a higher prevalence of contract-based employment, the cable TV 
industry often engages a significant p ortion of its workforce on an informal 
basis, making it challenging to compile specific data on job losses attributed to 
the declining subscriber base. However, the associations of MSOs and LCOs 
have claimed sustained reduction in the workforce in the indu stry over the last 5 
years‖.   
VII. IMPACT OF OTT PLATFORMS ON CABLE TV 

46 
 
53. When asked for the impact of OTT platforms on the popularity and sustainability 
of cable TV, the Ministry replied as under:- 
―The emergence of Over-The-Top (OTT) platforms has brought about significant 
transformations in India's cable TV industry, impacting both regulatory 
frameworks and market dynamics. While cable TV is governed by established 
regulations such as the Cable Television Networks (Regulation) Act, 1995, and 
the Telecom Regulat ory Authority of India (TRAI) Act, 1997, OTT platforms 
have largely operated outside of these regulations, falling under the Information 
Technology (Intermediary Guidelines and Digital Media Ethics Code) Rules, 
2021. Content regulation differs as well, wit h cable TV subject to the 
Programme Code and Advertisement Code, while OTT platforms face ongoing 
controversy over their content regulation under the 2021 Information 
Technology Rules due to concerns about objectionable material. Additionally, 
OTT platform s offer cost -effective access, on -demand content, and flexibility, 
potentially eroding the market share of traditional cable TV services. The entry 
of global players into the Indian market intensifies competition, as they can 
invest significantly in conten t creation and distribution, posing a substantial 
challenge to cable TV operators‖. 
54. Elaborating the strategies that were being implemented by the Ministry to ensure 
content parity between OTT applications, Cable TV, and DTH subscribers, the Ministry 
has submitted as under:- 
―Content provided on linear broadcasting (Cable TV, and DTH subscribers) and 
on-demand platforms like OTT is treated differently owing to the expressed 
consent and desire of consumers exercised while accessing the on -demand 
platforms. However, the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting has prepared 
the draft Broadcasting Services (Regulation) Bill, 2023 which attempts to bring 
on-demand platforms like OTT also under its preview. A single legislation and 
apex self -regulation body named B roadcast Advisory Council (BAC) are 
expected to bring the reasonable parity on content while respecting the 
differences in the nature of broadcasting‖. 
55. Asked whether the Ministry has implemented any measures to bring OTT 
application services within the sco pe of the Cable Television Networks Regulation Act, 
1995, and The Cable Television Networks Rules, 1994, or other content regulations, the 
Ministry replied as under:- 
―The Ministry of Information and Broadcasting has prepared the draft 
Broadcasting Service s (Regulation) Bill, 2023 which shall act as the umbrella 
legislation for all broadcasting services. The Bill aims to cover online curated 
content (for example OTT) and publisher of news under its ambit. The draft Bill 
has been placed in public domain on 1 0.11.2023 for inviting comments from 

47 
 
stakeholders/General Public. Time upto 09.12.2023 has been granted to 
provide comments on the draft Bill‖. 
56. Submitting the plans to establish regulatory control over tariff structures for OTT 
application services the Ministry has stated as under:- 
―Tariff for broadcasting services and cable services at present is regulated 
through the TRAI Act, 1997. OTT application services have not been notified as 
Telecommunication services and no such proposal is under consideration i n the 
Ministry. OTT is an on-demand service where expressed consent and discretion 
is received from the subscribers/consumers. Also, OTT services are not 
dependent on any specific intermediary network to reach the consumers unlike 
the other broadcasting services where a synergy on interconnection and quality 
and consequently revenue sharing i.e. Tariff is needed‖. 
57. According to the Ministry, the  second decade of the twenty first century saw 
significant development in the cable TV industry. While digitization  by and large 
revolutionized the consumer experience and quality of service wholly, few anomalies 
such as piracy of content have followed. The piracy at local level, being primarily dealt 
under the provisions of the Copyright Act, 1957 has been found chall enging to address. 
Nevertheless, the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting  has taken  crucial steps to 
check piracy at local level, including inspection by Authorized Officer and confiscation of 
equipment found violative of the provisions of the Cable Te levision Networks 
(Regulation) Act, 1995.  
58. Asked to elaborate on the  efforts of the Ministry to combat ‗Content Piracy‘ and 
provide statistics regarding the number of resolved piracy incidents in the past 5 years, 
the reply was : 
―The Ministry has prescrib ed Programme Code which prohibits the carrying of 
content without necessary copyrights. The violation of this provision may result 
into monetary penalty and even cancellation/suspension of registration. These 
are in addition to the provisions of the Copyri ght Act of 1957, a key legislative 
framework in India aimed at protecting the intellectual property rights of 
creators, including those in the realm of content such as literature, music, films, 
and other artistic works.  
In case of cable operators, violati on of copyright provisions may lead to seizure 
and confiscation of the equipments under the CTN Act, 1995. There is 
requirement of mandatory audit by the DPOs so that subscriber base is properly 
reported to the broadcasters. Recently, more than 700 MSO reg istrations have 
been cancelled due to violation of this provision‖. 

48 
 
VIII. ISSUES AFTER DIGITIZATION AND MEASURES TAKEN 
59. The Cable Television Networks (Regulation) Act, 1995 formalized the cable TV 
sector in India. Since then, the Pay TV segment served through the  cable networks has 
seen phenomenal growth in every nook and corner of the country. The launch of more 
and more satellite TV channels and diversity of content triggered a phenomenal growth 
in cable TV networks across the country.  However, initially all th e cable TV networks 
were analog which resulted in operational challenges for Cable Operators as their 
network could not cater to higher number of television channels and quality issues. On 
the other hand, digital cable TV networks have advantage of better quality and enables 
availability of large number of channels to consumers.  Looking at the advantages of 
digital cable TV networks, TRAI, on 5 th August 2010, gave its recommendations to the 
Government for implementation of Digital Addressable Cable TV Syst ems (DAS) across 
the c ountry. The Government accepted  recommendations of TRAI and amended the 
Cable Television Networks Rules, 1994 on 28 th April 2012 mandating implementation of 
Digital Addressable Cable TV Systems by MSOs across the country. 
60. The Cable Television in the country was completely  digitized since 31.03.2017. 
During the implementation of the digitization process between 2012 to 2015, TRAI 
received several representations from various stakeholders regarding the inadequacies 
of the existing regime  to tackle the problems being faced in digitization process leading 
to non-optimal realization of the benefits of addressability which inter-alia includes:  
a. protecting the interests of consumer by giving them a choice to select a 
channel that he/she wishes to watch and pay only for that;  
b. provisioning of channels by broadcasters to DPOs on a transparent and 
non-discriminatory manner;  
c. ensuring level playing field within broadcasters and within DPOs;  
d. ensuring access of distribution networks to broadcasters on non-
discriminatory terms;  
e. orderly growth of the sector and laying roadmap for future.  
61. TRAI in their background note, informed that similar problems were highlighted in 
the Noida Software Technology Park Ltd. v. Media Pro Enterprise India Pvt. Ltd., 
Petition No. 295 (C) of 2014 (NSTPL Case) by the Hon‘ble TDSAT. They also informed 
that in the said matter, the Hon‘ble Tribunal was pleased to direct TRAI to carry out a 

49 
 
comprehensive review of the existing Regulations and Tariff Order so as to frame a 
comprehensive code for the era of complete digitization and addressability. 
62. According to TRAI, in the digitalization era of complete addressability which was 
sought to be completed between 2012 and 2017, a lot of implementation issues and 
real concerns of the stakeholders and consumers emerged. They also submitted the  
following:  
―It was felt that a comprehensive review of the Regulatory regime must be 
undertaken to frame a comprehensive code for the Broadcasting Sector, so as 
to ensure that the consumer gets t he benefit of a meaningful and informed 
choice and the inter -se relationship between the Broadcasters and Distributors 
is based on the principles of non-discrimination and transparency.  
 
Under the then regulatory regime, there were many issues, as regards  the 
service offering and transparency.  An RIO model for pricing of TV channels 
existed, wherein the broadcaster would declare the RIO price of TV channel. 
Broadcasters used to offer huge discounts ranging upto 80 -85% on RIO prices, 
in case the DPOs agreed to their terms and conditions which included forcing all 
channels of the broadcaster and its associates to the consumers. If a DPO did 
not agree to such terms and conditions of broadcasters, then DPO would be 
forced to buy the channels on RIO prices (exo rbitantly high) from the 
broadcaster. DPO would then sell the channel to the consumer at a retail price 
which was decided by DPO. The flexibility given to the DPOs to fix retail price 
had also been misused. In some cases, it was found that the DPOs would 
charge Rs. 10/ - from consumers for a Free -to-Air (FTA) channel. TRAI noted 
that in several cases the price of FTA channels notified to subscribers was 
higher than the prices of some of the pay channels. The provisions of the 
previous regulatory framework, w ere being misused both by broadcasters and 
DPOs and the consumer offerings were distorted as the whole pricing structure 
was irrational and non-transparent for the consumers‖. 
63. Further, according to the Ministry,  monitoring cable operators has become 
increasingly challenging since the digitization of cable TV networks. Post digitization, 
the revenue share between broadcasters and cable operators is dependent on the 
exact number of subscribers which itself depends upon the adherence to TRAI 
regulations related to Audit.  Although, it falls under the purview of TRAI regulation, the 
Ministry has stepped in and classified the MSOs failing to get their systems Audited as 
per the TRAI regulations as ―Non -compliant‖, thus  making them unable to enter into 
fresh interconnection agreements until and unless requirement of Audit is fulfilled. 
 

50 
 
IX. GRIEVANCE REDRESSAL MECHANISM 
 
64. The Cable Television Networks (Regulation) Act, 1995 addresses grievances 
and complaints related to contents through a three -level structure: self -regulation by 
broadcasters, self -regulating bodies, and oversight by the Central Government. The 
Cable Television Networks (Amendment) Rules, 2021, further institutionalize s a 
statutory mechanism for redressal. 
65. According to the Ministry, with respect to the c onsumers‘ complaints against 
cable operators, a robust mechanism i.e. CPGRAMS portal is in place. The portal 
has been updated keeping in mind the exclusive need of consumers in relation to 
cable TV networks. The portal has stakeholders like TRAI, State Aut horities 
(Authorized Officer and State Police Authorities) etc. to whom the complaints against 
cable operators can be forwarded to in no time.  Moreover, a dedicated portal for 
complaints related to channel pricing, bouquet-related issues, quality -related issues 
etc. is being operated by TRAI. As regard consumer complaints regarding content, 
the Cable Television Networks Rules, 1994 were amended on 17th  June, 2021 to 
provide a statutory mechanism for redressal of grievances/ complaints of citizens 
relating to content broadcast by television channels. These Rules provide that in 
order to ensure observance and adherence to the Programme Code and 
Advertisement Code specified under the Cable Television Networks Rules, 1994, 
there shall be a 3-level structure as under:  
 Level I- A self-regulation by broadcaster.  
 Level II - Self- Regulation by the self -regulating bodies of the 
broadcasters; and 
 Level III- Oversight mechanism by the Central Government.  
 
*****

51 
 
Part – II 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS 
 
I. INTRODUCTION 
 
1. The Committee note that the cable TV industry in India has been an integral 
part of the Media and Entertainment (M&E) sector and forms the backbone of the 
Broadcasting distribution industry which has played a significant role in the 
growth of the electron ic media sector. With the growth in digital media, 
advancement in technology, and with the advent of OTT platforms, the cable TV 
subscriber base has witnessed a decline. The Committee note that as on 
September 2023, there are 915 Private Satellite TV Chann els permitted by the 
Ministry of Information and Broadcasting (MIB) which include 361 Pay Channels 
(257 SD Pay Channels and 104 HD Pay Channels) and 543 Free -to-Air (FTA) 
Channels and there are approximately 332 Broadcasters (including 42 Pay 
Broadcasters and 290 FTA Broadcasters). The Committee have been informed 
that there are 998 Multi -System Operators (MSOs) registered with the MIB and 
there are 81706 Cable Operators. The Committee have also been informed that 
there are 64.18 million total active Direct -to-Home (DTH) Subscribers, 0.58 million 
Internet Protocol Television (IPTV) Subscribers, 64 million Cable TV Households, 
2 million Headend -In-The-Sky (HITS) Subscribers, 50 million DD Free Dish 
households in the country. During the year 2022, the TV Reven ue was Rs. 70,900 
crore and out of that Rs. 39,200 crore was the subscription revenue and Rs. 
31,800 crore was the Advertisement Revenue.   
With respect to TV service value chain, the Committee note that the 
Broadcasting and Cable sector comprises of Broad casters, Distribution Platform 
Operators (DPOs), and Local Cable Operators (LCOs) to provide satellite 
television services to the consumers and the Broadcaster is responsible for 
uplinking the signals of their television channel to a satellite in an encryp ted 
form. The distributor then receives these signals from the satellite and decodes 
them using the decoder provided by the Broadcaster. The distributor is typically a 
company such as a Multiple System Operator (MSO), a Direct -to-Home (DTH) 

52 
 
operator, a Headend-In-The-Sky (HITS) operator, or an Internet Protocol Television 
(IPTV) operator. Once the distributor has received and decoded the signals, they 
process and merge the TV channel signals of multiple broadcasters and platform 
services. After merging thes e signals, the distributor encrypts the combined 
signals and retransmits them further, either directly or through the local cable 
operator (LCO), to the customer. This process ensures that the customer receives 
a clear and uninterrupted signal from the tel evision channel.  MSOs stand at the 
middle point in the hierarchy of the Cable Services Sector between the 
Broadcasters on one side and Local Cable Operators on the other. In some 
instances, MSOs also provide the services directly to their consumers.   
While examining the subject the Committee learnt that there has been a 
continuous decline in Cable TV Households and as per the Report of TRAI, the 
subscriber base of the Cable TV Industry has declined from 98.5 million (in 2018) 
to 67 million (in 2021) and f urther declining. The Committee also observed 
various constraints being faced by stakeholders in this sector. In the succeeding 
paragraphs, the Committee have examined various issues involved in the 
regulation of the cable TV industry in India and hope tha t the 
Observations/Recommendations will help in taking cognizance of the concerns 
related to this industry and addressing them too. 
II. REGULATION OF CABLE TELEVISION IN INDIA 
2. The Committee note that for regulating cable TV, „The Cable Television 
Networks (Regulation) Act 1995 (CTN Act)‟ and „The Cable Television Network 
Rules 1994‟ have been enacted and they are administered by the Ministry of 
Information and Broadcasting (MIB). The CTN Act comprises 5 chapters and 24 
sections and it includes guidelines  for cable networks operating within the 
country. The Act outlines provisions for mandatory registration of cable 
operators, categorizing them into Multi -System Operators (MSOs) and Local 
Cable Operators (LCOs). The Ministry of Information and Broadcasting  serves as 
the registering authority for MSOs whereas the registering authority for LCOs is 
the Head-Post office of the area in which they intend to operate.  

53 
 
 Initially enacted to safeguard subscriber interests and prevent the 
transmission of content agai nst national interests, the Act has undergone 
amendments to adapt to evolving technologies and industry dynamics. The 
recent amendment was done through the Jan Vishwas Act, 2023.  On the need for 
amendment of the CTN Act, 1995, the Ministry have informed that parity with other 
emerging technologies such as OTT has been the constant demand of the cable 
TV industry. The differential treatment of the content over different platforms 
(such as Programme Code and Advertisement Code for TV channels and IT Rules, 
2021 for content over the internet) is one of the primary reasons for distinctive 
features for each of the broadcasting services.  The Ministry have also informed 
that for creating a level playing field for all broadcasting services, the Cable 
Television Networks (Regulation) Act, 1995 may be amended and there is also a 
need to address the issues of satellite -based technologies which are being 
regulated through the old legislation. For this, the Ministry have prepared a draft 
„Broadcasting Services (Regulation) Bill, 2023‟ which was in the public domain to 
seek comments of stakeholders/general public by 15 th January, 2024. According 
to the Ministry, this proposed legislation aims to serve as a comprehensive 
framework governing various broadcasting services and emerging technologies. 
The Committee further note that as per the notification „Broadcasting 
services and cable services to be telecommunications service‟ made in 2004, the 
Telecom Regulatory Authority of India (TRAI) is mandated to regulate the 
Broadcasting and Cable Services.  As per the provisions of the TRAI Act, TRAI 
has two types of functions, that is Regulatory and Recommendatory. The 
Committee note that the TRAI oversees issues pertaining to tariff, quality of 
service (QoS), and interconnection ar rangements among different service 
providers in accordance with the TRAI Act of 1997.  In March 2017, TRAI notified 
the Regulatory Framework for „Digital Addressable Systems‟ and this framework 
comprised of (i) The Telecommunication (Broadcasting and Cable ) Services 
(Eighth) (Addressable Systems) Tariff Order (Tariff Order); (ii) The 
Telecommunication (Broadcasting and Cable) Services Interconnection 
(Addressable Systems) Regulations, (Interconnection Regulations); and (iii) The 
Telecommunication (Broadcast ing and Cable) Services Standards of Quality of 

54 
 
Service and Consumer Protection (Addressable Systems) Regulations, (QoS 
Regulations). 
The Committee note that for regulating the Cable TV industry there are not 
only multiple Acts, Rules, Guidelines, etc. but  there are also multiple regulatory 
bodies like MIB, TRAI, DoT, etc. For example, MIB serves as the registering 
authority for MSOs whereas the Head-Post office of the area serves as registering 
authority for Local Cable Operators. Besides, as submitted by MIB there is an 
urgent need for creating a level playing field for all broadcasting services as well 
as for addressing the need of satellite -based technologies which are being 
regulated through the old legislation. In view of the foregoing, the Committee a re 
of the opinion that the Cable TV industry needs to be regulated through a 
comprehensive Act and therefore recommend the Ministry to ensure that the 
proposed „Broadcasting Services (Regulation) Bill, 2023‟ sees the light of the day 
at the earliest since it will go a long way in resolving the concerns of this 
industry. Nevertheless, the Committee impress upon the Ministry to ensure that 
adequate consultations are done with all the concerned stakeholders. The 
Committee recommend that all the aspects concern ing the cable industry may be 
taken into consideration while bringing in the comprehensive Bill. The Committe e 
would further like to engage  in constructive discussions regarding the proposed 
draft legislation at a more mature stage of its formulation.  The  Committee also 
desire to be apprised of the timeline by which the Ministry would table the 
„Broadcasting Services (Regulation) Bill, 2023‟ for the consideration of the 
Parliament. The Committee desire to be apprised of the progress made in this 
regard. 
III. CONSTRAINTS/CHALLENGES FACED WITH RESPECT TO CABLE TV 
REGULATION IN INDIA 
3. With respect to the major issues concerning various players of the Cable 
TV industry viz. broadcasters, MSOs, LCOs, consumers, etc, TRAI has submitted 
that they engage with all  the stakeholders regularly from time to time to identify 
and address the issues. All the issues identified are duly analyzed for wider 
impact on the sector. The issues requiring changes in policy/ regulations are also 

55 
 
examined in-depth. They follow an ela borate consultation process before issuing 
any recommendations/ regulations. The issues are submitted by the stakeholders 
from time to time. In addition, TRAI constituted a committee to deliberate on the 
issues relating to the sector in November 2021 compr ising all stakeholders 
including representatives of MSOs, DTH service providers, and Broadcasters.  As 
informed to the Committee by All India Digital Cable Federation (AIDCF), some of 
the concerns related to the Cable industry include a declining subscribe r base, 
exponential increase in the channel prices by misusing their channel pricing 
freedom by Broadcasters, loss of livelihood of employees in the cable TV sector, 
etc. The Committee were also apprised of some of the constraints/challenges 
faced by the M inistry of Information and Broadcasting with respect to cable TV 
regulation in India include (i) Under -reporting of subscribers by cable operators 
leading to tax evasion and submission of inaccurate financial returns; (ii) 
Absence of robust oversight mecha nism at the ground level acting as major 
roadblock in ensuring compliance to the relevant regulations/guidelines; (iii) 
Absence of central database for Local Cable Operators because the registration 
process is offline/manual  and all LCOs are currently reg istered at the local head 
post office of their area of operations.; etc.  
The Committee further note the measures/initiatives taken to address the 
issues concerning various players of the Cable TV industry, TRAI has issued the 
consultation paper on „Issues  related to New Regulatory Framework for 
Broadcasting and Cable services‟ on 7 th May 2022 seeking stakeholders‟ 
comments. On the basis of this consultation, on 22 nd November 2022, TRAI 
notified the Telecommunication (Broadcasting and Cable) Services (Eight h) 
(Addressable Systems) Tariff (Third Amendment) Order, 2022 and the 
Telecommunication (Broadcasting and Cable) Services (Addressable Systems) 
Interconnection Regulations (Third Amendment) Order, 2022. Further, to address 
various issues, TRAI issued a con sultation paper titled „Review of Regulatory 
Framework for Broadcasting and Cable services‟ on 23 rd August 2023 seeking 
stakeholders‟ comments. The Committee have been informed that the comments/ 
counter-comments are being analyzed by TRAI. In this regard,  the Committee 
desire to be apprised about the updated status regarding the „Review of 

56 
 
Regulatory Framework for Broadcasting and Cable services‟ issued on 23rd 
August 2023 seeking stakeholders‟ comments along with the outcome on the 
following measures take n by MIB to ensure the growth of cable TV sector which 
includes (i) streamlining of procedures for Multi -System Operator (MSO) 
registration renewal, extending the period to ten years; (ii) Last Mile Access to 
Broadband service providers; (iii) Regulatory F ramework for Platform Services 
issued on 30.11.2022; (iv) guidelines issued on infrastructure sharing on 
29.12.2021, that is permitting Multi -System Operators (MSOs) to share 
infrastructure, including headends and networks, under specific conditions;  (v) 
streamlining the registration procedure for LCOs, etc.  
The Committee further recommend MIB to collaborate with the Ministry of 
Electronics and Information Technology (Meity) to develop a comprehensive 
digital solution for addressing underreporting among C able TV subscribers and 
the absence of an oversight mechanism. This solution should include an 
advanced digital platform with robust data analytics tools to detect and mitigate 
underreporting, real -time reporting features, standardized data protocols, and 
regular audits for ongoing effectiveness. The user -friendly interface will facilitate 
seamless reporting and monitoring, ensuring transparency and accountability 
within the Cable TV sector. 
The Committee would further urge the Ministry to (i) identify and address 
the issues acting as roadblocks of monitoring mechanism for ensuring 
compliance to the relevant regulations/guidelines; (ii) have a central database for 
monitoring cable operators; (ii) take initiatives for making Ministry of I&B as the 
registering authority for LCOs. The Committee would like to be apprised of the 
action taken on these issues. 
IV.  ROLE OF TRAI 
4. The predominant business model used in the Indian Cable TV Industry is 
based on the subscription model. This means that customers are req uired to pay 
a subscription fee to access a range of TV channels and programs. This fee is 
collected by Local Cable Operators (LCOs) or Multi -System Operators (MSOs) 
who then distribute the revenue generated to various parties as per the terms 

57 
 
agreed upon in interconnection agreements.  The interconnection agreements are 
contracts executed between the MSOs, LCOs, and broadcasters. The revenue 
distribution is based on a pre -agreed percentage split, which is typically 
determined based on various factors such as the number and type of channels 
offered, the customer base, and other related factors. The revenue share is 
typically distributed in proportion to the value provided by each party in the 
delivery of TV services.   The Committee have been informed that c able TV 
pricing is regulated by the Telecom Regulatory Authority of India (TRAI) under the 
framework known as the „New Tariff Order‟ (NTO) and the latest order i.e. NTO 3.0 
was introduced in 2022 to bring transparency and flexibility to cable TV pricing 
for consumers. Under NTO, the key points of the pricing policy include (i) 
Channel Pricing; Channel Bouquet Pricing; Network Capacity Fee (NCF) and MRP 
(Maximum Retail Price).   
With respect to measures taken by TRAI to control and monitor pricing and 
tariffs for cable TV subscribers, TRAI has informed that the framework was 
successful in establishing harmonized business processes in the sector, level 
playing field, bringing transparency in TV channel pricing, reducing litigations 
among stakeholders and provi ding equal opportunities to smaller Multi System 
Operators (MSOs). However, after a market survey in July -August 2019, the 
Authority considered it expedient to review some provisions, and, after due 
consultation amendments to the Regulatory Framework 2017 were notified on 1st 
January 2020.  However, the provisions related to the revision of television 
channels‟ prices in compliance with the January 2020 amendments could not be 
implemented due to the legal challenge and the Authority issued a letter dated 
12th October 2021 to the broadcasters seeking compliance with all the provisions 
of amended Regulatory Framework 2020 as upheld by Hon‟ble Court of Bombay 
within 10 days. Consequently, most of the broadcasters submitted their 
Reference Interconnect Offers (RIOs) to TRAI in line with the amended Regulatory 
Framework 2020 and published these on their websites in November 2021. As per 
RIOs filed by the broadcasters in November 2021, the new tariffs reflected a 
common trend i.e., the prices of their most popular channels including sports 
channels were enhanced beyond Rs. 19/ - per month. Immediately after new tariffs 

58 
 
were announced by the broadcasters, TRAI received representations from 
Distribution Platform Operators (DPOs), Associations of Local Cable Operators 
(LCOs), and Consumer Organizations stating that the new tariffs as announced by 
broadcasters would cause a huge increase in consumer payout and will also 
entail wide-scale changes necessitating large scale implementation efforts.   
TRAI also informed the Co mmittee that DPOs (including All India Digital 
Cable Federation) highlighted difficulties likely to be faced by them in 
implementing new rates in their IT systems and migrating the consumers in bulk 
to the new tariff regime through the informed exercise of  options, impacting 
almost all bouquets, due to upward revision in the rates of pay channels and 
bouquets. To deliberate on the various issues related to the implementation of the 
amended Regulatory Framework 2020 and suggest a way forward, a committee 
consisting of members from the Indian Broadcasting & Digital Foundation (IBDF), 
All India Digital Cable Federation (AIDCF) & DTH Association was constituted 
under the aegis of TRAI. To address the critical issues as identified by 
stakeholders, the Authority, after due consultation, notified the amendments, on 
22nd November 2022. The amendments have been duly implemented in January/ 
February 2023. The said amendments dated 22 nd November 2022 were challenged 
by one of the stakeholders in the Hon‟ble High Court o f Kerala. The amendments 
were upheld by the Hon‟ble Court. Further, according to TRAI Consumers are 
greatly empowered by the Regulatory Framework. A consumer becomes the real 
decision maker of what she/he views and has complete freedom to choose what 
he/she wishes to watch and pay only for that. The price of every television 
channel is clearly visible in the Electronic Program Guide on television. The 
consumer is not required to pay any subscription fee for an FTA channel if she/ 
he subscribes to one. The a mendments of January 2020 have increased the 
number of SD channels from 100 to 200 in the Network Capacity fee (NCF) of a 
maximum of Rs. 130/ - per month. Now NCF for 2 nd TV connection (or subsequent 
connections) is not more than 40% of declared NCF per additional TV.   
 

59 
 
On the decision of TRAI to not place a cap on channel pricing based on 
derived costing methodology for the benefit and protection of consumers, TRAI 
submitted that a channel consists of several programs. The cost of the 
production of differe nt programs drastically varies based on the actors, setup 
cost, script, copyrights, and other miscellaneous factors. The various programs 
in a given channel also frequently change based on their Television Rating Points 
(TRP), advertisement potential, and other ground reports. Hence, determining the 
cost of production of a channel at all times is an extremely difficult process, 
perhaps almost impossible. They also stated that Broadcasters should be given 
business flexibility to monetize their channels. 
Further, due to conflicting positions presented by AIDCF and TRAI during 
the deliberations, the Committee  urged both parties to engage in constructive 
dialogue and enhance mutual understanding before presenting their respective 
facts to the Co mmittee. The Comm ittee express  disappointment at TRAI's 
decision to instruct AIDCF to address pricing policy discrepancies without 
holding a meeting. Despite the Committee's clear directive, TRAI has persistently 
refused to engage with  AIDCF. The Committee emphasized  that fostering 
harmonious relations between the parties is crucial for achieving an amicable 
solution, but unfortunately, this collaborative approach has not been observed. 
The Committee acknowledge the complexity involved in determining channel 
pricing due to various factors influencing costing. Nevertheless, it emphasizes 
that TRAI holds a shared responsibility to ensure consumers receive services at a 
fair price. The Comm ittee further recognized  the paramount importance of 
providing consumers with good Quality-of-Service (QoS) under all circumstances. 
Given TRAI's pivotal role in fostering a healthy and competitive 
telecommunications and broadcasting ecosystem, the Committee recommend a 
collaborative effort among all stakeholders to address all the issues amic ably as 
it encourages parties to engage in constructive discussions, find mutually 
agreeable solutions, and take necessary actions to deliver optimal services to 
consumers. The Committee desire to be apprised regularly of the updates on the 
progress made in this regard. 

60 
 
V. ENHANCED FLEXIBILITY TO CURATE PERSONALIZED PACKAGES FROM 
BOUQUETS 
5. The Committee note that the central concern within the purview of Cable 
TV Regulations pertain s to the prevalent practice of B roadcasters implementing 
substantial discounts in the pricing of their bouquets while maintaining ele vated 
individual prices for a -la-carte channels. The Committee was informed by AIDCF 
that TRAI has given complete forbearance to Broadcasters to price their channels 
at any level (except for a noti onal capping at Rs. 19 if the channels are to be 
included in Bouquet). This is being misused by Broadcasters, as they have 
significantly increased their Pay TV channel Prices by up to 600% after the 
implementation of the New Tariff Order in 2019 and a further hike of up to 200% in 
some cases after the implementation of NTO 3.0, by force bundling all their 
channels, which is eventually becoming a burden on Pay TV subscriber . 
According to AIDCF, the B roadcaster makes a bouquet of channels (which 
include one o r two driver channels and about 7 -8 unpopular channels) and 
demands MSOs and DTH players to sell the same bouquet to a minimum of 90% 
of the subscriber base without breaking the bouquet.  MSO does not get the 
incentive if 90% of subscribers do not subscrib e to the bouquet intact. This 
means a common man pays for 7 -8 unwanted channels which include English 
channels, sports channels (which have important events only 2 -3 months in a 
year). AIDCF also submitted that the Cable TV monthly prices for the consumers  
have significantly increased from Rs. 200 -300 in 2017 -18 to Rs. 350 -450 in 20 22-
23; DPOs are forced to sell B roadcaster‟s bouquets and A -la-carte prices of the 
channel are artificially hiked, so that consumer is also forced to purchase 
bouquets only. They  have also stated that the TRAI consultation paper in 2019 
have pointed out this, but no action was taken to correct it.  
 The Committee discern that, since DPOs are the primary service providers 
operating through Local Cable Operators (LCOs), therefore, t he DPOs are 
strategically positioned to perceive and respond to the nuanced preferences and 
requirements of subscribers. The Committee acknowledge that the current 
practice of compelling subscribers to opt for predefined bouquets offered by 

61 
 
Broadcasters ac ts as a hindrance to consumer choice. While the  Committee do 
not question the B roadcasters' intent, it perceives that this practice does not 
align with the interests of consumers. Therefore, in order to safeguard consumer 
interests and promote freedom of c hoice, the Committee recommend that 
Distribution Platform Operators (DPOs) be granted the authority to select 
individual channels from broadcasters' bouquets. Further, in order to ensure that 
consumers have the flexibility to subscribe only to channels of their interest, 
fostering a more personalized viewing experience, the Committee recommend 
that DPOs should only be permitted to choose channels based on consumer 
preferences and remit to broadcasters the proportional price of the selected 
channels. The Committee wish to be apprised of the action taken in this regard.   
 
VI. DEMARCATION IN THE ADVERTISING GUIDELINES BETWEEN PAY TV AND 
FTA CHANNELS: 
6. During the deliberation of the Committee, the stakeholders submitted that 
Broadcasters push their non -driver channels by bundling them with „driver 
channels‟ to earn advertisement revenues. The Committee were further informed 
that the „Pay TV‟ channels are showing a plethora of advertisements, despite 
charging hefty subscription fees from subscribers. It was fur ther stated that 
establishing a clear demarcation in the advertising guidelines between Pay TV 
and FTA channels is in the interest of the consumer. The Committee consider that 
there is a need for a thoughtful examination of such issues to safeguard 
consumer interests. The Committee, therefore, call upon for a categorization of 
channels as either „Pay-TV‟ or „Free-to-air‟ (FTA), based on the respective sources 
of revenue. The Committee, therefore, recommend for initiating a comprehensive 
consultation focused  on the costing methodology of TV channels. This 
consultation should also aim to tackle the issue where consumers, who are 
essentially paying subscription fees, find themselves subjected to 
advertisements for a significant duration of their viewing experience. 
 
 

62 
 
VII. ISSUES RELATED TO AGR DEMAND: 
7. With respect to „Adjusted Gross Revenue Demand‟ (AGR), AIDCF have 
informed that Department of Telecommunication has raised wrongful demand to 
the tune of Rs. 7,000 Crore on Cable TV operators /MSOs by computing license 
fee on their Cable TV revenues (which do not come under the ISP license as 
MSOs operate under registration from Ministry of Information and Broadcasting), 
whilst license fee on the pure internet services itself was exempt under DOT 
License. It was also stated that several MSOs received the demand 
retrospectively with huge penalty and interest on Penalty based on wrong 
interpretation of the Hon‟ble Supreme Court order delivered on 24.10.2019, in 
Union of India v. Association of Unified Telecom Service Providers of India, (2020) 
3 SCC 525 (hereinafter referred to as “AGR Judgment”) in which MSOs are not at 
all parties and the ISP license /Unified License under which they operate is 
different from UAS license. The amount is so large that the MSOs will b e pushed 
to bankruptcy.  
  AIDCF have also informed that the demands raised by the DoT are 
unsustainable because the ISP licenses issued to MSOs are different from the 
UAS License considered by the Hon‟ble Supreme Court in the AGR Judgment. In 
1999, UAS li cense holders requested the Government for a migration package 
from a Fixed license fee to a license fee as a revenue share as they were not able 
to pay huge, fixed fees. MSOs are not covered by such a migration package. 
MSOs were never in the actual busin ess of providing mobile services to the 
public like the parties before the Hon‟ble Supreme Court. Two businesses - Cable 
TV and Internet Services - are under two different ministries, i.e., the Ministry of 
Information and Broadcasting and the Department of  Telecommunication, 
respectively, and under different licenses.  When the DoT were asked to provide a 
detailed account of the demands for license fees raised by the DoT on Multi 
System Operators (MSOs) for simultaneously offering internet services under 
Internet service provider licenses and the reasons for the demands, they 
informed that they grant licenses under section 4 of Indian Telegraph Act 1885 to 
offer various telecommunication services including Internet services. Any 

63 
 
company that proposes to offer Internet services is required to obtain the Internet 
Service provider license granted by DoT. It was further added that the matter is 
still sub judice and the next hearing of the case is on 23.01.2024. Since the matter 
is sub judice, the Committee would not like to furnish its comment at this stage, 
however, the Committee desire to be kept apprised about the development on this 
issue. 
VIII. ISSUE RELATED TO GST LIABILITIES 
8. The Committee acknowledge the complex dynamics between Multi -System 
Operators (MSOs) and Local Cable Operators (LCOs) within the cable television 
service ecosystem, particularly concerning Goods and Services Tax (GST) 
liabilities. As informed by the stakeholders, the Supreme Court, in the case of M/s 
Hathway Sukhamrit Cable and Dataco m (P) Ltd., has outlined that Local Cable 
Operators (LCOs) receive signals from Multiple System Operators (MSOs), and 
the ultimate consumers or subscribers receive signals from LCOs. Moreover, the 
judgment has established that the service recipient for MSO s is the LCO, and for 
LCOs, it is the ultimate subscriber s. The judgment emphasized that  
notwithstanding the provision of access to television channels through set -top 
boxes by MSOs, the interface between ultimate consumers and cable signals 
remains the ex clusive domain of LCOs. The Committee find  these observations 
crucial as they help in understanding the distinct roles and responsibilities of 
MSOs, LCOs, and ultimate subscribers. 
 The Committee recognize that LCOs wield control over, manage, and 
service the cable television network, and they are responsible for collecting 
charges from subscribers. The Committee are of the considered opinion that any 
GST and entertainment tax liabilities pertinent to LCOs should be exclusively 
discharged by LCOs, as per th e applicable norms. Thus, in order to maintain fair 
distribution of tax responsibilities, the Committee strongly urge to hold an inter -
Departmental consultation between Ministry of Information and Broadcasting and 
Department of Revenue with a mandate to de fine GST responsibilities within the 
sector, aiming to protect the interests of both MSOs and LCOs, with an approach 
meant to create a fair and effective tax system for the cable television sector. 

64 
 
IX. ISSUE OF EMPLOYMENT 
9. According to „All India Digital  Cable Federation (AIDCF)‟, an association of 
major Multi -system Operators functioning in India, approximately 3lakh 
employees have lost their livelihood in the last 4 years, and additionally, around 3 
lakh workforce is on the verge of losing their livelih ood in cable TV industry 
across India due to massive reduction in cable TV base. When asked to provide 
the data related to number of job losses that have occurred in the past 5 years 
due to the declining subscriber base in the Cable TV industry, the Minist ry 
informed the Committee that the employment landscape in the cable TV sector is 
predominantly informal and lacks a standardized record -keeping and reporting 
system. Unlike industries with a higher prevalence of contract -based 
employment, the cable TV ind ustry often engages a significant portion of its 
workforce on an informal basis, making it challenging to compile specific data on 
job losses attributed to the declining subscriber base. However, the associations 
of MSOs and LCOs have claimed sustained red uction in the workforce in the 
industry over the last 5 years.  The Committee while taking note that the decline 
in the work force in Cable TV sector is one of the inevitable effects o f the 
advancement of technology call upon the Ministry to apprise about the measures 
envisaged to address this issue.  
 
X. IMPACT OF OTT PLATFORMS ON THE CABLE TV 
10. The Committee note that the emergence of Over -The-Top (OTT) platforms 
has brought about significant transformations in India's cable TV industry, 
impacting both regulatory frameworks and market dynamics. Since OTT 
platforms offer cost-effective access, on-demand content and flexibility, it has led 
to eroding of the market share of traditional cable TV services. The entry of global 
players into the Indian market ha s also added to the competition, as they can 
invest significantly in content creation and distribution, posing a substantial 
challenge to cable TV operators. While cable TV is governed by established 
regulations such as the Cable Television Networks (Regul ation) Act, 1995 and the 
Telecom Regulatory Authority of India (TRAI) Act, 1997, OTT platforms have 

65 
 
largely operated outside these regulations and they fall under the „Information 
Technology (Intermediary Guidelines and Digital Media Ethics Code) Rules, 20 21‟. 
Content regulation differs as well, with cable TV subject to the Programme Code 
and Advertisement Code, whereas for OTT platforms there is the „IT Rules, 2021‟ 
and content regulation on OTT faces controversy due to concerns about 
objectionable material.  
 Elaborating on the strategies that were being implemented by the Ministry 
to ensure content parity between OTT applications, Cable TV, and DTH 
subscribers, the Ministry informed the Committee that the content provided on 
linear broadcasting (Cable TV,  and DTH subscribers) and on -demand platforms 
like OTT is treated differently owing to the expressed consent and desire of 
consumers exercised while accessing the on -demand platforms. However, the 
draft „Broadcasting Services (Regulation) Bill, 2023‟ which  intends to bring on -
demand platforms like OTT which has been prepared is also under its preview. A 
single legislation and apex self -regulation body named Broadcast Advisory 
Council (BAC) is expected to bring reasonable parity on content while respecting 
the differences in the nature of broadcasting.  To bring OTT application services 
within the scope of the Cable Television Networks Regulation Act, 1995, and „The 
Cable Television Networks Rules, 1994‟, or other content regulations, the 
Committee note that the MIB have prepared the draft Broadcasting Services 
(Regulation) Bill, 2023. The Committee hope that this legislation would act as an 
umbrella legislation for the Broadcasting Services as it aims to cover online 
curated content (for example OTT) and publisher of news under its ambit.  
 The Committee further observe that there is a need to rectify the existing 
disparity between Cable TV and OTT Platforms. With the aim of eliminating 
content disparities across various content delivery platforms, the Committ ee 
recommend the Ministry to enact a comprehensive regulatory framework . This 
framework should compel B roadcasters to make their content accessible on all 
available platforms, ensuring a level playing field for cable television and 
analogous technologies. Such measures, would aid in promoting fairness, 
diversity, and accessibility in the content distribution landscape, benefiting both 

66 
 
consumers and industry stakeholders. The Committee further expect that the 
issue related to content parity will be resolved at the earliest.  
 
XI. GRIEVANCE REDRESSAL MECHANISM 
11. The Committee note that „The Cable Television Networks (Regulation) Act, 
1995‟ addresses grievances and complaints related to contents through a three -
level structure: self -regulation by broadcasters , self -regulating bodies, and 
oversight by the Central Government. The Ministry have informed that with 
respect to the consumers‟ complaints against cable operators, a robust 
mechanism i.e. Centralized Public Grievance Redress and Monitoring System 
(CPGRAMS) portal is in place. The portal has been updated keeping in mind the 
exclusive need of consumers in relation to cable TV networks. The portal has 
stakeholders like TRAI, State Authorities (Authorized Officer and State Police 
Authorities) etc. to whom the  complaints against cable operators can be 
forwarded to in no time. In addition to this there is a dedicated portal for 
complaints related to channel pricing, bouquet -related issues, quality -related 
issues etc. is being operated by TRAI.  
The Committee fur ther learnt that the Cable Television Networks Rules, 
1994 were amended on 17th June, 2021 so as to provide a statutory mechanism 
for redressal of grievances/ complaints of citizens relating to content broadcast 
by television channels. As per these Rules, to ensure observance and adherence 
to the Programme Code and Advertisement Code specified under the Cable 
Television Networks Rules, 1994, there should be a 3 -level structure that is at 
Level I - self-regulation by broadcaster; at Level II - Self- Regulation by the self -
regulating bodies of the broadcasters; at Level III - an oversight mechanism by 
the Central Government.  While noting that „The Cable Television Networks 
(Amendment) Rules, 2021, institutionalizes a statutory mechanism for grievance 
redressal and CPGRAMS portal is in place for consumers‟ complaints against 
cable operators, the Committee desire to be kept apprised of the number of 
grievances addressed at Level I, II and III since 2021. The Committee would also 
like to be apprised about the cas es handled by the dedicated portal operated by 

67 
 
TRAI that is meant for complaints related to channel pricing, bouquet -related 
issues, quality-related issues etc., along with the reasons for delay in addressing 
the complaints, if any. Nevertheless, the Commi ttee also recommend the Ministry 
to make the grievance redressal mechanism more consumer friendly and create 
awareness drive for Consumer about the Grievance Redressal Mechanism that is 
available as it is very essential for a robust and responsive cable TV  eco-system. 
The Committee would like to be apprised of the progress made in this regard. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
*****
New Delhi;    PRATAPRAO  JADHAV, 
          06   February, 2024 Chairperson, 
          17  Magha, 1945 (Saka) Standing Committee on  
Communications and Information Technology. 

68 
 
 
ANNEXURE-I 
Key Recommendations of TRAI for Cable Television 
Date Recommendations 
12.11.2008 Recommendations on ―Issues relating to entry of certain entities 
into broadcasting and distribution activities‖.  
30.06.2010 Recommendations on ―Foreign Investment Limits for 
Broadcasting Sector‖.    
05.08.2010  Recommendations on ―Implementation of Digital Addressable 
Cable TV Systems in India‖.  
22.08.2013  Recommendations on ―Foreign Direct Investments (FDI) in 
Broadcasting Sector in India‖.  
26.11.2013  Recommendations on ―Monopoly/Market dominance in cable TV 
services‖     
12.08.2014  Recommendations on ―Issues Relating to Media Ownership‖  
   
19.11.2014  Recommendations on ―Regulatory Framework for Platform 
Services‖.    
29.03.2017 Recommendations on Sharing of Infrastructure in Television 
Broadcasting Distribution Sector 
26.02.2018 Recommendations on Ease of Doing Business in Broadcasting 
Sector. 
22.07.2019 Recommendations on Entry Level Net worth requirement of 
Multi-system Operators in Cable TV services. 
11.04.2020 Recommendations on Interoperability of Set-Top Box 
07.09.2022 Recommendations on Market Structure/Competition in cable TV 
services'' 
29.12.2022 Recommendations on 'Renewal of Multi-System Operators 
(MSOs) Registration' 
31.03.2023 Recommendations on Promoting Local Manufacturing in the 
Television Broadcasting Sector 
02.05.2023 Recommendations on Ease of Doing Business in Telecom and 
Broadcasting Sector 

69 
 
Appendix-I 
 
  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON COMMUNICATIONS AND  
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (2023-24) 
 
MINUTES OF THE THIRD SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
----------- 
 The Committee sat on Thursday, the 14 December, 2023 from 1615 hours to          
1745 hours in Committee Room No. ‗3‘, Extens ion to Parliament House Annexe,  New 
Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Shri Prataprao Jadhav- Chairperson 
 MEMBERS 
  
Lok Sabha 
2.  Shri Karti P. Chidambaram 
3.      Smt. Sunita Duggal 
4.  Dr. Sukanta Majumdar 
5.  Shri Santosh Pandey 
6.  Shri Sanjay Seth 
7.      Shri Ganesh Singh 
8.      Shri Shatrughan Prasad Sinha 
 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
9.  Dr. Anil Aggarwal 
10.  Dr. John Brittas 
11.       Shri Syed Nasir Hussain 
12.  Shri Praful Patel 
13.  Shri Kartikeya Sharma 
14.  Shri Jawahar Sircar 
15.  Shri Lahar Singh Siroya 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Satpal Gulati  - Additional Secretary 
2. Smt. Jyothirmayi  - Director 
3. Shri Nishant Mehra   - Deputy Secretary 
 

70 
 
 
LIST OF WITNESSES 
 
REPRESENTATIVES FROM MINISTRY OF INFORMATION AND BROADCASTING 
Sl. No. Name Designation 
 Shri Apurva Chandra Secretary  
 Shri Sanjiv Shankar Joint Secretary   
 
REPRESENTATIVES FROM MINISTRY OF COMMUNICATIONS  
(DEPARTMET OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS) 
 
Sl. No. Name Designation 
1.  Shri Mohammad Shahbaz Ali Advisor (F) 
 
REPRESENTATIVES FROM TELECOM REGULATORY AUTHORITY OF INDIA (TRAI) 
 
Sl. No. Name Designation 
1.  Ms. Meenakshi Gupta Member & Acting Chairperson 
 
REPRESENTATIVES FROM ALL INDIA DIGITAL CABLE FEDERATION (AIDCF) 
 
Sl. No. Name Designation 
1.  Sh. Manoj Chhangani Secretary General, AIDCF 
2.  Sh. S N Sharma CEO, DEN Networks Limited 
3.  Sh. Yogesh Sharma CEO, Siti Cable Network 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welc omed the Members to the Sitting of the 
Committee convened to consider and adopt two draft Action Taken Reports on Demands 
for Grants (2023 -24) relating to the Ministries/Departments under their jurisdiction and to 
have briefing by the representatives of th e Ministry of Information and Broadcasting, 
Department of Telecommunications, Telecom Regulatory Authority of India (TRAI) and All 
India Digital Cable Federation (AIDCF)  on the Subject ‗Regulation of Cable Television in 
India‘ relating to Ministry of Information and Broadcasting. 
 
3. The Committee, then, took up the following two draft Reports for consideration and 
adoption:- 
(i) Draft Report on Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Forty -
fifth Repo rt on ‗Demands for Grants (2023 -24)‘ relating to the Ministry of 
Electronics and Information Technology. 
(ii) Draft Report on Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their              
Forty-seventh Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on ‗Review of functioning of 

71 
 
Central Board of Film Certification (CBFC)‘ relating to the Ministry of 
Information and Broadcasting.  
4. The Committee adopted the Reports without modifications. 
 
5. The Committee authorized the Chairperson  to finalize the draft Action Taken 
Reports and present the same to the House during the current Session of Parliament. 
 
(The witnesses were then called in) 
6. Thereafter, the Chairperson welcomed the officials of the Ministry of Information and 
Broadcasting to the Sitting of the Committee. The Chairperson, in his opening remarks 
drew their attention to the recent amendment made in the Cable Television Networks 
(Regulation) Act, 1995 through the Jan Vishwas (Amendment of Provisions) Act, 2023 
which decriminalized the contraventions under the Act and asked the Ministry to elaborate 
as to why the contraventions were decriminalized. Further, with change in the mandate of 
the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting and emergence of OTT platforms, he desired 
to know about the constraints/challenges being faced by the Ministry with respect to cable 
TV regulation in India as well as the need for amending the CTN Act.   The Ministry were 
asked to provide details of issues that have emerged post-digitization of cable TV alongwith 
the measures taken to address them.   They were also asked about the existing pricing 
policy of cable TV channels and the role of TRAI to regulate the same. The Chairperson, 
then, desired to know about the role of ‗All India Digital Cable Federati on (AIDCF)‘ in 
regulation of cable TV in India. He also sought details of the complaints received against 
cable TV operators‘ in last 3 years alongwith their redressal status and the means available 
to consumers for redressal of their grievances with regard to choice of channels, their rates, 
etc. The Ministry were also asked to apprise the Committee about the impact of OTT 
platforms on cable TV popularity, if any.   
 
7. Thereafter, the representatives of AIDCF sought permission to make a brief 
presentation be fore the Committee and through power point presentation myriad issues 
related to the subject were covered which inter-alia included (i) Impact of increase in price 
of a-la-carte channels from pre -New Tariff Order (NTO) regime to New Tariff Order (NTO) 
3.0 regime; (ii) Variation in price of channel given by broadcasters to different Multi System 
Operators (MSO); (iii) issues related to increase in subscription cost; (iv) Issues related to 
payment of more price for less number of channels when compared to pre -NTO prices; (v) 
Issues related to creation of bouquet of channels by Broadcasters and non -allowance of 
breaking of bouquet of channels created by the Broadcasters; (vii) Lakhs of people losing 
their jobs because only 110 million (approximately) satellite homes in India including about 
55 million cable homes were there and remaining were DTH; etc.  
 
8. Subsequently, the Secretary, M/o I&B was asked to respond to the issues 
deliberated upon and he informed the Committee that the whole issue was regarding NTO - 
NTO 1.0, NTO 2.0, NTO 3.0. The Government was not party to it because it is directly 
between TRAI and the Broadcasters and it was directly an order passed by TRAI and the 
NTO was applicable to the Broadcasters, to the channel bouquets (whether it goes to D TH 
or to the cable). Elaborating further, the Secretary informed the Committee about reduction 
in existing 18 crores TV homes (DTH and cables) and rise in Free dish. He also informed 

72 
 
the Committee that people were consuming more content today due to advanc ement of 
technology, preference of OTT content and internet content instead of linear TV. 
 
9. Thereafter, the representatives of TRAI, through a power point presentation clarified 
the issues raised by AIDCF which inter-alia included (i) The role of TRAI to pr otect the 
interest of service provider and to promote and ensure orderly growth of the sector;           
(ii) Four phases of digitization of Cable TV; (iii) Issues associated with freezing of price of 
channels in January 2004; (iv) Issue related to WPI based increase done in 2005, 2006 and 
2009; (v) Tariff order that came for the first time in 2010 and the addressable system price 
made applicable to MSOs as soon as they started migrating to DASH -based system; (vi) 
Measures taken after 2017 i.e. non -prescription of ceiling on a -la-carte channels and 
prescription of a ceiling of Rs. 19 for putting channels into a bouquet; (vii) Segregation of 
the network cost and charging of network capacity fee (NCF); etc. TRAI also informed the 
Committee that there are total number of 906 channels wherein 550 channels are free to air 
and 213 are pay channels and these pay channels decreased their prices because of 2017. 
 
10. After that, the Committee deliberated and sought clarifications on various issues 
which inter-alia included (i) Channels given to customer in pre-NTO and NTO 3.0 period; (ii) 
Discrimination in price given by broadcasters from Multi System Operators (MSO) to MSO; 
(iii) National data regarding amount/price that the consumers would have shelled out due to 
price increase; (iv) Actual number of cable and satellite homes in the country;  (v) Validity of 
NTO even on digital dispensation like smart TVs; (vi) Same content of TV being available 
on digital platform without any tariff orders; (vii) Cost of a pack for same number of 
channels in comparison to what it costed in September 2019; (viii) Broadcasters being free 
to price the channel at any price without any threshold for a -la-carte channels; (ix) 
satisfaction level of consumers after New Tariff Orders;  (x) Issues associated with 
digitization of Cable TV; (xi) Issues related to reconciling the difference in number of TRAI 
and AIDCF and meeting between them; (xii) Pay -TV channel ecosystem being affected by 
OTT platforms  and Free Dish TVs; (xiii) Issues related to Re venue share/generation of the 
Broadcasters; etc. 
 
11. The representatives of M/o I&B, TRAI, DoT and AIDCF responded to most of the 
queries raised by the Members. The Chairperson, then, directed that written replies may be 
furnished to the Committee to the points on which information were not readily available. 
 
12. Thereafter, the Chairperson thanked the representatives of M/o I&B, TRAI, DoT and 
AIDCF for deposing before the Committee.  
 
The witnesses then withdrew. 
Verbatim Proceedings of the Sitting have been kept on record. 
 
The Committee, then, adjourned. 
 
***** 

73 
 
 Appendix-II 
  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON COMMUNICATIONS  
AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (2023-24) 
 
MINUTES OF THE FOURTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
----------- 
  
The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 6th Feb, 2024 from 1500 hours to 1535 hours in 
Main Committee Room, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
Shri Prataprao Jadhav- Chairperson 
 
 MEMBERS 
  
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri Karti P. Chidambaram 
3. Smt. Raksha Nikhil Khadse 
4. Dr. Sukanta Majumdar 
5. Shri Santosh Pandey 
6. Shri Shatrughan Prasad Sinha 
7.  Dr. M.K. Vishnu Prasad 
 
Rajya Sabha 
8.     Dr. Anil Aggarwal 
9.     Dr. John Brittas 
10.     Shri Jaggesh  
11.     Shri Jawahar Sircar 
12.     Shri Lahar Singh Siroya 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1.     Shri Satpal Gulati  - Additional Secretary 
2. Smt. Jyothirmayi  - Director 
3. Shri Nishant Mehra   - Deputy Secretary 
 
 
 
 

74 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson  welcomed the Members to the S itting of the 
Committee convened to consider and adopt Reports relating to the Ministries/Departments 
under their jurisdiction. 
 
3. The Committ ee, then, took up the following draft Reports  for consideration and 
adoption:- 
(iii) xxxxxxxx…………xxxxxxxx……………xxxxxxxx……………xxxxxxxx 
(iv) xxxxxxxx…………xxxxxxxx……………xxxxxxxx……………xxxxxxxx 
(v) Draft Report on the subject ‗Regulation of Cable Television in India‘ 
relating to Ministry of Information and Broadcasting 
(vi) xxxxxxxx…………xxxxxxxx……………xxxxxxxx……………xxxxxxxx 
4. After due deliberations, the Committee adopted the Reports without modifications. 
5. The Committee authorized the Chairperson to finalize the draft Reports and present 
the same to the House during the current Session of Parliament. 
The Committee, then, adjourned. 
 
 
xxxxxxxx…………xxxxxxxx…. Matter not related 
 
 