STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(2020-21) 
 
 
SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF COMMUNICATIONS   
(DEPARTMENT OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS) 
 
 
 
 
INDIA‘S PREPAREDNESS FOR 5G 
 
TWENTY- FIRST REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
 
February, 2021/Magha, 1942 (Saka) 
 
 
 
21 


 
TWENTY- FIRST REPORT 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(2020-21) 
 
 
SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
MINISTRY OF COMMUNICATIONS   
(DEPARTMENT OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS) 
 
 
INDIA‘S PREPAREDNESS FOR 5G 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 08.02.2021  
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 08.02.2021 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
 
 
February, 2021/Magha, 1942 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 


(i) 
CONTENTS 
  Page  
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (iii) 
ABBREVIATIONS (iv) 
INTRODUCTION (vi) 
 REPORT  
 PART I  
I.  Introduction 
 
1 
II.  5G Technology: Next Generation of Mobile Communications 1 
(i)  Definition and Salient Features 1 
(ii)  Advantages of 5G vis-à-vis other technologies 2 
(iii)  Benefit and Relevance for India 5 
(iv)  Race for 5G Around the World 
 
6 
III.  India‘s Preparedness for 5G Ecosystem 7 
(i)  DoT High Level Forum on 5G  7 
IV.  Spectrum Related Issues  10 
(i)  Availability of Spectrum for 5G 10 
(ii)  Spectrum Audit 13 
(iii)  High Spectrum Price in the Country 14 
(iv)  Spectrum for Industrial Use 
 
17 
V.  5G Test Bed, Use Case and 5G Field Trials  20 
(i)  Setting up of Indigenous 5G Test Bed 20 
(ii)  Setting up of 5G Use Case Labs 22 
(iii)  5G Field Trial and Experimental Spectrum for Field Trials 
 
25 
VI.  Issues Relating to Standards  27 
(i)  India‘s Contribution in Development of 5G Standards 27 
(ii)  Need for Harmonization of Indian Standards with Global Standards 
 
29 
VII.  Device Eco-system for 5G 33 
(i)  Affordable Handsets 33 
(ii)  Promotion of Domestic Manufacturing of Telecom Equipment 34 
 (iii)  Development of Indigenous 5G Technology 36 
 (iv)  Development of Open RAN in the Telecom Network 38 
VIII.  Infrastructure & RoW Policy Issues 39 
(i)  Fiberisation and RoW Policy Issues 39 
(ii)  Requirement of Small Cells 42 
 (iii)  Sharing of Infrastructure   
 
44 
IX.  Use of E and V Bands for Backhaul Spectrum 46 
X.  Security Related Issues in 5G Scenario  
 
48 
(i)  Threat from Imported Telecom Equipment 
 
 
51 

(ii) 
XI.  Other Issues 52 
(i)  Need for Investment 52 
(ii)  Availability of Reliable Power Supply 53 
(iii)  5G to BSNL and MTNL 54 
 (iv)  Coordinated Efforts across Sectors for 5G Eco-system 56 
 (v)  5G and Health Concerns 58 
 PART II  
 OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS 61 
 APPENDICES  
I. Minutes of the Twenty -first sitting of  the Committee (2019 -20) held on             
11th August, 2020. 
102 
II. Minutes of the Fourth sitting of the Committee (2020 -21) held on 27 th October, 
2020. 
106 
III. Minutes of the Fifth sitting of the Committee (2020 -21) held on 10 th November,   
2020. 
112 
Iv. Minutes of the Fifteenth sitting of the Committee (2020-21) held on 3rd February, 
2021. 
115 
 

(iii) 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY  
(2020-21) 
 
Dr. Shashi Tharoor - Chairperson 
Lok Sabha 
2. Smt. Locket Chatterjee 
3. Shri Karti P. Chidambaram 
4. Shri Sunny Deol  
5. Dr. Nishikant Dubey  
6. Smt. Raksha Nikhil Khadse  
7. Dr. Sukanta Majumdar  
8. Shri Dhairyasheel Sambhajirao Mane 
9. Ms. Mahua Moitra 
10. Shri P. R. Natarajan 
11. Shri Santosh Pandey 
12. Shri Nisith Pramanik  
13. Col. Rajyavardhan Singh Rathore 
14. Dr. Gaddam Ranjith Reddy  
15. *Shri Jayadev Galla 
16. Shri Sanjay Seth  
17. Shri Chandan Singh 
18. Shri L.S. Tejasvi Surya 
19. Dr. T. Sumathy (A) Thamizhachi Thangapandian  
20. Shri Bhanu Pratap Singh Verma 
21. #Smt. Sumalatha Ambareesh 
 
Rajya Sabha 
22. Dr. Anil Agrawal  
23. Dr. Subhash Chandra  
24. Shri Y. S. Chowdary  
25. Shri Shaktisinh Gohil 
26. Shri Suresh Gopi  
27. Shri Md. Nadimul Haque 
28. Shri Syed Nasir Hussain  
29. Shri Syed Zafar Islam 
30. Dr. Narendra Jadhav  
31. Shri Nabam Rebia 
Secretariat 
 
1. Shri Y. M. Kandpal  - Joint Secretary 
2. Dr. Sagarika Dash  - Additional Director 
3. Shri Shangreiso Zimik  - Deputy Secretary 
___________________________________________________________________ 
*Nominated to this Committee w.e.f. 15.10.2020 vide Bulletin Part -II dated 
15.10.2020. 
#Nominated to this Committee w.e.f. 28.12.2020 vide Bulletin Part -II dated 
28.12.2020.

 
(iv) 
ABBREVIATIONS 
 
3GPP              3rd Generation Partnership Project 
5G   Fifth Generation  
AR    Augmented Reality   
BBNL Bharat  Broadband Network Limited  
BIS   Bureau of Indian Standards  
BRI   Broadband Readiness Index  
CEWiT  Centre of Excellence in Wireless Technology  
CMRTS    Captive Mobile Radio Trunking 
CMSP   Cellular Mobile Service Provider  
COAI    Cellular Operators Association of India  
DoS    Department of Space  
DoT   Department of Telecommunications  
EMBB   Enhanced Mobile Broadband  
EMS   Electronics Manufacturing Services  
ER   Essential Requirements   
EU    European Union 
GHz    Gigahertz  
HLF   High Level Forum  
ICNIRP            International Commission on Non-Ionizing Radiation Protection  
ICRIER) Indian Council for Research on International Economic 
Relations  
IDRBT  Institute for Development and Research in Banking Technology  
IMC   Inter-Ministerial Committee  
IMG   Inter-Ministerial Group  
IoT   Internet of Things  
 ITU    International Telecommunications Union 
LMLC   Low Mobility Large Cell  
LSA   Licensed Service Area  
MHz   Megahertz 
MMTC  Massive Machine Type Communications  
MoD   Ministry of Defence  
M-SIPS  Modified Special Incentive Package Scheme  
MTCTE Mandatory Testing and Certification of Telecommunication 
Equipment   
NCCS   National Centre for Communication Security   
NDCP   National Digital Communication Policy   
NPV   Net Present Value  
OFC.   Optical Fiber Cable   
PLI   Production Linked Incentive  
PMP   Phased Manufacturing Programme  
RAN   Radio Access Network  
SMEs    Small and medium Enterprises 
SPECS Scheme for Promotion of Manufacturing of Electronic 
Components and Semiconductors  

(v) 
TAIPA   Tower and Infrastructure Providers Association  
TEC   Telecom Engineering Centre  
TEMA   Telecom Equipment Manufacturers Association of India  
TRAI    Telecom Regulatory Authority of India 
TRDF   Telecom Research and Development Fund   
TSDSI   Telecom Standards Development Society, India  
TSP   Telecom Service Provider  
UASL   Unified Access Service License  
URLLC  Ultra-reliable and Low-Latency Communications  
VR    Virtual Reality 
WHO   World Health Organization  

 
(vi) 
INTRODUCTION 
  I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Information Technology         
(2020-21), having been authorized by the Committee do present the Twenty -first 
Report on ‗India‘s Preparedness for 5G‘ relating to the Ministry of Communications 
(Department of Telecommunications).   
2.  The Standing Committee on Information Technology (2019 -20) selected this 
subject for detailed examination and report to the Parliament. The examination of the 
subject, however, could not be completed during the term of t he Committee (2019 -
20). Keeping in view the importance of the subject and the need for wider 
consultation, the Standing Committee on Information Technology (2020 -21) re -
selected the subject for further examination and report.    
3.  The representatives of the Ministry of Communications (Department of 
Telecommunications) briefed the Committee on the subject on 11 th August, 2020.   
The Committee heard the views of the industry bodies viz. Cellular Operators 
Association of India (COAI) and Telecom Equipment Ma nufacturers Association 
(TEMA) on 11 th August, 2020.  The Committee heard the views of the Telecom 
Service Providers (TSPs) viz. Reliance Jio Infocomm Limited, Vodafone Idea Limited 
and Bharti Airtel Limited on 27th October, 2020.  The Committee took evidence of the 
representatives of the Department of Telecommunications and Telecom Regulatory 
Authority of India (TRAI) twice i.e. on 27 th October, 2020 and 10 th November, 2020. 
The Committee also received written submissions from Prof. Bhaskar Ramamurthi, 
Director, IIT, Madras and Prof. Abhay Karandikar, Director, IIT, Kanpur.  
4.  The Committee at their sitting held on 3 rd February, 2021 considered and 
adopted the Report. The Committee wish to express their thanks to the 
representatives of the Department of T elecommunications (Ministry of 
Communications) and TRAI who tendered their evidence before the Committee and 
furnished valuable information. The Committee also wish to express their thanks to 
the representatives of COAI, TEMA, Reliance  Jio Infocomm Limited, Vodafone Idea 
Limited and Bharti Airtel Limited for appearing before the Committee and furnishing 

 
(vii) 
written information/views, which was of great help in the examination of the subject.  
The Committee further wish to express their sincere thanks to the two  experts 
namely, Prof. Bhaskar Ramamurthi, Director, IIT, Madras and Prof. Abhay 
Karandikar, Director, IIT, Kanpur for providing valuable inputs on the subject. 
5.  The Committee also place on record their appreciation for the invaluable 
assistance rendere d by the officials of Lok Sabha Secretariat attached to the 
Committee.   
6.  For facility of reference and convenience the Observations/Recommendations 
of the Committee have been printed in bold in Part-II of the Report.  
 
 
 
 
New Delhi;   DR. SHASHI THAROOR, 
04 February, 2021  Chairperson, 
15 Magha, 1942 (Saka) Standing Committee on 
Information Technology. 

1 
 
Part-I 
Narration Analysis 
 
I. Introduction 
 India‘s history with wireless services began early. The first experimental 
wireless telegraphy links were demonstrated as early as 1902. A Department of 
Wireless Telegraph was created soon thereafter, and wireless telegraphy came into 
routine use in Calcut ta at Diamond Harbour in 1908. However, widespread use of 
wireless technology had to wait for 90 more years. The first mobile phone service 
was launched in 1985 on a non -commercial basis, but it was only in 1995 that 
commercial service was started. The ini tial subscriber growth was modest, however 
new policy initiatives, beginning 2007, spurred rapid growth with the subscriber base 
reaching 560 million in 2009 and well over a billion by 2017. Early deployment of 
mobile networks was based on 2G technology, w ith 3G technology entering service 
in 2010 and 4G in 2016. All mobile services from 2G to 4G offered services based 
on increasingly advanced phones, with smart phones arriving about a decade ago. 
2. 2G and the early 3G networks primarily offered voice service s, but beginning 
with later 3G and now 4G technologies, the networks provide internet -based 
services like video, email, and social media. 4G technology has been a major 
inflexion in mobile technology with packet -switched data transmission and high -
speed co nnectivity.  The 5G technology‘s main benefits such as high speed, low 
latency, high connection density, greater reliability, and high energy savings are all 
conducive to enable Digital India use cases such as smart cities, smart 
manufacturing, smart agriculture, smart healthcare, to name a few. 
II. 5G Technology: Next Generation of Mobile Communications 
 
(i) Definition and Salient Features 
 
3. The macro level requirements for 5G have been defined by the International 
Telecommunications Union (ITU) in its ‗IMT 2020‘ specification. The 3GPP              
(3rd Generation Partnership Project), an industry driven standardization body, that 
has undertaken the standardization of mobile technologies for the past 25 years, is 
currently in the process of developing standards for 5G networks based on the ITU 

2 
 
requirements. 5G is a new member of the vast global telecommunications 
ecosystem. The four major comp onents of this ecosystem are Standards 
Development, Equipment Design and IP Development, Manufacturing and Service 
Provision. 5G standardization and deployment are at nascent stage and the 
technology is likely to reign the next decade or more considering i ts relevance 
across industry verticals .  5G will extend the use of wireless technologies, for the 
first time, across completely new sectors of the economy. 5G will enable both 
existing and new wireless service providers to develop novel business models to 
offer innovative applications to individuals and to different economic verticals from 
industrial, commercial, educational, healthcare, agricultural, financial and social 
sectors.  
(ii) Advantages of 5G vis-à-vis other technologies 
 
4. The Department of Telecommunications in a written note have explained the 
advantages of 5G over other technology like 4G as under: 
 ―4G was designed to provide the high speed internet facility. However, 5G 
has been designed to provide additional features w hich are not available 
in 4G. The 5G technology is capable of provisioning of diverse services in 
the intended three usage scenarios enhanced mobile broadband (eMBB), 
ultra-reliable and low -latency communications (URLLC), and massive 
machine type communications (mMTC) as well as support for features like 
network slicing, edge computing etc. 5G systems will outperform previous 
generation 4G systems . It is expected to support the following parameter 
values vis-à-vis 4G: 
Sl. No.  Parameter  4G  5G  
1.  User experienced data rate 
(Downlink - Megabits per 
second)  
10  100  
2.  Connection density (million 
connections per square 
kilometer)  
0.1  1  
3.  End-to-end latency (radio 
interface - milli seconds)  
10  1 (For specific 
usage scenario of 
URLLC)  
 
4.  Mobility  
in kilo meter per hour  
350  500 (For specific 
usage scenario)  

3 
 
5.  Area Traffic Capacity (Megabits 
per second per square meter)  
0.1  10  
 
 5G in future is expected to be revolutionary for data -driven industries, 
smart cities and smart manufacturing because it will be possible to have 
many more devices working, reliably, securely and uninterrupted in the 
same area. 5G public / private network may also be used in Industrial 
automation / smart manufacturing.  
 
 In essence, unlike 4G whose main focus was only on mobile broadband, 
5G has been designed with a plethora of use cases for the next decade.‖ 
5. Providing further insights into the 5G technolo gy, Director, IIT Kanpur has 
submitted as under: 
 ―The Fifth Generation (5G) mobile communication technology is a 
paradigm shift in the field of communications as it not only enables human 
to human communications but machine to  machine communications in a 
digitally connected world with a variety of use cases. There are  three key 
use cases of 5G. One of them, of course, is mobile broadband with very 
high throughput up to 20 Gbps, also called ‗enhanced Mobile Broadband 
(eMBB)‘. This will provide  substantial i ncrease in broadband throughput 
over that of 4G. The other two important use  cases of 5G are ‗Ultra -high 
Reliable Low Latency (URLLC)‘ and ‗Massive Machine Type  
Communications (MMTC)‘. These additional use cases result in a huge 
diversity of  applications, which cannot be supported by previous 
generations of the mobile technology  such as 4G. Significantly enhanced 
capabilities than those of 4G are possible in 5G. These are  in terms of 
spectral efficiency, which can be as high as 30 bps/Hz, very low latency o f 
less than a couple of milliseconds and very high -speed mobility support of 
up to 500 km/hour. 
 
 A key scenario for 5G technology is to support massive machine to 
machine communication (MMTC), or communication between appliances, 
devices or machines witho ut intervention  of human beings. While the 
earlier generations of telecom technology enabled human to  human or 
human to machine communications, 5G would unleash massive machine 
to machine communication by connecting a large number of devices. 
These Interne t of Things  (IoT) applications will transform many sectors 
such as Transport, Agriculture, Healthcare, Power grid etc. 
 
 The ultra -low latency and reliable communication (URLLC) is another 
capability offered by 5G  enabling newer applications such as vehicl e to 
vehicle communication, remote robot assisted  surgery, mission critical 
communication, augmented reality (AR), virtual reality (VR) etc. Some  of 
these, for example, vehicle to vehicle communication, also called the V2X 

4 
 
communication, may not require hi gh speed data access but needs 
extremely low latency or response time.  Similarly, applications such as 
robotic surgeries require very low latency coupled with high  reliability of 
communication. Some other applications like AR or VR may not only need 
high speed data access but low latency communication as well.‖  
 
6. He further submitted that t he applications enabled by URLLC, MMTC along 
with high speed connectivity or mobile  broadband will bring a significant change in 
the communications landscape. As the world moves towards more and more 
digitalization, 5G will help create an ‗all -pervasive digital world‘ where most of the 
appliances, equipment and gadgets will be connected. 5G  technology will not only 
be used in telecom but in other sectors such as agricu lture, healthcare, transport as 
well. While these developments are expected to transform the  society, they also 
pose new challenges from cyber security and national strategic perspective. 
 
7. As per TRAI, 5G is the latest iteration of cellular technology that will provide 
seamless coverage, high data rate, low latency, and highly reliable communications. 
It will increase energy efficiency, spectrum efficiency, network efficiency as well as 
efficiency of other systems. 5G will have use cases in many sectors such as health, 
smart cities, Industrial IoT and Industry 4.0, Emergency, disaster and public safety, 
Education, Transport etc. 
 
8. In order to create an enabling environment for timely roll out of 5G in Indi a, 
TRAI released a White Paper on ‗Enabling 5G in India.  This White Paper highlights 
the specifications of the 5G technology, discusses the potential use cases and 
architecture of 5G network, deliberates those areas that will require investment for 
5G deployment, covers the spectrum requirement for 5G network for the deployment 
of 5G in India. 
 
 
 
 

5 
 
(iii) Benefit and Relevance for India 
 
9. The relevance of 5G for India as contained in the Report ‗Maki ng India 5G 
Ready‘ is as under: 
 ―5G Relevance to India 5G has been designed for global adoption with 
flexibility to support wide number of applications. Its adoption in India will 
involve many use cases adopted widely in the world, but also some 
unique applications to suit India‘s needs. 5G‘s value for India may be even 
higher than in advanced countries because of the lower levels of 
investments in physical infrastructure. 5G may offer ‗leapfrog‘ 
opportunities by providing ‗smart infrastructure‘ that offers lower cost and 
faster infrastructure delivery. A good example of this leap frog effect, in the 
past, was in telephony. India‘s telephone density till the late 1990s 
remained small due to high cost fixed line telephony. However, the arrival 
of mobile networks vastly reduced cost of servi ce delivery and the 
country‘s telephone penetration went from less than 5% in 1995 to 95% by 
2010, bringing striking benefits to the Indian economy.  
 
 A more recent example of a leapfrog effect is ride sharing made possible 
by wireless internet access on 4G smart phones. Shared ride hailing 
services have transformed the infrastructure efficiencies in utilization of 
shared cars, autos and motor cycles. Th ough still early in its growth, 
vehicle sharing promises significant infrastructure value.  
 
 5G technologies will offer even more opportunities in infrastructure 
efficiencies. For example, 5G will enable ‗vehicle platooning‘, a technology 
that exploits 5G‘s low latency communication capability to pack vehicles 
into platoons with low inter -vehicle spacing despite travelling at high 
speeds. 5G will allow rapid coordination between the vehicles and keep 
the vehicles in the platoon safe. Platooning can doubl e vehicle density in 
roads promoting efficient and safer use of the limited road infrastructure. 
 
 In manufacturing,5G will enable use of robotics for precision 
manufacturing, particularly where humans cannot perform these functions 
safely or with the nece ssary precision. 5G can also enable better logistics 
to track goods from raw materials to product delivery and improved 
sharing of expensive design and manufacturing resources across the 
country.  
 
 In agriculture, 5G can enable improvement in the entire v alue-chain, from 
precision farming, smart irrigation, improved soil and crop monitoring, to 
live stock management.  
 In the energy sector, ‗smart grids‘ and ‗smart metering‘ can be efficiently 
supported enabling growth of alternate energy technologies. Wit h the rise 
of renewable and storage technologies, low latency communications will be 
critical to manage these grids. 
 

6 
 
 In health -care, 5G can enable more effective tele -medicine delivery, tele -
control of surgical robotics and wireless monitoring of vital statistics.  
 
 With over 300 million in the Indian middle class living in urban areas, a 
variety of 5G business models for new services are likely to be successful. 
However, the economically weaker sections of the population will need 
special help to benefi t from5G technologies. Clearly, it is this segment of 
population living in smaller towns and villages that require special attention 
from India‘s 5G initiatives.‖ 
 
(iv) Race for 5G Around the World 
 
10. As per TRAI, g lobally, 118 operators in 59 countries have depl oyed 5G 
network.  5G ecosystem is currently available in the following three bands: 
Lower Band:  700 MHz band (Put to auction in 2016, remains unsold). [Globally 7 
  operators have deployed 5G in this band] 
 
Mid Band:    3300-3600 MHz band (TRAI has recommended, yet to be auctioned). 
  [Globally 82 operators have deployed 5G in this band] 
 
mmWave Band: 26 GHz Band and 28 GHz band (S pectrum band yet to be declared 
in India). [Globally more than 8 operators have deployed 5G in this 
band] 
 
11. As per GSA Sep tember, 2020 Report (https://gsacom.com/paper/5G-
networks-member-report-september-2020/), over 100 commercial 5G networks are 
now launched worldwide. These networks are mainly in USA & Canada, UK (United 
Kingdom) and EU (European Union). As per information  from GSM Association, 5G 
services has received major stride in Australia, Brazil, Canada, China, Finland, 
Germany, Italy, Japan, South Korea, New Zealand, Philippines, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, 
Singapore, South Africa, Spain, Switzerland, Taiwan, Thailand, Uni ted Arab 
Emirates, United Kingdom and USA. 
 
12. Director, IIT Kanpur in his submission to the Committee stated as under: 
 ―Globally, close to 100 commercial launches of 5G technology have taken 
place across different countries. As on date, the 5G network covers 
around 7% of the world population. It is expected to cover 20% of the 
world population by the year 2025.Major countries and geographies where 
5G technology have already been launched are America – USA, Canada,  
Europe – UK and many countries under European Union such as Sweden, 

7 
 
Finland, Norway, Germany, Spain, Italy, Poland, Hungary etc. , Asia 
Pacific – China, Japan, South Korea, Thailand, Australia, New Zealand, 
Philippines, Middle East – UAE, Oman, Saudi Arabia, Qatar, Kuwait, 
Bahrain and Africa – South Africa. Mostly, these are partial launches, i.e., 
5G has been launched in parts of each of these countries. Countries in 
Asia Pacific like South Korea, Japan and China have witnessed sizeable 
growth in 5G deployments and possibly they are ahead of th e curve. It 
appears that so far China has already deployed more than 5 lakh 5G base 
stations covering around 7-8% of their population.‖ 
 
13. The Committee enquired w hether any effort has been made by the 
Department to study the experience gained by them .  To this query, the Department 
have replied that DoT have planned for India specific use case trials through 
Licensed Telecom Service Providers.   The Department have also informed the 
Committee that DoT have not signed any agreements specifically for cooperatio n in 
5G technology with other countries. However, cooperation in 5G technology is one 
of areas of cooperation in the Memorandum of Understandings (MoUs) signed with 
Cambodia, Myanmar, South Korea and Vietnam in field of Communications. 
 
14. The Department of Telecommunications have furnished the comparative 
chart for roll out of 2G, 3G, 4g and 5G as under:- 
Technology 2G 3G 4G 5G 
Global Deployment 1991 1998 2008 2019 
Indian Deployment  1995 2008 2015 - 
 
III. India‘s Preparedness for 5G Ecosystem 
 
(i) DoT High Level Forum on 5G  
 
15. 5G High Level Forum (HLF) was set up by the Government unde r 
Chairmanship of Secretary DoT, Secretary, MeitY and Secretary, Department of 
Science & Technology as Co–chairs with Members from Academia and Industry etc. 
in September 2017 to articulate the v ision for 5G in India and to recommend policy 
initiatives and action plans to realize this vision. 5G HLF has given its report titled 
―Making India 5G Ready‖ to the Government in August 2018. The HLF has 
recommended tha t India should embrace opportunity by deploying 5G networks 

8 
 
early, effectively and pervasively as well as emerge as a significant innovator and 
technology supplier at the global level.  For implementation of recommendations of 
HLF, DoT has constituted Expert Committee on S pectrum Policy, Regulatory policy, 
Education And Awareness Programme, Application and Use case Labs, 
Development of Application Layer Standards, Major Trials and Technology 
Demonstrations and Participation in International Standards. DoT along with MeitY, 
DST and other stakeholders is still working for the implementations of ―Making India 
5G Ready‖ recommendations. 
16. On being asked about the level of preparedness for 5G, the Department have 
informed that so far following action have been taken for 5G deployment: 
(i) Recommendations of HLF have been included in National Digital 
Communications Policy 2018.  
(ii) National Broadband Mission has been set up.  
(iii) Setting up of ―End to End 5G Test Bed‖ with investment of Rs. 224 crores 
under IIT Madras led multi  Academic/ Research institute consortium for 
testing of 5G products by startups/Small and medium Enterprises (SMEs).  
(iv) Liberalised guidelines for experimental spectrum was issued on 23rd July 
2019.  
(v) First Use case lab at Institute for Development and Resear ch in Banking 
Technology (IDRBT), Hyderabad has been set up in Banking and Financial 
sector.  
(vi) 5G spectrum has been identified and being coordinated with concerned 
agencies.  
(vii) Conferences are being supported for awareness on 5G and skill 
development.  
 
17. The Department have further replied that they are prepared for trials of I ndia 
specific Use cases. DoT have  organized 5G Hackathon and have short listed 100 
Use cases for further development. 30 out of 100, Use cases will be demonstrated 
along with TSPs to lea rn 5G Use cases and rollout challenges. The launch of 5G 
services is dependent of availability of network equipment and device ecosystem. 
5G is expected to be launched in the year 2021-22. 
 

9 
 
18. However, during the course of deliberation, the industry body COAI informed 
the Committee that India has to do a lot of catching up  so far as 5G deployment is 
concerned.   Though the approach to 5G Policy requirements in India was already 
finalized in the 5G High Level Forum (5GHLF) Report  released by DoT in August 
2018, minimal on-ground actions/ implementation instructions have been issued so 
far. Action in areas such as identification of spectrum band, decision on spectrum 
policy etc. are still to be initiated.  The 5G Trial applications  were submitted by the 
TSPs in the month of January 2020, however, till date the guidelines for trials have 
not been made clear and there is no set date for commencement of these trials. 
Instructions for conduct of trials for 5G technologies need to be issued at the 
earliest. 
19. Regarding the timeline for rolling out of 5G, Secretary, DoT, submitted during 
the sitting as under: 
―The 5G technology will initially ride on the 4G technology. It is not that 
one fine day 5G will come and replace all 4G. That is not so. The releases 
which are happening in 3GPP – release 8, 9, 10, 11, 12 like that – release 
15 is what generally taken to be as 5G features. But different countries will 
adopt different parts of the feature s and what is more likely is that in the 
initial years, the core and radio access network which are two separate 
things - the core will be of 4G and the radio access network will be 5G. 5G 
has various applications. One of the most early applications which w ill be 
in large metros will be on Enhanced Mobile Broadband (EMBB) which will 
give users better mobile experience in terms of talking, download, and 
more reliability. What we are seeking is not just EMBB. It is important , but 
we think the real strength of this technology is in social use applications, in 
the field of health, education, agriculture, disaster management, public 
safety, traffic management, etc. So, this is going to be our focus because 
between 4G and 5G for faster speed I think user may not be  able to 
distinguish. Sir, we do realize that it is a tough road ahead and we have to 
work to make sure that 5G in India comes in near future. Our own 
assessment would be regarding the specific time frame that somewhere 
by the end of 2021 and it is not tha t I am saying this based on any study 
which we have undertaken, but I am going by the logic that this will have 
to be preceded by auction of 5G. Right now, what we are going to have is 
auction for bands other than 3.3 to 3.6 but this band will also be auct ioned 
somewhere in the next six months or so. After that, spectrum will be 
available. In parallel, various companies would be benefiting using 5G and 
would be making their investments. It will be rolled out not pan -India but in 
select areas first where the demand would justify the capex.‖ 
 

10 
 
20. During the course of examination of the subject, the Committee ca me across 
numerous issues and challenges as submitted by various stakeholders and experts.  
These need to be addressed in war footing if the vision of 5G is to be achieved.  The 
Committee will now deal these issues in detail.   
IV. Spectrum Related Issues  
 
(i) Availability of Spectrum for 5G  
 
21. The Department have informed that they intend to make available 5G 
spectrum in various bands in line with global ecosystem. The Telecom Regulatory 
Authority of India (TRAI) had given their recommendation for the auction of spectrum 
in the 700 MHz, 800 MH z, 900 MHz, 1800 MHz, 2100 MHz, 2300 MHz, 2500 MHz, 
3300-3400 MHz and 3400 -3600 MHz bands on 01.08.2018 for providing mobile 
services. Digital Communications Commission has decided to hold auction of 3300 -
3600 MHz band separately.  The opening up of the mmWave bands viz. 26 GHz etc. 
for IMT Services/5G is under deliberations. 
 
22. Secretary, DoT, stated during evidence as under: 
 ―The bandwidth of 3,300 MHz. to 3,600 MHz. is not yet used in the 2G, 3G 
and 4G. It is envisaged to be used for 5G, but that does not  mean that 5G 
will not use other spectrum bands. So, 5G would also come in 700 MHz., 
800 MHz., 900 MHz. bands in the time to come. 5G would also be coming 
in what are called the millimeter wave bands, which are 24.25 GHz. to 
27.5 GHz. Sir, that is also where the international ecosystem is coming up. 
Currently, the Digital Communications Commission has decided that the 
auction of 3,300 MHz. to 3,600 MHz. bands will be delinked from the other 
auctions. So, we are now preparing a Cabinet Note for auctions in o ther 
bands like 700 MHz., 800 MHz., 900 MHz., 1,800 MHz., and 3,300 MHz. 
to 3,600 MHz. bands will be considered separately. There is also an issue 
in this matter as part of the spectrum is being used by ISRO. So, that 25 
MHz. has been taken away. There is also a band of about 100 MHz. 
between 3,3 00 MHz. to 3,400 MHz., which is to be used along with 
Defence. So, Defence has written now to us to allocate this entire band to 
them. We are in discussion with them because if we give this band to 
Defence, then wha t is available for 5G would just be about 175 MHz., 
which may not be sufficient for different vendors to actually give their 
services. We are holding discussions with them, and hopefully we will 
come with some solution on this issue.‖ 
 

11 
 
23. As per COAI c ountries are identifying spectrum in sub -GHz, Mid band 
(3.5GHz) & mmWave bands for 5G deployment. India at present does not have 
sufficient spectrum earmarked for 5G in any of these bands as many other 
stakeholders are seeking spectrum in the 5G bands recommended by the 5GHLF as 
well as also being commercially deployed in other countries. To make India 5G 
ready at the earliest, Government needs to allocate at least the following spectrum 
per operator: 
a. 3.5GHz : at least 100MHz per operator. 
b. Mm Wave (26, 28, 37 GHz): at least 400MHz per operator.  
c. Sub-GHz (600MHz & 700MHz): at least 2x10MHz per operator in each 
of these bands.  
d. E-Band: at least 2x1GHz per operator.  
e. V-Band: at least 1GHz per operator. 
 
24. Bharti Airtel in a written submission to Committee have submitted as under: 
―In India, only the 3.5 GHz band (3.4-3.6 GHz) has been earmarked for 5G 
services, with just 175 MHz of spectrum being available for5G. In contrast, 
the sector needs a minimum of 300 -500 MHz spectrum availability in this 
band. Apart from 3.5 GHz, other bands e.g. mmWave (26GHz) band and 
600 MHz band, can be used for 5G services. However, the same is yet to 
be earmarked in India. India must consider the allocation of mmWave 
band (i.e. 26 GHz) for 5G and make it a part of the  auction along with the 
3.4-3.6 GHz band. For rural penetration, the  spectrum in the 600 MHz 
band should be identified and earmarked for 5G.‖ 
25. A representative of a Telecom Service Provider  (TSP) further submitted 
during evidence as under: 
 ―In India we are talking about  only 175 MHz of spectrum that is right now 
having visibility for the 3.5 GHz spectrum, which means that every 
operator gets close to or less than 50 MHz spectrum, which is not 
sufficient. The second point is, the millimeter wave spectrum, which is the 
capacity spectrum, has yet to be identified. So, certainly there is need for 
getting the spectrum identified.‖ 
 
26. Explaining the impact of allocating less amount of spectrum, representative of 
a TSP during the sitting of the Committee stated as under: 
 ―On spectrum, our humble submission to the Committee is that there 
should be the right amount of spectrum at the right prices as per the global 
practices. For example, the famous 3.5GHz of spectrum which we call as 
sub-6 band in 5G, almost every operator acr oss the globe has 100MHz of 
it. There are some exceptions with 80MHz of it but if we go lower than 

12 
 
80MHz, there are equipment on which we will spend billions of Dollars, I 
think, it would be a severe underutilisation of that. It is like buying a car 
and working it with one particular seat because the other three seats are 
not available. The equipment itself will be severely underutilised.‖ 
 
27. He had further commented as under: 
 ―On an average, our 4G spectrum per operator is not more than one fourth 
of what a ny other operator s across the globe has. That is not the only 
problem. The other problem is our footfall not only that we have 25 per 
cent of the spectrum, we have three and a half to four times people per sq. 
kms. So, you have four times more people and y ou have four times less 
spectrum which means the spectrum available to one person is 1/16. The 
number of customer is four to five times and that is again making the point 
that if we go the same way in 5G where everybody else is getting 100 
MHz and we are getting 50 MHz and we have three or four times more 
customers, we will again be pegged at a much lower level saying that 
Indian customer will get four times less than what he is getting in US.‖ 
28. When the Secretary, DoT, was asked to clarify on  the issue, he stated as 
under: 
 ―Insofar as the spectrum availability is concerned, typically, we are talking 
of 5G spectrum as the band which is between 3.3 and 3.6 gigahertz. I had 
also flagged this issue last time. Of these 300 megahertz, which are 
available, 25 megahertz are required for certain satellite uses, which TRAI 
also said that we should give them  with a suggestion that beyond the 
footprint of the use, the available spectrum -- even out of this 25 -
megahertz -- should be used wherever we can for our various 
experimental and trial purposes. Now, out of the balance 275 megahertz, 
about 100 megahertz -- between 3.3 and 3.4 gigahertz -- Defence is also 
wanting a part of it. So, we are having discussions with them. Two 
meetings have been held. A very p ositive response has come. I am sure 
this issue will be resolved. If this is deducted, then 175 megahertz are 
available to us. If this is added, then 275 megahertz are available. There 
are four players. Ideally, we  should have about 300 megahertz.  We are 
also trying to see if we can get a little more, that is, beyond 3.6. There we 
have a problem , because that is already committed for satellite usage. 
There is also millimetre wave, which has not yet gone to TRAI for 
recommendations. The auction, right now, i s not thought of. No 
recommendation has come. There will be a consultation process.  So, I 
would like to assure the hon. Committee that we will take a balanced view 
and a holistic view and see how best the interest of the industry, consumer 
and the public w hich is prime and supreme is balanced and then we will 
act accordingly.‖ 
 
 

13 
 
29. Asked how the Department are addressin g the issue of lack of spectrum, the  
Department have stated that they are  deliberating with Department of Space (DoS) 
and the Ministry of Defence (MoD) for making sufficient spectrum available for 5G 
IMT services. Further DoT is working on sharing/ coexistence of spectrum uses in 
different spectrum bands including 3300-3600 MHz band and 24.25-27.5 GHz band.  
 
(ii) Spectrum Audit 
 
30. Licensed Service Area ( LSA) is a concept to dynamically share a spectrum 
band, whenever and wherever it is unused by the incumbent users. Shared use of 
the spectrum is only allowed based on an individual authorization (i.e. licensed). All 
the Government agencies in India are assigned spectrum administratively. Spectrum 
audit will help in identification of unutilized or inefficiently utilized spectrum. After the 
identification, LSA can be used for optimal utilization of spectrum. 
 
31. Asked as to whether any spectrum audit had been conducted in the county 
to suggest measures for efficient and best u tilization of spectrum in India, TRAI 
stated that Spectrum is a scarce resource. Any amount of spectrum, if not put to use 
optimally and efficiently, results not only into financial loss to the Government, but 
also hinders economic and social development of the country.  Spectrum allocation 
and spectrum management is done by DoT. Spectrum is also used by various 
Government agencies where its effective and efficient utilization needs to be 
measured. Therefore, spectrum audit is required to be done to detect under -
utilization and to make effective and efficient utilization of this natural resource. 
Since 2015, TRAI in its various recommendations, has raised its concerns and has 
recommended to DoT that there is an urgent need for audit of all allocated spectrum 
both commercial as well as spectrum allocated to various PSUs / Government 
organizations. Government decision in the matter is awaited. Considering the 
importance of the spectrum audit, it shoul d be done on priority basis by an 
independent agency regularly. 
 
 

14 
 
(iii) High Spectrum Price in the Country 
 
32. COAI has submitted that TRAI earmarked spectrum in 3.3 -3.6 GHz band for 
5G. TRAI recommended the reserve price at INR 492 crore per MHz which is far 
higher than the auctioned spectrum price in other country. Minimum block of 20 MHz 
(Price for a block of 20 MHz will be Rs.9,840 crore).  Minimum 80 MHz per TSP 
(Price will be INR 39,360 crores per operator).   
 
33. Commenting on the present spectrum pricing p olicy, representative of TEMA 
during the sitting stated as under: 
 ―I believe that the policy of spectrum which we are holding in our country is 
of inverted structure. We expect raw material to be purchased at the 
highest price and the product should be rolled out at the minimum price 
which is absolutely inverted structure. I would like to say that when 
Government thinks about it, the ultimate idea should be to take it from the 
taxes, take it from the growth, not from the raw material.‖ 
 
34. Bharti Airtel sub mitted a comparative statement of the TRAI recommended 
Reserve Price in India vis-à-vis the auctioned discovered spectrum price  in other 
countries in the 3.5 GHz band, both in absolute and relative terms as under: 
 
 
 
Country 
 
 
 
Auction 
determine
d price (in  
Cr/MHz) 
Spectrum Price in India is x times the 
price in other countries  
In 
Absolute 
Terms  
Basic 
Spectru
m 
Price/Po
pulation/
GDP per 
capita 
Basic 
Spectru
m 
Price/Po
pulation/
ARPU 
Italy 182 3 2 1 
UK 70 7 6 3 
Australia 35 14 6 3 
Spain 14 35 16 12 
Austria 7 70 10 3 
India 492 1 1 1 
 
 

15 
 
35. They have submitted that  the recommended price of TRAI for India is 
exorbitantly higher and ranges from 3-70 times of the market-determined price of the 
spectrum in other countries in absolute terms and is 16 times of the price in the case 
of comparison in relative terms.  Therefore, even if the price is compared after 
considering the Population and GDP per Capita / ARPU, the TRAI recommended 
reserve price in India is substantially higher than the auction determined pric e in 
other countries.  Moreover, to roll out 5G, any TSP will require a minimum of 100 
MHz spectrum in the 3.5 GHz band, which will cost around Rs. 50,000 Crores, even 
at TRAI recommended reserve price, thus making it too costly a proposition for the 
TSPs. Thus, to ensure the off -take of 5G services in India, the spectrum‘s pricing 
should be kept moderate. There is a need to strike a balance between the 
Government's expectation to generate revenue from the auction and growth of the 
sector and the overarching impact of 5G across the sectors. This is also critical since 
the monthly ARPU in India is under two dollars. India has one of the lowest ARPU in 
the world. While this can be seen as the telecom services are most affordable in 
India, below- cost pricing of  services will only stifle the telecom sector and deprive 
the customers  of good quality service and new technologies e.g., 5G. Hence, the 
necessary steps need to be taken to ensure adequate ARPU for the TSPs. 
 
36. On the issue, representative of a TSP submitted as under: 
 ―For one -fourth of the spectrum, there are four times more footfalls but 
then one-eighth the ARPU. That is another point. I think we should add to 
the equation. One -fourth, one -fourth and one -eighth is where the Indian 
telecom is right now.‖ 
 
37. Asked as to whether any consultations have been held with the various 
Stakeholders before giving the recommendations on 5G spectrum pricing,  the 
Department have stated that before giving its recommendations on "Auction of 
Spectrum in 700 MHz, 800 MHz, 900 MHz, 1800 MHz, 2100 MHz, 2300 MHz, 2500 
MHz, 3300-3400 MHz and 3400 -3600 MHz bands", which included 3300 -3600 MHz 
band (globally adopted for 5G), TRAI has consulted with stakeholders and in this 
regard a consultation Paper was issued by TRAI on 28 th August 2017 for the 

16 
 
comments of the stakeholders. The pricing methodology adopted by TRAI is given in 
the TRAI recommendation dated 1st August, 2018.  
 
38. On pricing of spectrum, Secretary, DoT during the sitting stated as under:- 
―TRAI has given recommendations even for 3,300 MHz. to 3,600 MHz. 
This was considered and taken up in the Digital Communications 
Commission. It was referred back to TRAI , but they have reiterated the 
same prices and they have done very detailed analysis of it. All the 
telecom players do get an opportunity to give their viewpoints as  TRAI has 
public consultation, etc. So, TRAI has given a very detailed report on this 
issue. The Digital Communications Commission has accepted what TRAI 
has said, but we have not yet finalised the prices because the prices are 
finalised by a Cabinet decision.  We have not yet gone to the Cabinet, and 
prices have not been finalised.‖ 
 
39. Representative of TRAI has further stated as under: 
 ―If we compare a country which is equivalent to the size of a State in India 
and compare price of whole of India, I think, it is not an apple to apple 
comparison. But nevertheless, there are 7 -8 well -defined international 
parameters. One has to judge the p rice based on those parameters …..I 
think a statement that the price of TRAI is very high requires some more 
in-depth deep dive so that we can reach to a conclusion.‖ 
40. On the reas ons for high spectrum cost in the country, the Department 
submitted  that  the sector regulator, TRAI, have recommended the reserve price of 
spectrum in different bands including 3300 -3600 MHz band (mid -band for 5G in 
industry parlance) after due considerations of all the aspects of it and due 
consultation with the stakeh olders. Department‘s proposals for auction of spectrum 
in various bands including reserve price, after due consideration of TRAI 
recommendation, will be placed before the Cabinet, for a decision.  
 
41. The Committee also enquired about the measures taken by th e Department 
to help the telcos to ease the burden of high spectrum cost.  The Department replied 
that  pursuant to the recommendations of Inter -Ministerial Group (IMG) on ―Stressed 
assets in Telecom Sector‖, Telecom Service Providers (TSPs) had been given  a 
one-time opportunity to opt for higher number of installments (16) instead of the 
previously permitted 10 installments in respect of spectrum auction deferred 
payment, subject to the Net Present Value (NPV) being protected. Considering the 

17 
 
stress in the  sector, the Government has given an option to the Telecom Service 
Providers (TSPs) to defer payment of the spectrum auction installments due for 
2020-21 and 2021 -22, either for one or both years. All the operational TSPs have 
generally opted for moratoriu m of 2 years. Deferment of spectrum auction 
installments will ease the cash outflow of the stressed TSPs and facilitate payment 
of statutory liabilities and interest on bank loans. 
 
 
42. When asked whether the AGR issues will have any impact on the TSPs to bid  
for 5G, COAI have stated that a part from the AGR issue, there is a need to 
rationalize other levies and duties on the telecom sector so as to ease their financial 
burden. Key asks including providing soft loans against GST input line credit due to 
Operators, to address the immediate liquidity crunch as also reducing the SUC by 
3% for all TSPs and reducing Licence Fee (USOF Contribution) from 8% to 3%. 
Exempt the levy of GST on payments to the government such as License Fees, 
SUC and Payment of Spect rum debt acquired in auctions. They also seek 
exemption of service tax on the amount of LF/SUC payable by telecom operators 
before implementation of GST, in compliance with the Hon‘ble Supreme Court AGR 
Order. We believe that sector can be compensated from  the USO Fund, which is 
estimated to be more than Rs. 51,500 crore, lying unutilised as on Marc h 31, 2020. 
The industry can be provided the refund of the unutilized input tax credit immediately 
or be provided soft loans at MCLR rate, using the GST input credit as collateral. 
 
(iv) Spectrum for Industrial Use 
 
43. TEMA had submitted before the Committee that i ndustry 4.0 is the main 
driver for 5G. Many countries around the world, be it the US, Germany, UK and 
Australia, all have allocated spectrum for the industrial development of 5G which is 
lacking in India. For example, in Germany, Mercedes is setting up a f actory entirely 
based on 5G, famously known as ‗Factory 56‘ around the world, but the German 
Government has separately allocated the spectrum for that. In the same way, the US 
has done it and the UK has done it. Every country is setting apart spectrum and 
laying out policies for industrial growth of that country using 5G. In India, 

18 
 
unfortunately, we have a very double licensing system that for a factory to set up any 
system of its own, they have a two -year long process, first to get a license and then 
to get a spectrum which is really not very conducive to supplying the 5G equipment 
to the industries.  
 
44. Asked to explain the term Industry 4.0, the Department have stated that 
Industry 4.0 is rooted in the concept of advanced manufacturing, also called Smart 
Manufacturing. Industry 4.0 based solutions enable better interoperability, more 
flexible industrial processes, and autonomous and intelligent manufacturing. 
Physical components of industrial production are being transformed into cyber  
physical systems by smart, digital networking, allowing for real -time management of 
production processes across great distances and products. DoT has not received 
any specific request/ demand for allocating spectrum for industry 4.0 uses.  
 
45. On the present policy governing spectrum allocation for  industrial uses in the 
country, the Department replied that currently , based on requests in this regard, 
industries are assigned spectrum, administratively, for their captive use in India.  
  
46. TEMA has submitted that  spectrum for industrial  4.0 uses be released 
immediately.  TEMA has further stated regulators around the world have realised the 
importance of captive communications by their industries and enterprises and have 
been proactively working towards making the necessary spectrum resources 
available for their captive needs, keeping in view the importance of these users in 
nation building and economic growth. TEMA would request that DOT may take the 
lead and ask TRAI to conduct for a public consultation on spectru m needs and 
issues for captive users. TEMA also requests that a group be formed to work out 
policy for spectrum allocation and operation of 5G for 4.0 industrial uses. 
 
47. Further elaborating on the issue, TEMA in a written note ha ve submitted that 
Captive users of mobile wireless communications are industries, police, paramilitary, 
fire, forestry and mining, municipal corporations and public utilities as well as  critical 

19 
 
infrastructure services projects such as railways, metros, airports, sea ports , 
refineries, highways , etc.  They apply to WPC/DOT for three licenses - CMRTS 
(Captive Mobile Radio Trunking Services) License, spectrum license and import 
licenses. These projects are lifeline of the Country‘s economic development, Public 
safety, Industrial development and logistics and are critical to support Atam  Nirbhar 
Bharat. The process of obtaining the necessary DOT/WPC approvals for such users 
typically takes between six months to two years. The main delay is in issue of a 
CMRTS license and also be cause of the sequential nature of the process where 
three separate licenses have to be taken from DOT one after the other rather than 
as single approval or as a parallel process. 
 
48. Currently captive users like police, paramilitary, metros, airports, refineries, 
factories etc. have to take a CMRTS license before they can apply for a DOT 
spectrum license. These captive users only need wireless spectrum for their 
―captive‖ use only and no telecom service is being provided by them to the public or 
to anyone else. Thus, in principle, it appears there should be no need for a separate 
CMRTS license under Section 4 of the Indian telegraph act as these users do not 
provide any service to any customers and the wireless network is 100% used for 
internal communica tions and coordination purposes such as security, safety and 
logistics. In June 2018, the TRAI had recommended that DoT should do away with 
CMRTS license. TEMA requests that the CMRTS (Captive Mobile Radio Trunking) 
License may merged with the WPC spectrum  license and that there needs to be a 
simplified process where the users directly apply for spectrum to WPC, instead of 
first going through an elaborate CMRTS licensing process with DoT and then 
applying for spectrum to WPC. This will cut down the process time substantially.  
 
49. TEMA have further stated that it is critically important that radio spectrum for 
all captive users that share the primary mission to protect lives and property and 
help the Country to prosper is made available under a permanent admini strative 
allocation process.  Spectrum authorizations need to be based on relatively simple 
application policies that require only nominal administrative fees from the agencies 
and organization that require use of the spectrum for ―private‖, non -commercial 

20 
 
communications networks.  Consistent with the administrative policies of Countries 
around the world, the authorization process for private networks need be 
distinguished from the competitive bidding ―spectrum auctions‖ that are commonly 
used to authorize commercial wireless networks that provide telecommunications 
services to the public at large on a for-profit basis.  
 
V. 5G Test Bed, Use Case and 5G Field Trials  
 
(i) Setting up of Indigenous 5G Test Bed 
 
50. Keeping in view India‘s specific requirements and to take lead in 5G 
deployment, Department of Telecommunications (DoT) approved financial grant for 
the multi-institute collaborative project to set up ‗Indigenous 5G Test Bed‘ (Building 
an end to end 5G Test Bed) in India in March 2018 with total cost of Rs. 224.01 
Crore. The test bed is expected to be ready by October, 2021.  The eight 
collaborating institutes in the project are IIT (Indian Institute of Technology) Madras, 
IIT Delhi, IIT Hyderabad, IIT Bombay, IIT Kanpur, IISc Bangalore, Society for 
Applied Microwave Electronics Engineering & Research (SAMEER) and Centre of 
Excellence in Wireless Technology (CEWiT). The test bed is likely to enhance 
national capability in telecom technology, develop indigenous Intel lectual Property 
(IP) and give fillip to Indian telecom manufacturers.  
 
51. The main goals of ‗Indigenous 5G Test Bed‘ are to provide an open 5G test 
bed that can enable Indian academia and industry to validate their products, 
prototypes and algorithms and demonstrate various services, provide a test bed with 
complete access for research teams to work on new novel concepts/ideas holding 
potential for standardization in India and on global scale., m ake a test bed available 
for Indian operators to understand t he working of 5G technologies along with 
security aspects and plan their future networks, p rovide the facilities of 5G networks 
for experimenting and demonstrating applications / use cases of importance to 
Indian society, and implement and demonstrate IoT based systems and services. 
 
 

21 
 
52. The test bed is planned to be realize d in stages over 4 versions – version 0 
(V0) to version 3 (V3).  The initial two stages have been completed.  The design of 
next version (V2) has started.  Significant progress has been made by the Institutes 
in system hardware and algorithm design.  It is anticipated that the third version 
(version 2) will be completed by March, 2021 and final version  (version 3) by 
October, 2021. During 2020 -21, Rs.45 crore  have been allotted out of which 
Rs.3.1855 crore has been disbursed and utilized.  It is expected tha t the balance 
fund shall be utilized within the stipulated time.   
 
53. Due to the COVID-19 pandemic and subsequent lockdown and closure of the 
academic institutions, the work of hardware design, fabrication and testing was 
adversely affected. Although softwar e development is on track, the testing and 
integration of the software with hardware requiring physical presence in the lab have 
been delayed. The test bed is likely to be set up by October 2021. Asked as to which 
other countries have successfully set up 5G test beds, t he Department have 
informed the Committee that US, UK, European Union, Sweden, Finland, Thailand, 
China, Japan and South Korea are some of the countries which have announced the 
launch of 5G. The term ―Test Bed‖ is being used somewhat loosely in many of these, 
and they are better classified as ―field trials‖. Ready -for-market products of MNCs 
are being deployed in a limited manner to show -case 5G capabilities in these field 
trials. Only a select few of these Test Beds are meant for experiment ation, validation 
of new ideas and products, and performance evaluation.  
 
54. The Department further informed India‘s effort is unique with special focus on 
setting up a test bed that will be utilized by Academia, Industry, Telecom Operators 
and Start-ups to develop solutions and use cases which can be India-specific. Going 
forward, this will raise India‘s visibility in the Global Forums and Standardization 
bodies. Hence, a comparison between our test bed and others may not be possible.  
 
55. Regarding the project, Director, IIT, Kanpur submitted that the ‗5G Testbed‘ 
project is focussed on developing IPRs in the country in the 5G technology space. 
The initiative is likely to lead to spin -offs that may be taken forward by telecom start -

22 
 
ups and other industrial organizations for product development in the 5G domain. 
Some of the IPRs generated by this project can also be utilized for product 
development for the defence sector of the country. The ‗5G Testbed‘ should lead to 
further research and standardization activities under 3GPP and IEEE from India. 
 
56. Director, IIT, Madras  also expressed hope that technology spin-offs from this 
Test Bed will enable Indian industry and startups to enter the Indian and global 
markets for 5G telecom equipment, thus addressing a criti cal gap in our economic 
and national security. 
 
57. On the progress of 5G Test  Bed, Secretary, DoT during evidence stated as 
under: 
 ―They have been progressing very well …..The timelines for completing 
this were September -October, 2020. In fact, we had a very big event, 
Indian Mobile Congress in October, 2020 and we thought that this the time 
we will formally have the Testbed absolutely ready. Then the technology 
would take a nother six months or so after that. But, due to Covid -19, all 
this has been delayed. Now what I am told is that a Testbed will be ready 
by March -April, 2021 and the technology which they are developing will 
take another six months or so after that …..The ti melines could be 
compressed. But I think that they are progressing well.‖ 
 
(ii) Setting up of 5G Use Case Labs 
 
58. DoT is working with different Ministries/Departments for setting up of India 
specific Use Case labs in Education, Health care, Agriculture, Public safety, FinTech 
etc. So far, Institute of Development and Research in Banking Technology (IDRBT), 
an Institute under RBI, in collaboration of Department of Financial Services has 
come forward for setting up of 5G Use case lab in Banking & Financial Service s and 
Insurance (BFSI). DoT has approved this proposal for setting up of 5G Use Case 
Lab in Financial Sector at IDRBT with investment o f Rs. 22.1 crore with Rs. 17.5 
crore funding by DoT.  
 
59. Considering that development of sufficient Use Case Labs is required for 
successful implementation of 5G.  T he Committee enquired what steps have been 
taken for setting up of India specific User Case Labs in other sectors.  The 

23 
 
Department have replied that DoT  is presently working with Food Safety and 
Standard Authority of India for setting up Use case lab in food safety certification and 
with Ministry of Health, AIIMS, Ministry of Housing and Urban Development for 
setting up of Use cases in respective domains.  
 
60. COAI has submitted that 5G would have business case i f there are 
applications for its use. Currently, there are no applications or use cases which are 
ready to promote business case & capex investment by operators. China has been 
working on the same since last two years and claim to have more than 100 use 
cases for 5G which have been built through initiatives from Government, Academia, 
Operators & Industry verticals. Coordinated Government actions are required for 
enabling digital transformation across sectors (Health, Transportation, Energy, 
Agriculture etc . as essential ). A Digital Readiness Index to measure the same for 
each sector should be there to monitor progress as well as to enable development of 
India specific use cases.  
 
61. On the plans of the Department to d evelop use cases in the country, the 
Department have stated that DoT has announced a ‗5G Hackathon‘ in association 
with MeitY, NITI Aayog, Start -up India, MSME, COAI, IITs/IIITs and other 
stakeholders on February 21, 2020. This Hackathon aims to shortlist ideas that can 
be converted into workable 5G products and solutio ns. In Phase 1 up to 30th April 
2020, 1024 applications /entries have been received and we have been able to short 
list 100 Use case in 10 economic verticals.  
 
62. With regard to the suggestion of COAI to prepare a Digital Readiness Index of 
different sectors to enable development of India specific use cases, the Department 
stated that the  National Digital Communication Policy -2018 (NDCP) acknowledged 
the need for building a robust digital communications infrastructure leveraging 
existing assets of the broadca sting and power sector including collaborative models 
involving State, Local bodies and the Private sector. Accordingly, the NDCP 
envisaged the measurement of Broadband Readiness Index (BRI) of the States/UTs 

24 
 
in order to address RoW challenges and attract investments. The Broadband 
Readiness Index is similar to Digital Readiness Index for Telecom sector.  
 
63. The framework on BRI parameters has been prepared based on the 
objectives of NDCP -2018 and inputs from the industry/expert. The Department of 
Telecom hav e entered into a Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) with Indian 
Council for Research on International Economic Relations (ICRIER), an 
autonomous, policy -oriented, not -for-profit, economic policy think tank, to develop 
Broadband Readiness Index for Indian St ates and Union Territories for the period 
2019-2022. DoT is engaged with the State/UT Governments for the development of 
Broadband Readiness Index. The report for the first year, i.e. 2019 -20 is under 
finalization. 
 
64. Regarding poor development of 5G use cases in India and the suggestions to 
develop more use cases in the country, COAI submitted that  coordinated 
Government actions are required for enabling digital transformation across sectors. 
There is a need for other industries to get to gether with the telecom industry at a 
common platform to discuss their requirements from 5G. Based  on this, use cases 
will be developed. Many start ups will be able to participate in the development of 
use cases for 5G based services for various industry v erticals.  While India is 
consuming a very large amount of data per capita in various industry verticals. 
However, there is a need to convert the data produced into useful services through 
the development of use cases. The Digital Readiness Index of variou s sectors can 
be monitored by a cross sectoral entity for e.g. NITI A ayog. This will facilitate the 
monitoring of digital transformation in various sectors and thereby facilitate the 
development of use cases for development of digital services in the more digitised 
sectors. The combination of this with the India IT stack will help 5G based 
technologies build efficiencies in the various sectors and benefit the country.  
 
 
 

25 
 
(iii) 5G Field Trial and Experimental Spectrum for Field Trials 
  
65. Government plans to allow 5G trials in limited area and for limited time to test 
potential 5G India specific Use cases based on enhanced Mobile 
Broadband(eMBB), Massive Machine Type Communications (mMTC) and Ultra 
Reliable Low Latency Communications (uRLLC) in isolation on non -commercial 
basis subject to strict safeguards. The participation in trials by any vendor is not 
linked to deployment of their equipment in Indian Network. Department of 
Telecommunications has received 16 Applications for 5G field trials using imported 
as well as indigenous technology. India has showcased 5G applications during India 
Mobile Congress 2019 and with these field trials, start-ups and SMEs can participate 
in this ecosystem. 5G trials are likely to be started in 2-3 months.  
 
66. DoT have issued guidelines for assignment of spectrum for trials across all 
available spectrum bands on a nominal fee of Rs. 5,000. Indian entities involved in 
Research & Development (R&D), manufacturing, telecom operators and academia 
for the purpose of R&D and experimentation can get licence for a period of up to two 
years depending upon activity which is further renewable on case to case basis by 
the Government. One Experimental (Radiating) License for 5G Test Bed at IIT Delhi 
was issued on 20.04.2018 with 3 -month validity. Guidelines  for experimental 
spectrum has been issued. The Department have also stated that there are no major 
issue confronting trials in the country. An inter -ministerial Committee for monitoring 
and evaluation of 5G technology trials has been  constituted under Member 
(Technology) in DoT. 
 
67. COAI raised some key issues for bringing improvement in trial spectrum 
allocations for 5G .  These include License for trial spectrum (3.5GHz, mmW, E -
Band) should be for minimum one year, flexibility to conduc t trial in any city/location 
within the circle as  per allocated trial spectrum, s ingle window clearance for the trial 
licenses, WPC license should be valid for any location change during the trial and 
should not need new application, no equipment/applicati on vendor restriction for 
conducting Lab Trial, TSPs should have flexibility to conduct Lab trial for ―Make in 

26 
 
India‖ solution with minimum to no requirement of submitting document to WPC / 
DOT / Spectrum clearance, flexibility to select site locations & c hange locations 
during within the trial LSA, import duty waiver on 5G Trial equipment., etc. 
 
68. COAI raised concern  that t he 5G Trial applications were submitted by the 
TSPs in the month of January 2020, however, till date the guidelines for trials have 
not been made clear and there is no set date for commencement of these trials. It is 
recommended that an early issue of orders for the conduct of these trials is issued.  
The issues listed above need to be resolved while issuance of final guidelines for 
conduct of trials. 
 
69. Explaining the need for conducting 5G trial, representative of a TSP stated as 
under: 
 ―……….we need to have these trials taking off very quickly. The industry 
as a whole, our industry body has participated as a part of the 
Government‘s 5G high -level committee which was set up a -year-and-a-
half or two years back. Deliberations have taken place. We have made a 
request for trials to be given to us and we are more than happy to kind of 
go down that path because that will ensure that the true benefi ts are 
actually tried out because India use cases are extremely essential in order 
to derive the best benefits for 5G. And, therefore, we believe that for 
proper commercial 5G rollouts to take place, say, in 2022, we need to 
initiate the 5G trials now and start to build the ecosystem.‖ 
 
70. On the allocation of 5G spectr um for trials, representative of one of the TSPs 
have submitted as under: 
―Airtel and other TSPs have submitted their application for 5G trials; 
however, the 5G trial spectrum is awaited for almost a year. It is important 
that lab and field trials of 5G should be carried out extensively to test the 
factors e.g. interoper ability of 5G smartphones with 5 G infrastructure, 
testing of indigenous 5G infra based on Open RAN ecosystem with the 
commercial 5G handsets. The trial is also critical to ascertain the 
interoperability of 5G infra with the existing 4G networks, serving as an 
underlay network for 5G services.‖  
 
71. 5G field trials will help stimulate local R&D eco system, help local TSPs better 
understand technology and business models for 5G, encourage OEMs to better 
target 5G applications for local needs, etc. When asked about status of 5G field trials 

27 
 
conducted so far, the Committee have been informed by the Department that 5G 
field trials have not yet been permitted.  
 
VI. Issues Relating to Standards  
 
(i) India‘s Contribution in Development of 5G Standards 
 
72. As per ITU procedure, the requirement for IMT -2020 (Technical name for 5G) 
networks, devices and services are finalized by the ITU Radio Communication 
Sector (ITU -R) through consensus development by way of multiple meetings with 
Member States and other stakeholders.  The current standards for 5G networks 
relate to 3GPP release 15 onwards.   
 
73. To promote development of technology in India, th e Government is working 
with academia, industry and start -ups for Innovation and R&D, generation of IPRs 
and their incorporation in 5G and related technologies‘ standards. DoT and Telecom 
Standards Development Society, India (TSDSI) in collaboration with t he IITs have 
been successful in getting the Low Mobility Large Cell (LMLC) use case accepted by 
ITU as one of the 5G requirements for rural area. LMLC reflects the needs of rural 
India in which the distance between 2 base stations will increase up to 6 KM against 
1.73 Km by other technology. This technology will be beneficial for India as well as 
other developing countries. The TSDSI has been established to enable Indian 
industry take lead in international standardization activities.. There are a few 
companies and institutions from India who are contributing on 3GPP and ITU and 
other international standard platforms in a limited way in telecom technologies. 
 
74. On the special features of LMLC technology, the Department have informed 
that LMLC is part of the IMT-2020 requirements of ITU. This mainly looks at rural 
connectivity by placing base stations at Gram Panchayats and providing connectivity 
to the neighboring villages and farms. Similar rural connectivity issues exist in many 
developing countries where affordable rural broadband coverage is required. In fact, 
LMLC requirement was strongly supported by many  African counties in ITU. The 

28 
 
Standard could be useful for deeper penetration in urban areas for other 5G 
applications. 
 
75. When asked about  the areas/technologies on which India is contributing to  
5G standard , the Department have stated that c ontributions to  3GPP have been 
made in areas such as c overage enhancements, positioning, reduced capability of 
user e quipment, New Radio Beyond 52.5 GHz operation, Flexible duplexing, 
Massive MIMO beamforming, OFDM Numerology and new waveforms, and 
NAVigation with Indian  Constellation (NaVic) inclusion for geolocation support in 
addition to GPS etc. Department is encouraging setting up of test beds, incubation 
centers, start-ups, 5G applications & use cases, which will boost the development of 
new technologies, applicatio ns and standards. By increasing participation in 
International Standardization bodies, inclusion of Indian requirements in the 
International Standards can be ensured. This will also result in future ownership of 
Intellectual Property Rights (IPR), Standards Essential Patients (SEPs) etc. by India. 
 
76. Director, IIT, Kanpur has submitted on the issue as under: 
 ―Telecom Standard Development Society of India (TSDSI) was 
established in 2014 to contribute to the next generation telecom standards 
and drive the eco -system of intellectual property creation in India. TSDSI 
is an organizational partner of 3GPP and works closely with the global 
standards‘ body to reflect Indian requirements into International telecom 
standards. With the formation of TSDSI, the Indian res earch community 
has been able to channelize their research efforts towards standardization 
initiatives for 5G and beyond technologies and make contributions to 
various global standards. TSDSI, being an organizational partner of 
3GPP, provides an opportunit y for all Indian organizations to contribute to 
standardization activities for 5G and beyond technologies under 3GPP. As 
mentioned in the previous section, an important beginning has been made 
with TSDSI facilitating the LMLC contribution from India to ITU  and 3GPP. 
More efforts can be made by the Indian research community to take their 
research contributions to 3GPP and other global standards development 
organizations such as IEEE through the forum offered by TSDSI. 
 
 
 

29 
 
77. Expressing the importance of addressing the digital communication needs of 
rural India, Director, IIT, Madras submitted as under: 
 ―The rural Indian, even more than the urban, needs wireless broadband 
connectivity in order to address basic needs. The pandemic has made this 
criticality even more stark.  Since wireless/cellular broadband needs to be 
back-hauled primarily using optical fiber, the rural towers have to be 
located where the BharatNet fiber ends, i.e., at the approximately 2.5 lakh 
gram panchayats.  From the towers at these locations, neighbouring 
villages numbering more than 3.5 lakh have to be provided wireless 
coverage. Roughly 33% of these villages are between 3 --6 km away from 
the gram panchayats, the rest being within 3 km. Ensuring coverage to  
these villages at distances up to 6 km is therefore crucial if a large fraction 
of rural Indians is not to be left out of 5G as well. 
 
 With Telecom Standards Development Society, India (TSDSI) in the lead 
and with the help of DOT, India for the first tim e took to ITU the 
requirement of Low Mobility Large Cell (LMLC), to provide rural cellular 
coverage up to a distance of 6 km and asked for this to be made a 
mandatory requirement of 5G (IMT -2020) technologies. Hitherto, only 
high-speed rural highway and ra ilway coverage was a requirement in 2G, 
3G and 4G. As expected we got a lot of support for LMLC from developing 
countries, but in the compromise hammered out at ITU, the mandatory 
coverage distance was reduced to 3 km. It is to be noted that there is 
nothing preventing 5G technology from exceeding this requirement. 
 
 Enthused by this partial success in ITU, Indian academia, supported by 
MEITY through research grants, along with some startups and industry, 
submitted innovative and affordable technology enhancements to the 
standard being developed in 3GPP (which is the preponderant global 
wireless standardization forum in which TSDSI is an organisational 
partner). These enhancements ensure LMLC coverage up to 6 km as 
needed in India through minimal softwa re changes in the equipment. 
However, due to the diverging interests of several companies represented 
in 3GPP, and possible concerns about Indian IPR, our enhanced LMLC 
coverage solution was not included in the 3GPP standard. 
 
 Given the importance of 100%  rural 5G broadband coverage to India, 
TSDSI has re - incorporated these LMLC enhancements into the 3GPP 
standard, in a fully inter - operable and compatible manner, and submitted 
an Indian ―5Gi‖ enhanced standard to ITU for approval as a part of IMT -
2020. T he 5Gi standard is on the threshold of being approved — this 
represents the first time a global standard is emerging from India at ITU.‖ 
 
(ii) Need for Harmonization of Indian Standards with Global Standards 
 
78. Need for enhanced rural coverage is one of the impor tant aspects to cover 
rural and remote areas considering the size of the country and large capex/ 

30 
 
investments required especially 5G cell site coverage is smaller compared to 4G as 
higher spectrum bands are used for 5G and higher the frequency higher the 
attenuation. IIT Madras and associate institutions have developed a variant to the 
3GPP standard (Release 15) with the objective to enhance coverage in the existing 
standards and also offered technology solution to implement it. This is called TSDSI 
RIT and is self-evaluated by an Independent Evaluation Group and submitted to ITU. 
The standard compliant to the requirements of 5G technology, the TSDSI RIT along 
with the original 3GPP standard have been recommended by the ITU. Some of the 
other developing coun tries also supported the TSDSI RIT considering its relevance 
for enhanced rural coverage, which implies reduced capex costs to cover a certain 
defined area.  
79. COAI while deposing before Committee have stated that i t is important to 
have globally harmonized standards to allow interoperability and economies of 
scale. India should adopt globally harmonized 3GPP standards. If India adopts any 
standard other than 3GPP, it would disconnect India from globally harmonized 
standard, device & network ecosystem. This would severely impact 5G rollouts, its 
adoption in India and increase cost.  
 
80. To a query of the Committee regarding whether India should adopt globally 
harmonized 3GPP standards and what steps have been by the Depa rtment in this 
regard, the Department have stated that India should adopt standards that are 
harmonized sufficiently with global standards to ensure inter -operability, roaming, 
and to derive ecosystem benefits such as economies of scale. However, it is 
possible to adopt carefully enhanced variants of the global standard that specifically 
provide some features of importance to India such as enhanced rural broadband 
coverage, without compromising on either inter-operability or economy of scale.  
 
81. On w hether I ndia has adopted any standard other than 3GPP , the 
Department have replied that ITU standards are in final stages of approval for 
finalization. India has not adopted any standard for 5G services as yet. 
 
 

31 
 
82. Bharti Aitel has also submitted as under: 
―Current TSDSI RIT standards being proposed for 5G are not globally 
harmonized. The adoption of TSDSI RIT without global harmonization 
would make India an isolated island in the global 5G ecosystem. GSMA & 
GSA have raised concerns on the same with DOT. This would i mpact 
international roaming, incompatibility of global handset & infra with Indian 
network. Similar efforts in the past by other countries like China              
(TS-SCDMA, local 3G standards), Korea (WiBro — local 4G standards) 
etc. have been failures due  to the lack of harmonization of these 
standards with the global ecosystem. The adoption of globally harmonized 
standards for 5G is more critical as SG services are not only for human 
communication but also impact the adoption of 5G in vertical industries. 
Gaps in the current TSDSI RIT specification would lead to a delay in 
adopting 5G services in India. It would increase the cost of 5G handset 
and services, which would impact the mass population, who will have to 
invest in a comparatively expensive handset  (because of made ONLY for 
India as against Made in India).Thus, any standard needs to be globally 
harmonized to create an open ecosystem that allows the development of 
common smartphones/ infrastructure to drive down the cost of services. 
The local standa rds approach will deprive Indians of affordable 5G 
devices and applications apart from making the network and devices cost 
higher and also cause a delay in the roll -out of 5G. Therefore, we suggest 
that the timelines should be to lay down for resolution of  gaps around 
Interoperability, Performance, Implementation, Alignment, and IPR in the 
proposed TSDSI RIT specifications.‖ 
 
83. COAI further submitted that even after submission of the inputs of the TSPs 
to TSDSI regarding technical errors, incompleteness, unimplementability aspects 
and non -testability issues in TSDSI documents, the same have not been 
incorporated in the TSDSI RIT.  Issues related to interoperability of the proposed 
specification with global 3GPP specification still prevail and remain unaddre ssed. 
Performance gain of proposed specifications compared to 3GPP specifications have 
not established.  Also, the 3GPP has identified that there is an overlap in the 
signalling messages of TSDSI, which will cause interoperability issues. The issue 
related to lack of interworking in the TSDSI RIT will lead to creating inefficient supply 
chain (limited for India market), thereby leading to higher cost of ownership of 
devices and services for end customers. It will also lead to restrictions in 
international ro aming of 5G services between India & other countries, leading to 
significant revenue loss.  It is important to have globally harmonized standards to 

32 
 
allow interoperability. If the standards are not harmonized, there will be compatibility 
issues with other s tandards, which will impact international roaming. Globally 
harmonized standards also allow economies of scale. The network and customer 
devices when developed for mass market will have economies of scale, however, if 
isolated devices are to be developed for niche market, the cost will definitely rise. 
 
84. On the apprehensions raised by some TSPs, Director, IIT, Madras submitted 
as under: 
―Fears have been expressed that with this 5Gi standard, India  will trap 
itself into a corner isolated from the global 5G ecosystem. This is wholly 
misplaced, as inter - operability and compatibility between the 3GPP 5G 
and the TSDSI 5Gi standards can easily be ensured, since the latter is 
merely an enhanced version of the former. Moreover, there will be no cost 
implications a s equipment will support both standards through mere 
software selection and in a m anner transparent to the 
user….xxxxx….xxxx…Instead of fretting about the largely imagined risks 
in adopting the 5Gi standard, such a move by the TSPs would establish 
the voice of rural Indian consumer, numbering more than half a billion, in a 
global body meant to serve their needs, and make India‘s presence felt for 
the first time. It is definitely not too much to ask for a couple of bits to 
enable India to serve the needs of her rural populace. Till date, 3GPP 
member- companies have not taken this request, hitherto made by Indian 
academia and some Indian industry members, seriously.  Should 3GPP 
not heed even this reasonable request, we will still implement the 5Gi 
standard in an inter -operable and compatible manner with the 3GPP 
standard in India, so that we avoid the trap of being ―islanded‖ or ―forked‖ 
form the global technology roadmap. However, I believe that the voice of 1 
billion-plus Indians cannot be so easily ignored.‖ 
85. Elaborating on the issue, Secretary, DoT, during the sitting stated as under: 
 ―The 3rd Generation Partnership Project, (3GPP) lays down standards 
which are adopted by ITU  after consideration . Then, that is an 
international standard. So, it is not a stand ard which is specific for India. 
We are free to also adopt specific standards. But one particular issue 
which must have been flagged before the hon. Committee is with regard to 
the Low Mobility Large Cell (LMLC) that is, where the tower for the 5G will 
have a large coverage. Sir, that is good for India. It is good for rural areas 
also. It is good for many countries on the same footing. Interoperability is 
important. The equipment that is used should be able to operate in this 
standard also. We are looking into it. Right now, there is no decision as if 
this is being adopted. But yes, if it is an international standard, it is also 
applicable to us and we have been advocating that it should be done 

33 
 
through the TSDSI, which is the standards settin g body and which also, 
incidentally, has private participation.‖ 
 
86. When asked about the difference between TSDSI RIT and LMLC, t he 
Department have stated that  LMLC is a rural test configuration and is part of the 
IMT-2020 requirements. TSDSI RIT has been approved by ITU SG5 and one of the 
standards which has successfully completed all evaluation steps for IMT 2020.  This 
is hence qualified for commercial deployments.  It is in final stage of approval by the 
193 member states of ITU . TSDSI-RIT (5Gi) is a st andard/technology specification 
approved by ITU which meets the IMT 2020 requirements (including LMLC) with 
enhanced performance for LMLC rural eMBB use case.  The concern of the TSPs 
relate to TSDSI-RIT. 
 
VII. Device Eco-system for 5G 
 
(i) Affordable Handsets 
 
87. India is a price sensitive market.  Therefore, the success of 5G roll out will 
also greatly depend on the availability of affordable 5G devices.   On the measures 
being envisaged to make affordable 5G handsets and devices, the Department have 
stated that the Government has approved Production Linked Incentive Scheme (PLI) 
for Large Scale Electronics Manufacturing which includes mobile phones also in 
which an incentive of 4% to 6% is proposed to be extended to eligible companies on 
incremental sales (over bas e year) of manufactured goods including mobile phones 
and specified electronic components for a period of five (5) years subsequent to the 
base year. There is another scheme, the Scheme for Promotion of Manufacturing of 
Electronic Components and Semiconduc tors (SPECS) which shall provide financial 
incentive of 25% on capital expenditure for the identified list of electronic goods that 
comprise downstream value chain of electronic products, i.e., electronic 
components, semiconductor/ display fabrication unit s, Assembly, Test, Marking and 
Packaging (ATMP) units, specialized sub -assemblies and capital goods for 
manufacture of aforesaid goods. The setting up of mobile manufacturing ecosystem 
including components will enable affordable handsets. 
 

34 
 
88. Expressing the need for affordable devices for 5G, representative of a TSP 
during the sitting of the Committee stated as under: 
 ―I think, devices or smartphones will play a role. With regard to 
smartphones along with fixed wireless devices, we really are,  I would say, 
enthralled by the Make in India incentives that have been given to the 
device or smartphone OEMs. But I think, similar ecosystem has to develop 
in 5G where we have to see how we can get the 5G smartphones and the 
devices less than Rs. 10,000 range. That will basically make the 5G thrive 
in India because that is exactly what happened with 4G, if I  have to go 
back in three years‘ time. Actually, when the 4G smartphones were less 
than Rs. 5,000, that is when the whole adoption started in a big ma nner. 
So, I think, certainly, we have to make sure that the ecosystem for 5G 
smartphones and devices is ready and is given the right incentives to 
make sure that we are able to see the 5G adoption once the networks get 
rollout.‖ 
 
(ii) Promotion of Domestic Manufacturing of Telecom Equipment 
 
89. Telecom service providers have done expansion in 4G infrastructure and 
hence import has increased. China is one of the leading suppliers of components, 
piece parts and also finished equipment including mobil e phones. There are a 
number of multinational companies who have manufacturing facilities in China.  
 
90. India has the second highest number of mobile subscribers in the world. The 
Committee enquired how much of telecom equipment requirement in the country is  
not through domestic production, the Department have replied that a s per 
information obtained from MeitY, as a result of the implementation of Phased 
Manufacturing Programme (PMP) to substantially increase the domestic value 
addition of cellular mobile ha ndsets manufacturing eco -system in India and support 
provided under Modified Special Incentive Package Scheme (M -SIPS), India rapidly 
started attracting investments in mobile manufacturing segment and significant 
manufacturing capacities have been set up i n India during the past five years. Most 
of the major brands (both foreign and Indian) have either already set up their own 
manufacturing facilities or have sub -contracted manufacturing to Electronics 
Manufacturing Services (EMS) companies operating from I ndia. India has emerged 
as the 2nd largest manufacturer of mobile phones in the world in volume terms. 

35 
 
During year 2018 -19, there were import of finished telecom equipment worth more 
than 50, 000 crores and about Rs. 10, 000 crores worth of telecom product s were 
manufactured within the country.  
 
91. Asked as to whether the Department foresee any obstacles in getting 
adequate supply of  equipment and technology for 5G , the Department stated that 
5G technology is still in development phase and vendors are making their efforts for 
development of eco -system in phased manner.  The Government have taken 
several  initiatives under ‗Atma Nirbhar Bharat‘ and ‗Make in India‘ for promotion of 
domestic manufacturing of telecom equipment , such as Scheme for Promotion of 
Manufacturing of Electronic Components and Semiconductors (SPECS), PLI 
Scheme of MeitY to attract large investment in manufacturing of mobile phones and 
electronic components, imposition of basic Custom Duty notification of 36 telecom 
products and services under Public Procurement Order, 2017, etc.    
 
92. The representatives of TEMA submitted before the Committee that an 
ecosystem needs to be developed for complete manufacturing rather than just 
assembly.  India should be made a manufacturing destination for g lobal companies 
and to develop Indian Champions.  As an association of equipment manufacturers in 
the country, TEMA are of the view that assembly gives value addition of 5 -20% 
whereas design led manufacturing give s much more value addition may be up to 
50% or more.  TEMA strongly believes that a  design led domestic ma nufacturing is 
the backbone of country to have complete control on strategicall y important telecom 
networks.  It is imperative that rather than just increasing manufacturing contribution 
to GDP  by low value added assembly -led manufacturing, efforts and policies are 
required to be evolved on building a strong design led manufacturing with high value 
addition in hi-tech products in telecommunication for commercial as well as strategic 
communications purposes and others.  
 
93. TEMA has also stated that TRAI in this behalf in its recommendations dated 
3rd August, 2018 has recommended that for promoting research, innovation, 

36 
 
standardization, design, testing, certification and manufacturing indigenous 
telecom equipment, Telecom Research and Development Fund (TRDF), with initial 
corpus of Rs. 1000 Crore, should be created. They have  further requested that 
Government may provide about Rs 1,000 Crores corpus to support Industry led 
R&D support to  promote Indian companies who have requisite technological 
competence to develop and commercialize world -class products in the core 
technological   areas. The Government may identify some o f the frontrunners and 
aim to create at least two National Champions in each category.  
 
94. Explaining the importance of R&D, representative of TEMA stated as under: 
 ―…..xxx…We need something very, very fundamental and solid on the 
R&D part because R&D is very different from innovation. The innovation 
comes from start-up and then it becomes the commercial part of it. R&D is 
a sustainable long -term activity. Unless there is a real policy, economic 
thrust and support for R&D, thinking that we will start manuf acturing really 
is a far-flung dream.‖ 
 
95. Further elaborating on the issue, TEMA stated that now the PPP MII policies 
are applicable to only Central Government and Central PSUs.  This includes two 
PSU as telecom service providers, which has about 10% market share. The balance 
market share is with private Telecom service providers. Thus the PPP MII policy 
addresses about 10% of the market share of telecom service operators. We feel that 
India can become Atma  Nirbhar with 100% access to market. Hence need for 
extension of PPP -MII to private telecom operators also. Likewise TEC, DOT 
technical specifications are at present followed by PSU telecom operators. Need to 
extend it to all public or private operators as also State Government/State PSUs. 
Detailed submissions hereunder. 
 
(iii) Development of Indigenous 5G Technology 
 
96. In the backdrop of Newspaper Reports that Reliance Jio ha s developed its 
own 5G technology using 100 per cent homegrown technologies and plans to offe r it 
to other telecom companies, the Committee desired to know more details about the 

37 
 
indigenous 5G developed by Reliance Jio. On Reliance Jio‘s progress on indigenous 
5G, Secretary, DoT, stated during evidence as under: 
 ―We have Jio which has announced recently publicly that they have the 
entire technology. We have sought details from them. They have also met 
us. We do not doubt them. We have not tested the technology as to how 
this is going to emerge. We have not examined it. But, given the track 
record, it must be workable, it must be good. .……They have their own 
major research organisation also and they have also applied for trial in our 
5G trial s. Jio has also given an application for trial using their own 
technology. So, we will be able to see it also . I am not aware of whether 
specifically they have sought any testing in the 5G Testbed.‖ 
97. Also submitting on the development of 5G technology by domestic industry, 
Secretary, DoT, further stated as under: 
 ―In terms of technology, we have Jio who have said  that they have got the 
technology. We have this 5G testbed, which is coming with the 
technology, and we are also encouraging CDoT to come up with the 5G 
technology. CDoT already has 4G technology not of a high level, and they 
are working on it. So, we hav e encouraged them and told them to now 
also work on 5G and come up with it. We are hopeful that they should do it 
in the year 2021. 
 
98. On the status of ITI, the only telecom PSU to manufacture 5G equipment, the 
Department have stated that ITI  has recently ti ed up with system integrators like 
Tech Mahindra, TCS etc. for 4G equipment. They are also discussing with couple of 
Indian companies with 4G upgradable to 5G solutions. ITI has the capabilities to 
take up manufacturing of Radio equipment for 4G/5G and has  been discussing with 
Original Equipment Manufacturers to have transfer of technology to manufacture 
these products. 
 
99. TEMA stated that Indian OEMs have proved time & again their expertise on 
technologies. Indian Prowess on Software is recognized world over. In recent times 
there is more of software in telecom equipment than hardware. Indian telecom 
equipment has already proved them in implementing many mission critical and 
national importance networks (Bharatnet, NFS, AFNET etc) based on domestically 
developed equipment. 5G standards are Open standards. Foreign OEMs has an 
edge in 2G,  3G & 4G because they monopolize  the standards implementation with 

38 
 
IPRs in their name hence restricting others to develop it or make use of. However in 
the case of 5G, it‘s not the case. All components can be developed individually with 
no dependency on one component working over the other, as 5G use cases is not 
just covering Mobile Users but the plethora of applications. Many foreign companies 
like Nokia, Ericsson, Ciena, N EC etc. are OEMing Indian products which shows the 
quality of the product which India is manufacturing now.  TEMA requests that f or 5G 
domestic procurement should be made mandatory, so that Indian companies first 
have in country deployment base and then they enter world market. 
 
100. Commenting on the issue, Director, IIT, Kanpur submitted as under:   
 ―Currently, India has insignificant share of its own homegrown product or 
equipment manufacturing companies in the domain of mobile 
communication technology. We missed the 3G and the 4G bus earlier. 
However, due to the changed nature of network components and the 
architecture of 5G, it offers us an opportunity to develop products in India.  
One of the key design principles used by 5G networks is the 
`softwarization‘ of network components. Unlike specialized hardware 
elements in the earlier generations of mobile networks, a large number of 
equipment/network entities in the 5G network will be based on software 
running on commodity off -the-shelf hardware. Specialized c hipsets and 
hardware elements may not be needed for most of the network entities in 
5G network barring elements like Radio Frequency frontends and antenna 
sub-system. This provides an opportunity to Indian vendors (R&D and 
software vendors) to leapfrog and  start developing 5G network equipment 
for deployments in India and across the world given our expertise in 
software.‖ 
 
(iv) Development of Open RAN in the Telecom Network 
 
101. As per the submission of Vodafone Idea Limited traditionally, telecom 
networks have followed the Single RAN model that consisted of defined standard 
interfaces with closed proprietary information and message exchanges between 
them and purpose -built hardware with all RAN components  from the same telecom 
vendor. This has meant that the control to resolve many of the challenges that 
confront the Telecom service providers on a day to day basis lies with just that one 
telecom vendor who has designed the particular hardware/software, dep ending on 
where the problem lies, as in traditional RAN deployments, the software and 

39 
 
interfaces remain either proprietary or "closed" by the individual vendor and are 
often tied on the underlying hardware by the same vendor. Open RAN , on the other 
hand, i s one where the interfaces and the software are open and there are no 
proprietary interfaces and can be executed on non -proprietary hardware. "Open 
RAN" is a  movement to define and build 2G, 3G, 4G  and 5G  RAN solutions  based 
on a general purpose, vendo r neutral hardware and software defined technology  
with  open interfaces between all the components. 
 
102. Vodafone further submitted that cost s avings, competition , choice and 
security are some of the key advantages of Open RAN.  Typically, RAN network 
constitutes about (60-70%) costs of whole CAPEX spend of a telecom operator, and 
hence the most important cost factor to focus upon.  It is expected that Open RAN 
would offer around one -third savings over the traditional gears. In cost sensitive 
market like India , Open RAN promises to off er a substantial saving to the telecom 
operators while maintaining the performance requirements and KPIs for the 
consumers.  
103. Accelerating Open RAN deployments and the development of a global Open 
RAN ecosystem can advance key strategic objectives of the Indian Government  viz. 
Make In India ; Connected India  and Building Atma Nirbhar Bharat . Government 
should provide financial incentives to operators that transit a portion of their network 
to Open RAN and Government should invest in and encourage private sector 
investment in areas where India has comparative advantage, such as software 
development.  The Government should seek to establish Open RAN Centres of 
Excellence (CoEs) at Indian Institutes of Technology, leveraging and enhancing their 
international reputation.   
 
VIII. Infrastructure & RoW Policy Issues 
 
(i) Fiberisation and RoW Policy Issues 
 
104. COAI has submitted that Uniform RoW policy across states has Critical role in 
the operationalization of 5G networks. Making available existing and new municipal 
infrastructure (for e.g. street furniture/ open spaces etc.) for site densification (small 

40 
 
cell deployments/ telecom in frastructure installation). Fiberization is next key 
foundation for 5G readiness. India lacks fiberized sites and there needs to be strong 
govt. push to build at least 50% sites on fiber. Tracker at circle level would be useful 
in this regard with target t o achieve 50% of sites in each circle on fiber. Free RoW 
for this will be a great contributor in the national interest of providing 5G access to 
the entire nation.  
 
105. Explaining the need for streamlining the RoW policy, representative of a TSP 
stated as under: 
―Since it is a high bandwidth capability on the network side, 5G would 
definitely demand the reach of the optical fibre to each and every tower or 
point of emissions from where the 5G radio waves are emitted. Now, this 
will need a significant change  in the way the policy, the subsequent 
implementation and the execution of right of way are handled in the 
country. Today, there are multiple agencies right from State Governments 
to municipalities to RWAs which have very clear entry barrier for anybody 
else like us to lay fibre while we call it essential services like electricity and 
water. I think our ability to reach out to the customer the way we want as 
far as our plan is concerned is seriously hampered by delays, exorbitant 
costs and non-uniform ways of operating this and this could be the single 
largest delay in expansion of the 5G network in length and breadth of the 
country. The second infrastructure related issue which I would like to 
highlight is the permission for putting up towers and polls. Unl ike 4G, 5G 
will be much more densified a network. It will go much closer to the 
customer because of the bandwidth, the kind of services and the industry 
support it would need. In that scenario, it would be very, very critical for us 
to go ahead and deploy towers, polls and sites what the world calls the 
‗street furniture‘, not only the classical towers or telco towers. To go there, 
we would again need a single window clearance, which means if I need to 
cover this room, I would need to put a sense of emissio n either here or in 
some place near which can cover it in the right way.‖ 
 
106. On the present policy governing RoW for setting up of towers and  laying of 
fiber in the country, the Department have stated that The Indian Telegraph Right of 
Way Rules, 2016 (IT Ro W Rules, 2016), notified in the Gazette of India 
Extraordinary on the 15th November, 2016, govern the RoW for setting up of towers 
and laying of fiber in the country. The uniform RoW policy is very critical for 
operationalisation 5G as it would help TSPs/I SPs/Telecom in creating and 
expanding telecom infrastructure [for 5G) across India. Ultimately it would support 

41 
 
citizens and enterprises by fulfilling the information and communication needs 
through the establishment of a ubiquitous, resilient, secure, acc essible and 
affordable telecom Infrastructure, necessary for 5G operations.  
 
107. Asked about the challenges in providing RoW across all States/UTs , the 
Department submitted the following:  
a) ―Delay in issuing permissions due to lack of Online Single window 
clearance system.  
b) Lack of clarity regarding documents required for submission of 
application for RoW permission.  
c) Multiple Policies with multiple levies of charges and procedures by 
many States/UTs.  
d) Lack of availability of Government Land & Buildings for installation of 
Mobile Towers as procedure for same is not included by many States/UTs 
in their existing policies. ― 
 
108. Regarding meeting the fiber requirement for complete roll out of 5G, the 
Department further stated that the requirement of towers and fiberization is subject 
to rollout plans of 5G. In the initial spell, 5G is envisaged to be rolled out in high 
density and high data consumption hotspots in mid band and in subsequent phases, 
the other applications will be rollout progressively considering the infrastructure 
costs in rolling out 5G and business demand.  
 
109. The IT RoW Rules, 2016 provide uniform rates for granting RoW permission 
by the States/UTs. So far 16 States/UTs have aligned their RoW Policies/Rules with 
the Indian Telegraph Right of Way Rules, 2016.Various Seminars, Regional 
Workshops, Meetings are being held from time to time with the States/UTs  including 
the stakeholders for reviewing the implementation of IT RoW Rules, 2016. Requests 
have been/are being made to Chief Ministers and Chief Secretaries of the remaining 
States/UTs from time to time for aligning their RoW Rules/Policies with the IT R oW 
Rules, 2016. As envisaged in the NDCP 2018, DoT has initiated to measure a set of 
parameters across states to assess Broadband Readiness Index with the objective 
to address the challenges in building infrastructure and attract investments in digital 

42 
 
infra. The DoT‘s 2016 RoW guidelines adoption, approval period, Power supply to 
cell sites, Fiberization are some of the parameters in the index that are important. 
The objective is to monitor and measure the performance to enhance the 
competitive spirit amon g states and build collaboration with states to mitigate the 
challenges in infrastructure rollout. 
 
110. On the issue of RoW policy and need for adoption of uniform policy, 
representative of TRAI stated as under: 
 ―Sir, Right -of-Way is very, very important if we want to increase 
fiberization. Our percentage of fiberization is very low. We have made very 
detailed recommendations and DoT also has written to MOHUDA. But we 
think that a time -bound schedule should be prepared. May be, i f required, 
we should work with States to amend the laws on Municipal ity Acts or the 
Municipal Corporation Act and the Panchayat Act in which specific 
provisions should be made. Today, what is happening? Different cities and 
different towns are charging di fferent kinds of rates. In many cases, the 
rates are prohibitive. It is because of that also the cable operators, even 
the TSPs find it very difficult. That is one thing. Secondly, giving a time -
bound permission is another problem. It is almost difficult f or an operator 
to get the permission in time. That is also increasing cost  and overruns. 
So, these are two things where we are of the view  that we should 
concentrate on Right -of-Way. We are also going to work with the State 
Governments on this. We are prep aring a Whit e Paper on 
it…..xxxxx….xxxxx….. On right-of-way, I just want to add one thing. If we 
have to improve the quality of service, modification of building bylaws is 
also very much required ….We have taken up this issue with Ministry of 
Housing and Urban Affairs. But a lot of work has to be done on that on 
topmost priority basis; otherwise the quality of telecom service will not be 
up to the mark and we will not be able to give proper coverage particularly 
for the 5G.‖ 
 
(ii) Requirement of Small Cells 
 
111. As large numbers of small cells are required to be deployed, in order to 
reduce the approval time and administrative burden of local authorities, batch 
processing for group of small cells will play a crucial role. Also, for making 
deployment of huge number of small cells economically viable, administrative fee for 
getting approvals/clearances needs reconsideration. Though comprehensive RoW 
rules 2016 have been declared, necessary steps need to be taken to follow up with 

43 
 
the state governments for getting RoW  rules 2016 implemented properly. Moreover, 
keeping with the requirements of small cell deployment, suitable amendment in the 
RoW rules will be beneficial.  
112. The Committee asked p ending amendment in the RoW Rules, whether any 
stopgap arrangements are being put in place to set up small cell or the proposal for 
amendment of RoW Rules is under process.  TRAI in a written reply stated that t he 
service providers and Infrastructure Providers (IP -1s) need to construct and 
establish small cell facilities in the publ ic Right of Way. Timely approval process for 
RoW permissions is required for ensuring faster rollout of 5G connectivity, wherein 
approximately 1000 Base Station cells per square kilometer are required. For rolling 
out 5G small cells, providers could utiliz e the existing electricity poles, streetlight 
poles or utility poles. Moreover, a 5G cell needs to be connected through a fiberized 
backhaul. This again requires RoW permissions for laying underground as well as 
aerial Optical Fiber Cable (OFC). The facili tation of OFC, towers and poles 
installation through the RoW Rules enables the operators to faster rollout 5G 
services. Mitigating the present challenges of RoW permissions in the country will 
expedite infrastructure rollout and make India 5G ready.  In view of the above, TRAI 
is reviewing whether the RoW Rules 2016 have effectively  addressed the issues in 
grant of RoW permissions on time at reasonable prices in nondiscriminatory 
manner? Accordingly, TRAI has raised various RoW issues for seeking inputs from  
stakeholders in the recent consultation paper on ―Roadmap to Promote Broadband 
Connectivity and Enhanced Broadband speed‖. The consultation with the 
stakeholders is under progress. After the conclusion of the consultation process, 
TRAI may issue suitable recommendations to the Government for addressing the 
issues relating to RoW permissions, if any.  Further, as a stop gap arrangement, the 
alternate of OFC backhaul for small cells could be wireless backhaul connectivity. 
The E and V spectrum bands are consi dered optimum for providing high speed 
wireless backhaul connectivity. For this purpose, TRAI has already given its 
recommendations to the Government for assignment of E and V band spectrum to 
the service providers. 
 

44 
 
(iii) Sharing of Infrastructure   
 
113. Infrastructure sharing provides a healthier competitive environment for the 
telecom market. It also improves economies of scale, avoiding duplication of 
networks where unnecessary. The increase of infrastructure sharing in the telecom 
business has allowed for a more efficient pace of expansion and innovation, for 
example, a faster roll-out of next generation networks and services have been made 
possible due to sharing of active and passive infrastructure. 5G would require 
densification of network, thus nece ssitates to further ease out the sharing of 
infrastructure. Presently, Infrastructure Providers Category -I (IP -I) are permitted to 
deploy and share passive infrastructure such as Dark fiber, Right of Way, Duct 
space, and Towers on lease/rent out/sale basis  to the licensees of telecom services 
on mutually agreed terms and conditions. In the year 2009, the scope of IP -I 
registration was enhanced to cover the active infrastructure limited to antenna, 
feeder cable, Node B, Radio Access Network (RAN), and transm ission system for 
and on behalf of Unified Access Service License (UASL)/Cellular Mobile Service 
Provider (CMSP) licensees. However, IP -I providers are not permitted to own and 
share active infrastructure, i.e., these elements should be owned by the TSPs. 
 
114. Stressing the need for sharing of fibre, representative of a TSP during the 
sitting stated as under: 
 
―5G rollouts typically have been in countries which are already having more 
than 90 per cent fibre rollouts. If you look at China, they have 90 per cent of 
their sites already fiberized. Similarly, if you look at Japan, they have the 
similar situation. If y ou look at US, even if it is a widespread market, they 
have a very good fibre penetration up to each and every site. So, I think, this 
is very very important that we should have a fibre infrastructure enrichment 
that should happen which basically would ent ail permissions to be given 
within a particular timeframe, or I would say, single window, very clear 
timeframe for a permission, as well as Government incentivizing the right of 
way by creating a free right of way and creating fibre as a national asset 
where we all can pool in our fibre asset and make it available on a sharing 
basis. I think, sharing the resources right now is very very critical and hence, 
what we recommend and request is that we should have fibre sharing policy 
well-defined wherein all the  fibre, right from PSUs to TSPs, operators like 
ourselves and others should share the fibre and make it usable so that we 

45 
 
can let our 5 lakh towers to be lit by fibre. The fiber sharing and using the fiber 
as a national asset has not been the case till now  along with the right of way 
in terms of its cost and in times that it will be very very critical.‖ 
 
 
115. Elaborating further on the issue, the representative of Bharti Airtel stated as 
under: 
 ―The connectivity of the BTSs through the fiber is another requirement for 
the roll-out of 5G services. However, India remains highly under-fiberized, 
providing connectivity to less than 30% of mobile towers and 7% of our 
homes. The major bottlenecks for low  fiber penetration in India have been 
the difficulties, delays, and costs associated with  obtaining Right of Way 
(RoW) permissions from various state/local authorities. Fiber needs to be 
accorded with the status of essential national infrastructure, and TSPs 
should be supported with zero RoW cost with single window clearance so 
that they can fiberize their BTSs. Sharing of fiber infrastructure across 
Govt. and private players should be made mandatory, and a pricing model 
for such sharing need to be adopted.‖ 
 
116. TRAI have informed that they have given their recommendations on 
‗Enhancement of Scope of Infrastructure Providers Category -I (IP -I)‘ to the 
Government on 13.03.2020.  TRAI has recommended to expand the scope of the     
IP-I providers, and permit them to own, establish, maintain, and work all such 
infrastructure items, equipment, and systems which are required for establishing 
Wireline Access Network, Radio Access Network (RAN), and Transmission Links. 
The recommendations are under consideration in DoT. Once implemented, this 
would increase sharing of common active sharable infrastructure established by IP -I 
providers resulting in efficient utilization of resources. 
 
117. To a query on their plan to meet the fibre requirement of TSPs  for 5G 
services, TRAI in a written reply stated that fiberisation is the ke y focus area for the 
industry. The National Broadband Mission  launched in December 2019, to achieve 
the NDCP goal of 'Broadband for All', highlights  fiberisation of towers, to increase by 
around two and half times the current number of  fiberized telecom to wers in the 
country. As per the latest data available with TRAI,  approximately 30 percent of the 
total base stations are connected through OFC.  It is right that BharatNet will be able 

46 
 
to meet the demand of the Telecom Service Providers for optical fibre connectivity in 
the rural and remote areas. As per the latest status  available on the website of 
Bharat Broadband Network Limited (BBNL), as on 6th Nov  2020, 4.7 lakh km length 
of OFC is laid for 1,59,901 Gram Panchayats (GP), out of which  1,47,368 GPs are 
made service ready (on fibre & satellite). This network can accelerate  5G 
penetration across rural India. However, BharatNet has its own set of challenges  
during implementation. TRAI has issued its recommendations to the Government for  
expeditious rollout and efficient utilization of BharatN et. The same are under  
implementation in some of the areas.  Further, TRAI has already taken steps to 
increase fiberisation through recent consultation  paper on ―Roadmap to Promote 
Broadband Connectivi ty and Enhanced Broadband  speed‖, illustrating the current 
footprint status, existing bottlenecks, and opportunities to  increase fibre penetration. 
As the Government is aiming to increase fibre footprint to 5  million-kilometer route 
and increase fiberized towers to 60% by 2022, TRAI would furnish  its 
recommendations on fiberisation soon. 
 
IX. Use of E and V Bands for Backhaul Spectrum 
 
118. As per TRAI fibre-based backhaul is still in its infancy in India. There is 
inadequacy in terms of optic fibre cable density both in urban and rural areas and a 
special focus for its densification in a time bound manner is essential for 5G 
deployments. While providing the inputs to the Government for the National Telecom 
Policy in February 2018, the Authority has recommended a n umber of strategies for 
increasing fiber penetration in the country. Most of those strategies have got 
reflected in the National Digital Communication Policy (NDCP) 2018. The 
Government should focus on implementation and execution of the NDCP 2018 
policy strategies as a critical attribute to drive the development of the whole telecom 
ecosystem in the right direction. If done timely, the policy will provide the impetus, 
the required thrust, and augur to be extremely positive for 5G launch in India. 
 
119. The spectrum in E Band and V band will provide high capacity backhaul links 
for mobile networks and is very important specially for deployment 5G network. E-

47 
 
band was established in the US over 10 years ago. Since then, E -band has grown 
steadily. E -band is now open in more than 85 countries and the most common 
regulation for E -band assignment is link -by-link coordination.  Over 70 countries 
across the world including US, UK, Korea, Japan, Australia, Sweden, South Africa 
among others, have already opened up the 60 GHz (V band) for delicensed usage. 
 
120. Regarding the status of E&V backhaul spectrum, the r epresentative of TRAI 
submitted during evidence as under: 
“TRAI has recommended giving the E band and V band for backhaul and  
band, for some portion, as a hotspot and Wi -Fi…… We have already 
made the recommendation. There are conflicts of interests. One is that the 
TSPs want that E band should be auctioned but Internet Service Providers 
and other people are of the opinion that it should not be.‖ 
 
121. Asked about auctioning of E& V band which will not only address fibre 
requirement but also generate revenue, the Department have replied that t he issue 
of allotment of Microwave Backhaul spectrum to the TSPs, which also include E&V 
Bands, is part of the ongoing process of finalisation  of ―Policy for Normative and 
Transparent Assignment /Authorisation of Spectrum‖ as well as the TRAI 
recommendation dated 29 August 2014.  
 
122. Representative of a TSP stated during the sitting as under: 
―Another thing which we always say is that just like fiber is there on the 
ground, we have the opportunity of using airwaves to reach just like 
wireline reaches to places. We could use wireless technology to reach 
people faster. Same thing is true about the ability to use E&V band, the 
recommendation which h as been made by TRAI and DOT in the past, 
however, it has not been allocated. As an industry body, we have 
requested that if a quick auction of that can be done along with the 
spectrum auction that takes place, then it is almost like providing fiber in 
the air. The ability for us, therefore, to make this figure of 30 per cent go 
up to 90 per cent becomes that much higher because you are literally 
having airwave-based fiber so to say.‖ 
 
 

48 
 
123. On the issue of delicensing, he further stated as under: 
 ―There are a lot of other people who are saying that it should be 
delicensed. Delicense is a problem. In the name of Wi -Fi, people are 
talking about delicensing. I will just mention one thing. In the last 18 
months, 550 MHz has been delicensed. The question to ask is, has it led 
to proliferation of Wi-Fi? The answer is no. The Wi-Fi that has been put by 
one-way operators like three of us or it has been done by the common 
service centers of the Government of India.‖ 
 
124. Bharti Airtel in their submission have stated that wit h explosive growth of 
wireless data services across the globe with advent of technologies like LTE, this 
high capacity spectrum band has been found to be very useful for backhaul 
transmissions. Many fibre rich countries like Japan and South Korea, among ot hers, 
are using E&V band for backhaul transmission networks. As backhaul spectrum, it 
can be used as high capacity focused, point -to-point ―pencil beam‖ links allowing a 
much higher reuse of the same frequency in a given area & make it suitable for last 
mile deployments in urban areas.  As 5G will enhance the access network's 
bandwidth and capacity, a higher capacity backhaul  spectrum is required. E&V Band 
can revolutionize 5G and high speed wired broadband. Therefore, an enabling policy 
for the E&V band as a backhaul needs to be finalized at the earliest. 
 
X. Security Related Issues in 5G Scenario  
 
125. Increased risk of hacking of data  is one of the immediate concerns of 5G .  In 
this background the Committee desired to know about the data security  related 
preparedness.  To this, the Department stated that the data including voice that goes 
through the network is protected considering the fact the network protocols reliably 
take care of potential scenarios. Further several applications say banking 
transactions etc., are protected end to end with specific application specific 
encryption keys. However, as 5G is a bouquet of technologies, is considered to work 
across platforms, devices, radio technologies, threat perception may be higher 
considering the fact that rollouts have just begun and issues are still being studied. 
The 3GPP standards do take care of network level protections as may be 
necessary.  

49 
 
126. Further, enhancing security protection and addressing vulnerabilities is a 
continuing process with equal responsibility on device makers, network gear makers 
and application developers as well.  
 
127. To tackle the cyber security related concerns emerging due to introduction of 
5G, the Department have stated that t he Telecom service in India is provided by the  
Telecom Service Provider  (TSP) after obtaining license from DoT . For ensuring 
security of Telecom networks the TSP has to abide by the 'Security Conditions' 
specified in chapter 6 of the license agreement. These ―Security Conditions‖ are 
technology agnostic and are equally applicable to 5G services. Further, DoT has 
notified Indian Telegraph (Amendment) Rules 2017 enabling Mandatory Testing and 
Certification of Telecommunication Equipment (MTCTE), which prescribes that any 
telegraph which is used or capable of being used with any telegraph established, 
maintained or wor ked under the licence granted by the Central Government in 
accordance with the provisions of section 4 of the Indian Telegraph Act, 1885, shall 
have to undergo prior mandatory testing and certification in respect of parameters as 
determined by the telegrap h authority from time to time. Telecom Engineering 
Centre(TEC) has been designated as the Telegraph Authority for the purpose of 
administration of MTCTE procedure and Surveillance Procedure, and for formulation 
of Essential Requirements (ER) under MTCTE. O ne of the important parameter s of 
ER against which the testing and certification shall be carried out is the Security 
Requirement. The National Centre for Communication Security (NCCS), DoT 
Bengaluru has been entrusted with the responsibility of drafting the same which shall 
be called Indian Telecom Security Assurance Requirement (ITSAR). Thus, any 
Original Equipment Manufacturer (OEM)/ importer/ dealer who wishes to sell or 
import any telecom equipment in India, shall have to obtain Certificate from 
Telecommunication Engineering Centre (TEC), DoT and mark or affix the equipment 
with appropriate Certification label. 
  
 

50 
 
128. It is also to mention that the ―Personal Data Protection Bill, 2019‖ has already 
been introduced in the Parliament on 11th December 2019. Onc e the PDP Bill is 
finally approved the directions related to Telecom Sector will be implemented 
accordingly. 
 
129. The Committee have also been informed that mandatory testing and 
certification in respect of ―Security requirements‖ is planned to be implemented 
through a scheme titled ―Communication Security Certification Scheme‖ (ComSeC). 
National Centre for Communication Security (NCCS) is responsible for 
implementation of this scheme. The objectives of ComSec are:  
 To develop country specific security standards, processes and test 
specifications.  
 To develop security testing and certification eco-system.  
 To ensure Telecom network elements meet security assurance requirements.  
 To ensure compliance of regulatory requirements pertaining to security 
testing.  
 Security requirements are framed by NCCS, for each Telecom product as per 
the country requirements by following an open, consultative and transparent 
process.  
 
130. On the issue of security, representative of a TSP submitted before the 
Committee as under: 
 ―We need to very clearly be cognitive of the fact that unlike 4G where the 
telecom was just a connectivity part of the whole network and we were 
building roads. From 5G onwards, it will become much more intrusive in 
our business operations like the application s, the digitisation,                     
e-governance, smart city, all the cameras in a city, the data centres, the 
device and the chipset in the devices. Now, the more open and more 
densified this whole network plain gets, the more vulnerable this becomes 
to threats. The threats are simple. It is a very good term – STRIDE. It talks 
about the fundamental threats, this is true in any scenario. ‗S‘ stands for 
Spoofing, ‗T‘ stands for Tampering, ‗R‘ stands for Repudiation which 
means the ownership and authentic ity of the data itself, ‗I‘ is for 
information disclosure, ‗D‘ is for denial of service making the network 
unavailable when it is needed more and ‗E‘ is for what they call as 
escalation of privileges which means that if I am not allowed to access this 
particular data and somehow I manipulate my privileges to elevate them to 
get it, all of them will cut across all the nine items in which we build our 

51 
 
network – the hardware which is the physics of the network, the software 
which is the whole brain of the netw ork and finally the data itself like 
customer data and the application data. Now, the mitigation strategy to the 
STRIDE is complying flawlessly with the right standards ensuring that the 
IPR is either our own which could be the best thing, which is what we  are 
trying, or is validated in such a foolproof way that there is absolutely no 
backdoor or hacking kind of scenario which comes up. Unless we 
understand this in its full glory, I think we will be kind of catching up with 
the nuances that will hit us post  the network goes live or post the 
industries or the Government start riding on this network. It would be a 
delay if that happens on the post facto basis.‖ 
 
131. In this regard, the r epresentative of a TSP submitted during evidence  as 
under: 
 ―Sir, we do have cloud service providers like Amazon and Google. We are 
having edge networks in India as well. So, what is important is that all the 
critical services should be hosted more from India as compared to being 
hosted outside, and the user data and the user infor mation should be 
secured within the Indian territories. That, I think, is our recommendation 
and request. 
 
(i) Threat from Imported Telecom Equipment  
132. There is a growing reluctance by a number of countries globally to allow 
Chinese telecommunications giant Huawei to roll out 5G services in their territories. 
The US has already banned Huawei over concerns of security. When asked about 
the stand of the Departme nt on the above issue, the Department have informed that   
they are having close watch on 5G development around the world and would take 
appropriate decision after evaluating all the pros and cons on 5G ecosystem 
including social, economic and security considerations. 
 
133. Secretary, DoT stated during the evidence as under: 
―Sir, DoT has not specifically banned any company. However, we have issued 
orders based on a representation from our local manufacturers that if there is 
any country which is preventing our vendors from supplying there, then our 
PSUs will also not buy from any such country. This order was issued about 
four or five months back, but no country is named here. So, if there is any 
such case, then the PSU will have to then not buy from such a country.‖ 
 
 
 

52 
 
XI. Other Issues 
 
(i) Need for Investment 
 
134. TRAI in their White Paper on ‗Enabling 5G in India‘ had given reference to the 
report on ―5G: The catalyst to Digital Revolution in India‖ by Deloitte,  where it has 
been mentioned that while the investment for 5G would grow incrementally as 
advancements on existing 4G/LTE technology, with 5G spectrum and network 
densification needs, it is anticipated that industry might require an additional 
investment of USD 60-70 billion to seamlessly implement 5G networks. Ernst & 
Young has also estimated that India would have to invest USD 60-70 billion for 5G. 
 
135. When asked to  furnish their comment on the above observation , TRAI have 
stated that it is a fact that substantial amount of investment would be required to roll 
out 5G services in India. The service providers have to envisage various business 
cases and the revenue models for commercial success of the 5G network roll out. 
Service providers should also consider various methods to minimize the cost of 
deployment. One of the methods is the Infrastructure sharing which is the key for 
success of 5G.Infrastructure sharing provides a healthier competitive environment 
for the telecom market. It also  improves economies of scale, avoiding duplication of 
networks where unnecessary. The sharing of towers and equipment also translates 
into sharing of expertise between telecom companies, and an overall reduction in 
Capex and Opex costs. Presently, Infrastr ucture Providers Category -I (IP -I) are 
permitted to deploy and share passive infrastructure only such as Dark fiber, Right of 
Way, Duct space, and Towers. TRAI has given its recommendations on 13th March 
2020 on ‗Enhancement of Scope of Infrastructure Prov iders Category -I (IP -I)‘ vide 
which TRAI has recommended to expand the scope of the IP -I providers, and permit 
them to own, establish, maintain, and work all such infrastructure items, equipment, 
and systems which are required for establishing Wireline Acc ess Network, Radio 
Access Network (RAN), and Transmission Links.  The recommendations are under 
consideration in DoT.  Once the recommendations are implemented, there will be 
increased sharing of common active sharable infrastructure established by IP -I 

53 
 
providers resulting in efficient utilization of resources and reduction in cost for the 
TSPs. 
 
136. On the requirement of Government support, representative of  a TSP stated 
as under: 
 ―The next thing I would like to mention is around the investment required to 
make this whole thing work. Everybody would acknowledge that there is 
stress in this sector at this moment. As an industry, all of us individually and 
as a body, have written to TR AI to also intervene in setting low prices. We 
understand that in the recent past, the aviation sector has got floor and 
ceiling, Rs.4000 for a ticket at a minimum and Rs. 10,000 at a maximum. We 
are balancing out in a difficult situation like this in the consumer‘s interest and 
in the industry‘s interest. We submit that for some time to come, it is very 
important that price stability is there and the floor pricing would be a great 
way to ensure that the industry which is supposed to cough up about a 
hundred billion dollars for 5G investment over the next few years is able to 
become more robust and therefore contribute not just to the exchequer, 
because that would be useful by way of revenue share that we give to the 
Government, but also would become cashflow-rich to handle that. The related 
area there is National Digital Communications Policy 2018 approved by the 
Parliament and the Government which talks about reducing the levies and 
duties. Should that be done quickly, it will again put more money in the ha nds 
of the industry to invest faster, and therefore, capitalize the whole 5G 
movement.‖ 
 
137. Bharti Airtel also submitted as under: 
 ―5G services launched globally are being offered at the same price levels 
as 4G services and mostly used for offloading 4G networks and building 
capabilities to offer FWA services that were not scalable on 4G networks. 
Given the high level of 4G network usage in the Indian market, 5G would 
be used mainly for decongesting 4G networks. Hence, it would not 
increase operators‘ rev enues unless there is price correction in existing 
4G & fixed broadband services. However, the adoption of 5G requires 
massive investments. Therefore, as stated above, it is critical to ensure 
the telecom sector's viability and sustainability by taking nec essary steps 
such as rationalization of regulatory levies, tariff floor on a temporary 
basis, etc.‖ 
 
(ii) Availability of Reliable Power Supply 
 
138. Availability of the reliable grid power has also been cited as one of the largest 
bottlenecks in upgrading the network. According to Tower and Infrastructure 

54 
 
Providers Association  (TAIPA), about 35% towers in the country are connected to 
reliable power sup ply on Pan India basis.  As regards rural areas, on an average, 
power supply is available for 10-12 hrs. Since telecom services are to be maintained 
on 24x7 basis, the short fall in the power supply is supplemented through alternate 
power sources like DG se ts, renewable energy solutions and high efficiency battery 
deployment. Therefore, there is a need to augment grid power supply availability in 
rural areas for greening of telecom; so that the shortfall in power availability could be 
met only through deployment of high efficiency battery banks. 
 
139. The cross-sectoral use cases would require coordinated efforts in managing 
the 5G ecosystem with cross sectoral involvement. For cross -sectoral cases of 
M2M/ IoT, in order to bring M2M industry concerns and regulator y bottlenecks, DoT 
has proactively formed M2M Apex Body, M2M Review Committee and M2M 
Consultative Committee. Domain experts from every vertical which has been 
considered as potential M2M/IoT market has to get together to address the concerns 
and also be i n advisory role to the policies making bodies of the government. 
Consultative Committee has been constituted incorporating representatives from 
Standardizing bodies such as Bureau of Indian Standards (BIS) and Telecom 
Standards Development Society of India  (TSDSI) and sectoral industry 
representative bodies to bring M2M industry concerns and regulatory bottlenecks to 
the notice of Apex body. Also, in order to support implementation of actionable 
points evolved from National Telecom M2M Roadmap, M2M Review C ommittee has 
been formed under DoT. The scope of the existing committees can be expanded or 
broadened for inclusion of all the 5G use cases. 
 
 
(iii) 5G to BSNL and MTNL  
 
140. Cabinet in its meeting held on 23.10.2019 approved the administrative 
allotment of spectrum  to BSNL/MTNL for 4G services through capital infusion. The 
funds for 4G spectrum has been allocated in FY 2020-21. BSNL had floated a tender 
on 23.03.2020 for 4G Mobile Network in North, East, West & South Zones of BSNL 
and Delhi & Mumbai LSA of MTNL on t urnkey basis for procurement of 50,000 e -

55 
 
Node B‘s of BSNL and 7,000 e -Node B‘s of MTNL. However, due to some policy 
issues, that tender has been cancelled and fresh tender will be floated compliant 
with PMI provisions to give preferential treatment to dome stic vendors as per 
Government of India guidelines. In so far as sourcing of technology and participation 
of suppliers from different countries is concerned, Government instructions/decisions 
including provision of the General Financial Rules 2017 (i.e. Ru le 144(xi)) and 
Department of Expenditure order dated 23.07.2020 will be followed.  
 
141. The Government in its decision dated 23.10.2019 decided that BSNL/MTNL 
will be allotted spectrum for 4G services administratively and funding of the 
spectrum cost through capital infusion by the Government. BSNL/MTNL has not yet 
requested for allocation of 5G spectrum.  
 
142. Highlighting the importance of domestic players, TEMA submitted as under: 
―The domestic industry has made huge competence and requisite 
expertise in the mobile technology domain to compete with foreign OEMs.   
Domestic players have successfully supplied and managed O &M of more 
than 2000 sites in BSNL, under LWE areas in 2G technology. Domestic 
players have also successfully developed the 4G network products and 
done the POC in BSNL network. We would also like to bring your attention 
to the DOT‘s interactions with the domestic industry on their readiness of 
4G LTE products for the BSNL/MTNL requirements.    
Many Indian Companies have participated and have even  showcased 
their competence in respective areas.  We strongly believe the domestic 
industry should be promoted for design & development of indigenous 4G 
technologies, such handholding will also help develop domestic 
ecosystem for 5G technologies also.‖ 
 
143. During evidence, the representatives of TEMA submitted as under: 
―Today, I was to talk about the Indian manufacturing. TEMA appreciates 
domestic manufacturing. We want Indian manufacturing and at the same 
time, it is our duty to ensure that the guys who give us order for Indian 
manufactured goods survive. So, who is givi ng us orders for Indian 
manufactured goods are only PSUs, BSNL, MTNL. Now, as per the 
Government policy, we are being able to supply IDDM and Make in India 
goods to Indian companies. BSNL, which is of a strategic importance is 
allowing Make in India, IDDM products to be sold to it. We would wish that 
BSNL survives and therefore, the policy should be that 30 per cent goods 

56 
 
should be made IDDM with preference to Make in India policy, meeting all 
those conditions and to ensure that Indian products which they w ill buy, 
will be approved on a fast track basis because the policy which is being 
considered will take 3 -4 years for BSNL to roll out 4G. But that will delay 
the competitiveness of BSNL and that could also be a death knell to 
BSNL. So, we would wish that 3 0 per cent is given to IDDM and all that 
but the pricing which is given is higher because technological 
development cost initially is higher, therefore, there is a difference in cost 
and the Government should support to that level. But the 70 per cent, 
initially, at least, in the next one year could go to  others or Make in India 
products, which do not have Indian -owned technology at present so that 
the supplies to BSNL can happen and they can roll out the 4G network in 
the next few months. The domestic comp anies are putting up our 
manufacturing plants and technology together. C -DoT, ITI, Sterlite, even 
Paramount, we are all working towards consortium approach in having a 
complete Indian made technology. The process is that it will go to different 
levels of t esting, namely, first, second and third, and then only it will be 
rolling out on a commercial scale. If BSNL dies in the process, then at that 
time, we will have nobody to again buy our product and we will be lost in 
the woods. So, that is our hope and cla im. We want to survive but we also 
want our customer to survive.‖ 
 
(iv) Coordinated Efforts across Sectors for 5G Eco-system 
 
144. The cross-sectoral use cases would require coordinated efforts in managing 
the 5G ecosystem with cross sectoral involvement. For cross-sectoral cases of 
M2M/ IoT, in order to bring M2M industry concerns and regulatory bottlenecks, DoT 
has proactively formed M2M Apex Body, M2M Review Committee and M2M 
Consultative Committee. Domain experts from every vertical which has been 
considered as potential M2M/IoT market has to get together to address the concerns 
and also be in advisory role to the policies making bodies of the government. 
Consultative Committee has been constituted incorporating representatives from 
Standardizing bodies such  as Bureau of Indian Standards (BIS) and Telecom 
Standards Development Society of India (TSDSI) and sectoral industry 
representative bodies to bring M2M industry concerns and regulatory bottlenecks to 
the notice of Apex body. Also, in order to support impl ementation of actionable 
points evolved from National Telecom M2M Roadmap, M2M Review Committee has 
been formed under DoT. The scope of the existing committees can be expanded or 
broadened for inclusion of all the 5G use cases. 

57 
 
145. The Committee desired to know whether TRAI has conducted any study to 
understand the best international  practices and identif y as adopted by other 
countries.  The Committee also enquired as to whether the present body formed by 
DoT will be adequate to deal with all issu es concerning cross -sectoral use cases 
including 5G.  To the above queries, TRAI have replied that it is important to develop 
India specific use cases across different verticals for utilizing the 5G ecosystem. DoT 
has taken initiative for development of use cases through setting up of test beds and 
labs in this regard. For standardization in M2M and IoT segment, TSDSI and 
Telecommunication engineering Centre (TEC) have carried out the transposition of 
international standards for use in India.  Further, subsequent to formation of M2M 
Apex Body, a 5G High Level Forum (5G HLF) was set up by the Government in 
September 2017 to articulate the vision for 5G in India and to recommend policy 
initiatives & action plans to realize this vision. The 5G HLF released a rep ort in 
August 2018 titled ―Making India 5G ready‖ suggesting measures in the area of 
Spectrum Policy, Regulatory Policy, Education and Awareness Promotion Program, 
Application & Use Case Labs, Development of Application Layer Standards, Major 
Trials and Te chnology Demonstration and Participation in International Standards. 
The Steering Committee formed by 5G HLF created seven Task Forces, each with a 
Chair and one of these task forces was for ―Application and Use Case Labs‖. 
Regarding applications and use cases it has been mentioned in the report. Since 5G 
will support many applications, deeper and faster deployment in India  can greatly 
benefit from the setting up of Applications and Use Case Labs. These  labs will 
provide multiple functions – interoperability testing for new applications,  fostering 
innovation in 5G use cases, and promote entrepreneurship to develop  locally 
tailored solutions. The 5G HLF has recommended that the Applications and  Use 
Case Labs be set up within different economi c verticals in a phased manner.  
Accordingly, DoT has taken initiative in setting up of the Test Beds and labs for use 
cases involving the key academic institutions. 
 
 
 

58 
 
(v) 5G and Health Concerns 
 
146. The International Commission on Non ‐Ionizing Radiation Protection (ICNIRP) 
issues guidelines for Limiting Exposure to Electromagnetic Fields (100 kHz to 300 
GHz) which cover many applications such as 5G technologies, WiFi, Bluetooth, 
mobile phones, and base stations. Department of Telecommun ications has adopted 
stricter norms for safety from Electric and Magnetic Fields (EMF) emission from 
mobile towers in India which has been fixed to be 10 times more stringent than the 
safe limits prescribed by International Commission on Non -Ionizing Radia tion 
Protection (ICNIRP) and recommended by World Health Organisation. Further, 
Government of India has taken adequate steps to ensure that Telecommunications 
Service Providers strictly adhere to these prescribed norms.  
 
147. The Department have informed the C ommittee that  with regard to impact of 
Electromagnetic Field (EMF) emissions from mobile towers on health, it is intimated 
that World Health Organization (WHO) has referred to approximately 25,000 articles 
published around the world over past 30 years, an d based on an in -depth review of 
scientific literature, has stated, ―Despite the feeling of some people that more 
research needs to be done, scientific knowledge in this area is now more extensive 
than for most chemicals.‖ WHO has concluded - ―current evidence does not confirm 
the existence of any health consequences from exposure to low level 
electromagnetic fields. WHO has recommended that National authorities should 
adopt international standards to protect their citizens against adverse levels of RF 
fields and referred to the international Exposure Guidelines developed by the 
International Commission on Non -ionizing Radiation Protection (ICNIRP). The main 
conclusion from the WHO review is that EMF exposure below the limits 
recommended in the ICNIRP intern ational guidelines do not appear to have any 
known consequence on health.  
 
148. In the year 2008, DoT adopted the ICNIRP guidelines that are recommended 
by WHO for basic restriction levels of electromagnetic emission from mobile towers. 
Further, based on media reports and public concerns an Inter -Ministerial Committee 

59 
 
(IMC) consisting of officers from DoT, Indian Council of Medical Research (Ministry 
of Health), Department of Biotechnology and Ministry of Environment and Forest 
was constituted on 24.08.2010 to examine the effect of EMF Radiation from base 
stations and mobile phones. The Inter-Ministerial Committee (IMC) in its report, has 
examined the environmental and health related concerns and has indicated that 
most of the laboratory studies were unable to find a direct link between exposure to 
radio frequency radiation and health; and the scientific studies as yet have not been 
able to confirm a cause and effect relationship between radio frequency radiation 
and health. The effect of emission from cell phone towers on human health is not 
known yet with certainty.   
 
149. Based on the recommendations by Inter -Ministerial Committee (IMC), norms 
for exposure limit for the Radio Frequency Field (Base Station Emissions) have been 
made further stringent and reduced to 1/10th of the existing limits prescribed by 
ICNIRP. These limits were furt her reviewed in 2014, based on recommendation of a 
committee that was setup at the behest of High Court Allahabad, Lucknow bench. 
The Committee in their report submitted in 2014, has, inter-alia, noted that ―there are 
no conclusive evidence to establish an y causal link between the effect of EMF 
radiation from BTS with biological effects described in cell models, animals or 
humans, and any possible resulting health effects.‖ After due consideration of the 
human health concerns on account of EMF radiation bei ng raised in public and the 
Report of the Committee, the Government has decided, in February 2014, that the 
present prescribed precautionary EMF safe exposure limits are adequate and need 
no further change at this stage. In February, 2020, the WHO, in Q&A session on ―5G 
mobile networks and health‖ again clarified that ―To date, and after much research 
performed, no adverse health effect has been causally linked with expo sure to 
wireless technologies. 
 
150. The Committee also enquired from the Department whether some 
Governments are halting 5G until their health authorities have reviewed the impacts 
to environmental and human health. The Department in a written reply have stated 

60 
 
that no such information/report regarding halting 5G by some Governments until 
their h ealth authorities have reviewed the impacts to environmental and human 
health, has come to their notice. Further, DoT is regularly monitoring the global 
development in this regard. However, it is reiterated that EMF radiations from a 
mobile tower, irrespective of technology being used, which are below the safe limits 
prescribed by ICNIRP and recommended by WHO, have no convincing scientific 
evidence of causing adverse health effects.  
 
151. Clarifying on the issue, Secretary, DoT, during the sitting stated as under: 
 ―….xxxx…different literature  available world over including WHO  clearly 
say that this is unfounded and there is no basis to say that radiation from 
the 5G will be harmful to the people.‖ 
 
152. Representative of a TSP during the sitting also stated as under: 
 ―In fact, Indian standards are one -tenth of the global standards. We have 
actually gone and put the emission standards which is one -tenth of the 
global standards, and, therefore, there is no issue at all. As industry, we 
work with the Government and we  have made sure 100 per cent of our 
towers are visible to anybody. We have a portal called Tarang Sanchar, 
which anybody can go and see what is the emission taking place from any 
tower in their neighbourhood. Further, by paying this small amount of 
Rs.5000, they can actually have the DoT to go and do a test and give 
them a certified test report.‖ 
 
 
 
  

61 
 
Part-II 
Observations/Recommendations 
 
1. The Committee note that 5G is a new member of the vast global 
communications eco system.  The four components of this eco -system are 
standards development, equipment design and IP development, 
manufacturing and service provision.  5G standardization and de ployment are 
at a nascent stage and the technology is considered likely to reign the next 
decade or more considering its relevance across industry verticals.  5G will 
extend the use of technologies across new sectors of economy.  It will enable 
service pro viders to dev elop novel business mode ls to offer innovative 
applications in different economic verticals from industrial, commercial, 
educational, healthcare, agricultural, financial and social sectors.  Several 
countries across the globe have already taken a foray into 5G technology.   
 
2. The Committee note that an Inter -Ministerial High Level Forum for 5G 
India 2020 was constituted in September, 2017 to articulate the vision for 5G in 
India and to recommend policy initiatives and action plans to realize this 
vision.  This Committee submitted its Report titled ‗Making India 5G Ready‘ in  
August, 2018.  Based on the R eport, the Government is creating an enabling 
framework for development of 5G services in India.  The 5G services are 
expected to be introduced gradually and advance to a full ra nge of services as 
ecosystem and demand for services grows.  As per the above Report 5G is the 
next generation of cellular communications technology with evolutionary and 
revolutionary services that can have a deep impact on India.  5G can unleash 
new econ omic opportunities and societal benefits giving it the potential for 
being a transformational force for Indian society.  It can help the country 
leapfrog the traditional barriers to development as well as advance the ‗Digital 
India‘ Mission.  The cumulative economic impact of 5G on India can reach one 
trillion USD by 2035.  The Committee note that the 3GPP (3 rd Generation 
Partnership Project), an industry driven standardization body that has 
undertaken the standardization of mobile technologies for the past 25 years, is 

62 
 
currently in the process of developing standards for 5G networks based on 
the ITU requirements.  The Committee have been informed that the Fifth 
Generation (5G) mobile communication technology is a paradigm shift in the 
field of communication s as it not only enables human to human 
communications but machine to machine communication in a digitally 
connected world with a variety of use cases.   
 However, there are apprehensions that India is set to miss the ‗5G bus‘ 
due to lack of preparedness, spectrum issues, inadequate use -case 
development, uncertainty around sale of radio waves for 5G, etc.  The 
Committee find that inadequate availability of spectrum, high spectrum prices, 
poor development of use cases, low status of fiber ization, non-uniform RoW 
issues, deficient backhaul capacity, etc. are some of the factors coming in the 
way of rolling out of 5G services in India.  Considering the immense benefits 
of 5G for a country like India, the Committee took up the subject ‗India‘s 
preparedness for 5 G‘ for detailed examination.  During the course of 
examination of the subject, the Committee heard the views of the 
representatives of the Ministry of Communications (Department of 
Telecommunications) and Telecom Regulatory Authority of India (TRAI).  The 
Committee also heard the views of the representatives of the Cellular 
Operators Association of India (COAI),  Telecom Equipment Manufacturers 
Association of India (TEMA) and representatives of three Telecom Service 
Providers viz., Reliance Jio Infocom Limited, Vodafone Idea Limited and Bharti 
Airtel Limited.  The Committee examined the subject in the light of the views 
expressed by the above stakeholders and written documents/informati on 
furnished by DoT, TRAI, COAI, TEMA and TSPs.  The Committee also received 
inputs from the professors of IITs involved in 5G Test bed development.  All 
the issues relevant to the subject have been dealt with in the succeeding 
paragraphs.   
 
 
 
 

63 
 
5G Deployment Around the World vis.-à-vis. Position in India    
3.  The Committee have been informed by TRAI that globally 118 operators 
in 59 countries have deployed 5G network.  Currently, the 5G network covers 
around 7 per cent of the world population.  It is expected that 20 per cent of 
the world population will be cov ered by the year 2025.  Major countries where 
5G technology have been launched are USA, Canada, UK and European Union, 
Asia pacific countries like China, Japan, South Korea, Thailand, Australia, New 
Zealand and Philippine etc.  In Middle East, UAE, Oman, S audi Arabia, Qatar, 
Kuwait, Bahrain have also launched 5G.  In Africa, 5G has been launched in 
South Africa.  Mostly, 5G has been launched partially in these countries.  
Countries in Asia Pacific like South Korea, Japan and China have witnessed 
sizeable growth in 5G developments and possibly they are ahead of the  curve.  
The Committee are given to understand that so far China has already 
developed more than 5 lakh 5G base stations covering around 7 -8 per cent of 
their population.   Regarding status of deplo yment of 5G in India, the 
Department have informed that 5G High Level Forum has given its report titled 
‗Making India 5G Ready‘ to the Government in August, 2018.  5G Hackathon 
had been organized and  the Department have  shortlisted 100 use cases for 
further development.  30 out of 100 use cases will be demonstrated along with 
TSPs to learn 5G use cases and roll out challenges.  However, Cellular 
Operators Association of India (COAI) has informed the Committee that even 
though the report of the 5G HLF has be en released by the Department of 
Telecommunications in August, 2018 minimal implementation instructions 
have been issued so far.  Spectrum issues which are at the heart of 5G are yet 
to be resolved.  The TSPs, have submitted that spectrum bands for 5G are yet 
to be identified and made available to them.  The current reserve price  of 
spectrum is one of the highest in the world , which needs to be rationalized 
taking into account per capi ta income and reserve price benchmarks of other 
countries, 5G trial applications have been submitted by the TSPs in the month 
of January, 2020, however, till date the guidelines for trials have not been 
made clear and there is no set date for commencement of these trials.  When 

64 
 
asked about the timeline for the rollout of 5G, the Secretary, DoT informed the 
Committee during its hearings that in India 5G technology will initially ride on 
4G technology.  In the initial years, the core will be 4G and the radio access 
network will be 5G.  First it will not be rolled out pan India, b ut in selected 
areas where the demand would justify the Capex.  The Committee have been 
informed that by the end of calendar year 2021 or beginning of 2022, there will 
be some roll out in India in some specific uses, because 4G should continue in 
India for at least another 5-6 years. 
 From the foregoing , the Committee are inclined to conclude that 
sufficient preparatory work ha s not been undertaken for launching of 5G 
services in India.  As such, India has not moved beyond the modest beginning 
stage as compared to other countries  in the world.  The  Committee‘s concern 
about this observation is enhanced  by the fact  that while 2G was deployed 
globally in 1991 , it was deployed  in India only in 1995;  3G was deployed 
globally in 1998 but deployed in India ten years later, i.e. in 2008.  Similarly, 4G 
services were launched in India 7 years after their global launching in 2008.  
This reflects very poorly on our planning and execution.  Now when many 
countries are swiftly moving towards 5G technology,  India is l ikely to witness 
its deployment only by the end of 2021 or early part of 2022 , that too partially.  
So it is very likely that a fter missing the 2G, 3G and 4G bus, India is going to  
miss on 5G opportunities, unless time-bound action is taken in core areas 
where Governmental intervention is required. It is disappointing to note  that 
the Department have hardly learnt from the past delays as the vision for 5G 
which was reflected in the constitution of the HLF and Expert Committees ha s 
not been transformed into action on the ground is not reflected in the policies 
formulated by the Government.  The Committee trust that the Government will 
take expeditious action on the pending recommendations of TRAI.   The 
Government are yet to take action on many of the recommendations of TRAI 
on issues which have direct bearing on 5G deployment ( outlined in 
subsequent pages).   

65 
 
 While expressing their displeasure over the laid back approach,  the 
Committee recommend that the Department review all their policies relating to 
5G, identify the areas which need concerted action   and fast track their action 
so that a conducive eco -system for 5G deployment is developed soon and 
India is not left behind the race for 5G.   The Comm ittee desire that the 
Department should conduct a thorough study of the experience gained by 
other countries in successfully rolling out  5G f or better understand ing the 
complexities involved in the process . The Committee further desire that the 
Department apprise them of the reasons for delay and explain why  India has 
not been able to  catch up and keep pace with comparable countries in rolling 
out 5G services.  The Committee may be kept informed of the progress made 
as well as hurdles that in the Government‘s view impede such progress.   
 
Allocation of Spectrum for 5G 
4. The Committee note that International Telecommunication Union  (ITU) 
has identified two broad spectrum ranges for 5G, the frequency range -I and 
frequency range-II.  Frequency range-I extends from 410 MHz to 7125 MHz and 
multiple frequency  bands have been identified for 5G in this large range.  
Frequency range-II is the millimeter wave band lying between 24.25 GHz and 
52.6 GHz.  Around 40 countries in the world have completed allocation of 5G 
spectrum.  So far as allocation of spectrum for 5G in India is concerned, the 
Committee note that TRAI on 01.08.2018 had given their r ecommendation for 
the auction of spectrum , in the 700 MHz, 800 MHz, 900 MHz, 1800 MHz, 2100 
MHz, 2300 MHz, 2500 MHz, 3300 -3400 MHz and 3400 -3600 MHz bands for 
providing mobile services.  However, it is disturbing to note that even after the 
lapse of more than 2 years  since TRAI gave their recommendations for 
auctioning of spectrum, including 3300 MHz to 3600 MHz in the prime band for 
5G, the auction of spectrum in this band is yet to be done by the Department. 
The Department while deposing before the Committee had informed that they 
are still in the process of  preparing a Cabinet Note for auction of bands like 
700 MHz, 800 MHz, 900 MHz, 1800 MHz etc. excluding 3300 -3600 MHz bands as 
the Digital Communications Commission has decided to hold auction of 3 300-

66 
 
3600 MHz band separately.  The bandwidth of 3300 MHz to 3600 MHz is 
currently not used for 2G, 3G and 4G.  It is envisaged to be used for 5G.  The 
Committee have also been informed that 5G will come in other bands like 700 
MHz, 800 MHz, 900 MHz bands i n times to come and also in millimeter wave 
spectrum which are 224.2G GHz to 275 GHz.  As this Report is being finalized, 
the Committee have come to know from media reports that auction s for the 
above bands except 3300 MHz to 3600 MHz are slated to be held in March, 
2021.  The coveted 5G spectrum has been kept out of the offer.  The 
Department had informed the Committee that 3300 MHz to 3600 MHz band will 
also be auctioned sometime in the next six months or so.  The Committee fail 
to understand as to how the TSPs are going to move towards 5G technology 
without spectrum , the lifeline for 5G , being allocated.  No wonder the TSPs 
and the industry body COAI were in unison in their demand for ―right 
spectrum at right price ‖ as the key for 5G rollout and pleaded for release of 
spectrum at the earliest.   
 The Committee, while deploring the Department‘s unconscionably long 
delay in auctioning  of spectrum, recommend that spectrum auction including 
auctioning of 3300 MHz to 3600 MHz be conducted at the earliest . The 
Department have assured the Committee that 3300 MHz to 3600 MHz  is going 
to be auctioned in the next 6 months or so.    While urging the Department to 
take necessary steps so that auction  of spectrum takes place early, the  
Committee also desire that the process of spectrum allocation must be guided 
by constitutional provisions and the doctrines of equality and larger public 
good.  They, therefore, trust that the Department will take all the appropriate 
steps for the successful auctioning of the spectrum so as to avoid any 
litigation or controversy which may further impede the process of 5G 
launching.      
   
Availability of Adequate Spectrum 
5. The Committee note that the 5G ecosystem is currently available in 
three bands, lower band, Mid Band 3300 MHz to 3600 MHz and millimeter wave 
band (26 GHz and 28 GHz) for 5G deployment.  Globally seven operators have 

67 
 
deployed 5G in lower band, 82 operators have deployed in mid band and more 
than 8 operators have deployed in mm Wave band.  However, India at present 
does not have sufficient spectrum earmarked for 5G in any of these bands.  
Department of Space and Defence are seeking spectrum in the bands  
identified for 5G.  The Committee have been informed by COAI that to make 
India 5G ready at the earliest , the Government need to allocate at least 100 
MHz per operator in 3.5 GHz, at least 400 MHz per operator in mmWave 
(26,28,37 GHz) and at least 2x10 MHz per operator in e ach of these bands in 
Sub-GHz (600 MHz & 700 MHz).  This is without taking into consideration the 
requirement of the operators in E&V band.  In 3.5 GHz , which is basically the 
mainstream spectrum for 5G, almost every operator across the globe has 100 
MHz.  However, in case of India out of 300 MHz, 25 MHz are required for 
satellite uses.  About 100 MHz between 3.3 and 3.4 GHz has been demanded 
by Defence. If this is deducted, only 175 MHz is available.  The Committee note 
that the Department are deliberating  with Department of Space (DoS) and the 
Ministry of Defence (MoD) for making sufficient spectrum available for 5G IMT 
services.  The Department have stated that they have received very positive 
response and expressed the hope that the issue will be resolve d.  With regard 
to mmWave spectrum, the same is yet to be earmarked in India.  The average 
4G spectrum per operator in India is around one -fourth of the global average.  
According to submission made by one of the TSPs , we have four times more 
people and fou r times less spectrum which means that spectrum available to 
one person is 1/16th of the global average.   
 The Committee are fully aware of the extreme shortage  of spectrum in 
the country.  Availability of 175 MHz only in 3300 MHz to 3600 MHz band will 
mean that approximately 50 MHz  or so  spectrum per operator could be 
allocated, which is far below the global average.  The Committee note that not 
allocating right amount of spectrum will not only deprive the customers of 
good quality of services but also lead to severe under utilization of investment 
made as the equipment installed cannot be optimally utilized.  The Committee 
are of the view that  the issue of allocating the right amount of spectrum as 

68 
 
demanded by the industry needs to be addressed by the Department if India is 
to have the real benefits of 5G.  In this regard, the Committee recommend that  
the Department need to have fruitful deliberation with Department of Space 
and Ministry of Defence and an understanding must be reached at the earliest  
for identification of adequate spectrum for 5G services.  The Department 
should also expedite  the implementation of OFC based network for Defence 
services. Efforts should be made to earmark and allocate mmWave band for 
5G in consultation with TRAI.  
  
Audit of Spectrum 
6. The Committee note that  TRAI as back as 2015 have recommended that 
there is an urgent need for audit of all allocated spectrum both commercial as 
well as spectrum allocated to various PSUs/Government organizations.  
However, Government‘s decision in the matter is still awaited.  The Committee 
are of the view that audit of spectrum is essential for detecting under 
utilization of this precious natural resource and  also to assess the adequacy 
and operating effectiveness on management control framework in order to  
make its utilization more efficient. It is deplorable that  the Department have 
neglected such an im portant recommendation of TRAI , which is both future-
oriented and has serious implications for technological advancements.  The 
Committee would like the Department to explain as to  why spectrum audit as 
recommended by TRAI has still not been carried out  so far by DoT and come 
out with specific reasons/compulsions which has forced the Department not 
to undertake such an exercise . The Committee desire that early decision on 
spectrum audit may be taken on a priority basis and the findings of the audit 
may be shared with the Committee.   
 
Issues Relating to High Spectrum Price in the Country 
7.  COAI has informed the Committee that TRAI had recommended Rs.492 
crore per MHz as reserved price for spectrum in 3300 MHz to 3600 MHz for 5G 
which is f ar higher than the  auctioned spectrum price in other countr ies.  
Comparison of unit pricing of 5G spectrum with other countries indicates that 

69 
 
it is 07 times costlier than UK, 14 times costlier than Australia, 35 times 
costlier than Spain and 70 times costlier than Austria.   Bharti Aritel has 
informed the Committee that the price recommende d by TRAI is exorbitantly 
high and ranges from 3 -70 times of the market determined price of the 
spectrum in other countries in absolute terms and is 16 times of the price in 
relative terms .  They are of the view that there is a need to strike a balance 
between the Government‘s expectation to generate revenue from the auction 
and growth of the sector and the overarching impact of 5G across the sectors.  
Commenting on the issue, representativ e of TEMA stated that the policy of 
spectrum in the country is of inverted structure.  Raw material is expected to 
be purchased at highest price and the product at minimum price which is 
absolutely unviable.  Having noted the unanimous view of industry 
associations and Telecom Service Providers that spectrum price in India is 
exorbitantly high and  that there is a need to review the spectrum price by 
taking into consideration factors, such as per capita and ARPU in the country, 
the Committee sought the vi ews of TRAI on spectrum price.  TRAI, to the 
surprise of Committee , have informed that if comparison is made in terms of 
population and geographical size, India‘s spectrum price is one of the lowest.  
The Committee note, however, that 5G is not intended to be rolled out 
everywhere in the country, nor extend to the entire population, for some years. 
TRAI further stated that there are well -defined parameters and if we compare 
all these parameters India‘s price is very moderate.  The Committee are also 
given to understand that TRAI have given the reserve price of the s pectrum 
after due consideration  of all the aspects and due consultation with the 
stakeholders.  The Department have informed the Committee that proposals 
for auction of spectrum in various bands in cluding reserve price, after due 
consideration of TRAI recommendation will be placed before the Cabinet for a 
decision.   
 The Committee  further note that  in order  to ease the burden of high 
spectrum cost, TSPs had been given a one-time opportunity to opt for a higher 
number of installments (16) instead of the previously permitted 10 installments 

70 
 
in respect of spectrum  auction deferred payment, subject to the Net Present 
Value (NPV) being protected.  The Committee have also been inf ormed that 
considering the stress in the sector, the Government have given an option to 
the TSPs to defer payment of the spectrum auction installments due for 2020 -
21 and 2021 -22, either for one or both years.  The Committee have been 
informed that all the  operational TSPs have generally opted for moratorium of 
2 years and deferment of spectrum auction installments will ease the cash 
outflow of the stressed TSPs and facilitate payment of statutory liabilities and 
interest in bank loans.  Their industry body  COAI, on the other hand , have 
stated that there is a need to rationalize other levies and duties on the telecom 
sector so as to ease their financial burden, such as providing soft loans 
against GST input line credit due to operator, reducing spectrum usage charge 
by 3 per cent for all TSPs and license fees from 8 to 3 per cent, soft loans at 
MCLR rate using the GST input credit as collateral etc. 
 Going by the merits of the submissions from both sides, the Committee 
find that there are fundamental differences between the versions of TSPs and 
TRAI on fixing of spectrum price in the country and there is a need to review 
the spectrum pricing policy in the country.  The divergent views given by the 
two sides also implies that there is  a need to revisit the nuances of spectrum 
pricing in other countries and adopt the best practices .  The Committee are of 
the view that telecom is the backbone of  many important sectors of economy.  
Both DoT and TRAI which are at the forefront of telecom revolution in the 
country need to pay adequate attention to the concerns expressed by the 
TSPs and industry associations.  Considering the  stress in the sector and that 
the 5G ecosystem is yet to be  developed, keeping such a huge reserve price 
for 3.3 GHz to 3.6 GHz will undoubtedly have an adverse impact on the ability 
of the TSPs to fully rollout 5G in the country. At this rate, price for a block of 
20 MHz will be Rs.9, 840 crore and minimum price for 80 MHz per TSP will be 
Rs.39,360 crore.  In this, t he Committee are of the view  that long -term 
consumer benefit should be the guiding principle and not   short term revenue 
maximization.  TRAI  need to take the TSPs on board as it is they who are 

71 
 
contributing to the growth of the sector. The concerns expressed by TSPs and 
COAI cannot be ignored but merit  attention.  Factors such as per capita 
income and ARPU should also be taken into considerati on.  The Committee 
recommend that  the issue of high spectrum prices is looked into and 
DoT/TRAI should come out with a convincing spectrum pricing policy that is 
sustainable, a ffordable and acceptable to all , focusing on consumer interest 
and socio economic goals of our country.  The Committee also recommend 
that the concerns raised by COAI for rationalization of levies and duties on the 
telecom sector should also be given time bound c onsideration by the 
Government, so that financial burden neither acts as a deterrent fo r TSPs in 
their move towards 5G  nor places an unsustainable burden on the Indian 
customers.     
 
Spectrum for Industrial Use 
8. TEMA have submitted that apart from Enhanced Mobile Broadband 
(EMBB), Industry 4.0 is the main driv er for 5G. Industry 4.0.  is mooted in the 
concept of advanced manufacturing, also called Smart Manufacturing.  
Industry 4.0 based solutions enable better interoperability, more flexible 
industrial processes, and autonomous and  intelligent manufacturing.  Many 
countries in the world like USA, Germany, UK and Australia have allocated 5G 
spectrum for industrial development.  For example, in Germany, Mercedes is 
setting up a factory entirely based on 5G, term ed as ‗Factory 56‘.  Ma ny 
countries are setting aside spectrum and laying out policies for industrial 
growth using 5G.  Not only industry, captive users of mobile wireless 
communications are industries, police, paramilitary, fire, forest and mining, 
municipal corporations and pu blic utilities as well as critical infrastructure 
services like Railways, Metros, Airports, Sea Ports, Refineries, Highways, etc.  
As per the present policy of  licensing, TEMA have sta ted that they have to 
apply to WPC/DoT for three licenses – Captive Mobile Radio Trunking Services 
(CMRTS) License, Spectrum License and import License which usually takes 
six months to two years.  They have further informed the Committee that since 
these captive users only need wireless spectrum for their ‗captive‘ use only, it 

72 
 
appears that there should be no need for a separate CMRTS license. TEMA 
have requested that TRAI may be requested to conduct a public consultation 
on spectrum needs and issues for captive users.  TEMA have also stated that 
a group be formed to work out policy for spectrum allocation and spectrum of 
5G for 4.0 industrial uses. 
 The Committee feel that Industry 4.0 will be one of the main driver s of 
5G in days to come.  However, the present licensing policy is not conducive to 
the growth of Industry 4.0. The manufacturing industry ‗s choice and decision 
to come to India is heavily dependent on how quickly the Government of India 
can go ahead and allocate spectrum  for 5G-driven industry.   The issues 
relating to licensing and allocation of spectrum for Industry 4.0 need to be 
properly streamlined to attract the manufacturing industry to set up their base 
here and also  to reap the full benefits of 5G in industry.  In this regard, the 
Committee desire the Department to look into the above suggestion given by 
TEMA and also to explore all possible issues needed for the  success of 
Industry 4.0 , so that spectrum can be allocated and proper policies are laid 
down for industrial growth of the country using 5G.  The Committee would like 
DoT/TRAI to take the views of stakeholders on board in the matter.     
 
 
Setting up of Indigenous 5G Test Bed 
9. The Committee note that the Department of Telecommunications had 
approved financial grant for multi -institute collaborative  project to set up 
‗Indigenous 5G Test Bed‘ for building end -to-end 5G Test Bed in India in 
March, 2018 with total cost of Rs.224.01 crore.  The Test Bed was expected to 
be ready by October, 2020.  However, due to the Covid -19 pandemic, the work 
of hardware design, fabrication and testing was adversely affected.  The test 
bed is likely to be set up by October, 2021.  The Committee have been 
informed that the indigenous test bed is completely home -grown and it is first 
of its kind, wherein eight leading academic and research institutes have come 
together to build the test bed with Government support. The eight 
collaborative institution s are IIT (Indian Institute of Technology) Madras, IIT 

73 
 
Delhi, IIT Hyderabad, IIT Bombay, IIT Kanpur, IISc Bangalore, Society for 
Applied Microwave Electronics Engineering & Research (SAMEER) and Centre 
of Excellence in Wireless Technology (CEWiT).  India‘s effort is unique with 
special focus on setting up a Test Bed that will be utilized by academic, 
industry, telecom operators and startups to develop solutions and use cases 
which can be India specific.  The Test Bed is going to raise India‘s visibility in 
the global forums and standardization bodies.  The Committee  also note that 
‗5G Test Bed‘ project is focused on developing IPRs in the country in 5G 
technology.  Some of the IPRs generated by this project can also be utilized 
for product development for the Defence sector of the country.  It is expected 
that technology spin -offs from this Test Bed will enable Indian industry and 
startups to enter the Indian and global markets for 5G telecom equipment, 
thus addressing a critical gap in our economic and security  prospects.  The 
Department have informed the Committee that the Test Bed is not a 
commercial project , only what is reaso nable or affordable will be char ged.  
The Department also foresee a lot of private sector participation for testing. 
 The Committee are happy to note that the 5G test bed project which is a 
good example of harnessing the talents and capabilities in the country  is 
progressing well and is going to be ready for operation by October, 2021 .  The 
Committee hope that the balance fund of Rs.  45 crore allocated for the project 
will be utilized fully and project becomes operational as per schedule.   It is 
indeed encouraging to note that som e of the best Institutes in the country are 
making collaborative efforts to develop end -to-end and open Test Bed for 5G.   
While a ppreciating the efforts put in for 5G test bed as a right step for 
promotion of indigenous technolo gy, startups, Indian innovat ors, t he 
Committee desire that more such collaborative efforts  are encouraged in 
future too by involving more and more Institutes/Industry  verticals. The 
Committee recommend that efforts should be made to get the Test Bed ready  
and operational  as per schedule and the Department must ensure that the 
deadline is not further extended.  The Committee may be kept apprise d of the 
progress of the project and its technological spin-offs.   
 

74 
 
Setting up of 5G Use Case Labs 
 
10. As per the submission made by COAI, China has b een working on  use 
case labs for last two years and claim to have more than 100 use cases for 5G 
which have been built through initiatives from Government, academia, 
operators and industry verticals.  On the contrary, India does not have a ny 
applications or Use C ases which are ready to promote business case and 
capex investment by operators.  Coordinated Government actions are required 
for enabling digital tra nsformation across sectors.  A Digital R eadiness Index 
to measure the same for each sector should be there to monitor progress as 
well as to enable  development of India specific Use C ases.   The Committee 
are given to understand that the Department are working with different 
Ministries/Departments for setting up of India specific Use C ase in education, 
healthcare, agriculture, public safety, fintech, etc.  So far, Institute of 
Development and Research in Banking Technology (IDRT), an institute under 
RBI, in collaboration of Department of Financial Services , has come forward 
for setting up of 5G use case lab in Banking and Financial Services and 
Insurance (BFSI).  The Department are also presently working with Food 
Safety and Standard Authority of India for setting up of use case lab in food 
safety certificat ion and Ministry of Health, AIIMS, Ministry of Housing and 
Urban Development for setting up of use cases in respective domains.  To 
develop more use cases, the Department have organized 5G Hackathon and 
have shortlisted 100 use cases for further development.  Out of these, 30 Use 
Cases wil be demonstrated along with TSPs to learn 5G use cases and roll out 
challenges.  On the suggestions of COAI for development of Digital Readiness 
Index, the Department have stated that Broadband Readiness Index is similar 
to Digital Readiness Index for Telecom sector.  The framework on BR I 
parameters has been prepared based on the objectives of NDCP -2018  and 
inputs from the industry/expert.  The BRI is envisaged to create robust and 
high quality digital communications infra structure, attract investments in 
creating next generation digital communication infrastructure, simplification 
of compliance and procedures and create a collaborative i nstitutional 

75 
 
mechanism between Centre, States and Local B odies.  An MoU has been 
entered with Indian Council for Research on Institutional Economic Relations 
(ICRIER) to develop Broadband Readiness Index for Indian Sta tes and Union 
Territories for the period 2019 -2022.  The Committee also note that the 
Department are engaged with the States/ UT Governments for the development 
of BRI and the report for the year 2019 -20 is under finalization.  COAI has 
further submitted that India is consuming a very large amount of data per 
capita in various industry verticals and there is a need to convert the data 
produced into useful servi ces through the development of Use C ases.  The 
Digital Readiness Index of various sectors can be monitored by a cross 
sectoral entity, such as NITI Ayog. This will facilitate the monitoring of digital 
transformation in vario us sectors and thereby  facilitate the development of 
Use Cases for development of digital services in the most digitalized sectors.   
 The Committee  note with concern that even though Use C ases have 
been developed around the world, in India no sufficient use cases have been 
developed so far  for successful implementation of 5G in India. The present 
status indicates that India is far behind countries like China in term of  
development of 5G.  This will undoubtedly have an adverse impact on rolling 
out of 5G considering that development of sufficient Use Case labs is required 
for successful implementation of 5G.  The Committee recommend  the 
Department to focus on development of Use C ases by providing suitable 
incentives and support and U se Case labs which are currently under 
development should be expedited.  The Department need to involve more  
Government Ministries/Departments,  start ups/ MSMEs, academia, telecom 
service providers, industries, etc. for development of Use C ases for 5G in the 
country with adequate funding and hand holding , wherever required.  
Considering the fact  that coordinated Government actions are required for 
enabling digital transformation across sectors like health, transportation, 
energy, agriculture, etc. the Committee desire that the Department may 
consider assigning cross sectoral entity like NITI Ayog  to monitor Digital 
Readiness Index of various sectors so as to facilitate the development of use 

76 
 
cases for development of digital services in the more digitalized sectors.  The 
Committee also recommend that the Broadband Readiness Index Report for 
the yea r 2019 -20, which is under preparation should also be finalized at the 
earliest.  
 
Experimental Spectrum Policy and Conduct of 5G Trial 
11. The Committee have been informed by the Department that the 
Government have allowed all applications for 5G trials, in limited areas and for 
a limited time, to test potential 5G India specific use cases based on enhanced 
Mobile Broadband (eMBB), Massive Machine Type Communications (MMTC) 
and Ulrtra Reliable Low Latency Communications (URLLC) in isolation on non-
commercial basis subject to strict safeguards.  The Department have received 
16 applications for 5G trials , using imported as well as indigenous 
technologies. 5G trials were likely to be started in 2 -3 months.  DoT have 
issued guidelines for assignment of spectru m for trials across all available 
spectrum bands on a nominal fee of Rs.5000.  Guidelines for experimental 
spectrum has also been issued.  An I nter-Ministerial Committee has been 
constituted under Member (Technology) in the Department of 
Telecommunications for monitoring and evaluation of 5G technology trials.  
With regard to Indian entities/TSPs that have been issued  experimental 
license, the Department have informed that so far one experimental (radiating) 
license for 5G Test Bed at IIT, Delhi has been  issued on 20. 04.2018 with 3 
months validity and 5G field trials have not yet been permitted.  Though the 
Department submitted that there are no major issues confronting trials in the 
country, industry body COAI flagged a number of issues relating to trial  
spectrum.  These include , license for trial spectrum should be for minimum 
one year, flexibility to conduct trial in any city/location within the circle as per 
allocated trial spectrum, singe window clearance for the trial license, no 
equipment/application vendor restriction for conducting lab trial, import duty 
waiver in 5G trial equipment, etc.  TSPs  also echoed the same sentiment  
during evidence that for proper commercial 5G roll outs to take place by 2022, 

77 
 
there is an urgent need to initiate the trials  now and start to build the 
ecosystem. COAI brought out the concern that though TSPs submitted the 
applications of 5G trial in January, 2020, till date the guidelines for trials have 
not been made clear and there is no set date for commencement of these 
trials.  Bharti Airtel specifically emphasized that the lab and field trials of 5G 
should be carried out extensively to test factors, such as interoperability, 
testing of indig enous 5G infra based an Open RAN  ecosystem with the 
commercial 5G handsets.  The t rial is also critical to ascertain the 
interoperability of 5G infra with the existing 4G networks, serving as an 
underlay network for 5G services. 
 Notwithstanding the submission of TSPs, and the industry body, it is 
really disturbing to note that 5G trials have not yet been permitted.  This is in 
complete contradiction to what the Department had informed the Committee 
during examination of Demands for Grants (2020-21) in the month of February, 
2020 that Government have allowed all applications for 5G trials in limited area 
and for limited time to test potential 5G India specific use cases.  The 
Department have also issued  only one experimental (Radiating)  license to IIT 
Delhi for 5G Test Bed in April, 2018 with 3 months validity.  The Committee 
wonder why spectrum for 5G trial has still not been allowed when the 
Department have categorically stated that there are no major issues 
confronting trials in the country.  Considering that TSPs have submitted their 
applications for 5G trials in the month of Janu ary, 2020, the Committee would 
like to know the reasons for the delay in issuing  spectrum for 5G  trials to  
TSPs.  The Committee feel that 5G trial s are an essential prerequisite for 
building the 5G ecosystem and the Department need to take the issue s of 
experimental spectrum and early conduct of 5G trial s more seriously .  Any 
further delay will only have an adverse impact on building an ecosystem for 
5G in the country and will further delay the launching of 5G services.   The 
Committee recommend that the guidelines relating to experimental spectrum 
are streamlined and implemented in letter and spirit.  The concerns raised by 
COAI for bringing in improvements in 5G trials may also be looked into by the 

78 
 
Department.  The Commi ttee anticipate the number of field trials in the 5G 
spectrum to accelerate in the coming days. 
   
India‘s Contribution in Developing 5G Standards 
 
12. The Committee note that the Department and Telecom Standards 
Development Society India (T SDSI), in collaboration with the IITs , have been 
successful in getting the Low Mobility Large Cell (LMLC) use case accepted by 
ITU as one of the 5G requirements for rural area.  LMLC reflects the need of 
rural India in which the distance between two Base Stations will increase up to 
6 km against 1.73 km by other technology.  This technology will be beneficial 
for India as well as other developing countries.  The T SDSI has been 
established to enable Indian industry to take the lead in international 
standardization activities.  Currently Indian contribution in design ownership 
of telecom products is very limited and the Indian market has been a 
significant user of global products.  The Department have informed the 
Committee that LMLC is part of the IMT -2020 requirements for ITU.  This 
mainly looks at rural connectivity by placing base stations at Gram 
Panchayats and providing connectivity to the neighbouring villages and 
farms.  LMLC requirement was strongly supported by many Afri can countries 
in ITU. The Committee have also been informed that the standard could be 
useful for deeper penetration in urban areas for other 5G applications.  
Director, IIT, Kanpur has hailed the achievement of TSDSI facilitating the LMLC 
contribution fro m India to ITU as an important beginning  in 5G revolution .  
Commenting on the issue, Director, IIT, Madras also stated that the rural 
towers have to be located where the BharatNet fiber ends, i.e. at approximately 
2.5 lakh Gram Panchayats.  From the towers  at these locations, neighbouring 
villages numbering more than 3.5 lakh villages have to be provided wireless 
coverage.  Roughly 33 per cent of th ese villages are between 3 -6 km away 
from the Gram Panchayats, the rest being within 3 km.  En suring coverage to 
these villages at distance up to 6 km. is therefore crucial if a large fraction of 
rural Indians is not to be left out of 5G as well.  The Department have also 

79 
 
informed the Committee that in addition to LMLC, academia, R&D units, 
startups and Indian com panies are participating with Government in 3GPP, 
ITU, IEEE, IEC and are engaged in providing contributions to developing the 
standards and trying to incorporate  Indian technologies.  The Committee are 
given to understand that more efforts can be made by t he Indian research 
community to take their research contributions to 3GPP and other global 
standards development organization such as IEEE through  forum offered by 
TSDSI. 
 The Committee are of the view that LMLC is a suitable technology for 
providing telecom connectivity in rural India.  The Committee are glad to note 
that for the first time a global standard is emerging from India at ITU.  This will 
enhance rural coverage and reduce capex cost.  It is indeed a big achievement 
to note that LMLC use case has been accepted by ITU as one of the 5G 
requirements for rural area.  The Committee are given to understand that  
LMLC is a test configuration for rural eMBB use case which has become  part 
of the IMT 2020 performance requirements at ITU.  The Committee recommend 
the Department to make  sustained efforts to contribute in development of 5G 
standards by engaging academia, R&D units, startups and Indian companies.  
The Committee desire that the Department continue to  represent the 
aspirations of the rural population  and facilitate their  access to telecom 
services and keep on safeguarding their interest in international forums such 
as ITU.    
 
Need for Harmonization of Indian Standards with the Global Standards 
13. The Committee note that the need for enhanced rural coverage is one of 
the important aspects to cover rural and remote areas.  IIT Madras and 
associate institutions have developed a variant to the 3GPP standard 
(Release. 15) with the objective to enhance coverage in the existing stan dards 
and also offered technology solution to implement it. This is called TSDSI RIT 
and is self -evaluated by an Independent Evaluation Group and submitted to 
ITU. The standard compliant to the requirements of 5G technology, the TSDSI 

80 
 
RIT along with the or iginal 3GPP standard have been recommended by the 
ITU. Some of the other developing countries also supported the TSDSI RIT 
considering its relevance for enhanced rural coverage, which implies reduced 
capex costs to cover a certain defined area. One of the Indian operators also 
supported the TSDSI standard. The Department have also informed the 
Committee that a fter formal release of the standards, the TSDSI may 
recommend the standard to DOT for its consideration. DoT will take a policy 
decision after taking several factors into consid eration on its Indian adoption.  
The Department have further stated that TSDSI RIT has been approved by ITU  
SG5 and one of the standards which has successfully completed all evaluation 
steps for IMT 2020.  This is  hence qualified for commercial deployments.  It is 
in final stage of approval by the 193 member states of ITU. TSDSI-RIT (5Gi) is a 
standard/technology specification approved by ITU which meets the IMT 2020 
requirements (including LMLC) with enhanced performance for LMLC  rural 
eMBB use case.  The concern of the TSPs relate to TSDSI-RIT.  
 COAI have submitted before the Committee that it is important to have 
globally harmonized standards for 5G to allow interoperability and economies 
of scale. India should adopt globally harmonized 3GPP standards. If India 
adopts any standard other than 3GPP, it would disconnect India from the 
globally harmonized standard, device & network ecosystem. This would 
severely impact 5G rollouts, its adoption in India and increase cost. Bharti 
Aitel also has submitted  that current TSDSI RIT standards being proposed for 
5G are not globally harmonized. The adoption of TSDSI RIT without global 
harmonization would make India a n isolated island in the global 5G 
ecosystem. GSMA & GSA have raised concerns on the same with DOT. Bharti 
Airtel have also cited examples of similar efforts in the past by other countries 
like China (TS -SCDMA, local 3G standards), Korea (WiBro — local 4G 
standards) etc. which proved to be failures due to the lack of harmonization of 
these standards with the global ecosystem. COAI have further informed the 
Committee that even after submission of the inputs of the TSPs to TSDSI 
regarding technical errors, incompleteness, unimplementability aspects and 

81 
 
non-testability issues in TSDSI documents, these have not been incorporated 
in the TSDSI RIT. Is sues related to interoperability of the proposed 
specification with global 3GPP specification still prevail and remain 
unaddressed. Performance gain of proposed specifications compared to 3GPP 
specifications have not been established. Also, the 3GPP has id entified that 
there is an overlap in the signalling messages of TSDSI, which will cause 
interoperability issues. Globally harmonized standards also allow economies 
of scale. The network and customer devices when developed for mass market 
will have economies of scale; however, if isolated devices are to be developed 
for niche market, the cost will definitely rise. COAI have suggested that the 
timelines should to be laid down for resolution of gaps around Interoperability, 
Performance, Implementation, Alignme nt, and IPR in the proposed TSDSI RIT 
specifications.  
 When the Committee drew the attention of the Department to the above 
concerns around standards , the Department have stated that India should 
adopt standards that are harmonized sufficiently with global standards to 
ensure inter -operability, roaming, and to derive ecosystem benefits such as 
economies of scale. However, it is possible to adopt carefull y enhanced 
variants of the global standard that specifically provide some features of 
importance to India such as enhanced rural broadband coverage, without 
compromising on either inter -operability or economy of scale. ITU standards 
are in final stages of approval for finalization. India has not adopted any 
standard for 5G services as yet. On the apprehensions that  India will trap 
itself into a corner isolated from the global 5G ecosystem, Director, IIT, Madras 
has informed the committee that t his is wholly misplaced, as inter - operability 
and compatibility between the 3GPP 5G and the TSDSI 5Gi standards can 
easily be ensured, since the latter is merely an enhanced version of the 
former. Moreover, there will be no cost implications as equipment will support  
both standards through mere software selection and in a manner transparent 
to the user.  

82 
 
 The Committee find that the objective of TSDSI RIT to enhance rural 
coverage is a worthy initiative;  however, the concerns  raised by COAI and 
other TSPs are also alarming and a cause for concern. Going by the merits of  
the views given by the Department and expert s on the one hand and the 
entirely different views of COAI and TSPs on the other , Committee would like 
to sound a word of caution that while continuing with fostering innovation in 
the field of development of 5G standards, India should adopt only those 
standards that are globally harmonized to ensure interoperability, economies 
of scale, and help build a conducive device & network ecosystem. Considering 
that similar efforts in the past by other countries like China, Korea, etc. have 
been failures due to the lack of harmonization of these standards with the 
global ecosystem, the Committee would want  the Dep artment to be extra 
careful before adopting such standards in the country. The Committee 
recommend that the Department should look into the concerns raised by COAI 
and TSPs and ensure that their concerns are adequately addressed. While 
emphasizing that India should adopt the  standards that are good for the 
country, the Committee also desire that the Department should also take into 
consideration the interests of all before taking the final decision and adopt 
standards that will be in the best interest of the country.  
 
Promotion of Domestic Manufacturing of Telecom Equipment and Affordable 
5G Handsets 
 
14. The Committee note that recently Government have taken many 
initiatives under ―Make in India‖ and ―Atma Nirbhar Bharat‖ for promotion of 
domestic manufacturing in the country. The Committee hope that domestic 
manufacturing in the country will receive a fillip through the implementation of 
these policies. The Committee are of the view that the promotion  of proper 
R&D is absolutely necessary for the success of telecom manufacturing in the 
country.  An e cosystem must be developed for complete manufacturing 
rather than just assembly , as manufacturing gives much higher value 
addition.  A Telecom Research and Development Fund (TRDF) is to be 
created with an initial corpus of Rs. 1000 crore for promoting research, 

83 
 
innovation and manufacturing indigenous telecommuni cations equipment. 
The Committee recommend  that TRDF as proposed by TRAI should be 
created at the earliest.  Apart from this, the suggestions given by TEMA for 
extension of PPP MII policies to private telecom operators, and TEC, DOT 
technical specifications  to all public or private operators as also State 
Government/State PSUs , may be given a thorough consideration by the 
Department. The Committee also note that India is a price -sensitive market.  
Therefore, the success of 5G rollout will also greatly depend on the availability 
of affordable 5G devices.  The Committee note that the creation of a mobile 
manufacturing ecosystem , including components, in the country is the need 
of the hour. The Committee are also given to understand that the promotion of 
globally harmonised standards for 5G will allow the development of common 
smartphones/infrastructure, which will drive down the cost of services. The  
local standards approach will affect affordable 5G devices, making the devices 
cost higher apart  from causing delay in the roll out of 5G. The Committee 
recommend that the ecosystem  for 5G smartphones and devices is created 
and nurtured and right incentives  are given  to domestic manufacturers who 
should be encouraged under ‗Make in India‘  and ―Atma Ni rbhar Bharat‖ to 
ensure that affordable 5G devices and smartphones are readily available for 
the successful rollout of 5G services. 
 
Development of Open RAN in the Telecom Network 
15.  The Committee note that in a single RAN model, the control to resolve 
many of the challenges that confronts the TSPs on a day to day basis lies with 
just one telecom vendor , which designed the particular hardware/software  
because the software and interfaces remain either proprietary or ‗closed‘ by 
the individual vendor and are of ten tied to the underlying hardware by the 
same vendor.  ‗Open RAN‘ is a movement in wireless telecommunication to 
disaggregate hardware and software and to create open interfaces between 
them.  Open RAN is about de -coupling of hardware and software and th us 
provides more choices and interoperability.  In cost effective market like India, 

84 
 
Open RAN promises to offer a substantial saving to the telecom operators and 
also help in promoting ‗Make in India‘ and ‗Atma Nirbhar Bharat‘.  The 
Committee have been inf ormed that Open RAN can have a large presence in 
India provided supportive policy and enabling environment  are put in place to 
accelerate the revolution. Considering the fact that it has the potential to give 
the legacy telecom equipment vendor a strong and effective competition in the 
RAN market, the Committee desire that the Department create an enabling 
environment for Open RAN in the country by providing financial incentives for 
research, development and production of Open RAN solutions . T he 
suggestion of the TSP for enabling Open RAN Centre for Excellence is worth 
consideration by the Department.   This will not only lead to cost saving and 
other benefits for the TSPs but will also help India to emerge as a global leader 
in Open RAN hardware and software  development.  The Committee 
recommend the Department to take suitable policy measures for promotion of 
Open RAN in the telecom sector by providing requisite thrust in this direction. 
Development of Indigenous 5G Technology 
16. The Committee are given to understand that Reliance Jio had developed 
its own 5G technology using 100 per cent homegrown technologies and plans 
to offer it to other telecom companies. The Committee note that the 
Department have sought details from them. However, the Department have not 
tested the technology and examined it. Jio has also given an ap plication for a 
trial using their  own technology. With regard to the development of 5G 
technology by domestic industry, the Committee have been informed that 
apart from Reliance Jio, 5G Test Bed is coming up with technology, and the 
Department are  also encouraging C-DoT to come up with 5G technology. ITI 
has  also recently tied up with system integrators like Tech Mahindra, TCS etc. 
for 4G equipment. They are also discussing with couple of Indian companies 
with 4G upgradable to 5G solutions. ITI has the capabilities to take up 
manufacturing of Radio equipment for 4G/5G a nd has been discussing with 
Original Equipment Manufacturers to have transfer of technology to 

85 
 
manufacture these products.  TEMA have also informed the Committee that 
Indian OEMs have proved time & again their expertise on technologies. Indian 
prowess on Software is recognized world over. In recent times there is more of 
software in telecom equipment  than hardware. Indian telecom equipment has 
already proved them in implementing many mission critical and national 
importance networks (Bharatnet, NFS, AFNET et c) based on domestically 
developed equipment. 5G standards are Open standards. Foreign OEMs has 
an edge in 2G, 3G & 4G;  however, in the case of 5G, this is not the case. All 
components can be developed individually with no dependency on one 
component working over the other, as 5G Use Cases do not just cover Mobile 
Users but a plethora of applications. TEMA requested  that for 5G , domestic 
procurement be made mandatory, so that Indian companies are able to first 
have an in-country deployment base and then are enabled to  enter the world 
market. The Director, IIT, Kanpur also emphasized on the need for developing 
indigenous 5G technology.  According to him, India currently has an 
insignificant share of its own homegrown product or equipment 
manufacturing companies in the domain of mobile communication 
technology. As discussed earlier, w e missed the 3G and the 4G bus already. 
However, due to the changed nature of network components  and the 
architecture of 5G, we now have  an opportunity to develop products in India.  
Unlike specialized hardware elements in the earlier generations of mobile 
networks, a large number of equipment/network entities in the 5G network will 
be based on softwa re running on off -the-shelf hardware. Specialized chipsets 
and hardware elements may not be needed for most of the network entities in 
the 5G network , barring elements like Radio Frequency front -ends and the 
antenna sub-system. This provides an opportunity to Indian vendors (R&D and 
software vendors) to leapfrog and start developing a 5G network equipment 
for deployments in India and across the world, given our expertise in software. 
 The Committee are of the view that the development of indigenous 5G 
technology by the domestic telecom industry is very important in view of the 
fact that India is greatly dependent on the import of telecom equipment. 

86 
 
Considering that there will be multi -fold increase in demand for telecom 
equipment to provide ubiquito us connectivity , it is desirable that the 
Department should take initiatives to promote domestic capabilities  and 
support Indian companies  for developing homegrown technologies. This will 
not only help in addressing the burgeoning telecom import bill and help save 
precious foreign exchange, but will also help in addressing national security 
concerns. India has missed the 3G and 4G bus;  however, it is comforting to 
note that , due to the changed nature of network components  and the 
architecture of 5G, it offers us an opportunity to develop products in India. The 
Committee note that the key design principles used by 5G networks called 
`softwarization‘ of network components provides an opportunity to Indian 
vendors (R&D and so ftware vendors) to leapfrog and start developing 5G 
network equipment for deployment  in India and across the world , given our 
expertise in software. The Committee recommend that sincere effort s must be 
made by the Department so that India can take full adv antage of the 
opportunities emerging out of 5G. It will be a great achievement if Indian 
companies can develop end -to-end 5G technology and emerge as global  
players in 5G technology. The Committee would like the Department to work in 
a mission mode  in order to encourage  Indian companies to develop home - 
grown 5G technologies.  The Committee further recommend that the 
Department should make serious efforts to minimize their reliance on foreign 
support and wherever unavoidable due regard be paid to nationa l security 
considerations. 
 
Uniform RoW Policy across States 
 
17. COAI have  submitted that Uniform RoW policy across states has a 
critical role in the operationalization of a strong and robust 5G telecom 
network in the country. India lacks fiberized sites and there needs to be strong 
Government push to build at least 50 percent sites on fib re. Providing f ree 
RoW for this will be a great contributor in the national interest of providing 5G 
access to the entire nation. Explaining the difficulties, the representative of 

87 
 
Reliance Jio stated that there are multiple agencies right from State 
Governments, Municipalities to RWAs which have erected entry barriers to the 
laying of  fibre. The ability of the TSPs to reach out to the customers is 
seriously hampered by delays, exorbitant costs and non -uniform RoW rules 
and this could be the single largest cause of delay in the expansion of the 5G 
network across the  length and breadth of the country. The Department have 
stated that The Indian Telegraph Right of Way Rules,  2016 (IT RoW Rules, 
2016) govern the RoW for setting up of towers and laying of fibre  in the 
country. Some of the main challenges in providing RoW across all States/UTs 
are delay in issu ing permissions due to lack of an online single window 
clearance system, lack of clarity regarding documents required for 
submission of application for RoW permission, multiple po licies with multiple 
levies of charges and procedures by many States/UTs, lack of availability of 
Government Land & Buildings for installation  of Mobile Towers (as procedure 
for the same has not been included by many States/UTs in their existing 
policies). The IT RoW Rules, 2016 provide uniform rates for granting RoW 
permission by the States/UTs. So far 16 States/UTs have aligned their RoW 
Policies/Rules with the Indian Telegraph Right of Way Rules, 2016.  Various 
Seminars, Regional Workshops, Meetings are being held from time to time 
with the States/UTs , including other stakeholders, for reviewing the 
implementation of IT RoW Rules, 2016. Requests have been/are being made to 
Chief Ministers and Chief Secretaries of the remaining States/UTs from time to 
time for aligning their RoW Rules/Policies with the IT RoW Rules, 2016. The 
Committee have also been informed by TRAI that a  very detailed 
recommendations have been made by them. They have suggested that a time -
bound schedule should be prepared for grant of RoW permission and  if 
required, Municipal Act or the Municipal Corporation Act a nd the Panchayat 
Act should be amended and specific provisions should be made. There is also 
increasing cost overruns and in many of the cases the rates are prohibitive. 
The Committee note that TRAI is going to work with the State Governments 
and they are preparing a Whit e Paper on it. TRAI have also suggested that to 

88 
 
improve the quality of service, modification of building bylaws is also very 
much required. TRAI have taken up this particular issue with the Ministry of 
Housing and Urban Affairs. 
 
 The Committee note that the Right of Way issue is still a big concern in 
our country. Even though the Department had issued the Row guidelines in 
2016, only 16 states have aligned their policies with the RoW rules. The result 
is that different states are having dif ferent rules. Since Local B odies and 
municipal corporations are laying down separate rules and this has greatly 
hampered the work of TSPs to lay fibre, the Committee are of the view  that 
considerable efforts need to be made by the Department on topmost priority 
for implementation of uniform RoW policies. If the present situation continues, 
then Row issues will definitely act as stumbling block and it will be difficult for 
the TSPs to provide the best quality of se rvices. To solve the RoW issues, the 
Committee desire that the Department should look into the matter by taking 
various stakeholders on board  and come out with coherent and practical 
solutions. In this regard, the Committee desire that the suggestions give n by 
TRAI for the time -bound issue of RoW permissions, suitable amendment o f 
Municipal or Panchayat Acts,  building bylaws,  fixing of uniform  RoW rates 
across the country, etc . may be considered  by taking it up with concerned 
Department/Ministry and appropriate authorities at the earliest.  The 
Committee feel that there should be common guidelines for States/UTs for 
RoW permission and specific provisions for the same may be made in 
Municipal law.  Since modification of building bylaws is also very much 
required, the Committee recommend that  the Ministry of Housing and Urban 
Affairs may be impressed upon  to furnish their vie ws and comments at the 
earliest, to permit a  suitable policy decision on RoW  issues for the safe and 
convenient passage of fibre and also come out early with a White Paper by 
taking various stakeholders on board.  The Committee also recommend that 
TRAI complete the consultation process on the ―Roadmap to Promote 
Broadband Connectiv ity and Enhanced Broadband speed‖ so that suitable 

89 
 
recommendations may be issued to  the Government for addressing all 
remaining issues relating to RoW permissions. 
 
Fibre as National Asset 
 
 
18. The Committee note that Infrastructure Providers Category -I (IP-I) are 
permitted to deploy and share passive i nfrastructure such as Dark fibre , Right 
of Way, Duct space, and Towers on lease/rent out/sale basis to the licensees 
of telecom services on mutually agreed terms and conditions. In the year 2009, 
the scope of IP-I registration was enhanced to cover the active infrastructure. 
However, IP -I providers are not permitted to own and share active 
infrastructure, i.e., these elements should be owned by the TSPs. TRAI has 
recommended to expand the scope of the IP -I providers, and permit them to 
own, establish, maintain, and work all such infrastructure items, equipment, 
and systems which are required for establishing Wireline Access Network, 
Radio Access Network (RAN), and Transmission Links. The recommendations 
are u nder consideration in DoT. Once implemented, this would increase 
sharing of common active sharable infrastructure established by IP-I providers 
resulting in efficient utilization of resources.  The National Broadband Mission 
launched in December 2019, to ac hieve the NDCP goal of 'Broadband for All', 
highlights fiberisation of towers, to increase by around two and half times the 
current number of fiberized telecom towers in the country. As per the latest 
data available with TRAI, approximately 30 percent of t he total base stations 
are connected through OFC. Further, TRAI has already taken steps to increase 
fiberisation through recent consultation paper on ―Roadmap to Promote 
Broadband Connectivity and Enhanced Broadband speed‖, illustrating the 
current footpri nt status, existing bottlenecks, and opportunities to increase 
fibre penetration. As the Government is aiming to increase fibre footprint to 5 
million-kilometer route and increase fiberized towers to 60 percent by 2022, 
TRAI would furnish its recommendatio ns on fiberisation soon. The Committee 
also have been informed by the TSPs that 5G rollouts typically have been in 
countries which are already having more than 90 per cent fibre rollouts. They 

90 
 
have suggested that Government should incentivize the right of way by 
creating a free right of way and creating f ibre as a national asset. They have 
asked for a well defined fibre sharing policy which can be shared by all from  
PSUs to TSPs, so that 5 lakh towers can be lit by fibre. The sharing of fibre 
and using fibre as a national asset has not been the case till now. Commenting 
on the issue, Bharti Airtel has submitted  before the Committee that t he 
connectivity of the BTSs through fiber is one important  requirement for the 
roll-out of  5G services. However, India remains highly under-fiberized, 
providing connectivity to less than 30 percent of mobile towers a nd 7 percent 
of our homes. Fibre  needs to be accorded the status of essential national 
infrastructure, and TSPs should be supported with zero RoW cost wi th single 
window clearance so that they can fiberize their BTSs. Sharing of fib re 
infrastructure across Govt. and private players should be made mandatory, 
and a pricing model for such sharing needs to be adopted. 
The Committee are in full agreement with TSPs that  sharing of fibre will 
provide a healthier competitive environment for telecom market. It will improve 
economies of scale, avoiding duplication of networks where unnecessary. The 
Committee note that , at present  in India , IP-I providers are not permitted to 
own and share active infrastructure and TRAI had recommended to expand 
the scope of the IP-I providers. The recommendations are under consideration 
in DoT. The Committee recommend that the Department should consider the 
recommendation made by TRAI  early, as this would increase sharing of 
common active sharable infrastructure established by IP -I providers, resulting 
in the efficient utilization of resources. The Committee further note that  the 
main reason that India remains a fibre-challenged country in the world  is 
because of difficulties, delays and costs associated with Right of Way 
permissions from various state/local authorities , and it is high time these 
issues are addressed . The Committee feel that there is an urgent need for a 
well defined fibre sharing policy which can be shared by all starting from 
PSUs to TSPs so as to increase fibre footprint  and decongest our cities . The 
Committee are of the firm view that introducing a n enabling policy like single 

91 
 
window clearance for the grant of permission for fibre laying will be of great 
help.  The Committee recommend that the Department should take all 
necessary steps to increase India‘s fibre footprint so that the goal of covering  
5 million kilometres and 60 per cent fiberized towers by 2022 is achieved. 
 
Use of E and V Bands for Backhaul 
 
19. The C ommittee note that fibre -based backhaul is still in its infancy in 
India. There is inadequacy in terms of optic fibre cable density , both in urban 
and rural areas , and a special focus for its densification in a time -bound 
manner is essential for 5G deployment . TRAI has recommended a number of  
strategies for increasing fibre  penetration in the country and most of these 
strategies have been reflected in the National Digital Communication Policy 
(NDCP) 2018. The Committee have been informed that TRAI has recommended 
giving the E band and V band for backhaul and V band, for some portion, as a 
hotspot and Wi -Fi. The spectrum in E Band and V band will provide high 
capacity backhaul links for mobile networks and is very important specially for 
deployment 5G network. E-band was established in the US over 10 years ago. 
Since then, E -band has grown steadily. E -band is now open in more than 85 
countries and the most common regulation for E -band assignment is link -by-
link coordination. Over 70 countries across the world including US, UK, Korea, 
Japan, Australia, Sweden, South Africa among others, have already opened up 
the 60 GHz (V band) for delicen sed usage. However, the Committee were 
disturbed to see the anguish and frustration of TSPs that in India , the decision 
to permit the opening of the E&V band for backhaul purpose s is still pending.  
The Department have replied that the issue of allotment o f Microwave 
Backhaul spectrum to the TSPs, which also include E&V Bands, is part of the 
ongoing process of finalisation of ―Policy for Normative and Transparent 
Assignment/Authorisation of Spectrum‖. The TSPs have requested that  
Government may consider auction of E and V  band along with the spectrum 
auction. They have expressed the view that this will be like providing airwave 
based fibre. TSPs have also expressed the view that delicensing is a problem. 

92 
 
They have informed the Committee that in the last 18 months, 550 MHz has 
been delicensed but this has not led to  the proliferation of Wi-Fi. On the other 
hand, t he Committee have been informed by the Department that while the 
TSPs want the E band to be auctioned, Internet Service Providers and others 
are of the opinion that it should not be auctioned. The Department have further 
stated that it will be allowed to be used for Wi-Fi only. 
 The Committee clearly note that TSPs are demanding an enabling policy 
for the E and V bands , keeping in view their usage for both integrated access 
and backhaul transmission. The Committee note that many fibre rich countries 
like Japan and South Korea, among others, are already using E&V band for 
backhaul transmission networks.  Keeping in view the fact  that the laying of 
fibre requires manpower, in addition to considerable investments, and that the 
provision of spectrum in the E&V band will provide the requisite high capacity 
backhaul links for mobile networks  which is essential in  5G deployment, the 
Committee desire that the Department should identify the spectrum in E&V 
band and frame a policy and  suitable guidelines to allocate them to TSPs for 
meeting their backhaul nee ds. The current cumbersome approval process 
should also be amended. On the issue of delicensing the E&V band,  the 
Committee desire the Department to take  a balanced approach where  both 
TSPs and ISPs come to an agreement so that both will equally benefit from the 
allocation of this scarce resource. The Department should not lose sight of the 
fact that  the telecom operators as they themselves pointed out to have 
invested thousands of crore s in acquiring spectrum  for providing telecom 
services and  hence they should not be deprived of providing services in 
advanced technology due t o want of backhaul requirements , which can be 
taken care of by spectrum in E and V band .  The Committee expect the 
Department to evolve a policy that will give due consideration  to all these 
aspects. 
 
 
 
 

93 
 
Security Scenario in 5G Climate 
20. The Committee note that with so much data being shared through 
mobile network, there is an increased risk of hacking of data on 5G 
connections. Usually data including voice that goes through the network is 
protected, considering the fact the network protocols reliably take care of 
potential scenarios. Further , several applications , such as  banking 
transactions, are protected end -to-end with application specific encryption 
keys. However, as 5G is a  bouquet of technologies considered to work across 
platforms, devices, radio technologies, the threat perception may be higher 
considering the fact that rollouts have just begun and issues are still being 
studied. When asked about India‘s preparedness with  regard to the security 
architecture for 5G, t he Depart ment have informed the Committee that 
Telecom Service Provider s (TSPs) provide telecom service in India after 
obtaining licenses from DoT. Therefore, with regard to the security of Telecom 
networks, TSPs have to abide by the 'Security Conditions' specified in chapter 
6 of the license agreement. Further, DoT has notified the Indian Telegraph 
(Amendment) Rules, 2017 enabling the Mandatory Testing and Certification of 
Telecommunication Equipment (MTCTE)  which prescribes that any telegraph 
which is used , or capable of being used , with any telegraph established, 
maintained or worked under a licence granted by the Central Government in 
accordance with the provisions of section 4 of the Indian Telegraph Act,  1885, 
shall have to undergo prior mandatory testing and certification in respect of 
parameters as determined by the telegraph authority from time to time. The 
Committee have also been informed that mandatory testing and certification in 
respect of ―Securi ty requirements‖ is planned to be implemented through a 
scheme titled ―Communication Security Certification Scheme‖ (ComSeC). 
National Centre for Communication Security (NCCS) is responsible for 
implementation of this scheme.  
 Reliance Jio has informed th e Committee that from 5G onwards, 
technology will become much more intrusive in our business operations , 
given the applications, widespread digitisation, e -governance, the smart city  

94 
 
project, all the cameras in a city, the data centres, the device and the chipset 
in the devices , etc. Now, the more open and dense this whole network gets, 
the more vulnerable it becomes to threats. The threats are simple and c an be 
represented by the term STRIDE, where ‗S‘ stands for Spoofing, ‗T‘ stands for 
Tampering, ‗R‘ sta nds for Repudiation, ‗I‘ for information disclosure, ‗D‘ for 
denial of service making the network not available when it is needed , and ‗E‘ 
for what they call the escalation of privileges. The mitigation strategy to 
combat STRIDE is to comply flawlessly with the right standards , ensuring that 
the IPR is either our own or is validated in such a foolproof way that there is 
absolutely no backdoor or hacking kind of scenario.  TEMA have submitted 
that while the focus is on 5G, it is important not t o lose sight of the cyber 
threats that are faced by  existing infrastructure  like small city networks, 
BharatNet, power grid infrastructure, banking infrastructure, etc.  5G 
infrastructure is going to be a national strategic asset.  There is lot of data 
being shared on 4G networks and it will only increase multifold in 5G 
networks.  Because of the increased dependency of communication networks, 
the hacking of 5G networks is a very clear national security risk.  The 
Committee concur with the view that t he only solution is to build secur e and 
trustworthy indigenous communication infrastructure.  Vodafone Idea has 
suggested that all our critical services should be hosted more from India as 
compared to being hosted from outside and the user data and user 
information should be secured in the Indian territories.   
 The Committee observe that while 5G promises to deliver low latency, 
high speed and more reliable connections, there is going to be heightened 
security risks in a 5G scenario.  Managing security is going to be much more 
complex and complicated as 5G is a bouquet of technologies that are 
supposed to work across platforms, devices and technologies. STRIDE is just 
one of the threat models identified by Reliance Jio.   The Committee can well 
foresee that 5G will generate massive data , both personal and non-personal, 
which will demand special efforts for its protection. The growing concern over 
availability and protection of user data and privacy will exacerbate with 

95 
 
security challenges in 5G.  The Committee are aware the Personal Data 
Protection Bill, 2019 is still under consideration of the Government  and will 
deal with various data security issues.  The Committee recommend that to 
address the threat to data security, indigenous IPR, equipment and software 
should be encouraged and developed. It is important to examine in detail the 
need for critical services to be hosted from India so that user data and user 
information are secured within Indian territory, provided this  does not impede 
India‘s access to global services and data flows . On the issue of mandatory 
testing of telecom equipment, the Committee are concerned to note that the 
Indian Telecom Security Assurance Requirement has still not been finalized 
and notified.  The Committee recommend that it should be finalized at the 
earliest. The Committee also feel that cyber security threat s are  a collective 
concern and there is a need for a collective effort to build  an effective 
Government data protection and security strategy.  The Committee are hopeful 
that DoT will work in greater co -ordination with MeitY/Cert -In, State 
Governments and other agencies on cyber security in the 5G environment.  
The Committee also urge the Department to study the experience of other 
countries on 5G rollout and report to them about their experience with regard 
to security concerns. 
Threat from Imported Telecom Equipment 
21. The Committee are given to understand that there is a growing 
reluctance by a number of countries globally to allow C hinese 
telecommunications operators like  Huawei and ZTE to rollout 5G services in 
their territories. The US and the UK have  already banned Huawei over 
concerns of security. The Department have informed the Committee that they 
are close ly watching 5G develo pment around the world and would take an 
appropriate decision after evaluating all the pros and cons on 5G ecosystem 
including social, economic and security considerations.  The Department have 
not specifically banned any company including Huawei and ZTE. In view of the 
security-related concerns raised by various countries, such as USA and 
European Union, the Committee feel that adequate precautions should also be 

96 
 
taken by India before installing telecom equipment from Chinese sources  in 
the Indian telecom network including 5G. The Committee desire that in -built 
safety measures be put in place to ensure that the security of the country is 
not compromised.  The Committee also desire that such safety mechanisms 
should be strictly adhered to by both the public and private telecom 
companies.   
Availability of Reliable Power Supply 
 
22. The Committee note that the availability of reliable grid power in India is 
one of the largest bottlenecks in upgrading the network. Only about 35 percent 
of the towers in the country are connected to reliable power supply . As 
regards rural areas, on an average, power supply is available for just 10-12 
hrs. Since telecom services are to be maintained on 24x7 basis, the shortfall in 
the power supply is supplemented through alternate powe r sources like DG 
sets, renewable energy solutions and high efficiency battery deployment. The 
Committee are of the view that there is a n urgent need to augment grid power 
supply, especially in rural areas, by taking up the matter with the Ministry of 
New and Renewable Energy.  This will not only ensure better quality of service 
but will also help in the greening of the telecom sector. The Committee also 
recommend that the Department should make an active effort to introduce 
renewable energy , such as solar  energy, to power  telecom towers in the 
country.  The Committee are also of the view that  the Department must take 
the necessary steps to utilize the existing tower infrastructure for installing 
antennas of the TSPs. 
 
5G to BSNL and MTNL  
23. The Committee are  concerned to note that 4G spectrum has still not 
been allocated to BSNL/MTNL, even though the Cabinet in its meeting held on 
23.10.2019 had approved the administrative allotment of spectrum for 4G 
services through capital infusion. The funds for 4G spectr um has been 
allocated in FY 2020 -21. BSNL had floated a tender on 23.03.2020 for a 4G 

97 
 
Mobile Network on turnkey basis.  However, due to some policy issues, that 
tender has been cancelled and a fresh tender will be floated compliant with 
PMI provisions to gi ve preferential treatment to domestic vendors as per 
Government of India guidelines. State -owned BSNL and MTNL have not yet 
planned the introduction of  5G services yet on their network s. TEMA has 
desired that to promote domestic manufacturing it is importa nt that 
BSNL/MTNL survive , because only PSUs are placing orders for  Indian 
manufactured goods. BSNL, which is of strategic importance, purchases Make 
in India, IDDM products which might remain unsold otherwise. The issue 
remains of why Indian manufactured products are not deemed sufficiently 
attractive by other entities. 
 The Committee observe that the revival of BSNL/MTNL is critical for 
domestic telecom manufacturing industries as they are the only one s 
purchasing Indian manufactured goods , and t hey have been implementing 
important schemes in remote rural  areas and LWE affected areas.  In such 
circumstances, the survival of BSNL/MTNL is in the national interest. In order 
for BSNL/MTNL to remain viable  telecom service providers in the country, th e 
Committee recommend that necessary measures be taken to allocate  4G 
spectrum to them at the earliest. The Committee also recommend that the 
Department also take adequate measures to ensure that 5G spectrum be 
allocated to BSNL/MTNL at the same time as private TSPs, so that they are in a 
position to compete and stay relevant in the market.   They recommend that  if 
necessary, the Government can provide necessary guarantees , such as   
through a Letter of comfort to BSNL/MTNL to facilitate 4G/5G allocation.  
 
Coordinated Effort Across Sectors for 5G Eco-system 
  
24. The Committee note that i t is important to develop India -specific Use 
Cases across different verticals for utilizing the 5G ecosystem. The cross -
sectoral Use Cases would require coordinated efforts in managing the 5G 
ecosystem with cross -sectoral involvement. The Committee have been 
informed that for cross -sectoral cases of M2M/ IoT, in order to bring M2M 

98 
 
industry concerns and regulatory bottlenecks, DoT has proactively formed an 
M2M Apex Body, a M2M Review Committee and a M2M Consultative 
Committee. Domain experts from every vertical that has been considered as a 
potential M2M/IoT market have  to get together to address the concerns and 
also be enlisted to serve in an advisory role to the policy making bodies of the 
Government. A c onsultative Committee has been constituted incorporating 
representatives from Standardizing bodies such as Bureau of Indian 
Standards (BIS) and Telecom Standards Development Society of India (TSDSI) 
and sectoral industry r epresentative bodies to bring M2M industry concerns 
and regulatory bottlenecks to the notice of the Apex body. The scope of the 
existing committees can be expanded or broadened for inclusion of all the 5G 
use cases. 
 The Committee observe that 5G will lead to the convergence of multiple 
sectors and critical sectors will no longer work in silos. This calls for 
convergence between various regulatory bodies/authorities so as to arrive at a 
consensus on multiple regulatory frameworks  and different laws applicable to 
them. The Committee recommend that the scope of the existing Committees 
should be expanded or broadened for in clusion of all the 5G Use Cases.  The 
Committee also recommend that efforts must be made by the Department to 
work in tandem with  different Ministries so that an inter-sectoral regulatory 
body to deal with regulatory issues emerging due to the development of 5G 
Use Cases in different sectors may be identified and set up at the earliest. The 
Committee trust that such regulatory bodies  shall intervene in  conflict 
situations and also help formulate policies that will promote innovation in 
development of 5G Use Cases and local entrepreneurship in the country. 
 
5G and Health Concerns  
 
25. The Committee note that the Int ernational Commission for Non-Ionizing 
Radiation Protection (ICNIRP) issues guidelines for limiting exposure to 
electromagnetic fields which cover many applications such as 5G 
technologies, Wi -Fi, Bluetooth, Mobile phones, and base stations.  The 

99 
 
Department have informed the Co mmittee that WHO has concluded that 
current evidence does not confirm the existence of any health consequences 
from exposure to low level electromagnetic field s. In the year 2008, DoT 
adopted the ICNIRP guidelines that are recommended by WHO for basic 
restriction levels of electromagnetic emission from mobile towers.  An Inter -
Ministerial Committee (IMC) was constituted in 2010 to examine the effects of 
EMF radiation from base stations and mobile phones. The Committee note that 
based on the recommendation o f IMC, the norms for exposure limit for the 
Radio Frequency Field (Base Station Emission) have been made further 
stringent and reduced to 1/10 th of the existing limit prescribed by ICNIRP.  
After taking into consideration the concerns raised in public and report of the 
IMC, the Government in 2014 decided that the present prescribed limits are 
adequate and need no further change.  WHO has again clarified in 2020 that  to 
date, and after much research performed, no adverse health effect has been 
causally linked with exposure to wireless technologies.  The Department have 
also informed the Committee that no information or report has come to their 
notice regarding any Government halting the rollout of 5G  until their health 
authorities have reviewed its impact on  the environment and human health.  
As earlier noted, t he Committee have also been informed that there is a portal 
called TARANG Sanchar, where anybody can go and check the levels of  
emission taking place from any tower in their neighbourhood. 
 The Committee are glad to note that India had adopted an exposure limit 
of Base Stations that  is 1/10 th of the exis ting limit prescribed by ICNIRP, 
thereby ensuring that the levels of permitted exposures are  much lesser in 
India when compared with other countries tha t have adopted the ICNIRP 
guidelines.  However, there are many citizen s‘ groups, RWA, local 
organizations which are not convinced of the findings made by WHO 
regarding the absence of adverse health effect due to exposure to radiation 
from base station s of mobile towers.  The Committee have also received 
representations from noted citizen s‘ groups expressing fear relating to 
radiation which they feel will escalate due to intrusive technology of 5G.  The 

100 
 
Committee feel that 5G technology is still in a nascent  stage and the real 
dangers of radiation for health will become clearer only when its application 
becomes all pervasive.  The Committee recommend the Department not  only 
to rely on the report s of WHO, but to keep their eyes and ear s open to other 
studies and sc ientific researches that emerge  from time to time on health 
hazards from 5G radiation.  The Committee also recommend that the 
Department should collaborate with other Ministries and Institutes for a long - 
term India -specific research to study the imp act of EMF from mobile towers 
and propose adequate budgetary allocation for this purpose. At the same time, 
the Department/TRAI should carry out a continuous and effective awareness 
programme to educate the masses.  While appreciating the Department ‘s 
launching the TARANG Sanchar Portal, the Committee are of the view that 
greater efforts need to be undertaken by the Department to increase the 
visibility and awareness  of the portal among the general public.     
Telecom Services as Essential Services  
26. The Committee are of the view that telecommunication s services have 
become inevitable for the growth of key sectors in the country. Its role and 
importance in business and Government , and in  empowering different 
sections of society , can hardly be overstated. It is also becoming a force 
multiplier for various other sectors of the economy. Considerin g its 
importance for business, G overnments and various other sectors, the 
Committee feel that it is a high time that the Government should treat 
telecommunications services as an essential service like water and electricity 
and accord ICT the status of essential national infrastructure . The t elecom 
sector needs to be treated as an important strategic sector and no longer only 
as source of revenue for the Government. The Committee, therefore, desire 
that necessary legislation be formulated to declare telecom service s as an 
essential service  and telecom infrastructure as critical infrastructure of the 
country.  The enabling legislation can also address several related issues 
such as theft of fibre, disruption of services, RoW, cyber security measures 
and other matters addressed in the present rep ort, which are well beyond the 

101 
 
scope of the Indian Telegraph Act of 1885. Such new legislation can underpin 
the various measures reviewed by the Committee in this report, and equip the 
country better to take its place as a significant telecommunications po wer in 
the 21st Century. 
 
 
 
 
  
New Delhi;   DR. SHASHI THAROOR, 
04 February, 2021  Chairperson, 
15 Magha, 1942 (Saka) Standing Committee on 
Information Technology. 

102 
 
Appendix-I 
  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(2019-20) 
 
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY-FIRST SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
----------- 
 
 The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 11 August, 2020 from 1100 hours to 
1345 hours in Main Committee Room, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
 
Dr. Shashi Tharoor - Chairperson 
 
 MEMBERS 
  
Lok Sabha 
 
2.  Smt. Locket Chatterjee  
3.  Dr. Nishikant Dubey 
4.  Smt. Raksha Nikhil Khadse  
5.  Ms. Mahua Moitra  
6.  Shri Santosh Pandey  
7.  Col. Rajyavardhan Singh Rathore  
8.  Shri L.S. Tejasvi Surya  
Rajya Sabha 
9.  Dr. Anil Agrawal  
10.  Shri Syed Nasir Hussain  
11.  Shri Shaktisinh Gohil 
Secretariat 
1. Shri Y. M. Kandpal          - Director 
2. Dr. Sagarika Dash          -     Additional Director 
3. Shri Shangreiso Zimik                -     Deputy Secretary 
 
 

103 
 
List of Witnesses 
Department of Telecommunications 
 
Sl. No. Name Designation 
1.  Shri Anshu Prakash Secretary 
2.  Shri K. Ramchand Advisor 
3.  Shri Hari Ranjan Rao Joint Secretary 
4.  Shri YGSC Kishore Babu DDG  
5.  Shri R. K. Pathak DDG 
6.  Shri Surendra Rai DDG 
 
Cellular Operators Association of India (COAI) 
 
Sl. No. Name Designation 
1.  Lt. Gen. Dr. S P Kochhar  Director General 
2.  Shri Vikram Tiwathia  Dy. Director General 
3.  Shri Vertika Misra  Sr. Director 
 
Telecom Equipment Manufacturers Association (TEMA) 
 
Sl. No. Name Designation 
 
1.  Shri Ravi Sharma 
 
Chairman, TEMA 
 
2.  Prof N.K. Goyal Chairman Emeritus, TEMA 
 
3.  Shri Saurabh Kumar  Vice Chairman, TEMA Integration 
Council, Vice President, Sterlite 
Technologies Ltd. 
 
4.  Shri Bharat Bhatia Chairman, Empowering India 
through Wireless Spectrum Council 
and President ITU APT India. 
 
5.  Shri Sandeep Aggarwal Vice Chairman, TEMA, Chairman PH,D 
Telecom Committee, Co Chairman 
TEPC 
 
6.  Shri Rajiv Aggarwal 
 
Vice Chairman, TEMA Finance 
Committee, CFO Primetel Plus staff to 
help in adm maters 
 
7.  Ms. Manisha Kumari,  GM, TEMA 
 

104 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee convened for briefing by the representatives of the Department of 
Telecommunications on the subjects …..xxxxx…xxxxx….. and ‗India‘s preparedness  
for 5G‘ and to hear the views of the representatives of the Cellular Operators 
Association of India (COAI) and Telecom Equipment Manufacturers Association of 
India (TEMA) on the subject ‗India‘s preparedness for 5G‘. 
 
(The representatives of the Department of Telecommunications were then called in) 
3. …..xxxxx…xxxxx…..…..xxxxx…xxxxx…..…..xxxxx…xxxxx….. 
4. …..xxxxx…xxxxx…..…..xxxxx…xxxxx…..…..xxxxx…xxxxx….. 
5. …..xxxxx…xxxxx…..…..xxxxx…xxxxx…..…..xxxxx…xxxxx….. 
6.  Thereafter, the Committee took up the subject ‗India‘s preparedness for 5G‘ 
for examination.  The Chairperson in his initial remark drew the attention of the 
representatives of DoT to the findings of inter -Ministerial High Level Forum 5G India 
2020, lack of preparedness, lack of spectrum, inadequate use case development, 
uncertainty around the sale of radio waves for 5G, etc.  
7. The representatives of the Department made their submission on the issues 
pertaining to 5G such as Mobile Technologies and 5G, 5G v ision for India, 
illustrations of 5G applications in the field of agriculture, transport, surveillance and 
traffic management, education, health, etc., status of setting up of indigenous 5G 
Test Bed and deployment strategy, India‘s contribution in 5G stand ard development, 
status of 5G technology development in India, etc.  During the course of deliberation, 
Members raised queries on issues such as measures for promotion of domestic 
manufacturing industry, status of utilization of funds available with USOF, status of 
development of indigenous 5G Test Bed, status of utilization of funds allocated, 
criteria for selecting the institutes for development of 5G Test Bed, availability of 
spectrum, etc.  The representatives of the Department responded to the above 
queries.   
 
8. The Chairperson, then, thanked the representatives of the Department of 
Telecommunications for deposing before the Committee. 
(The witnesses then withdrew.) 

105 
 
[The representatives of Cellular Operators Association of India (COAI) and Telecom 
Manufacturers Association of India (TEMA) were then called in] 
 
9.   The Chairperson welcomed the representatives of COAI and TEMA to the 
sitting of the Committee. The representatives of TEMA submitted before the 
Committee on the need for India to develop an eco sy stem for complete 
manufacturing rather than just assembly to become global destination for 
manufacturing, need to promote R&D in security networks, immediate release of 
spectrum for industrial 4.0 uses.  TEMA suggested that BSNL should be asked to 
promote connectivity in North-East, Left Wing Extremism Affected Areas and border 
and hilly areas on priority.   
10. Thereafter, the representatives of COAI made their presentation focusing on 
issues, such as status of availability of 4G in India. impact of restrictin g Huawei and 
ZTE from supplying telecom equipment, need for inter -Ministerial consultation for 
spectrum allocation, support required from Government for 5G readiness viz. 
internationally harmonized spectrum, gaps and delay in allocation of trial spectrum 
for 5G, uniform RoW policy across States and need for high fiberization, etc. They 
emphasized on the need for 5G use cases and coordinated Government action for 
enabling digital transformation across sectors and a digital readiness index to 
measure the same .  They urged for rationalization of regulatory levies such as 
License Fees, spectrum usage charges, USO Levy and costs, etc.   
 
11. The queries raised by the Members were responded to by the representatives 
of TEMA and COAI.  At the end, Hon‘ble Chairperson thanked the representatives of 
COAI and TEMA for presenting their views before the Committee. 
   
The witnesses then withdrew 
Verbatim proceedings of the sitting have been kept on record. 
The Committee, then, adjourned. 
___________________________________________________________________ 
….xxxxx… Matters not related to the Report 
  

106 
 
Appendix-II 
 
MINUTES OF THE FOURTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (2020-21) HELD ON 27th OCTOBER, 2020 
----------- 
 
 The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 27th October, 2020 from 1600 hours to 
1900 hours in Committee Room No. ‗3‘, Extension to Parliament House Annexe, 
New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
Dr. Shashi Tharoor – Chairperson 
 
 MEMBERS 
  
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Smt. Raksha Nikhil Khadse 
3. Shri Dhairyasheel Sambhajirao Mane 
4. Ms Mahua Moitra 
5. Shri P.R. Natarajan 
6. Dr. Gaddam Ranjith Reddy 
7. Shri Jayadev Galla 
8. Shri Bhanu Pratap Singh Verma 
 
Rajya Sabha 
  
9. Dr. Anil Agrawal 
10. Shri Y.S. Chowdary 
11. Shri Syed Zafar Islam 
12. Shri Nabam Rebia 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Y.M. Kandpal   - Joint Secretary 
2. Dr. Sagarika Dash   - Additional Director 
3. Shri Shangreiso Zimik  - Deputy Secretary 
  

107 
 
List of Witnesses 
 
Reliance Jio Infocomm Limited 
 
Sl. No. Names Designation 
 
1.  Shri Shyam Prabhakar Mardikar Group CTO 
2.  Shri Mahipal Singh VP, Regulatory 
3.  Shri Ravi P. Gandhi President, Reliance Retail 
 
Vodafone Idea Limited 
 
1.  Shri P. Balaji Chief Regulatory & Corporate 
Affairs Officer 
2.  Shri Mudit Agarwal Executive Vice President - 
Technology 
3.  Shri Sundeep Kathuria Executive Vice President – 
Regulatory & Policy 
 
Bharti Airtel Limited 
 
1.  Shri Sandeep Gupta Head Strategy and Architecture 
2.  Shri Tarun Chitkara General Manager (Regulatory 
Affairs) 
 
Department of Telecommunications (DoT) 
 
Sl. No. Names Designation 
 
1.  Shri Anshu Prakash Secretary (Telecom) 
2.  Shri K. Ramchand Member (Technology) 
3.  Smt. Anita Praveen Additional Secretary (Telecom) 
4.  Shri Hari Ranjan Rao Joint Secretary (T) 
 
Telecom Regulatory Authority of India (TRAI) 
 
1.  Dr. P.D. Vaghela Chairman 
2.  Shri S.K. Gupta Secretary 
3.  Shri Rajiv Sinha Principal Advisor (NSL) 
4.  Shri S.T. Abbas Advisor (NSL-II) 
 
 
 

108 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee convened to hear the views of the representatives of Telecom Service 
Providers (TSPs) i.e. Reliance Jio Infocomm Limited, Vodafone Idea Limited and 
Bharti Airtel Limited, D epartment of Telecommunications and Telecom Authority of 
India (TRAI) on the subject ‗India‘s preparedness for 5G‘.   
 
(The representatives of Reliance Jio Infocomm Limited, Vodafone Idea 
Limited and Bharti Airtel Limited were then called in) 
 
3. Welcoming the representatives, the Chairperson sought the views of Telecom 
Service Providers (TSPs) on their preparedness for the 5G services in India and 
their level of engagements with DoT and TRAI on this issue.   
4. Taking the floor, the Group CTO of Reliance Jio drew the attention of the 
Committee to the humungous amount of work required to be done in a country of 
this size with demographic disparities for launching of 5G services. Flagging concern 
over lack of digital fibre network and broadband challenges be fore the country, he 
expressed views that 5G would need a significant change in the way of policy, the 
subsequent implementation, the execution of right of way and availability of reliable 
grid power.  The representative of Jio also submitted that right am ount of spectrum 
at right prices as per the global practices would be essential to carry out 5G services 
effectively.  To achieve the desired objectives, incentivisation of whole ‗Make in 
India‘ scheme and the right intellectual properties in the country w ould be essential 
from an affordability perspective as well as from compelling nature of technology, he 
added.  On security aspect, he was of the view that 5G becoming more intrusive in 
the business operations, would become more vulnerable to threats which  can be 
abbreviated as STRIDE (Spoofing, Tempering, Repudiation, Information Disclosure, 
Denial of Services and Escalation of Privileges) which could be mitigated through 
complying flawlessly with the right standards ensuring that the IPR is either our own  
or is validated in a foolproof way. On the issue of their current level of engagements 
with DoT and TRAI, the Committee were  informed by the JIO representative that all 
the TSP are together and in discussion on trial  spectrum and full trial labs.  
   
5. Thereafter, the representatives of Bharti Airtel briefed the Committee about 
5G.  He alluded that right amount of spectrum with right pricing and development of 
IPRs in Indian market, including need of adequate and proper infrastructure with 
fibre sharing  policy are essential pre -requisite for the 5G launch. He desired 
Committee to help Telecom Service Providers (TSPs) in getting the infrastructure 
ready for fibre rollout which is going to be the platform for 5G network. Expressing 
concern over creating is lands of technology through some standards which are 
specific to India he apprehended that this will actually become bottleneck to the 5G 
mission and, therefore, stressed the need for harmonizing Indian standards globally.  
He added that smart phones and c onnected devices will be important pre -requisite 
for 5G and therefore an appropriate ecosystem for 5G smart phones and devices 

109 
 
with proper incentivisation under ‗Make in India‘ is the need of hour. The 
representative of Bharti Airtel also stressed the need  for having innovations in 5G 
technology in right direction with global harmonization. 
6. The representative of Vodafone who took the floor thereafter was of the view 
that lot of efforts are required to be made to derive huge socio -economic benefits of 
5G which would need alignment of roadmaps with worldwide standards. He was of 
the view that India need to initiate the 5G trials now with an ecosystem.  He 
supported the idea of use of wireless technology to reach people faster. In order to 
achieve the target  of 90 per cent fibrization for 5G services, the representative of 
Vodafone pleaded for the auction for allocation of E&V band with spectrum 
allocation.  Touching upon the issue of impact of 5G in HR development the 
representative from Vodafone seemed optimistic that early launch of 5G would open 
up many digital jobs in the world economy. He, however, insisted on price stability 
for the already stressed sector with the floor pricing in order to create a robust 
industry which may contribute to the exchequer as well as be useful by way of 
revenue sharing.  He desired that National Digital Communications Policy 2018 
should be implemented quickly in order to put more money in the hands of industry 
to invest faster and capitalize 5G movement.  
7. On a specific qu ery by the Chairman regarding building a competitive 
environment in order to give benefits to the consumers, the representatives of 
industry were of the views that a vibrant industry will be built on the certain price 
stability which all of them have reque sted for and sought intervention of the 
Committee in this matter.   
8. The Chairperson drew the attention of the representatives to a TRAI report 
which speaks that India would be the largest user of E-band in the world and desired 
clarity in the matter.  T he industry representative informed the Committee that there 
were two bands E & V and both of them are available but unused which need to be 
delicensed in a systematic manner. The representatives sought help of the 
Committee in getting them E -band to rollo ut their so called fibre in air or wireless 
fibre.   
9. On the issue of potential danger of 5G technology on health, the 
representatives informed that Indian standards are 1/10 of the global standards and 
therefore this is not a cause of concern.  They fur ther informed that they have a 
portal called Tarang Sanchar  which enables anybody to go and see the rate of 
emission that is taking place in the tower of neighbourhood and suitable corrective 
measures including penalties have been put in place.   
10. The Members raised various queries regarding the reserve price, better cash 
flow and profitability in the sector, price stability, low level of preparedness in rural 
areas, urban rural divide, inadequate fibrization of towers, identifications of bands for 
Service Providers, Defence, etc., cyber security, manufacturing of 5G handsets, 
global harmonization of standards, R&D, Chinese collaboration in the 5G business, 
etc. which were replied to by the TSPs. All the TSPs were unanimous in their 
demand for right amount of spectrum with right roadmap and right pricing along with 

110 
 
right infrastructure in order to give their best and affordable services to their 
customers. 
11. The Chairperson thanked TSPs for appearing before the Committee and 
desired that the queries of M embers which could not be replied may be sent in 
writing.   
The witnesses then withdrew 
 
(The representatives of DoT and TRAI were then called in) 
 
12. The Chairperson while welcoming the Secretary, DoT, Chairman, TRAI and 
other officials of the DoT and TRAI to the sitting of the Committee drew their 
attention to the concerns expressed by the industry representatives over the minimal 
availability of spectrum and exorbitant pricing and level of support from the 
Government being given to these service provi ders.  He also drew the attention of 
the representatives to the issues of gaps and delays in allocation of trial spectrums, 
implementation of uniform right of way policy across states, lack of a proper 
ecosystem for 5G rollout, not working with globally ha rmonised standards, etc.  He 
also expressed concern over great deal of policy frustration and very slow decision 
making process on the part of the Government as informed by the TSPs. 
13.  Thereafter, the representatives of TRAI made a power point presentat ion on 
India‘s preparedness on 5G which inter alia highlighted on key performance 
indicators of 5G, 3 categories of Use Cases, requirements for 5G, 5G access 
spectrum, 5G ecosystem, steps taken by TRAI, recommendations for auction of 
spectrum of 5G, and sharing infrastructure for 5G, etc.   
14. On the issue of providing E -band to the TSPs, the representative of DoT 
informed that it has not been open for access even on the recommendations of TRAI 
but being allowed to be used for wifi purpose only. According to the DoT 
representative, E -band is primarily for the Backhaul and also for the access of 
wireless wifi. They informed that Committee that limited Backhaul may not provide 
adequate speed and ultimately quality of service will suffer.  According to them, E  & 
V bands are very valuable bands and not auctioned in other countries also.   
15. On the concern expressed by TSPs regarding high spectrum prices, the 
representative of TRAI informed that they have done a scientific exercise in a 
transparent manner and t hey have a consultation paper which is available on the 
website. Based on this, cabinet has to take a call on the pricing.  They, however, 
expressed hope that the concern of the stakeholders will be taken into account.   
16. Regarding the security concern over the use of 5G technology, the 
representatives of TRAI informed that the standards in India are far far more 
stringent and the radiation is set at lower in terms of what is permitted. This is much 
lower than the WHO standards. 

111 
 
17. On the issues of glob al harmonization of 5G standards, the representative of 
DoT informed the Committee that these standards are being followed as they 
believe in harmonious standards because there has to be an ecosystem which is 
operable. 
18. Members also raised queries regar ding recommendations of TRAI in the 3.3 
GHz to 3.6 GHz which is going to be used for 5G, identification and allocation of 
spectrum to departments of ISRO, Department of Defence, Navy, etc., Inter -
ministerial issues of band identification, connectivity of d evices for 5G, 5G Use 
Cases, development of test beds in coordination with  IITs and IISc, network slicing, 
involvement of Chinese companies and technology on 5G trials, etc. which were 
replied to by the representative.  
 The Chairperson thanked the witnesses for appearing before the Committee. 
The witnesses then withdrew 
   
Verbatim proceedings of the sitting have been kept on record. 
 
The Committee, then, adjourned. 
  

112 
 
Appendix-III 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(2020-21) 
MINUTES OF THE FIFTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
----------- 
 
 The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 10th November, 2020, from 1600 hours to 
1730 hours in Main Committee Room, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
Dr. Shashi Tharoor- Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
  
Lok Sabha 
2. Shri Karti P. Chidambaram 
3. Dr. Nishikant Dubey 
4. Dr. Sukanta Majumdar 
5. Shri Dhairyasheel Sambhajirao Mane 
6. Ms. Mahua Moitra 
7. Shri P. R. Natarajan 
8. Shri Santosh Pandey 
9. Col. Rajyavardhan Singh Rathore 
10. Shri Sanjay Seth 
11. Shri Bhanu Pratap Singh Verma 
 
Rajya Sabha 
12. Dr. Anil Agrawal 
13. Shri Md. Nadimul Haque 
 
Secretariat 
 
1. Shri Y. M. Kandpal          - Joint Secretary 
2. Dr. Sagarika Dash          -     Additional Director 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

113 
 
List of Witnesses 
 
Department of Telecommunications 
Sl. No. Names Designation 
1.  Shri Anshu Prakash Secretary, DoT 
2.  Shri K. Ramchand Member (Technology) 
3.  Ms. Anita Praveen Additional Secretary 
4.  Shri Hari Ranjan Rao Joint Secretary  
5.  Shri R. K. Pathak DDG(IC) 
6.  Shri Kishore Babu DDG(SRI) 
7.  Shri Surendra Rai DDG(NT) 
Telecom Regulatory Authority of India 
Sl.  
No. 
Names(Mr./Ms.) Designation 
1.  Dr. P. D. Vaghela Chairman 
2.  Shri S. K. Gupta Secretary 
3.  Shri Rajiv Sinha Principal Advisor (NSL) 
4.  Shri S. T. Abbas Advisor (NSL-II) 
5.  Shri Sunil Kr. Singhal Advisor (BB&PA) 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the representatives of the Ministry of 
Communications (Department of Telecommunications) and Telecom Regulatory 
Authority of India (TRAI) to the sitting of the Committee. After the initial remarks by 
the Chairperson,  the representatives of the Department made a power -point 
presentation highlighting the advantages of 5G in agriculture, transport, surveillance 
and traffic management, education, health, smart homes, etc. The power -point 
presentation also included the sta tus of 5G in India, setting up of an indigenous 5G 
test bed and its deployment strategy, broad areas of work of the Participating 
Institutes, contribution of TSDSI in global standards, 5G use case for banking and 
financial services, 5G Hackathon, etc.   
 
3. Members raised queries on availability of spectrum, international parameter 
for pricing of spectrum, allocation of E and V band, spectrum for testing facilities, 
Low Mobility Large Cell (LMLC), Low standards of fiberization, identification of 
millimeter wave etc. which were replied by the Department.  
 

114 
 
4. Members also enquired about the 5G test bed project being developed by IIT, 
Madras, the timeline of the project, use cases of 5G fiberization status, right of way 
rules, non reliability of grid power, s ecurity related concerns, delicensing of E and V 
bands, Policy on affordable handsets etc. The Department submitted that for the 
right of way guideline and rules, they have made detailed recommendation to the 
Ministry of Urban Development and a time bound schedule needs to be prepared on 
the right of way rules.  
5. The Department assured the Committee that the fears of danger caused by 
5G radiation are unfounded and they will furnish in writing, the concerns about 
dangers posed by microwave radiation coming  from 5G towers and steps taken by 
the Department to dispel these concerns. 
 
6.    The Chairperson, then, thanked the representatives of the Department of 
Telecommunications and TRAI for deposing before the Committee. 
 
 
The witnesses then withdrew. 
 
Verbatim Proceedings of the sitting have been kept on record. 
 
 
The Committee, then, adjourned.  
  

115 
 
Appendix-IV 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(2020-21) 
MINUTES OF THE FIFTEENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
----------- 
 
 The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 3rd February, 2021 from 1400 hours to 
1525 hours in Committee Room ‗B‘, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Dr. Shashi Tharoor- Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
  
Lok Sabha 
2. Shri Karti P. Chidambaram 
3. Shri Sunny Deol 
4. Smt. Raksha Nikhil Khadse 
5. Shri Dhairyasheel Sambhajirao Mane 
6. Shri P. R. Natarajan 
7. Shri Santosh Pandey 
8. Col. Rajyavardhan Singh Rathore 
9. Dr. Gaddam Ranjith Reddy 
10. Shri Sanjay Seth 
11. Dr. T. Sumathy (A) Thamizhachi Thangapandian 
12. Shri Bhanu Pratap Singh Verma 
13. Smt. Sumalatha Ambareesh 
 
Rajya Sabha 
14. Dr. Anil Agrawal 
15. Shri Shaktisinh Gohil 
16. Shri Syed Nasir Hussain 
17. Shri Syed Zafar Islam 
18. Shri Nabam Rebia 
 
Secretariat 
 
1. Shri Y. M. Kandpal          - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri H. Ram Prakash  - Director 
3. Dr. Sagarika Dash          -     Additional Director 
4. Shri Shangreiso Zimik  - Deputy Secretary 
 
 

116 
 
2 At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee convened to consider and adopt Draft Report on the subject ‗India‘s 
Preparedness for 5G‘ relating to the Ministry of Communicati ons (Department of 
Telecommunications).  For the convenience of the Members, Hon'ble Chairperson 
gave a broad overview of the Observations/Recommendations contained in the 
Report. 
3. The Committee, thereafter, took the draft Report in for consideration and adopted 
the same with certain modifications.   
 
4. The Committee, also, authorized the Chairperson to finalize the draft Report and 
present the same to the House during the current session of Parliament. 
 
The Committee, then, adjourned 
 
 
***** 