STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
COMMUNICATIONS AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(2023-24) 
 
 
SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
MINISTRY OF ELECTRONICS AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
of the Committee contained in their Forty-eighth Report (Seventeenth Lok 
Sabha) on ‘Citizens’ Data Security and Privacy’] 
 
FIFTY-FIFTH REPORT 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
 
 
February 2024/ Magha 1945 (Saka) 
 
 
55 
 


 
FIFTY - FIFTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
COMMUNICATIONS AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(2023-24) 
 
 
SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
MINISTRY OF ELECTRONICS AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
of the Committee contained in their Forty-eighth Report (Seventeenth Lok 
Sabha) on ‘Citizens’ Data Security And Privacy’] 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on  08.02.2024 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on  08.02.2024 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
February, 2024/Magha,1945 (Saka) 
 


CCIT No. 399 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2023 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in  
Lok Sabha (Sixteenth Edition) and Printed by Lok Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi-110 001. 
  

 
CONTENTS 
 Page 
No. 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
(ii) 
INTRODUCTION (iii) 
CHAPTER I Report……………………………………………………………………… 1-13 
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government…………………………………………………………………… 
14-22 
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of replies of the Government……………………………… 
23-24 
CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and require 
reiteration ……………………………………………………………………. 
25-30 
CHAPTER V Observations/Recommendations i n respect of which replies are of 
interim in nature……………………………………………………………… 
31-34 
 ANNEXURES  
I. Minutes of the  Fourth S itting of the Committee held on  6 February, 
2024  
35-36 
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in their Forty-eighth Report (Seventeenth 
Lok Sabha)  
 
          37   
 
(i) 
 

 
 
Composition of the Standing  Committee on Communications and  
Information Technology (2023-24) 
 
Shri Prataprao  Jadhav - Chairperson 
 
 
Lok Sabha 
  
2. Smt. Sumalatha Ambareesh 
3. Shri Karti P. Chidambaram 
4. Dr. Nishikant Dubey 
5. Smt. Sunita Duggal 
6. Shri Jayadev Galla 
7. Shri S. Jagathrakshakan 
8. Smt. Raksha Nikhil Khadse 
9. Dr. Sukanta Majumdar 
10. Shri P. R. Natarajan 
11. Shri Santosh Pandey 
12. Dr. Gaddam Ranjith Reddy 
13. Shri Sanjay Seth 
14. Shri Ganesh Singh 
15. Shri Parvesh Sahib Singh 
16. Shri Shatrughan Prasad Sinha 
17. Shri L.S. Tejasvi Surya 
18. Dr. T. Sumathy (A) Thamizhachi Thangapandian 
19. Dr. M. K. Vishnu Prasad 
20. VACANT* 
21. VACANT** 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha 
22. Dr. Anil Agrawal 
23. Dr. Laxmikant Bajpayee 
24. Dr. John Brittas 
25. Shri Syed Nasir Hussain 
26. Shri Ilaiyaraaja 
27. Shri Jaggesh 
28. Shri Praful Patel 
29. Shri Kartikeya Sharma 
30. Shri Jawhar Sircar 
31. Shri Lahar Singh Siroya 
Secretariat 
 
1. Shri Satpal Gulati     - Additional Secretary 
2. Smt. A. Jyothirmayi     - Director 
3. Shri Nishant Mehra                       - Deputy Secretary 
 
_____________________________________________________________________  
Committee constituted w.e.f. 13 th September, 2023 vide Para No.7371 of Bulletin Part -II dated                  
16th September, 2023. 
* Col. Rajyavardhan Singh Rathore resigned from Lok Sabha w.e.f. 06th December, 2023.  
** Smt. Mahua Moitra ceased to be a Member of the Lok Sabha w.e.f. 08 th December, 2023. 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Communications and Information 
Technology (2023-24), having been authorised by the Committee, present this Fifty-
Fifth Report on Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of t he Committee contained in their Forty -eighth 
Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Citizens Data Securit y and Privacy’ of the Ministry 
of Electronics and Information Technology. 
2. The Forty-eighth Report was presented to Lok Sabha and also laid on the Table 
of Rajya Sabha on 1st August, 2023 .  The Ministry of  Electronics and Information 
Technology furnished their Action Taken Notes on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Forty-eighth Report on 19th  December, 2023.  
3. The Report was considered and ado pted by the Committee at their S itting held 
on 6th February, 2024. 
4. For facility of reference and convenience, Observations/Recommendations of the 
Committee have been printed in bold in Chapter-I of the Report.  
5. An analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Forty-eighth Report of the Committee 
is given at Annexure-II. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi;    PRATAPRAO  JADHAV, 
  6 February, 2024 Chairperson, 
17 Magha, 1945 (Saka) Standing Committee on  
Communications and Information Technology. 

1 
 
CHAPTER I 
REPORT 
 
This Report of the Standing Committee on  Communications and  Information 
Technology deals with the action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Forty -Eighth 
Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on the ‘ Citizen’s Data Security and Privacy’ relating to 
the Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology. 
 
2. The Forty -Eighth Report was presented to Lok Sabha/laid in Rajya Sabha on         
1st August, 2023.  It contained 15 Observations/Recommendations. 
 
3. Action Taken Notes in respect of all the Observation s/Recommendations 
contained in the Report have been received from the Ministry of Electronics and 
Information Technology and are categorized as under: 
(i)  Observations/Recommendations which have been 
accepted by the Government 
 
 Rec. Sl. Nos.:  1,2,4,5,6,13 and 15.  
  Total - 07 
  Chapter-II 
(ii)  Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of the replies of the 
Government 
 
 Rec. Sl. No.:  9.  
  Total - 01 
  Chapter-III 
(iii)  Observations/Recommendations in respect of which r eplies 
of the Government have not been accepted by the 
Committee and require reiteration 
 
 Rec. Sl. Nos.:  7, 8, 10, 11, 14.  

2 
 
  Total - 05 
  Chapter-IV 
(iv)  Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the  
replies of the Government are of interim in nature 
 
 
 Rec. Sl. Nos.: 3 and12. 
 
 
  Total -02  
  Chapter-V 
   
   
4. The Committee trust that utmost importance would be given to 
implementation of the Observations/Recommendations accepted by the  
Government. The Committee further desire that Action Tak en Statement on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in Chapter -I and final action taken 
replies to the Observations/Recommendations contained in Chapter -V of this 
Report be furnished to them at an early date. 
5. The Committee will now deal with action taken by the Government on some of 
their Observations/Recommendations. 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 3) 
 Inclusive and Comprehensive Consultation Journey for Comprehensive 
 Solutions: 
6. The Committee, in their Original Report, had recommended as under: 
“The Committee have been informed that Ministry has undergone a thorough and 
comprehensive process of consultation thereby ensuring comprehensive input 
from various stakeholders while drafting the Bill to safeguard citizen’s data and 
privacy. The Committee observe t hat the Ministry had invited public comments 
on the draf t Bill in 2022. Further, inter -Ministerial consultations were initiated to 

3 
 
gather feedback on the Bill. The Committee were informed that along with the 
people’s feedback, the Ministry also received fe edback from 45 
Ministries/Departments, a total of 21666 comments were received from various 
stakeholders. Subsequently, the Parliamentary Standing Committee were briefed 
on the intricacies of the subject ‘citizen’s data security and privacy’ in December, 
2022 and June, 2023. The Committee are pleased to learn that the concerns 
raised during these meetings, regarding the "rulemaking" powers of the Central 
Government, compensation from data fiduciaries, duties on data principals, and 
the establishment of a gr ievance redressal system for data principals, etc., have 
been suitably incorporated in the Draft Bill. The Committee exhort and 
recommend that the Ministry will not be complacent and will actively pursue 
necessary improvements to the legislation to effecti vely adapt to the ever -
evolving and dynamic nature of digital technologies whenever the need arises”. 
7. The Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology , in the Action Taken 
Note, have stated as under: 
“Yes, this M inistry aims to actively pursue necess ary improvements to the 
legislation to effectively adapt to the ever -evolving and dynamic nature of digital 
technologies whenever the need arises. 
The DPDP Act, 2023 has been prepared keeping in view the dynamic and fast -
changing nature of the Digital tech nologies. The usage and the threat landscape 
of Digital technologies evolves at very high pace where dynamic decision making 
and changes in the processes of operations and subsequent harm and its 
mitigation are desired to counter the ever-evolving threat landscape. Owing to the 
explained dynamicity, to address the public concerns as the challenges evolve 
and to provide sufficient adaptability, the act provides for rule -making power to 
the Central government. The Rules made are to be laid in the Parliament 
subsequently for the approval. These Rule making powers are more of routine in 
nature and are provisioned to make implementation of the act practical and 
feasible in long run”. 
8. The Committee noted in its Original Report a thorough and compre hensive 
process of consultation that was undertaken  while drafting the Bill to 
safeguard citizen’s data and privacy. Recognizing the pivotal role of 
rulemaking in successful implementation of provisions any Act, the 
Committee, recommended the Ministry, not to be complacen t and actively 
pursue necessary improvements to the legislation to effectively adapt to 
the ever evolving and dynamic nature of digital technologies. Upon 

4 
 
reviewing the action taken notes submitted by the Ministry, the Committee 
are satisfied to note that the Ministry has in-principle agreed to  the 
recommendation of the Committee  and aims to actively pursue necessary 
improvements to the legislation to effectively adapt to the constantly 
changing and dynamic landscape of digital technologies.  The Committee 
reiterate their  earlier recommendation and caution the Ministry to remain 
vigilant and responsive to the continually evolving digital landscape while 
formulating rules under the Digital Personal Data Protection Act, 2023. The 
Committee emphasise the need  to maintain pace with the advancements 
and intricacies of the digital realm to ensure the effectiveness and 
relevance of the regulatory framework. The Committee, further, urge the 
Ministry to draw up simple rules under the law, which are easy to 
understand and administer. The Committee trust that the recommendation  
shall be complied with, effectively. 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 7) 
 
9. The Committee, in their Original Report, had recommended as under: 
“The Committee note that as of today, to protect personal data o f users, the 
Central Government, in exercise of its powers under the Information Technology 
Act, 2000, has prescribed reasonable security practices and procedures for 
sensitive personal data or information through the Information Technology 
(Reasonable Security Practices and Procedures and Sensitive Personal Data or 
Information) Rules, 2011. While these rules impose obligations on data collectors 
and processors to ensure reasonable security practices, the Committee 
recognize the need for a more comprehensiv e framework that delineate the 
rights and responsibilities of individuals whose digital personal data is involved, 
as well as the obligations of entities determining the purpose and methods of 
data processing. In order to strengthen personal data protectio n laws, the 
Government has developed and published a comprehensive legal framework 
known as the draft Digital Personal Data Protection Bill, 2022. Further, due to the 
outdated nature of the Information Technology Act, enacted in 2000, the need for 
its subs titution with the Digital India Act has become imminent. The Ministry is 
actively working on the Bill, which is expected to be rolled out in the near future. 
Recognizing the pressing need to fortify personal data protection laws, the 
introduction and subse quent implementation of the Digital India Bill becomes an 

5 
 
imperative step forward. The Committee, therefore, strongly urge the Ministry to 
promptly finalize the framework of the Digital India Bill and expedite its enactment 
without any undue delay”. 
10. The Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology , in the Action Taken 
Note, have stated as under: 
“The suggestion has been noted”. 
11. In their Original Report, the Committee had expressed apprehension about 
the outdated Information Technology Act of 2000, whi ch is now 24 years 
old. It had emphasized that there is an urgent need for replacing it with the 
Digital India Act. The Committee, therefore, urged the Ministry to promptly 
conclude the framework for the Digital India Bill and expedite its enactment 
without unnecessary dela ys. Upon reviewing the  action taken notes  of the 
Ministry the Committee observe the lack of specified timeline for rolling out 
the Digital India Bill . There is no indication of the Government introducing 
the Act in the upcoming Session of  Parliament. Consequently, the Ministry  
has ample time to release the draft bill for public consultation before its 
presentation in Parliament. The Committee, reiterating their earlier 
recommendation strongly urge the Ministry to promptly finalize the draf t of 
the Digital India (DIA) Bill without any further delay.  The earliest action in 
this regard would be appreciated. 
 
 (Recommendation Sl. No. 8) 
 
12. The Committee, in their Original Report, had recommended as under: 
 
“During the evidence the Committee were informed that the enactment of the 
Digital Personal Data Protection Bill necessitates amendments to certain 
provisions of the Information Technology Act, including Section 43A, Section 81, 
and Section 87. Even power of disclosure under Right to Information  Act, which 
exempts from disclosure of personal information but empowers PIO/ Appellate 
Authority to disclose despite exemption has to be removed. The Committee 
urges the Ministry to proactively revisit the provisions of the Information 
Technology Act to e nsure their congruence with the Constitutional spirit. The 
Committee further emphasize the need for bringing out subsequent amendments 
to other relevant acts, particularly the Information Technology Act, to complement 
the provisions outlined in the DPDP Bill”. 
 

6 
 
13. The Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology , in the Action Taken 
Note, have stated as under: 
“To align subsequent amendments with other relevant acts, especially the 
Information Technology Act, and to complement the provisions outlined in the 
DPDP Act, specific amendments to the Information Technology Act, 2000, will be 
enacted as follows: 
(a) The removal of section 43A.  
(b) In section 81, the inclusion of the phrase "or the Digital Personal Data 
Protection Act, 2023" after the words "the Patents Act, 1970" in the proviso.  
(c) In section 87, the omission of sub-section (2), clause (ob). 
These proposed amendments aim to ensure harmonization and coherence 
between existing legislation and the new DPDP Act, enabling a comprehensive 
and effective legal framework for personal data protection. 
The suggestion has been noted”. 
14. The Committee, in their O riginal Report, urged the Ministry to proactively 
revisit the provisions of the Information Technology Act to ensure their 
congruence with the Constit utional spirit and further emphasized the need 
for bringing out subsequent amendments to other relevant Acts, 
particularly the Information Technology Act, to complement the provisions 
outlined in the D igital Personal Data Protection Bill. Upon reviewing th e 
action taken notes furnished by the Ministry, the Committee find that the 
Ministry has noted the recommendation of the Committee and is likely to 
roll-out specific amendments to the Information Technology Act, 2000, to 
ensure coherence between existing l egislation and the new Digital 
Personal Data Protection Act, 2023, and thereby enabling a comprehensive 
and effective legal framework for personal data protection. While 
appreciating these  initiatives, the Committee expect the Ministry to 
expedite enactment of the amendments and t he Committee may be 
apprised of the progress made in this matter. 
 
 (Recommendation Sl. No.10) 
 
Enhancing Citizen Awareness and Safeguarding Digital Personal Data: 
 
15. The Committee, in their Original Report, had recommended as under: 

7 
 
 
“The Committee have been apprised during the deliberations that the Draft 
legislation to safeguard citizen’s data security and privacy is slated to be 
introduced in the Parliament not only enhances the ease of doing business and 
ease of living but also e nables speedier adjudication by providing for alternate 
dispute resolution and acceptance of voluntary undertakings by the adjudicatory 
body in an accountable manner. Further, any individual experiencing harm due to 
a civil wrong can seek compensation thro ugh torts law. This includes cases 
where a Data Fiduciary violates rights or fails to fulfill obligations. The affected 
person can bring a claim in a civil court and cite penalties imposed by the Board 
in support of his/her claim. The Committee strongly be lieve that ensuring public 
awareness on the mechanisms for alternative dispute resolution and remedies 
available in Civil Court is vital to protect citizens' interests. While acknowledging 
the provisions empowering individuals to exercise their rights over  personal data, 
the Committee urge the Ministry to collaborate with State/UT Governments in 
organizing impactful awareness campaigns. These campaigns should educate 
the public about alternative remedies in cases of harm caused by civil wrongs 
violating the ir rights. Additionally, there is a need to counsel and inform 
individuals about the option of Alternate Dispute Resolution through mediators. 
The Committee also suggest the establishment of a helpline number or online AI -
based chatbot to provide guidance to affected individuals”. 
 
16. The Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology , in the Action Taken 
Note, have stated as under: 
“(i). CERT-In regularly disseminates information and shares security tips on cyber 
safety and security through its official s ocial media handles and websites. CERT -
In organised various events and activities for citizens during Safer Internet Day 
on 7 February 2023 and Cyber Security Awareness Month in October 2023 by 
posting security tips using posters and videos on social media  platforms and 
websites. CERT-In, in association with C -DAC, conducted an online awareness 
campaign for citizens, covering topics such as general online safety, social media 
risks and safety, mobile related frauds and safety, secure digital payment 
practices etc. through videos and quizzes on MyGov platform.  
(ii) CERT -In and the Reserve Bank of India jointly carry out a cyber security 
awareness campaign on ‘beware and be aware of financial frauds’ through the 
Digital IndiaPlatform. 
(iii) The Ministry of El ectronics and Information Technology conducts 
programmes to generate information security awareness. Specific books, videos 
and online materials are developed for children, parents and general users about 

8 
 
information security, which are disseminated throug h portals such as 
www.infosecawareness.in and www.csk.gov.in. 
(iv). The G20 -Stay Safe Online (SSO) Campaign was launched by MeitY in 
December 2022 during India’s G20 Presidency to raise awareness among 
citizens to stay s afe in online world on the widespread use of social media 
platforms and rapid adoption of digital payments. The target group of users are 
Children/ Students, Women, Sr. Citizens, Teachers/ Faculty, General Public, 
Specially-abled and Government officials. The campaign has been actively 
promoted by States, UTs, Google, META, CSC, DSCI, CSI, Paytm, NIC etc. from 
their respective social media handles.  Awareness materials are disseminated 
through the https://www.staysafeonline.in/  website & social media handles, 
States, UTs and academic institutions, quizzes, Emails, SMSs, etc”. 
 
17. The Committee, in their O riginal Report had noted that ensuring public 
awareness on the mechanisms for Alternative Dispute R esolution (ADR) and 
remedies available in Civil Court is vital to protect citizens' interests. The 
Committee had, therefore, urged the Ministry to collaborate with State/UT 
Governments in organizing impactful awareness campaigns to educate the 
public about al ternative remedies in cases of harm caused by civil wrongs 
violating their rights. The Committee had also suggested for establishment 
of a helpline number or online AI -based chatbot to provide guidance to 
affected individuals. Upon perusal of the action ta ken notes furnished by the 
Ministry, the Committee note that a number of initiatives have been taken by 
the various agencies in this regard . The Ministry has submitted that  CERT-In 
regularly disseminates information and shares security tips on cyber safety  
and security through its official social media handles and websites, CERT -In, 
in association with C -DAC, conducted an online awareness campaign for 
citizens, CERT -In and the Reserve Bank of India jointly carry out a cyber 
security awareness campaign on ‘b eware and be aware of financial frauds’ 
through the Digital India  Platform. The Ministry also conducts programmes 
to generate information security awareness, which are disseminated through 
portals such as www.infosecawareness.in and  www.csk.gov.in, etc. Wh ile 
appreciating these initiatives, the Committee are constrained to point out 
that the Ministry has not indicated anything on awareness campaigns to 
educate the public about alternative remedies in cases of harm caused by 
civil wrongs violating their righ ts and establishment of a helpline number or 
online AI -based chatbot to provide guidance to affected individuals 
especially post enactment of DPDP Act, 2023. The Committee, call upon the 

9 
 
Ministry to look into the feasibility to implement the recommendation  and 
hope that the Ministry will make sincere effort in this regard. 
(Recommendation Sl. No.11) 
 
18. The Committee, in their Original Report, had recommended as under: 
 
“The Committee have been informed during the deliberation that draft Bill has a 
provision f or robust consent mechanism and notice requirements regarding the 
usage of personal data. It emphasizes the importance of providing consent and 
notice in languages specified in the Eighth Schedule to the Constitution to ensure 
clarity and comprehension. It includes provisions that allow for the establishment of 
prescribed methods for obtaining consent and delivering notices. It also provides 
for Data Principals to have the right to withdraw their consent at any time. The 
Committee are pleased that it recogn izes the need for the consent framework to 
adapt and improve over time for the processing of personal data. Therefore, the 
Committee urge the Ministry to ensure that the default consent settings are 
designed to extend benefits to data principals, especiall y digitally illiterate 
individuals. The Committee, further urge the Ministry to incorporate visual elements 
for consent and notice, promoting easier understanding, accessibility, and inclusive 
digital access while defining the prescribed methods for obtain ing consent and 
delivering notices”. 
19. The Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology , in the Action Taken Note, 
have stated as under: 
“The Ministry is taking steps to ensure that default consent settings are tailored to 
benefit data principals, incl uding digitally illiterate individuals. The Ministry's 
objective is to empower all data principals by making default settings easily 
accessible and understandable. The suggestion has been noted further”. 
20. The Committee, in their O riginal Report, had inter a lia recommended the 
Ministry to take necessary action to ensure that the default consent settings 
are designed to extend benefits to data principals, especially digitally 
illiterate individuals. Upon reviewing the action taken notes, the Committee 
note that the Ministry has not furnished any reply on the present status and 
merely stated that it is taking steps to ensure that default consent settings 
are tailored to benefit data principals, including digitally illiterate individuals. 
A concrete action by the  Ministry in this regard may be taken at the earliest 
and the Committee may be apprised of the same. 
 

10 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No.12) 
 
21. The Committee, in their Original Report, had recommended as under: 
 
“The Committee are pleased to note that the provision of t he 'Deemed consent' 
clause, which was present in the draft Digital Person al Data Protection Bill, 2022 
has been removed based on public consultation and feedback from stakeholders. 
The personal data can now only be processed for certain legitimate uses. Th ese 
exemptions are limited to the State and its instrumentalities to perform functions 
under law or in the interest of sovereignty and integrity of India and security of the 
State, to provide or issue subsidies, benefits, services, certificates, licences a nd 
permits that are prescribed through rules, to comply with any judgement or order 
under law, to protect or assist or provide service in a medical or health 
emergency, disaster situation or maintain public order and in relation to an 
employee. While recog nizing the right to privacy, the Supreme Court has also 
observed that privacy, like other fundamental rights, is not an absolute right. 
However, any law encroaching upon privacy must withstand the scrutiny of 
permissible restrictions on fundamental rights.  Nevertheless, the Committee are 
of the view that there is still a possibility of these exceptions being misused. 
Therefore, the Committee strongly recommend the Ministry to devise a 
mechanism to ensure that these exceptions do not become the general rule and 
are used only in exceptional circumstances, with the aim of promoting ease of 
living and the digital economy”. 
22. The Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology , in the Action Taken 
Note, have stated as under: 
 
“In the earlier DPDP Bill, 2022 draf t the deemed Consent was applicable only 
when a data principal was deemed to have given consent for her personal data if 
such processing is necessary for the specific conditions only including public 
order, employment etc. The deemed consent clause has bee n henceforth 
removed after the consultation and feedback received from stakeholders. In the 
modified DPDP Act, 2023, in its equivalent format, the personal data can be 
processed for certain legitimate uses. These are as under: 
1. For the State and its inst rumentalities to perform functions under law or in the 
interest of sovereignty and integrity of India and security of the State 
2. For the State and its instrumentalities to provide or issue subsidies, benefits, 
services, certificates, licences and permits that are prescribed through rules 

11 
 
3. To comply with any judgement or order under law 
4. To protect or assist or provide service in a medical or health emergency, 
disaster situation or maintain public order and 
5. In relation to an employee. 
As suggested, the ministry is aware that these exceptions should not become the 
general rule and are used only in exceptional circumstances, with the aim of 
promoting ease of living and the digital economy”. 
23. In their Original Report, the Committee highlighted that post enactment of 
the Digital Personal Data Protection Act, 2023 personal data could only be 
processed for specific l egitimate uses. Notwithstanding that,  the 
Committee had expressed concern regarding the poten tial misuse of these 
exceptions. T herefore, the Min istry was urged  to establish a mechanism 
that prevents these ex ceptions from becoming the norm and  ensure that 
they are employed only in exceptional situations. After examining the 
action taken notes provided by the Ministry, the Committee note that the 
Ministry is aware about its potential misuse of these exceptions . However, 
the Committee find that the Ministry has not outlined any specific in this 
regard. Reiterating their earlier recommendation, the Committee call upon 
the Ministry for an early action and apprise them about the same. 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No.14) 
 
24. The Committee, in their Original Report, had recommended as under: 
 
 “The Committee note that the current draft of the Digital Personal Data Protection 
Bill, 2022 has been prepared with considera tion for the dynamic nature of the 
subject matter. The threat landscape is constantly evolving at a rapid pace, 
requiring dynamic decision -making and the ability to adapt processes to counter 
these evolving threats. In order to address public concerns and provide sufficient 
adaptability, the draft Bill grants rule-making power to the Central government. The 
draft has been designed as technology agnostic legislation to accommodate the 
rapid evolution of digital technology, which has significant social and ec onomic 
impacts. Therefore, the law governing digital technology should possess the 
necessary flexibility to address changing situations and emerging requirements. 
While the Bill outlines the rights and duties of Data Principals and the obligations of 
Data Fiduciaries, it aims to retain sufficient flexibility to address these evolving 

12 
 
needs. The Committee are of the opinion that delegations of power are common in 
legislation and serve to make implementation practical and feasible. The 
Committee firmly believ e that no legislation can be perfect from the outset. It 
evolves over time and is fine -tuned in response to changing circumstances. The 
Committee, therefore, urge that the provisions that cannot be fully defined within 
the scope of the Bill can be addresse d through rules prescribed under the Bill, 
which are subsequently presented to Parliament. The Committee appreciate the 
wise step of making space for subordinate legislation, as it allows necessary 
flexibility to address changing situations and emerging re quirements. However, the 
Committee also wish to caution the Ministry about the judicious use of rule -making 
powers and emphasizes the importance of employing them responsibly and with 
utmost care”. 
25. The Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology , in the Action Taken Note, 
have stated as under: 
 
 “The DPDP Act, 2023 has been prepared keeping in view the dynamic and fast -
changing nature of the Digital technologies. The usage and the threat landscape of 
Digital technologies evolves at very high pace where dynamic decision making and 
changes in the processes of operations and subsequent harm and its mitigation 
are desired to counter the ever -evolving threat landscape. Owing to the explained 
dynamicity, to address the public concerns as the challenges evolve and to provide 
sufficient adaptability, the Act provides for rule -making power to the Central 
government. The Rules made are to be laid in the Parliament subsequently for the 
approval. These Rule making powers are more of routine in nature and are 
provisioned to make implementation of the Act practical and feasible in long run”. 
26. Taking into account, the dynamic and rapidly evolving landscape of digital 
technologies, the Committee, in their O riginal Report had observed that the 
provisions that cannot be f ully defined within the scope of the Bill may be 
addressed through prescribed rules. The Committee also cautioned the 
Ministry on prudent exercise of rule -making powers and had emphasized the 
importance of employing them responsibly and with utmost care. F urther, 
rules formulated should be subsequently presented to Parliament for 
scrutiny.  
 However, upon examination of the action taken notes provided by the 
Ministry, the Committee note that the Ministry has merely outlined the 
established practice for rule-making without providing clarity on its expected 
finalization. The Committee would like to draw attention of the Ministry to the 
established norms, which provides that rules under an Act should be framed 
within six months of its commencement. The Committe e expected that since 

13 
 
the data protection law was no tified on August 11, 2023, the R ules in this 
regard should now be nearing completion.  However, the Committee observe 
that the lack of properly framed rules has prevented the notification of 
essential comp onents of the data privacy law, including the Data Privacy 
Board, which is mandated to investigate privacy breaches and impose 
penalties as outlined in the Act.  Recognizing the pivotal role of R ules in the 
implementation of the Act practical and feasible, the Committee urge the 
Ministry to prioritize this matter, so as to  ensure that drawing up of R ules is 
completed within the prescribed period of six months and  avoid seeking an 
extension. The Committee may be informed of the efficacious steps taken by 
the Government in this regard. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

14 
 
CHAPTER II 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN  
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Introductory- Need For Dedicated Legislation on Data Privacy: 
 (Recommendation Sl. No. 1) 
In recent years, personal data prote ction issues have gained significant attention in 
public discussions and debates. It has become evident that while the Internet and 
technology bring about positive connectivity, they also create an environment where 
user harm and misuse can thrive in the a bsence of appropriate rules and laws. To 
address these concerns, it is crucial for laws and regulations governing the Internet to 
be built upon foundational principles of openness, safety, trust, and accountability. 
The Supreme Court, in the matter of Just ice K. S. Puttaswamy (Retd.) and Anr. vs. 
Union of India and Ors., has recognized the right to privacy as an essential part of the 
fundamental rights guaranteed by the Constitution. The Court commended the Union 
Government to put into place a robust regime  for data protection. This landmark 
judgment highlights the significance of protecting privacy in the digital age. 
In light of the growing significance of protection of citizen’s personal data and the need 
to strengthen data protection laws, the Government  introduced the Personal Data 
Protection Bill, 2019, in the Parliament in December, 2019. After consideration, the Bill 
was referred to the Joint Committee of Parliament, which engaged in consultations and 
submitted a Report. Taking into account feedback f rom stakeholders and various 
agencies, the Bill was, however, withdrawn in August, 2022. 
Subsequently, on November 18, 2022, the Government published a new draft Bill, titled 
the Digital Personal Data Protection Bill, 2022, and initiated public consultatio n on this. 
The Observations/Recommendations of the Committee are given under the subsequent 
paragraphs. 
 
Reply of the Government 
The observation is true and has been noted. 
(Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology O.M. No.- 6(8)/2023-Parl. dated 
04.01.2024) 
 
 

15 
 
 
The Cyber Conundrum - Addressing the Surge of Cyber Crimes And Urgent Call 
For Regulatory Action: 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 2) 
The Committee acknowledge that data in general and personal data in particular are at 
the core of this fast-growing digital economy and ecosystem of digital products, services 
and intermediation. In the post -pandemic world, this progress has been exemplified by 
the staggering number of e-transactions, with over 40 crore transactions occurring daily, 
and the immense volu me of UPI transactions, totaling Rs. 12.8 trillion, on December, 
2022. India's digital adoption has been remarkable, providing internet access to 
approximately 76 crore citizens. However, amidst this global digital transformation, the 
Committee recognize t he dual nature of the digitization of personal data. While it has 
revolutionized service delivery and significantly improved the ease of living, it has also 
exposed individuals to mounting vulnerability due to the growing risk of personal data 
misuse. To a ddress this concern, the Governments around the world have responded 
by enacting data protection laws to safeguard digitized personal data. The Committee 
are also conscious of the fact that in addition to the global impact, recent cyber -attacks 
on India's prestigious medical institution, have exposed the deficiencies to counter such 
attacks, in the absence of a comprehensive data protection law. The Committee firmly 
believe that in the absence of well -defined rights and obligations of individuals and 
entities responsible for data processing, the interests of stakeholders are not adequately 
safeguarded. The Committee are of the firm opinion that there is an urgent need to 
introduce a data protection law,  that effectively combats the growing menace of 
cybercrime, ensures public order and also strengthens India's defense capabilities. 
Hence, the Committee emphasize the imperative need for enactment of an appropriate 
law to ensure comprehensive and robust safeguards for citizens' data security and 
privacy in an ever-evolving digital landscape. 
Reply of the Government 
 DPDP Act has been enacted. 
 (Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology O.M. No.- 6(8)/2023-Parl. dated 
04.01.2024) 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 4) 
 The Committee have been informed that the Ministry is in a process of enacting a 
law with a purpose to establish a robust framework for the processing of digital personal 
data by striking a balance between safeguarding individuals' rights to protect their 

16 
 
personal data and facilitating lawful data pr ocessing activities. This draft legislative 
initiative draws inspiration from internationally recognized principles that underpin 
personal data protection laws in diverse jurisdictions. For instance; the principle that 
usage of personal data by organisatio ns must be done in a lawful manner, which is fair 
and transparent to the Data Principals; the principle of purpose, i.e., the personal data 
be used only for the purpose for which it was collected; the principle of data 
minimisation, i.e., only those items of personal data be collected as are 38 required for 
attaining the specified purpose; the principle of accuracy of personal data, i.e., 
reasonable effort be made to ensure that the personal data is accurate and kept up to 
date; the principle of storage lim itation, i.e., personal data not be stored perpetually by 
default and storage be limited to such duration as is necessary for the specified 
purpose; the principle that reasonable safeguards be taken to prevent personal data 
breach; the principle that the person who decides the purpose and means of processing 
of personal data should be accountable for such processing. The Committee firmly 
believe that the implementation of the a suitable legislation to safeguard citizen’s data 
and privacy will be a much need ed step in the domain of data processing, as it 
effectively brings the previously unregulated landscape under comprehensive regulation 
in a seamless and non -disruptive manner. In this regard, the Committee are of the 
considered view that enactment of such a law will herald a new era of enhanced data 
security and privacy protection, ensuring the safeguarding of personal information and 
fostering trust in the digital ecosystem. 
Reply of the Government 
 In light of these privacy safeguards established by the I nformation Technology 
(Reasonable Security Practices and Procedures and Sensitive Personal Data or 
Information) Rules, 2011, it becomes evident that there is a need for a more 
comprehensive framework to address the rights and responsibilities of individual s and 
data processors. The Central Government, in exercise of its powers under the 
Information Technology Act, 2000, has made the Information Technology (Reasonable 
Security Practices and Procedures and Sensitive Personal Data or Information) Rules, 
2011 [ “SPDI Rules”], which contain privacy safeguards to protect personal data. Key 
safeguards include the following: 
 (i) A body corporate, or any person collecting, receiving, possessing, storing, 
dealing or handling information provided, is required to provid e a policy for privacy and 
disclosure of personal information, including sensitive personal data or information, and 
to publish the same on its website. 
 (ii) Such a policy is required to provide for the practices or policies of such body 
corporate or person, type of personal or sensitive personal data or information collected, 

17 
 
purpose of its collection and usage, disclosure and reasonable security practices and 
procedures. 
 (iii) The body corporate or person is also required to use the information collected 
for the purpose for which it has been collected and to keep it secure. 
 (iv) Disclosure of sensitive personal data requires prior permission of the 
information provider, unless such disclosure has been contractually agreed to or is 
necessary under law. 
 (v) Publishing of sensitive personal data or information is barred. 
 (vi) Any third party receiving sensitive personal data or information on behalf of 
body corporate or other person shall not disclose it further. 
 Rule 6 of the SPDI Rules provides that se nsitive personal data or information 
shall be shared, without obtaining prior consent from provider of information, with 
Government agencies mandated under the law to obtain information for the purpose of 
verification of identity, or for prevention, detect ion, investigation, prosecution and 
punishment of offences. 
 While these rules obligate persons collecting and processing data to ensure 
reasonable security practices and procedures, there is need to have a more detailed 
framework that provides for rights and duties of individuals to whom digital personal 
data relates and the obligations of persons who determine the purpose and means of 
processing of such personal data. 
 The framework in the enacted Digital Personal Data Protection Act, 2023 frames 
out the rights and duties of individuals to whom digital personal data relates (“Data 
Principals”) and the obligations of persons who determine the purpose and means of 
processing of such personal data (“Data Fiduciaries”). It is based on the following 
principles, which have formed the basis for personal data protection laws in various 
other countries/jurisdictions: 
(a) The principle that usage of personal data by organisations must be done in a lawful 
manner, which is fair and transparent to the Data Principals. 
(b) The principle of purpose, i.e., the personal data be used only for the purpose for 
which it was collected. 
(c) The principle of data minimisation, i.e., only those items of personal data be 
collected as are required for attaining the specified purpose. 
(d) The principle of accuracy of personal data, i.e., reasonable effort be made to ensure 
that the personal data is accurate and kept up to date. 

18 
 
(e) The principle of storage limitation, i.e., personal data not be stored perpetually by 
default and storage be limited to such duration as is necessary for the specified 
purpose. 
(f) The principle that reasonable safeguards be taken to prevent personal data breach. 
(g) The principle that the person who decides the purpose and means of processing of 
personal data should be accountable for such processing.  
 
(Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology O.M. No.- 6(8)/2023-Parl. dated 
04.01.2024) 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 5) 
 Regarding the proposed Digital Personal Data Protection Bill, published by the 
Ministry in November, 2022 the Committee has been apprised that its primary objective 
is to establish a comprehensive legal framework that governs the protection of digital 
personal data. The Bill addresses the previously unregulated realm of data processing 
in a manner that minimizes disruption for all stakeholders, including Data Principals, 
Data Fiduciaries, regulatory bodies, and both State and non -State entities. It ensures 
consistency with existing laws and serves as a horizontal legislation that applies to  
various entities, encompassing the State and its instrumentalities, and non -State actors 
alike. The Committee observe that the proposed Digital Personal Data Protection Bill 
incorporates a number of innovative features, viz., for the first time in any Cen tral Act or 
Bill, women have been acknowledged by using the feminine pronoun “she” for a person. 
It also provides Data Principals the option of giving consent for personal data 
processing in any language enumerated in the Eighth Schedule to the Constitutio n. The 
Committee were apprised that while drafting, 39 it has been ensured that the rights and 
consent-based model approach is appropriately balanced. The Ministry informed that it 
offers a simpler law which is easy to understand and administer. The Commit tee 
appreciate that unlike the previous Bill i.e., Personal Data Protection Bill, 2019, the 
proposed Bill consciously follows an approach of providing for protection of personal 
data as a whole, without further classification, thereby avoiding issues of in terpretation 
and classification -based protection. The Data Bill aims to strike the right balance 
between rights, commerce and innovation. In view of the above, the Committee have 
every reason to believe that enactment of a comprehensive law on citizen’s da ta 
security and privacy will have various tangible benefits such as enhancing data security 
measures, fortifying privacy protections, fostering greater transparency and 
accountability in data processing practices, empowering individuals with greater contro l 
over their personal information, and instilling public confidence in the digital ecosystem. 
 

19 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 In aim to strike balance between right balance between rights, commerce and 
innovation the Act incorporates a number of innovative features, including the following: 
(a) In line with Prime Minister’s vision of drafting of laws in simple language, it attempts 
to set a new benchmark by employing simple language, avoiding provisos and cross -
referencing and incorporating illustrations.  
(b) F or the first time in any Central Act or Bill, women have been acknowledged by 
using the feminine pronoun “she” for a person. 
(c) It lays down obligations in terms of principles, avoiding prescriptive law -making, 
thereby enhancing Ease of Living and Ease of  Doing Business while ensuring 
accountability. 
(d) It gives Data Principals the option of giving consent for personal data processing in 
any language enumerated in the Eighth Schedule to the Constitution. 
(e) The largely unregulated area of data processing  is being brought under regulation in 
a non -disruptive manner for various stakeholders, including Data Principals, Data 
Fiduciaries, the State and its instrumentalities and regulatory bodies, while ensuring 
consistency with other laws.  
(f) It provides for  the first time the establishment of an adjudicatory body that will be a 
digital office, with the receipt of complaints and their allocation, hearing and 
pronouncement of decisions in respect of the same being digital by design. 
(g) It enables speedier adj udication by providing for alternate dispute resolution and 
acceptance of voluntary undertakings by the adjudicatory body in an accountable 
manner.  
(h) In place of multi -layered law consisting of the Act, rules, regulations and codes of 
practice, it provides for only the Act and the rules. The intent is to issue a single body of 
rules, to enable ease.  
(i) Conferring of rights to citizens comes with responsibilities codified as duties. 
(j) It enables India’s innovation ecosystem by providing for lesser com pliance burden for 
startups. 
(k) It facilitates economic diplomacy by enabling processing of digital personal data outside 
India while retaining India’s right to restrict the same in respect of notified countries/territories. 

20 
 
(Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology O.M. No.- 6(8)/2023-Parl. dated 
04.01.2024) 
 
Globally aligned - embracing international best practices: 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No.6) 
 The Committee have been apprised that the Government has made all -out effort 
in formulating the Bill b y taking into account best global practices observed in the 
personal data protection laws of Singapore, Australia, the European Union, and the 
prospective federal legislation of the United States of America. The Committee have 
been informed that the fundam ental principles that underpin personal data protection 
laws in various jurisdictions, also form the basis of the Draft Digital Personal Data 
Protection Bill. These principles include the lawful, fair, and transparent usage of 
personal data by organization s, the principles of purpose, data minimization, accuracy, 
storage limitation, and the need for reasonable safeguards. It is encouraging to find the 
Ministry’s submission that the Bill aligns with the data protection laws of other 
jurisdictions, featuring financial penalties instead of criminalization, imposing additional 
obligations on specific Data Fiduciaries (known as Significant Data Fiduciaries in the 
Bill), resembling the approach of the European Union and Singapore. The Bill also 
establishes supplementary obligations and safeguards 40 for the processing of personal 
data of children, following the model of the Singaporean data protection law. Further, 
provisions for cross -border data transfer, similar to those found in the European Union 
and Singapore, are also incorporated into the Bill. The Committee also appreciate the 
fact that by using the word “she” instead of “he”, for the first time, women have been 
acknowledged in any Central Act or Bill. The Committee are hopeful that the Bill while 
absorbing international practices would exemplify the best of the knowhow to India and 
become a model legislation for the other countries to follow. 
Reply of the Government 
 The Act has successfully integrated leading international practices, recognizing 
the significance of cross-border interactions in today's interconnected global landscape.  
As per the DPDP Act, 2023 the Data Fiduciaries may transfer personal data outside 
India for processing, subject to restrictions imposed by the Central Government in 
respect of  any notified country or territory which may be based on assessment of 
relevant factors. 
Data Fiduciaries will also have to practice with higher protection or restriction on data 
transfer as governed by other domestic laws. 

21 
 
Furthermore, the Act introduces innovative elements, such as the pioneering use of the 
feminine pronoun "she" for individuals, marking the first instance of such inclusivity in 
any Central Act or Bill. 
(Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology O.M. No.- 6(8)/2023-Parl. dated 
04.01.2024) 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No.13) 
 The Committee note that a person who suffers a civil wrong on account of 
violation of her rights or non -compliance of obligations by a Data Fiduciary may raise 
such a claim before a civil court in consequence of such wrong. Such a person could 
also cite any penalty imposed by the Board for non -compliance as material in support of 
his/her claim. Further, as part of the deterrent mechanism, the Significant Data 
Fiduciary (SDF) in addition to the general obligations, will  have to meet additional 
obligations like appointing India based data protection officer, conducting data 
protection impact assessment and data audit. In addition to these obligations, to make 
Data Fiduciaries accountable for the data processing, there are  provision to impose 
financial penalty by data protection board in case of personal data breach by data 
fiduciaries after due inquiry under the principle of natural justice. The Bill entrusts 
entities to take reasonable security safeguards to prevent perso nal data breach with 
respect to the personal data in its possession making them accountable to the 
individuals. Further, if the Data Protection Board determines on conclusion of an inquiry 
that breach of the provisions of this Act or the rules by the entit y is significant, it may, 
after giving the person an opportunity of being heard, impose monetary penalty. Also, 
the Central Government may, on the request of Board that intimates the imposition of 
monetary penalty on the entity in more than two instances a nd advises in the interests 
of the general public, instruct the appropriate agencies/intermediary to block the 
services of the entity. The Committee note that like the data protection laws in the other 
mentioned jurisdictions, the Bill does not make any pr ovision for any criminal liability, 
the liabilities envisaged are civil in nature. Although, criminal liability under certain 
sections of IPC like 405 may also be invoked in the case of data theft. The Committee 
are of the view that the criminal liability available under IPC may also be informed to the 
Public at large which would have a deterrent effect and firefighting at a later stage would 
be avoided. Further, the Committee assert and recommend that publicising the same 
would discourage data theft. 
Reply of the Government 
 The DPDP Act does not provision any criminal liability, the liabilities envisaged 
are civil in nature. However, provisions of existing laws will continue to be remain 

22 
 
applicable as this law is not derogation of any other law of time bei ng in force. The 
suggestion has been noted. 
(Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology O.M. No.- 6(8)/2023-Parl. dated 
04.01.2024) 
(Recommendation Sl. No.15) 
Conclusion: 
In summation, the Committee, in no uncertain words stress the urgent necessit y for the 
early enactment of a robust and all -encompassing legislation that effectively safeguards 
citizens' data and privacy. As the digital landscape continues to evolve rapidly, such 
legislation would serve as a crucial protective measure, ensuring the secure and 
responsible handling of personal information while instilling public confidence in the 
digital ecosystem. Delaying the implementation of such a comprehensive framework 
could potentially expose individuals to various risks and compromise the priv acy rights 
of citizens. Hence, the Committee strongly advocate for the immediate action of 
enacting this crucial legislation to protect the interests and rights of citizens in the digital 
age. The Committee emphasize that the Observations and Recommendatio ns put forth 
in this Report should be duly considered in the process. 
Reply of the Government 
Digital India has results in the digitalization of the Indian economy and transformed the 
lives of Indian citizens in particular and in governance in general. The digitalization has 
also increased chances of user harms. In the framework of global standard cyber laws  
along with the vision of a future of technological opportunities in safe and trusted 
manner, the Digital Personal Data Protection Act, 2023 (DPDP Act) was enacted on 
11th August 2023. 
(Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology O.M. No.- 6(8)/2023-Parl. dated 
04.01.2024) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

23 
 
CHAPTER- III 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS  WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO 
PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Ensuring robust safeguards for inclusive digital access through citizens’ 
awareness: 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 9) 
 
The Committee note that the safeguards proposed for processing of personal data of 
children include processing only with parental c onsent and not undertaking processing 
detrimental to children’s well -being or involving tracking, behavioural monitoring or 
targeted advertising. However, to enable use in cases like protection of abandoned 
children, etc. The Committee have been apprised t hat the Ministry has made essential 
revisions to the draft, taking into account public feedback regarding the consideration of 
a child's maturity when determining the age of consent. Government may notify 
purposes where processing may be allowed without pa rental consent or with tracking, 
etc. The Committee further note that the Bill includes provisions that enable the 
establishment of prescribed methods for obtaining consent and delivering notices. As 
the Bill progresses, the consent and notice mechanisms m ay even incorporate visual 
elements, allowing for easier understanding and accessibility. The Committee urge the 
Ministry to incorporate these enabling provisions, so as to extend its benefits to digitally 
illiterate individuals, ensuring their inclusion i n the evolving landscape of data privacy 
and protection. The Committee are aware of the “Pradhan Mantri Gramin Digital 
Saksharta Abhiyan (PMGDISHA)” scheme that aims to usher in digital literacy in 42 
rural India by covering 6 crore rural households (one p erson per household). To ensure 
equitable geographical reach, each of the 2,50,000 Gram Panchayats across the 
country are registering an average of 200 -300 candidates. Special focus of the said 
Scheme is on training the beneficiaries on use of Electronic P ayment System. As on 
31st October, 2022, a total of 6.51 crore beneficiaries have been enrolled, out of which 
training has been imparted to 5.59 crore beneficiaries, out of this more than 4.15 crore 
beneficiaries have been certified under the PMGDISHA Sche me. The Committee 
recognize that the Scheme aims to bridge the digital divide, specifically targeting the 
rural population including the marginalised sections of society and is complementary to 
the Digital Personal Data Protection Bill which aims at inclus ive governance. The 
Committee therefore exhort the Ministry to put in all efforts in accelerating the progress 
of digital literacy while simultaneously aiming at a digitally safe cyber ecosystem for the 
citizens. 

24 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
As highlighted ear lier, the Ministry is committed to accelerating the advancement of 
digital literacy while concurrently striving for a digitally secure cyber ecosystem for all 
citizens. This commitment extends to ensuring that consent and notification 
mechanisms are user-friendly and not limited by language barriers. By prioritizing user -
friendliness and accessibility, the Ministry aims to empower individuals, regardless of 
their level of digital literacy, to fully exercise their data data protection rights within a 
safe an d secure digital environment. This comprehensive approach seeks to promote 
both digital inclusion and data protection, fostering a more equitable and secure digital 
future for all. 
(Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology O.M. No.- 6(8)/2023-Parl. dated 
04.01.2024) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

25 
 
CHAPTER IV 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS  IN RESPECT OF  WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND REQUIRE 
REITERATION 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 7) 
 
The Committee, in their Original Report, had recommended as under: 
“The Committee note that as of today, to protect personal data of users, the Central 
Government, in exercise of its powers under the Information Technology Act, 2000, 
has prescribed reasonable security practices and procedures fo r sensitive personal 
data or information through the Information Technology (Reasonable Security 
Practices and Procedures and Sensitive Personal Data or Information) Rules, 2011. 
While these rules impose obligations on data collectors and processors to ens ure 
reasonable security practices, the Committee recognize the need for a more 
comprehensive framework that delineate the rights and responsibilities of individuals 
whose digital personal data is involved, as well as the obligations of entities 
determining the purpose and methods of data processing. In order to strengthen 
personal data protection laws, the Government has developed and published a 
comprehensive legal framework known as the draft Digital Personal Data Protection 
Bill, 2022. Further, due to th e outdated nature of the Information Technology Act, 
enacted in 2000, the need for its substitution with the Digital India Act has become 
imminent. The Ministry is actively working on the Bill, which is expected to be rolled 
out in the near future. Recogni zing the pressing need to fortify personal data 
protection laws, the introduction and subsequent implementation of the Digital India 
Bill becomes an imperative step forward. The Committee, therefore, strongly urge the 
Ministry to promptly finalize the fram ework of the Digital India Bill and expedite its 
enactment without any undue delay”. 
The Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology , in the Action Taken Note, 
have stated as under: 
“The suggestion has been noted”. 
(Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology O.M. No.- 6(8)/2023-Parl. dated 
04.01.2024) 
 
 
 

26 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 11 of Chapter I) 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 8) 
 
The Committee, in their Original Report, had recommended as under: 
 
“During the evidence the Commi ttee were informed that the enactment of the Digital 
Personal Data Protection Bill necessitates amendments to certain provisions of the 
Information Technology Act, including Section 43A, Section 81, and Section 87. Even 
power of disclosure under Right to I nformation Act, which exempts from disclosure of 
personal information but empowers PIO/ Appellate Authority to disclose despite 
exemption has to be removed. The Committee urges the Ministry to proactively revisit 
the provisions of the Information Technolog y Act to ensure their congruence with the 
Constitutional spirit. The Committee further emphasize the need for bringing out 
subsequent amendments to other relevant acts, particularly the Information 
Technology Act, to complement the provisions outlined in the DPDP Bill”. 
 
The Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology , in the Action Taken Note, 
have stated as under: 
“To align subsequent amendments with other relevant acts, especially the 
Information Technology Act, and to complement the provisions ou tlined in the DPDP 
Act, specific amendments to the Information Technology Act, 2000, will be enacted 
as follows: 
(a) The removal of section 43A.  
(b) In section 81, the inclusion of the phrase "or the Digital Personal Data Protection 
Act, 2023" after the words "the Patents Act, 1970" in the proviso.  
(c) In section 87, the omission of sub-section (2), clause (ob). 
These proposed amendments aim to ensure harmonization and coherence between 
existing legislation and the new DPDP Act, enabling a comprehensive a nd effective 
legal framework for personal data protection. 
The suggestion has been noted”. 
(Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology O.M. No.- 6(8)/2023-Parl. dated 
04.01.2024) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 14 of Chapter I) 

27 
 
 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No.10) 
 
Enhancing Citizen Awareness and Safeguarding Digital Personal Data: 
 
The Committee, in their Original Report, had recommended as under: 
 
“The Committee have been apprised during the deliberations that the Draft 
legislation to safe guard citizen’s data security and privacy is slated to be 
introduced in the Parliament not only enhances the ease of doing business and 
ease of living but also enables speedier adjudication by providing for alternate 
dispute resolution and acceptance of vo luntary undertakings by the adjudicatory 
body in an accountable manner. Further, any individual experiencing harm due to 
a civil wrong can seek compensation through torts law. This includes cases 
where a Data Fiduciary violates rights or fails to fulfill o bligations. The affected 
person can bring a claim in a civil court and cite penalties imposed by the Board 
in support of his/her claim. The Committee strongly believe that ensuring public 
awareness on the mechanisms for alternative dispute resolution and r emedies 
available in Civil Court is vital to protect citizens' interests. While acknowledging 
the provisions empowering individuals to exercise their rights over personal data, 
the Committee urge the Ministry to collaborate with State/UT Governments in 
organizing impactful awareness campaigns. These campaigns should educate 
the public about alternative remedies in cases of harm caused by civil wrongs 
violating their rights. Additionally, there is a need to counsel and inform 
individuals about the option of Alternate Dispute Resolution through mediators. 
The Committee also suggest the establishment of a helpline number or online AI -
based chatbot to provide guidance to affected individuals”. 
 
The Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology , in the Actio n Taken 
Note, have stated as under: 
“(i). CERT-In regularly disseminates information and shares security tips on cyber 
safety and security through its official social media handles and websites. CERT -
In organised various events and activities for citizens during Safer Internet Day 
on 7 February 2023 and Cyber Security Awareness Month in October 2023 by 
posting security tips using posters and videos on social media platforms and 
websites. CERT-In, in association with C -DAC, conducted an online awareness 
campaign for citizens, covering topics such as general online safety, social media 
risks and safety, mobile related frauds and safety, secure digital payment 
practices etc. through videos and quizzes on MyGov platform.  

28 
 
(ii) CERT -In and the Reserve Bank of Ind ia jointly carry out a cyber security 
awareness campaign on ‘beware and be aware of financial frauds’ through the 
Digital IndiaPlatform. 
(iii) The Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology conducts 
programmes to generate information security aware ness. Specific books, videos 
and online materials are developed for children, parents and general users about 
information security, which are disseminated through portals such as 
www.infosecawareness.in and www.csk.gov.in. 
(iv). The G20 -Stay Safe Online (SSO) Campaign was launched by MeitY in 
December 2022 during India’s G20 Presidency to raise awareness among 
citizens to stay safe in online world on the widespread use of social media  
 
 
platforms and rapid adoption of di gital payments. The target group of users are 
Children/ Students, Women, Sr. Citizens, Teachers/ Faculty, General Public, 
Specially-abled and Government officials. The campaign has been actively 
promoted by States, UTs, Google, META, CSC, DSCI, CSI, Paytm,  NIC etc. from 
their respective social media handles.  Awareness materials are disseminated 
through the https://www.staysafeonline.in/  website & social media handles, 
States, UTs and academic institutions, quizzes, Emails, SMSs, etc”. 
 
(Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology O.M. No.- 6(8)/2023-Parl. dated 
04.01.2024) 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 17 of Chapter I) 
(Recommendation Sl. No.11) 
 
The Committee, in their Original Report, had recommended as under: 
 
“The Committee have been informed during the deliberation that draft Bill has a 
provision for robust consent mechanism and notice requirements regarding the 
usage of personal data. It emphasizes the importance of prov iding consent and 
notice in languages specified in the Eighth Schedule to the Constitution to ensure 
clarity and comprehension. It includes provisions that allow for the establishment 
of prescribed methods for obtaining consent and delivering notices. It a lso 
provides for Data Principals to have the right to withdraw their consent at any time. 

29 
 
The Committee are pleased that it recognizes the need for the consent framework 
to adapt and improve over time for the processing of personal data. Therefore, the 
Committee urge the Ministry to ensure that the default consent settings are 
designed to extend benefits to data principals, especially digitally illiterate 
individuals. The Committee, further urge the Ministry to incorporate visual 
elements for consent and no tice, promoting easier understanding, accessibility, 
and inclusive digital access while defining the prescribed methods for obtaining 
consent and delivering notices”. 
The Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology , in the Action Taken 
Note, have stated as under: 
“The Ministry is taking steps to ensure that default consent settings are tailored to 
benefit data principals, including digitally illiterate individuals. The Ministry's 
objective is to empower all data principals by making default settings easily 
accessible and understandable. The suggestion has been noted further”. 
(Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology O.M. No.- 6(8)/2023-Parl. dated 
04.01.2024) 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 20 of Chapter I) 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No.14) 
 
The Committee, in their Original Report, had recommended as under: 
 
“The Committee note that the current draft of the Digital Personal Data Protection 
Bill, 2022 has been prepared with consideration for the dynamic nature of the 
subject matter . The threat landscape is constantly evolving at a rapid pace, 
requiring dynamic decision -making and the ability to adapt processes to counter 
these evolving threats. In order to address public concerns and provide sufficient 
adaptability, the draft Bill grants rule-making power to the Central government. The 
draft has been designed as technology agnostic legislation to accommodate the 
rapid evolution of digital technology, which has significant social and economic 
impacts. Therefore, the law governing digi tal technology should possess the 
necessary flexibility to address changing situations and emerging requirements. 
While the Bill outlines the rights and duties of Data Principals and the obligations 

30 
 
of Data Fiduciaries, it aims to retain sufficient flexibi lity to address these evolving 
needs. The Committee are of the opinion that delegations of power are common in 
legislation and serve to make implementation practical and feasible. The 
Committee firmly believe that no legislation can be perfect from the out set. It 
evolves over time and is fine -tuned in response to changing circumstances. The 
Committee, therefore, urge that the provisions that cannot be fully defined within 
the scope of the Bill can be addressed through rules prescribed under the Bill, 
which are subsequently presented to Parliament. The Committee appreciate the 
wise step of making space for subordinate legislation, as it allows necessary 
flexibility to address changing situations and emerging requirements. However, the 
Committee also wish to caution the Ministry about the judicious use of rule -making 
powers and emphasizes the importance of employing them responsibly and with 
utmost care”. 
The Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology , in the Action Taken 
Note, have stated as under: 
 
“The DPDP Act, 2023 has been prepared keeping in view the dynamic and fast -
changing nature of the Digital technologies. The usage and the threat landscape of 
Digital technologies evolves at very high pace where dynamic decision making and 
changes in the proc esses of operations and subsequent harm and its mitigation 
are desired to counter the ever -evolving threat landscape. Owing to the explained 
dynamicity, to address the public concerns as the challenges evolve and to 
provide sufficient adaptability, the Act  provides for rule -making power to the 
Central government. The Rules made are to be laid in the Parliament 
subsequently for the approval. These Rule making powers are more of routine in 
nature and are provisioned to make implementation of the Act practical  and 
feasible in long run”. 
(Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology O.M. No.- 6(8)/2023-Parl. dated 
04.01.2024) 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 26 of Chapter I) 
 
 
 
 

31 
 
 
CHAPTER V 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF  
WHICH RE PLIES  OF THE  GOVERNMENT ARE INTERIM IN NATURE 
 
 Inclusive and Comprehensive Consultation Journey for Comprehensive 
Solutions: 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 3) 
 The Committee have been informed that Ministry has undergone a thorough and 
comprehensive process of c onsultation thereby ensuring comprehensive input from 
various stakeholders while drafting the Bill to safeguard citizen’s data and privacy. The 
Committee observe that the Ministry had invited public comments on the draft Bill in 
2022. Further, inter -ministerial consultations were initiated to gather feedback on the 
Bill. The Committee were informed that along with the people’s feedback, the Ministry 
also received feedback from 45 Ministries/Departments, a total of 21666 comments 
were received from various s takeholders. Subsequently, the Parliamentary Standing 
Committee were briefed on the intricacies of the subject ‘citizen’s data security and 
privacy’ in December, 2022 and June, 2023. The Committee are pleased to learn that 
the concerns raised during these meetings, regarding the "rulemaking" powers of the 
Central Government, compensation from data fiduciaries, duties on data principals, and 
the establishment of a grievance redressal system for data principals, etc., have been 
suitably incorporated in the Dr aft Bill. The Committee exhort and recommend that the 
Ministry will not be complacent and will actively pursue necessary improvements to the 
legislation to effectively adapt to the ever -evolving and dynamic nature of digital 
technologies whenever the need arises 
 
Reply of the Government 
 Yes, this ministry aims to actively pursue necessary improvements to the 
legislation to effectively adapt to the ever -evolving and dynamic nature of digital 
technologies whenever the need arises. 
 The DPDP Act, 2023 has bee n prepared keeping in view the dynamic and fast -
changing nature of the Digital technologies. The usage and the threat landscape of 
Digital technologies evolves at very high pace where dynamic decision making and 
changes in the processes of operations and s ubsequent harm and its mitigation are 
desired to counter the ever -evolving threat landscape. Owing to the explained 
dynamicity, to address the public concerns as the challenges evolve and to provide  

32 
 
 
sufficient adaptability, the act provides for rule-making power to the Central government. 
The Rules made are to be laid in the Parliament subsequently for the approval. These 
Rule making powers are more of routine in nature and are provisioned to make 
implementation of the act practical and feasible in long run. 
 
 The Committee expressed satisfaction in its Original Report regarding 
undertaking a thorough and comprehensive process of consultation, while drafting the 
Bill to safeguard citizen’s data and privacy. Recognizing the pivotal role of rulemaking in 
successful implementation of provisions any Act, the Committee, recommended the 
Ministry, not to be complacent and actively pursue necessary improvements to the 
legislation to effectively adapt to the ever evolving and dynamic nature of digital 
technologies w henever the need arises. Upon reviewing the action taken notes 
submitted by the Ministry, the Committee are satisfied to note that the Ministry has 
accepted the Committee's recommendation aims to actively pursue necessary 
improvements to the legislation to  effectively adapt to the ever evolving and dynamic 
nature of digital technologies whenever the need arises. Keeping in view the dynamic 
and fast -changing nature of digital technologies, the Committee reiterates its earlier 
recommendation and caution the M inistry to remain vigilant and responsive to the 
continually evolving digital landscape while formulating rules under the Digital Personal 
Data Protection Act, 2023. It is crucial to maintain pace with the advancements and 
intricacies of the digital realm to ensure the effectiveness and relevance of the 
regulatory framework. The Committee, further, urge the Ministry to draw up simple rules 
under the law, which are easy to understand and administer. 
 
(Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology O.M. No.- 6(8)/2023-Parl. dated 
04.01.2024) 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 8 of Chapter I) 
 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No.12) 
 
 

33 
 
The Committee, in their Original Report, had recommended as under: 
 
“The Committee are pleased to note that the provision of the 'Deemed consent' 
clause, which was present in the draft Digital Personal Data Protection Bill, 2022 
has been removed based on public consultation and feedback from stakeholders. 
The personal data can now only be processed for certain legitimate uses. These  
exemptions are limited to the State and its instrumentalities to perform functions 
under law or in the interest of sovereignty and integrity of India and security of the 
State, to provide or issue subsidies, benefits, services, certificates, licen ces and 
permits that are prescribed through rules, to comply with any judgement or order 
under law, to protect or assist or provide service in a medical or health 
emergency, disaster situation or maintain public order and in relation to an 
employee. While recognizing the right to privacy, the Supreme Court has also 
observed that privacy, like other fundamental rights, is not an absolute right. 
However, any law encroaching upon privacy must withstand the scrutiny of 
permissible restrictions on fundamental ri ghts. Nevertheless, the Committee are 
of the view that there is still a possibility of these exceptions being misused. 
Therefore, the Committee strongly recommend the Ministry to devise a 
mechanism to ensure that these exceptions do not become the general rule and 
are used only in exceptional circumstances, with the aim of promoting ease of 
living and the digital economy”. 
The Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology , in the Action Taken 
Note, have stated as under: 
 
“In the earlier DPDP Bill, 2022  draft the deemed Consent was applicable only 
when a data principal was deemed to have given consent for her personal data if 
such processing is necessary for the specific conditions only including public 
order, employment etc. The deemed consent clause ha s been henceforth 
removed after the consultation and feedback received from stakeholders. In the 
modified DPDP Act, 2023, in its equivalent format, the personal data can be 
processed for certain legitimate uses. These are as under: 
1. For the State and its  instrumentalities to perform functions under law or in the 
interest of sovereignty and integrity of India and security of the State 
2. For the State and its instrumentalities to provide or issue subsidies, benefits, 
services, certificates, licences and permits that are prescribed through rules 
3. To comply with any judgement or order under law 

34 
 
4. To protect or assist or provide service in a medical or health emergency, 
disaster situation or maintain public order and 
5. In relation to an employee. 
 As suggested, the ministry is aware that these exceptions should not become the 
general rule and are used only in exceptional circumstances, with the aim of 
promoting ease of living and the digital economy”. 
(Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology O.M. No.- 6(8)/2023-Parl. dated 
04.01.2024) 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 23 of Chapter I) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      New Delhi;  PRATAPRAO JADHAV, 
  06 February,2024   
Chairperson, 
  17    Magha, 1945 (Saka) Standing Committee on 
Communications and Information 
Technology. 

35 
 
Annexure-I 
 
  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON COMMUNICATIONS AND INFORMATION 
TECHNOLOGY 
(2023-24) 
MINUTES OF THE FOURTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
----------- 
 The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 6th Feb, 2024 from 1500 hours to 1535 hours in 
Main Committee Room, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
 
Shri Prataprao Jadhav- Chairperson 
 
 MEMBERS 
  
Lok Sabha 
 
2.       Shri Karti P. Chidambaram 
3.    Smt. Raksha Nikhil Khadse 
4.  Dr. Sukanta Majumdar 
5.  Shri Santosh Pandey 
6.  Shri Shatrughan Prasad Sinha 
7.      Dr. M.K. Vishnu Prasad 
Rajya Sabha 
8.     Dr. Anil Aggarwal 
9.     Dr. John Brittas 
10.     Shri Jaggesh  
11.    Shri Jawahar Sircar 
12.    Shri Lahar Singh Siroya 
 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Satpal Gulati  - Additional Secretary 
2. Smt. Jyothirmayi  - Director 
3. Shri Nishant Mehra   - Deputy Secretary 
 

36 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson  welcomed the Members to the S itting of the 
Committee convened to consider and adopt Reports relating to the Ministries/Departments 
under their jurisdiction. 
 
3. The Committee, then, took up the fo llowing draft Reports  for consideration and 
adoption:- 
(i) xxxxxxxxxxxx....................xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx.....................xxxxxxxxxxxx 
(ii) Draft Report on Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their              
Forty-eighth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Citizens’ Data Security and 
Privacy’ relating to the Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology 
(iii) xxxxxxxxxxxx....................xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx.....................xxxxxxxxxxxx 
(iv) xxxxxxxxxxxx....................xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx.....................xxxxxxxxxxxx 
4. After due deliberations, the Committee adopted the Reports without any 
modifications. Two Members, namely, Dr. John Brittas, M.P. (Rajya Sabha) and Shri 
Karti Chidambaram, M. P. ( Lok Sabha) expressed their dissent with the Draft Report 
on Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of t he 
Committee contained in their Forty-eighth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on 
‘Citizens’ Data Security and Privacy’ relating  to the Ministry of Electronics and 
Information Technology. 
5. The Committee authorized the Chairperson to finalize the draft Reports and present 
the same to the House during the current Session of Parliament. 
The Committee, then, adjourned. 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
xxxxxxxx…………xxxxxxxx…. Matter not related 

37 
 
Annexure-II 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THEIR  FOURTY-EIGHTH 
REPORT (SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
[Vide Paragraph No. 5 of Introduction] 
(i)  Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the  
Government 
 
 Rec. Sl. Nos.: 1,2,4,5,6,13 and 15  
  Total -07 
 Percentage 46.66 
(ii)  Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue 
in view of the replies of the Government 
 
 Rec. Sl. No.: 9  
  Total - 01 
 Percentage 06.67 
(iii)  Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee and require reiteration 
 
 Rec. Sl. Nos.: 7,8,10,11 and 14  
  Total - 05 
 Percentage 33.33 
 
 
(iv)  Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the  replies of the 
Government are of interim in nature 
 
 
 Rec. Sl. Nos.: 3 and 12 
 
 
 
  Total - 02 
 Percentage 13.33 
 