 
 
Confidential 
 
   STANDING COMMITTEE ON COMMUNICATIONS  
AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(2022-23) 
 
 
SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
MINISTRY OF INFORMATION AND BROADCASTING 
 
 
REVIEW OF FUNCTIONING OF 
CENTRAL BOARD OF FILM CERTIFICATION (CBFC) 
 
 
FORTY-SEVENTH REPORT 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI 
August, 2023/ Sravana, 1945 (Saka) 
 
47 


 
 
 
FORTY-SEVENTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
COMMUNICATIONS AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(2022-23) 
 
 
SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
MINISTRY OF INFORMATION AND BROADCASTING 
 
 
REVIEW OF FUNCTIONING OF 
CENTRAL BOARD OF FILM CERTIFICATION (CBFC) 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on    01.08.2023 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on   01.08.2023 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
 
August, 2023/ Sravana, 1945 (Saka) 
 


 
 
 
CONTENTS 
 Pg No. 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2020-21) ii 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2021-22) iii 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2022-23)  
INTRODUCTION iv 
REPORT  
PART I  
I. Introductory 1 
II. Mandate and Objectives  1 
 A. Mandate 1 
 B. Objectives of film certification 2 
III. Organizational Structure of CBFC 2 
 A. Human resource – composition, role and function 3 
 (i) Chairperson, Board Members, CEO and Regional Officer of CBFC 5 
 B. Infrastructure 7 
IV. Certification  8 
 A. Category for Certification 8 
 B. Certification Process 14 
 C. Time limit for the certification process  17 
 D. Revenue from Certification and fees 21 
 E. Certification Vis-À-Vis  Censorship 21 
 F. Validity of certificate 40 
 G. Revisionary Power of the Government 41 
V. Digitization / Online Certification System – ‘e-cinepramaan’ 
 
52 
VI. Act/Rules/Guidelines related to functioning of CFBC 
 
55 
VII. Film certification appellate tribunal (FCAT) 
 
62 
VIII. Role of CBFC in light of recent developments 67 
IX. Grievance Redressal Mechanism  75 
X. Miscellaneous  80 
 A. Initiatives for Persons with Disabilities 80 
 B. International practices  80 
Part-II  
Recommendations/Observations 82-98 
 
ANNEXURES   
I. Guidelines for certification of films 99 
II. (A) Consolidated statement indicating the films certified by the board from  
1-4-2019 TO 31-3-2020 
102 
 (B) Consolidated statement indicating the films certified by the board from  
1-4-2020 TO 31-3-2021 
103 
 (C) Consolidated statement indicating the films certified by the board from  
1-4-2021 TO 31-3-2022 
104 
 (D) Consolidated statement indicating the films certified by the board from  
1-4-2022 TO 30-9-2022 
105 
III. (A) Key recommendations of the Mudgal Committee 106 
 (B) Key recommendations of the Committee of Experts headed by Shri 
Shyam Benegal 
108 

 
 
 (C) Mudgal Committee and the Benegal Committee have given different 
recommendations in the following matters 
 
111 
APPENDICES   
  
I. Minutes of the Twelfth sitting of the Committee (2020-21) held on 13.01.2021 113 
II. Minutes of the  Sixteenth sitting of the Committee (2020-21) held on  
04.02.2021 
116 
III. Minutes of the  Twenty-second sitting of the Committee (2020-21) held on 
15.03.2021 
119 
IV. Minutes of the  Twenty-seventh sitting of the Committee (2020-21) held on 
06.07.2021 
123 
V. Minutes of the  Twenty-eighth sitting of the Committee (2020-21) held on 
27.07.2021 
126 
VI. Minutes of the Third sitting of the Committee (2021-22) held on 17.11.2021 131 
VII. Minutes of the Sixteenth sitting of the Committee (2022-23) held on 
26.07.2023* 
 

 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (2020-21) 
 
 
Dr. Shashi Tharoor - Chairperson 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Smt. Locket Chatterjee 
3. Shri Karti P. Chidambaram 
4. Dr. Nishikant Dubey  
5. Smt. Sunita Duggal* 
6. Smt. Raksha Nikhil Khadse  
7. Dr. Sukanta Majumdar  
8. Shri Dhairyasheel Sambhajirao Mane 
9. Ms. Mahua Moitra 
10. Shri P. R. Natarajan 
11. Shri Santosh Pandey 
12. Col. Rajyavardhan Singh Rathore 
13. Dr. Gaddam Ranjith Reddy  
14.  Shri Jayadev Galla 
15.  Shri Sanjay Seth  
16.  Shri Chandan Singh 
17.  Shri L.S. Tejasvi Surya 
18.  Dr. T. Sumathy (A) Thamizhachi Thangapandian  
19.  Smt. Sumalatha Ambareesh 
20. Shri Ganesh Singh* 
21. Shri Parvesh Sahib Singh* 
 
 
Rajya Sabha 
22. Dr. Anil Agrawal  
23. Dr. Subhash Chandra  
24. Shri Y. S. Chowdary  
25. Shri Shaktisinh Gohil 
26. Shri Suresh Gopi  
27. Shri Md. Nadimul Haque 
28. Shri Syed Nasir Hussain  
29. Shri Syed Zafar Islam 
30. Dr. Narendra Jadhav  
31. Shri Nabam Rebia 
 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
* Smt. Sunita Duggal, Shri Ganesh Singh and Shri Parvesh Sahib Singh (vice Shri Sunny Deol) were 
nominated to the Committee vide Para No. 2822 of Bulletin Part-II  dated 27 July, 2021. 
 

 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON COMMUNICATIONS  
AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (2021-22) 
 
Dr. Shashi Tharoor - Chairperson 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Smt. Sumalatha Ambareesh 
3. Smt. Locket Chatterjee 
4. Shri Karti P. Chidambaram 
5. Dr. Nishikant Dubey  
6. Smt. Sunita Duggal 
7. Shri Jayadev Galla 
8. Smt. Raksha Nikhil Khadse  
9. Dr. Sukanta Majumdar  
10. Shri Dhairyasheel Sambhajirao Mane 
11. Ms. Mahua Moitra 
12. Shri Santosh Pandey 
13. Shri P. R. Natarajan 
14. Col. Rajyavardhan Rathore 
15. Dr. Gaddam Ranjith Reddy  
16. Shri Sanjay Seth  
17. Shri Ganesh Singh 
18. Shri Parvesh Sahib Singh 
19. Shri Tejasvi Surya 
20. Dr. T. Sumathy (A) Thamizhachi Thangapandian  
21. Vacant$ 
 
Rajya Sabha 
22. Dr. Anil Agrawal 
23. Shri John Brittas  
24. Shri Syed Nasir Hussain  
25. Shri Jawhar Sircar 
26. Vacant $ 
27. Vacant* 
28. Vacant** 
29. Vacant*** 
30. Vacant**** 
31. Vacant***** 
_________________________________________________________________ 
Name of the Committee Changed on 23.11.2021 from Standing Committee on 
Information Technology to Standing Committee on Communications and Information 
Technology.  
$ Vacant since the inception of the current term of the Committee 
 
* Dr. Subhash Chandra, M.P., Rajya Sabha retired w.e.f. 01.08.2022 as per Rajya  
Sabha Table Office Parliamentary Bulletin Part-II No. 61503 dated 05.01.2022. 
 
** Shri Syed Zafar Islam, M.P., Rajya Sabha retired w.e.f. 04.07.2022 as per Rajya 
Sabha Table Office Parliamentary Bulletin Part-II No. 61503 dated 05.01.2022. 
 

 
 
***Shri Y.S. Chowdary, M.P. Rajya Sabha retired w.e.f. 21.06.2022 as per Rajya 
Sabha Table Office Parliamentary Bulletin Part-II No. 61503 dated 05.01.2022. 
 
****Shri Ranjan Gogoi, Member, Rajya Sabha, has resigned w.e.f. 05.05.2022 from 
the membership of the Committee on Communications and Information Technology 
as per Lok Sabha Bulletin Part-II No. 4691 dated 10.05.2022. 
 
*****Shri Suresh Gopi, M.P. Rajya Sabha retired w.e.f. 24.04.2022 as per Rajya 
Sabha Table Office Parliamentary Bulletin Part-II No. 61503 dated 05.01.2022. 
 

 
 
Composition of the Standing  Committee on Communications and  
Information Technology (2022-23) 
 
Shri Prataprao  Jadhav - Chairperson 
 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Smt. Sumalatha Ambareesh 
3. Shri Karti P. Chidambaram 
4. Dr. Nishikant Dubey 
5. Smt. Sunita Duggal 
6. Shri Jayadev Galla 
7. Smt. Raksha Nikhil Khadse 
8. Dr. Sukanta Majumdar 
9. Smt. Mahua Moitra 
10. Shri P. R. Natarajan 
11. Shri Santosh Pandey 
12. Col. Rajyavardhan Singh Rathore 
13. Dr. Gaddam Ranjith Reddy 
14. Shri Sanjay Seth 
15. Shri Ganesh Singh 
16. Shri Parvesh Sahib Singh 
17. Shri Shatrughan Prasad Sinha 
18. Shri L.S. Tejasvi Surya 
19. Dr. T. Sumathy (A) Thamizhachi Thangapandian 
20 Dr. M. K. Vishnu Prasad@ 
21. Shri S. Jagathrakshakan$ 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
22. Dr. Anil Agrawal 
23. Shri V. Vijayendra Prasad# 
24. Dr. John Brittas 
25. Shri Syed Nasir Hussain 
26. Shri Ilaiyaraaja 
27. Shri Jaggesh 
28. Shri Praful Patel 
29. Shri Kartikeya Sharma 
30. Shri Jawhar Sircar 
31. Shri Lahar Singh Siroya 
 
 
Secretariat 
 
 
1. Shri Satpal Gulati     - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. A. Jyothirmayi     - Director 
3. Smt. Rinky Singh                       - Executive Officer 
 
_____________________________________________________________________________________ 
Committee constituted w.e.f. 13th September, 2022 vide Para No.5288 of Bulletin Part-II dated 4th October, 
2022. 
@   Dr. M. K. Vishnu Prasad has been nominated vice Dr. Shashi Tharoor vide Para No. 5311 of Bulletin 
Part-II dated 12th October, 2022. 
$    Shri S. Jagathrakshakan has been nominated vide Para No. 5580 of Bulletin Part –II dated 8th 
December, 2022.  
# Shri V. Vijayendra Prasad has been nominated vice Dr. Laxmikant Bajpayee  vide Rajya Sabha Bulletin 
No. 63085 dated 12th April, 2023 of Parliamentary Bulletin Part II. 
 

 
 
INTRODUCTION 
  I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Communications and Information 
Technology (2022-23), having been authorized by the Committee do present the Forty-
seventh Report on the subject 'Review of functioning of Central Board of Film Certification 
(CBFC)' relating to the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting.  
2.  The Standing Committee on Information Technology (2020-21) selected this subject 
for detailed examination and Report to the Parliament. The examination of the subject, 
however, could not be completed during the term of the Committee (2020-21). Keeping in 
view the importance of the subject and the need for wider consultation, the Standing 
Committee on Communications and Information Technology (2021-22)  re-selected the 
subject for further examination and Report. The Report, though finalized, could not be 
adopted during the year 2021-22 due to expiry of the term of the Committee. The 
Committee, therefore, selected the subject once again during the year 2022-23 for its final 
adoption and presentation to the House. 
3.  The representatives of the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting and Central 
Board of Film Certification (CBFC) briefed the Committee on the subject on                
13.01.2021. On 04.02.2021, the Committee heard the views of the some of the 
individuals/experts/stakeholders/organizations. The representatives of the Ministry of 
Information and Broadcasting and the Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology 
(MeitY)  briefed the Committee on ‘Information Technology (Intermediary Guidelines and 
Digital Media Ethics Code) Rules, 2021’, in the context of examination of the subject 
'Review of functioning of Central Board of Film Certification (CBFC)' on 15.03.2021. On 
06.07.2021, the Committee took evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of 
Information and Broadcasting on the subject ‘in the context of ‘Draft Cinematograph 
(Amendment) Bill, 2021’. Further, on 27.07.2021, the Committee took evidence of the 
representatives of M/o I&B in connection with the examination of the subject in context of 
the draft 'Cinematograph (Amendment) Bill, 2021’.   The Committee also heard the views 
of an expert and the representatives of “Producers' Guild of India (PGI)” and “Indian 
Broadcasting Federation (IBF)” on 27.07.2021. On 17.11.2021, the Committee took the 
evidence of the representatives of M/o I&B on the subject with special emphasis on 
Reports of two Committees i.e. Mukul Mudgal Committee and Shyam Benegal Committee. 
The Committee also received written submissions from Indian Broadcasting Federation 
(IBF); Producers Guild of India (PGI); Director, Indian Motion Pictures Producers’ 

 
 
Association (IMPPA);, Associate Policy Counsel and  Centre for Communication 
Governance (CCG) Digital Fellow of  Internet Freedom Foundation on ‘IT (IGDMEC) 
Rules, 2021’; Film Director/Producer/Script Writer; an 
Actor/Filmmaker/Screenwriter/Playback singer and a Film Director/Producer/Screenwriter. 
4.  The Committee at their sitting held on 26.07.2023 considered and adopted the 
Report. The Committee wish to express their thanks to the representatives of the Ministry 
of Information and Broadcasting, Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology and 
CBFC who tendered their evidence before the Committee and furnished valuable 
information. The Committee also wish to express their sincere thanks to all the 
individuals/stakeholders/organizations for providing valuable inputs either by appearing 
before the Committee or by furnishing written Memoranda which were of great help in 
examination of the subject.  
5.  The Committee also place on record their appreciation for the invaluable 
assistance rendered by the officials of Lok Sabha Secretariat attached to the Committee.   
6.  For facility of reference and convenience the Observations/Recommendations of 
the Committee have been printed in bold in Part-II of the Report. 
 
 
New Delhi;    PRATAPRAO  JADHAV, 
 27 July, 2023 Chairperson, 
 5 Sravana, 1945 (Saka) Standing Committee on  
Communications and Information Technology. 

1 
 
REPORT 
 
Part – I 
I. Introductory 
 
In 1920, Boards of Film Censors were setup in Bombay, Calcutta, Madras and 
Rangoon, the four places at which films were imported into the country (Burma then being 
part of India). At that time there was hardly any indigenous industry of filmmaking. The 
principles of censorship were based on the rules of censorship drawn up by the British 
Board of Film Censors.  In 1952, a consolidated statute (Act 37 of 1952) called the 
Cinematograph Act of 1952 was enacted. The Board was established in 1951 as the 
Central Board of Film Censorship.  Through an amendment in the Cinematograph Act on 
June 1, 1983 the name of the Board was changed to its present version Central Board of 
Film Certification. 
2. The Central Board of Film Certification (CBFC), setup under the Cinematograph 
Act, 1952, performs the statutory function of certifying films for public exhibition under the 
provisions of the Cinematograph Act, 1952. It functions under the Ministry of Information 
and Broadcasting, Government of India. All films, music videos, and documentaries meant 
for public exhibition, irrespective of their length, and media type (Celluloid, video, CD, or 
DVD version) are subjected to certification by CBFC. The Cinematograph Act, 1952 is 
read along with the Cinematograph (Certification) Rules, 1983 and the Central 
Government guidelines of 1991 are the statutes from where the CBFC derives its 
authority.  The Board functions with its headquarters at Mumbai and has nine Regional 
offices each at Mumbai, Kolkata, Chennai, Bengaluru, Thiruvananthapuram, Hyderabad, 
New Delhi, Cuttack and Guwahati.  
II. Mandate and Objectives: 
(A) Mandate 
 
3. The mandate of CBFC are as under: 
a) To examine and sanction the Cinematograph Films for public exhibition in 
India 
b) To certify the Cinematograph Films as suitable  
c) Section 6 of Cable Television Network Rules 1994 (Programme Code) 
mandates CBFC to certify films, film songs, film promos, film trailers, music 
videos, music albums or their promos, whether produced in India or abroad, 
as suitable for unrestricted public exhibition in India, so that they can be 
carried through cable service. 

2 
 
d) To certify the advertisements of genuine brand extension products, that use 
a brand name or logo, which is also used for cigarettes, tobacco products, 
wine, alcohol, liquor or other intoxicants [Rule 7(2) of Cable Television 
Network Amendment) Rules, 2009 (Advertising Code)] 
4. Regarding fulfillment of mandate under the Cinematograph Act of 1952, the Ministry 
in their written reply submitted that it is the mandate of CBFC to ensure that appropriate 
ratings are given to films and majority of films are certified in the primary screenings by 
Examining Committees themselves. However, if the applicant is not satisfied, he/she can 
approach the Revising Committee which comprises of a CBFC Board member as well. 
With digitization, modernization and simplification of its application process, the 
organization has made significant efforts to fulfill the mandate given to it under the Act.  
(B) Objectives of film certification 
5. The basic principles that guide CBFC in certifying films for public exhibition in India 
are laid down in the Cinematograph Act 1952. Cinematograph (Certification) Rules, 1983 
and the guidelines issued by the Government under Section 5B(2) of the Act. In 
accordance with the guidelines for certification issued under the provisions of Section 5B 
of Cinematograph Act 1952, following are the  objectives of film certification: 
i. The medium of film remains responsible and sensitive to the values and 
standards of society 
ii. Artistic expression and creative freedom are not unduly curbed 
iii. Certification is responsible to social changes 
iv. The medium of film provides clean and healthy entertainment 
v. The film is of aesthetic value and cinematically of a good standard. 
 
6. In pursuance of the above objectives, the CBFC strives to ensure the following: 
i. Any film is to be judged in its entirety from the point of view of its overall 
impact. 
ii. It is to be examined in the light of the period depicted in the film and the 
contemporary standards of the country and the people to whom the film 
relates, provided that the film does not deprave the morality of the audience.  
 
 
III. Organizational Structure of CBFC 
7. As stated earlier, the Central Board of Film Certification which is a two tier 
organization has the Board at Mumbai and the 9 regional offices at Mumbai, Kolkata, 
Chennai, Bangalore, Thiruvananthapuram, Hyderabad, New Delhi, Cuttack and Guwahati.  
The organizational structure of the CBFC, which is based on the provisions of the 
Cinematograph Act, 1952 and the Cinematograph (Certification) Rules 1983,  is given 
below: 

3 
 
Structure of CBFC 
 
A. Human resource – composition, role and function 
 
8. CBFC comprises of a Chairperson and 12 to 25 members. The Chairperson and 
other members of the Board are appointed for a term of three years or till such time as 
decided by the Central Government. All the appointed members are eminent personalities 
from different spheres like education, art, film, social sciences, law, etc., and they 
represent a cross section of the society. 
9. Since 11.08.2017, apart from the Chairperson, Shri Prasoon Joshi, there were 12 
other Board members appointed w.e.f. 11.08.2017. 
 
10. The existing strength of panel members in different offices of CBFC is as below:- 
                Status of Advisory Panel members as on Date: 
Sr. No.Region Total Female Male 
1 Mumbai 222 115 107 
2 Hyderabad 158 69 89 
3  Chennai 194 97 97 
4 Bengaluru 125 56 69 
5 Thiruvananthapuram 70 23 47 
6 Delhi 75 45 30 
7 Kolkata 101 45 56 
8 Guwahati 55 23 32 
9 Cuttack 33 15 18 
 
Board Members CBFC 

4 
 
11. According to the Ministry, there is an Advisory Panel for assisting CBFC for 
discharging its functions efficiently under the Act. Advisory Panel has been established at 
each of the nine regional offices of CBFC. The Members of regional Advisory Panels are 
drawn from various walks of life and are appointed in accordance with Section 5 of the 
Cinematograph Act, 1952 read with Rules 7 and 8 of the Cinematograph (Certification) 
Rules, 1983. An Advisory Panel shall consist of such number of persons, being persons 
qualified in the opinion of the Central Government to judge the effect of films on the public 
as the Central Government may think fit to appoint thereto. Generally, these members of 
the panel hail from different walks of life like social sciences, education, legal, film making, 
art, etc., and represent a cross-section of the population. There is adequate representation 
of women in the advisory panels.  
 
12. The members of Advisory Panel are selected for two years and they are mandated 
to 
i. Attend the Examination Committee meetings 
ii. Attend the Revising Committee meetings (if nominated) 
iii. Attend workshops/seminars 
iv. Visit cinema houses to detect violations of CBFC certificates  
 
13. The members of an Advisory Panel examine the films along with Examining 
Officers (in Examining Committees) and Presiding Officers (in Revising Committees). 
Examining Committee generally consists of 1 Examining Officer and 4 panel members, at 
least two of whom should be women. Whereas Revising Committee consists of 4 to 9 
panel members, apart from the Chairperson/Board member who acted as a Presiding 
Officer. It was ensured that there are minimum 50 per cent women members in the 
Revising committees as well. When asked whether the Advisory panels were entrusted 
with quasi-judicial powers, the Ministry reply was negative. 
14. On the issue of women representation in the Board, the Ministry during evidence 
submitted as under: 
“As of today, there is no limit over the number of women that will be in the 
Certification Board. So, Mudgal Committee said that one-third should be 
women. We would like to make changes in the rules and ensure due 
representation.  There is a recommendation regarding Advisory Panels. Mudgal 
Committee said that they should not be called Advisory Panels. Rather they 
should be called Screening Panels. Of course, it is just a matter of name. 
Mudgal Committee again recommended one-third should be women in the 
Advisory Panels also”. 
 

5 
 
15. Adding on the issue of women representation in the Board, the Chairperson, CBFC 
while deposing before the Committee submitted that in practice women representation is 
more than fifty per cent. Asked about the plan to include ‘at least one-third’ representation 
of women as recommended by the Benegal Committee, the Secretary, M/o I&B during 
evidence submitted that CBFC was already working with one-third and it would be done. 
 
(i) Chairperson,  Board Members, CEO and Regional Officer of CBFC 
 
16. The functions of the Chairperson are given below:- 
i. Providing direction and guidance on behalf of CBFC to all Regional Officers 
in performing the statutory functions of film certifications. 
ii. Ensure films are certified in accordance with the provisions of the Act & 
Rules. 
iii. Scrutinize the records of proceedings of the Examining Committee received 
from the Regional Officers. 
iv. Sanction of the film in four categories i.e., “U”, “UA”, “A” and “S”. 
v. Appoints and determines the time and place of the Revising Committee, 
vi. Presides over the Revising Committee for re-examination of the Certified 
Films. 
vii. Signs for and on behalf of the Board, Certificate authorizing the public 
exhibition of films. 
viii. Advises the Central Government about the composition of the CBFC and 
also of the Advisory panels by suggesting suitable names. 
 
 
17. Some of the important functions of the Board Members are:- 
i. Attend the meetings of the Board 
ii. Chair the Revising Committee Meetings (if nominated) 
iii. Review the work of Regional Officers and members of the Advisory Panel. 
 
18. The functions of the CEO are as us under: 
i. Advise the Chairperson, CBFC in all matters 
ii. Implement various plan and non-plan schemes pertaining to CBFC, 
sanctioned by the Ministry 
iii. Supervise the administrative work of CBFC headquarters and coordinate 
the work of all nine regional offices 
iv. Liaise with Ministry of Information and Broadcasting on financial and 
administrative issues. 
v. Examination of films in accordance with Cinematograph Act and the Rules 
made there under. 
vi. Appointing authority in respect of all the staff working in the CBFC 
headquarters and all regional offices of the CBFC except the Regional 
Officers and Additional Regional Officers of CBFC. 
vii. Chief Vigilance Officer (CVO) for CBFC 
viii. To represent the CBFC in all court and CAT cases and authorized to file 
affidavits on behalf of CBFC 
 
 

6 
 
19. The functions of the Regional Officer (RO) are as under: 
i. To supervise the work of scrutiny on behalf of the CBFC of applications 
from producers of Cinematograph films or their representatives in respect of 
all films. 
ii. Appoints an Examining Committee in respect of each application. 
iii. Associate himself as a member of the Committee for examining the film in 
accordance with the guiding principles laid down in the Cinematograph Act. 
iv. Sign on behalf of the Chairperson the certificates authorizing the public 
exhibition. 
 
20. As regards the criteria and procedure for appointment of the Chairperson and the 
Members of the CBFC, the Ministry in their written submission stated that it was in 
accordance with Section 3(1) of the Cinematograph Act, 1952 read with rule 3 of the 
Cinematograph (Certification) Rules, 1983. Section 3(1) of the Cinematograph Act, 1952, 
reads as under: 
“For the purpose of sanctioning films for public exhibition, the Central 
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute a Board to be 
called the Board of Film Certification which shall consist of a chairman and not 
less than twelve and not more than twenty-five other members appointed by the 
Central Government.” 
 
21. In the light of thousands of films made every year, the Committee desired to know 
about the sufficiency of number of members in CBFC. Responding to this, the Ministry, in 
their written submission stated as under: 
"Desired strength of the advisory panel members in respect of each Regional 
Office of CBFC is worked out after carrying out a detailed analysis of work load in 
each of the regional offices based on the number of feature films, video films and 
short films certified. CBFC has been functioning over last few years with support 
of its 12 Board members and a total of 963 advisory panel members across 
different offices. Both Board members and panel members have been active 
participants in the certification process and there have been no hiccups owing to 
their numerical strength. It is always ensured that there should be diversity and 
adequate representation to different sections, while appointing Board and the 
advisory panels. The members have also seen that they adequately involve 
themselves into CBFC’s work and are available for its meetings and committee 
work".  
 
22. Adding on the adequacy of the existing human resource in CBFC, the Ministry 
replied that with the growth of film industry over the years, the work of CBFC has also 
increased manifold. There has been almost a 3 fold increase in the number of feature films 
certification since the year 2000. A detailed study of CBFC’s manpower vis-à-vis workload 
has been conducted for taking necessary measures to enhance the human resources for 

7 
 
smooth working of the organization. As regards changes proposed, the Ministry replied as 
under : 
"No changes are proposed in the role, function and structure of CBFC as of now". 
 
23. Regarding appointment of Members of CBFC, one of the witnesses during evidence 
submitted as under: 
"The Members of CBFC should not be appointed by the Central Government 
instead there should be an independent self- regulatory body comprising of 
people appointed by the industry similar to a Broadcasting Content Complaints 
Council (BCCC) for non-news Television content". 
 
24. Raising concern over functioning of Regional board and Regional officer, a Director 
and Producer from the industry, in his memorandum submitted that each Regional Board 
operates under a Regional Officer and they are obliged to carry out instructions from 
above. It was also submitted that other members of the Board were neither film 
professionals nor experts on any subject. 
B. Infrastructure 
 
25. According to the Ministry, CBFC is presently functioning at its 9 regional offices 
located in Central/State government complexes in different cities. The office spaces are 
mainly used for video film screenings, conducting meetings, smaller conferences and 
workshops, and for administrative and certification-related work; whereas theatrical film 
screenings are held in Films Division theatre in the same premises. As far as CBFC Head 
Quarter office is concerned, it also examines films for certification in the auditorium of 
Films Division located in the same premises. There was shortage of space in CBFC 
Headquarters office in Mumbai in the Films Division Complex, due to which it could not 
procure/ install Digital Projection System and Digital Theatres as planned. Therefore, the 
funds allocated for the said purposes could not be utilised which led to shortfall in financial 
targets. Suitable action for providing office space for CBFC is being done by utilizing the 
existing auditorium of Films Division in the same building complex. 
 
26. When asked to clarify about the shortage of office space in Mumbai, the 
representative of the CBFC during initial stage of examination of subject had submitted 
that they are looking for additional space from the Films Division. The representative from 
the Ministry had also assured to take care of the requirements of the Board as this was 
their responsibility and they would be doing it. Later, the Ministry informed that for 
redressing the space issue, CBFC, Mumbai had been allotted three theatres from Films 

8 
 
Division in the Films Division Complex and the theatres were being effectively used by 
CBFC which had helped in improved coordination and saving of time in the film 
certification process, besides revenue generation. They also informed that after the 
merger of media units, the Films Division’s space and other space within the campus, 
more space would be available for CBFC.  
 
IV. CERTIFICATION  
 
(A) Category for Certification 
27. At present, films are certified under 4 categories, U, UA, A&S, which are as follows: 
Category Description 
U Films considered suitable for unrestricted public exhibition 
UA Films which contain portions considered unsuitable for children 
below the age of twelve, but otherwise suitable for unrestricted 
public exhibition 
A Films considered suitable for exhibition restricted to adults only 
S Films restricted for exhibition to specialized audience such as 
doctors etc. 
 
28. In June, 2021, the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting had sought comments 
from the Public on the Draft 'Cinematograph (Amendment) Bill, 2021'. One of the 
amendments proposed in Draft Bill, 2021 related to Certification of films under 
‘unrestricted public exhibition’ category. It is proposed to be amended so as to further sub-
divide the existing UA category into age-based categories, viz. U/A 7+, U/A 13+ and U/A 
16+.  
 
29. Justifying the proposed amendment to sub-divide the existing UA category, the 
Ministry, in their written submission, have stated as under: 
“Both Mudgal and Benegal Committees have suggested for introducing age 
related classification of films. [Mudgal Committee – U, 12+, 15+, A and S;                     
Benegal Committee – U, UA12+, UA15+, A, AC (Adult with Caution) and S]. The 
Information Technology (Guidelines for Intermediaries and Digital Media Ethics 
Code) Rules, 2021” issued on 25.02.2021 has introduced five age based 
categories - U (Universal), U/A 7+, U/A 13+, U/A 16+, and A (Adult) for OTT 
platforms, based on international practices. The classification of U/A 7+, U/A 13+, 
U/A 16+ in  the draft Cinematograph (Amendment) Bill 2021 have been derived 
from the IT(GIDMEC) Rules, 2021.  Accordingly, it is proposed to further sub-
divide the existing UA category in the Cinematograph Act into U/A 7+, U/A 13+ 
and U/A 16+ as introduced for OTT platforms to keep it in sync with the IT 
(GIDMEC) Rules 2021.   This will lead to a uniform categorization across all 
platforms including OTT platforms. The idea provides a level- playing field to the 
filmic content classified under Cinematograph Act, 1952 and Audio Visual content 
classified for OTT platforms.    Age-appropriate classification of content was 

9 
 
recommended by the Mudgal and Benegal Committees. Mudgal Committee 
recommended 5 categories of certification. Benegal Committee recommended 6 
categories for certification. In the Information Technology (Intermediary 
Guidelines and Digital Media Ethics Code) Rules, 2021 for the OTT platforms, 5 
categories of age- based classification have been notified. To keep uniformity of 
content classification within the country, the classification notified for the OTT 
platforms recently has been proposed. Parents or guardian of a child shall be 
responsible for considering whether a child below the age of seven years, 
thirteen years or sixteen years, may be allowed to see a film certified under U/A 
7+, U/A 13+ or U/A 16+, respectively.    Age based categories would help people 
to make informed choices about the suitability of content, at the same time 
ensuring the artistic and creative freedom of filmmakers are also protected.  This 
will lead to creation and development of new content in the industry that caters to 
age specific classification”. 
 
 
 
30. On the issue of sub-dividing the existing U/A category, Indian Broadcasting and 
Digital Foundation (IBDF), in their Memorandum, submitted the following: 
“We believe that the current practice of certifying a film into U, U/A and A 
categories is appropriate and sufficient. Further, provisions contained in proviso 
to Section 4(1)(i) of the Cinematograph Act 1952 (as amended) (“Cinematograph 
Act”) that empowers parents / guardians by giving them the option to decide 
whether or not they believe that a film with U/A certification is appropriate for 
viewing by their children / wards in movie theaters is adequate and appropriate. 
 
Any sub-division of existing U/A category into the three proposed age-based 
categories is regressive step instead of progressive  considering  the  socio-
economic  change  in  the  society  and  will  also  inter-alia  cause  unnecessary 
inconvenience to movie goers, their families as well as film exhibitors. In this 
regard it is submitted that it will be a logistical nightmare for film exhibitors if they 
are required or expected to conduct age verification exercise of each and every 
person coming to watch a film in order to determine whether or not such person 
is entitled to watch the relevant film basis such film’s age-based certification. 
Further, requirement to do any such exercise will also invariably lead towards 
increasing gaps between shows in the theaters for completion of age verification 
exercise and may also result in causing delays between shows. The Government 
also needs to be cognizant of the fact that the proposed additional sub-divisions 
may also lead to agitation / quarrels / untoward incidents”.  
 
Various sub-categories will also divide the viewers as per the age group 
restrictions, which will reduce the number of viewers which will ultimately impact 
the commercial exploitation due to such age group parameters. All this will 
adversely impact the investment in production of good quality of films due to low 
return on investments. Finally, this will impact the employment opportunities and 
income generated under this sector.   
  
Although the approach in the Draft Bill seems to reflect the USA and UK 
classification, it does not reflect the mechanism of self-classification and self-
certification that is integral to the self-regulatory principle and as adopted by such 
jurisdictions.  

10 
 
 
The proposed amendment in Draft Bill is only valid against a methodology or basis 
for arriving at the relevant sub- classification; and clarity on the objective and usage 
of such sub-classification – in absence of which it is prone to arbitrariness and 
would be contradictory to the mandate of Article 14.  
 
Sub-classification,  without  methodology  or  clarity  on  objective  and  use,  is  
susceptible  to  adversely  impact  the dissemination of cinematograph films on 
cable and satellite TV, which broadcasts films certified for unrestricted public 
exhibition. Moreover, CBFC will be unnecessarily overburdened with these 
additional certifications, without achieving much”. 
 
31. Opposing certification  and  classification and sub-division, IBDF in the written 
submission have stated as under: 
"On  principle,  the  necessity  for  certification  and  classification  for  broadcast  of  
films  for  television  is  arbitrary, unreasonable and imposes excessive restrictions 
on the dissemination of content specially by importing the standards of ‘public 
exhibition’ into the television ecosystem where the viewer accesses content in the 
privacy of their own premises. Fundamentally, the extrapolation of pre-certification 
for film to be received and viewed on the Television platform is contrary to the 
principles of non-arbitrary and reasonable classification enshrined in Articles 14 
and the right to free speech enshrined 19(1)(a) on the Constitution".  
 
32. On the amendment proposing to introduce age-based certification, Producers Guild 
of India made following submissions: 
i. As per the 2021 Amendments, s.4(1)(i), s.5A(1)(a), and s.6(2)(b) of the 
Act are proposed to be amended in order to further sub-divide the “U/A” 
category into age-based categories of certification, such as „U/A 7+‟, 
“U/A 13+, and “U/A 16+”. 
 
ii. Our limited request with the said amendment is that the amendment 
should also clarify the criterion for each proposed certification. Without 
clarification, filmmakers would be in a constant state of uncertainty as to 
what certification their film is going to get. 
 
iii. Moreover, without any guidelines/criteria being defined, it could lead to 
the CBFC also incorrectly certifying films thus impacting filmmaker 
revenues. 
 
iv. As also highlighted with respect to the amendment in S.6(1) of the Act, 
with the abolishment of the FCAT, the only recourse is via the High 
Courts. If films are incorrectly certified due to lack of clarity on the 
appropriate certifications, producers will have to spend a lot of time and 
money before the courts getting the certification rectified. This would 
also add to the existing burdens of the High Courts. 
 
v. Both Mudgal Committee and Benegal Committee in fact had provided 
for guidelines of how to certify a film into age-based certifications rather 
than censoring the films to fit them into categories”. 
 

11 
 
33. During evidence, the representative from Producers Guild of India (PGI), submitted 
as under: 
“In principle, we agree that certificate category needs to be broader because the 
current regime of U, UA, PG and Adult is pretty restrictive. So, we welcome the 
broadening of the categories, but we need clarity as to what all these categories 
would constitute for different age groups so that there is no confusion both at the 
end of content creators as also at the exhibitors’ end when they have to actually 
check who is coming to the theatres”. 
 
34. On the same proposed amendment, a representative of  IBDF, submitted the 
following during evidence: 
“I will give you an example. Today you have a classification of U and UA. I can 
take a ‘U’ movie and show it on the children’s channel after showing it to CBFC 
and I have no problems. But when you start subdividing the category into 3+, 7+ 
and 13+ and so on and so forth, which movie will run where and how would you 
control a remote control in a house? A 13+ movie is being watched by a child 
who is seven years old. What do you do about that? I am not getting into details 
of it; I am just making holistic points”. 
 
35. When asked to comment on the concerns related to the proposed amendment for 
sub-dividing the existing U/A category, the Secretary, M/o I&B submitted as under: 
“The amendment that we have proposed says it should be considered by the 
parents or guardians. The suggestions also that we have received …xxx…xxx…. 
say that guardians and parents should ensure it, not the cinema hall owner 
because it will not be possible for him to check the age. For example, if am going 
to a cinema hall it is not that I should take the Birth certificate of my child. The 
other way round, the Gatekeeper can also say that you should carry the Aadhaar 
Card and Birth Certificate, we will calculate the age. So, this onus is on the 
parents”. 
 
36. Adding on the issue, the representative of the Ministry while deposing before the 
Committee submitted the following: 
“I would like to read from Section 4 of the existing Cinematograph Act on 
examination of films, which is about age categorization. Board may, after 
examining or having the film examined in the prescribed manner, sanction the 
film for unrestricted public exhibition, whether any child below the age of 12 years 
may be allowed to see such a film should be considered by the parents or 
guardians of such children. So, below 18 years it is the responsibility of parent or 
guardian. So, the responsibility lies on them. Then, it is also emphasized when 
the draft was brought out, that it would be the responsibility not of the exhibitor 
but of the parent and the guardian. Concerns have been received from the film 
fraternity on this, but it is yet to be finalized as you know”. 
 
 
37. Elaborating on the mechanism for ensuring reliable age verification for content 
classification by various platforms for having effective implementation of parental lock 

12 
 
system, the Ministry submitted that the Code of Ethics for OTT platforms provides that the 
platform making available content that is classified as ‘U/A 13+’ or higher shall ensure that 
access control mechanisms, including parental locks, are made available for such content. 
Additionally, a platform which makes available content or programmes classified as ‘A’ 
shall implement a reliable age verification mechanism for viewership of such content. 
Examples of age-verification mechanisms include separate profiles of the children, and 
password protection of other profiles to restrict access by children.  
 
38. On the issue of parental control,  a Member from CBFC and an actor while 
deposing before the Committee during evidence, submitted as under: 
“There is an issue with the word ‘parental control’ and it exists.  For example, my 
experience of CBFC in the past six years is this.  I have seen in cinema halls 
children walking and streaming and parents being oblivious of the fact. I would 
suggest or request the Committee about the literacy towards parental control.  
There is a very little literacy despite the fact that cinema is such an old idiom and 
certification has been done since decades here.  People still do not understand 
the difference between what the U, UA and A is.  So, in a country where that is 
still in nascent, by just putting a disclaimer or putting age related classification, 
there is a big question mark. Again, I said it is a matter of debate”.   
 
39. Clarifying on the issue of age verification, the Secretary, M/o I&B during evidence 
submitted that it is not the theatre owner who is supposed to restrict the entry of the child. 
He also submitted: 
“As far as I understand, in the adult category only there is restriction. But in the 
U/A category, as you said, it is a guidance for the parents that this is not for a 7-
year-old or 13-year-old and the discretion has to be employed by the parents or 
guardians”. 
 
40. While examining the witnesses, during evidence, the Committee putforth a situation 
wherein a teenager could go to a theatre to watch a film without a parent or a guardian 
and observed that this invariably indicated that there was a lack of clarity with respect to 
application of this Rule. Responding to this, the Secretary, M/o I&B submitted that they 
would consider it and bring about more clarity on this. 
 
41. On the proposed sub-division of the existing U/A category, following is the 
submission of Chairperson, CBFC during evidence: 
“On this issue, I have only requested for fine tuning of the categories. We have 
U/A right now. Now, U/A has been actually fine tuned into U/A 7+, U/A 13+ and 
U/A 16+. The way the Members today work, they will need guidelines on this that 
how one chunk of U/A has been now sliced. How do you see them differently? 
How will you see the categories of 7+, 13+ and 16+ differently? A little clarity and 
deliberation on that is required probably because this is also going to be 

13 
 
happening on OTT platforms. There is a synergy there. So, that is where 
probably some work needs to be done in my opinion. And, of course, Benegal 
Committee has got a category AC (Adults with Caution) which is a debatable 
point whether we should have that at all”. 
 
42. Adding further, the Chairperson, CBFC also submitted: 
“If the clarity of intent emerges, then it would be good for everyone 
because,..xxx..xxx..xxx…, it is about implementation as well”. 
 
  
43. On the need for uniform categories of film certification, the representative of the 
Ministry in a submission before the Committee during oral examination of the subject 
stated as under: 
“There would be a change in the categories of film certification and broadly we 
could have the same pattern for certification….xxxx…xxx…xxx…. this is the 
thinking, that is, to have similar categories because the population that is 
watching this content is the same. Therefore, it makes total sense that the same 
sets of categories should be there across the platforms”. 
 
44. On an issue related to Certification, President of Indian Motion Picture Producers' 
Association (IMPPA), in a written submission has stated as under: 
 " 'A' certified films cannot be screened on Satellite which forms a major portion 
of the revenue that a producer can generate from the film, the producers are 
forced to re-apply for grant of 'UA' Certificate/'U' Certificate for the 'A' certified film 
in which case the producers are expected to pay the same amount of fees for 
certification as for a new certificate which is very expensive and we request that 
incase of re-certification of 'A' films into 'UA' it should not be treated as new 
certificate and the already financially suffering producer is not made to pay heavy 
CBFC fees which he can ill afford". 
 
45. IBDF while suggesting for inclusion of additional stipulations regarding certification 
of films have submitted the following:  
"Government should consider including stipulations on the following lines to be 
brought in the Cinematograph Act. viz. the applicants should have opportunity to 
seek review and apply for re-certification of the same film at any point in time 
inter-alia in view of the changing social behavior / norms within the country / 
globally; and the applicants should have an opportunity to apply for film 
certification in one or more categories (i.e., U, U/A or A) of its choice for the same 
film.  According to them this will inter-alia give flexibility to producers to decide 
whether they would want to release a film with uniform certification (e.g., U 
certification) across all territories, or whether they would want to release the film 
with different certification (e.g., U/A certification) in certain territories. Additionally, 
this would also address difficulties faced by broadcasters / applicants while 
broadcasting the film on television channels. In this regard, it may be noted that 
the Programme Code under the Cable Television Network Regulation Rules, 
1994 (as amended) requires broadcasters to broadcast films, which are certified 
by CBFC under the U or U/A categories. It becomes necessary for broadcasters 
who acquire films, which are certified as ‘A’ to remove any portion that may be 

14 
 
unsuitable for unrestricted public exhibition and to get the edited version of the 
film recertified by the CBFC".  
 
46. Further,  IBDF have also stated as under: 
"Presently,  there  are  no  specific  provisions  or  process  set  out  under  the 
Cinematograph Act to enable the process of recertification of a film, which has 
already been certified by the CBFC under a particular category. Thus, they have 
requested to consider the above submissions and inter-alia introduce a process 
for recertifying a film and also provide for an enabling provision that allows 
certification of different version(s)of the same film with age-appropriate ratings. It 
is also submitted that re-certification of a film may also be necessitated on 
account of the fact that change in maturity level of audience is a continuing 
phenomenon thereby, bringing certain topics / issues to the mainstream that may 
have earlier been considered to be a taboo. It may be noted that currently, an 
applicant is permitted to obtain separate certification in respect of each language 
version of the same film. We believe that applicants should be allowed to obtain 
multiple age-based certifications in respect of the same film since, the same will 
inter-alia not only allow wider outreach for the film but will also throw light on 
content consumption statistics / patterns. This will also enable stakeholders to 
make informed choices based on analysis of demand for various type of content". 
 
(B) Certification Process 
47. CBFC is the body that certifies long and short films both in the celluloid and digital 
format. It also certifies documentaries, advertisements, films and promos of feature films. 
With regard to the guidelines issued by the Central Government for film certification in 
1991, the Ministry have stated that Section 5B(2) of the Cinematograph Act, 1952 
authorizes the Central Government to issue such directions as it may think fit, setting out 
the principles which shall guide the CBFC in sanctioning films for public exhibition. 
Accordingly, under Section 5B(2) of the Act, the Central Government has issued 
Guidelines for certification of films for Public Exhibition in 1991 and while certifying a film, 
the CBFC is guided by these guidelines. A copy of these guidelines is at Annexure-I. 
 
48. According to the Ministry, Certification Rules also apply to Foreign Films imported 
into India, dubbed films and video films. Further, the work of certification of films is a 
Central Subject and the penal provisions of the Act can be enforced by the State 
Governments only. 
 
49. As per Cinematograph (Certification) Rules, 1983, the procedure for film 
certification is as follows: 
(i) The material for certification is required to be submitted to the Regional officer 
of the concerned Regional center. In case of a dubbed film, it may be 

15 
 
submitted at the same Regional Office where the original was certified and the 
same category certificate would be awarded.  
(ii) On receipt of all the film materials, requisite fees (certification fees, screening 
fees) and written matter required under the rules, the Regional officer will form 
an Examining Committee to view the film. The composition of this committee 
will be as follows: 
a. In the case of a short film (less than 70 minutes in duration or less 
than 2000m in celluloid), it will consist of an officer of the CBFC and an 
advisory panel member one of whom shall be a woman.  
b. In the case of a long film/feature film (other than short films), it will 
consist of an officer of the CBFC alongwith four advisory panel 
members, two of whom shall be women. If the EO is not present, 5 
advisory panel members may also constitute the Examining 
Committee. 
(iii) After the film has been previewed, each member gives his/her report in 
writing about the general theme of the film, deletions and/or modifications 
recommended in light of the applicable guidelines and the category of 
certificate the film should be given.  
(iv) The Examining Officer then submits report to the Chairperson. If the 
Chairperson or the producer agrees with the recommendations of the 
Examining Committee, the Chairperson directs the Regional officer to initiate 
further procedures for issue of certificate, on behalf of the Board, in 
conformity with the recommendations of the Examining Committee made 
either unanimously or by majority.  
(v) If required, the Chairman on his own motion or on the request of the 
Producer if he disagrees with the decision of EC, may refer a decision of 
Examining Committee to a Revising Committee. The appeal to the Revising 
Committee can be made by the producer within 14 days of the Examining 
Committee’s recommendation. 
(vi) A Revising committee will consist of the Chairperson or in his absence, a 
member of the Board and not more than nine advisory panel members, 
provided none of them were on the Examining Committee that viewed the 
film earlier.  
(vii) The Revising Committee will view the same film print shown to the Examining 
Committee without any changes. Each member will be required to record his 
verdict before leaving the theatre. Where the Chairperson disagrees with the 
decision of the majority committee, the Board can itself examine the film or 
cause the film to be examined again by another Revising Committee and that 
decision of the Board or the second revising committee, as the case maybe 
is regarded as final.  
(viii) After the applicant is apprised of the decision of the Board, Examining 
Committee or the Revising Committee, he may submit a revised version to 
the regional officer for certification of the revised film. If the applicant is 
aggrieved by the order of the board, an appeal can be made under section 
5C of the 1952 Act to the Film Certification Appellate Tribunal (FCAT) [In 
April, 2021 FCAT has been abolished and its functions have been transferred 
to the High Courts].  
 
 
50. Details of films certified by the CBFC from 2018-19 to 2022-23, are as under: 

16 
 
     Total Grand Total 
2018-19 
Indian Long Films Video   855  
 
 
4288 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
22570 
Digital 2447 
Foreign Long Films Video 701 
Digital 285 
Indian Short Films Video 6438  
 
 
18282 
Digital 11068 
Foreign Short Films Video 245 
Digital 531 
   
2019-20 
Indian Long Films Video  841  
 
 
4466 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
20593 
Digital 2454 
Foreign Long Films Video 905 
Digital 266 
Indian Short Films Video 5772  
 
 
16127 
Digital 9557 
Foreign Short Films Video 273 
Digital 525 
  
 
 
2020-21 
Indian Long Films Video 1054  
 
 
3175 
 
 
 
 
8299* 
 
 
Digital 1204 
Foreign Long Films Video 776 
Digital 141 
Indian Short Films Video 3058  
 
 
5124 
Digital 1887 
Foreign Short Films Video   65 
Digital 114 
2021-22 
Indian Long Films Video 1054  
 
 
3906 
 
 
 
 
12719 
 
 
Digital 1856 
Foreign Long Films Video 547 
Digital 175 
Indian Short Films Video 4359  
 
 
8813 
Digital 3967 
Foreign Short Films Video 175 
Digital 312 
 
Long film: more than 70 minute duration ; Short film: upto 70 minute duration 
 
51. Detailed statements for the period 2019-20, 2020-21, 2021-22 and 2022-23 (upto 
September, 2022) are given at Annexure-II (A to D).  It can be seen from the above that 
the number of films certified during 2018-19, 2019-20, 2020-21 and 2021-22 the total 
number of films that were certified by CBFC were 22570, 20593, 8299 and 12719 
respectively. During 2022-23 (upto September, 2022) 9484 films were certified by CBFC. 
Providing reasons for decline in the number of films seeking certification from CBFC, the 
Ministry have stated that it was due to COVID-19 pandemic. 
 
52. While deposing before the Committee, the representative of the Ministry also 
submitted as under: 
“The year 2019 had 4600 certifications of theatrical films. During the last year 
2020, due to pandemic, it had about 2500 certifications.  But in all formats put 

17 
 
together like documentaries, short films, etc., they issue about 20,000 annual 
certifications in a year in different formats. The cineplexes are further getting 
converted into leisure zones. So, this sector is huge and also set to grow. This 
sector has also seen a huge growth despite all kinds of technologies, from VCRs, 
CDs to blue rays and everything coming over. But this sector, which is the 
cinema sector has continued to grow. So, in this context, I would say that we, in 
the Ministry are here to facilitate this ever-growing sector. Films are also one of 
our biggest exports to the world. It is the soft power of India, and we are 
committed to support the growth of this sector by creating an enabling 
environment like checking piracy, and also promoting ease of doing business. 
Sir, despite the restrictions that this pandemic has imposed on us, which is a 
temporary phase, we see this sector growing immensely”. 
 
(C) Time limits for the certification process  
53. According to the Cinematograph Rules, the following time limits have been 
stipulated for certification process: 
Process Time Limit 
Scrutiny of Application 7 days 
Formation of Examination Committee (EC) 15 days 
Forwarding the EC report to Chairman 10 days 
Communication of the order to the applicant 3 days 
Surrender of cuts by the producer 14 days 
Examination of cuts 14 days 
Issue of Certificate 5 days 
Total Time Limit 68 days 
 
54. Further, there is a time limit of 68 days for certification process i.e. from the time of 
submission of complete application to issue of certificate. After the launching of the online 
certification system of ‘e-cinepramaan’ and the new website of cbfcindia.gov.in since 2017, 
the certification process has been working smoothly, including online payments of 
certification fees.  
55. When asked whether 100 per cent of the films submitted to CBFC get cleared 
within 68 days, the representative of CBFC during evidence stated that almost all the films 
are certified within 20 to 25 days and generally, it was done within15 days. Adding to this, 
the Chairperson, CBFC submitted: 
“In my experience, only when they go through the Committees, Sub-Committees, 
and Revising Committees, the delays happen. …xxx…xxx…xxx….  That is a 
cause for concern as it takes more time. But that is also done under 68 days”. 
 
56. Further dwelling on the issue, Chairperson, CBFC explained as under: 
“Èया होता है कȧ कई बार, जैसा इÛहɉने बोला कȧ Examining Committee is the first 
Committee. If everything is agreed in that Committee, then the certificate is 

18 
 
issued very quickly. Suppose, कुछ उसक े  बीच मɅ ǒववाद  है या कोई चीज पर एĒीमɅट[ 
नहȣं  है, जो इÛहɉने कहा है, उससे Ǒफãम मेकस[ सहमत नहȣं हɇ। Ǒफãम मेकस[ जो होते हɇ, 
वे कहते हɇ कȧ  हम ǐरǒविसंग किमटȣ क े  पास जाना चाहते हɇ। इसका पुन: अवलोकन 
Ǒकया जाए। उसको तब दोबारा देखा जाता है और उसकȧ दोबारा किमटȣ बनती है। इस 
बार जो किमटȣ का अÚय¢ होता है, वह एक बोड[ मɅबर होता है ताǑक उसमे आǑट[ǔèटक 
सɅसेǒबिलटȣ आ जाए। इसिलए आप देखɅगे कȧ बोड[ मɅबस[ Ïयादातर Ǒफãमɉ से हȣ जुड़े हुए 
लोग हɇ। उनकȧ अÚय¢ता मɅ दूसरȣ किमटȣ बनती है। अगर इस तरह क े  लूप मɅ वह घुस 
गया तो शायद उनको Ïयादा वƠ लग जाएगा” I 
 
57. Regarding the time taken to complete the process of certification, the CEO, CBFC 
while deposing before the Committee submitted as under: 
“Once the application is accepted, from the date of application on an average 
within 10-15 days, as of now, we are issuing the certificate….xxx…xxx…xxx…It 
depends on the workload also at times, but we have been given a maximum time 
of 68 days….xxx…xxx…xxx….. If the film is referred to the Revising Committee, 
then it may take more than two weeks also. If it is being challenged in the CAT, 
then accordingly it takes time. Otherwise, on an average, it is 10-15 days. As of 
now, we do not have a backlog of more than a month’s time…..xxx……xxx….. It 
all depends on the kind of compliance. If they can submit the cuts that we have 
suggested the next day, then we will further process it. Sometimes, they take 
months to submit the cuts also. So, it all depends on the kind of compliance 
followed by them". 
 
58. Responding to the concern regarding inordinate delays in certification leading to 
huge financial burden on producers, Member CBFC in a deposition before the Committee 
submitted as under: 
 
“There is no 70 days delay. I think we had really expedited the process.  But 
within the Act, it is the 65 days process which requires certification. I must also 
tell you one thing.   Sir, the producers come one week before the release date.  
Now, that is not the point which you asked. This has become a norm… So, there 
are 100 more people in the line who already have adhered to a process. So, 
there is a lot which is amiss between the cup and lip. We do get badgered for 
being in CBFC but one has to understand, especially, for example, for national 
awards, by December 31, you need the certification done. Everybody, between 
15th December and 31st December, would come down like a tonne of bricks on 
us saying we will miss the deadline. So, there is little adherence to procedures”. 
 
59. On the delay in certification process, the Ministry pointed out to one of the 
recommendations of Benegal Committee and submitted that the Committee had 
recommended for having a provision for Tatkal certification of films on an enhanced 
payment and this provision could be brought into the rules by amending them. 

19 
 
60. About their adherence to the timeline for certification, the CEO, CBFC submitted 
that with the implementation of e-pramaan, the notice is sent online on the day the film is 
screened and the Report is to be submitted within that evening and the show cause notice 
is given the next day. He also stated that screening of film was done within one week of 
filing of application. 
 
61. Regarding the  timeline for providing certification to films, President of Indian Motion 
Picture Producers' Association (IMPPA), in a written submission, stated: 
“Due to large number of films produced there is inordinate delay in previewing the 
film and since the advent of online certification the producer has to wait cluelessly 
for number of weeks to get the SMS regarding the preview in which regard no 
information is given to the producer on the phone or writing and he has to keep 
waiting for the elusive SMS which takes very long time to 
come….xxx…xxx…xxx.. Despite repeated request there has been no change in 
the timelines provided in the guidelines of 68 days which was done in 1954 are 
highly excessive as in today's date of digitization and speedy communication 
there is no reason why 68 days should be taken and with everything in the world 
going digital as per the Prime Minister's Digital Vision of India in our opinion 
certification of films should not take more that  3-4 days as according to the 
report submitted by the C & AG the time taken by CBFC to issue certificates 
varied from 3 to 491 days, thereby proving our contention that it is possible to 
clear films in 3 days but this was the facility being extended only to big films & 
producers who make small & medium budget films and were producing more that 
90% of the films were facing heavy delays and while the big films were cleared in 
a matter of days small & medium budget films formed bulk of the films which took 
491 days or slightly less to get cleared”. 
 
62. On the submission of President, IMPPA, that the time taken by CBFC to issue 
certificate should be reduced from 64 days to 3-4 days because for medium and small 
budget films (which form 90% of the films) it took almost  491 days or little less, the 
Ministry was asked to provide their comments. To this, the Ministry, in their written 
submission responded as under: 
“68 days is the maximum time that has been mentioned in the Cinematograph 
(Certification) Rules, 1983. However, CBFC ensures that certification of most of 
the films is completed in not more than 10-15 days. Besides, there is no 
preferential treatment given to big budget films. Very occasionally, films have 
taken longer time of a few months because the filmmakers/applicants have not 
complied by producing requisite documents (NOCs) or submitted the necessary 
cuts in time”.   
 
63. When the Committee sought to know why there was differential treatment in issuing 
certificate, the CEO, CBFC, during evidence explained as under:  

20 
 
“It all depends on the kind of compliance. If they can submit the cuts that we have 
suggested the next day, then we will further process it. Sometimes, they take 
months to submit the cuts also. So, it all depends on the kind of compliance 
followed by them”. 
 
64. To  a query related to differential treatment given for film certification even if same 
dialogue is used, , the Chairperson,  CBFC responded as under: 
“इसमɅ दो चीजɅ हɇ। एकतो कला क े  ¢ेğ मɅ आप यह नहȣं कह सकते हɇ यह डायलॉग 
सैĐोसɅÈट है। There is no suspended reality. It is a contextual reality. वहȣ डायलॉग 
अगर मɇ ǒपता से कहूंगा, तो वह अपमानजनक हो जाएगा। वहȣ डायलॉग अगर मɇ अपने 
िमğ से कहूंगा, तो वह अपमानजनक नहȣं रहेगा। वह बɇटर हो जाएगा। There is a 
difference between banter and crossing the boundary”. 
 
65. On another related issue, the Ministry during evidence informed that at present 
deletions in films are made in percentage terms or in terms of length of metres. However, 
in the digital technology, it is made in terms of minutes and seconds and percentages as 
well. When asked to clarify about ‘quantum deletion’, the Ministry during evidence 
submitted as under:  
“It is because they happen at different points of time, five seconds here or ten 
seconds there, etc. So, they all clubbed together and that is the number of 
deletions. They are all clubbed together and that is why it is called quantum 
deletion.  Otherwise, it is just deletion. The units used today are millimetre or 
meter….xxx…..xxx….xxx..These are procedural improvements in the formats 
that are submitted. It is just to make it more explicit that it is mentioned both in 
terms of percentage as well as in minutes or seconds”. 
 
66. Further, the Chairperson, CBFC submitted as under: 
“It is to the contrary. The percentage will tell you the reduction in potency. So, the 
precision of seconds tells you the entry point and exit point of this particular 
scene and the length of the scene, which is flouting the rules as per 
Cinematograph Act. We often talked about it as to whether the power to suggest 
these changes should be there or not”. 
 
67. Clarifying on one instance where a cut was recommended in one Hollywood movie 
where kiss scene was for 35 seconds, the Ministry during evidence submitted as under: 
“It is not about any kiss being shown 35 seconds or five seconds. It is just about, 
in a film of two hours, if the CBFC decides that the cut is for 35 seconds then the 
rule says that the cut should be mentioned in terms of percentage. Now, we will 
mention 0.1 per cent and 35 seconds. It is not about duration about anything”. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

21 
 
(D) Revenue from Certification and fees 
68. CBFC receives revenue in the form of certification charges. Details of revenue 
collected during last five years are as under: 
Sl. No. Period Revenue collected in Rupees 
1.  2017-18 8,40,35,600 
2.  2018-19 13,46,33,658 
3.  2019-20 13,67,45,463 
4.  2020-21 8,40,92,178 
5.  2021-22 12,21,40,116 
6.  2022-23 (up to September 2022) 7,58,50,596 
 TOTAL  63,74,97,611 
 
69. When asked to provide views on the existing fee structure of CBFC along with 
lacunae, the Ministry replied as under: 
"Fees chargeable for examination of films is prescribed under Rule 36 of the 
Cinematograph (Certification) Rules, 1983 and the present fees charged by 
CBFC for examination are in accordance with Notification dated 27.01.2017. 
There is discount given for Predominantly Educational (PE) films that generally 
includes different kinds of documentaries, children’s films, scientific films, films on 
health and environmental awareness, etc. For a two hour long film, the 
Certification fee works out as Rs. 4350/- for PE films and Rs. 21,850/- for other 
(Non-PE) films. No lacunae have been noted in the existing fee structure of 
CBFC and it is found to be quite rational and logical". 
 
70. On the proposal to revise the certification fee, the Ministry submitted that the Film 
Certification fees structure was reviewed at regular intervals in the light of increased 
procedural costs and honorarium of panel members. However, taking into consideration 
the impact of COVID-19 pandemic on film industry, there was no immediate likelihood of 
revision of certification fees.  
 
(E) CERTIFICATION vis-à-vis  CENSORSHIP 
 
71. On the relevance of censorship in today’s scenario and possibility of implementing 
a purely certification model in India, the Ministry, in their written reply, submitted as under:  
"Sanctioning of Cinematograph films for exhibition’ is included in Entry 60 of the 
Union List (List I) of the Seventh Schedule of the Constitution of India. The Union 
Government has been entrusted with matters pertaining to sanctioning or 
certification of films for exhibition in India and accordingly the Central Board of 
Film Certification (CBFC) certifies film for public exhibition under the provisions of 
Cinematograph Act. Article 19(1)(a) and 19(2) of the Constitution of India lays 
down that while all citizens shall have the right to freedom of speech and 
expression, the State can operate any existing law, or make any law, in so far as 

22 
 
such law imposes reasonable restrictions on the exercise of the right conferred 
by the 19(1)(a), in the interests of the sovereignty and integrity of India, the 
security of the State, friendly relations with foreign States, public order, decency 
or morality or in relation to contempt of court, defamation or incitement to an 
offence".  
 
72. The Ministry also added that over the years, CBFC has evolved from a Board of 
Censors to a modern Board of film certification organization. However, as per its mandate, 
CBFC was empowered to examine and certify cinematograph films prior to their exhibition. 
The CBFC was performing its duties under Section 5(B) and related guidelines of the 
Cinematograph Act. Besides, CBFC also relied upon other prevailing laws of the land and 
Acts while certifying films.  Therefore, due diligence was exercised while examining the 
films for public exhibition. Some of the laws were as follows: 
(i) The Cable Television Networks (Regulation) Act, 1995 r.w. the Cable 
Television Network Rules, 1994 (Programmes and Advertising Codes 
therein) 
(ii) The Cigarettes and Other Tobacco Products Act (COTPA), 2003 & Rules, 
2004 
(iii) The Prevention of Cruelty to Animals Act 
(iv) The Emblems and Names (Prevention of Improper Use) Act, 1950 
(v) The Prevention of Insults to National Honour Act, 1971 
(vi) The Drug and Magic Remedies Act 
(vii) The Scheduled Castes and Tribes (Prevention of Atrocities) Act, 1989 
(viii) The Indecent Representation of Women (Prohibition) At, 1986 
(ix) The Protection of Children for Sexual Offenses Act (POCSO Act), 2012 etc. 
 
 
73. Asked about the grounds for excisions or modifications imposed by CBFC in films, 
the Ministry stated as under: 
"The cuts in the Film are given in the light of guidelines of Cinematograph Act 
and in order to meet the Category-specific requirements of the Films. However, 
these cuts are more often in the form of minor modifications rather than actual 
excisions of the entire scenes/sequences. Many of these are procedural cuts only 
like anti-smoking static messages as per the requirement of The Cigarette and 
Other Tobacco Products Act (COTPA) 2003. Over the course of last few years, 
CBFC has attempted to create an amicable platform for discussions with the 
filmmakers, to ensure that filmmakers get sensitized to the larger societal point of 
view".  
 
74. On the issue of making cuts in the films for getting certificate the Chairperson, 
CBFC while deposing before the Committee submitted as under: 
“मोǒबिलटȣ क े बारे मɅ मɇ ĤैǔÈटकल ऐÛसर देता हूं Ǒक Èयɉ ऐसा हो रहा है? æयामबेनेगल कमेटȣ 
मɅ, जब उÛहɉने कहा Ǒक आप सǑट[Ǒफक े ट दȣǔजए या अगर आपको लगता है Ǒक इस आधार पर ये 
Ǒफãम नहȣं Ǒदखाई जानी चाǑहए, for example, if there is something against the 
sovereignty of the country or something which is very critical or certain things 

23 
 
which harm the nation, आप उसको सǑट[Ǒफक े ट मत दȣǔजए। आपक े सामने दोहȣ ऑÜशन हɇ। 
मɇ आपको ĤैǔÈटकल बात बता रहा हूं, Ǒफãम मɅ उसका एक सीन इस तरह का है, जो देश कȧ 
सàĤभुता को हािन पहुंचाता है, लेǑकन, उस सीन को हटा देने क े बाद वह Ǒफãम ठȤक हो जाता है। 
ये Íवॉइश आपने उनसे लेली। I am not a lawmaker here. I am just a body which is 
certifying and implementing what is there. But in practical life, why it has 
sustained is that if you have only one option that because of this particular scene, 
ये ǒपÈचर नहȣं Ǒदखाई जा सकती है, यह देश क े िलए सहȣ नहȣं है। इसमɅ िसÈयोǐरटȣ कȧ कोई 
Ħीच है।  यǑद, ऐसी कोई चीज है और सभी उस पर सहमत हɇ Ǒक  ऐसी चीजɅ नहȣं आनी चाǑहए, 
तब वह ǒपÈचर नहȣं Ǒदखाई जाएगी। ÈयɉǑक,  आपक े पास बीच का ऑÜशन नहȣं है Ǒक आप 
उनसे कहɅ Ǒक इस वजह से यह Ǒफãम नहȣं Ǒदखाई जा सकती है। आज आपक े पास वह ऑÜशन 
होता है। The filmmaker says that he is ready to sacrifice that part from the film and 
then the film can come out. So, there is a practical solution out there. Without that 
particular scene or episode, the film comes out. We are taking that option away 
from the filmmaker who would have probably not realized while submitting the 
film that there is something objectionable as per laws of the land. He himself 
realizes that he would not have done it had he taken cognizance of that. Now in 
that retrospective, it cannot be corrected. But given a choice, this film practically 
goes out and sees the light of the day. That is where probably the buck stops”. 
 
75. He also added: 
“I just want to add to what you have suggested earlier. In most of the cases 
today, the filmmakers are making voluntary changes. At least, I can tell you in my 
time. Most of the times, they are coming, realizing, and doing things on their own. 
So, accessions and cuts are anyway on decline. Most of the times, they are 
realizing it and coming back to us with submissions. So, that is already 
happening”. 
 
76. Following is the submission of a witness with respect to censorship and 
certification: 
“It is a fact that ‘regulation’ itself is a very scary term for most of the actors and 
content makers. Today, content is created in so many ways. Coming to what you 
are trying to ask, Mr. Chairman Sir, there is a paradigm shift in how we create 
and consume content today. Obviously, we are one of the largest film-producing 
nations in the world, and for CBFC per se, it would be absolutely a Nat Geo wild 
guess to know that across various formats, languages, we certify more than 
20000 films in a year. It means that regarding the whole crux of certification, as I 
call it, you are right in suggesting that ‘censor’ is a very old term which was used 
during the British colonial period where India was a colony to the British, and 
broadcasting information was censored and obstructed. At least, in the past three 
years, within the six years that I have been on the Board, the way forward has 
been certification. When we say ‘certification’, we have three paradigms of 
creating certification in India – one is ‘Universal viewing’, which is for all age 
groups, second is ‘Universal/Adult’ which is for 13 plus, and of course, the third is 
‘Adult’ which is for 18 plus. We just have these three categories, unlike most of 
the other countries in the world which have five to six different categories, where 

24 
 
there is parental guidance, viewing for 13 plus, viewing for 16 plus, and finally 
coming to what we call as adult rating….xxxx….xxx…xxxx….. But in the past 
three years, there have been films which have been a matter of great social 
debate. …xxx…xxxx… there were no cuts or deletions at all.  Now there is 
another word which we use in CBFC. It is called, ‘modification’. Modification 
means that there is a democratic dialogue with the film maker who is there in the 
room after the viewing is done. It is a kind of a, you could say, empirical tradition 
that a dialogue is made after the film is screened. There are nine panel members 
who sit with me who is a Board member. We are only the last leg which is 
revising the Committee Report. They are the examining Committee which sit with 
various regional officers. It sits with panel members from that region.  So, coming 
to the certification part, in the past three years, we have really tried hard.  We 
have strengthened and empowered our dialogues with the film industry, which 
were not there in the past so many decades. We need to understand the area in 
which the content creators also work. There will be storylines which will have 
socio-political ramification. There may be comments about societal concerns. But 
we being a hyper sensitive democracy, at least three or four things are given 
when it comes to caste, when it comes to religion and when it comes to gender 
rights. One thing which personally bothers me is violence in children. Of course, 
these are matters which are taken into cognizance when we are certifying films”. 
 
77. Adding on OTT, it was submitted: 
“Coming to OTT, there is a big difference between content being collective where 
a thousand or 500 odd people are sitting in a dark room and they are watching a 
film together. They are strangers to each other. It is within the Cinematograph Act 
of 1952 about which you very correctly pointed out that it is crying for 
amendment. As technology has grown, as we have seen things grow around us 
in the creative eco systems of the country, obviously, it needs amendment and 
needs change. But within the guidelines when you are watching a film with 500 
odd people in a dark room, as Peter Brook says, ‘everything in front of you is a 
dark hole’. How you receive it is what creates or makes or breaks it.   Similarly, 
OTT or what we say, Over the Top content today, till about 11 months ago, was 
in our palm. The report you mentioned that I co-authored with hon. Mr. Shekhar 
Kapoor looks at non-linear narratives of creating stories. Non-linear narrative 
means that you do not have a continuum of the story. We are all used to soap 
operas on television or a film which ends in three hours. But here you have non-
linear format of storytelling where you start somewhere. The middle could be very 
different from the beginning and the end would be absolutely separate from 
where the story started. So, immersive story telling is the way forward and 
immersive story telling also means gaming, augmented reality and artificial 
intelligence. The algorithms, which rule everyday social media units like Face 
Book and Twitter, also read which 25 people should be on my net page that I 
should be communicating with every single day. AI is already ruling us. It is 
already intrinsically a part of our lives and that also includes the story telling 
narratives. So, within the report, we have spoken about creative freedom; we 
have not really spoken about regulation. But before we get into the ambit of 
regulation, domain experts need to speak upon this. There are a lot of analysts 
which have been doing this kind of work. Me and Shekhar were talking about this 
for past many years since the advent of also the OTT platforms, which is fairly 
nascent in India. It is just about five and a half years old. Coming to the Code 

25 
 
part, the industry also has to step up. There has not been enough dialogue where 
we find convergent realities of how content is being created. We do not see 
enough film makers, content creators talk about what the method of storytelling 
is, how they are actually creating the story. So, the way forward is not one size 
fits all. There need to be deeper dialogues and discussions around this, including 
the content creators and those who are very much a part of it. But there needs to 
be a standard Code which also the industry should be a part of – whether it is a 
Code for looking at how content is being put out or whether it is a Code for 
looking at the best practices, which the countries like the United States, the U.K., 
Singapore and Australia – which we have explored deeply in the report – have 
adhered to.  Finally, the difference between provocative hurtful vs. telling the truth 
needs to be made”. 
 
78. Further, on the issue of censorship, the submission made by the witness was as 
under: 
“Madam, there are nine panel members who sit with me, who belong to various 
walks of life like architects, doctors, engineers and they are not necessarily film 
critics, film makers, film writers or actors. Only a Board Member like me, which is 
the last stage of the Revising Committee sits. So, the Examining Committee is 
also there having six panel members with the Regional Officer. Under the 
Cinematograph Act of 1952, it is a democratic process where nine panel 
members sit with me and have an opinion. Within the Act, the guidelines are that 
there has to be a consensus, which means one dissent and certification will not 
happen.     We have no business with this word that media constantly uses ‘ban’. 
We cannot do it, and in the history of this country I have never banned a film. We 
are not even a judicial body that we can ban or stop or whatever, but it is a 
democratic process. Those nine members have to agree with me. I am bound 
under an oath of confidence and cannot tell you, but there are times and there 
are films that I certified and the panel members disagreed with me, but I had to 
go with the consensus opinion. Hence, I am saying that the Act is crying for 
amendment.   It will always be a process of human resource and the mind. Those 
nine people will come with their set of ethics, morality, perceptions, societal and 
political concerns. To put this all on the Government and the Ministry that they 
are not allowing all this has never happened. So, to begin with, for political 
messaging, the first question that you asked, in my six years of the 
consciousness of this body I have never received a phone call -- despite the 
political background I come from -- from a Minister or a Ministry official to say 
that: “***, do not let this film go through”. The fact is that we deliberate for hours 
together. There are times when people in the panel feel very strongly towards 
sexuality, explicit content, language, etc., and for hours we sit. So, before that 
one question that the guy lingers on outside, that is, the Producer / Director, 
those many hours we are sitting inside short of breaking each other’s head – pun 
intended – which means that it is a democratic process. There is a lot of 
dialogue, which occurs inside. The tradition of the producers and director coming, 
they come because they are also badly with us. I am putting this on record 
confidentially, they say, my film will not get sold to the satellite rights or to certain 
television if I have a certain certificate, give me cuts, I will take this certificate. 
This never gets spoken about outside but this is what occurs. So, there is 
interaction which occurs between two sets of human beings, one which has 

26 
 
commercial interests within the part of creating what they are their creative 
freedom, and the other part is those people who are trying hard not to obstruct 
the creative freedom but have concerns about when this content or this piece 
goes out. So, opinion, Madam, no. The opinion is right in that room. It is the 
people and a lot of people within their mindsets who know how it works. 
 
Within the Board, for the past three years, one thing I am going to say with great 
confidence – objectification of women has been a `no’ for us. Yes, we have taken 
very serious points of view on item numbers, on the objectification of women, and 
about the certification, one word in Hindi `niyat’ called `intent’ in English is 
important. we have in Board meetings constantly spoken about what do we do 
about the objectification of women.  Madam, you talked about lyrics, yes, if it 
objectifies women, we will have an objection towards it. There are people who go 
at length discussing whatever they are pelting out as explicit, vulgar, whatever 
content, where women are involved in the scene, and feel pride about it, of 
course, we have an aggressive debate with them after the screening of the film.   
About the lingering part, sometimes, it is the deliberation that takes a long time. 
This is within the Act that if the producer has to be told, what the Committee felt, 
sometimes, if a film doesn’t get certified because of lack of democratic 
consensus. This is very much part of the Act; the guidelines are bound by it. That 
is what we have to adhere to”. 
 
79. Responding to a question on modification of films, the witness submitted as under: 
“To your question about modification, it is a democratic discussion which 
happens. If nine panel members with me feel very strongly about a certain 
content, they are also parents, educationists, there could be people from all 
walks of life, that is the opinion which matters and we have to have convergence 
of ideas for a consensus.  Madam, you asked me about language. We have 
language experts. We have zonal offices all across the country. For South, we 
have one in Trivandrum and in Chennai; for Northeast, we have one in Guwahati 
and in Kolkata; one in Delhi and Mumbai is the biggest head office. So, language, 
minority rights, anything connected to sensitive content, panel members are 
always there as representatives”. 
 
80. Responding to a query whether certification is done even if the suggested cuts are 
not made, another witness submitted the following during evidence: 
“That does not happen. Usually, it is like getting an ‘A’. If it is a big budget film, 
obviously you do not want ‘A’ as it restricts your audiences and it restricts your 
sales to TV channels. Then you negotiate. There is a discussion and they would 
say if you remove these five points, you can get a ‘UA’, or if you remove these 10 
points you get a ‘U’. That does happen. At least in my personal experience, it has 
never been like if you do not do this, you would not get certificate at all. Are we 
made to wait? No, that has never happened. I can only speak from my personal 
experience. It has never been an unpleasant experience. It has always been an 
experience when you go and debate. After the viewing you have a discussion 
and then it is a question of us being able to convince them or they being able to 
say that these are necessary cuts. Then you evaluate it and you come back and 

27 
 
make those cuts or you can always take it to the next step where you say you do 
not agree and let it be reviewed”. 
 
 
81. On the issue of censorship and cuts made in films, Shyam Bengal Committee in 
their Report had observed that the current system of suggesting modifications and 
amendments to a film by the CBFC should be done away with and the Board must 
function only as a film certification body. The Shyam Bengal Committee had also drafted a 
new set of guidelines for certification. The objectives of these guidelines inter-alia included 
(i) artistic expression and creative freedom of filmmakers is protected through parameters 
that are objective, (ii) audiences are empowered to make informed viewing decisions and 
(iii) the process of certification is responsive to social change. 
 
82. On this issue, Indian Broadcasting and Digital Foundation (IBDF) have suggested 
for having only certification and no modification/deletion/cuts. According to IBDF, CBFC 
should only certify the movies in specific categories basis the subject, its treatment, audio-
visual presentation and target audience. In this certification process, CBFC should not 
suggest the edits in the content, so as to ensure that the certification process remains 
limited to categorization of films instead of extending to editing the films. If the producer/ 
author of the film does not want his/her films to be certified in a particular category e.g., 
“A”, then the producer / author should be allowed to voluntarily carry out the necessary 
edits to bring the movie within desired category e.g., “UA” or “U” category.  (b) We believe 
that the current practice of certifying a film into U, U/A and A categories is appropriate and 
sufficient. Further, provisions contained in proviso to Section 4(1)(i) of the Cinematograph 
Act 1952 (as amended) (“Cinematograph Act”) that empowers parents / guardians by 
giving them the option to decide whether or not they believe that a film with U/A 
certification is appropriate for viewing by their children / wards in movie theaters is 
adequate and appropriate.  
83. The submission of President, IMPPA,  on this issue is as under: 
"It is to be appreciated that Films are a business where a producer makes the 
entire investment and his film has to have content which the audience wants to 
see as otherwise no one will buy a ticket which is why more than 90% of films are 
miserable flops and in view of the fact that the film is specifically made for a ticket 
buying audience only after seeing the publicity material knowing fully well what 
they are going to see and hence there should be no restriction as such on the 
creative freedom of expression of the film maker as long as the same are within 
the norms of decency and national pride". 
 
 

28 
 
84. Voicing against Censorship a witness in a written memorandum submitted the 
following: 
“ (i) Censoring is a legacy left behind by our colonizers, the British as they were 
highly suspicious of the subjects of its colony. Strangely, we as a free democracy 
have inherited it and are reveling in its enforcement unabashedly without any 
sense of guilt or remorse. 
 
(ii) Although it was re-named some time back The Central Board of Film 
Certification, it has all along continued to function as The Central Board of Film 
Censoring for all practical purposes. 
 
(iii) Over the years Censoring has become more and more coercive but the Film 
industry has never protested against it as it had high stakes in terms of 
investment and thus couldn’t afford to invite any displeasure of the authorities. 
 
(iv) Censoring films is redundant in today’s time with the new advances in 
science and technology. In this age of TV, internet, streaming and other devices, 
only cinema is singled out for close scrutiny clinging on to many archaic and 
irrelevant regulations and also periodically adding on to them.  It is conveniently 
forgotten that with the change of times, Cinema has ceased to be the only 
medium of popular entertainment. One gets the feeling that the past weighs 
heavily on the Governments.  It is high time they woke up to ground realities. 
 
(v) Our Constitution has ensured the Citizen freedom of speech and    expression 
in all modes of creativity within reasonable limits. 
 
(v) The State need interfere only when these limits are transgressed.  And      
such aberrations are within the purview of the judiciary to examine and judge. 
 
(vi) With the idea of issuing a Censor certificate for public screening of films came 
the stipulation of having to exhibit on the body of the film itself all kinds of free 
Governmental ads unmindful of the fact that it is unethical and unaesthetic. 
Nowhere in the world are such violations tolerated and sustained without a 
question". 
 
85. Another witness, during evidence had stated that there should not be censorship of 
any kind. The reasons provided were as under: 
“Just to continue the thing about self-regulation - as a filmmaker, I would say that 
self-regulation is the best regulation. Ultimately, the market forces also step in 
and the intent of the filmmaker is also very important. It is one of those intangible 
things that we cannot really define. It is there and the audience picks up on the 
intent. You know that this shot is being taken for titillation or it is necessary for 
storytelling. You know whether the hero is smoking to glorify smoking or to look 
cool or if this is necessary. I would give a simple example of how one rule could 
create problems for filmmakers. My last film that is ‘83’ based on the 1983 Cricket 
World Cup. …xxx…xxxx….xxx… If I do not show Srikanth smoking, a lot of 
people will say that I am not showing Srikanth properly; this is incorrect portrayal 
of Srikanth because he is infamous for smoking. For showing smoking, I am in 
the risk of getting several cuts in my film. These are the tricky parts. Ultimately, 

29 
 
you will be able to see the intent of the filmmaker. If I am showing Srikanth 
smoking in style in some backlight, with smoke going up in the air and then him 
going out to bat and hit a six, I am glorifying smoking. When I am showing 
Srikanth just sitting and smoking everywhere, then I am just trying to authentically 
recreate a personality of the 80s who everybody knows about. So, these are the 
tricky areas that we get into when there is a blanket rule that smoking should not 
be shown…xxxx…..xxxx….xxxx….It is because I am a creator and I will never 
want people sitting on shoulders and telling me what I can do and what I cannot 
do. So, my take will always be no. We need to have a sense of humour and 
again even in that joke you can see the intent. Is that meant to be hitting below 
the belt or no? It is a genuine comment on our society…..xxxxx….xxx…xxxx… 
Twenty years ago, I remember I used to sit in front of Doordarshan at 6 o’clock 
and the film was played and we all would watch the film as a family. 
Unfortunately, today we do not have that system. But today we have a system 
where when I sit with my 12 years old daughter, I know there are certain films I 
can watch with her and there are certain films that I cannot watch with her. I have 
the choice. I have those 50 films earmarked and I know that out of these, 25 of 
them I will watch very happily with my 12 years old daughter and the rest 25 I will 
not let her watch till she is 18 years and can decide for herself. So, what has 
changed in 20 years is also the options and the choices we have. During the 
lockdown we thought that we will watch everything. We could not watch even 2 
per cent of what is available. I would not agree entirely that there is nothing you 
can watch with your family. I think, our film industry is producing a lot of films 
which are good for family consumption where you can really enjoy the film with 
your family. Yes, of course, there are films where you will not want to go with 
your family. I am just saying that let you decide that. I do not think that another 
body should decide what you want to watch with your family and what is correct 
for your family. I think, the individual needs to decide that with the correct 
information. Say, for example, I want to watch a film or I am seeing a poster and 
the poster is saying that there is excessive abusive content, excessive violence, 
sex and nudity and I am saying that it is not for me today and I do not go for it. 
But if there is somebody who wants that, then I do not want to be the person to 
decide that it is not for you. That is my perspective on this”. 
 
 
86. On the issue of vulgarity, the witness submitted as  under: 
”Ultimately, what is vulgarity? There is sexual content. Is it necessary? It is a 
debate and two people can never agree on it. That is the whole problem with 
creativity. Me as a content creator will always try and push for less regulation. As 
a director and as a creator, I would always want less regulation. There is one 
fundamental point and we have still not spoken about it. It is very important when 
you are looking at regulation. Both OTTs and feature films, watching them is a 
voluntary act and that is something that we must take into consideration. If you 
have certification and it says, ‘this film has excessive violence, a lot of violence or 
a sexual content’, the person buying the ticket which is usually very expensive, 
going in and watching it is a voluntary act. It is not being pushed down. It is a pull 
content.   There are some series which I totally agree with you have excessive 
abuses because they are doing it to get thrills, they know they will get more 
eyeballs if they do some thrills. But I will never say that it is not what filmmakers 
like to do. If a filmmaker wants to do it, I will say that let them do it but certify it in 
a way that clearly says that this series has a lot of abusive content and then let 

30 
 
the audience decide. I do agree that the children need to be protected but today, 
the children can be protected by certification easily. In theatres, a child cannot go 
or if it is below fifteen. In the OTT, the technology is there to prevent a child from 
it, there are child locks and personal passcodes. If there is a show which is not 
suitable for a child, you can even have for that show itself a passcode that the 
consumer can press in and access it. So, it does become the responsibility of the 
parents to make sure that they do that. That is something which I as a filmmaker 
try and push the point that whatever content people are consuming is a voluntary 
choice. They are going for that. I do not know where we stop. 
xxxx…xxxx….xxx….I am not going to pass any qualitative 
remarks…xxxx…xxx…..xxx…., I personally feel that the controversy made 
maybe ten times more people watch it. Otherwise, it would have died a natural 
death; I do not think people would have seen that. Even in that we can give a 
certification. Before you watch the serial you can actually put a disclaimer that 
this has provocative thing. I have not seen the serial, so I cannot comment. But I 
am saying whatever it is, if you put the disclaimer the audience knows what they 
are going in for and they can choose to ignore it”. 
 
87. Providing views on censorship, another witness (an Actor, Producer and Director) 
submitted as under: 
“The contents of the film should be self-regulated just as in the case of television 
or OTT. The members of CBFC should not be members appointed by the Central 
Government but should be an independent self-regulatory body comprising of 
people appointed by the industry similar to a Broadcasting Content Complaints 
Council (BCCC) for the non-news television content. Such independent self-
regulating body shall certify films or act upon complaints based on the firm 
footing of law or on parameters that are objective”. 
 
 
88. In written submission, the witness also submitted as under: 
“Sharing views against the functioning of CBFC is guided more by the policies of 
a transient Government than on any sound principles of Law. The number of 
Films cleared without cuts have been sharply reducing over the years and the 
number of controversies over film certification has been on the rise. There are 
regional differences in certifying films. The films with cuts also seem to vary 
widely from one Language to another, thereby exposing the lack of objectivity in 
parameters determining certification of a film.  Why I refer to regulations and 
restrictions here is mainly because, the CBFC perceives itself to be more of a 
censoring body instead of being a certifying body as it should be. What was 
needed or relevant in 1952 need not any longer be relevant in the present day. 
Controlling and curbing freedom of expression in a Film through an executive 
driven body such as CBFC is completely retrograde in the present day. The 
contents of the Film should be self-regulated just as in the case of Television or 
OTT”. 
 
89. Responding to a suggestion for fully liberating the process of certification, the 
Chairperson, CBFC during evidence submitted as under: 
“That is fine.  But then the accountability comes with the age-old example.  You 
know, you had seen a theatre and your freedom of expression tells you, ‘Fire’.  

31 
 
उसक े  बाद भगदड़ मच जाती है, 20 लोग मर जाते हɇ। You have said fire because it 
was your freedom.  You have said ‘fire’ aloud.  There was no fire but you felt like 
saying it….x.xx…xxx…xxx. I said that I felt like saying and I said it. It is my 
imagination and I acted upon it. अगर हम इन चीजɉ पर  िलडसकस नहȣं करना चाहते 
ह§ तो न करɅ, लेकȧन मुझे लगता है कȧ state of women in the country and portrayal of 
women and objectification of women, मै अÈसर यह उदाहरण देता हूँ कȧ जैसे आप 
एक Ǒफãम  देख रहे हɇ, उसमे एक पुिलस वुमन है  और आपको उसमे पुिलस नहȣं 
Ǒदखाई देती है! आप लगातार उसकȧ टाइट Ĝेस पर फोकस कर रहे हɇ और एक गाना 
चला रहे हɇ, उसमे तरह-तरह इनुइनडोस  हɇ।  She is absolutely disrespected by the 
camera. The intent of the camera is to see her as anything else but as an object. 
In a country where it is very difficult for her to get educated and then get a job like 
police, repeatedly you are objectifying her putting titillating songs, and gyrating 
her......xxxx......xxxx.....xxxx..xxxxx.... If you do not talk about these things, 
especially in a country where you see such burning issues which should concern 
us, and only talk about one side of that – I am free to do and I only want to see 
her as an object - then I think we will not be having the same debate. We will not 
be talking about correction. You know that it is not everybody’s intent to portray a 
woman in just the way she is. it could be exploitation. It could be that we need to 
correct that perception about a woman in uniform. There are films and there are 
people who are doing it repeatedly. If we do not bring these things up, and do not 
debate them, then let us not at all talk about these issues. When it is convenient 
to us, we talk about it and on the other hand when it suits us, we start raising 
objections about it…….xxx….xxxx….xxxx….There are people who are 
sexualising children.  Even if it is pleasing a few, if you say that sexualising 
children should be left to your imagination, where are we going”. 
 
 
90. When asked to comment on whether we should move from a censorship culture to 
a certification culture, the Chairperson, CBFC submitted as under: 
“This is a larger debate because India is a layered country. We do not use 
censorship. I mean we have been working now mostly on certification. Most of 
the times, the filmmakers have voluntarily offered to do so. What does a 
committee do? If you watch them, they are the people from normal walks of life -- 
they could be teachers, and doctors, etc. They are looking it from the point of 
view of families and that is the way it was constituted. How would people react to 
it? They would want their children to watch it or not watch it. Especially, now, we 
have skewed the committee towards more women. So, if you see, about 60 per 
cent of the presence in the committee is women because we felt that probably 
overcorrection is required in certain parts of our society, including, the children -- 
the vulnerable ones. Those things concern people. So, that is how, it was 
created. Are we done with it? We do not require any sort of filter or any point of 
view there. I am not very sure. There is a need for certification and deliberation”. 
 
 
91. The Chairperson, CBFC was asked to comment on a situation where a foreign film 
exhibited in India requires certification by CBFC, however, an Indian movie seen abroad 

32 
 
does not require certificate. Responding to this, the Chairperson, CBFC submitted the 
following before the Committee: 
“सर, जो हमारे देश मɅ Ǒदखाया जा रहा है, वह हमारे दश[कɉ कȧ सेǔÛसǒबिलटȣ का Úयान मɅ 
रखकर Ǒदखाया जाए, वह Ǒफãम चाहे कहȣं भी बनी हो । It is actually bottom up 
approach. It is not top down”. 
 
92. On the issue of censorship and certification, another witness (Director, Producer, 
screenwriter and Author) submitted as under: 
“When mankind stepped into the digital age, everything in every sphere of life 
changed, and the movies were no exception.  Today, the locomotives of the 
entertainment world are not the big studios, but the OTT platforms.  Finally here 
was the space that the filmmaker had dreamt of… where there was no 
censorship of any kind, and makers had the freedom to make what they truly 
desired to, without the shackles that had so cramped their expression earlier on.  
And now, after having had to live through an entire year of the pandemic, where 
cinema halls have been shut down all over the world and the world wide web has 
become the new cinema hall (at least for now), it would be an exercise in futility 
to attempt to rein in streaming content with archaic censorship laws, which were 
able to be enforced in a cinema hall, but are completely irrelevant when dealing 
with this new beast on the block.  It would be like attempting to catch an entire 
ocean in a flimsy fishing net. ....xxxx....xxxx.....xxxx...xxx.... Having said that, in 
conclusion I appeal to the Committee to prevail upon the lawmakers not to 
strangulate the voices which are clamouring to tell their stories through this new 
technology in this age of hyper connectivity.  We live in the most fascinating time 
of human history.  The only way we can thrive in it is to embrace this change 
rather than to attempt to suffocate it.  Intelligence has been traditionally viewed 
as the ability to think and learn.  But the experts say that in this post pandemic 
turbulent world, decision makers will have to acquire another set of cognitive 
skills that will matter more which is the ability to rethink and unlearn”.   
 
 
93. Witnessing an increase in usage of OTT platforms, the Committee desired to 
know about the framework for OTT platforms. To this, the Chairperson, CBFC during 
evidence stated that "this is actually not the domain but Ministry’s domain as OTT does not 
fall under the CBFC, which does not even have the bandwidth to be able to handle the 
massive content you are talking about".  Elaborating on the issue it was submitted as 
under: 
“OTT is complex and it has just come up. But accountability is something and 
there has to be accountability in any industry if you are calling it a product and 
product has to be accountable. Where do you go? If people are finding certain 
content or seeing it in a certain light, probably where do they go, from where it 
was sourced? Accountability is of concern. Who is accountable for that piece of 
content that is available? Where is it coming from? Yes, you are free to choose, 
when you want to choose but there is a certain code of conduct that is self-

33 
 
emerging or emerges with collaboration with people but it has to emerge 
…xxxx…..xxxx….xxxx….If there is an emergence of a code of conduct, I do not 
see any harm to film industry, or any other industry. Business and profiteering are 
fine, but it has to be done in cognizance with society norms because we operate 
in an ecosystem. It cannot be just one-way street that since it is profitable, it has 
to be done. I think a code of conduct, whichever way it emerges, will be a good 
thing. It will emerge only with dialogue. If we shun dialogue of any kind and 
become adamant that we should not listen to each other, it will not happen. There 
are diverse points of view which are emerging at this time. I think they should be 
tabled and then let us see what emerges out of it. I think informed choice has to 
be given to people. If you are the one who are selling your product it is not 
enough for me if you certify your product. You are the only one and you know my 
ideas to make profit. You are out there to make profit. But if there is a sort of 
collective which does that which is more accountable to each other, I think that is 
a better way to go because if I am giving information, especially in the creative 
world, it is not so black and white as to what is 12 plus, 15 plus or 18 
plus……xxx…xxx…xxx….You are talking about accountability. I feel no matter 
what you do, whether there is no body or no framework or whether the framework 
comes from the Government or from themselves, I believe in informed choice. If 
you are empowering the consumers, I need to give consumers a choice, I need 
to tell them what I am. If you are a vegetarian and I am selling a product which is 
non-vegetarian and this information is not written on the product, I am offending 
you”. 
 
94. Further it was also submitted: 
“We live in a complex country and such situations have to be studied before we 
make any decision about it. Even the self-regulation of OTT is in infancy stage. 
We do not know how it will work and how the associations and bodies will work 
together. CBFC has for years learnt certain things and mastered certain things, 
and those things should be definitely learnt from”. 
 
95. On different set of Rules for movies shown on OTT, TV, Theatre and other 
platforms, the witness while deposing before the Committee stated: 
“Actually, it is the first flush.  What has happened is, for years we have these 
rules in cinema that you cannot use abusive language.  Suddenly, the OTT 
platforms came….xxxxx….xxxx….xxxxx….. When we finish from school and go 
in to college, as boys we go little crazy because it is a sudden new found 
freedom that you get which you did not have in school.  When you enter college, 
for a moment you lose your mind.  Maybe, in the first year you lose your mind.  I 
think our industry is going through that losing of mind to a certain extent because 
it is the first flush of getting a lot of freedom but I am very-very confident that it 
will finally settle down because people ultimately will not keep consuming that 
kind of content.  There is a certain intent that you can make out”. 
 
96. The witness also added: 
“Today, an individual can be broadcaster.  So, the problem on online content is 
this. You can guess, try and regulate the established players. But where then 
does it end? It is because there can be ten people who come together and form a 

34 
 
platform.  They can shoot on the i-phone and looks pretty good and pretty 
impressive in terms of technical quality.  When you try to regulate online content, 
I do not know how will it get begin because it is a huge mountain of content.  
Every day, we have new players. As I said, you could be regulating the main 
players. You know the Netflix, Amazon and Disney. But how to regulate the new 
platforms that will keep sprouting up”.   
 
97. The view of Producers Guild of India about movies/content shown on different 
platforms was as under: 
“I think, there is a fundamental difference between watching a film in a cinema 
hall with people around you, watching television over the dining table, and 
through OTT platform which is more of a private nature. So, we can have similar 
guidelines and some of the freedom. I think, we acknowledge that there is a 
difference in the mediums, the nature of the medium itself”. 
 
98. With respect to regulating OTT platforms, the representative, from Indian 
Broadcasting and Digital Foundation (IBDF), during evidence submitted: 
“First and foremost, we must remember that the line between linear television, 
which you watch on TVs and digital OTT platforms or cinema halls is very 
quickly blurring. We are here to talk about an august body which will govern 
what goes on each of these platforms. But ultimately a decision has to be taken 
whether we go digital first, which is on an OTT platform and bring the same 
content on the linear platform, or show it in a cinema hall and keep it digital. But 
the cinema halls are shut today because of COVID-19 lockdown. Movies are 
premiering on OTT platforms. Where do you draw the barriers? My first 
submission to you is to please keep that at the back of your mind when you are 
talking about content. The more restrictive you make it, the more difficult it is for 
everybody in the food chain to make a profit”. 
 
 
99. On the issue of self regulation of OTT platforms, the representative of IBDF 
submitted as under: 
“The first step that we took was with the blessings of the Parliamentary 
Committee, which is of a similar nature, an organisation called BCCC, 
Broadcasting Content Complaints Council which is headed by a retired Judge. It 
has eminent personalities as members. The viewer has the right to complain in 
case he or she finds the content offensive of any nature. Every channel has to 
run a scroll saying that if you have any complaint against the content of this 
channel, please inform or approach so and so and there is a proper 
methodology. We have been very successful. So far we have been able to deal 
with all kinds of complaints and take them to their natural conclusion. We have 
just launched a similar thing for digital content which is why the IBF expanded 
its mandate to say that we are now called IBDF taking the digital players into 
foray. Big platforms, which operate in India, like Disney Hotstar, Zee5, Sonyliv, 
etc., are members of this organisation. We have created a similar Council again 
headed by Justice Vikramjit Sen, who is an eminent Judge and having eminent 

35 
 
personalities and film personalities like Nikhil Advani, who have experience in 
creating this kind of content and we are following the same process. So, we are 
already taking that step”. 
 
100. Supporting the idea of freedom for OTT platforms, Producers’ Guild of India (PGI) 
during evidence submitted the following before the Committee: 
“As a general opinion, right from the time of Russia’s love affair with Raj Kapoor, 
Indian cinema, content has been one of most effective purveyors of India's soft 
power, our cultural ambassadors. In fact, it is on the verge of exploding worldwide, 
thanks to the OTT platforms, which are taking our films, our content all over the 
world. Now is the time to actually let it fly. We are positioned to take on the world. 
We have a Korean group called BTS taking over the Bill Board charts; we have 
Turkish drama taking over airwaves all across the world. Indian cinema and 
content have the potential to do that and more. But we have to let it reach its 
potential and not cut it to size”.  
 
101. For certification model for OTT, the representative of the Ministry during evidence 
submitted as under: 
““On the OTT platforms, we are looking at some kind of self-certification 
because as we know that under definitions the audio-visual content on the OTT 
platforms is not covered under the Cinematograph Act unless we amend the 
Act. In case we go for that route, will the existing setup of CBFC be able to 
handle the volumes of OTT...xxxx…xxx…xxx…..We had our Consultative 
Committee meeting yesterday and this was the subject under discussion - 
regulation of OTT platform. It was strongly recommended by the MPs that there 
has to be some kind of regulation, a framework has to be there. This is also the 
thinking of the Ministry. We need a framework to what extent, censorship is 
definitely out, we are working on a framework and I can say here. It should be 
placed in the public domain as soon as the draft is ready. That is the idea. That 
is the route we would be taking. Once we put things together, and we have a 
framework for regulation, it will be in the public domain and then, we go as per 
the consultation or the demand of the country”. 
 
102. Adding on the issue of regulation of  OTT platforms, the Secretary, M/o I&B during 
evidence submitted as under: 
“With regard to OTT platforms, the digital media rules have come in the month 
of February, 2021 and we are just into this. I think, even the self-regulatory 
mechanism has been introduced for the first time where the Ministry also comes 
in the third tier. Here, the Ministry means there is a Committee and there is an 
authorized officer who also can take a view. Till now, what was happening was 
that anything could be shown on OTT platforms and there was per se nothing 
actually which was governing OTT platforms. Now, with this coming into place, 
there are cases which are being referred to the self regulatory mechanism. We 
have not really received anything till now from the Ministry on the OTT 
platforms. So, let us see how this works, and if there are issues later on, then 
we can think of them in the future”. 
 

36 
 
 
103. The Chairperson, CBFC also added as under: 
“जब मुदगल और æयाम बेनेगल कमेटȣ कȧ ǐरपोÒस[ आई थीं, उस समय Ǒडǔजटल 
Üलेटफॉम् जैसी कोई चीज पररĤेêय मɅ नहȣं थी। It was nowhere in the picture. There 
is an argument which I often used to use about personalized viewing versus 
collective viewing. Now, collective viewing is that when people together are 
viewing something and they are cognizant of the fact that somebody is sitting 
with them and it becomes a different behavioural pattern versus somebody is 
viewing something very personally. Hence, the consumption and the stimulus has 
a very different response. So, these things were not in the purview. I think one 
has seen that there has to be a holistic approach towards certifying content of 
any kind as various platforms are emerging now. This approach has to be rather 
agnostic, in my opinion, to the mediums we follow, otherwise we will keep having 
new inventions in technology. So, I think somewhere at the source one has to 
sort of look at it in that sense and these Committees had not taken cognizance of 
these emerging mediums. They were never in the purview. So, that also has 
been something which is in the discussion. It is not in the CBFC’s purview, but I 
thought I just sort of share my point of view on that”. 
 
104. Pointing out to the scenario where OTT and television viewers though were same, 
yet ‘A’ certificate movies were not permitted to be telecast in television, the Committee 
asked if there was a need to reform the policy because OTT and television caters the 
same catchment almost. Responding to this, the CBFC, Chairperson submitted to the 
Committee: 
“Not absolutely the same and there is reach, Internet and a lot of other things in 
OTT. If you go to a remote village, probably you get a television channel, you 
might not get OTT because of the Internet”. 
 
105. When asked whether there was a need to have a relook on these issues,  CBFC, 
Chairperson submitted as under: 
“Yes absolutely. The availability of adult channel is something which probably the 
Ministry has taken cognizance of earlier also. But I do not think there is any 
consensus on that, at least, to my knowledge”. 
 
106. The Committee desired to know whether same rules ought to apply to all the 
platforms, whether it was a public cinema theatre or a private channel wherein one had to 
pay a subscription to watch or a television exhibition or the internet for that matter. 
Responding to this, the Chairperson, CBFC submitted as under: 
“A more nuanced definition of what is collective viewing is, this could be an 
intellectual sort of exercise.. xxx….xxx….xxx…. In the lockdown, I have just 
been observing that the patterns have changed as to how people consume 
content. Now, people could not step out of their homes. Now, certainly, which 
you got personalized content became a collective content. People started 
watching these streaming platforms together in the family and unlike many, 

37 
 
there are not many televisions in somebody’s house. There is one TV in the 
common place and people are watching the contents collectively in their 
households. Suddenly, something which was probably they found very 
comfortable watching alone versus suddenly whole family watching it together, 
the attitude towards the same content got changed. This is human behaviour. 
They started seeing it very differently and the definition of what is collective and 
individual suddenly got blurred. So, these are the developments which one has 
to take cognizance of. I think we need to think about certification of the content 
and it is not a question which only India is facing. It is a global question and we 
could take a sort of lead in that because we are huge content producing nation 
and we can probably guide the whole world in this”. 
 
107. When asked to clarify whether there was a need to have different guidelines for 
personalized content and different guidelines for common viewing, the Chairperson CBFC 
submitted: 
“I am saying, there could be. As a debate, one can look at it how do you look at 
content differently”. 
 
108. Clarifying on intervention by the Ministry, the Secretary, M/o I&B during evidence 
submitted as under: 
“There is no Government intervention there in TV or in internet arena. If you see 
the oversight mechanism in TV, this Act has been in existence for more than a 
decade or so and there has not been any complaint of undue interference from 
the Government so far. Somehow, the apprehension is coming that the oversight 
will be an overreach. I think there is a subtle difference and the fact remains that 
even the Government officers who are sitting on these committees are bound to 
follow the law. There are the judicial proceedings and officers will not take the 
risk of going beyond the four corners of law. These mechanisms have been 
working for since 1995 under the Cable Television Network Act. This is what I 
would like to submit…xxx…xxx…xxx… It is like NBSA for the TV. The news 
broadcasters have got together and have formed a body. Justice Sikri, if I am not 
mistaken, is the Chairman of their grievance redressal body. Similarly, the non-
news or the entertainment channels, if we can call them, have NBA. So, the OTT 
platforms already have a society called the Internet and Mobile Association of 
India. They will themselves select a person as the chair and the member”. 
 
 
109. Presenting the current situation prevailing w.r.t to regulation of OTT, a witness 
appearing before the Committee during the evidence, submitted as under: 
“The CBFC only looks at theatrical releases of films. It starts from there and it 
ends there. So, whatever is happening on OTT, it is totally unregulated right now. 
It is entirely up to the viewers’ discretion as it is called. We have dealt with one 
thing in the report. We will send you more copies of the report. Hon. Chairperson, 
Sir, I would request you that the Committee give views on the report. We have 
really worked on it.  
 

38 
 
But the number two part is that as Chairman Sir initially mentioned is about 
Ombudsmen part.  Now, if I am the Judge in the Jury of the audience which 
means if age related classification is the way forward, then streaming devices 
should not be doing their own classification because there is a conflict of interest.  
If there is a separate code which is required to look at classification, then it 
should be an operative mechanism which looks at what should be for 13 years 
and what should be for 16 years.  All over the world, it is there.  I will give you an 
example of cultural nuance.  Somebody mentioned it.  In France, gender nudity is 
not a problem, gangster films are.  But in the United States, if gangster films were 
a problem, France would be popular in making such films.  But nudity is a 
problem when they certify this.  So, obviously, there is a cultural nuance to every 
country. We cannot say that we are devoid of the tradition and the nuance that 
we belong to but that nuance also should be progressive with the advent of the 
new technologies.  We speak in the Report about AI and augmented reality.  This 
is one thing about which I forgot in the last segment.  Screenplays are written for 
immersive gaming today.  How are they doing for films?  I mean today, I could be 
in Kurukshetra and I will become Karun, I will become Krishna and everything 
with just a click of the button.  I will change my own characterisation and the story 
will not end probably as Mahabharata did.  I think that is the absolute name – 
immersive gaming and immersive story telling. So, if we really have to look at 
gaming, we go on talking about gaming and all those things. There is a very 
progressive approach of gaming which is coming up. We should explore it. We 
should help creators as far as immersive gaming paradigm is concerned.  Sir, I 
do not think we are censoring. We are a hyper-sensitive democracy but we must 
remember as I said in the beginning, hurtful provocative versus truth telling needs 
to be defined”.  
 
110. On the problem being faced while certification, a witness submitted before the 
Committee as under: 
“Speaking from my own personal experience, the films that I have made, I am 
confident that the intention has never been wrong, you know, to create a certain 
scene or to show a certain character.  So, I go with this innate confidence that I 
have done with a good intent, there would not really be any problems in my films.  
The problems arise.  Sometimes, as I said, there is an arbitrary nature that 
comes because there are just nine different individuals sitting there and you are 
not sure how they are going to react.  So, when you go in, you are not really sure.  
Sometimes, there are scenes in a film where you know, okay, this is going to get 
attention; let us be prepared what we have to argue about this film.  But 
sometimes, something comes out which is not even thought about.  It suddenly 
pops up and you say, okay, now what do I do about this.  So, that is for me an 
impediment.  The arbitrary nature that comes from the fact that there are 
ultimately seven or eight individuals who will come up with their own points of 
view.  How, how do you counter that?  How do you divorce it from being at the 
mercy of different viewpoints on that particular day and how would the reaction to 
my film be different if a different set of people were there?  Which is what needs 
to be balanced out.  It should not be the luck of the draw that the seven people 
today will have a different view of my film and seven people the next day might 
have a different view of my film”. 
 

39 
 
111. Adding on the issue of making certification of film faceless, the witness submitted 
as under: 
“I am going to speak about this from a film maker perspective, from my own 
personal experiences, from shared experiences of my film maker friends about 
the whole process of certification/ censoring that our films have gone through 
over the years. I even do not know where to begin with from because there have 
been so many layers to it. But let me just begin by saying that when we are going 
for certification of our films, it is almost like a joke. We do not know what cards 
will be dealt to us. What I mean is, it has been a little bit arbitrary. It reflects the 
personalities of the seven or eight panellists who are going to be there. We have 
had that, a very amusing anecdote to say that when we were walking in there 
was always one person who does your paper work and takes you into the 
screening or viewing room and there is always a saying that aree koi problem 
nahi hai, ye madam yaa ye sir thik hai. What that thik means, we really do not 
know but it means that they will be a little more lenient, they would not catch on 
to words.  Sometimes we have had cases where the problem, of course, is 
because there are many things open to interpretation. For example, we should 
not use abusive language. But in some films of mine I have been told to cut out, 
in five instances, the word like ‘saala’. The line said, ‘aree ye saala hamesha late 
aata hai’. That was found offensive.  Sir, it is a matter of degree. When you are 
opening and out to interpretation to people, that is when systems begin to fail. 
For us, we need regulations/ systems that work irrespective of who the people 
involved are. It is a system that needs to work without the human contact once 
the major guidelines put in place.  Mr. Chairperson, as you rightly mentioned the 
culture of asking for cuts, when you walk in basically what you are bracing 
yourself for is what are the cuts. I think that needs to be done away with because 
that truly interferes with a content creator’s work. This might sound like 
romanticised notions but there is a certain rhythm. There is a certain balance to a 
film, which does get upset when out of context things are removed or you ask to 
just cut and throw them out. Therefore, there is a need to look at how to 
circumvent that problem, maybe, through certifications like what Shyam Babu 
Committee recommended.   Then, despite even having seven or eight people in 
the panel, sometimes there are some contradictory views on issues. 
…xxxx….xxxx…xxxx…We need to look at how we get away from individual 
personalities deciding what is good and what is bad because that is always going 
to be recipe for trouble. Some filmmakers might be in sync with the ideology or 
the way those people think; one filmmaker might be on the other side. That 
should not be deciding the fate of a film, whether it gets the cut or it does not get 
the cut. We have to accept all viewpoints. We have to accept everybody’s 
perspective as filmmakers because it will really be a boring world if all of us make 
the same films. I think that is important for us.  
 
112. The witness further added as under: 
"To take it forward, I would say that the film industry for long has always been 
viewed as an industry that just makes stuff to entertain people; we do not 
recognise actually the economic contribution of the film industry.  Now with the 
OTTs coming in – I will not have the exact figure – if you were to take the spend 
of just the OTT platforms worldwide, it would be upwards of USD 30-35 billion a 

40 
 
year on content creation. With China out of the picture, India can easily get 20 
per cent of that. I am talking of a good amount of USD 4-5 billion of content 
creation coming out of India.  Then, one very important element that I have 
always noticed as a filmmaker is just the sheer soft power that Indian cinema 
gives to India. I would be extending myself to say that the soft power that India 
has really comes primarily from the film industry. I have seen it and it has saved 
my life as a man did not pull the trigger on me in Afghanistan when he realised 
that I was from India. He started singing the song Mere Sapnon ki Rani Kab 
Aayegi Tu.  He was going to shoot me when I was doing documentaries in 
Afghanistan. That is the power of Indian cinema which we also need to 
recognise. It is, therefore, an industry that needs to be nurtured. Though some 
form of regulation could be put in place, we really need to have a light hand on 
that because regulation or over-regulation can constrict creativity.   The 
multinationals are coming here on OTT platforms. Of course, a market is a great 
market and India is a huge market. They would want to come. I think, ease of 
doing business is also a very important factor for them. They could easily shift to 
Turkey which has suddenly become an attractive destination. As you notice, in 
the last five years, the soft power that Turkey has obtained through its web series 
is amazing. So is the case of Korea. As a content creator, I would just request 
that if there needs to be some sort of regulation - because India is a unique 
country and it is a very diverse country and there are lot of fault-lines present 
historically arising from contemporary issues and we need to recognise that – I 
would always say that the filmmakers need to self-regulate and that is the best 
way to go forward. I know that there will be some people who would take 
advantage of lax regulation or not too much regulation and do things that can end 
up becoming a little sensational or, what we call, cheap thrills. But, ultimately it 
balances out. If you look at the top grossing films in this country, none of them 
really have abusive language or sexual content for titillation or overtly political 
dialogues or lines. They are politics, of course, and they must be but it is always 
in the layers beneath. So, I feel the market also balances out. We as a few 
filmmakers might make something sexually provocative to get a few extra bucks 
but it is not going to last for long because a 16-year-old can access the Internet 
today and see whatever he wants to.  So, ultimately, it is the self-regulation that 
is really going to work. And in the OTT space, really, how much can you 
regulate? You are going to be talking about thousands and thousands of hours of 
content. Already, I think there are about 60 OTT platforms and God knows how 
many will be opening up in the years to come. That is an area which really needs 
to be looked at very seriously. How does one regulate the OTT content and is it 
even possible to be able to regulate that”. 
 
113. Regarding the process of certification by CBFC, one of the witness who is an 
Actor, Producer and Director has submitted that it should be faceless. 
 
(F) Validity of certificate 
 
114. The Committee were given to understand that one of the proposed provisions in 
the Cinematograph (Amendment) Bill, 2021 relates to “Validity of the Certificate” issued by 

41 
 
CBFC. Regarding this, the Ministry informed that as per the provision of the present Act 
under Sub-section 3 of Section 5A, the certificate issued by the Board is valid for 10 years. 
Although this restriction on validity of certificate for only 10 years was removed through an 
executive order, the existing provision in the Act required to be amended to remove the 
stipulation such that the certificate is valid in perpetuity.   
 
115. Justification provided by the Ministry for this proposed amendment is that in 1984 
the Central Government had passed an order to remove the validity of 10 years for a   film 
certification. However, the provision in the Act was still in existence which would be 
deleted through the amendment. This would continue to allow the films to be exhibited 
without getting the certification revalidated from time to time. They also informed that 
Mudgal Committee had also recommended for making the validity of certificates perpetual 
as it was in line with ease of doing business policy of the Government. 
 
116. During cross-examination by the Committee, the representative of the Ministry 
justified the proposed amendment related to validity of certification, by submitting the 
following: 
“We brought this proposal of amendment in the Act but a notification under 
Section 9 of the Act, which is about power to exempt, had already been issued 
which said that the validity of certificate will not be fixed. The term ‘for a period of 
ten years’ is not mentioned there…xxx…xxx…xxx… Technically, it is already 
implemented. We brought it into the draft Bill because we thought that the Act 
should be updated. If something happens in the meantime, that should also form 
a part of the Act but it has been already implemented..xxx…xxx…xxx…. In 1984, 
vide a notification of the Central Government, that validity of 10 years was 
removed. So, that has already been done. Only, it has to be added in the law. It 
requires to be included in the main body of the Act”. 
 
 
117. As regards validity of certificate, Indian Broadcasting and Digital Foundation 
(IBDF), in their written submission, welcomed and concurred with Government’s proposal 
in the Draft Bill to remove the stipulation in the Cinematograph Act, which currently 
provides for film certificate issued by Central Board of Film Certification (“CBFC” or 
“Board”) to be valid for ten (10) years so as to make such certificate valid in perpetuity. 
(G) Revisionary Power of the Government 
 
118. The examination of the draft ‘Cinematograph (Amendment) Bill, 2021’ had 
revealed that another provision proposed relates to Sub-section(1) of Section 6 which was 

42 
 
regarding “Revisional powers of the Central Government‟. In this regard, the Ministry in 
their written submission, stated: 
“High Court of Karnataka in its judgment dated 2nd April, 1990 in Writ Petition 
No. 4335 of 1979 - K.M. Shankarappa Vs Union of India had struck down some 
clauses in sub-section(1) of Section 6 such that the Central Government could 
not exercise revisional powers in respect of films that are already certified by 
the Board, viz. "or has been decided by", "or as the case may be decided by the 
Tribunal", and "or to whom a certificate has been granted as the case may be". 
This was also upheld by the Hon’ble Supreme Court vide judgment dated 
28/11/2000 in Civil Appeal 3106 of 1991. Benegal Committee had also 
recommended modifying Section 6 in view of the Karnataka High Court and 
Supreme Court judgment. Hence the struck down provisions are being deleted.   
 
The Hon’ble Supreme Court vide judgment dated 28/11/2000 in Civil Appeal 
3106 in the K.M. Shankarappa case has opined that at the highest, the 
Government may apply to the Tribunal itself for a review, if circumstances so 
warrant. However, the option to apply to the Tribunal for review is no longer 
feasible with the abolishment of the FCAT by ‘The Tribunals Reforms 
(Rationalisation and Conditions of Service) Ordinance, 2021’”. 
 
Sometimes complaints are received against a film that allude to violation of 
Section 5B(1) of the Cinematograph Act, 1952 after a film is certified  and 
provisions of Section 5B(1) are derived from Article 19(2) of the Constitution and 
are non-negotiable. Therefore, if a complaint is received regarding violation of 
Section 5B(1) of the Act, the Central Government may refer the matter to CBFC 
for re-examination of the film.   
 
Benegal Committee recommended that a certified film can be re-examined by 
CBFC if a reference is received from MHA in respect of violation of section 5B(1) 
of the Cinematograph Act, 1952 and clause 3 of the CBFC Guidelines. As per the 
proposed proviso, the Central Government will only be referring a case for re-
examination to the Chairman, CBFC and will not pass any order on its own.  
 
In case the certification of a film is re-examined by the CBFC, the interest of the 
producers of the film will be safeguarded by giving him an opportunity to be heard 
before orders are passed by CBFC.  At the same time, Rules will be framed to 
clarify the procedure and circumstances under which this power can be exercised 
so that there is no arbitrariness in the action taken.   
 
It may be noted that Central Government cannot recall or re-certify any film 
certified by the CBFC. It has been proposed that only on receipt of complaint on 
account of violation of Principles for guidance in certifying films mentioned in 
section 5B(1) such as sovereignty and integrity of India, the security of the State, 
friendly relations with foreign States, public order, decency or morality, or 
involves defamation or contempt of court or is likely to incite the commission of 
any offence, the Government may direct CBFC to re-examine a film. CBFC will 
take the final decision in this regard”.  
 

43 
 
119. On the proposed amendment in the draft ‘Cinematograph (Amendment) Bill, 2021’  
relating to ‘Revisional powers of the Central Government,  a witness who is a Director and 
Producer, in a written memorandum, submitted as under: 
“The proposal to re-censor films that have already been censored by a 
Government appointed board with an officer of the Government as its head is 
suspicious. It is not clear who this super-censor is. As practitioners of the art, we 
have anxious questions about why and what for. The Government should not 
suspect its own officials who carry out all the dictums without fail”. 
 
 
120. Following is the submission of another witness on the proposed amendment: 
“The draft amendment bill seeks to vest the Union Government with Revisionary 
powers to review a film after being certified by CBFC, when such power to review 
a film after certification by the CBFC has already been struck down by the 
Hon’ble Supreme Court as unconstitutional in the Union Of India vs K. M. 
Shankarappa case. The Hon’ble Supreme Court held that Section 6(1) of the 
Cinematograph Act 1952 is a travesty of the rule of law, which is one of the basic 
structures of the Constitution.    In its note, the Ministry justifies the introduction of 
the amendment by stating that sometimes complaints are received against a film 
that allude to violation of Section 5B(1) of the Cinematograph Act, 1952 after a 
film is certified,” and that the Government is not able to act on those complaints 
because the Courts have said it has no power once a film is certified by the 
CBFC.  The above justification is a big fallacy. The impression that the Central 
Government is powerless to act against complaints received has no basis. The 
Hon’ble Supreme Court of India had observed that if the circumstances so 
warrant, the Government may apply to the Tribunal for a review and be bound by 
the ultimate decision of the Tribunal. The Government is well empowered to act 
against complaints received by submitting itself to judicial review against 
decisions of the Board granting certification instead of trying to impose executive 
excess, and this was the core principle laid down by the Hon’ble Supreme Court 
through its order.  The proposed amendment seeks to empower the Central 
Government to have a back door entry for controlling and curbing the creative 
expressions of a Film maker with retrospective effect, through the Chairman of 
the Board who is somebody receiving his salary and allowances, as determined 
by the Central Government. I am of the humble view that what the Hon’ble 
Supreme Court has prevented the Central Government from doing directly should 
not be done even indirectly, which this proposed amendment paves way to”. 
 
121. On the proposed amendment in the draft ‘Cinematograph (Amendment) Bill, 
2021’, the witness while deposing before the Committee further added as under: 
“The provisions of Section 5E and 5F of Cinematographic Act 1952 should be 
repealed. The proposed amendment with respect to revisionary powers of the 
Government should not be implemented, as it is redundant and superfluous for 
reasons mentioned above. Therefore, any unconstitutional interference with the 
right to speech and expression under article 19(1)(a) shall only result in spate of 
litigations. If the Central Government is aggrieved by a certification, it should, 
instead, of referring to the Chairman for review, should subject itself before a 
judicial review to challenge the certification issue.  The retrospective nature of the 

44 
 
proposed amendment is most sinister. If a film once certified loses its certification 
on account of any whimsical decision of a transient executive, the same shall 
snowball into multifarious legal issues, contractual violations and severe 
economic losses. Hence, the same should not be implemented. The powers 
envisaged under the proposed amendment for the CBFC shall only pave way for 
executive excess, bias, undue influence and totalitarianism against free and fair 
voice and expression, which is the main pillar in a flourishing democracy, and 
hence should not be implemented”. 
 
122. According to Indian Broadcasting and Digital Foundation (IBDF), the proposition 
was against the principles of separation of power and a potential ground to enable 
executive interference with independent decision making by an expert body sitting in 
committee / and a statutory mechanism. The separation of powers was undermined as the 
principal fact remained that the office of the expert body was solely at the pleasure of the 
Central Government.  The principle is against the essence of the judgment in Union of 
India vs KM Shankarappa.  In their written memorandum, they also submitted following: 
“The ability of the executive (Government) to direct reopening of a matter decided 
by an expert body at any point of time, is an infringement of the rights established 
and articulated by courts as granted by Article 14 and the rights integrated under 
Article 19(1)(a) which only permits regulation under specified grounds in a 
‘reasonable’ manner.   The failure to provide any time limit brings regulatory 
uncertainty and it defies the principles of legitimate expectation.  They have 
stated that the Central Government ought to refrain from seeking any revisionary 
powers as contemplated in the Draft Bill as further revisionary requirement as 
suggested in the Draft Bill is not necessary and would be considered as an over-
breadth. 
 
Considering that the producer of a film will be proceeding with release and 
incurring huge expenses in marketing, promotion and release of the film basis the 
certification given by CBFC to such film, therefore, any revision / cancellation of 
such CBFC certificate or delay on account of complaints / references, would 
cause irreparable losses to the producer, theatre owners, etc. Further, if such re-
examination is ordered after the release of the film, it will cause disruption in its 
theatrical exploitation, the losses towards which can never be recovered by the 
producer since, within a short time after release, the pirated copies of the films 
are available on torrent and other pirate websites and the shelf life of theatrical 
exhibition is presently at an average of two (2) weeks.  Further, there is neither 
any consultation nor discussion, as to what will happen in case Central 
Government receives multiple references albeit at different points in time. It is not 
clear whether the Central Government will keep on seeking review, which may 
ultimately stifle release of a film. Further, there is no clarity as to how and when a 
time-bound finality to film certification process will be achieved. There is also no 
clarity or discussion on any due diligence that will be conducted by Central 
Government before any such revisionary power entitling it to seek review of a 
film’s certification before High Court can be exercised. Failure to address these 
issues or provide a reasonable solution not only has potential to cause 

45 
 
irreparable loss / damages to producers but, importantly, may also be violative of 
their fundamental rights. 
 
The Cinematograph Act had a provision that allowed Government to have final 
say in all matters relating to certification of a film. However, this provision was set 
aside by the Hon’ble High Court of Karnataka and subsequently upheld by the 
Hon’ble Supreme Court in Union of India vs. K. M. Shankarappa matter. The 
present draft stipulation is an attempt to overcome the principles laid down under 
the aforesaid Judgments and allow Central Government to indirectly 
review/revise the certificate granted by CBFC. The draft stipulation is not 
desirable and susceptible to misuse. To illustrate – Government may require 
High Court to re-examine a film umpteen number of time based on complaints 
received by it at different points in time on account of alleged violation of 
certification principles, even though the actual reason for seeking re- examination 
may have political undertones.  It is not desirable for Central Government to 
become an adjudicator or a stakeholder calling for re- examination, when CBFC 
itself is constituted by the Central Government for fulfilling the purposes of 
certification. Distinction / separation of powers needs to be maintained since, any 
direction by Central Government for re-examination may weigh in with CBFC to 
recertify or even decline any certification.  
 
We suggest that CBFC should have an autonomy in taking independent 
decisions in furtherance of the objectives of the Cinematograph Act and Rules 
framed there under. It should not be influenced by any political pressure/ views of 
the Central Government. If the Central Government is not satisfied with the re- 
examined  certifications,  then  the  government  has  the  discretion  to  
challenge  the  same  before  the appropriate High Court. 
 
This would also adversely impact the licensing/production deals in connection 
with procurement/creation of content, as there will always be a sword hanging on 
the head of the creator or the licensor wherein, even after complying with the law 
to take requisite  certification there is no conclusiveness on whether  a 
subsequent demand to re-examine could be raised. This may even impact the 
negotiating power as the licensee would always want to be protected if there is 
any adverse impact in their exploitation of the film and expose licensees and 
assignees to adverse actions by the Government apart from economic losses 
being suffered”. 
 
 
123. The CEO, Producers Guild of India (PGI), on the proposed amendment had made 
the following written submissions to the Committee : 
“The proposed amendments, while attempting to be different, are yet giving the 
Central Government the same powers it had with respect to certification prior to 
Shankarappa. While the Central Government itself will not be re-certifying the 
film, it will be directing the CBFC to re-examine an already certified and released 
film, and since such a directive would be coming from the Central Government 
therefore there is a high likelihood of a re-certification of the film by the CBFC.    
Moreover, the language of the amendment is vague, as it does not specify who 
can make such reference/complaint to the Central Government, thus enabling 
anyone to do so even for frivolous / mischievous purposes. 

46 
 
 
Even though the Shankarappa judgment was given at a time before the Film 
Certification Appellate Tribunal was abolished, there is still a provision for the High 
Courts around the country to be the appropriate forum to hear any issues 
(including with respect to certification) and the Government does not need any 
powers in addition to this.  There is therefore no change in the foundation of the 
Shankarappa judgment, and thus the introduction of the proposed amendment, 
which will have the effect of nullifying the Shankarappa decision, will be ultra 
vires the constitution and against the principle of separation of powers. 
 
In addition to the contravention of the SC decision in Shankarappa, and the lack of 
basis to overrule a judgment by enactment of this legislature, the proposed 
amendment to Section 6(1) also threatens to affect the producers‟ fundamental 
rights of freedom of speech and expression under Article 19 of the Constitution. 
This is simply because if anyone is allowed to raise a complaint with the Central 
Government, they will do so through their personal subjective cultural lens and raise 
issues with the film that actually embody the free speech and expression of the 
producer/director.  Therefore, allowing the proposed amendment, would open the 
floodgates of issues for filmmakers since these amendments would enable any 
individual to raise their personal grievances against any film, which would not only 
hinder cultural advancement but would also interfere with the freedom of expression 
of the producer / director. 
 
Lastly, while the Act does not specifically provide for any transparency in the 
discharge of functions, it is an established rule of law, that implementation of the 
legislature should be done in an open and transparent matter. While it is 
appreciated that comments are being taken on the proposed amendments, it is 
surprising that this amendment has never been proposed earlier – for example in 
the Mudgal Report, the Shyam Benegal Report, the Standing Committee Report 
and even the 2019 draft bill. Therefore, the basis/discussion of such amendment 
has clearly not been done, and it has directly been introduced to the public for 
their comments. This is similar to the manner in which the FCAT was abolished in 
April 2021”. 
 
124. During evidence, the representative of PGI added as under: 
“Our biggest concern, of course, is the proposed amendment to Section 6(1) 
which, we feel, is not only bad in law but also at odds with constitutional 
guarantees. This would create havoc in the film industry. We can get into the 
practical difficulties of having a sword constantly hanging over our head where 
even a film, which is certified, could tomorrow be pulled out on the basis of a 
frivolous complaint. That is a huge concern for all of us. We hope, the Committee 
would recommend against keeping it”. 
 
125. On this proposed amendment in the draft ‘Cinematograph (Amendment) Bill, 
2021’, following view was expressed by the Chairperson, CBFC, during evidence: 
“I think, it would have created an unnecessary layer. If the intent is to go for the 
rare cases where there has been an oversight or something which really impacts 
the country’s security or things like that or those issues, I understand the 

47 
 
concerns, but that one .0001 per cent chance will also open a Pandora’s Box 
where everything becomes important. How do you put a judgment there as to 
what is important and what is not important? There has to be more flashing out of 
it...xxx....xxx.xxx...If you ever have this kind of an intervention, it has to be very 
sharply and precisely articulated that this would be in very rare cases. If it 
becomes an everyday practice, then I see that it hampers the way we function”. 
 
126. However, the Ministry while emphasizing on the need for this proposed 
amendment in the draft ‘Cinematograph (Amendment) Bill, 2021’, during evidence, 
submitted the following: 
“As I said, very, very few or rare cases do come up once in a while, maybe once 
in three or four years, that undermine the security and integrity of the 
country…..xxxx…xxx…xxx….In the case of two particular films ‘KaumDe Heere’ 
and ‘Mastermind SukhaJinda’, certificates were issued. After this certification, 
MHA had written to the Ministry”. 
 
127. The representative of the Ministry also added: 
“The CBFC cannot re-examine its own case once it has finalised the 
decision..xxx…xxx…. It is because the procedure in CBFC is that there is an 
Examining Committee and it has examined it. If there is no decision by majority, 
there is a Revising Committee. Again, if there is no majority decision or no 
conclusive decision, there is a Second Revising Committee. After that, the 
decision of the CBFC is final….xxx…xxxx…xxxx….I will break up the issues. 
Firstly, what are the kind of circumstances under which the Government would 
give the direction to the CBFC? …..xxx…xxx…xxx…The circumstances under 
which the Government would require to give this direction to the CBFC could be 
very rare because for everything else there is the CBFC and the court of appeal, 
which is now the High Court. So, what are those circumstances? There are a few 
cases that have come over a period of time, which are again rare cases. Let me 
first say that this power is along with a provision. The provision is about the 
manner in which the Government will be issuing directions to the CBFC to re-
examine the films and it will be prescribed in the rules”.  
 
128. Elaborating on the circumstances under which the Government can refer the 
matter to the CBFC, the representative of the Ministry during evidence submitted before 
the Committee as under: 
“Now, what are the circumstances under which the Government can refer the 
matter to the CBFC? These could be issues of national security and integrity. 
That is a  suggestion made by the Benegal Committee that this should be done 
on a report received from MHA. I will give example of a couple of films, where it 
was felt that this provision should be evoked. One is the film called ‘Kaum De 
Heere’, certified and released in 2014. It means ‘gems of the community’. The 
film was about glorification of two people, who had assassinated a former Prime 
Minister. MHA informed the Ministry that it has been certified and the Ministry 
wanted to intervene. But the matter went to the court and ultimately the court 
decided. Another film, which was next to it, was called ‘Mastermind Sukha Jinda’, 
which was about the assassination of a retired Army Chief, who was heading the 

48 
 
Army at the time of operation Blue Star. This again was a film which was 
objected. These films were not only eulogising a particular act but it came at a 
particular time when the ideology of terrorism was feared to be reviving or could 
lead to such revival. So, that was the concern of the MHA and that is why it was 
felt required in such kind of rare cases, where such things come up. Another 
case can be when CBFC feels that it has certified a film after following all the 
procedures within the CBFC. But after that they still feel that they have not 
certified it properly and it needs re-certification. There are cases like that. In that 
case, CBFC can write to the Ministry and the Ministry can direct the CBFC to go 
through that.    As I insisted and informed, the final decision of any re-
examination that will be done will be of the CBFC. The Government cannot or will 
not take the final decision so far as final re-examination is concerned. This 
process, one, will be detailed and the rules will be prescribed as to what kind of 
circumstances would require the use of this provision. There are safeguards 
because there is a rule of law. These all will be given in detail. The person 
concerned will be heard by the CBFC and a speaking order will be passed by the 
CBFC, after which he can go to the court. Further prescribing of the rules and the 
details to check any arbitrary power by the Government would be detailed in the 
rules. This is what I have to say regarding this. I must assure the hon. Members 
that the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting of the Central Government will 
not be deciding the certification of a film because it has been struck down. The 
Central Government does not have the power and it will not have the power. The 
power will be with the CBFC….xxx…xxx…xxx…. 
 
As I said, the provision has not been understood in the right spirit. The provision 
that we have proposed is that the Central Government will not have any 
revisional power to decide it herself because it has been struck down. So, it goes 
back to the CBFC. Further, as the CBFC functions, it is an independent body; it is 
an autonomous body. All the officials – Chairman and the members – are 
appointed by the Government and all the employees belong to the Government. 
But it is an independent body. They have their own systems. The Government 
does not interfere there. It is a body which takes its own decisions. There can be 
situations, where they themselves feel that there should be a provision to 
reexamine a film or change the certification of a particular film.  As I said, the 
power to be exercised by the Central Government in this regard, will be specified 
clearly in the rules and will not be arbitrary. That is the safeguard that we will 
have. Of course, when CBFC decides it, it has to hear. It will be required to give 
an opportunity of hearing to the persons concerned and take a decision”. 
 
 
129. Furthering the submission of the Ministry, the CEO, CBFC during evidence 
submitted as under: 
“Actually there are certain cases in which, we feel, some developments come 
later on - some matters are under litigation – and you have already certified a 
film. In that case, CBFC also does not have any provision to review, once a 
certificate has been issued….xxx…xxx…xxx… a certificate is issued only after 
going to the revising committee. Certification is the final process, once all the 
revising committees have been done. That is our internal mechanism to reach to 
the certification stage. Sometimes, you come to a certain kind of development 
where you feel that you have already certified a film. Recently also, we got a 

49 
 
case in which the matter was under litigation and the film was certified. Then, the 
aggrieved party approached the High Court and we approached the Ministry. 
Then, we were directed to re-examine the film. We suo motu cannot take a film, 
once certification is done. In that case, we need that power”. 
 
130. On the same issue, the representative of the Ministry during evidence added: 
“There are two things here. One is, I have already mentioned that this is at the 
consultation stage and we have received more than 200 suggestions from 
different industry bodies.  The provision is not that the Government will review.  
The provision is that the Government may ask the CBFC to review. There is a 
slight difference here.  The Government is not taking the power but unfortunately, 
the impression that has gone due to the legal language perhaps is that the 
Government is going to review the certificate that has been already granted 
whereas the provision is that the Government will ask the Central Board of 
Certification to review.    However, as I said, we have received about 200 
suggestions on this issue". 
 
131. Further, it was added as under: 
"Sir, as we just heard the hon. Member, there can be a situation where a 
certificate has been granted in ‘x’ place because of lack of knowledge of the 
language or the social situation.  There may be a problem with the certificate. 
This is my view. There needs to be some exceptional provision if a certificate has 
been granted. It is not that it should be a general power as Chairman of CBFC, 
mentioned. The provision should be only in the rarest of the rare cases. But if 
there is no provision, then we will say that whatever has been given by the 
Thiruvananthapuram Board is final and now nothing can be done. Will that 
situation be good?  That is the issue which comes before us.  Many a time, we 
know that perhaps this should not have been done or at that point of time, the 
officers at the local level could not appreciate the wider implication which it could 
have in other places because they are looking perhaps at their perspective.   In 
the regional level, it should have a different perspective and at the national level, 
it could have a different perspective.  So, this is the rarest of the rare provision 
but definitely, we will go by your suggestions.  But I must say that this problem 
does arise in some cases”. 
 
132. The Ministry stated that there was a misunderstanding of the proposed 
amendment to Section 6(1) in the draft ‘Cinematograph (Amendment) Bill, 2021’, which 
related to revisionary power by the Government and added that it was a re-examination by 
the Board and not by the Central Government. Elaborating on the issue, the Ministry 
submitted as under: 
“This issue of re-examination of films has come about because in the 
Shankarappa case, the High Court and the Supreme Court had struck down 
certain provisions of 6(1) of the Act. Those provisions have to be deleted from the 
main body of the Act. While we delete that particular provision, which is a 
proposal under the Bill, the issue of re-examination comes up. While the 
provisions of the Central Government have been struck down by the hon. Court, 
a provision has been proposed for re-examination of the certification by CBFC. 

50 
 
The genesis for this is this. In this, the same provision is being touched upon. So, 
in the same provision, we are touching upon any related amendment that is 
required to be done…xxx…xxx…xxx…Sir, I will be very specific. I will try to 
explain the background of the proposed provision. While examining the 
recommendations of the Committee, we were also touching upon and deleting 
certain provisions of the same Section. The provision or the requirement of re-
examination of film was felt in certain cases, and that is why, both the Shyam 
Benegal Committee and Justice Mukul Mudgal Committee have recommended a 
provision to this extent, and that is the background. The hon. Supreme Court had 
deleted these provisions in the year 2000, and these two reports have come in 
2013 and 2016. So, both these Committees and both the Chairpersons and the 
members knew the background of the case regarding re-examination. So, I will 
read out the recommendation of Justice Mudgal Committee in this regard. 
Section 29 of the draft Bill that has been proposed by Justice Mudgal Committee 
says, ‘reexamination of a certified film (i) where any complaint is received by the 
Board in respect of film which has been certified for public exhibition, the same 
shall be forwarded to the Central Government. The Central Government, if it 
considers so to do, shall direct the Chairperson of the Board to re-examine any 
film in respect of which a complaint is received by it directly or from the Board 
under sub-section (i) in such manner as may be prescribed.’ This is the 
recommendation of Justice Mukul Mudgal Committee….xxx….xxxx…xxx…. 
Similarly, the Shyam Benegal Committee in its draft CBFC rule 32 talks about re-
examination of a certified film. They say, ‘where in respect of a film that has been 
certified for public exhibition, the Central Government receives a reference from 
the Ministry of Home Affairs in respect of Section 5B (1) of the Cinematograph 
Act, 1952 and clause 3 of the CBFC guidelines, the Chairperson may, if he 
considers it necessary so to do, direct the Board through the CEO to re-examine 
any film…..xxxx….xxxx…xxx….  Probably, this is a provision that has been 
largely misunderstood. The Central Government cannot have the power because 
the Supreme Court has struck down this power. So, the Central Government 
cannot have the power to re-examine a case that has been decided by the Board 
or the Tribunal. The Tribunal is no longer in existence. So, here it is the Board. 
So, the provision that we have proposed is that the Central Government, if it 
receives a complaint either from the MHA or from the Board itself, may direct the 
CBFC to re-examine and the decision of the CBFC will be final”. 
 
133. Assuring the Committee that arbitrariness will be taken care, the representative of 
the Ministry during evidence submitted as under: 
“It is still a proposal under consultation. We have gone into pre-legislative 
consultation. It is in intent, as of now. Further to this is that we have to see how 
the due diligence will be carried out so that there is no arbitrariness or it is used 
in the rarest of cases and which are those rarest of cases will be enumerated in 
detail. That is what I can say. This is still at consultation stage. After all, it will 
come to the Parliament after a view is formed”. 
 
134. While deposing before the Committee the representative of the Ministry also 
informed that since the proposed amendment was objected to by many stakeholders, a 
formal view had not been taken. After the process of taking views and discussion with 

51 
 
others was over, whether this will come up or not at all in the final recommendation or in 
the proposal of the Bill, it will come at a later stage. Even the Secretary, M/o I&B, during 
evidence stated that they have received a number of comments, many people had their 
views on it and the Government has to take a view. 
 
135. Following view was put forward by the representative of CBFC during evidence: 
“That could be one view, Sir, but the other view is this, and I am sure, the Hon. 
Members may have had some experience of this. Sometimes, it does happen 
that perhaps certificates of all films do not come to the Chairman.  The 
certificates are issued at the regional level.  Their perspective and the 
perspective which the Chairman of CBFC may be having, could be quite 
different.  It could be viewed differently.  So, the first question is whether there 
should be a revisionary power or no revisionary power.    The second issue is 
that if there is to be a revisionary power, who should exercise it?  Should the 
appointing authority exercise any revisionary power?  I think, this is the question 
that you have raised.    About the first issue, Sir, my submission to the Hon. 
Committee would be that some exceptional provision is always required.  It can 
happen that.  In some Regional Board, there could be a situation of wrong 
certification, which needs to be corrected, or some cuts may be required.  There 
have been agitations at many places.  I need not repeat that. Later on, the 
concerned producers had to make certain adjustments so that they are in line.   
Regarding your question, Sir, we have got a number of representations, and the 
Government will finally take a view.  I would not be competent to give the final 
view of the Government.  We will place it before the Government whether this 
revisionary power should be exercised by the Board itself if it does come.  The 
first question is, whether there should be a power.  Secondly, if there is a power, 
perhaps one solution could be that the CBFC in exceptional cases may itself 
exercise that power without Government interference because we have no 
intention, whatsoever to interfere.  The hon. Minister has also replied that we 
have no intention of interfering in the work and taking over the film certificates.  
That is very clear.      In my view, some residual power is required in exceptional 
cases.  But as was rightly mentioned, it should be properly worded that 
‘exception’ should not become the rule that everything is exceptional and we start 
reviewing all the films. Secondly, as the hon. Member asked, whether it should 
be exercised by the Central Government through the appointing authority or 
whether it could be a separate system.  That is something, which I will place 
before the Government.  We have already got 200 plus suggestions, and then, I 
think, the Government will take a final view”.  
 
136. Regarding the authority that would decide what is ‘exceptional’ in these cases, the 
Secretary, M/o I&B submitted the following to the Committee during evidence: 
“It comes back to the same question, whether this power is to be exercised by 
which authority and on what basis.  So, basis would be, what has been written in 
the Act itself, and as already mentioned, only in cases of violation of sovereignty 
of India, and other clauses which we have, it should be exercised.  But who will 
exercise, I think the hon. MP made a point. …xxxx….xxx….I am coming to it. It is 
that the exceptional rules should not be drafted in such a manner that everything 

52 
 
becomes an exception.  If it becomes a matter of right, then ‘exception’ itself will 
become a rule.  That situation is also to be covered”. 
 
 
V. DIGITIZATION / ONLINE CERTIFICATION SYSTEM – ‘E-CINEPRAMAAN’ 
137. During the course of examination, the Committee learnt that from a manual 
operation prior to 2009, CBFC has progressively moved towards automation. It saw one of 
its major paradigm shift with the implementation of digital certification process in toto. The 
Online Certification System of CBFC ‘e-cinepramaan’ which was launched on 27th March, 
2017, aimed at transparency and ease of doing business in the Media and Entertainment 
Sector. The move was an important step in making CBFC office paperless and also to 
enable effective monitoring and real time progress tracking for both CBFC officials and the 
producers. The certification fees payment system has been fully integrated with 
Bharatkosh e-payment gateway. With the launch of ‘e-cinepramaan’, CBFC started online 
examination of short films (films of less than 10 minutes duration), resulting in swift 
certification of these films. Further the work of scanning and digitization of past certification 
records had also been undertaken by CBFC.    
 
138. According to the Ministry, the next phase of digitisation was to make                       
‘e-cinepramaan’ more user-friendly. For this various steps were being undertaken, some of 
which are mentioned below: 
a) Provision for online upload of cuts and online verification of those. 
b) Online verification of alterations in film carried out after certification (under 
Rule 33). 
c) Simplification of system by delegating some roles from Regional Officer to 
Examining Officer’s dashboard, and by removing the role of editor and other 
redundant entries. 
d) Alternate payment gateway facility (in addition to Bharatkosh) for fees 
payment. 
e) Provision for intimation of ‘tentative date of screening’ to the applicants.  
f) Development of mobile app version of e-cinepramaan.  
g) Revamping of CBFC website to make it more dynamic, interactive and state-
of-the art. 
 
139. The key objectives of Computerization Phase-II as envisaged are: 
 Complete Process Automation 
 Minimal Human Intervention 
 Technology Usage (SMS/Email Gateway) Towards Effective Information 
Dissemination 
 Dashboard For Real Time Progress Tracking 
 Robust MIS For Performance Tracking And SLA Management 
 Inbuilt Workflow And Auto Escalation Mechanism 

53 
 
 Effective Archival Of Records And Film Scripts 
 Effective Grievance Management 
 Increased Access To Information 
 
140. The Ministry informed the Committee that currently the certification application 
process was completely online and offline applications had been dispensed with. In the 
context of Covid-19 pandemic and challenges posed by it on movement of people, the 
examination of the films was also being done through platforms like vimeo which provide 
for download-disabled and password protected sharing of content.  
 
141. CBFC had taken proactive measures to enhance the ease of film certification by 
implementing some changes in the e-cinepramaan system, which are as under:  
(i)  Online submission of cuts – CBFC has started online submission and 
acceptance of cuts/modifications in films w.e.f. 8th July, 2021 to increase 
transparency and reduce manual interventions with the applicants. The 
applicants or their representatives will not have to make physical visits to 
CBFC hereon to submit cuts/modifications up to 10 minutes duration, as the 
same would be accepted on the e-cinepramaan portal. Also, the online 
submitted cuts would be better archived and accessible than the ones stored 
in DVDs that may get damaged over time.  
 
(ii)  Integration and simplification of application forms – CBFC has integrated the 
existing four types of application forms into a unified common application 
form for film certification w.e.f. 9th August, 2021. The form size has been 
greatly reduced, the redundant entries on the Application forms have been 
eliminated, language has been simplified, and the documentary requirements 
have also been reduced.   
 
(iii) Integration of alternate payment gateway - In order to minimize cash 
transactions, CBFC has made all adequate provisions for online payments 
through Bharatkosh payment gateway.  In alternate, work of integration with 
another payment gateway viz. SBI payment gateway has been started and 
once completed, the same will be available for applicants. 
 
142. According to the Ministry the changes were aimed at reducing the regulatory 
compliance burden which was an important step towards simplification of the certification 
process of films. All these changes significantly contributed in system improvement, 
thereby reducing certification time.  When asked whether ‘online certification system’ 
helped in reducing the number of days taken to certify a film, the Ministry replied as under: 
“Online certification system has substantially reduced the number of days taken 
in film certification by curtailing the procedural delays that used to often take 
place at the time of file movement. The scrutiny of applications and its online 
processing including submission of examination reports by officers can be done 

54 
 
from home as well, which has brought down the average time taken for long film 
certification to less than 10-15 days as compared to earlier 20-30 days. More 
prominently, short films including songs, promos and teasers etc., can now be 
examined on the online system itself thereby reducing short films certification 
time to just 1 to 2 days”.  
 
143. When asked whether digitization has helped in improving transparency and 
efficiency of the certification process, the Ministry replied that it had played a very vital role 
in improving transparency because the filmmakers could now check the status of their 
applications through their logins only. Filmmakers could reply to intimations and enquire 
through dedicated helpdesk of CBFC. There was full transparency in documentation 
processes.  The duplications in certifications had been eliminated and with QR code 
implementation, authenticity of certificates could be checked which had helped in tackling 
the forged certificates’ problem.  General public, press and researchers could also now 
access certification details of the films on CBFC website, as the same had been integrated 
with e-cinepramaan for pooling of certification data.  
 
144. When asked about the satisfaction with respect to digitization of certification 
process by CBFC, the Ministry has replied that they had actively supported it and they 
laud the efforts put in by CBFC in facilitating the film industry through use of digital 
technology. Dedicated funds had been provided by the Ministry to CBFC as part of a 
Central Sector Scheme named ‘Infrastructure Development Programme relating to Film 
Sector’.  
 
145. Raising concern over digitization of certification, President, IMPPA, in a 
Memorandum to the Committee, submitted as under: 
“It is important that the systems be recalibrated and simplified because when any 
company or individual producer submits the papers required for opening ID for 
online certification and when all documents are already submitted why producer's 
personal presence is compulsorily required at time of scrutiny if all the documents 
are in order and why scrutiny should take months if producer is not able to attend 
personally and hence it is necessary that authorized representative of the 
producer should be allowed to complete the formalities. I have to state that 
though CBFC has started online registration for CBFC purposes but no one has 
bothered to answer the question as to why when online registration has started 8 
hard printed copies of all documents like script, screen play have to be submitted 
at time of screening and these documents are not taken online.  Even after 
completing the full process of certification the producer is forced to be personally 
present to collect the certificate but they have to visit again and again as most of 
the time the film is cleared but the certificate has not been signed for one reason 
or the other forcing repeated visits of the producer to CBFC office. I cannot 

55 
 
understand why 'certificate is ready' message is not sent after certificate is signed 
because today producer has to wait for a very long time and make repeated visits 
to collect the certificate”. 
 
 
146. When the Ministry was asked whether complaints had been received expressing 
dissatisfaction with the digitisation of certification process, they replied that the present 
online certification system had been developed and improved from time to time after 
consultation with all stakeholders including filmmakers and applicants. The changes were 
done in the system from time to time based on the feedback received from them. 
Occasional complaints had also helped into relooking the system, identifying the bugs if 
any and resolving the issues. It was also stated that four years into operation, the online 
system was functioning satisfactorily and applicants were also comfortable with it.  CEO, 
CBFC and Regional Officer CBFC Mumbai had held detailed specific interaction with Film 
Association office-bearers across India on 6th August 2020 on the automation process 
relating to film certification, and following system improvements were being carried out in 
the second phase based on their suggestion/feedback: 
i. Merging of four different application forms into a common simplified form, also 
removing redundant entries.  
ii. Making cut verification process completely online 
iii. Informing applicants on the tentative date of screening on their dashboard 
iv. Providing alternate and additional payment gateway for deposition of fees 
 
VI. ACT/ RULES/GUIDELINES related to functioning of CFBC 
 
147. According to the Ministry, CBFC discharged its function of certification in 
accordance with the provisions of Article 19(1)(a) and 19(2) of the Constitution of India and 
provisions of Act, Rules & guidelines which are given below: 
(a) The Cinematograph Act 1952 
(b) The Cinematograph (Certification) Rules, 1983 
(c) The Guidelines issued by the Central Government under Section 5B of 
the Cinematograph Act, in 1991. 
 
148. According to the Ministry, various laws of the land are applicable to the films that 
were certified. Acts, Rules and Guidelines that CBFC had to consider while certifying films 
were: 
i. The Cable Television Networks (Regulation) Act, 1995  
ii. The Prevention of Cruelty to Animals Act. 
iii. The Cigarettes and other Tobacco Products (Prohibition of 
Advertisement and Regulation of Trade and Commerce, Production, 
Supply and Distribution) Act, 2003 & Rules 2004. 

56 
 
iv. The Emblems and Names (Prevention of Improper Use) Act, 1950.  
v. The Prevention of Insults to National Honour Act, 1971. 
vi. The Drug and Magic Remedies Act. 
 
149. Asked whether the guidelines issued by the Central Government for film 
certification in 1991 had become outdated, the Ministry stated that the guidelines issued 
for film certification in 1991 had been time tested and were relevant as on date. However, 
at the same time changes were made in these guidelines from time to time as required. 
They informed that these guidelines provided broader objectives and issue-specific 
insights for the committees to judge the contents for public exhibition. 
150. According to the submissions made to the Committee, the present 
Cinematograph Act was enacted in 1952 and cinema had undergone radical changes 
since then. During last sixty eight years, the Cinematograph Act, 1952 had been amended 
nine times. Some of the important amendments were as follows: 
i. Cinematograph (Amendment) Act, 1953  
a. Section 6-A was introduced: making it mandatory for a person 
delivering certified film to any distributor or exhibitor to also give 
information and documents of the Film and its Certificate.  
b. Section 7 was amended: Enhanced penalty for interpolations, 
violations 
 
ii. Cinematograph (Amendment) Act, 1959  
a. Section 7-A inserted: empowering police to seize the film exhibited in 
contravention of the Cinematograph Act  
b. Section 5(B): Incorporated the principles for guidance in certifying 
films, based on the provisions of Article 19(2) of the Constitution 
 
iii. Cinematograph (Amendment) Act, 1973: Cinematograph Act extended to 
Jammu and Kashmir 
 
iv. Cinematograph (Amendment) Act, 1981 
a. Section 3: CBFC members’ strength increased from earlier 9 
(maximum) to 12-25 members (minimum 12, maximum 25 board 
members) 
b. Section 4: Two new certificate categories added viz. ‘U/A’ and ‘S’ 
c. Section 5-B: one more principle for guidance in certifying the films 
added, namely, ‘in the interests of sovereignty and integrity of India’ 
d. Section 5-C: provision to set up Film Certification Appellate Tribunal 
(FCAT).  
e. Provision to suspend or revoke the certificate granted by CBFC in 
contravention of Cinematograph Act and the Rules made thereunder 
 
v. Cinematograph (Amendment) Act, 1984: Enhance penalties under        
Section 7 making exhibition of uncertified/interpolated film a cognizable 
offence 
 

57 
 
vi. Finance Act 2017: Section 5-DD added in Cinematograph Act: 
Qualifications terms and conditions of service of Chairman and members of 
FCAT to be governed by Finance Act , 2017    
 
vii. The Tribunals Reforms (Rationalisation and Conditions of Service) 
Ordinance, 2021: Abolition of FCAT; functions transferred to High Court 
 
151. The Ministry informed the Committee that a review of the Cinematograph Act, 
1952 was undertaken to address various issues concerning the certification process in a 
comprehensive manner by suitably amending the Cinematograph Act to make the process 
of sanctioning of films for exhibition more effective, in tune with the changed times and 
curb the menace of piracy. In 2019, to tackle the menace of film piracy, the 
Cinematograph (Amendment) Bill, 2019 was introduced in the Rajya Sabha on 12.02.2019 
after getting Cabinet approval on 06.02.2019, wherein it was proposed to insert a new 
section 6AA and a new sub-section (1A) in Section 7 of the Act. The Standing Committee 
on Information Technology (2019-20) had presented their 9th Report on ‘Cinematograph 
(Amendment) Bill, 2019’ in Rajya Sabha and Lok Sabha on 16.03.2020. Thereafter, on 
18.06.2021 the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting notified ‘The Cinematograph 
(Amendment) Bill, 2021’ on the website of Ministry and CBFC for seeking public 
comments. 
 
152. When asked to provide update with respect to action taken on the comments 
received from the general Public on the Draft 'Cinematograph (Amendment) Bill, 2021', the 
Ministry replied that a large number of views and comments were received from various 
film bodies/organizations and members of the public regarding the proposed amendments. 
In compliance of the Pre-Legislative Consultation policy of the Government, the inter-
ministerial consultations and the pre-legislative consultations with the major stakeholders 
were done: 
a) Inter-Ministerial Consultations: The Ministry of Home Affairs, the Ministry of 
Electronics and Information Technology, the Ministry of Culture, the Ministry of 
Education, the Department of Industrial Policy and Promotion, Department of 
Revenue, the Department of Telecommunications and the Law Ministry were 
consulted. 
b) Pre-Legislative Consultations: Suggestions/comments were received from 
more than 200 film bodies/organizations and members of the public, regarding the 
proposed amendments and have been examined. 
 
153. The Ministry, in their written submission, also added: 
“It was decided that before a final view is taken on the comments received, wider 
stakeholder consultations should be held, in person, to allay the concerns of the 
film industry and to make them active partners in the regulatory ecosystem. 

58 
 
Accordingly, two consultation meetings were held with major stakeholders on 3th 
March, 2022 in Chennai and in Mumbai on 4th March, 2022 to inter-alia discuss 
the proposed amendments in the Cinematograph Act and improvements in the 
certification process. 
 
A review of the Cinematograph Act, 1952 has been done to address the various 
issues   concerning   the   certification   process   in   a   comprehensive   
manner.  Inter-ministerial consultations (IMC) and the pre-legislative 
consultations with the major stakeholders have also   been   completed.    
 
Amendment   of   the   Cinematograph   Act, 1952   is   under active 
consideration and Ministry is in the process of finalizing the Cinematograph 
(Amendment) Bill. The various procedural formalities for introduction of the Bill 
will take some more time to complete. Since the initially proposed amendment 
has undergone substantial changes, it is required to undertake IMC for 
approaching the Cabinet for its approval to convey the new Bill in Parliament. 
After the IMC & Cabinet approval, the Bill will be laid in the Parliament”. 
 
154. When the Committee desired to know whether this draft was a piecemeal 
amendment like Draft, Bill, 2019 or a comprehensive one, the Ministry during evidence 
submitted as under: 
“About the proposed Bill, you had asked whether it is the complete structure. 
Yes. The last time we had brought the Bill only for piracy but this has enlarged 
the scope. There are four major items….xxx…xxx….xxx… unfortunately, I would 
say that the entire attention has got focused to one particular provision relating to 
review but there are three other provisions. I would like to mention that many of 
them have been appreciated and you can check it with the industry”. 
 
155. Regarding the consultation process, the representative of the  Ministry during 
evidence submitted as under: 
“The Ministry has initiated discussions with film-makers and film bodies. The 
Secretary visited Mumbai recently and had an interaction with film-makers. He 
has directed that further consultations may be held with the stakeholders on the 
comments received from them, specifically the larger bodies like film producers’ 
bodies and guilds that have given their observations and comments to the 
Ministry. The Ministry will be interacting with them and taking into account their 
views as to what extent they want improvements in the system..xxx… xxx…xxx… 
a formal view will be given only when this consultation process is over”. 
 
 
156. On being asked about consultation done by the Ministry of Information and 
Broadcasting/CBFC on the draft Bill, 2021, some of the witnesses appearing before the 
Committee have replied in the negative. 
157. The views expressed by the Chairperson, CBFC on the amendments proposed in 
the draft Bill, 2021, were: 
“As far as CBFC and our point of view about the current amendments are 
concerned, I want to be very clear that I also kind of disagree with the 

59 
 
intervention there. I feel that there is a sufficient mechanism. We have had 
dialogues. That is the way in which we have been working over the years, 
especially during my last four years. This is the industry’s feedback on that also. 
मɇ हमेशा कहता हूं Ǒक ǒववादɉ कȧ जगह, ǒवचार-ǒवमश[ करना चाǑहए। We have been able to 
find a way and have come to a solution amicably with dialogues with the industry 
with regard to films which people felt are too sensitive to come out. So, the whole 
mechanism is in place…xxx….xxx…xxx… So, we try to do as much as possible 
for the industry”. 
 
158. Responding to the concern of the Committee that the principal Act had become 
old and obsolete and it required an overhaul, the representative of the  Ministry during 
evidence submitted as under: 
“The Ministry has felt that an overhaul is not required...xxx…xxx. The Ministry 
feels that changes and improvements are always required in the system, but then 
the system may not be required to be overhauled in total. The Ministry was also 
asked to build a consensus on the recommendations of the two Committees. We 
have worked on it”. 
 
159. The Ministry have informed that an Expert Committee was constituted in 
February, 2013 under the Chairmanship of Justice Mukul Mudgal, Retired Chief Justice, 
High Court of Punjab and Haryana to examine issues of certification under the 
Cinematograph Act, 1952. The Mudgal Committee submitted its report on 28.09.2013. 
Alongwith its findings and recommendations, this Committee also submitted a draft 
Cinematograph Bill with its report. Thereafter, a Committee of Experts headed by Shri 
Shyam Benegal was constituted on 1st January, 2016 to recommend broad guidelines/ 
procedures which would set principles to guide the Board with respect to certification of 
films. The Benegal Committee submitted first part of report in April, 2016 and final part in 
June, 2016 along with draft Cinematograph Certification Rules and draft guidelines for 
certification of films. The key recommendations of the Mudgal Committee and the Benegal 
Committee are given at Annexure III(A) and Annexure III(B). 
 
160. When asked for  the rationale for constituting a new Committee when Mudgal 
Committee had already given their Report , the Ministry during evidence submitted before 
the Committee as under: 
“We have looked at the papers and it appears that in 2016, it was felt that the 
amendments or overhauling of the Act is not required; within the ambit of existing 
Act, the procedures and guidelines for certification have to be improved. That is 
what the Shyam Benegal Committee had worked on. In fact, there were lot of 
recommendations of the Mukul Mudgal Committee since they recreated the 
Cinematograph Act. So, they took up lot of provisions which were already 

60 
 
existing in the Act….xxx…xxxx…xxxx….. The Mukul Mudgal Committee was 
about a new draft Bill and the second Committee was for the improvement in 
procedures under the existing Cinematograph Act. By 2016, the Government had 
already decided that the existing provisions of Cinematograph Act and the rules 
and guidelines require amendments in the existing Act. In 2016, we were not 
looking at a new Act. So, the improvements were sought to be made in the 
existing system. I am reading this from the ToR of the Shyam Benegal 
Committee Report”. 
 
161. Asked to furnish details of the action taken on the recommendations/observations 
of the Mudgal Committee and Shyam Benegal Committee, the Ministry, in their written 
reply, submitted the following: 
“The reports submitted by both the Committees have been thoroughly examined 
in the Ministry in consultation with the Central Board of Film Certification (CBFC) 
for acceptance/non-acceptance/acceptance with modifications of the 
recommendations made by both Committees. The acceptable recommendations 
of the Mudgal and Benegal Committees can be considered for implementation by 
amendment in the Cinematograph Act, 1952, amendment in the Cinematograph 
(Certification) Rules, 1983, issue of Executive Orders and drafting of category 
specific guidelines”. 
 
162. Further, on the status of implementation of Mudgal and Benegal Committee, the 
representative of the Ministry during evidence submitted as under: 
“The Mukul Mudgal Committee had come up with 40 recommendations, which 
we have examined in the Ministry. This was in 2013. This was largely to examine 
the issues of certification. They also gave a draft amendment bill that would be 
carried out. The Shyam Benegal Committee had 35 recommendations, which 
were given in 2016. These were again broad guidelines and procedures for 
certification of films within the ambit of the existing law.   When we examined 
these, we felt that the recommendations fall under three categories based on the 
action to be taken on these recommendations. Some would be included in the 
Act in terms of additional definitions or other amendments, and there could be 
amendments in the Cinematograph Certification Rules of 1983 or some of the 
recommendations could be met by issue of Executive Orders. So, we are working 
on all of these, and as the Chairman said that we are also looking at these 
recommendations in the light of the subject that has been transferred to the 
Ministry, that is, audio-visual content on the digital platforms”. 
 
163. The Ministry in their written submission, apprised the Committee as under: 
"It is pointed out that certain recommendations made by the Mudgal and Shyam 
Benegal Committees, are already under implementation. For instance, the 
recommendation made by the Benegal Committee regarding online submission 
and processing of applications for certification is already under implementation 
since the Online Certification System of CBFC ‘e-cinepramaan’ came into force in 
April, 2017. The recommendation of Mudgal Committee regarding size of the 
Board, power of the Chairman to suo-moto refer films to Revising Committee, 
role of the Chief Executive Officer, eligibility criteria for Regional Officers 
(ROs)/Additional Regional Officers (AROs), meetings of Board, selection of 

61 
 
Members for Examining Committee and strength of Revising Committee are also 
already in force.  The Mudgal Committee had proposed new definitions of the 
terms ‘cinematograph’, ‘exhibit/exhibition’, ‘public medium’ in order to keep pace 
with changing technology associated with representation of cinema by enlarging 
the scope of CBFC. Further, both the Committees have recommended 
introduction of additional categories of certification. The Mudgal Committee had 
suggested subdividing the existing ‘UA’ category into two new categories, i.e. 
12+ and 15+. The Benegal Committee has suggested subdividing the existing 
‘UA’ category into two new categories, i.e. UA12+ and UA15+, and for a new 
category ‘AC’ (adults with caution). In light of the Information Technology 
(Intermediary Guidelines and Digital Media Ethics Code) Rules, 2021, it is being 
considered to further sub-divide the existing UA category into age-based 
categories, viz. U/A 7+, U/A 13+ and U/A 16+, in order to have a uniform 
categorization across all platforms including OTT platforms. The introduction of 
Category specific guidelines under the Cinematograph (Certification) Rules 1983 
is also being considered so as to better aid CBFC in objective assessment of 
films". 
 
164. According to the Ministry, both the Committees had made varying 
recommendations in respect of some similar issues, viz. the composition and criteria of 
appointment in respect of the Board, the composition and criteria of appointment in 
respect of Advisory Panels, categories of certification, specific provision for re-certification, 
re-examination of already certified films on reference from Government, etc. The details of 
such recommendations are given in Annexure III (C). 
 
165. The Ministry have also added as under: 
"The recommendations of Benegal Committee have been examined along with 
the recommendations of Mudgal Committee and a comprehensive review of the 
Cinematograph Act, 1952 has been undertaken in the Ministry to address the 
various issues concerning the certification process. After examining the matter, a 
Draft Cabinet Note for introduction of the Cinematograph (Amendment) Bill, 2021 
was circulated on 03.06.2021 to various Ministries/ Departments for Inter-
Ministerial Consultations for seeking their comments. In compliance of the Pre-
Legislative Consultation policy of the Government, the essential elements of the 
proposed legislation were published in public domain on the website of Ministry 
and CBFC on 18.06.2021 for seeking public comments.  A large number of views 
and comments have been received from the stakeholders and members of the 
public regarding the various proposed amendments. The Ministry has examined 
the comments and intends to have further deliberations with the major 
stakeholders on the concerns expressed by them". 
 
 
166. A witness appearing before the Committee, stated that the recommendations of 
Shyam Benegal Committee on the certification and guidelines should be implemented and 
regarding delay in implementation of Benegal Committee Report or presenting the same in 
the House,  the following was put forth: 

62 
 
“It is done to refrain from making it long winded. That recommendation itself has 
all the explanations and are not just paranoia, but well-founded fears that came 
from a committee of filmmakers and film producers. That has already been 
spoken of in detail and I have recommended it. We have spent a lot of man-hours 
on it to produce it for the benefit of the Government”. 
 
167. In the light of the present day requirement and recent developments, the 
Committee desired to know about the relevance of the recommendations made by Shyam 
Bengal Committee and Mukul Mudgal Committee. To this, the Ministry replied that 
recommendations like category-specific Guidelines, ensuring adequate representation of 
women on CBFC Board and advisory panels, enhancing term of panel members to three 
years, merging of application forms, tatkal scheme for urgency screening requests would  
be useful in effective functioning of CBFC and these were being considered. Both 
committees had suggested for having more categories of certification. 
 
VII. FILM CERTIFICATION APPELLATE TRIBUNAL (FCAT) 
 
168. During evidence when the Committee asked about the existing Grievance 
Redressal Mechanism (GRM), the Chairperson, CBFC stated that there was Appellate 
Tribunal. However, on 04.04.2021, with the promulgation of the ‘Tribunals Reforms 
(Rationalization and Conditions of Service) Ordinance, 2021’ the FCAT had been 
abolished and its functions had been transferred to the High Courts. Consequently, the 
filmmakers could exercise their right to appeal against the decisions of CBFC by 
directly approaching the High Courts. 
 
169. When asked to furnish a brief note on FCAT, from its inception till abolition, the 
Ministry informed that Film Certification Appellate Tribunal (FCAT) was a statutory body, 
constituted under the provisions of Section 5C and 5D  of the Cinematograph Act, 1952 
(37 of 1952), under the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting. The role of FCAT was to 
hear appeals made under Section 5C of the Cinematograph Act, 1952 by an applicant for 
a certificate in respect of a film in case he was aggrieved by an order of the CBFC. The 
Tribunal was headquartered in New Delhi and was headed by a retired High Court Judge 
as Chairperson with four other members appointed by the Central Government. Apart from 
the Chairperson and the Members, the Tribunal had a Secretary to look after its day to day 
affairs. FCAT was one amongst five tribunals to be abolished by the ‘Tribunals Reforms 
(Rationalization and Conditions of Service) Ordinance, 2021’ promulgated on 4th April, 
2021.  
 

63 
 
170. One of the statement of objects and reasons of the ‘Tribunals Reforms 
(Rationalization and Conditions of Service) Bill, 2021' is as under: 
"The tribunals that are proposed to be abolished in this phase are of the kind 
which handle cases in which public at large is not a litigant or those which neither 
take away any significant workload from High Courts which otherwise would have 
adjudicated such cases nor provide speedy disposal. Many cases do not achieve 
finality at the level of tribunals and are litigated further till High Courts and 
Supreme Court, especially those with significant implications. Therefore, these 
tribunals only add to another additional layer of litigation. Having separate 
tribunal requires administrative action in terms of filling up of posts and such 
other matters, and any delay in such action further delays disposal of cases. 
Reducing the number of tribunals shall not only be beneficial for the public at 
large, reduce the burden on public exchequer, but also address the issue of 
shortage of supporting staff of tribunals and infrastructure". 
 
171. While furnishing the reasons for abolition of FCAT, the Ministry replied as under: 
"The Tribunals Reforms (Rationalization and Conditions of Service) Bill, 2021’ 
was introduced in the Budget Session of the Parliament to streamline the 
tribunals by abolishing certain tribunals and authorities and to provide a 
mechanism for filing appeal directly to the commercial court or the High Court, as 
the case may be".  
 
 
172. The Ministry also added as under:  
"From the film industry’s specific standpoint, the fact is that over the last few 
years, the number of films needing to go to an appellate body has seen a steady 
decline. Over the last 2-3 years, only around 0.2% films were taken to FCAT. 
Considering the miniscule ratio of films approaching FCAT, this step is not 
expected to have any significant impact on the film industry".  
 
173. Following is the submission of the Chairperson, CBFC on abolition of FCAT, 
during evidence: 
“As far as the Tribunal is concerned, in the last few years, 0.2 per cent films 
actually went to the Tribunal. We have three committees, three layers in the 
CBFC process already. After that court exists. If you ask me, this made a huge 
difference. It may have definitely made the layer, which has been cut off. But still 
the court is there. As far as evolving the sensibilities is concerned, I am with you. 
Sensibilities have to be constantly evolved. For this reason, we keep having 
training programmes, seminars to make sure we talk about the sensibilities”. 
 
174. When sought to know the details of the number of cases where in the filmmakers 
were not satisfied with the decision of CBFC and had appealed to the Appellate Authority 
during the last five years, the Ministry replied that from the records available, for last 3 
years following theatrical long films had approached Film Certification Appellate Tribunal 
(FCAT) against the decisions of CBFC:  

64 
 
2018  
1. Battle of Banaras: Refused by CBFC, granted UA with Cuts by FCAT 
2 Aabhaasam (Malayalam): Given Adult by CBFC, FCAT granted UA category 
3. Gandhi Hatya Ek Saazish: Given UA with Cuts by CBFC, FCAT granted Adult 
4. Ravi History: Given UA with 3 Cuts by CBFC, FCAT granted clear UA 
5 Dark side of Life-Mumbai City: Given Adult by CBFC, FCAT granted UA 
category 
6  Ascharya Fuck It: CBFC decision of A category with cuts upheld by FCAT 
7. Rangeela Raja: Partially in favour of filmmaker as some cuts were waived off 
by FCAT 
 
 
2019 
1. Tarpan: CBFC had given Adult, FCAT granted UA category as applied by 
Filmmaker 
2. Kademane (Kannada): Given Adult by CBFC, FCAT granted UA category 
3. No fathers in Kashmir: CBFC had given Adult, FCAT granted UA category as 
applied by Filmmaker, however modifications granted by CBFC were upheld by 
FCAT 
4. Moolniwasi Shudra to Khalsa: Refusal to film by CBFC was upheld by FCAT  
5. Pallu Padama Pathuko (Tamil): Adult category given by CBFC upheld by 
FCAT, however some cuts given by CBFC were disallowed.  
6. Saligrama (Kannada): Adult category given by CBFC upheld by FCAT 
7. Maadathy-An Unfairy Tale (Tamil): Given UA with Cuts by CBFC, FCAT 
granted clear A 
8. Delhi Bus:  Given A by CBFC, FCAT upheld category, but waived off some 
cuts 
9. "A" (Kannada): Adult category given by CBFC was upheld by FCAT 
 
2020 
1. Cheerharan: was refused by CBFC in 2017, granted UA by FCAT  
2. Chidi Ballaa: Refusal by CBFC due to repeat application, was upheld by FCAT 
 
2021: None till 04.04.2021, i.e. the date of abolition of FCAT vide promulgation of 
‘The Tribunals Reforms (Rationalisation and Conditions of Service) Ordinance, 
2021’ on 04.04.2021 
 
175. It can be seen from the above-mentioned 18 cases, FCAT gave decision in favour 
of filmmakers in 8 cases, in 5 cases the decision was partially in favour of them while in 
remaining 5 cases the decision was against the filmmaker. 
 
176. Expressing concern over abolition of FCAT, a witness, in a Memorandum 
submitted that while continuing with the practice of censoring, the Appellate Authority has 
been quietly done away with thereby denying the film producers the one and only 
institution available to redress unfair and unreasonable decisions made by the Regional 
Committees of the CBFC. 

65 
 
177. Another witness has submitted that the Central Government has abolished the 
FCAT in April 2021 leaving a fledgling filmmaker aggrieved by a decision of the CBFC to 
approach only the relevant High Court, which option not many Producers in the current 
eco system can afford.  Further, it was added that the decision to abolish the Appellate 
Tribunal by the Central Government is a deviation from the submission made by the Union 
Government of India in the K.A.Abbas case, where the Central Government undertook to 
amend the Cinematograph Act to set up an Appellate Tribunal. The Committee has been 
apprised that the proposed amendment of the Central Government was contrary to its own 
submission before the Hon’ble Supreme Court of India. The witness also quoted, the 
comment of the Hon’ble Supreme Court which is as under: 
"We express our satisfaction that the Central Government will cease to perform 
curial functions through one of its Secretaries in this sensitive field involving the 
fundamental right of speech and expression. Experts sitting as a Tribunal and 
deciding matters quasi-judicially inspire more confidence than a Secretary and 
therefore, it is better that the appeal should lie to a court or Tribunal”. 
 
 
178. Emphasizing on the positive role of FCAT, a witness submitted as under: 
“I survived many close shaves with insolvency, almost. But that is only because of 
the Tribunal was there for redressal.” 
 
179. Sharing similar view, Indian Broadcasting and Digital Foundation (IBDF) stated 
that the Central Government ought to consider reinstating Film Certification Appellate 
Tribunal (FCAT) since having an expert appellate tribunal enables stakeholders to have an 
affordable, easily accessible and timely adjudication of grievances. Further, the same 
would also go a long way in reducing burden on higher judiciary. 
 
180. Following is the submission by CEO, Producers Guild of India (PGI) on abolition 
of  the FCAT: 
“The making of a film requires heavy investment from producers and the 
recoupment of such investments depends on the release of the film and its success. 
Prior to the release, the films also have to receive certification from the CBFC. The 
CBFC often recommends edits to the filmmakers in order to qualify for certification 
and such edits have to be made in a timely manner so that the filmmakers can 
release the film on the pre-announced date.  In case the producers have any issues 
with the edits suggested by the CBFC, now they have to approach the High Courts 
(earlier FCAT), and until such issue is cleared by the High Courts, they cannot even 
release their films.  If after going through the aforementioned cumbersome process, 
the filmmakers manage to release the film, and thereafter have to worry about a 
possible re-certification of the film, the costs for the producers will be immensely 
high. It will also be a cumbersome process as they will have to withdraw their films 
from various theatres till there is a re-certification and re-release the film. This will 

66 
 
lead to widespread losses for the filmmakers and the film industry. Such a process 
will ultimately disincentivise producers from making films and thus will impact the 
industry as a whole.  Moreover, from the perspective of the CBFC, it will start taking 
a cautious approach with respect to its initial certification as it would not want its 
certification to be challenged by any individual in the society. Such cautious 
approach by the CBFC could have widespread repercussions for the producers 
(especially given the abolishment of the FCAT) as they will constantly have to 
approach the high courts to resolve any certification issues. The High courts in India 
are already severely backlogged and thus having to further adjudicate on such 
matters will cause stress to their case load and will also cause delays to the release 
of the film, which in turn causes producers losses.  Lastly, it should also be 
considered that India is currently one of the only democratic countries that pre-
censors films before public exhibition. Therefore, the proposed amendments will 
simply add another layer of censorship to the films”. 
 
181. During evidence, the representative of PGI submitted as under:  
“We were very upset when the FCAT was abolished, again, without consultation. 
…xxx…xxx…xxx…..  The minute you hear that the producer is going to court, that 
is the battle lost for him. Small producer is very scared to go to court. Can’t afford to 
go to court. We saw the FCAT, as a body, which understands our language, and 
give us reasonably quick justice. So, we being very upset with it. We didn’t know 
actually what to do about it”. 
 
182. When asked whether consultation was made when FCAT was abolished. IBDF 
replied in negative. 
183. Enquired about alternative mechanism being put in place for appeals, for 
redressal of grievance in future, the Ministry replied that under the Cinematograph Act, 
1952 and Cinematograph (Certification) Rules, 1983, CBFC has a robust and efficient 
mechanism to deal with the concerns of the film fraternity. CBFC has a well placed internal 
mechanism in the form of representation and appeals in the form of revising committees, 
which have eminent persons from different fields outside government as their members. 
Examining and revising committees of CBFC after patient hearing and through a 
collaborative effort address the grievances of the film makers. However in cases of 
disagreements, the filmmakers can directly approach High Courts against the 
decisions of CBFC.  
 
184. On abolition of FCAT, the representative of the Ministry during evidence 
submitted as under: 
“We have received lot of concerns from the filmmakers, film bodies, industry bodies 
and individuals as well. It has gone for inter-ministerial consultation and also to the 
Law Ministry. The concerns that have been received will be studied and examined. 
It is not a formality; the concerns will be taken seriously and we will go through them 
and examine them”. 

67 
 
185. When the Committee sought to know about Ministry’s view  on abolition of FCAT, 
the Secretary, M/o I&B deposed before the Committee as under: 
“We have received a letter from the Chairman of the FCAT…xxx…xxx…xxx…. I 
had sent that to the Ministry of Finance because it is entirely in the jurisdiction of the 
Ministry of Finance. The Chairman of FCAT had written to me the day it was 
abolished and we have sent that letter to the Ministry of Finance. But a final view is 
to be taken. I read in the newspaper. This is not an authentic report. But in the 
newspaper, it was reported that the Committee has examined and, perhaps, they 
are submitting some recommendations and report. Sir, the issue which the hon. 
Member raised about revision, let me submit, having been also on the Ministerial 
side and various positions in Bihar and Jharkhand, actually the power of revision 
lies with the same court. Appellate is the higher court. Appellate Authority remits the 
case like the hon. Supreme Court many times remits the case to the High Court”. 
 
186. The Committee learnt that on 13th August, 2021, ‘The Tribunals Reforms Act, 
2021’ was passed by both the Houses of the Parliament. 
 
VIII. Role of CBFC in light of recent developments 
 
187. In November, 2020, the Central Government vide their notification had amended 
the Allocation of Business Rules, 1961 relating to MIB and had inserted ‘digital/online 
media’ in their work allocation. In February, 2021, ‘Information Technology (Intermediary 
Guidelines of Digital Media Ethics Code), Rules, 2021’ was notified. Under this Rule, 
Digital Media Ethics Code relating to Digital Media and OTT Platforms is to be 
administered by Ministry of Information and Broadcasting. On ‘IT Rules, 2021’, the Ministry 
of Information and Broadcasting had informed as under: 
“The Government studied the models in other countries including Singapore, 
Australia, EU and UK and has gathered that most of them either have an 
institutional mechanism to regulate digital content or are in the process of setting-up 
one.  The Rules establish a soft-touch self-regulatory architecture and a Code of 
Ethics and three tier grievance redressal mechanism for news publishers and OTT 
Platforms and digital media”. 
 
188. The Ministry of Information and Broadcasting also informed that notified under 
section 87 of Information Technology Act, ‘IT (Intermediary Guidelines of Digital Media 
Ethics Code) Rules, 2021’ these Rules empower them to implement Part-III of the ‘IT 
Rules, 2021’ which prescribe the following:  
“Code of Ethics for online news, OTT platforms and digital media: This Code 
of Ethics prescribe the guidelines to be followed by OTT platforms and online 
news and digital media entities.  

68 
 
Self-Classification of Content: The OTT platforms, called as the publishers of 
online curated content in the rules, would self-classify the content into five age 
based categories- U (Universal), U/A 7+, U/A 13+, U/A 16+, and A (Adult). 
Platforms would be required to implement parental locks for content classified 
as U/A 13+ or higher, and reliable age verification mechanisms for content 
classified as “A”. The publisher of online curated content shall prominently 
display the classification rating specific to each content or programme together 
with a content descriptor informing the user about the nature of the content, and 
advising on viewer description (if applicable) at the beginning of every programme 
enabling the user to make an informed decision, prior to watching the programme.  
Publishers of news on digital media would be required to observe Norms of 
Journalistic Conduct of the Press Council of India and the Programme Code 
under the Cable Television Networks Regulation Act thereby providing a level 
playing field between the offline (Print, TV) and digital media.  
A three-level grievance redressal mechanism has been established under the 
rules with different levels of self-regulation. 
o Level-I: Self-regulation by the publishers; 
o Level-II: Self-regulation by the self-regulating bodies of the publishers; 
o Level-III: Oversight mechanism.  
Self-regulation by the Publisher: Publisher shall appoint a Grievance Redressal 
Officer based in India who shall be responsible for the redressal of grievances 
received by it. The officer shall take decision on every grievance received by it 
within 15 days.  
Self-Regulatory Body: There may be one or more self-regulatory bodies of 
publishers. Such a body shall be headed by a retired judge of the Supreme Court, 
a High Court or independent eminent person and have not more than six 
members. Such a body will have to register with the Ministry of Information and 
Broadcasting. This body will oversee the adherence by the publisher to the Code 
of Ethics and address grievances that have not be been resolved by the publisher 
within 15 days.  
Oversight Mechanism: Ministry of Information and Broadcasting shall formulate 
an oversight mechanism. It shall publish a charter for self-regulating bodies, 
including Codes of Practices. It shall establish an Inter-Departmental Committee 
for hearing grievances”. 
189. The Ministry also stated as under: 
“The ‘IT (IGDMEC) Rules, 2021’, provides an institutional mechanism for the 
digital media sector while protecting artistic freedom and creativity. The 
provisions adopted in Part III of the IT Rules, 2021 are in consonance with 
measures adopted globally and also account for the politico-administrative, socio-
cultural, legal, and demographic factors in India. Various features of the rules 
such as age-verification, classification of content, complaint mechanism, and 
blocking of content for public access, are in line with the mechanisms adopted by 
other countries. It may also be added that the rules for digital media publishers 
are more liberal than the regulations prevailing in several other countries, 
including Singapore and Australia, where statutory authorities have been 
established to regulate digital media content’. 

69 
 
 
190. Adding on the institutional mechanism, the Ministry informed as under:  
“The institutional mechanism establishes three levels-two levels of self-regulation 
(Level-I being the publisher and Level-II being the Self Regulatory Body), and an 
Oversight Mechanism. The presence of a retired judge of the Hon’ble Supreme 
Court/High Court, or an independent eminent person from the field of media, 
broadcasting, entertainment, child rights, human rights or such other relevant 
field as the Chairperson of the Self Regulating Body further raises its stature. The 
first two levels are independent from any intervention by the Government. With 
regard to the third tier, the Inter-Departmental Committee would not only consist 
of representatives of Ministries/Departments, but also members from other 
“organisations, including domain experts” [Rule 14(1)].  Section 69A of the 
Information Technology Act contains provisions and grounds related to the 
blocking of content. For the past eleven years, since 2009, this provision has 
been exercised by the Secretary, Ministry of Electronics and IT under the 
Information Technology (Procedure and Safeguards for Blocking for Access of 
Information by Public) Rules, 2009. Under the rules issued on 25th February, 
2021, this provision has only been replaced with Secretary, Ministry of I&B 
because Part III of the ‘IT (IGDMEC) Rules, 2021’, would be administered by the 
Ministry of Information & Broadcasting. No change in provision has been made 
nor any new provision has been added on blocking of content under Information 
Technology (Intermediary Guidelines and Digital Media Ethics Code) Rules, 
2021”.  
 
191. Updating about the implementation of self regulatory mechanism by OTT 
platforms, the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting, in their written reply, had 
submitted that they are in the process of putting in place the institutions and mechanisms 
required for implementation of the Part III of the ‘IT (IGDMEC) Rules, 2021’. The 
Authorized Officer under Rule 13(2) has already been appointed and the nominations from 
the concerned Ministries/Departments for constitution of the Inter-Departmental 
Committee have been sought. The mechanism for submission of information by the 
publishers of news and current affairs and publishers of online curated content is being 
worked out by the Ministry. The Hon’ble Minister of Information & Broadcasting also held 
interactions with the representatives of digital news publishers and OTT platforms. They 
also stated that with regard to Part III of the rules, some of the OTT players have 
requested for more time to undertake the 5-tier classification of the large pre-existing 
catalogue of content. The publishers may also require more time to establish the self-
regulatory bodies forming Level II of the grievance redressal mechanism.  
 
192. Asked as to why Government officials would be there for self regulation, the 
Ministry during evidence clarified as under: 

70 
 
“Sir, level I and level II committees are purely industry bodies where they can 
engage with any eminent person. If they find that any reader is useful to them, 
any viewer is useful, they can have him as a member. There is absolutely no 
government person in tier-I and tier-II”. 
 
193. In light of the ‘IT (IGDMEC) Rules, 2021’, the Ministry was asked about changes 
planned in role, function and structure of CBFC or in Rules/Acts related to it. Responding 
to this, they submitted as under: 
‘IT (IGDMEC) Rules, 2021’ do not have any direct bearing on the role, function 
and structure of CBFC or the application of Cinematograph Act, 1952 and 
Cinematograph Certification Rules 1983. However, it is being considered to 
further sub-divide the existing UA category into age-based categories, viz. U/A 
7+, U/A 13+ and U/A 16+, in order to have a uniform categorization across all 
platforms including OTT platforms. The introduction of category specific 
guidelines under the Cinematograph (Certification) Rules 1983 is being 
considered so as to better aid CBFC in objective assessment of films”.  
 
194. Noting the paradigm shift in mass media, the Committee desired to know whether 
pre-censorship by CBFC puts unreasonable restrictions on the stakeholders. To this, the 
Ministry replied as under: 
“As held by various judicial pronouncements, the medium of Cinema cannot be 
equated with other forms of expression. It is a very powerful medium arousing 
emotions and actions among the masses. Therefore, people and the societal 
interest should be the main concern while evaluating the role of CBFC or such 
other body in guiding the creative content”.  
 
195. As regards the role of CBFC for content being shown on OTT Platforms, the 
Ministry, in their written submission, stated following: 
“The Central Board of Film Certification (CBFC) created under the 
Cinematograph Act, 1952 performs the statutory function of certifying films for 
public exhibition in India under the provisions of Cinematograph Act. The 
Cinematograph Act, 1952 is read along with the Cinematograph (Certification) 
Rules, 1983 and the Central Government guidelines of 1991 are the statutes 
from where the CBFC derives its authority”.  
 
196. Following is the submission of Chairperson, CBFC on the role of CBFC: 
“The role of the CBFC is to strike a balance between sensibility and societal 
sensitivity and that always stays a challenge where you hear from various bodies 
and various parts of the society and you have to take everything into cognizance. 
We have been trying to do our best for that. At the same time, I had tried to put 
myself in the shoes of people and filmmakers and try to come up with solutions. 
The Ministry has been very supportive most of times. But these are the 
amendments which probably they should talk more about. As far as the role of 
CBFC is concerned, we do not see any great need to do intervention there. So, I 
would be rather candid on that”. 

71 
 
197. On the emergence of OTT platforms and role of CBFC vis-à-vis, one of the 
witness submitted following during evidence: 
“With theatre business virtually at a standstill over the last 15 months or so, our 
people have only turned up to OTT and television for content consumption. The 
greatest learning that we have today is that the content in Television and OTT is 
self-regulated and in spite of prolific contents consumed by the society through 
these medium, there has been no perceptible change in social behaviour.  When 
content communicated through Television or OTT or by way of advertisements 
are self-regulated by the industry, why should film content alone be under 
Governmental control? The Film certification should also be self-regulated and 
the Board should be constituted by persons appointed by the Film 
Industry…xxx…xxx..xxx…There is no reluctance to come under one roof. I 
cannot talk for the whole industry, the platform as yet because some of them 
don’t even know that this discussion is happening. That is very important. It is my 
duty to go back and educate them on these things that is happening, and how it 
is very pertinent to their lives, and they fail to recognize now. But I would say that 
our recommendation as far as Certificate Board is concerned, is retrograde, to go 
back to older censor and as he very carefully put it, abolishing it might be a big 
word but why not is a very small word”. 
 
 
198. On IT (IGDMEC) Rules, 2021’, Internet Freedom Foundation, in their 
memorandum, had submitted that Part-II and Part-III of the Rules has serious implications 
on freedom of speech and expression of Digital News Media and OTT Platforms and on 
the right of citizens to have access to information. Further, they submitted following: 
“(i) The Rules establish a Code of Ethics which is enforced by an Inter-
Departmental Committee which consists only of officers of the Government. The 
Inter-Departmental Committee may recommend the Ministry of Information and 
Broadcasting to block, delete or modify content published by Digital News Media 
and OTT platforms. Thus, the Central Government is now the sole arbiter of 
permissible speech. This affects the publisher’s Fundamental Right to Expression 
and the citizen’s right to access differing points of view because publishers will be 
compelled to only produce content which is palatable to the Central Government    
 
(ii) Notably, Rule 14(1)(b) r/w Rule 14(1)(6) permits the Ministry of Information 
and Broadcasting to refer complaints to an Inter-Departmental Committee and 
also decide upon those complaints after taking into consideration the 
recommendations of the Inter-Departmental Committee. This is arbitrary as the 
Ministry of Information and Broadcasting becomes a ‘judge in its own cause’, and 
has a chilling effect on speech of the publishers.  
 
(iii) The Code of Ethics mandates OTT Platforms to “ take into consideration 
India’s multi-racial and multi-religious context” and exercise ‘due caution’ when 
portraying any racial or religious group. If they do not exercise ‘due caution’ their 
content may be blocked by the Inter-Departmental Committee. This obligation on 
OTT Platforms is vague and has a “chilling effect” because vague laws by their 

72 
 
very nature, are overbroad and cover within their ambit both unlawful and 
legitimate speech”. 
 
199. Internet Freedom Foundation (IFF) also submitted following: 
“The regulatory paradigm for digital news media and OTT platforms has also 
raised grave cause for concern. We believe that here that the first point of 
departure must be the principles laid down in the report of the Ministry of 
Information and Broadcasting’s Report of the Committee of Experts chaired by 
Shyam Benegal that recommended broad guidelines/procedures for certification 
of films by the central board of film certification. The report of the Ministry of 
Information and Broadcasting’s Expert Committee on Film Certification 
recommended a more liberalised regime even for film certification, arguing that 
the Central Board of Film Certification should not act as a ‘moral compass’, and 
instead limit itself purely to certification (and not dictate modifications and 
withdrawals). The committee also stated that film viewing is a consensual act, 
and so regulation should limit itself to a statutory warning, noting that the artistic 
expression and creative freedom of filmmakers should be protected and any 
certification should be responsive to social change. Such arguments apply even 
more to the realm of online content, where the viewer directly chooses the 
content they wish to consume. Thus, we believe that the Ministry must put the 
findings of the Committee of the public consultation process, and ensure that its 
recommendations are implemented in the next version of the Rules. The 
deleterious effects of these Rules can already be seen: two journalists from 
Manipur, who have been hounded for their work by the police before, were 
served a notice under the new Rules, asking them to furnish details attesting to 
their compliance with the new Rules. Though the notice was subsequently 
retracted, this incident may be a precursor to future such events in which 
journalists are intimidated and harangued in such a manner. Meanwhile, self-
regulation has already given way to self-censorship for OTT platforms, with on-
demand video streaming platforms already exercising self-censorship”.  
 
 
200. Clarifying on emergency power and a related incident that happened in Manipur 
after notification of IT Rules, 2021, the Secretary, M/o I&B during evidence submitted as 
under: 
“About the emergency power, I had written in the article I had written why 
emergency power is required for the Secretary and I would just repeat. 
Somebody is showing a wrong map of Jammu and Kashmir or the Indian 
territories. We would not like for a complaint to be filed and then it referred to 
level-I and level-II committees. If it is in front of me and the Government knows 
that the map is incorrect, there should be some provision to correct it 
immediately. These are the type of emergency powers. They are meant for 
emergent situation; they are not to be used every day.    If I may add in the end, 
before I conclude, the country has a strong scrutiny by the Judiciary and by the 
Parliament. So, it is not that the Executive, and particularly the Government 
officers, if they are given some power, will go beyond their scope and they will do 
anything and everything. After all, they are also subject. In the case of Manipur 
incident, within six hours, without anybody going to the court or filing a 

73 
 
representation, we ourselves took notice and corrected it. We said that this is an 
incorrect interpretation and the order has to be withdrawn. There is no power with 
the State Government. They had to comply and they complied with it in six 
hours”. 
 
201. When asked for the impact of Code of Ethics of ‘IT Rules, 2021’ on free speech of 
publishers and as well as on the right to access information by consumers of content, the 
Ministry, in their written submission, submitted as under:  
“The format of content published over the internet has the unique nature of being 
medium agnostic. Thus, such content can be in the form of text, audio and/or 
video formats. The Code of Ethics prescribed for digital news publishers creates 
a level playing field for news publishers in the print, electronic and digital news 
media. It provides for similar codes of conduct applicable to news on print media 
(i.e. Norms of Journalistic Conduct of the Press Council of India under the Press 
Council Act, 1978) and electronic media (i.e. Programme Code under Section 5 
of the Cable Television Network (Regulation) Act, 1995). Additionally, the Code 
provides that content which is prohibited under any law for the time being in force 
shall not be published or transmitted. Therefore, under the Information 
Technology (Intermediary Guidelines and Digital Media Ethics Codes) Rules, 
2021, the Code of Ethics does not provide for any additional or new restrictions 
on free speech. 
  The Norms of Journalistic Conduct of the Press Council of India, and 
Programme Code under the Cable Television Network (Regulation) Act, 1995, 
are time-tested norms/codes for conventional news media which have protected 
the freedom of speech of the publishers as well as the right to access information 
of the consumers.   
 Similarly the Code of Ethics applicable to OTT Platforms provides guidelines for 
self-classification of content into categories meant for viewing by different age 
groups and display of such classification, with content descriptor, at the 
beginning of the programme. These provisions would enable the viewer to make 
informed decisions prior to watching the programme. Guidelines for classification 
of content by OTT platforms have been provided in Schedule to the Rules to 
remove any ambiguity in this regard. Furthermore, the access control and age-
verification mechanisms would enable the parents to protect the children from 
any content not suitable for their age. Therefore, the Code of Ethics for OTT 
platforms protects the right to free speech of publishers of online curated content 
while also empowering the consumers of such content on digital media”. 
 
202. Asked about the approach/policy on balancing freedom of speech and expression 
and the diverse social fabric of country like India, the Ministry replied as under:  
“CBFC has actively stood behind filmmakers defending their artistic freedom 
against complaints by various interest groups. CBFC constantly strives to simplify 
its processes and bring in more yet easily accessible and user-friendly 
technology into the Certification. It has been attempting to improve its physical 
and human infrastructure. Focus is also upon the better and effective sensitising 
of its panel members upon the appreciation of the films through periodic 
workshops and trainings. The film fraternity has a key facilitating body in CBFC 

74 
 
that works in an efficient and pragmatic manner. Therefore, all matters and 
concerns are dealt with responsibly, amicably and in the spirit of collaboration 
between the stakeholders. 
 
Information Technology (Intermediary Guidelines and Digital Media Ethics 
Codes) Rules, 2021 provides an institutional mechanism for the digital media 
sector while protecting artistic freedom and creativity. The provisions adopted in 
Part III of the IT Rules, 2021 are in consonance with measures adopted globally 
and also account for the politico-administrative, socio-cultural, legal, and 
demographic factors in India. Various features of the rules such as age-
verification, classification of content, complaint mechanism, and blocking of 
content for public access, are in line with the mechanisms adopted by other 
countries. It may also be added that the rules for digital media publishers are 
more liberal than the regulations prevailing in several other countries, including 
Singapore and Australia, where statutory authorities have been established to 
regulate digital media content”. 
 
203. On social responsibility of a film, following is the view expressed by one of the 
witnesses during evidence: 
“There is nothing which says you cannot preach. You can preach, you can use 
propaganda. If you want to talk about propaganda, the best use of cinema was 
made by Nazi Germany. It can be used, but it depends in which direction you 
want to use it. That is when social responsibility comes. For example, there are 
separate channels from various religions preaching through moving images. So, 
it has gone beyond the purview of what we thought was an aspect ratio of cinema 
and television. Now it is a wrist watch. It is round and it has changed. 
..xxx..xxx….xxx… It is too broad a spectrum for us to limit it to a rule book. That 
is why it is going to be even broader and broader. Mr. Christ, Marks and Angels, 
Gandhiji- they all have the right to write what they want. It is the life according to 
how they see and believe in. Dhamma Pada is right for Buddha; what I believe in, 
I try to say this is the best way to live and that is what every thinker and artist 
would always try to do. So, it is going to become broader and broader. As they 
were saying that the mediums, everybody is a film maker now. What used to be a 
big gizmo that need a great technology and a technician behind it, now it boils 
down to this. I can make a movie in this and release it in this without ever 
consulting or considering this body. That is where it has come to technically. That 
person, that film maker does not come under the purview of this body, Censor 
Board or anything. You will have to actually hunt for him and find out where he 
is”. 
 
204. Regarding addressing the issues faced by the stakeholders, without infringing on 
the freedom of expression, the Ministry replied as under: 
“With fair amount of hearings with filmmakers, more dialogues and interactions, 
rational and transparent decisions, many sensitive films have been smoothly 
cleared by the Board in last few years.  With due regard to Guideline 1 (b), viz. 
“artistic expression and creative freedom are not unduly curbed”, CBFC has in 
fact time and again, worked towards actively defending freedom of expression in 
many Courts of law. Its certification and rating standards have matched with the 

75 
 
practices followed by certification bodies in the other progressive democracies of 
today’s world. 
 
CBFC constantly strives to simplify its processes and bring in more yet easily 
accessible and user-friendly technology into the Certification. It has been 
attempting to improve its physical and human infrastructure. Focus is also upon 
the better and effective sensitising its panel members upon the appreciation of 
the films through periodic workshops and trainings. CBFC has actively stood 
behind filmmakers defending their artistic freedom against complaints by various 
interest groups in numerous court cases. 
 
The film fraternity has a key facilitating body in CBFC that works in an efficient 
and pragmatic manner. Therefore, all matters and concerns are dealt with 
responsibly, amicably and in the spirit of collaboration between the stakeholders”. 
 
205. Asked to comment on the idea of having a code of conduct for the film industry, 
the Ministry submitted following: 
“All legitimate industries work within certain frameworks and guidelines which are 
best implemented when there is responsibility and accountability clearly spelt out 
through a conduct code. The film industry is already functioning under the 
regulatory framework of Cinematograph Act, 1952 and Rules framed thereunder, 
the Code of Social Security, 2020 and other laws of the land”. 
 
IX. GRIEVANCE REDRESSAL MECHANISM  
206. When asked for details of the existing Grievance Redressal Mechanism in CBFC, 
the Ministry replied as under: 
“It is being especially stressed that filmmakers and applicants are involved and 
their views are considered while deciding on their films. The representations from 
filmmakers as well as other complainants are considered by the CBFC 
committees before making final recommendations. Providing hearings to 
filmmakers has been made compulsory to all committees before writing their 
reports. 
 
If the filmmaker is aggrieved with the recommendation of Examining Committee, 
he can approach Revising Committee constituted under Rule 24 of 
Cinematograph Certification Rules 1983. There is also provision for re-revising 
committee if the issue is not resolved at the stage of revising committee.  Further, 
in case of any disagreement, the filmmaker/applicant can appeal in the 
respective High Court for appropriate remedies.  
 
Chairperson and all officers of the Board are accessible to general public or 
various organizations, groups that have any complaints about the contents of the 
Film. Such complaints are put before the respective committees who decide and 
dispose the same based on their merit.  
 
Chief Executive Officer acts as Chief Grievance Redressal Officer for 
administrative matters as well as Appellate Authority under RTI Act, 2005”.  
 

76 
 
207. Regarding problems/constraints being encountered by actor, producer, director, 
film maker, etc., involved in film making and getting approval/ certified by CBFC, the 
Ministry, in their written submission, stated as under: 
“In recent years, CBFC has strived for an environment of dialogue and 
discourse and encouraging a collaborative and facilitative approach to film 
certification. The Board has been very effective in dealing with issues of 
certification of many potentially sensitive films through dialogue, discussions 
and a balanced approach. Interactions at various levels have increased, with 
better quality of hearings and organization of industry events and workshops. 
Overall focus has been on detailing and streamlining the processes. There has 
been improved mutual understanding and   appreciation by the film fraternity of 
CBFC's work”. 
 
208. Asked for details of the grievances of producers, Directors, and other 
stakeholders of Films, the Ministry informed that through various interactions and 
representations, following grievances have been made by producers, directors and other 
stakeholders of the films: 
 
 S.No. Grievance Action taken  
1.  At least 50 per cent members 
of Examining Committees 
should be from film industry 
Due representation is given to the people 
from creative domains in the Advisory 
panel. Moreover, for an unbiased and 
objective committee decision, it is more 
useful to have people from cross-section 
of society representing larger and diverse 
audience base. 
2.  Accepting Open DCPs (non 
KDM protected) for CBFC 
screenings  
KDM-protected DCPs ensure better 
safety of content. However, Regional 
Officers have been advised to take a call 
on this, based on need and convenience.  
3.  CBFC screenings sometimes 
may get cancelled due to 
technical reasons in DCPs. In 
such cases, although CBFC 
charges only 25% cancellation 
charge, Screening theatres 
charging full amount upon 
cancellation of CBFC 
Screenings  
Conveyed that theatre owners lose out 
on their other bookings as the slots were 
reserved for CBFC screenings. Although 
the consideration of this issue lies with 
the theatre owners, a request has been 
made to all the theatres on panel to 
waive off some part of their charges in 
case of such cancellations. Also CBFC is 
prioritising government owned theatres 
for its screening.  
4.  Screening of Hindi dubbed 
films in South Indian offices in 
the light of restrictions during 
Covid-19 pandemic 
Request Accepted 
5.  Online screening of Video 
Films during COVID times  
Request accepted  

77 
 
6.  Simplification of application 
form system and doing away 
with needless documents and 
affidavits 
The four different application forms are 
being integrated into single unified 
application form. The affidavits on 
stamped paper have been done away 
and undertakings on letterheads are 
being accepted. 
7.  Complaints about return of 
applications where 1) 
applicants have mentioned 
their names as Producers of 
dubbed films so as to sell such 
films to exhibitors. 
2) Indian Copy-right holders 
mentioning themselves or the 
intermediary companies from 
which they purchased the 
films, as Producers  
Communicated that  
1) Producer’s name cannot be changed 
and dubbing companies or rights-
holders cannot replace Producers’ 
names by their own. This would be 
violation of Intellectual property norms 
2) The Producers’ names cannot be 
changed under any circumstances. 
Replacing the Producer as a more 
suitable alternative for inability to 
provide due agreement copies is not 
acceptable.  
8.  CBFC certifying films with 
repeat titles  
It has been conveyed that Title disputes 
do not fall under CBFC’s purview as held 
in Bombay High Court Judgment in 
Neelam Vashisht case (WP 318 in 2016) 
9.  Some Regional Officers 
insisting on Title registration 
and Publicity Clearance 
certificates for smaller films 
which are made only for 
awards and festival purposes  
It has been clarified to all Regional 
Officers that Title registration certificate is 
not a mandatory document for accepting 
applications. Moreover, Publicity 
Clearance Certificates are not required in 
cases of films not intended to have 
commercial theatrical releases.  
209. Regarding vigilance cases reported in CBFC, the Ministry replied that 
three vigilance cases were reported during the last 5 years. The details and status of these 
three vigilance cases are as follows: 
S. 
No.
Officer against 
whom vigilance 
case reported 
Details and status of Vigilance case 
1.  Former Secretary 
to Chairman, 
CBFC, Mumbai 
 
CBFC received a complaint from CVC vide their OM 
No.3854 dated nil wherein allegation of corruption and 
misuse of official power and position by the officer were 
reported. Based on the complaint, an inquiry was 
conducted and eventually charges against the officer 
were proven. 
 
The officer was removed from service vide CBFC’s 
order dated 23-8-2016. 
2.  Additional 
Regional Officer, 
Mumbai 
 
CVC vide its letter dated 8.12.2017 advised Ministry to 
initiate major penalty proceedings against the officer. 
 
In pursuance of this, Ministry of I & B vide Order dated 

78 
 
6-4-2021 appointed an Inquiry Authority and Presenting 
Officer to inquire into the charges framed against the 
officer. Major penalty proceedings are in process. 
 
3.  UDC, Mumbai 
 
CVC vide its letter dated 8.12.2017 advised Ministry to 
take suitable action against one UDC, Mumbai. 
 
Vigilance case proceedings against the officer are in 
process. 
210. When asked for State-wise details of violations of certification detected by the 
regional panels in the cinema houses, the Ministry replied as under: 
“There have been some rare cases of violations reported during last five years. 
One prominent case was about Marathi film ‘Saint Nerry Marathi Medium’ (2018) 
which was caught having been exhibited without CBFC Certification in a private 
theatre in Mumbai. CBFC raided the exhibition site and filed the police 
complaint”. 
 
211. One of the suggestions by President, IMPPA, was that Producers and Directors 
should be present at the time of screening and post screening discussions with CBFC. 
When the Ministry was asked to comment on this, they replied as under: 
“Producers and Directors are not allowed to be present at the time of screening 
as the CBFC previews are completely confidential under the Cinematograph 
(Certification) Rules, 1983 and presence of producers or directors does not serve 
any purpose. However, they are invited after the screening for discussion and 
hearing by the committee, where they can make their verbal as well as written 
submissions before the committee members”. 
 
212. On other issue related to certification, when asked to comment on the harassment 
faced by Producers while submitting NOC from the Animal Welfare Board of India, which 
is a mandatory requirement for application for certification, the CEO, CBFC during 
evidence had stated that they have also come across many such complaints. Adding on 
this issue he further submitted as under: 
“Earlier, the filmmakers were also mandated to submit these certificates for the 
films which were shot abroad. Now, these things have been done away with. It 
was discussed with the Animal Welfare Board and they have done away with 
such a thing. Now, the filmmakers are using the digital technologies to show 
animals. So, these complaints are now coming down. In recent movies, they are 
just stating that digital technology has been used while depicting this animal”. 
 
 
213. Assuring the Committee to address the matter, the representative of the Ministry 
during evidence submitted as under: 
“Now, we can look into it. The idea of the whole thing is to facilitate things, 
businesses, filmmaking, certification, etc. If something is obstructing that flow of 

79 
 
facilitation, definitely -- as you have pointed out -- we will look into it and see as to 
how we can do away with something that leads to harassment”. 
 
214. On another related query, the Committee desired to know about the action taken 
on the letter from the Defence Ministry wherein CBFC was advised to ask production 
houses to seek a NOC on Army content. Responding to this, the representatives of CBFC 
during evidence submitted as under: 
“There was a reference from the Ministry of Defence regarding NOC to be taken 
from them but there is no such provision.  Whenever there is an Army sensitive 
content, we are calling the subject experts from their team.  They are a part of 
our team; they screen the film and accordingly, they give us their suggestions 
and views which are very well taken care of…xxxx….xxxx….xxxxx…..As far as 
the provision goes, whenever we see not only Army but any particular domain 
where we feel that there is a sensitivity involved and require expert comments, 
we have an expert window where we do invite experts of any subject.  It could be 
Defence as well.  We do invite them when such subjects come up”. 
 
215. Regarding proposal to make any change in the present system which may 
appropriately redress the grievances of industry, the Ministry, in their written submission, 
informed following: 
“A review of the Cinematograph Act, 1952 was undertaken to address various 
issues concerning the certification process in a comprehensive manner by 
suitably amending the Cinematograph Act. A draft Cabinet Note was moved in 
this regard and Inter-Ministerial Consultation was initiated. Amendment of sub-
section(1) of section 6 regarding ‘Revisional powers of the Central Government’ 
is inter-alia proposed in the Draft Cabinet Note such that on receipt of a reference 
against a certified film on account of violation of Section 5B(1) of the Act, the 
Central Government may direct the Chairman, CBFC to re-examine the film. This 
is intended to act as a grievance redressal mechanism in the light of abolition of 
the Film Certification Appellate Tribunal (FCAT). The Ministry also informed that 
appropriate provisions will be made in the Rules regarding the procedure to be 
adopted in the Central Government before a film can be referred to CBFC for re-
examination”.  
 
216. Following is the submissions of  the President, IMPPA on Grievance redressal 
mechanism: 
“In all banks and other institutions working has become online but always there is 
a window where any aggrieved party can get redressal of his problem and justice 
but in CBFC it is a rule that to meet Chairman or RO appointment is required but 
there is no one to give appointment, so it is necessary to make public the number 
on which appointment can be taken so that the producer does not have to visit 
again and again without meeting the Chairman or RO who don't meet without 
appointment and appointment they don't give”. 
 
 

80 
 
X. MISCLLENEOUS  
A. Initiatives for Persons with Disabilities 
 
217. The Committee were informed that the Ministry of Information of Broadcasting 
had issued an advisory on 01.10.2019 to major film Industry bodies with the request that 
they persuade and motivate their associated members to make film more accessible to 
Persons with Disabilities by using Audio Description and closed captioning in films. 
Consequently an awareness and sensitization workshop-cum-interaction was held under 
chairmanship of CEO, CBFC with the stakeholders of film industry and subject experts, for 
arriving on agreed parameters for implementation of accessibility standards in cinema. 
 
218. When enquired about the extent of implementation of the advisory for making 
films accessible to differently-abled persons, the Ministry replied as under: 
“In the light of the advisory, they are constantly working towards sensitising 
filmmakers to adopt the accessibility standards while making their films. An 
elaborate workshop-cum-consultation with all major film industry associations, 
also involving experts in the field, was held in this regard by CBFC on 
29.01.2021.  Film Gandhi (Hindi) (Director: Richard Attenborough, produced by 
NFDC) is the only film certified in Accessible format for differently-abled persons 
after 1st October, 2019. CBFC Mumbai had examined it and issued endorsement 
on 13.11.2019”. 
’ 
 
B. International practices  
 
219. Asked as to whether any study has been conducted of the global best practices in 
film certification including the use of Artificial Intelligence, the Ministry replied as under: 
“The experiences and mechanisms in other countries including in liberal 
democracies are constantly referred to while evolving and adapting our own 
certification system. As previously mentioned, rating systems and certification 
guidelines in western countries have been studied and we are in the process of 
suitably modifying those to Indian context. In future too, effort will be to 
collaborate and learn from global best practices especially in the field of 
technology and artificial intelligence. However, it is also pertinent to mention here 
that assessment of a film and certification is essentially a human process based 
on appreciation of content in the light of narrative and theme of the film and 
people to whom it relates. Neither it can be mechanized, nor a uniform one-size-
fits-all formula be applied to the films while deciding on their classification”. 
  
220. The Committee also desired to know whether Digital Media in India is under too 
much of regulations leading to adverse impact on creativity, technology and economy. To 
this, the Ministry submitted as under: 
“In India, the digital media sector is a sunrise sector which has been evolving at a 
rapid pace with changes in technology, entertainment patterns and other socio-
economic factors. Information Technology (Intermediary Guidelines and Digital 
Media Ethics Codes) Rules, 2021 would provide an institutional mechanism for 
the sector while protecting artistic freedom and creativity. It is expected that 

81 
 
policy certainty and a level playing field for all stakeholders of the sector would 
help in attracting higher investments, leading to growth in the industry.  
A comparison between regulations adopted by various countries may need to 
account for politico-administrative, socio-cultural, legal, and demographic factors. 
Since these factors vary from country to country, it may not be appropriate to 
compare the measures adopted by different countries. Still, it may be mentioned 
that the provisions adopted in Part III of the IT Rules, 2021 are in consonance 
with measures adopted globally”.  
 
221. The Ministry also informed that various measures have been envisaged by the 
Ministry for India to be at the forefront of worldwide Media and Entertainment Industry as 
well as to capitalize the vast pool of talent and capacity available in the country to create 
more employment opportunities. Some of them are as under:   
“For promoting ease of doing business as also to facilitate filming in India (which 
indirectly promotes allied sectors like hospitality, tourism etc.) the Ministry of 
Information & Broadcasting has developed a web portal (https://www.ffo.gov.in) 
in the National Film Development Corporation, which functions as a single 
window facilitation mechanism to accord online permissions for film shooting in 
India, for both domestic and international film makers. 
 
Specifically for film makers whose films have been selected in international film 
festivals of repute/ Academy Awards, the Ministry provides financial assistance 
under Film Promotion Fund Activity to those filmmakers whose films are selected 
in competition section of an international film festival of repute or Academy 
Awards. 
 
For promotion of co-production of films between Indian film makers and film 
makers of different countries, Ministry of Information & Broadcasting enters into 
audio visual Co-production Agreements with various countries. 
 
The National Centre for Excellence for Animation, Visual effects, Gaming and 
Comics (NCoE-AVGC) aims to be built as a Centre for excellence at the national 
level to impart world class talent pool in India to cater to the requirements of the 
Indian as well as global industry, to set-up an incubation Centre for the AVGC 
sector in the country and to provide opportunity for small players to grow. 
 
The digital media has been evolving at a rapid pace with changes in technology, 
entertainment patterns and other socio-economic factors. Information Technology 
(Intermediary Guidelines and Digital Media Ethics Codes) Rules, 2021 would 
provide an institutional mechanism for the sector while protecting artistic freedom 
and creativity. It is expected that policy certainty and a level playing field for all 
stakeholders of the sector would help in attracting higher investments, leading to 
growth in the industry”. 
********* 

82 
 
 
PART-II 
 
OBSERVATIONS/ RECOMMENDATIONS 
 
INTRODUCTORY 
 
1. The Committee note that ‘Boards of Film Censors’ were setup in 1920 at four 
places (Bombay, Calcutta, Madras and Rangoon) where films were imported into the 
country. Thereafter, in 1951, the Board was established as the ‘Central Board of Film 
Censorship’. In 1952, a consolidated statute (Act 37 of 1952) called the 
‘Cinematograph Act of 1952’ was enacted. On 1st June, 1983 through an amendment 
in the Cinematograph Act, the name of the Board was changed to its present 
version i.e. ‘Central Board of Film Certification (CBFC)’. The Committee note that a 
lot of water has flowed under the bridge since inception of CBFC and it has 
witnessed a long and dynamic journey from being ‘Board of film censors’ to ‘Central 
Board of Film Certification’. The Board has evolved with change in technology, 
governance, audience, etc., since at that time of inception there was hardly any 
indigenous industry of filmmaking and the principles of censorship were based on 
the rules of censorship drawn up by the British Board of Film Censors.   
 
While noting a few significant changes in last few years like notification of 
‘Information Technology (Intermediary Guidelines and Digital Media Ethics Code) 
Rules, 2021’; emergence of myriad content viewing platforms; change in ‘Allocation 
of Business Rules, 1961’ of the M/o I&B so as to include the mandate for 
Digital/Online Media yet with no change in the mandate of CBFC; etc., the 
functioning of CBFC has been taken up for review. During examination of the 
subject, the Committee heard divergent views varying from need for regulation to 
complete freedom in film making and viewing. In the process of examination, the 
Committee learnt that CBFC under its current regime is pragmatic and believes in 
consultation with the stakeholders/film industry. Nonetheless, the Committee are of 
the opinion that functioning of CBFC indeed necessitate certain changes to keep 
pace with the emerging technologies and changes in the film industry today 
particularly because India is unique not only in being diverse in culture but also in 
terms of growth and development.  Besides, with digital growth, entertainment 
industry has surpassed all the barriers and has reached to the remotest part of the 

83 
 
country requiring CBFC to function in tandem with the changes and fulfill their 
mandate. Accordingly, in the succeeding paragraphs, the Committee have made 
their observations/recommendations on various issues of Central Board of Film 
Certification.  The Committee hope that these recommendations would help in 
better  functioning of CBFC and in achieving the mandate of CBFC and objective of 
film certification which inter-alia include Certification being responsible to social 
changes, Artistic expression and creative freedom not being curbed unduly, 
Medium of film remaining responsible and sensitive to the values and standards of 
society, and so on.  
Human Resource in CBFC 
2. The Committee note that the Central Board of Film Certification (CBFC) is a 
two tier organization viz. the Board at Mumbai and 9 regional offices at Mumbai, 
Kolkata, Chennai, Bangalore, Thiruvananthapuram, Hyderabad, New Delhi, Cuttack 
and Guwahati.  At each of the nine regional offices of CBFC, there is an Advisory 
Panel established for assisting CBFC for discharging its functions efficiently under 
the Act. CBFC has 12 to 25 members appointed for a term of three years or till such 
time as per the directions given by the Central Government. The Committee have 
been informed that all the appointed members are eminent personalities from 
different spheres like education, art, film, social sciences, law, etc., representing a 
cross section of the society and the Board has sufficient representation of women. 
When asked about the adequacy of number of members in CBFC, the Ministry have 
informed that over last few years the Board has been functioning with 12 Board 
members and 963 advisory panel members across different offices. Both Board 
members and panel members have been active participants in the certification 
process. According to the Ministry no changes are proposed in the role, function 
and structure of CBFC. The Committee note that the functioning of Board has not 
witnessed any problem with regard to their numerical strength and there has been 
sufficient representation of women in the Board. Nevertheless, the Committee feel 
that it should be made obligatory to have one-third Members as Women in the CBFC 
Board and Advisory Panel. Further, the Committee also note that in light of the 
growth of film industry and almost 3 fold increase in the number of feature films 
certification, the Ministry have conducted a detailed study of human resources of 
CBFC vis-à-vis workload. The Committee, desire to be apprised about the outcome 

84 
 
of the said study alongwith the measures taken for smooth functioning of the 
Organization.  The Committee feel that in addition to the eminent personalities in the 
CBFC Board, having some representation from general public at large would 
provide an inclusive face to the composition of the Board. Furthermore, in the light 
of the concerns expressed by some of the Stakeholders regarding functioning of 
Regional Boards/Officers, the Committee desire to be informed about action taken 
on any such grievances received by CBFC/Ministry during last five years alongwith 
the details of complaints regarding functioning of the Members of the Board and 
Advisory Panel Members and action taken thereon. 
Infrastructure of CBFC 
3. The Committee are informed that the office space of CBFC and its 9 regional 
offices are mainly used for video film screenings, administrative and certification-
related work and for conducting meetings, smaller conferences and workshops. 
Screenings of theatrical films are also held in Films Division theatre in the same 
premises. As far as Headquarter office of CBFC is concerned, it also examines films 
for certification in the auditorium of Films Division located in the same premises.  
During initial phase of examination of the subject, the Committee were apprised that 
the Digital Projection System and Digital Theatres could not be procured or installed 
as planned because of shortage of space in the Films Division Complex at CBFC 
Headquarter in Mumbai. However, the Committee note with satisfaction that suitable 
action for providing office space for CBFC have been taken by utilizing the existing 
auditorium of Films Division in the same building complex and three theatres from 
Films Division have been allotted in the Films Division Complex. The Committee 
have also been informed that after merger of media units, the Films Division’s space 
and other space within the campus will be available for CBFC. With these measures, 
the Committee hope that the space constraints and related problems witnessed by 
CBFC would be resolved and the theatres are used effectively. Nevertheless, the 
Committee recommend the Ministry/CBFC to ensure that such constraints are 
addressed immediately so as to avoid its cascading effect on the functioning of 
CBFC. 
 
 

85 
 
Time limits for the certification process   
4. The Committee note that the Cinematograph (Certification) Rules, 1983 
prescribes a time limit of 68 days for the film certification process i.e. from 
submission of complete application to issuing of certificate. This time limit includes 
Scrutiny of Application, formation of Examination Committee (EC), forwarding the 
EC report to Chairman, Communication of the order to the applicant, Surrender of 
cuts by the producer, Examination of cuts and for Issue of Certificate. The 
Committee are given to understand that all the films are certified within 68 days and 
CBFC do not have a backlog of more than a month’s time. However, raising concern 
over delay in film certification, President of ‘Indian Motion Picture Producers' 
Association (IMPPA)’ informed the Committee that there is an inordinate delay in 
previewing the film and even with the advent of online certification the producers 
were made to wait for weeks to get the SMS regarding the preview and no 
information is given to the producer over phone or in writing. Referring to a Report 
of Comptroller and Auditor General of India (C&AG) he submitted that CAG had 
observed that the time taken by CBFC to issue certificates varied from 3 to 491 
days. The Committee express concern that despite repeated requests there has 
been no change in the timelines of 68 days. When asked for clarification, the 
representative of CBFC informed the Committee that almost all the films are 
certified within 20 to 25 days and generally it is done within 15 days. It is only when 
films go through the Committees, Sub-Committees, and Revising Committees, the 
delays occur. He also informed that at times it all depended on the workload, but 
maximum time limit was of 68 days. Besides, with the implementation of e-pramaan, 
the notice is sent online on the day the film is screened and the Report has to be 
submitted within that evening. The show cause notice, if any, is given the next day 
and screening of film is done within one week of filing of application.  On another 
suggestion received by the Committee, to reduce the time for issuing certificate 
from 64 days to 3-4 days, the Ministry clarified that 68 days is the maximum time 
that has been mentioned in the Cinematograph (Certification) Rules, 1983, however, 
CBFC ensured that certification of most of the films is completed within 10-15 days. 
Regarding submission of the President, IMPPA that in case of big budget films, 
certification is done within short period whereas for medium and small budget films 
(which form 90% of the films) it takes almost 491 days or little less, the Committee 
have been  informed that there is no preferential treatment given to big budget films 
and very occasionally, films have taken longer time of a few months because the 
filmmakers/applicants have not complied by producing requisite documents (NOCs) 
or submitted the necessary cuts in time.  On the differential treatment in issuing 
certificate, the CEO, CBFC, informed the Committee that it depends on the kind of 

86 
 
compliance. Regarding the inordinate delays in certification leading to huge 
financial burden on producers, Member CBFC clarified that there is no delay and the 
process is really expedited.   
 
The Committee note with appreciation that by and large the time limit for 
certification process of 68 days is adhered to by CBFC. Nonetheless, in the light of 
the concerns raised by the stakeholders, the Committee recommend the 
Ministry/CBFC to adhere to time limit for certification process in letter and spirit. 
The Committee call upon the Ministry/CBFC to reduce the time period by 
streamlining the entire certification process and ensuring transparency in the 
working of CBFC. Further, synchronization of all the stages of certification with SMS 
facility will enable filmmakers to be updated about each stage concurrently. The 
Committee maybe kept apprised about the action taken. 
Revenue from Certification and fees 
5. The Committee note that the fees charged by CBFC for examination of films 
have been prescribed under Rule 36 of the Cinematograph (Certification) Rules, 
1983 and the present fees are in accordance with notification dated 27.01.2017. 
Predominantly Educational (PE) films that generally includes different kinds of 
documentaries, children’s films, scientific films, films on health and environmental 
awareness, etc. are given a discount. For a two hour long film, the Certification fee 
works out as Rs. 4350/- for PE films and Rs 21,850/- for other (Non-PE) films. The 
Committee also note that during the year 2021-22, CBFC received Rs. 12,21,40,116/- 
as certification charges and from 2017-18 (upto September 2022) they have received 
Rs. 63,74,97,611/-. The Committee are pleased to learn that the existing fee structure 
of CBFC is found to be reasonable and that there is no lacunae.  The Committee 
also learn that in the light of increased procedural costs and honorarium of panel 
members, the Film Certification fees structure is reviewed at regular intervals and 
there is no immediate likelihood of revision of certification fees due to impact of 
COVID-19 pandemic on film industry.  Nevertheless, the Committee are concerned 
over the issue highlighted by the President of Indian Motion Picture Producers' 
Association (IMPPA) wherein it has been stated that since 'A' certified films cannot 
be screened on Satellite, the producers are forced to re-apply for grant of 'UA' 
Certificate/'U' Certificate for the same film and in that case the producers are 
expected to pay the same amount of fees again for a new certificate which is 
expensive. A request has been made to the Committee that in case of re-
certification of 'A' films into 'UA' it should not be treated as new certificate because 
the already financially suffering producer is made to pay heavy CBFC fees. Taking 
into consideration the above submission, the Committee would like the Ministry to 

87 
 
apprise about the feasibility of waiving off the certification fees in cases when a film 
is re-submitted for re-certification. The Ministry may look into the grievances related 
to certification fees and other fees charged by CBFC and provide details of the 
action taken on such grievances.  
Certification vis-à-vis Censorship 
6. The Committee note that during examination of the subject, the discussion 
mainly revolved around the contention whether there should be cut/modification 
while certifying films or should there be a purely certification model without any 
cuts/modification or to have no regulation at all. The Committee note that most of 
the stakeholders from film industry voiced against any form of regulation and 
desired for having minimal regulation i.e. only Certification. Justification for having 
only certification model was that certification provided choice to the viewer and 
content is not being pushed and act of watching film is voluntary.  Examining the 
role of CBFC in this regard, the Committee learnt that CBFC has been working 
mostly on certification and not on censorship. CBFC informed that many a times to 
get a certificate under a certain category the filmmakers themselves offer to go for 
cuts/modification because sometimes the film makers are unaware that a particular 
scene is violating a Section under the Act/Rule. However, the Committee note with 
concern that over the years the number of films cleared without cuts have been 
sharply reducing and the number of controversies over film certification has been 
on the rise. In this regard, one of the Members of CBFC submitted before the 
Committee that ‘Regulation’ is a scary term for media or film industry actors or 
content makers, however, with absolute no oversight mechanism in a country like 
India, the main concern would always remain for children being exposed to 
unwanted contents. Further, in the light of submission of one of the stakeholders 
that the creative freedom of filmmakers and rights of speech and expression should 
be protected, the Committee feel that with right to freedom of speech and 
expression there exists reasonable restrictions on the exercise of the rights 
conferred by Article 19(1)(a) of the Constitution and Article 19 of the Universal 
Declaration of Human Rights (UDHR) and International Covenant on Civil and 
Political Rights, 1966 (ICCPR), that provides for the protection and promotion of the 
right to speech and expression, carries special duties and responsibilities and have 

88 
 
reasonable restrictions for protection of the rights and reputations of others/ 
national security/ public order/ public health and morals.   
 
 
Furthermore, during deliberations on the issue of certification, the Member, 
CBFC submitted before the Committee that there are cultural nuances to every 
country. For example in France, gender nudity is not a problem while gangster films 
are and likewise, in other countries other factors can be an issue and thus a country 
cannot be devoid of the tradition that people belong to. The Committee, therefore, 
feel that in a country like India which has diverse culture, there is a need to consider 
the sensibility of the people of the country while making and showing films in our 
country and therefore there is a need for deliberation and certification. It is 
important to recollect the words of Supreme Court  in K.A. Abbas v. Union of India 
case wherein it took a stand that treatment of motion pictures must be different 
from other forms of art and expression because motion picture has the ability to stir 
up emotions more deeply than any other product of art. Thus, the Committee are of 
the opinion that open accessibility to violent and pornographic material, especially 
to kids, would lead to desensitization and consequent collateral damage cannot be 
offset by gains to the exchequer. Nevertheless, the Committee also feel that it will 
be grossly wrong to be heavy handed and to have over regulation. The Committee, 
feel that a great responsibility lies with the Ministry/CBFC/Film industry as there is a 
need for striking a balance between freedom of speech/creativity/artistic expression 
and at the same time being sensitive about the cultural diversity of the country and 
the impact of content of the film. For this, a preemptive mindset is needed to avoid 
fire-fighting after the damage is already done.  The Committee, therefore, desire and 
hope the Ministry/CBFC along with the Film fraternity will make all endeavours to 
achieve this balance as it is imperative duty of the film makers to be considerate 
about the impact of the content of films on the public at large and on children in 
particular. Besides, in light of paradigm shift in how content is created and 
consumed today, the Committee urge the Ministry to holistically examine the type of 
certification model required for the Country and apprise the Committee accordingly. 
The Committee also recommend the Ministry/CBFC to increase objectivity in 
parameters for determining category for film certification because with the advent of 
new technologies, with digitization and with pragmatic approach, human 
intervention and personal biasness can be minimized and the certification process 

89 
 
can be made responsive to social change. The Ministry may apprise the Committee 
about the action taken on all the issues highlighted in this paragraph. 
 
Validity of Certificate 
7. The Committee note that as per sub-section 3 of section 5A of ‘The 
Cinematograph Act, 1952’, the certificate issued by the Board is valid for 10 years 
and in 1984 the Central Government had passed an order to remove this restriction 
on validity of certificate. However, the provision in the Act is still in existence. The 
Committee note that the Ministry have proposed an amendment, relating to ‘Validity 
of the Certificate’, in the draft ‘Cinematograph (Amendment) Bill, 2021’.  Justifying 
the proposed amendment, the Ministry have stated that although the restriction on 
validity of certificate for only 10 years was removed through an executive order, the 
existing provision in the Act is to be amended so that the certificate is valid in 
perpetuity and the proposed amendment would continue to allow the films to be 
exhibited without getting the certification revalidated from time to time. In this 
regard, the Committee have been informed that Mudgal Committee had also 
recommended for making the validity of certificates perpetual because it is in 
tandem with ease of doing business policy of the Government. The Committee note 
that almost all stakeholders have welcomed and concurred with the amendment 
proposed regarding validity of certificates in the ‘Cinematograph (Amendment) Bill, 
2021’. The Committee welcome the move of the Ministry in initiating this 
amendment. 
Revisionary power of the Government 
8. While examining the subject, the Committee had noted that another 
amendment proposed in the draft ‘Cinematograph (Amendment) Bill, 2021’ related 
to sub-section (1) of Section 6 which was regarding ‘Revisional powers of the 
Central Government’. In this regard, the Committee had learnt that High Court of 
Karnataka in its judgment on 2nd April, 1990 in Writ Petition No. 4335 of 1979 - K.M. 
Shankarappa Vs Union of India, had struck down some clauses in sub-section(1) of 
Section 6. As a result the Central Government could not exercise revisional powers 
in respect of films that are already certified by the Board, viz. ‘or has been decided 
by’, ‘or as the case may be decided by the Tribunal’, and ‘or to whom a certificate 
has been granted as the case may be". This was also upheld by the Hon’ble 

90 
 
Supreme Court vide judgment dated 28/11/2000 in Civil Appeal 3106 of 1991.  During 
the course of examination of the subject the Committee came across various views 
regarding amendment proposed to Section 6(1) of ‘The Cinematograph Act, 1952’.  
 
 Regarding this proposed amendment in ‘ The Cinematograph (Amendment) 
Bill, 2021’, the Chairperson, CBFC stated that the amendment to sub-section(1) of 
Section 6 would create an unnecessary layer because even if the intent is to go for 
the rare cases,  yet it will open a Pandora’s Box where everything becomes 
important. Clarifying about the amendment, the Ministry had informed the 
Committee that the said provision in ‘The Cinematograph (Amendment) Bill, 2021’ 
has been largely misunderstood or not understood in the right spirit because the 
Central Government cannot have the power to re-examine a case that has been 
decided by the Board or the Tribunal because the Supreme Court has struck down 
this power. The Ministry had also stated that the Hon’ble Supreme Court vide 
judgment dated 28/11/2000 in Civil Appeal 3106 in the K.M. Shankarappa case had 
also opined that at most, the Government may apply to the Tribunal itself for a 
review, if circumstances so warrant. However, with the abolishment of the Film 
Certification Appellate Tribunal (FCAT) the option to apply to the Tribunal for review 
is no longer available.  Therefore, the amendment proposed in  the draft 
‘Cinematograph (Amendment) Bill, 2021’ was for cases where the Central 
Government might receive a complaint either from the Ministry of Home Affairs 
(MHA) or from the CBFC itself. In such cases, the Government may direct CBFC to 
re-examine and the decision of the CBFC will be final. Endorsing the need for this 
exception, the CEO, CBFC informed the Committee that there are certain cases in 
which some developments come after a film is certified and in that case CBFC does 
not have any provision to review, because Certification by CBFC is the final process 
after it has gone through all the revising Committees. He also informed the 
Committee that CBFC suo-motu cannot take up a film for review after certification is 
done and so in that case the revisionary power is needed.  The Committee also 
learnt that Central Government cannot recall or re-certify any film certified by the 
CBFC but sometimes after a film is certified complaints are received against a film 
that allude to violation of Section 5B(1) of the Cinematograph Act, 1952 which has 
been derived from Article 19(2) of the Constitution and which are non-negotiable 
and in that case the Central Government may refer the matter to CBFC for re-

91 
 
examination of the film.  Clarifying the intent on the amendment proposed in ‘The 
Cinematograph (Amendment) Bill, 2021’, the Ministry had informed that the Central 
Government will be referring a case for re-examination only on receipt of complaint 
on account of violation of Principles for guidance in certifying films mentioned in 
section 5B(1) such as sovereignty and integrity of India, the security of the State, 
friendly relations with foreign States, public order, decency or morality, or involves 
defamation or contempt of court or is likely to incite the commission of any offence. 
The Ministry had assured that this would be in the rarest of the rare cases and in 
case the certification of a film is re-examined by the CBFC, the interest of the 
producers of the film will be safeguarded by giving him an opportunity to be heard 
before orders are passed by CBFC.  At the same time, Rules will be framed to clarify 
the procedure and circumstances under which this power can be exercised so that 
there is no arbitrariness in the action taken.   While noting that 'The Cinematograph 
(Amendment) Bill, 2023' has been introduced in Rajya Sabha on 20th  July, 2023  the 
Committee hope that the Ministry have taken into consideration all the concerns 
raised during deliberations on the subject. 
 
Digitization / Online Certification system – ‘e-Cinepramaan’ 
9. The Committee note that since 2009 CBFC has been progressively moving 
from manual operations to automation and on 27th March, 2017 online certification 
system of CBFC - ‘e-cinepramaan’ was launched. The Committee appreciate that 
system for paying certification fees has been fully integrated with Bharatkosh              
e-payment gateway and the work of scanning and digitization of past certification 
records has also been undertaken by CBFC.  The Committee have been informed 
that the present online certification system has been developed and changes are 
done in the system from time to time based on the feedback received from all 
stakeholders including filmmakers and applicants. The Ministry have informed that 
four years into operation, the online system is functioning satisfactorily and 
applicants are also comfortable with it. The Committee note that online certification 
system has not only reduced the time taken for film certification substantially but 
has also enabled the filmmakers to check the status of their applications through 
their logins, reply to intimations and make enquiries through dedicated helpdesk of 
CBFC. This has brought in transparency in documentation processes and has 

92 
 
brought down the average time taken for long film certification to less than 10-15 
days as compared to earlier 20-30 days. Further, short films certification time has 
reduced to just 1 to 2 days. Duplications in certifications is eliminated and with QR 
code implementation, authenticity of certificates can be checked, thereby tackling 
the problem of forged certificates”.  Some system improvements that are being 
carried out in the second phase based on the suggestions/feedback received inter-
alia include (i) merging of four different application forms into a common simplified 
form, also removing redundant entries (ii) Making cut verification process 
completely online (iii) Informing applicants on the tentative date of screening on 
their dashboard (iv) Providing alternate and additional payment gateway for 
deposition of fees, etc.  With the launch of ‘e-cinepramaan’, CBFC have also started 
online examination of short films (films of less than 10 minutes duration), enabling 
swift certification of these films.   
 
Further, the Committee are given to understand that the next phase of 
digitization is to make ‘e-cinepramaan’ more user-friendly and Computerisation 
Phase-II aims at complete automation with minimal human intervention.  However, it 
is a matter of concern to note the grievance raised by film makers with respect to 
some of the manual processes that are still being followed i.e. there is a need for 
submission of 8 hard copies of all documents like script/screen play at the time of 
screening and at the time of scrutiny of all the documents producer's personal 
presence is compulsorily required and there is no provision for allowing authorized 
representative of the producer to complete the formalities, etc.  Even after 
completing the full process of certification the producer is required to collect the 
certificate personally. Besides, even after the film is cleared, to collect the 
certificate producer has to visit CBFC office repeatedly because it does not get 
signed for one or the other reason.  The Committee call upon the Ministry that the 
initiatives being taken for digitization of certification process may address all 
concerns of the stakeholders. Further, these initiatives be implemented at the 
earliest. 
Act/ Rules/Guidelines related to functioning of CFBC 
10. The Committee note that CBFC discharges its function of certification 
in accordance with the provisions of (i) The Cinematograph Act 1952, (ii) The 

93 
 
Cinematograph (Certification) Rules, 1983 (iii) The Guidelines issued by the Central 
Government under Section 5B of the Cinematograph Act, in 1991 and (iv) Article 
19(1)(a) and 19(2) of the Constitution of India. The Committee also note that there 
are various other Acts, Rules and Guidelines that CBFC needs to consider while 
certifying films. The Committee have been informed that the guidelines issued by 
the Central Government for film certification in 1991 have been time tested and are 
relevant even today as they provide broader objectives and issue-specific insights 
for the Committees to judge the contents for public exhibition. However, the present 
Cinematograph Act enacted in 1952 needs review/amendment. The Ministry of 
Information and Broadcasting had notified the draft ‘Cinematograph (Amendment) 
Bill, 2021’ on their website seeking public comments. The Committee have been 
informed that that it was decided that before a final view is taken on the comments 
received, wider stakeholder consultations would be held in person to allay the 
concerns of the film industry and to make them active partners in the regulatory 
ecosystem. Accordingly, two consultation meetings were held with major 
stakeholders on 3th March, 2022 in Chennai and in Mumbai on 4th March, 2022 to 
inter-alia discuss the proposed amendments in the Cinematograph Act and 
improvements in the certification process. The Ministry also informed that a review 
of the Cinematograph Act, 1952 has been done to address the various issues   
concerning   the   certification   process   in   a   comprehensive   manner.  Inter-
ministerial consultations (IMC) and the pre-legislative consultations were also done 
with the major stakeholders. During the course of examination of the subject the 
Ministry had informed that since the initially proposed amendment has undergone 
substantial changes, it is required to undertake IMC for approaching the Cabinet for 
its approval to convey the new Bill in Parliament. After the IMC & Cabinet approval, 
the Bill will be laid in the Parliament. They also had informed the Committee that the 
proposed Draft, Bill 2021, is a comprehensive amendment. Further, the Committee 
note that ‘The Cinematograph (Amendment) Bill, 2023’ is introduced in the Rajya 
Sabha on 20th July, 2023.  
In addition, the Committee note that the recommendations of the two 
Committee, viz. Mukul Mudgal Committee and Shyam Benegal Committee, are yet to 
be implemented in toto.  On delayed implementation of the recommendations, the 
Ministry have submitted that upon examination they felt that the recommendations 
fall under three categories wherein (i) some would be included in the Act in terms of 

94 
 
additional definitions or other amendments, and there could be amendments in the 
Cinematograph Certification Rules of 1983, (ii) some of the recommendations could 
be met by issue of Executive Orders, and (iii) certain recommendations made by the 
Mudgal and Shyam Benegal Committees, are already under implementation.  The 
Committee disapprove the delay by the Ministry in taking concrete action on these 
two Reports. Having delayed it for more than 6 years, the Committee strongly urge 
the Ministry to implement the recommendations depending on the feasibility and 
ensure to avoid such excessive delays in future.  The Ministry may also informed 
whether the concerns expressed by the Committee on the Subject were considered 
in ‘The Cinematograph (Amendment) Bill, 2023’ introduced in the House.  
Film Certification Appellate Tribunal (FCAT) 
11. The Committee note that with promulgation of ‘The Tribunals Reforms 
(Rationalization and Conditions of Service) Ordinance, 2021’ on 04.04.2021, the Film 
Certification Appellate Tribunal (FCAT) has been abolished and its functions have 
been transferred to the High Courts. The role of FCAT was to hear appeals made 
under Section 5C of the Cinematograph Act, 1952 by an applicant for a certificate in 
respect of a film in case he was aggrieved by an order of the CBFC. Explaining the 
reasons for abolishing FCAT, the Ministry has said that under the Cinematograph 
Act, 1952 and Cinematograph (Certification) Rules, 1983, CBFC has a robust and 
efficient mechanism to deal with the concerns of the film fraternity and it has a well 
placed internal mechanism for representation and appeals in the form of revising 
committees comprising of eminent persons from different fields outside 
Government as their members. The Ministry also submitted that examining and 
revising committees of CBFC after patient hearing and through a collaborative effort 
address the grievances of the film makers. According to the Ministry, the number of 
films having to go to an appellate body saw a steady decline and during last 2-3 
years, only around 0.2% films were taken to FCAT. Thus, considering the miniscule 
ratio of films approaching FCAT, abolition of FCAT is not expected to have any 
significant impact on the film industry. While perusing the Statement of Objects and 
Reasons of ‘The Tribunals Reforms (Rationalization and Conditions of Service) Bill, 
2021’, the Committee learnt that the tribunals that are proposed to be abolished 
through this Bill/Act are of the kind which handle cases in which public at large is 
not a litigant or those which neither take away any significant workload from High 

95 
 
Courts which otherwise would have adjudicated such cases nor provide speedy 
disposal. Many cases do not achieve finality at the level of tribunals and are litigated 
further till High Courts and Supreme Court, especially those with significant 
implications. Therefore, these tribunals only add to another additional layer of 
litigation. Having separate tribunal requires administrative action in terms of filling 
up of posts and such other matters, and any delay in such action further delays 
disposal of cases. The Ministry also informed that reducing the number of tribunals 
shall not only be beneficial for the public at large, reduce the burden on public 
exchequer, but also address the issue of shortage of supporting staff of tribunals 
and infrastructure.  In the light of the submissions made by the Ministry and 
keeping in view the larger interest of the public, the Committee see merit in the 
Government’s justification in abolishing FCAT.   Nonetheless, the Committee take 
into cognizance the submissions of the stakeholders that such experts Appellate 
Tribunal not only enables stakeholders to have an affordable, easily accessible and 
timely adjudication of grievances but also avoids cumbersome process of going to 
courts which inhibits most of the filmmakers because time is the essence in release 
of films. Thus, the Committee feel such decisions of abolishing a body meant for 
grievance redressal should at least be done after thorough discussions with the 
respective stakeholders, in this case film industry fraternity. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend the Ministry to have extensive/wider consultation so as to 
have negligible grievances and court cases after implementation of such decision.  
The Committee desire to be apprised about all the related 
developments/cases/appeals filed after ‘The Tribunals Reforms Act, 2021’ was 
passed by the Parliament in August, 2021 and FCAT was abolished.  
Grievance Redressal Mechanism 
12. The Committee note that at present the representations from filmmakers as 
well as other complainants are considered by the Committees of CBFC before 
making final recommendations and it is compulsory for all their Committees to hear 
filmmakers before writing their Reports.  However, an aggrieved filmmaker can 
approach Revising Committee constituted under Rule 24 of Cinematograph 
Certification Rules 1983. There is also a provision for Re-revising Committee, if the 
issue is not resolved at the stage of revising committee. In case of any 
disagreement, the filmmaker/applicant can appeal in the respective High Court for 

96 
 
appropriate remedies. The Ministry have informed that the Chairperson and all 
officers of the Board are accessible to general public or various 
organizations/groups that have any complaints about the contents of the Film. Such 
complaints are put before the respective Committees who decide and dispose the 
same based on their merit. The Ministry have also informed that they have strived 
for an environment of dialogue and discourse. Thereby, encouraging a collaborative 
and facilitative approach to film certification and overall focus has been on detailing 
and streamlining the processes. As a result there has been improved mutual 
understanding and   appreciation by the film fraternity of the work of CBFC. 
However, in due course of examination, the Committee have come across numerous 
problems/constraints encountered by actors, producers, directors, film makers, etc., 
in getting approval/certification by CBFC.   
 
On the concerns related to submission of NOC from the Animal Welfare Board 
as a mandatory requirement for application for certification and inconvenience 
faced by the Producers/Film makers, Committee have been assured that the matter 
will be looked into it. The Ministry have also informed that whenever there is a 
sensitive issue and there is requirement of expert comments, CBFC has an expert 
window where they invite experts on any subject. Regarding violations of 
certification Rules, the Committee note that during the last 5 years there has been a 
few cases of violations against certification of films. Further, Out of three vigilance 
cases that were reported in CBFC, in two cases the investigation/proceedings 
against the officers which started in 2017 are still in process and has not been 
settled even after 5 years. Therefore, in addition to the present arrangement of 
having Chief Executive Officer for administrative matters, CBFC should also have 
one Chief Grievance Redressal Officer at each regional level for dealing with other 
matters.  The Committee urge the Ministry to expedite the pending vigilance cases 
along with the grievances of Producers/Directors/other Stakeholders of the Film 
industry at the earliest and apprise the Committee about the same.   Having a single 
window/platform for complaint registration and to fix a timeline for redressing each 
category of grievance alongwith a help line number for Grievance Redressal and for 
any aggrieved party seeking appointment with the Chairperson or Regional Officer 
would ameliorate the situation. The Committee may be apprised about the action 
taken in this direction. 
 

97 
 
Initiatives for person with special needs 
13. The Committee note that on 01.10.2019 the Ministry had issued an advisory to 
major Film Industry bodies with the request to persuade and motivate their associated 
members for making their film more accessible to person with special needs by using 
Audio Description and closed captioning in films. However, the Committee note with 
extreme concern that only one film - ‘Gandhi’ (Hindi) (by Director: Richard 
Attenborough, produced by NFDC) was certified in accessible format for differently-
abled persons after 1st October, 2019. The Committee are perturbed about the shoddy 
implementation of accessibility standards for persons with disabilities, and feel that 
such initiatives should emanate from the industry suo-moto to cater to the special 
needs of differently-abled persons. The Committee urge the Ministry to ensure that their 
efforts for sensitizing film makers about the accessibility standards has tangible 
outcomes.  
 
International practices  
 
14. The Committee note that in India, the digital media sector is a sunrise sector 
which has been evolving at a rapid pace with changes in technology, entertainment 
patterns and other socio-economic factors. The Ministry have informed that the 
provisions adopted in Part III of the ‘Information Technology (Intermediary 
Guidelines and Digital Media Ethics Codes) Rules, 2021’ are in consonance with 
measures adopted globally and it would provide an institutional mechanism for the 
sector while protecting artistic freedom and creativity. According to the Ministry, it 
is expected that policy certainty and a level playing field for all stakeholders of the 
sector would help in attracting higher investments, leading to growth in the 
industry. The Committee note that the Ministry are making efforts to collaborate and 
learn from global best practices especially in the field of technology and artificial 
intelligence. The Ministry have also stated that a comparison between regulations 
adopted by various countries may need to account for politico-administrative, 
socio-cultural, legal, and demographic factors. However, since these factors vary 
from country to country, the Committee feel that the nuances of other countries 
cannot be compared/implemented in totality particularly in case of assessment of a 
film and certification which is essentially a human process based on appreciation of 
content in the light of narrative and theme of the film and people to whom it relates 
to. Neither it can be mechanized, nor a uniform one-size-fits-all formula be applied 
to the films while deciding on their classification. Thus, the Committee expect that 

98 
 
the Ministry to adopt a balanced approach while bringing any Act/Guideline/Policy 
changes by ensuring protection to the artistic freedom and creativity taking into 
consideration the diverse nature of the country. Nevertheless, the Committee 
recommend the Ministry to take comprehensive, concerted efforts on all the issues 
affecting the functioning of CBFC and inform the Committee about the action taken. 
 
 
 
New Delhi;    PRATAPRAO  JADHAV, 
27 July, 2023 Chairperson, 
5 Sravana, 1945 (Saka) Standing Committee on  
Communications and Information Technology. 

99 
 
ANNEXURE - I 
 
 
 (Vide Para No. 47) 
Guidelines for certification of films 
 
In exercise of the powers conferred by sub-section (2) of section 5B of the Cinematograph 
Act, 1952 ( 37 of 1952) and in supersession of the notification of the Government of India 
in the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting No. S.O. 9E) , dated 7th January, 1978, 
except as respects things done or omitted to be done before such supersession, the 
Central Government hereby directs that in sanctioning films of public exhibition , the Board 
of Film Certification shall be guided by the following principles. 
 
1. Objectives of Film Certification 
a. the medium of film remains responsible and sensitive to the values and 
standards of society; 
b. artistic expression and creative freedom are not unduly curbed; 
c. certification is responsible to social changes; 
d. the medium of film provides clean and healthy entertainment; and 
e. as far as possible, the film is of aesthetic value and cinematically of a good 
standard. 
 2. In pursuance of the above objectives, the CBFC shall ensure that 
vi. anti social activities such as violence are not glorified or justified 
vii. the modus operandi of criminals, other visuals or words likely to incite the 
commission of any offence are not depicted; 
viii. scenes - 
a. showing involvement of children in violence as victims or perpetrators 
or as forced witnesses to violence, or showing children as being 
subjected to any form of child abuse. 
b. showing abuse or ridicule of physically and mentally handicapped 
persons; and 
c. showing cruelty to, or abuse of animals, are not presented needlessly 
ix. pointless or avoidable scenes of violence, cruelty and horror, scenes of 
violence primarily intended to provide entertainment and such scenes as 
may have the effect of de-sensitising or de-humanising people are not 
shown; 
x. scenes which have the effect of justifying or glorifying drinking are not 
shown; 
xi. scenes tending to encourage, justify or glamorise drug addiction are not 
shown; 
a. scenes tending to encourage, justify or glamorise consumption of 
tobacco or smoking are not shown; 

100 
 
xii. human sensibilities are not offended by vulgarity, obscenity or depravity; 
xiii. such dual meaning words as obviously cater to baser instincts are not 
allowed; 
xiv. scenes degrading or denigrating women in any manner are not presented; 
xv. scenes involving sexual violence against women like attempt to rape, rape or 
any form of molestation or scenes of a similar nature are avoided, and if any 
such incidence is germane to the theme, they shall be reduced to the 
minimum and no details are shown 
xvi. scenes showing sexual perversions shall be avoided and if such matters are 
germane to the theme they shall be reduced to the minimum and no details 
are shown 
xvii. visuals or words contemptuous of racial, religious or other groups are not 
presented 
xviii. visuals or words which promote communal, obscurantist, anti-scientific and 
anti-national attitude are not presented 
xix. the sovereignty and integrity of India is not called in question; 
xx. the security of the State is not jeopardized or endangered 
xxi. friendly relations with foreign States are not strained; 
xxii. public order is not endangered 
xxiii. visuals or words involving defamation of an individual or a body of 
individuals, or contempt of court are not presented. 
EXPLANATION: Scenes that tend to create scorn, disgrace or disregard of 
rules or undermine the dignity of court will come under the term ''Contempt of 
Court'' : and 
xxiv. national symbols and emblems are not shown except in accordance with the 
provisions of the Emblems and Names (Prevention of Improper Use) Act, 
1950 (12 of 1950) 
3. The Board of Film Certification shall also ensure that the film 
a. Is judged in its entirety from the point of view of its overall impact; and 
b. Is examined in the light of the period depicted in the films and the 
contemporary standards of the country and the people to which the film 
relates provided that the film does not deprave the morality of the audience. 
  
4. Films that meet the above – mentioned criteria but are considered unsuitable for 
exhibition to non-adults shall be certified for exhibition to adult audiences only. 
 

101 
 
1. While certifying films for unrestricted public exhibition, the Board shall ensure 
that the film is suitable for family viewing, that is to say, the film shall be such 
that all the members of the family including children can view it together. 
2. If the Board, having regard to the nature, content and theme of the film is of 
the opinion that it is necessary to caution the parents / guardian to consider 
as to whether any child below the age of twelve years maybe allowed to see 
such a film, the film shall be certified for unrestricted public exhibition with an 
endorsement to that effect. 
3. If the Board having regard to the nature, content and theme of the film, is of 
the opinion that the exhibition of the film should be restricted to members of 
any profession or any class of persons, the film shall be certified for public 
exhibition restricted to the specialized audiences to be specified by the 
Board in this behalf. 
6. The Board shall scrutinize the titles of the films carefully and ensure that they are 
not provocative, vulgar, offensive or violative of any of the above-mentioned 
guidelines. 
 

102 
 
 
ANNEXURE - II (A) 
(Vide Para 50) 
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENT INDICATING THE FILMS CERTIFIED BY THE BOARD FROM 
1-4-2019 TO 31-3-2020 
A  - CELLULOID 
  U U* UA UA* A A* S S* TOTAL 
Indian Long Films - - - - - - - - - 
Foreign Long Films - - - - - - - - - 
Indian Short Films - - - - - - - - - 
Foreign Short Films  - - - - - - - - - 
TOTAL - - - - - - - - - 
B  - VIDEO  
  U U* UA UA* A A* S S* TOTAL 
Indian Long Films 187 68 258 318 5 5 - - 841 
Foreign Long Films 127 23 442 301 7 5 - - 905 
Indian Short Films 3994 136 1451 125 64 2 - - 5772 
Foreign Short Films  124 - 143 6 - - - - 273 
TOTAL 4432 227 2294 750 76 12 - - 7791 
C - DIGITAL  
  U U* UA UA* A A* S S* TOTAL 
Indian Long Films 572 342 446 860 64 170 - - 2454 
Foreign Long Films 51 14 63 44 46 48 - - 266 
Indian Short Films 8093 104 1100 178 69 13 - - 9557 
Foreign Short Films  185 0 302 21 15 2 - - 525 
TOTAL 8901 460 1911 1103 194 233 - - 12802 
GRAND TOTAL (A+B+C) 13333 687 4205 1853 270 245 - - 20593 
 
* with cuts 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

103 
 
 
 
ANNEXURE II (B) 
 
CONSOLIDATEDSTATEMENT INDICATING THE FILMS CERTIFIED BY THE BOARD FROM 1-
4-2020 TO 31-3-2021 
 
 
CELLULOID 
  U U * UA UA * A A *  S Total 
Indian Feature Films - - - - - - - - 
Foreign Feature Films - - - - - - - - 
Indian Short Films - - - - - - - - 
Foreign Short Films - - - - - - - - 
TOTAL (A) - - - - - - - - 
 
VIDEO 
  U U * UA UA * A A *  S Total 
Indian Feature Films 193 78 418 357 4 4 - 1054 
Foreign Feature Films 89 9 523 142 5 8 - 776 
Indian Short Films 2317 31 641 44 24 1 - 3058 
Foreign Short Films 19 - 45 - 1 - - 65 
TOTAL (B) 2618 118 1627 543 34 13 - 4953 
 
DIGITAL 
  U U * UA UA * A A *  S Total 
Indian Feature Films 300 174 185 429 31 85 - 1204 
Foreign Feature Films 18 5 63 23 13 19 - 141 
Indian Short Films 1369 18 424 42 29 5 - 1887 
Foreign Short Films 28 - 82 1 3 - - 114 
TOTAL (C) 1715 197 754 495 76 109 - 3346 
GRAND TOTAL (A+B+C) 4333 315 2381 1038 110 122 - 8299 
 
* with cuts 

104 
 
 
Annexure II (C) 
 
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENT  INDICATING  THE  FILMS  CERTIFIED  BY THE 
 BOARD  FROM 1-4-2021  TO  31-3-2022 
 
 
A - CELLULOID 
  U U * UA UA * A A *  S S* Total 
Indian Feature Films - - - - - - - - - 
Foreign Feature Films - - - - - - - - - 
Indian Short Films - - - - - - - - - 
Foreign Short Films - - - - - - - - - 
TOTAL (A) - - - - - - - - - 
B - VIDEO 
  U U * UA UA * A A *  S S* Total 
Indian Feature Films 224 132 562 390 13 7 - - 1328 
Foreign Feature Films 91 6 356 83 7 4 - - 547 
Indian Short Films 3016 40 1171 84 44 4 - - 4359 
Foreign Short Films 30 - 141 1 3 - - - 175 
TOTAL (B) 3361 178 2230 558 67 15 - - 6409 
C - DIGITAL 
  U U * UA UA * A A *  S S* Total 
Indian Feature Films 424 191 360 717 48 116 - - 1856 
Foreign Feature Films 23 1 85 17 34 15 - - 175 
Indian Short Films 3037 22 803 74 26 5 - - 3967 
Foreign Short Films 80 - 227 2 3 - - - 312 
TOTAL (C) 3564 214 1475 810 111 136 - - 6310 
GRAND TOTAL (A+B+C) 6925 392 3705 1368 178 151 - - 12719 
 * with cuts 
 

105 
 
Annexure II (D) 
 
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENT  INDICATING  THE  FILMS  CERTIFIED  BY THE 
 BOARD  FROM 1-4-2022  TO  30-9-2022 
A - CELLULOID 
  U U * UA UA * A A *  S S* Total 
Indian Feature Films 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
Foreign Feature Films 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
Indian Short Films 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
Foreign Short Films 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
TOTAL (A) 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
B - VIDEO 
  U U * UA UA * A A *  S S* Total 
Indian Feature Films 123 48 309 208 2 1 0 0 691 
Foreign Feature Films 36 2 220 26 2 0 0 0 286 
Indian Short Films 1785 34 873 46 17 2 0 0 2757 
Foreign Short Films 25 0 45 0 0 0 0 0 70 
TOTAL (B) 1969 84 1447 280 21 3 0 0 3804 
C - DIGITAL 
  U U * UA UA * A A *  S S* Total 
Indian Feature Films 272 83 280 462 31 73 0 0 1201 
Foreign Feature Films 19 1 36 5 8 8 0 0 77 
Indian Short Films 3365 9 790 45 18 2 0 0 4229 
Foreign Short Films 54 1 118 0 0 0 0 0 173 
TOTAL (C) 3710 94 1224 512 57 83 0 0 5680 
GRAND TOTAL (A+B+C) 5679 178 2671 792 78 86 0 0 9484 
* with cuts 
 
 
 
 

 
106 
 
Annexure-III (A) 
(Vide Para 155) 
Key recommendations of the Mudgal Committee 
1) Advisory Panels - The Committee observed that there were concerns within the 
industry and outside, about the role and responsibilities of Advisory panel members 
who are under the Act, appointed by the Ministry in consultation with the Chairman, 
CBFC. The Committee has recommended a rigorous selection procedure for the 
advisory panel members, who, as per the Committee’s report, should now be 
referred to as “Screening panel” members. As per the revised procedure 
recommended by the Committee, the Board would first set up a 9 member 
committee ensuring language and regional representation and with adequate lady 
members, who in turn would recommend names of eminent persons from various 
disciplines  such as law, art, media, psychology, education, cinema, literature, 
history, etc. The Ministry would then choose the Screening panel members from 
this list. The Board would send a list of double the number of members to be 
appointed. 
 
2) Guidelines for certification and issues such as portrayal of women, obscenity and 
communal disharmony.  The Committee was conscious of the fact that today there 
is a raging debate between artistic freedom vis-a-vis growing concerns about 
excessive violence and obscenity in films. The Committee was of the opinion that 
there can be no rigid guidelines for certification, and that there must be a provision 
in the guidelines under the Act, to ensure that the Examining Committee views the 
film in its entirety from the point of view of its overall impact, and in the context of its 
theme, the characters and the period to which the film belongs. 
 
3) Classification of Films - The Committee has appreciated that present category of 
classification of films, especially the category of ‘U/A’ are insufficient considering 
the myriad of subjects, complex theme, and content of films.  Accordingly, the 
Committee has recommended two new categories namely 12+ and 15+, to replace 
the existing ‘U/A’ category.  
 
4) Power of State Government vis-à-vis Central Government – The Committee has 
noted that after a film is produced, has received certification from the Board, and is 
ready for release in theatres, certain vested groups, fringe elements and at times 
simple publicity seekers create local disturbance on ground, file criminal 
proceedings and also approach respective High Courts in the country seeking 
suspension of exhibition of such film.  In certain cases, State Governments have 
proceeded to suspend exhibition of such films suo moto or being influenced by such 
elements or on a perceived threat to law and order with or without invocation of 
powers under Section 144 of CrPC, thereby prohibiting the Assembly of four or 
more persons.  The Committee strongly recommends inclusion of a statutory 
provision in cinematograph legislation to firstly provide that ordinarily exhibition of a 
film which has been certified shall not be suspended.  Assuming that there are 
certain circumstances which have arisen during the public exhibition of such 
certified films leading to a breach of public order or likelihood of such breach, then 
the Central Govt. either suo moto or at the behest of the relevant State Govt. may 

 
107 
 
proceed to pass an order of suspension of exhibition of such film.  Such order of 
suspension ought not to be passed unless an opportunity has first been given to the 
producer / holder the certificate, informing his of the grounds of proposed 
suspension and to show cause or explain why the film ought not to be suspended.  
Further, any order passed suspending the exhibition of a certified film must be 
appealable to the FCAT.  
 
5) Jurisdiction of the Appellate Tribunal – Under the present scheme of legislation only 
an applicant for certification may prefer and appeal to the film certification appellate 
Tribunal (FCAT).  This leads to a flood of litigation in various High Courts leading to 
different points of view by different High Courts in the matter.  It also provides a 
handle to unscrupulous elements who either for vested interests or petty reasons 
rush to the nearest High Court to seek suspension / a ban on the film.  The 
Committee is of the view that since there is already a specialised Tribunal under the 
Act, the best remedy would be to expand the jurisdiction of the FCAT to permit any 
person who is aggrieved by the order the Board, to file an appeal for the FCAT.  
This would lead to a beneficial situation where a specialized Tribunal will address 
issues relating to cinema.  Such expansion of jurisdiction would be in consonance 
with legislation in other fields of quasi-regulation / licensing such as the Securities 
Appellate Tribunal for the capital markets and so on.  Furthermore, a genuinely 
aggrieved would not be required to adopt the expensive process of High Court 
litigation.  
 
6) Treatment of Piracy – The Committee strongly felt that piracy, illegal and 
unauthorized duplication of certified film is to be treated in the strictest form 
possible and therefore recommended that such Act be made substantive non-
bailable offense.  In the draft proposed Bill, Committee has suggested structuring of 
an entire chapter on Offences and Penalties recommending a fine which may 
extend from Rs. 5 lacs upto Rs. 25 lacs and an imprisonment which may extend 
upto 3 years.   
 
7) Review of the provisions of the Cinematograph Act, 1952 – The Committee has 
recommended a holistic review of the present cinematograph legislation, and has 
also submitted a draft Cinematograph Bill for consideration by the Ministry.  Among 
others, the Committee has recommended expansion of the definition of the “film” to 
include songs, lyrics and related advertising material.  This is to ensure that all 
trailers, music videos, posters, etc., which are often released separately and well 
before release of actual film, should also be subject to some form of check, 
regulation and certification.   
 

 
108 
 
Annexure-III (B) 
Key recommendations of the Committee of Experts headed by Shri Shyam Benegal 
(i) There should be no system of imposing excision and the CBFC must transition into 
practically film certification body - This would require amendment in Section 4(iii) of 
the Cinematograph Act, 1952 and other relevant sections. 
 
(ii) Scope of CBFC largely only to decide what category of audiences can watch a 
particular film. 
 
(iii) Guidelines needed for each category of certification in order to empower viewers to 
make informed viewing choices by specifying the category.  The present objectives 
regarding ensuring clean & healthy entertainment, aesthetic value & good standard 
being outside the purview of CBFC, has been taken out.  Highest category of 
certification is proposed beyond which CBFC can refuse certification. 
 
(iv) New categories 12+ and 15+ proposed under the UA category.  Beyond A, another 
category A with caution, i.e. A-C category has been suggested. Detailed guidelines 
for each category have been given. Requirement of additional categories would 
require amendment in the relevant section of the present Act. 
 
(v) Films violating the provisions of Section 5B(1) of the Cinematograph Act, i.e. film 
depicting scenes  against the interests of the sovereignty and integrity of India, 
security of the State, friendly relation with foreign States, public order, decency or 
morality, defamation or contempt of court etc., be not allowed certification. 
 
(vi) CBFC Chairperson & Board Members to play a role in guiding the Board at apex 
level than participating in routine certification process. 
 
(vii) Lesser number of members in the Board suggested in view of the suggested role of 
CBFC, i.e. One Member representing each Regional Office (=9) and a Chairperson. 
This would require an amendment in the Act. 
 
(viii) Two tier system of Advisory Panels, Regional & Central Panels for Examining & 
Revising Committee respectively to be chosen through different processes. 
 
(ix) For Regional Advisory Panels, 25% nomination to come through FFI, 25% through 
FFSI, 25% from NCPCR & NCW and 25% from NFDC.  Women to have 50% 
representation in these. Central government to notify these committees. 
 
(x) The Examining Committee members to be nominated through customized software.  
The Examining Officer to be a member from the Regional Advisory Panel instead of 
an official from CBFC.  Regional Officer to act as member-Secretary of the 
Committee only. 
 
(xi) The Central Advisory Panel to be located at the CBFC Head Office and to comprise 
the pool for Revising Committee Members of slightly higher caliber. Appointment 
through a 5-member committee by the Central Government with due representation 
from all the regions. 

 
109 
 
 
(xii) Revising Committee to constitute first stage of appeal whose member-Secretary 
would be the CEO, CBFC or his representative. 
 
(xiii) Central Advisory Panel members to be nominated from amongst persons having in 
depth understanding of Indian Society and persons of eminence in various fields like 
sociologists, psychologist, anthropologist, etc. 
 
(xiv) Online submission & processing of applications for certification. 
 
(xv) Out of turn (Tatkal Scheme) film certification to be allowed on payment of 5- time 
fees. 
 
(xvi) Recertification of films to be permitted. 
 
(xvii) Revision of Honorarium paid to the Examining & Revising Committee. 
 
(xviii) Cap of two films to be watched by the Examining Committee per day. 
 
(xix) Re-examination of the films by the CBFC on complaints received after certification 
of films in certain cases on account of violation of provisions of Section 5B(1) of the 
Act. 
 
(xx) In other recommendations it has suggested: 
 
a. conduct a study on the impact of cinema when viewed collectively as against 
individually. 
 
b. Categorization of films should not be used for purposes of State taxation. 
 
c. NFDC to produce a short film for educating the film going audience about the 
categories of the films and their applicability to various sections of society.  
This should be dubbed in primary Indian languages and shown in all theatres 
for a period of two years. 
 
(xxi) “Licensed suppliers” of Performing Animals (PA) whose services can be hired by 
the Producer till a directory of “certified (approved) personnel” is published by AWBI 
to facilitate NOC for such films. 
  
(xxii) “Performing animals” in case of a film may be defined as an animal which is written 
into the script of the movie, and is required to perform an act which it would not 
normally do. 
 
(xxiii) A meaningful static anti-smoking disclaimer in the beginning of a film with standard 
visual background and an audio backing in place of current disclaimers during each 
and every scene depicting smoking. 
 
(xxiv) Film Industry should produce small films on anti-tobacco/smoking with popular 
actors on their own for screening in cinema halls and on TV channels. 

 
110 
 
Annexure-III (C) 
(Vide Para 160) 
Mudgal Committee and the Benegal Committee have given different 
recommendations in the following matters 
Sl. 
No. 
Mudgal Committee 
Recommendation 
Benegal Committee Recommendation 
i)  The CBFC shall consist of a 
Chairperson and not less than 
twelve and not more than 
twenty five other members 
The Board shall comprise not less than six and not 
more than one member each in respect of each 
Regional Office of CBFC, and a Chairperson 
ii)  The other Members of the 
Board shall be persons who, 
in the opinion of the Central 
Government, by reason of 
their profession, qualifications 
or experience, in the field of 
art, cinema, drama, law, 
literature,  history, sociology, 
psychology, media, 
education, performing arts, 
uniform services  or public 
administration are qualified to 
judge the effect of films on 
the public,  
Criteria of appointment of Members of the Board:- 
(i) Persons who have an in-depth understanding 
of Indian society, such as sociologists and 
anthropologists and psychologists 
(ii) Persons of eminence comprising writers, 
artists, media and entertainment experts, 
lawyers, entrepreneurs etc.  
iii)  The Board shall ordinarily 
meet once in three months for 
the transaction of business 
but the Chairperson may at 
any time call an extraordinary 
meeting, if considered 
necessary to do so. 
 
The Board shall ordinarily meet once a quarter, and 
not less than four times in a calendar  year, for the 
transaction of business but the Chairperson may at 
any time call for an extraordinary meeting, if he 
considers it necessary to do so. 
iv)  The Board may regulate the 
procedure to be followed at its 
meeting including its quorum. 
At every meeting of the Board, three members, if the 
Chairperson is present, and four members, if he is 
absent, shall form a quorum. The presence of the 
Member-Secretary (i.e. CEO, CBFC) shall not be 
taken into account for purposes of meeting the 
quorum. 
v)  Name of Advisory Panel 
should be changed to 
‘Screening Panel’. 
Has not made any such recommendation regarding 
change of nomenclature of ‘Advisory Panels’. Has 
said that it will be a two tiered system with Regional 
Advisory Panel (for Examining Committee) and a 
Mumbai based Central Advisory Panel (for Revising 
Committee) 
vi)  The Members of the screening 
panel shall be selected by a 
Committee comprising of 9 
Members constituted from the 
The appointment of each Regional Advisory Panel 
shall be as under:- 
a. 25% of the strength of a Regional Advisory Panel  
in each regional office shall be recommended by the 

 
111 
 
Board by the Chairperson with 
at least two lady Members 
and in such manner as to 
ensure due regional and 
language representation, to 
the extent possible.   
 
 Such Committee in 
consultation with the 
Chairperson shall draw up a 
panel of Members to be 
appointed as Members of the 
screening panel and shall 
consist of persons, who, in the 
opinion of the Committee are, 
by reason of their profession, 
qualifications or experience in 
the field of art, cinema, drama, 
law, literature, history, 
sociology, psychology, media, 
education, performing arts, 
uniform services or public 
administration, are fit to judge 
the effect of films on the 
public.  
 
NFDC Ltd. 
 
b. 25% shall be nominated by the Board, comprising 
members from all walks of life, from 
recommendations sent by FFSI. 
c. 25% of members of each Regional Advisory 
Panel shall comprise representatives nominated by 
the National Council for Protection of Child 
Rights(NCPCR) and National Commission of 
Women(NCW) 
d. 25% of members of each Regional Advisory 
Panel shall be from the local film industry. The Film 
Federation of India, who shall approach all film trade 
associations of all nine regions specified in the First 
Schedule and form a database for this purpose. 
 
Provided that women shall comprise 50% of the 
representation on each Regional Advisory Panel. 
 
A Central Advisory Panel shall be appointed by the 
Central Government through a five-member 
Committee that shall recommend names for the 
consideration of the Central Government. The 
Central Advisory Panel shall have due 
representation from all the regions and not less than 
10 members from all the regions mentioned in the 
First Schedule. The Board, depending upon the 
requirement, may determine their actual number. 
The Revising Committee for each film shall be 
drawn from this panel. 
 
Criteria for appointment of members of the Central 
Advisory Panel will be as under: 
i) Persons who have an indepth understanding 
of Indian society, such as sociologists and 
anthropologists and psychologists 
ii) Persons of eminence comprising writers, 
artists, lawyers, entrepreneurs, mass media etc. 
Provided that 20% of the representation from each 
region shall be from the film industry. 
vii)  Every Member of ‘Screening 
Panel’ shall hold office for 
such period not exceeding two 
years. 
 
Every member of Advisory panels shall hold office 
for a period not exceeding three years. 
viii)  Does not mention about online 
application for certification of 
film 
Every application to certify film for public exhibition 
shall be made online in the form available on the 
website of the CBFC – website to be mentioned.  
ix)  Classification of films as U, 
12+, 15+, A, S 
Classification of films as U, UA12+, UA15+, A and 
AC(Adult with Caution) and S. 

 
112 
 
x)  Provided that the Board may 
also direct the applicant to 
carry out such excisions or 
modifications in the film as it 
thinks necessary before 
classifying and sanctioning 
the film for certification of 
exhibition  
The Board shall not propose or make any cuts, 
revisions or modifications to the film to meet any of 
the classification categories. 
xi)  Before the issuance of a 
certificate granted under this 
section, the applicant or his 
authorized representative 
shall deposit, at his own cost, 
a copy of the film in digital 
format, in the same format in 
which it has been certified or 
in such other format, with such 
agency or agencies, as may 
be prescribed, for archival 
purpose and record thereof.  
The applicant or his authorized representative shall 
also deposit, at his own cost, a copy of the Director’s 
Cut (i.e. edit of the film as approved by the Director 
of the film) in digital format to the NFAI for archival 
purpose and record thereof. 
xii)  (1) Where any complaint is 
received by the Board, in 
respect of a film which has 
been certified for public 
exhibition, the same shall be 
forwarded to the Central 
Government. 
(2) The Central 
Government, if it considers 
necessary so to do, direct the 
Chairperson to re-examine 
any such film, in respect of 
which a complaint is received 
by it directly or from the 
Board under sub-section (1), 
in such manner as may be 
prescribed. 
Where in respect of a film, that has been certified for 
public exhibition, the Central Government receives a 
reference from the Ministry of Home Affairs in 
respect of Section 5B(1) of the Cinematograph Act, 
1952, and Clause 3 of CBFC Guidelines, the 
Chairperson may, if  he considers it necessary so to 
do, direct the Board (through the CEO) to re-
examine any film through a Re-examination 
Committee  in such manner and with such 
assistance as may be specified in the direction. 
 
***** 
 
  

 
113 
 
Appendix-I 
 
MINUTES OF THE TWELFTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(2020-21) 
 
 The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 13 January, 2021 from 1600 hours to 1752 
hours in Committee Room No. 2, Extension to Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
Dr. Shashi Tharoor - Chairperson 
 
 MEMBERS 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
  
2.  Shri Karti P. Chidambaram  
3.  Dr. Nishikant Dubey  
4.  Ms. Mahua Moitra  
5.  Shri Santosh Pandey  
6.  Shri Jayadev Galla  
7.  Shri Sanjay Seth  
8.  Shri L.S. Tejasvi Surya  
9.  Shri Bhanu Pratap Singh Verma  
10.  Smt. Sumalatha Ambareesh  
 
Rajya Sabha 
11.  Dr. Anil Agrawal  
12.  Shri Shaktisinh Gohil  
13.  Shri Syed Zafar Islam 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1.  Shri Y.M. Kandpal  -  Joint Secretary 
2. Shri H. Ram Prakash            - Director 
3.  Smt. Geeta Parmar  - Additional Director 
 
 
 
 

 
114 
 
LIST OF WITNESSES 
 
MINISTRY OF INFORMATION AND BROADCASTING 
 
Sl. No. Name Designation 
1.  Ms Neerja Sekhar Additional Secretary 
2.  Ms Anju Nigam Joint Secretary (Films) 
3.  Shri Vikram Sahay Joint Secretary (P&A) 
4.  Ms Dhanpreet Kaur Director (Films) 
 
CENTRAL BOARD OF FILM CERTIFICATION (CBFC)   
 
1.  Shri Prasoon Joshi Chairman, CBFC 
2.  Shri Ravinder Bhakar Chief  Executive  Officer, CBFC 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee convened to have briefing by the representatives of the Ministry of Information 
and Broadcasting (MIB) in connection with the examination of the subject ‘Review of 
functioning of Central Board of Film Certification (CBFC).   
(The witnesses were then called in) 
3. Thereafter, the Chairperson welcomed the officials of the Ministry of Information 
and Broadcasting and CBFC to the sitting of the Committee. Drawing their attention to the 
rapidly changing landscape of cinema, the technology associated with it and the audience, 
the Chairperson in his remarks desired to know whether the guidelines issued by the 
Central Government for film certification in 1991 need an overhaul. He also desired to 
know the extent to which CBFC has fulfilled the mandate given to it under the 
Cinematograph Act of 1952 and its subsequent amendment in 1983. He then enquired 
about the budgetary aspects of CBFC, infrastructure related issues and also about 
numerous landmark judgments arising out of a conflict between the fundamental right to 
speech and expression and the restrictions imposed under Article 19(2) of Constitution 
and their relevance in the present context.  
 
4. Subsequently, the representatives from the M/o I&B and CBFC made a brief 
presentation highlighting the organizational structure of CBFC, functioning and 

 
115 
 
achievements of present CBFC Board, certification process, Cinematograph Act 1952, 
Certification Rules 1983 and Guidelines, other Acts/Rules that CBFC relies upon while 
certifying films, the Categories of Certificates, automation in CBFC, CBFC’s Online 
Certification System – ‘e-cinepramaan’, etc. They also briefed the Committee about the 
proposed upgradation in CBFC.  
 
5. The Committee, then, desired to know the relevance of screening and censorship in 
today’s world particularly in light of OTT (Over the Top) platforms, regulation of OTT 
platforms, possibility of usage of AI for censorship and reducing human interference. The 
Committee also sought clarification on the existing grievance redressal mechanism 
available to film makers whose identical content is rejected whereas that of others is 
accepted. In addition, the Committee deliberated on issues like certifying films for 
personalized viewing vis-à-vis collective viewing, having transparency in certification and 
removing procedural hurdles to get certification form CBFC, simplifying the process of 
receiving clearance from Animal Welfare Board of India (AWBI), measure to reduce impact 
of Covid-19 lockdown, etc.  
 
6. The Committee also desired to know the status of non-implementation of the 
recommendations of the two expert Committees viz. Justice Mukul Mudgal Committee 
(constituted in 2013 to examine the issues of certification under the Cinematograph Act, 
1952) and Shri Shyam Benegal Committee (constituted in 2016 to evolve broad 
guidelines/procedures for certification of films). To this, the representative from the 
Ministry stated that they are at an advanced stage where they have to take a decision as 
to which recommendations are to be finally accepted. Once the approval of the Minister is 
through, the Cabinet Note will be ready for circulation for inter-Ministerial consultations and 
then it will go to the Cabinet. The Committee also deliberated on the problems/constraints 
encountered by CBFC in performing its role for film certification to the fullest and on the 
membership of CBFC.  The representatives of M/o I&B and CBFC responded to most of 
the queries raised by the Members. The Chairperson, then, directed that written replies to 
points on which information were not readily available may be furnished to the Committee. 
 
7. The Chairperson, then, thanked the representatives of representatives of              
M/o I&B and CBFC for deposing before the Committee.  
 
The witnesses then withdrew. 
A copy of verbatim record of the proceedings was kept on record. 
The Committee, then, adjourned. 

 
116 
 
Appendix-II 
MINUTES OF THE SIXTEENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (2020-21) 
 
 The Committee sat on Thursday, the 4th February, 2021 from 1400 hours to 1550 
hours in Committee Room No. 2, Extension to Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
Dr. Shashi Tharoor - Chairperson 
 
 MEMBERS 
 
Lok Sabha 
  
2.  Shri Karti P. Chidambaram  
3.  Shri Sunny Deol  
4. Dr. Nishikant Dubey  
5.  Ms. Mahua Moitra  
6.  Shri Santosh Pandey 
7. Col. Rajyavardhan Singh Rathore 
8. Dr. Gaddam Ranjith Reddy  
9.  Shri Jayadev Galla  
10.  Shri Sanjay Seth  
11. Dr. T. Sumathy (A) Thamizhachi Thangapandian  
12.  Shri Bhanu Pratap Singh Verma  
13.  Smt. Sumalatha Ambareesh  
 
Rajya Sabha 
14.  Dr. Anil Agrawal  
15.  Shri Suresh Gopi  
16. Shri Syed Nasir Hussain  
17. Shri Syed Zafar Islam 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1.  Shri Y.M. Kandpal  -  Joint Secretary 
2. Shri H. Ram Prakash            - Director 
3.  Dr. Sagarika Dash  - Additional Director 
 
 
 

 
117 
 
 
LIST OF NON-OFFICIAL WITNESSES 
 
Sl. No. Name Designation 
 
1.  Ms Vani Tripathi Tikoo Member, CBFC and Actor 
2.  Shri Kabir Khan Film Director 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee convened to hear the views of the individuals/stakeholders/organisations in 
connection with the examination of the subject ‘Review of functioning of Central Board of 
Film Certification (CBFC).   
 
(The witnesses were then called in) 
 
3. Thereafter, the Chairperson welcomed the Non-official witnesses to the sitting of 
the Committee and informed them that the representatives from other two organisations 
viz. Indian Motion Pictures Producers’ Association (IMPPA) and Film Federation of India 
(FFI) who were also supposed to join the sitting could not make it due to their 
indisposition.  
 
4. The Chairperson, in his opening remarks, drew the attention of the non-official 
witnesses to the rapidly changing landscape of cinema, the audience and the technology 
associated with it and stated that the present day needs and aspirations of the audience 
have necessitated the need for a fresh look into the relevance of concept of censorship 
and sought their views in the matter. Drawing attention to the uncensored contents in OTT 
platforms, he wondered if the OTT platforms should undergo some sort of processes and 
categories that creative contents in cinema theatres undergo or should OTT platforms be 
allowed to have some kind of self-certification. He also sought the views of representatives 
on other important issues such as certification process, Cinematograph Act 1952, 
categories of Certificates, status of automation/digitisation in CBFC, problems/constraints 
encountered by Producers, Directors, film makers, etc. in getting their film certified by 
CBFC etc.  Considering the importance of entertainment and creative industry in the 
economy, he sought guidance from the witnesses in finding a right sort of balance without 
resorting to restrictions and regulations which may impact the ability of this industry.  
 
5. Thereafter, the Member, CBFC and Actor, Ms. Vani Tripati Tikoo shared her views 
on the relevance of censorship in today’s world in view of the paradigm shift in creation 
and consumption of content, existing certification process and categories in India and 
around the world, new initiatives taken by CBFC through strengthened and empowered 

 
118 
 
dialogues with film industry on certification part, difference in content being watched 
collectively and individually, need for amending ‘The Cinematograph Act of 1952’, etc. She 
also briefed the Committee about her Report titled ‘Embracing NonLinearity: The Future of 
India's Entertainment Industry', which she co-authored with Shri Shekhar Kapur, and 
stated that the report speaks about the creative freedom and looks at non-linear narratives 
of creating stories. She also stated that this, immersive story telling is the way forward and 
it also means gaming, augmented reality and artificial intelligence.  Expressing concern 
over inadequate dialogue about content creation she felt the need for a deeper dialogue 
around this. She also stated that there is a need to have a standard Code for looking at 
how content is being put out and for looking at the best practices around the world with 
industry representatives on board. Coming to OTT platforms, she apprised the Committee 
that there are no real numbers available as to the subscription of OTT platforms and in 
India there is a need for literacy and awareness creation towards parental control and just 
putting a disclaimer or putting age related classification is a matter of debate. 
 
6. Thereafter, Shri Kabir Khan, Film Director, presented his views from a film maker 
perspective and shared his experiences about the present system of 
certification/censoring.  He supported the idea to have regulations/systems that work 
without human contact once the major guidelines are put in place. Expressing reservations 
over the present system of cuts in CBFC, he opined that this interferes with content 
creator work and expressed hope that implementation of recommendations of Shyam 
Benegal Committee could circumvent this problem.  He was also of the view that 
regulation or over regulations can constrict the creativity. While supporting the idea self-
regulation by the film makers and he was of the view that regulation of OTT content needs 
a serious consideration. He also drew the attention of the Committee to the contribution of 
the Film Industry to country’s economy and soft power that Indian cinema can leverage for 
the country. He emphasized the need for having ease of doing business for multinationals 
in view of the vast potentials our country does have. 
 
7. The Chairperson and the Members of the Committee, then raised various queries 
regarding grievances of film producers on cumbersome and undue procedures involved 
with the certification procedure in the CBFC, regulatory framework for OTT platforms, 
voluntarily code of conduct for the film industry, promoting domestic content, public audit 
of OTT content, propagating creativity with ethos, personalized viewing vs. collective 
viewing, IPR issues, etc. Both the witnesses responded to the queries raised by the 
Members. 
 
8. The Chairperson, then, thanked both the non-official witnesses for deposing before 
the Committee.  
 
The witnesses then withdrew. 
A copy of verbatim record of the proceedings was kept on record. 
The Committee, then, adjourned. 

 
119 
 
Appendix-III 
 
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY-SECOND SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (2020-21) 
 
 The Committee sat on Monday, the 15 March, 2021 from 1500 hours to 1705 hours 
in Committee Room C, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
Dr. Shashi Tharoor - Chairperson 
 
 MEMBERS 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri Karti P. Chidambaram 
3. Smt. Raksha Nikhil Khadse  
4. Shri Dhairyasheel Sambhajirao Mane 
5. Shri Santosh Pandey 
6. Col. Rajyavardhan Singh Rathore 
7. Dr. Gaddam Ranjith Reddy  
8. Shri Sanjay Seth  
9. Shri Bhanu Pratap Singh Verma 
10. Smt. Sumalatha Ambareesh 
 
Rajya Sabha 
11. Shri Syed Zafar Islam 
12. Dr. Narendra Jadhav  
 
 
Secretariat 
 
1.  Shri Y.M. Kandpal  -  Joint Secretary 
2. Shri H. Ram Prakash            - Director 
3.  Dr. Sagarika Dash  - Additional Director 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
120 
 
LIST OF WITNESSES 
 
MINISTRY OF INFORMATION AND BROADCASTING 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Name Designation 
1. Shri Amit Khare Secretary 
2. Ms Neerja Sekhar Additional Secretary 
3. Ms Anju Nigam Joint Secretary (Films) 
4. Shri Vikram Sahay Joint Secretary (P&A) 
5. Ms Dhanpreet Kaur Director (Films) 
6. Shri Ravinder Bhakar Chief  Executive  Officer, CBFC 
 
MINISTRY OF ELECTRONICS AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
 
1. Shri Ajay Prakash Sawhney Secretary 
2. Dr. Rajendra Kumar Additional Secretary 
3. Shri Rakesh Maheshwari Group Coordinator, Cyber Law and 
Scientist 'H' 
4. Shri Prafulla Kumar Senior Director, Cyber law and  
Scientist 'H' 
 
8. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee convened to hear the views of the representatives of the Ministry of Information 
and Broadcasting (MIB) and the Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology 
(MeitY) on 'The Information Technology (Intermediary Guidelines and Digital Media Ethics 
Code) Rules, 2021' in the context of examination of the subject 'Review of functioning of 
Central Board of Film Certification (CBFC)’ selected by the Committee.   
(The witnesses were then called in) 
 
9. Thereafter, the Chairperson welcomed the officials of the  
MIB, CBFC and MeitY to the sitting of the Committee. Drawing their attention to ‘The 
Information Technology (Guidelines for Intermediaries and Digital Media Ethics Code) 
Rules, 2021’, notified on 25th February, 2021, the Chairperson in his remarks desired to 
know about their plan/roadmap to implement these Rules alongwith the 

 
121 
 
problems/constraints which may be faced by the Ministries in implementing the new 
guidelines and implications of the new Rules on free speech, journalistic freedom, artistic 
creativity, etc. He also drew their attention to the concerns being raised about bringing 
these rules without any apparent consultation with relevant stakeholders and even to the 
fact that the Committee were not consulted in advance either and asked the Ministries to 
provide details of the complaints/suggestions received from civil society, film-makers, 
political leaders, trade organisations, etc. and the Ministries’ preparedness to handle 
challenges including court cases that might arise from these new Rules. He also desired to 
know in detail about various related issues which inter-alia included oversight 
mechanisms, plans for having Inter-Departmental Committees for hearing grievances and 
coordination, mechanism for ensuring reliable age verification for content classification and 
for the parental lock system, status of implementation of the Reports of Mukul Mudgal 
Committee and the Shyam Benegal Committee etc. 
 
10. Subsequently, the representatives from the MIB made a brief presentation on the IT 
Rules 2021, highlighting the scope of the Rules, Digital Media Ethics Code, Grievance 
Redressal Mechanism, Information Disclosure, Benefits and Outcomes of the Rules, etc. 
Stressing on the need for bringing these Rules, the Secretary, MIB informed that for 
bringing level playing field between Online & Offline News Media new Rules were notified.  
Justifying the new Rules, Secretary, MIB stated that they have taken mid-path between 
the two extreme views one in which a two-judge bench of the Hon’ble Supreme Court had 
observed that these Rules lack teeth and be made stricter with penal provisions whereas 
the other view demanding total freedom. Further, the Committee were informed that Part-I 
of the Rules is preliminary and provides definitions, Part-II relates to ‘Intermediaries’ and 
shall be administered by MeitY whereas Part-III relates to Digital Media Ethics Code and 
shall be administered by the MIB. The representatives of MIB thereafter elaborated the 
key aspects of the ‘IT Rules, 2021’ which inter-alia included ‘code of Ethics’, self-
classification of content into five age based categories - U (Universal), U/A 7+, U/A 13+, 
U/A 16+, and A (Adult), due diligence to be done by the Intermediaries, three-tier 
grievance redressal mechanism with 'Publisher' being at Level-I, self regulating body at 
Level-II and at level-III the oversight mechanism by the MIB, etc. The Secretary, MIB 
informed the Committee that the film industry and others have actually welcomed these 
new Rules as this institutional mechanism may actually be in favour of the OTT platforms 
because the plethora of FIRs which are being filed all over the country against OTT may, 
in fact come down.   
11. Thereafter, the representatives from the MeitY made a brief presentation on the 
Rules 2021, highlighting the process of amendment in ‘The Intermediaries Guidelines 
Rules, 2011’ and the changes related to the ‘Intermediaries’ in the new Rules. On the 
need for bringing the changes related to ‘Intermediaries’, which is defined under Section 
2(w) of the IT Act, the representative of MeitY stated that the ‘Intermediaries’ are no longer 
very pristine intermediaries as they are no longer passive players and they tend to behave 
like publishers and therefore the changes have been brought. Elaborating on this issue it 
was stated that Section 79 of the IT Act provides exemption to intermediaries who fulfill 
certain conditions. The representatives of MeitY also highlighted the salient features with 
respect to the guidelines related to Social Media to be administered by MeitY which 

 
122 
 
included (i) due diligence to be followed by Intermediaries, (ii) grievance redressal 
mechanism, (iii) ensuring online safety and dignity of users, specially women users, (iv) 
two Categories of social media Intermediaries,(v) additional due diligence to be followed 
by significant social media intermediary by appointing a Chief Compliance Officer, 
publishing a monthly compliance Report, etc. (vi) identification of the first originator of the 
information (vi) Intermediary not required to disclose the contents of any message or any 
other information to the first originator, (vii) significant social media intermediary to have a 
physical contact address in India published on its website or mobile app or both, (viii) 
voluntary user verification mechanism, (ix) giving users an opportunity to be heard, (x) 
removal of unlawful Information, etc. They also elaborated on various other related issues 
which inter-alia included ‘traceability’, process of identification of the first originator of the 
information, users getting an opportunity to be heard, having only government bureaucrats 
in the third level of Grievance Redressal mechanism etc. 
 
12. After the power point presentation, the Committee sought clarification on various 
issues like legislative and constitutional basis for bringing the Rules, need to give more 
explicit meaning to the term used like ‘Public order’ to avoid undue harassment to innocent 
parties due to any ambiguity, emergency power vested with the Secretary, MeitY in case 
of any emergent requirement, obligation of Intermediaries’ under the IT Act and the new 
Rules, appointment of Grievance Redressal Officer by the platform who has more than five 
million registered users in India, court cases related to the new Rules, impact of the new 
Rules on functioning of CBFC and Censorship, Plans to make changes in the functioning 
and structure of CBFC or in the Rules/Acts related to the CBFC, plans to harmonize the 
new rules with the existing Rules/Acts such as the Press Council of India Act, the 
Cinematograph Act, the Programme Code under the CTN Regulation Act, etc. The 
Committee also desired to know the reason for non-implementation of recommendations 
of Mukul Mudgal Committee and the Shyam Benegal Committee and desired for a copy of 
the Reports. The Committee also asked the Ministries to clarify on the concerns raised in 
one of the Memoranda/representations received from the Associate Policy Counsel of 
Internet Freedom Foundation. The representatives of MIB and MeitY responded to most of 
the queries raised by the Members. The Chairperson, then, directed that written replies to 
points on which information were not readily available may be furnished to the Committee. 
 
13. The Chairperson, then, thanked the representatives of MIB, MeitY and CBFC for 
deposing before the Committee.  
 
The witnesses then withdrew. 
A copy of verbatim record of the proceedings was kept on record. 
The Committee, then, adjourned. 

 
123 
 
Appendix-IV 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(2020-21) 
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY SIXTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
----------- 
 
 The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 6th July, 2021 from 1600 hours to 1730 hours 
in Main Committee Room, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
Dr. Shashi Tharoor - Chairperson 
 
 
MEMBERS 
 
  
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Smt. Locket Chatterjee 
3. Shri Karti P. Chidambaram  
4. Dr. Nishikant Dubey 
5. Smt. Raksha Nikhil Khadse 
6. Ms. Mahua Moitra 
7. Shri Santosh Pandey 
8. Dr. Gaddam Ranjith Reddy 
9. Shri Sanjay Seth 
10. Shri L.S. Tejasvi Surya 
11. Shri Bhanu Pratap Singh Verma 
 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
12. Dr. Anil Agrawal 
13. Shri Y.S. Chowdary 
14. Shri Shaktisinh Gohil 
15. Shri Md. Nadimul Haque 
16. Shri Syed Nasir Hussain 
17. Shri Syed Zafar Islam 
 
Secretariat 
 
1. Shri Y.M. Kandpal   - Joint Secretary 
2. Shri H. Ram Prakash  - Director 
3. Dr. Sagarika Dash          -     Additional Director 
4. Shri Shangreiso Zimik  - Deputy Secretary 
 

 
124 
 
 
List of Witnesses 
Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology (MeitY) 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Name Designation 
1. Shri Ajay Prakash Sawhney Secretary 
2. Smt. Jyoti Arora Special Secretary and Financial Advisor 
3. Dr. Rajendra Kumar Additional Secretary 
4. Shri Rakesh Maheshwari Scientist ‘G’ & Group Coordinator 
5. Dr. Sanjay Bahl DG, CERT-In 
 
Ministry of Information and Broadcasting (MIB)  
 
 Sl. 
No. 
Name Designation 
1.  Shri Vikram Sahay Joint Secretary 
2 At the outset, Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting. of the Committee 
and informed them that the said sitting has been convened for a briefing by the 
representatives of Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology (MeitY) and Ministry 
of Information and Broadcasting (MIB) on the subject ‘Safeguarding citizens’ rights and 
prevention of misuse of social/online news media platforms including special emphasis on 
women security in the digital space’. 
 
[The representatives of MeitY and MIB were then called in] 
 
3. Chairperson welcomed the representatives of MeitY and MIB to the sitting of the 
Committee. They were asked to brief the Committee on the Intermediary Guidelines and 
Digital Media Ethics Code Rules, 2021 including issues such as efficacy of the 
consultation process, the extent to which it achieved a consensus or common ground 
amongst the various stakeholders, reported opposition to Intermediary Guidelines and 
Digital Media Ethics Code Rules, 2021 by some intermediaries and online news portals on 
grounds such as lack of inherent safeguards for the intermediaries, personal liability risk to 
the Chief Compliance Officer mandated under the rules, ambiguity on expanded scope of 

 
125 
 
content takedown and lack of clarity on designated authorities empowered to issue content 
takedown orders etc. 
4. Members enquired about the rationale behind bringing the Digital Media Ethics 
Code under the ambit of the Intermediary Guidelines and Digital Media Ethics Code Rules, 
2021, compliance to the new rules by the social media intermediaries, end to end 
encryption feature in WhatsApp and scope and feasibility of traceability of messages in 
WhatsApp, new privacy policy announced by WhatsApp and its implication, etc. They also 
desired to know global position on breaking encryption and traceability, protection to social 
media platforms under safe harbor provision, legal and regulatory framework for emerging 
technologies such as Artificial Intelligence, Machine Learning and Internet of Things, etc.  
Members also sought clarification on loss of safe harbor protection to Twitter due to non-
compliance of Intermediary Guidelines Rules. 
 
5. The representatives of MeitY and MIB, thereafter responded to the queries raised 
by Members. The representatives of MeitY elaborated on issues related to Intermediary 
Guidelines and Digital Media Ethics Code Rules, 2021 including technical feasibility of 
traceability of first originator of encrypted messages, implications of loss of safe harbor 
provisions, efficacy of compulsory verification of accounts in curbing malicious content etc. 
The representatives of MIB presented their views on inclusion of Digital Media Ethics 
Code in the Intermediary Guidelines, brining the OTT platforms under the fold of 
Intermediary Guidelines, take-down powers and emergency provisions contained in the 
Digital Media Ethics Code, their impact on freedom of expression and legal challenges to 
validity of Digital Media Ethics Code etc. 
 
6.  The Chairperson, then, thanked the representatives of MeitY and MIB for deposing 
before the Committee and directed that written replies to points on which information was 
not readily available may be furnished to the Committee. 
 
The representatives of MeitY then withdrew 
Verbatim proceedings of the sitting have been kept on record. 
The Committee, then, adjourned. 
 
***** 

 
126 
 
Appendix-V 
 
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY-EIGHTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (2020-21) 
 
 The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 27th July, 2021 from 1600 hours to 1845 hours 
in Main Committee Room, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
 
Dr. Shashi Tharoor – Chairperson  
 
MEMBERS 
 
Lok Sabha 
  
1.  Shri Karti P. Chidambaram 
2.  Ms. Mahua Moitra 
3.  Shri P. R. Natarajan 
4.  Shri Jayadev Galla 
5.  Dr. T. Sumathy (A) Thamizhachi Thangapandian 
6.  Smt. Sumalatha Ambareesh 
 
Rajya Sabha 
7.  Shri Shaktisinh Gohil 
8.  Shri Suresh Gopi 
9.  Shri Md. Nadimul Haque 
10.  Shri Syed Nasir Hussain 
11.  Dr. Narendra Jadhav  
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1.  Shri Y.M. Kandpal             -          Joint Secretary 
2.  Shri H.Ram Prakash         -         Director 
3.  Dr. Sagarika Dash          -         Additional Director 

 
127 
 
 
LIST OF WITNESSES 
 
Non-Official 
 
Sl. No. Name Designation 
 
1. Shri Kamal Haasan Actor/ dancer/ film director/ screenwriter/ producer/ 
playback singer/ lyricist 
 
2. Sri Nitin Tej Ahuja,  CEO, Producers Guild of India 
 
3. Shri Siddharth Jain,  Secretary General, Indian Broadcasting & Digital 
Foundation (IBDF) 
 
4. Shri Pranav Bhatnagar Senior Associate–Legal, Sony Pictures Networks 
India Private Limited 
 
 
Official 
Ministry of Information and Broadcasting 
 
1. Shri Amit Khare Secretary 
2. Ms. Neerja Sekhar Additional Secretary 
3. Ms. Dhanpreet Kaur Director (Films) 
 
 
Central Board of Film Certification 
 
4. Shri Prasoon Joshi Chairman, CBFC 
5. Shri Ravinder Bhakar Chief Executive Officer 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee convened to hear the views of individuals/stakeholders/organisations and the 
representatives of the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting (MIB) and the  Central 
Board of Film Certification (CBFC) in connection with the examination of the subject 
‘Review of functioning of Central Board of Film Certification (CBFC)’ in the context of the 
draft ‘Cinematograph (Amendment) Bill, 2021’. He thereafter informed the Members about 
the nomination of three new Members in the Committee, namely, Smt. Sunita Duggal, Shri 
Ganesh Singh and Shri Parvesh Sahib Singh (vice Shri Sunny Deol) and welcomed them. 
 (The Non-official witnesses were then called in) 
 
3. The Chairperson, in his opening remarks, welcomed the Non-official witnesses to 
the sitting of the Committee and drew their attention to the recent developments viz. new 
mandate given to the M/o I&B, abolition of the Film Certification Appellate Tribunal 
(FCAT), notification of the Information Technology (Intermediary Guidelines and Digital 
Media Ethics Code) Rules, 2021 and the draft ‘Cinematograph (Amendment) Bill, 2021’ 
which had a direct/indirect bearing on the film industry, certification process and also on 
the role of statutory bodies like CBFC. Pointing out at rapidly changing landscape of 
cinema and the technology associated with it, he stated that it has necessitated a fresh 

 
128 
 
and holistic look into the functioning of CBFC in consonance with the present day needs 
and aspirations of the audience especially with the emergence of digital media and OTT 
platforms. He also flagged concern over the relevance of censorship today as certification 
of content has become a global phenomenon. He invited the views of the non-official 
witnesses on these and various other issues which inter alia included role of CBFC, 
censorship versus certification, regulatory framework for OTT platforms, international 
practices in vogue, ‘Cinematograph (Amendment) Bill, 2021’, abolition of the FCAT, new 
IT Rules, 2021, etc. 
 
4. Thereafter, Shri Kamal Haasan, one of the  non-official witnesses while drawing 
attention of the Committee to the Shyam Benegal Committee recommendations on the 
certification and guidelines desired that the same should be implemented. On the role of 
CBFC, he was of the view that the members of CBFC should not be members appointed 
by the Central Government instead the CBFC should be an independent self-regulatory 
body comprising of people appointed by the industry similar to a Broadcasting Content 
Complaints Council (BCCC) for the non-news television content. He advocated the idea 
that the contents of the film should be self-regulated just as in the case of television or 
OTT platforms and the certifying process of CBFC should be faceless and any 
unconstitutional interference with the right to speech and expression under article 19(1)(a) 
would only result in spate of litigations.  He proposed that the provisions of Section 5E and 
5F of Cinematographic Act 1952 should be repealed. While opposing the proposed 
amendment related to revisionary powers vesting with the Government in the new 
Amendment Bill, 2021, he was of the view that if the Central Government is aggrieved by a 
certification, it should subject itself before a judicial review to challenge the certification 
issue. He added that the retrospective nature of the proposed amendment is most sinister 
because if a film once certified loses its certification on account of any whimsical decision 
of a transient executive, the same shall snowball into multifarious legal issues, contractual 
violations and severe economic losses.  
 
5. Thereafter, another non-official witnesses, Shri Siddharth Jain, Secretary General, 
IDBF and Shri Pranav Bhatnagar, Senior Associate–Legal, Sony Pictures Networks India 
Private Limited, both representing IBDF presented industry’s perspective on the subject.  
Pointing to the fact that the line between linear television, digital OTT platforms or cinema 
halls is very quickly blurring, the Secretary General, IBDF did not support the idea of the 
age based classification. On the measures enumerated in the Cinematograph Act against 
piracy, he stated that since piracy is the biggest bane in the country, more draconian 
measures need to be taken against it. They supported the proposal to issue a certificate 
that is valid in perpetuity. With regard to the working of CBFC, they stated that it still 
remains in the little previous ages and therefore recommended some online measures. On 
the issue of revisionary powers, they reminded of the Supreme Court judgment in Union of 
India versus K.M. Shankarappa which was already in place. 
 
 

 
129 
 
6. Shri Nitin Tej Ahuja, CEO, IBF, on behalf of the Federation welcomed the idea of 
perpetual validity of the censor certificate as well the proposal that looks at tightening anti-
piracy provisions. Besides, he also desired that certificate category needs to be broader 
and the current regime of U, UA, PG and Adult is restrictive and clarity is needed as to 
what all these categories would constitute for different age groups so that there is no 
confusion both at the end of content creators as also at the exhibitors’ end when they have 
to actually check who is coming to the theatres.  However, expressing concern over the 
proposed amendment to Section 6(1), he stated that it is not only bad in law but also at 
odds with constitutional guarantees which would create havoc in the film industry.  
 
7. The Chairperson and the Members of the Committee, thereafter, raised various 
queries relating to the amendments made in the Cinematograph (Amendment) Bill, 2021’ 
which inter-alia included age based certification of films, issues of re-examination of films, 
powers of Central Governments to override decisions of CBFC, implementation of Shyam 
Bengal and Mukul Mudgal Committee Reports, etc. Members also raised their concerns 
regarding the ‘Cinematograph (Amendment) Bill, 2021’ and wondered if they were 
consulted before drafting of the Cinematograph (Amendment) Bill, 2021’. To this, they 
replied in negative and informed that other several associations like the Film & TV 
Directors’ Association, the Screenwriters Association, etc., were also not consulted. To an 
another query from the Members regarding consultations held before abolition of the 
FCAT, the non-official witnesses replied in negative. With respect to changes in CBFC, 
one of the non-official witnesses stated that it should move in the direction for film 
certification and content certification with necessary steps put in. The Members also dwelt 
upon other issues like relevance of CBFC today, impact of intermediary guidelines in IT 
Rules, 2021, etc. During the deliberations, the general sentiment of the witnesses was that 
the Indian cinema and its content through OTT platforms today has been one of the most 
effective purveyors of India's soft power and has the potential to expand globally which 
requires creative freedom in order to reach worldwide. 
 
8. The Chairperson, then, thanked the Non-official witnesses for deposing before the 
Committee.  
(The Non-official witnesses then withdrew and  
the representatives of the Ministry and CBFC were called in) 
 
 
9. Thereafter, the Chairperson welcomed the representatives of the Ministry of 
Information and Broadcasting (MIB) and Central Board of Film Certification (CBFC) to the 
sitting of the Committee and drew their attention to the views/concerns of the film industry 
relating to the functioning of CBFC in the context of the amendments made in the draft 
‘Cinematograph (Amendment) Bill, 2021’. He pointed out various concerns of 
individuals/stakeholders/organizations over amendments made in the Bill, 2021and 
reasons for keeping them out of consultation process before bringing out Cinematograph 
(Amendment) Bill, 2021 and abolition of FCAT. He also sought Ministry’s response to 
another important issue raised by the PGI regarding re-certification  and its impact on 

 
130 
 
producers. He also desired specific response of the Ministry on the role of CBFC in light of 
all the recent amendments, concerns related to OTT platforms, submission of Industry to 
reinstate FCAT, etc. 
 
10. Responding to the queries of the Committee, the Chairperson, CBFC, stated that 
the role of the CBFC is to strike a balance between sensibility and societal sensitivity and 
they have been trying to do best and they do not see any need for intervention as there is 
a sufficient mechanism in CBFC. Besides, if this provision was to come in, it would create 
an unnecessary layer. To a query, about CBFC being consulted formally or informally 
before the new Bill, 2021 was drafted, he replied in negative. On the question of 
censorship vis-à-vis certification culture, he stated that it is a larger debate because India 
is a layered country and the way CBFC is functioning today, most of the times, barring a 
few cases related to country’s sovereignty/security issues, there has been never a 
disagreement and most of times, the deletions or changes have been voluntary. 
 
11. Subsequently, the Secretary, MIB explained the amendments proposed in the new 
draft Bill, 2021 and stated that the proposal to amend the Act is still at the consultation 
stage and no final view has been taken on the draft ‘Cinematograph (Amendment) Bill, 
2021’. On the amendment related to revisionary powers of the Central Government, he 
clarified that the Government will not review the film and instead may ask CBFC to do so. 
Thus, the Government is not taking the power but unfortunately, the impression has been 
made otherwise. He also responded to other queries of the Members related to 
amendments proposed in the Bill.   
 
12. The Chairperson, then, thanked the representatives of Ministry of Information and 
Broadcasting and CBFC for deposing before the Committee and desired that written 
replies to the queries unanswered may be furnished at the earliest. 
The witnesses then withdrew. 
 
A copy of verbatim record of the proceedings was kept on record.' 
 
The Committee, then, adjourned. 

 
131 
 
 Appendix-VI  
 
  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(2021-22) 
 
MINUTES OF THE THIRD SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
----------- 
 
 The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 17th November, 2021 from 1100 hours to 1305 
hours in Main Committee Room, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Dr. Shashi Tharoor- Chairperson 
 
 MEMBERS 
  
 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri Karti P. Chidambaram 
3. Smt. Sunita Duggal 
4. Dr. Sukanta Majumdar 
5. Ms. Mahua Moitra 
6. Shri Santosh Pandey 
7. Shri Sanjay Seth 
8. Smt. Sumalatha Ambareesh 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
9. Dr. Anil Agrawal 
10. Shri John Brittas 
11. Shri Suresh Gopi 
12. Shri Jawhar Sircar 
 
Secretariat 
 
1. Shri Y. M. Kandpal          - Joint Secretary 
2. Dr. Sagarika Dash   - Additional Director 
3.           Shri Shangreiso Zimik                 -     Deputy Secretary 
 
 
 

 
132 
 
 
 
List of Witnesses 
Ministry of Information and Broadcasting 
Sl. No. Name  Designation 
1.  Shri Apurva Chandra Secretary 
2.  Ms Neerja Sekhar Additional Secretary 
3.  Ms Dhanpreet Kaur Director (Films) 
 
Central Board of Film Certification 
1.  Shri Prasoon Joshi Chairman 
2.  Shri Tushar Karmakar Regional Officer, CBFC, Mumbai 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the Committee 
convened to consider and adopt four draft Action Taken Reports on Demands for Grants 
(2021-22) relating to the Ministries/Departments under their jurisdiction and to take evidence 
of the representatives of the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting on the subject ‘Review 
of functioning of Central Board of Film Certification (CBFC)’ with special emphasis on Mukul 
Mudgal and Shyam Benegal Committee Reports.   
3. The Committee, then, took up the following draft Action Taken Reports for 
consideration and adoption. 
(i) Draft Action Taken Report on Demands for Grants (2021-22) of the Ministry of 
Communications (Department of Posts); 
 
(ii) Draft Action Taken Report on Demands for Grants (2021-22) of the Ministry of 
Communications (Department of Telecommunications);  
 
(iii) Draft Action Taken Report on Demands for Grants (2021-22) of the Ministry of 
Electronics and Information Technology; and 
 
(iv) Draft Action Taken Report on Demands for Grants (2021-22) of the Ministry of 
Information and Broadcasting    

 
133 
 
 
4. After due deliberations, the Committee adopted the draft Action Taken Reports at Sl. 
Nos. (ii) and (iii) without any modifications and draft Action Taken Reports at Sl. No. (i) and 
(iv) with slight modifications. The Committee also authorized the Chairperson to finalize the 
draft Action Taken Reports and present the Reports to the House during the next Session of 
Parliament. 
 
5. Before the Committee took up the next agenda, Hon’ble Chairperson drew the 
attention of the Members to the widespread coverage of the observations/recommendations 
in the Report ‘Suspension of Telecom Services/Internet and its impact’ considered and 
adopted by the Committee the previous day i.e. on 16th November and also the deliberations 
held by the Committee with Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology on the Subject 
‘Review of functioning of Unique Identification Authority of India (UIDAI)’ in various 
newspapers. He cautioned the Members that this was in clear violation of Rule 275 (2) & (3) 
of Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha and Direction 72(2) of 
Directions by the Speaker Lok Sabha.  He requested Members to strictly adhere to the Rules 
and Directions and also to maintain strict confidentiality of the proceedings of the Committee 
which otherwise constitutes a breach of privilege of the Committee.  
 
(The witnesses were, then, called in ) 
 
6. The Chairperson welcomed the representatives of the Ministry of Information and 
Broadcasting and Central Board of Film Certification to the sitting of the Committee and asked 
them to brief the Committee on the implementation status of the Benegal and Mudgal 
Committee Reports and the public comments received on the Draft Bill. 
 
7. The representatives of the Ministry and CBFC gave a power point presentation 
covering various aspects such as the constitutional provisions for regulation of films, 
Cinematograph Act 1952, Certification Rules 1983 and Guidelines, the Cinematograph 
Amendment Bill, 2019 and Draft Cinematograph Amendment Bill, 2021, overview of the 
recommendations of the Mudgal and Benegal Committees, recommendations already 
implemented and recommendations requiring amendment or issue of executive orders, 
varying recommendations on similar issues and the way forward. 
 

 
134 
 
8. The representatives of the Ministry and CBFC further explained that the  
Cinematograph Act, 1952 had become obsolete which necessitated an overhaul in the form of 
the new Draft Bill, 2021. The changing scenario required a revisit of the categories of 
certification which needed to be age specific and the implementation of the same continues to 
pose a challenge.  They further submitted that they have to take a final view of the voluminous 
comments received on the Bill and propose to have further consultations with the film bodies 
before presenting the Bill to the Parliament. 
 
9. Members then raised queries on the Draft Cinematograph (Amendment) Bill, 2021 
which inter alia included the mandate of the Mudgal and Benegal Committees, relevance of 
censorship, protection of artistic expression and creative freedom in the certification process, 
validity of certificates, certification standards for OTT platforms, quantum deletion of scenes, 
time frame for examination and certification, challenges faced in enforcing the certification in 
cinema halls, representation of women in the Advisory Panels, revisionary powers of Central 
Government in the Draft Bill, abolition of the Film Certification Appellate Tribunal, etc. which 
were replied to by the representatives. The Members also desired to know whether the 
Ministry propose to bring about an altogether new Cinematograph Act that is in tune with the 
present times or amend the Act of 1952 in piecemeal. The representatives of Ministry and 
Chairperson, CBFC presented their views on the issue. 
10. The Chairperson, then, thanked the representatives of Ministry of Information and 
Broadcasting and Central Board of Film Certification for deposing before the Committee. 
 
The witnesses, then withdrew. 
Verbatim Proceedings of the sitting have been kept on record. 
 
The Committee, then, adjourned. 
 
***** 
 
 
 

 
135 
 
Appendix-VII 
  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON COMMUNICATIONS AND INFORMATION 
TECHNOLOGY 
(2022-23) 
 
MINUTES OF THE SIXTEENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
----------- 
 
 The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 26th July, 2023 from 1000 hours to 1055 hours 
in Committee Room ‘D’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
Shri Prataprao Jadhav  
 
 MEMBERS 
  
Lok Sabha 
2. Shri Karti P. Chidambaram  
3. Shri Nishikant Dubey 
4. Shri Santosh Pandey 
5. Shri Sanjay Seth 
6. Dr. T. Sumathy (A) Thamizhachi Thangapandian 
7. Smt. Raksha Nikhil Khadse 
8. Dr. Sukanta Majumdar 
9. Ms. Mahua Moitra 
10. Shri P.R. Natarajan 
11. Shri Shatrughan Prasad Sinha 
12. Dr. M. K. Vishnu Prasad 
13. Shri Jayadev Galla 
  
Rajya Sabha 
14. Dr. Anil Aggarwal 
15. Dr. John Brittas 
16. Shri Syed Nasir Hussain 
17. Shri Kartikeya Sharma 
18. Shri Jawahar Sircar 
19. Shri Lahar Singh Siroya 
20. Shri Jaggesh 
21. Shri Praful Patel       
 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri Satpal Gulati  - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. A. Jyothirmayi  - Director 
3. Shri Nishant Mehra   - Deputy Secretary 
 
 

 
136 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the Sitting of the Committee 
convened to consider and adopt two Draft subject Reports relating to the 
Ministries/Departments under their jurisdiction.   
 
3. The Committee, then, took up the following draft Reports for consideration and 
adoption. 
 
(v) Draft Report on “Citizens’ data security and privacy” related to Ministry of Electronics 
and Information Technology. 
 
(vi)   Draft Report on “Review of functioning of Central Board of Film Certification (CBFC)” 
related to Ministry of Information and Broadcasting. 
 
4. After due deliberations, the Committee adopted the draft Report on “Review of 
functioning of Central Board of Film Certification (CBFC)” with modifications.   
5. As regards the draft Report on “Citizens’ data security and privacy” , some Members 
pointed out the Rule 331 H of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha 
which inter alia states that the Committee shall consider only such Bills introduced in either of 
the Houses as are referred to them by the Chairman, Rajya Sabha or the Speaker, as the 
case may be and stated that the Draft Personal Data Protection Bill, 2023 had not been 
referred to the Committee. They also placed on record their disagreement with the Report 
which examined the Clauses of the said Bill.  Some Members insisted that a division of votes 
may be conducted to determine the majority which was eventually not implemented. Further, 
some Members left the Sitting saying that a Whip had been issued to them to attend the 
House and some others left saying that the Report cannot be submitted to the Parliament as 
the Bill had not been referred to the Committee. One of the Members stated that he was 
submitting a dissent Note and the same was to be appended to the Report.  
6. At the end of the Sitting, the Chairperson said that the Report was adopted. The remaining 
Members of the Committee authorized the Chairperson to finalize the draft Reports arising out 
of factual verification, if any, and present the Reports to the House during the current Session 
of Parliament. 
  
The Committee, then, adjourned. 
 
 
 