 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
 
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
 
(2019
-
20)
 
 
SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF INFORMATION AND BROADCASTING 
 
 
 
 
THE CINEMATOGRAPH (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2019
 
 
 
NINTH REPORT
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
 
NEW DELHI
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
March, 2020/ 
Phalguna, 1941 (Saka)
 
 
 
 
 
9
 


 
NINTH REPORT
 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
 
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
 
(2019
-
20)
 
 
 
 
 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA)
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF INFORMATION AND BROADCASTING 
 
 
 
 
THE CINEMATOGRAPH (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2019
 
 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 16.03.2020 
 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 16.03.2020
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
 
NEW DELHI
 
 
 
 
 
March, 2020/ Phalguna, 1941 (Saka)
 
 
 
 
 


(j)
 
 
 
CONTENTS
 
 
Page 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
 
(ii)
 
INTRODUCTION
 
(iii)
 
 
REPORT
 
 
 
 
PART I
 
 
 
I
.
 
Introductory
 
1
 
II
.
 
Insertion of new section 6AA after section 6A of the Cinematograph act 1952 and 
amendment to section 7 of the principal act
 
5
 
III
.
 
Existing provisions deal with 
Film Piracy
 
1
0
 
IV
.
 
'Fair Use’ Provision
 
1
4
 
V
.
 
Expert Committees on Film Certification
 
1
7
 
VI
.
 
Online/Digital Piracy
 
18
 
VII
.
 
Publicity/Campaigns/Preparedness for new legislation 
 
2
1
 
 
 
 
OBSERVATIONS/ RECOMMENDATIONS
 
 
22
-
3
2
 
 
APPENDICES
 
 
 
I
.
 
L
ist of  
Stakeholders/Organisations/Individuals from whom Memoranda were 
received in response to the Press Communique
 
33
 
II
.
 
List of Non
-
Official Witnesses who tendered Evidence on 'The Cinematograph
 
(Amendment) Bill, 2019
’
 
34
 
III
.
 
Section 51 of the Copy Right Act
 
35
 
IV
.
 
Anti
-
camcording provisions in the United States, South Korea and Phillippines
 
 
36
 
V
.
 
The Cinematograph (Amendment) Bill, 2019
 
41
 
 
 
ANNEXURES
 
 
 
I
.
 
Minutes of the 12th sitting of the Standing Committee on Information Technology 
(2018
-
19) held on 06.03.2019
 
 
45
 
II
.
 
Minutes of the 7th sitting of the Standing Committee on Information Technology 
(2019
-
20) held on 30.10.2019
 
 
48
 
III
.
 
Minutes of the 13th sitting of the Standing Committee on Information Technology 
(2019
-
20) held on 06.02.2020
 
 
52
 
IV
.
 
Minutes of the 19th 
sitting of the Standing Committee on Information Technology 
(2019
-
20) held on 13.03.2020
 
54
 
 
 
 
 

(ij)
 
COMPOSITION OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
 
(2019
-
20)
 
 
Dr. Shashi Tharoor 
-
 
Chairperson
 
Lok Sabha
 
2
.
 
Smt. Locket Chatterjee
 
3
.
 
Shri Karti P. Chidambaram
 
4
.
 
Shri Sunny Deol 
 
5
.
 
Dr. Nishikant Dubey 
 
6
.
 
Shri Vijay Kumar Dubey 
 
7
.
 
Choudhary Mehboob Ali Kaiser
 
8
.
 
Smt. Raksha Nikhil Khadse 
 
9
.
 
Dr. Sukanta Majumdar 
 
10
.
 
Shri Dhairyasheel Sambhajirao Mane
 
11
.
 
Ms. Mahua Moitra
 
12
.
 
Shri P. R. Natarajan
 
13
.
 
Shri Santosh Pand
ey
 
14
.
 
Shri Nisith Pramanik 
 
15
.
 
Col. Rajyavardhan Singh Rathore
 
16
.
 
Dr. Gaddam Ranjith Reddy 
 
17
.
 
Shri M V V Satyanarayana 
 
18
.
 
Shri Sanjay Seth 
 
19
.
 
Shri L.S. Tejasvi Surya
 
20
.
 
Dr. T. Sumathy (A) Thamizhachi Thangapandian 
 
21
.
 
Shri Bhanu Pratap Singh Verma
 
 
Rajya Sabha
 
22
.
 
Dr. Anil Agrawal
 
 
23
.
 
Dr. Subhash Chandra 
 
24
.
 
Shri Y. S. Chowdary 
 
25
.
 
Shri Suresh Gopi 
 
26
.
 
Shri Md. Nadimul Haque
 
27
.
 
Shri Syed Nasir Hussain 
 
28
.
 
Dr. Narendra Jadhav 
 
29
.
 
Shri D. Kupendra Reddy 
 
30
.
 
Shri Ronald Sapa Tlau 
 
31
.
 
Shri Beni Prasad Verma
 
 
Secretariat
 
1
.
 
Shri Ganapati Bhat
 
 
 
-
 
Additional 
Secretary
 
2
.
 
Shri Y.M. Kandpal
 
 
 
-
 
Director
 
3
.
 
Smt. Geeta Parmar
 
 
 
-
 
Additional Director
 
4
.
 
Smt. Rinky Singh
 
 
 
-
 
Assistant Executive Officer
 

(iii)
 
INTRODUCTION
 
 
I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Information Technology (2019
-
20), having 
been auth
orized by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present this Ninth 
Report on 'The Cinematograph (Amendment) Bill, 2019' of the Ministry of Information and 
Broadcasting.
 
2
.
 
The Cinematograph (Amendment) Bill, 2019 as introduced in Rajya Sabha on 
12.02.2019 
was referred by the Hon'ble Speaker (16
th
 
Lok Sabha) to the 
erstwhile
 
Standing Committee on 
Information Technology on 22.02.2019 for examination and Report within a period of two 
months. The Committee, after hearing the views of the Ministry of Information and 
Broadcasting on the proposed amendment at their sitting held on 
6 March, 2019 and 
considering wide ramifications of the proposed amendment Bill on the film industry across the 
country and public at large felt the need to have an in
-
depth examination of the Bill and to seek 
views/suggestions of experts/ associations/ bo
dies/ stakeholders/ General Public. However, due 
to paucity of time, owing to the declaration on General Elections, the Standing Committee on 
Information Technology (2018
-
19) left the matter of the examination of the Bill to the 
succeeding Committee in the
 
new Lok Sabha. 
 
3
.
 
During the 17
th
 
Lok Sabha, the Bill was again referred by the Hon'ble Speaker (17
th
 
Lok 
Sabha) to the Standing Committee on Information Technology (2019
-
20) on 04.10.2019 for 
examination and report within two months. Since the Committee re
mained occupied with the 
time bound exercise of examination of the Demands for Grants (2019
-
20 and 2020
-
21) related 
to the four Ministries/Departments they sought extension of time up to second week of March, 
2020 for examination and Report on 'The Cinemat
ograph (Amendment) Bill, 2019'.
 
4
.
 
In the process of examination of Bill, Committee invited the views/suggestions from 
experts, stakeholders, organisations, public at large on the proposed amendment through a 
press communiqué issued and received around Thirteen (13) views/suggestions.  The 
Committee took oral evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of Information and 
Broadcasting on 30 October, 2019 and 6 February, 2020, besides obtaining written clarifications 
from them on the proposed amendment.  The Committee also took oral eviden
ce of the Film 
and Television Producers Guild of India Limited, The Viacom 18 Motion Pictures, The Motion 
Picture Distributors Association India Pvt. Limited and Eros International Media Limited at their 
sitting held on 30 October, 2019. 
 
5
.
 
The Report was co
nsidered and adopted by the Committee at their sitting held    13 
March, 2020.
 
6
.
 
The Committee wish to express their thanks to the representatives of the Ministry of 
Information and Broadcasting for appearing before the Committee and for furnishing the 
infor
mation in connection with examination of the Bill. The Committee also wish to express 
their thanks to experts/individuals/organisations/stakeholders for their valuable inputs and 
public at large who furnished written information/views for consideration of 
the Committee as 
well as to the non
-
official witnesses for appearing before them and furnishing valuable 
suggestions on the proposed amendment. 
 

(iv)
 
7
.
 
The Committee would also like to place on record their deep sense of appreciation of the 
val
uable assistance rendered to them by the officials of Lok Sabha Secretariat attached to the 
Committee.
 
 
8
.
 
For facility of reference and convenience, the observations and recommendations of the 
Committee have been printed in bold in Part
-
II of the Report. 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi;
 
  
DR. SHASHI THAROOR,
 
13 
March, 2020
 
 
Chairperson,
 
23 
Phalguna, 1941 (Saka)
 
Standing Committee on
 
Information Technology.
 

1
 
 
REPORT
 
PART
-
I
 
 
I.
 
Introductory
 
 
Cinema is an artistic expression of ideas, stories and often opinions. There are few other 
mediums of communication that can claim rival levels of pervasive influence and presence in our daily 
lives. In 1913, Dadasaheb Phalke made and released India’s firs
t indigenous feature film ‘Raja 
Harishchandra’ and thereafter a flurry of films followed rapidly all across our country. India is one of the 
largest 
producers
 
of films in the world and the film sector in India provides employment opportunities 
to millions.
 
 
2.
 
The first Indian Cinematograph Act was enacted in 1918 whereby Censor Boards (as they were 
called then) were placed under Police Chiefs in the cities of Madras, Bombay, Calcutta, Lahore and 
Rangoon.  These regional censors were independent.  After Ind
ependence, the autonomy of regional 
censors was abolished when the Bombay Board of Film Censors was established. Sanctioning of 
cinematograph films for exhibition has been included in Entry 60 of the Union List (List
-
I) of the Seventh 
Schedule of the Const
itution of India.  However, Cinemas subject to the provisions of Entry 60 of List
-
I is 
included in Entry 33 of the State List (List
-
II).  Therefore, as per the Constitutional provisions, the Union 
Government is empowered to legislate in matters pertaining 
to sanctioning (also called certification) of 
films for exhibition in India and the State Legislatures are empowered to make laws for regulating the 
licensing and other matters related to exhibition of Cinema.  
 
 
3.
 
In respect of Union territories, the pow
er to make laws for regulating exhibition also vests with 
the Parliament. In exercise of its power, the Parliament had enacted the Cinematograph Act, 1952 (37 
of 1952 on 21 March, 1952 to make provisions for the certification of cinematograph films for 
exh
ibition and for regulating exhibitions by means of cinematographs. The medium of cinema 
viz
. tools 
and technology associated with it and its audience has undergone radical changes over a period of 
time. After the enactment in 1952, the Act has been amended
 
eight times, details of which are as 
under:
 
(i)
 
The Cinematograph Act, 1953 (
19 of 1953)
 
(ii)
 
T
he Cinematograph Act, 1957 (
36 of 1957)
 
(iii)
 
The Cinematograph Act, 1959 (
3 of 1959)
 
(iv)
 
The Cinematograph Act, 1960 (
58 of 1960)
 
(v)
 
The Cinematograph Act, 1
973 (
25 of 1973)
 

2
 
 
(vi)
 
The Cinematograph Act, 1981 (
49 of 1981)
 
(vii)
 
The Cinematograph Act, 1984 (
56 of 1984)
 
(viii)
 
The Cinematograph Act, 2017 (
7 of 2017)
 
 
4.
 
Some of the major amendments in the Act were made in 1981 whereby the number of 
members of the 
Board was increased, new categories of certification namely ‘UA’ and ‘S’ were 
introduced, an independent Appellate Tribunal was created, offences for violations under the Act were 
made cognizable and enhanced punishments/fines were provided. Last amendment
 
was made in 2017 
where by the qualifications, terms and conditions of service of the Chairman and Members of the 
Appellate Tribunal was inserted by the Finance Act, 2017 (7 of 2017) in section 5E of the principal Act. 
Cinematograph (Certification) Rules, 
1983 came into effect from 09.05.1983 and it lays down terms and 
conditions of tenure of Board and Tribunal members and procedures for certification etc. 
 
 
5.
 
The Cinematograph Act, 1952 is now proposed to be amended 
so as to provide that no 
person shall, without the written authorisation of the author, be permitted to use any audiovisual 
recording device in a place to knowingly make or transmit or attempt to make or transmit or abet the 
making or transmission of a cop
y of a film or a 
part thereof. Also, the persons 
who contravenes the 
provisions of section 6AA may be punished for a term which may extend to three years or with fine 
which may extend to ten lakh rupees or with both.
 
 
6.
 
According to the Ministry of Inform
ation and Broadcasting, film piracy, particularly, release 
of pirated version of films on internet, causes huge losses to the film industry and the government 
exchequer. 
In most cases illegal duplication in cinema halls is the originating point of piracy
. 
At present, 
there are no enabling provisions to check film piracy, either in the Cinematograph Act, 1952 or in the 
Cinematograph (Certification) Rules, 1983. 
 
 
7.
 
The Ministry of I & B have added that the Department for Promotion of Industry and Internal 
T
rade under Ministry of Commerce and Industry, which oversees implementation of the 
National IPR 
Policy
, allotted the following Action Point to the M/o I&B: 
 
 
“
3.7 
–
 
Indian Cinematograph Act, 1952 may be suitably amended to provide for penal provisions for 
illegal duplication of films
”.
 
 
 
8.
 
The Ministry have also constituted the 
Committee 
of Experts headed by Justice Mukul Mudgal, 

3
 
 
Retd. Chief Justice of High Court of Punjab and Haryana to examine issues of certification under the 
Cinematograph Act, 1952, wh
ich in its report dated 28
th
 
September, 2013 inter
-
alia recommended strict 
penalty for unauthorised duplication of a film etc. Para 27 of the Report and Section 40 of the Draft 
Cinematograph Bill are reproduced as under:
-
 
 
Para 27 
–
 
Treatment of piracy and
 
other offences, Immunity etc.
: 
 
 
“
The Committee strongly feels that piracy, illegal and unauthorized duplication of certified film is to 
be treated in the strictest form possible and therefore recommend that such act be made 
sustentative non
-
bailable offe
nces. Such actions are nothing sort of fraud and theft and ought to be 
treated by law as such. In the draft proposed bill the Committee has suggested structuring of an 
entire chapter on Offences and Penalties recommending a fine which may extend from Rs.5 
Lacs to 
Rs.25 Lacs and an imprisonment which may extend upto 3 years.
”
 
 
Section 40 
–
 
Penalty for unauthorized duplication of a Film etc.
:
 
 
“(1)
 
No person who undertakes the processing of a film, analogue or digital or in any other form 
using any 
technology, shall,
 
(a)
 
issue any negative or copy of the film to any person except one copy of the first married 
print of the film to the person applying for a certificate under sub
-
section (1) of section 
18 until a certificate is granted under section 22;
 
or
 
(b)
 
make or cause to be made an unauthorized duplicate print or a copy of the film in any 
form using any technology.
 
 
(2)
 
Any person, who contravenes the provisions contained in sub
-
section (1) above, shall be 
punishable with a fine of not less than fi
ve lakh rupees which may extend to twenty
-
five lakh 
rupees or imprisonment of not less than one year which may extend upto three years, or both.”
 
 
9.
 
The Ministry has informed that the proposal for amendment in the Cinematograph Act, 1952 
was circulated by
 
the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting to the Ministry of Home Affairs, 
Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology, Ministry of Culture, Ministry of Human Resource 
Development, Department of Industrial policy and Promotion and Department of 
Telecommunications. 
The proposed amendment was published on the Ministry’s website on 03.01.2019 and a press release 
was posted on 08.01.2019 by Press Information Bureau (PIB) inviting comments. 
 
 
10.
 
The Ministry has stated to have received repeated repre
sentations from various film industry 
bodies, viz. Motion Pictures Dist. Association, The South Indian Film Chamber of Commerce, The Film & 
Television Producers Guild of India Ltd., FICCI, Producers Guild of India, etc. recommending the 
introduction of str
ict penal provisions in the Cinematograph Bill. The proposal regarding amendment in 

4
 
 
the Cinematograph Act, 1952 and introduction of ‘The Cinematograph (Amendment) Bill, 2019’ was 
approved by the Union Cabinet in its meeting held on 06.02.2019.
 
 
11.
 
Accordingly, the Ministry of I & B introduced in Rajya Sabha on 12.02.2019, The Cinematograph 
(Amendment) Bill, 2019 to further amend the Cinematograph Act, 1952. The Bill was referred to the 
erstwhile Standing Committee on Information Technology on 22.02.
2019 by the Hon'ble Speaker (16
th
 
Lok Sabha), for examination and Report within a period of two months. However, due to the paucity of 
time in view of the General Elections in the months of April and May, 2019, the Standing Committee on 
Information Technol
ogy (2018
-
19) could not examine the Bill and left the matter to the succeeding 
Committee in the new Lok Sabha. 
 
 
12.
 
During the 17
th
 
Lok Sabha, the Bill was again referred by the Hon'ble Speaker to the Standing 
Committee on Information Technology (2019
-
20)
 
on 04.10.2019 for examination and report
.
 
 
13.
 
In the process of the examination of the Bill, the Committee issued a Press Communique on 22 
December, 2019 inviting views/suggestions from Experts/Stakeholders/Organisations/Public at large on 
the proposed a
mendments contained in the Bill. In response to that several Memoranda were received 
and scrutinised by the Committee. A list of  Stakeholders/Organisations/Individuals from whom 
Memoranda were received in response to the above said Press Communique is at 
Appendix
-
I.
 
 
14.
 
Gist of the important/relevant points raised in the above cited memoranda is as under:
 
 
(
i
)
 
A minimum quantum of punishment
 
should be included for a first time offender under the 
proposed Section 7(1A). 
 
(
ii
)
 
Enhanced penalties should be imposed for 'Habitual and subsequent offenders' on the lines 
of section 63A of the Copyright Act, 1957 with an imprisonment and a fine. 
 
(
iii
)
 
In clause 2 of the Bill, ‘6AA. Notwithstanding any law for the time being in force, no person 
shall, without the written authorisation of the author’, the word ‘author’ be replaced with 
‘owner’. Although the Copyright Act, 1957 clarifies under Section 2(d)
(v) that ‘author’ in 
relation to a Cinematograph Film shall mean its producer, nevertheless, there may be 
circumstances where the economic rights / ownership of the Copyright in the 
Cinematograph Film may have been assigned to a third party (such as toward
s financing film 
production, etc). Therefore, in such cases, seeking consent of the author may not be 
relevant (or even proper) and consent of the owner of the Copyright may be sought. 
 
(
iv
)
 
Provision be made for quick and timely action against wrongdoers by th
e police upon receipt 
of complaint disclosing occurrence of an offence under proposed clause 6AA, without having 
to approach a court to get orders which often results in delay that proves to be critical in 
such matters. 
 

5
 
 
(
v
)
 
Provision should be included to mak
e the offence cognizable and non
-
bailable. 
 
(
vi
)
 
Provision should be made for exceptions to infringement of Copyright such as provisions 
regarding non
-
commercial uses such as for review/critique, for educational purposes, etc.  
 
 
(
vii
)
 
Section 7(1B) should be include
d as under:
 
 
 
 
“Enhanced penalty on subsequent convictions
-
Whoever having been convicted of an 
offence under sub section 7(1A) is convicted of a subsequent offence under section 6AA 
shall be punishable for every such subsequent offence, with imprisonment o
f a term which 
shall not be less than three years but which may extend upto seven years and with a fine 
which shall not be less than ten lakh rupees but which may extend upto twenty lakhs 
rupees.”
 
 
15.
 
The 
Committee 
also 
took oral evidence of various stake
holders on 30.10.2019. A list of the non
-
official witnesses who tendered 
evidence is
 
shown at 
Appendix
-
II.
 
16.
 
The Committee obtained Background note, Written Replies, Post Evidence 
Information/Clarifications from the Ministry of Information and Broadcasti
ng. The Committee took oral 
evidence of the Ministry on 
6 March, 2019, 
30 October, 2019
 
and
 
6 February, 2020. The 
representatives of the concerned Ministries/Departments remained present in all the sittings of the 
Committee.
 
 
17.
 
Thus, based on the written
 
and oral depositions of both official and non
-
official witnesses and 
inputs received from the Memoranda received from other sources, the Committee examined the Bill 
thoroughly and given their observations/recommendations as enumerated in the succeeding 
pa
ragraphs.
 
 
II.
 
INSERTION OF NEW SECTION 6AA AFTER SECTION 6A OF THE CINEMATOGRAPH ACT 1952 AND
 
AMENDMENT TO SECTION 7 OF THE PRINCIPAL ACT
 
 
18.
 
The Cinematograph(Amendment) Bill, 2019 proposes that after section 6A, the following 
section
 
shall be inserted, namely:
-
 
6AA.
 
"Notwithstanding any law for the time being in force, no person shall, without the written 
authorisation of the author, be permitted to use any audiovisual recording device in a place to 
knowingly make or transmit or attem
pt to make or transmit or abet the making or transmission of a 
copy of a film or a part thereof." 
 
Explanation
—
For the purposes of this section, the expression “author” shall have the same meaning as 
assigned to it in clause (d) of section 2 of the Copyrig
ht Act, 1957.’
 
 

6
 
 
19.
 
As per clause(d) of section 2 of the Copyright Act, 1957, the expression "author" means,
-
 
 
(i) in relation to a literary or dramatic work, the author of the work; 
 
(ii) in relation to a musical work, the composer; 
 
(iii) in relation to an artistic work other than a photograph, the artist; 
 
(iv) in relation to a photograph, the person taking the photograph; 
 
[(v)
*
 
in relation to a cinematograph film or sound recording, the producer; and (vi) in relation to 
any literar
y, dramatic, musical or artistic work which is computer
-
generated, the person who causes the 
work to be created;]
 
20.
 
The Government further propose that i
n section 7 of the Principle Act, after sub
-
section (1), the 
following sub
-
section shall be inserted:
-
 
"(1A). If any person contravenes the provisions of section 6AA, he shall be punishable with an 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years or with fine which may extend to ten 
lakh rupees or with both.”.
 
 
21.
 
It has been stated that the new a
mendment intends to reduce piracy, thereby leading to 
increased Industry revenues, boost job creation and fulfill important objectives of India's National 
Intellectual Property Rights policy (NIPRP). 
 
 
22.
 
Piracy in the context of the proposed legislation 
is the unauthorised duplication of films. There 
is a constant threat of piracy of films. Film Industry has been facing huge losses due to advent of new 
technology, decline of number of people visiting the cinema theatres, increase in piracy, particularly 
r
elease of pirated version of films on the internet, copyright violations, etc. According to the film 
industry associations, the films are available online within few hours of release, causing huge monetary 
loss to the industry as well as to the Government 
exchequer. 
 
 
23.
 
When t
he Committee enquired about the estimated revenue loss due to film piracy, the 
Ministry submitted as under:
 
 
“As per a report of FICCI, the film and TV is constantly battling with the threats of online piracy. In 
a 
study
 
of over thousand pirated websites in India, it was estimated that large pirated networks 
can generate between $2
-
4 million per annum, and medium and small pirate website can 
generate up to $ 2 million annually.
 
As per Cinematograph (Certification) Rules 1
983, fees are collected from film producers in the 
form of Examining fees for examination of films and screening fees for screening of films by 
                                        
       
 
*
 
Subs. by Act 38 of 1994, s. 2, for sub
-
clauses (v) and (vi) (w.e.f. 10
-
5
-
1995)
 

7
 
 
Central Board of Film Certification. The revenue earned by Government on account of 
certification will be affect
ed by piracy of films. 
 
According to a report by FICCI
-
EY in 2018 on India’s M&E Sector, the Indian film industry loses 
$2.8 billion of its annual revenue to piracy.”
 
 
24.
 
Film piracy  is  done  in  various  forms  ranging  from  producing  Compact Discs (
CDs)  through  
camcording  during  the exhibition of movies at theatres to downloading movies and sharing files with 
each other without the  permission  of  author  from  unauthorized  sites. Piracy is done in many ways 
like video piracy, cable piracy, DVD
/CD piracy and online piracy. 
 
 
25.
 
When asked for the details of various modes of piracy, the Ministry have informed as under:
 
(a) 
 
Video piracy
 
takes place when a film is produced in the form of a videocassette without 
proper authorization from the right
 
holder, i.e. the producer. Often, film producers sell video 
rights to another party (generally after six weeks or more of release in theatres), which makes 
video cassettes for selling, or lending. The videocassettes on sale are meant for home viewing 
only
. 
 
 
 
(b)
 
Cable piracy
 
refers to unauthorized transmission of films through the cable network. 
Very often, films, especially the new releases, are shown through cable without permission from 
the rights holder. 
 
 
 
(c) 
 
DVD/VCD 
piracy of Indian films happens 
in the international markets when the prints 
sent for overseas screening of the film are pirated. 
 
 
 
(d)
 
Online Piracy
 
refers to illegally copying or distributing films over the internet. Online 
piracy is rampant in India and all over the world replacing p
iracy through CDs and DVDs as 
downloading pirated content from different Torrent websites is much simpler and cheaper. It 
has been brought out that the films are available online within few hours of release and the 
content feeds are often from overseas."
 
 
26.
 
Elaborating on piracy of films, the Ministry has further informed that like most other film 
industries across the world, the Indian film industry relies extensively on media and industry sponsored 
studies for arguing that online piracy is substantial i
n India. One such study, which projects the views of 
the Indian film industry on online piracy, is India: Internet Piracy Landscape Audit, conducted by 
Envisional and the Motion pictures Association (MPA).  This study claims that online piracy of film 
cont
ent is significant in India. According to this report, one of the Bollywood movies was downloaded 
more than 350,000 times on Bit Torrent and two third of 
downloads 
could be traced to location within 
India .
 
 

8
 
 
27.
 
The Indian Broadcasting Federation (IBF), Fe
deration of Indian Chambers of Commerce and 
Industry (FICCI) and Producers Guild of India in their memoranda have suggested to redefine section 
6AA so as to include word 'owner' along with the word 'author'. While another stakeholder expressed 
that the wor
d 'author' be replaced with 'owner'. Further, the Copyright Act, 1957 clarifies under Section 
2(d) (v) defines ‘author’ in relation to a cinematograph film as its producer, nevertheless, there may be 
circumstances where the economic rights/ownership of the
 
Copyright in the cinematograph film may 
have been assigned to a third party (such as towards financing film production, etc). Therefore, in such 
cases, seeking consent of the author may not be relevant and in that case, consent of the owner of the 
Copyrig
ht may be sought.
 
 
28.
 
The Ministry of I & B in response to the above suggestions have stated that according to the 
Department for Promotion of Industry and Internal Trade, the Copyright Act, 1957 confers certain 
rights, moral as well as economic, to the 
creator/author of a work. These rights are granted to an 
author by virtue of them being the first owner in accordance with Section 17 of the Act. Hence, in order 
to maintain uniformity and to avoid any uncertainty, it is opined that, the above suggestion m
ay not be 
considered.
 
 
29.
 
The Committee 
pointed out that the Bill in the present form 
deals with only one form of film 
piracy that happens 
in cinema halls
 
though there are 
a range of  online piracy which need to be 
urgently dealt. It was desired that the 
Government should take a comprehensive view to address piracy 
issues by bringing amendments in t
he Cinematograph Act of 1952 which is very old and has become 
obsolete in view of the dramatic transformation of the information and cinematography landscape. I
n 
this regard, the Committee wanted to know that how soon the Ministry would be taking up all those 
issues of compelling interests of the public. To this, the Ministry has replied as under:
 
" At present, there are no enabling provisions to check film piracy, either in the 
Cinematograph Act, 1952 or in the Cinematograph (Certification) Rules, 1983. 
It is a matter of 
fact that film piracy, particularly release of pirated version of films on int
ernet, causes huge 
losses to the film industry and the government exchequer and that in most cases, illegal 
duplication in cinema halls is the originating point of piracy. 
This Ministry also received 
repeated representations from various film industry bodi
es, viz. Motion Pictures Dist. 
Association, The South Indian Film Chamber of Commerce, The Film & Television Producers 
Guild of India Ltd., FICCI, Producers Guild of India, etc. recommending the introduction of 
strict penal provisions in the Cinematograph 
Bill. Accordingly, it was proposed by the Ministry 
to amend the Cinematograph Act to make unauthorized duplication of films a punishable 
offence. Amending the Cinematograph Act will also give a strong signal globally on India’s 
resolve to strengthen the IP
 
regime."
 
 

9
 
 
30.
 
To a similar query, the Secretary, I & B, during the course of evidence before the Committee 
submitted as under:
 
"…….the Act is quite old and in fact the major amendments which were made were also 
about two decades old. It does require an ov
erhaul but the two issues of certification and 
piracy, our feeling or rather my recommendation to the Committee is that two issues could 
be segregated. At the moment, we have the amendment to the piracy now and we have 
the other part relating to certificat
ion because there are a lot of differences between the 
industry as far as the Shyam Benegal Committee is concerned…So, may be my submission 
would be that the hon. Committee may examine this Bill, and the other part, I would 
submit before the Committee. We 
will also try to synchronise the other part but as of now, 
the amendment relating to piracy could be taken up now and the entire gamut relating to 
the film certification because that is a much wider issue, that can be taken up 
subsequently."
 
 
31.
 
In this c
ontext, one of the stakeholders
, during their evidence before the Committee stated as 
under: 
 
“This 
is not a new law which is only getting introduced in India. There are mature markets 
in the world including UK, Australia and USA. They have similar kinds 
of laws which protect 
recordings and then get uploaded. If we take a view from the industry perspective or the 
business perspective, then we have no protection. If anyone is free to do whatever he 
wants, then the investment in this business will be of no u
se. Whether we should take the 
cinema owner or the consumer or the website owner to court is more a legal point of view 
which is debatable. The question is to create a fear amongst people that this is illegal and 
it should not be allowed. And you will see 
a dramatic change once the law is in place.”
 
 
 
32.
 
The Committee were of the view that the word ‘Knowingly” should be well defined in the 
proposed amendment as some one may get punished because of inadvertent use. The Secretary, I & B 
submitted as under:
 
“
 
Sir, by the term ‘knowingly’, I meant is that there should be 
mens r
e
a
 
because all 
criminal offences require it.….. Sir, to qualify as a criminal offence, we need to have 
mens 
re
a
 
except in the Corruption Act in which 
mens r
e
a
 
was removed by the Parliamen
t for 
some purpose. Genuinely, in a criminal offence, 
mens re
a
 
is a necessary ingredient and it 
has to be there. So, what I mean was that 
mens re
a
 
has to be there……. I will send the 
United States Code also in writing. It says that any person who without the authorisation 
of the copy right owner knowingly uses or attempts to use an audio
-
visual recording 
device to transmit or make a copy of a motion 
picture or other audio visual work 
protected under Title 17 
–
 
this is their section 
–
 
that will be considered an offence.  We 
have similar provisions in UK and in several other countries.”
 
 
33.
 
In a written 
submission
 
furnished to the Committee
 
later on
, i
t has been informed that 
the term 
‘knowingly’ has also been used in Section 63 of the Copyright Act, without being defined in the said Act. 
Under Section 63 of the Copyright Act, any person who 
knowingly
 
infringes or abets the infringement of 

10
 
 
the copyright
 
in a work shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than 
six months but which may be extended to three years and with fine which shall not be less than fifty 
thousand rupees but which may be extended to two lakh rupees.
 
 
34.
 
On this issue, one of the stakeholders during evidence
 
submitted as under
:  
 
“The only one point that we would like to highlight is the proposed Section 6AA already 
uses the word `knowingly’. So, that is the protection normally a person will have in case 
of 
any inadvertent recording or general recording that may accidentally happen, may be a kid 
playing with a mobile phone. Courts do have inherent powers where these kinds of things 
would be looked at. But in case there is a specific recording which is bein
g made by camera 
or a phone kept on a tripod and then recordings happen or otherwise, those are the things 
which we need to address and therefore we feel that the word `knowingly’, because 
anybody who knowingly uses an audiovisual device to make a recordin
g is when the 
offence gets committed. So, there seems to be sufficient protection already in place. Any 
further protection will only dilute the proposed Section. It may actually become counter
-
productive because it may actually give a leeway to unscrupulou
s people to go ahead.”
 
 
 
35.
 
The Committee desired to know whether there is a need to define some of the words used in 
the proposed section 6AA 
viz
. ‘any  audiovisual recording device',  ‘in a place’,  ‘transmission’. In a 
written reply furnished to the Co
mmittee. The Ministry in their reply has stated that due to 
advancement in technology and availability of different types of audiovisual recording equipment and it 
is felt that there is no need to define the term Audiovisual recording device under Cinemato
graph Act, 
1952 and Cinematograph (Certification) Rules, 1983. Further, the following expressions defined under 
Section 2 of the Cinematograph Act, 1952 are given as under:
 
"Section 2(c): 'cinematograph' includes any apparatus for the representation of mov
ing pictures 
or series of pictures;
 
Section 2(dd): 'film' means a cinematograph film;
 
Section 2(e): 'place’ includes a house, building, tent and any description of transport, whether 
by sea, land or air;
 
Section 2(f) 'prescribed' means prescribed by rules 
made under this Act"
 
 
 
III.
 
Existing provisions deal with Film Piracy
 
 
36.
 
Asked about the existing provisions
 
for tackling film piracy, 
the Ministry in their reply has stated 
that the following provisions exist in the Copyright Act, 1957 and the Informati
on Technology Act, 2000:
 
(i)  
Copyright Act, 1957
 
The Copyright Act, 1957 as amended in 2012, provides civil remedies [Chapter XII (Section 54
-
62)] as well as criminal remedies [Chapter XIII (Section 63
-
70)] to the copyright holder. Clause (c) 

11
 
 
of 
subsection (1) of Section 52 of the Copyright Act, 1957 read with Rules 75 of the Copyright 
Rules, 2013 are the provisions to deal with piracy of films.
 
Under Section 63 of the Copyright Act, infringement of the copyright in a work is a cognizable 
offence 
and the offender shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be 
less than six months but which may extend to three years and with fine which shall not be less 
than fifty thousand rupees but which may extend to two lakh rupees. Making a
 
copy of a film on 
any medium by any means, including recording of films in a theatre, is a punishable offence 
under the Copyright Act. 
 
 
(ii)    
The Information Technology Act, 2000:
 
Section 79(2)(c) of the IT Act, 2000, indicates, “the intermediary obser
ves due diligence while 
discharging his duties under this Act and also observes such other guidelines as the Central 
Government may prescribe in this behalf”. Thus, provision exists under the IT Act to make 
guidelines and direct the intermediaries or Inter
net Service Providers (ISPs) to block the content. 
 
 
The Information Technology (Intermediaries guidelines) Rules, 2011 provide a due diligence 
framework to be observed by intermediary while discharging his duties under Rule 3. Sub
-
rule 
(2) of Rule 3 indic
ates not to host, display, upload, modify, publish, transmit, update or share 
certain information, including infringement of copyright. Sub
-
rule (4) of Rule 3 provides that the 
intermediary upon obtaining knowledge by itself or been brought to actual knowl
edge by an 
affected person about any such information as mentioned in sub
-
rule (2) of Rule 3, shall act 
within thirty six hours to disable such information that is in contravention of sub
-
rule (2).
 
 
37.
 
The Committee was also informed that the Copyright 
Amendment Act, 2012 also introduced 
provisions related to Digital Rights Management (DRM), which relates to protection of Technological 
Measures (TPM) (Section 65A) and protection of Rights
 
Management Information (RMI) (Section 653).
 
 
The Technological Pro
tection Measures encompass technologies used to block or limit access to a work, 
or certain actions with respect to the work (e.g. copying). The T
RM
 
makes circumvention of an effective 
technological measure applied for the purpose of protecting any of the 
rights conferred by the 
Copyright Act, with the intention of infringing such rights, punishable with imprisonment which may 
extend to two years and
 
shall also be liable to fine.
 
 
The RMI includes information identifying the author 
of a work, and the terms 
and conditions relating to its use. It is used by authors of digital works to 
identify their works or provide information about the copyright work. The implementation of the 
provisions related to DRM has to be ensured by Copyright owners.
 
 
 
38.
 
To a specif
ic query as to h
ow the provisions in the Copyright Act are different from the 
proposed amendment in the Cinematograph Act 1952, it has been stated that according to 
the 
Department for Promotion of Industry and Internal Trade, the Copyright Act has general 
provisions 
classifying the events at when a copyright is infringed under section 51 of the Act (
Appendix
-
III
). 
However, t
he objective of The Cinematograph (Amendment) Bill, 2019 is to tackle film piracy by 

12
 
 
including stringent penal provisions for unauthori
sed camcording and duplication of films. The Bill, 
2019, whilst specifically prohibiting a person from using a recording device to make a copy or transmit a 
film, without written authorisation from the author of the film, makes it a punishable offence, wit
h 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years or with fine which may extend to ten lakh 
rupees or with both, thereby increasing the pecuniary limit of the fine imposed.
 
Hence, the proposed 
amendment is specific to offences of piracy in the area
 
of cinematography. 
 
 
40.
 
In this context, Secretary, I&B during evidence, submitted as under:
 
“We had a discussion with the Registrar of Copyrights especially because there is a view 
that the Copyright Act deals with this and so, why we should bring this 
change here. Now, 
the issue is that what we discussed with the Registrar of Copyrights is that the Copyright 
Act is enforced when a copy of the film is made. Here, we are not just talking about making 
a copy but also of unauthorised recording and so on so 
forth. I would like to say that 
several other countries also have similar provisions apart from copy right……………As far as 
the film industry is concerned, there are specific and separate provisions in their Acts 
because film is a very big industry and we hav
e to protect the IPR of the film industry. As 
you must have been told, FICCI has said that Indian film industry loses about 2.8 billion 
dollars due to film piracy. So, a specific provision will help both the law enforcing agency, 
that is the police, the in
vestigating agency as well as the judiciary in arriving at an early 
conclusion. If we use provisions of other Acts there may be some confusion and the 
investigating agencies and the judiciary or the deciding authority would take time. So, 
putting a specifi
c provision, I think, would help in the early disposal of such cases.”
 
 
 
41.
 
In a written information subsequently furnished to the Committee, it has been elaborated that 
in most countries around the world, a film is granted protection by copyright. Generally, anyone who 
infringes the exclusive rights of the copyright owner, shall 
be liable under the copyright law of that 
country.  However, even with this protection, the rapid growth of illegal camcording still interferes with 
the film industry. The amount of illegal camcording in movie theatres globally is increasing and 
threatens 
the film industry around the world.  Every country suffers from the impact of illegal 
camcording, which is considered a primary cause of movie piracy. This implies that copyright law alone 
may be insufficient to 
tackle
 
this problem and that it may have som
e gaps that prevent enforcing the 
law against such piracy.  Therefore, the Governments of the suffering countries have paid a lot of 
attention to this matter and made great efforts to provide a new legal solution to quickly tackle this 
problem. Amongst the
 
measures taken against illegal camcording in movie theaters, Anti
-
Camcording 
legislation seems to be the most effective in stopping the rapid increase of camcording piracy. The 
United States of America, Canada, the Czech Republic, Germany, Hong Kong, Ital
y, Japan, and the 
Philippines now have Anti
-
Camcording law and some others are actively considering legislation. 
A copy 

13
 
 
each of the anti
-
camcording provisions in the United States, South Korea and Phillippines, is placed at 
Appendix
-
IV
.
 
 
41.
 
The Committee 
categorically asked whether the proposed Bill, after enactment, will override 
provisions/clauses/sections of any other existing Acts in the country. To this, the Ministry replied in 
negative. It was added that an i
nter
-
ministerial consultation with Departm
ent for Promotion of Industry 
and Internal Trade who are administering Copyright Act and Ministry of Electronics and Information 
Technology who administers the Information Technology Act, was made before finalizing the 
Cinematograph (Amendment) Bill, 2019.
 
They are of the opinion that there is no legal or constitutional 
objection to the proposal made in the Cinematograph Bill.
 
 
42.
 
Reacting to a query as to whether all the other Acts having provisions relating to film piracy 
should be mutually consistent, t
he Secretary, I & B  stated as under:
 
 
“The first question that you raised was about how it is in consonance with other Acts. There are 
six or seven Acts which have some provisions relating to copyright. We have examined them, 
circulated our draft to all t
he concerned Ministries and taken their views while drafting this Bill. 
So, we expect that since the other Ministries have seen this, who are the administrative 
Ministries for those Acts, there should be no problem or conflict with other Acts….. We had sen
t 
our provisions to the concerned administrative Ministry, and they have said that there is no 
inconsistency. We had also sent it to the Department of Legal Affairs.”
 
 
43.
 
When the Committee sought the views of stakeholders on the need for  having reconcil
iation of 
the Bill which is relating to film piracy with Copyright Act, 1957 and IT Act, 2000, they have submitted 
as under: 
 
 
“We totally agree with you that all the Acts should be consistent and they should be 
streamlined with each other. Otherwise, 
there is a dissonance. Which Act becomes primary 
and which becomes secondary become a problem. We felt that in the past. So, we are 
totally in agreement with you.”
 
 
44.
 
The Committee have observed that 
minimum period for imprisonment and also the minimum 
fine have not been specified in the penal provision of the proposed amendment to punish the persons 
contravening provisions of the proposed Section 6AA. When asked 
about the
 
reasons for the same, it 
has 
been stated that as
 
per the proposed amendment, 
the person who contravenes the provisions of 
Section 6AA can be punished for a term which may extend to three years or with fine which may extend 
to ten lakh rupees or both. The quantum of punishment may be d
ecided by the Hon’ble Courts.
 

14
 
 
 
45.
 
It may further be seen that the offence has not been clearly spelt in the proposed amendment. 
In this regard, the Ministry clarified that a
s informed by the Legislative Department, Ministry of Law and 
Justice, it is not n
ecessary to specify the nature of the offence in the Bill as the nature of the offence, 
like it is cognizable or non
-
cognizable, bailable or non
-
bailable, etc. shall be as per the entries specified 
in Part I of the First Schedule to the Code of Criminal Pr
ocedure, 1973.
 
 
IV.
 
'Fair Use
’ Provision
 
 
46.
 
In its most general sense, a fair use is any copying of copyrighted material done for a limited 
purpose, such as to comment upon, criticize, or parody a copyrighted work. Such uses can be done 
without permission from the copyright owner. In other words, fa
ir use is a defense against a claim of 
copyright infringement. If someone’s usage qualifies as a fair use, then it would not be considered an 
infringement. 
 
 
47.
 
To a suggestion of the Committee to include a provision for exception clause for ‘Fair Use’ in
 
the 
proposed amendment, the Ministry in a written submission has stated that a
s informed by the 
Department for Promotion of Industry and Internal Trade, Doctrine of Fair Use
 
is a
 
law recognized 
under the United States Copyright Law, wherein limited use of
 
copyrighted material is permitted 
without having to first acquire permission from the copyright holder. Fair use is termed as one of 
the
 
limitations to copy
right
, whose
 
intention is to balance the interests of right holders with the general 
public interest, allowing Fair Use as a defense to copyright infringement claims to certain limited uses 
that might otherwise be considered infringement.
 
 
48.
 
Asked about 
the existing provisions which take care of 'Fair use' related to Intellectual Property 
Rights, 
the Ministry has informed that the Copyright Act, 1957 recognizes the concept
 
of fair dealing 
under clause (1) of Section 52, which is as under:
 
 
“
The following 
acts 
shall not constitute an infringement of copyright, namely. 
-
 
(a) A
 
fair
 
dealing with any work
, not being a computer programme, for the purposes of 
–
 
i
)
 
private or personal use, including research; 
 
ii
)
 
criticism or review, whether of that work or of any other work; 
 
iii
)
 
the reporting of current events and current affairs, including the reporting of a 
lecture delivered in public.”
 
 
 
49.
 
It has been added that the Copyright Act allows fair dealing as a defense
 
for specific acts that 
would not be deemed as infringement. The Act only allows fair dealing with the work and not the 

15
 
 
reproduction of the work. Accordingly, reproduction of the whole work or substantial part of it will not 
be permitted; only use of extra
cts from a work will be permissible, and may be determined on a case to 
case basis. Further, there is stated to be no provision related to ‘Fair Use’ in the Cinematograph Act, 
1952.
 
 
 
50.
 
To a similar query, the Ministry further supplemented that ‘Fair Use
’ permits limited use of 
copyrighted material without having to first acquire permission from the copyright holder. The 
proposed amendment aims to check piracy at source, that is, origination from illegal duplication in the 
cinema halls, by imposing strict
 
penalty on a person who, without the written authorization of the 
author, uses any audiovisual recording device in a place to knowingly make or transmit or attempt to 
make or transmit or abet the making or transmission of a copy of a film or a part thereo
f.
 
 
51.
 
To another suggestion to add 
proviso similar to Section 52 of the Copyright Act, 1957, which 
sets out a number of exceptions to infringement of Copyright, the Ministry of I & B clarified that as 
informed by the Department for Promotion of Industry 
and Internal Trade, the aforementioned 
suggested provision intends to incorporate a safe harbor for the persons who have not made a copy of 
a film for a commercial gain. In this regard, it is recommended that, incorporating such a provision 
would defeat th
e purpose of having an absolute anti
-
camcording provision. The intention of 
incorporating such a provision in the Act is to create ‘making a copy of a film’ an offence. By making 
such a provision a conditional one may result into uncertainty in principle i
tself. 
 
 
52.
 
As regards the use of cinematograph works for purposes such as review or critique, as 
mentioned under Section 52(1)(a), it is stated that, making copies of the work in no way contributes 
towards creating a narration or events in consequence. F
urther, in order to have access to 
cinematograph works for educational purpose, making infringing copies is not the only option, access 
to works can be obtained by legalized channels as well, such as purchasing a DVD, etc.
 
 
53.
 
On being asked whether forwa
rding of film clips/short extract of movies as memes, jokes etc., 
for commercial gains would qualify for fair use, 
the Ministry has stated that a
s informed by the 
Department for Promotion of Industry and Internal Trade, whenever any work is used for commer
cial 
purpose, it is no more considered as an exception under “fair dealing. As “fair dealing” only protects 
the works which are used for purposes such as private, educational or review or critique or reporting of 
current events."
 
 

16
 
 
54.
 
Further, with regard 
to film clips/short extract of movies as memes, jokes etc., being forwarded 
for non
-
commercial gains, the Ministry has  submitted that the decision for lodging a complaint is 
entirely up to the author or the copyright holder of the film when it comes to fi
lm clips, short extracts 
of movies, etc. being used/ forwarded as Memes, Jokes, etc. for non
-
commercial gains.
 
 
55.
 
The Committee expressed their concern that as per the provision in the Bill, anyone would be 
criminalized for forwarding film clips, short extract of movies, etc. as memes, Jokes etc. even for non
-
commercial gains. To this, the 
Secretary, during evidence, 
submitted as under:
 
 
“You have raised the issue of fair use and what happens if a kid is taking a trophy shot of 
the screen and how do you deal with that. The dilemma is this. The reverse case is that if 
you allow them to do that, then they will take small parts of it and stit
ch it outside…….Even 
today, Sir, some of it will come as an offence under the IT Act. But no action is generally 
taken 
because
 
the authority who is required to take action, examines it. He has to see 
what misery is to be done.”
 
 
56.
 
Responding to a query r
elated to ‘Fair Use’, the Secretary, 
during evidence, submitted as 
under:
 
 
“We do not know whether a small part of five or three minutes is really not going to be a 
dangerous way of stitching smaller pieces which can be recorded. There are evidences in 
the
 
past that it is difficult for anyone to record the entire two hour long film but a film can 
be recorded by 50 different people, part of that group for 10 minutes each and they stitch 
the film. They are told that you record from this time to this time, the
n it shifts to the next 
person.”
 
 
57.
 
To a suggestion of putting a cap of few minutes in context of ‘Fair Use’, the Secretary, 
during 
evidence, submitted as under:
 
 
“
Fair Use’ for certain purposes is allowed under the Copyright Act. But there it is much 
ea
sier to take into account by the Courts or by the law settled till now as to what is the 
‘Fair Use’. Here, if the climax of the film starts circulating on 
WhatsApp
, I think there is a 
need to stop it. Otherwise, if the entire climax of the film is known to
 
everybody, people 
may not watch the film at all….. I would again submit that in a song, if somebody copies 
the tune and uses it as a ringtone, even that can lead to huge loss of revenue for the 
person who created that tune. It could only be for thirty sec
onds. But if you provide a 
definition that up to one minute you can copy, then the most important song or the tune 
will get copied and it could be a real loss to the creative person who has made it. That is 
why we are saying. But if it is copied with the p
ermission of the author, then there is no 
offence which is made. But if go to cinema hall and just copy the song which is there be a 
very important song or the tune could be very important or the climax scene would be very 
important to the film. More so, i
n the studios, before a film is released, if somebody copies 
the climax, it is not fair.”
 

17
 
 
 
58.
 
On the issue of having an exception clause for ‘Fair Use’ in the Bill, one of the stakeholders was 
of the  view  that any such exception can be used as a rule.  Another witness submitted that 
the 
Cinematograph Act, 1952 is not intended to give another laye
r of 'Fair Use' because it is already 
addressed under a separate legislation. 
 
 
59.
 
In response to a suggestion for specifying the duration for ‘Fair Use’, another stakeholder 
during 
evidence as under
:
 
“Even a one minute, as an exception can be used as a 
rule. It will be very difficult for a 
cinema owner to implement and check the duration because he can keep saying that he 
has taken one minute fifty times, which becomes fifty minutes. If you prescribe it in law, he 
will say that he is not going beyond a m
inute but law will not say that you cannot do more 
than once. Then it can be fifty times or hundred times and how do we control that…… From 
the ‘Fair Use’ point of view, if there was a need to put a cap of few minutes or a few 
seconds, the law would have a
nyway done it. The Copyright Act has ‘fair use’ exceptions 
for years now. The fair use law is well settled by a legislation and judicial intervention.”
 
 
60.
 
On the issue of taking a one minute or half a minute film clip and circulating the same, one of 
the
 
stakeholders submitted as under:
 
“That opens up the possibility of stitching with smaller clips and creating a commercially 
useable content online.”
 
 
V.
 
Expert Committees on Film Certification
 
 
61.
 
In the background note furnished to the Committee, it has been mentioned that the medium of 
cinema, the tools the technology associated with it and even its audience have undergone radical 
changes over a period of time and the certification process for pub
lic exhibition needs to be 
contemporized in order to make the process in tune with the changed time. 
 
 
62.
 
In this process, the Committee have observed that an expert committee under the 
Chairmanship of Justice Mukul Mudgal (retired Chief Justice of High C
ourt of Punjab and Haryana) was 
constituted by the Government of India on 04.02.2013, in order to examine the issues of certification 
under the Cinematograph Act, 1952 and this committee submitted its Report on 8.09.2013 along with 
draft Cinematograph Bill
. The committee strongly felt that piracy, illegal and unauthorized duplication 
of certified film should be treated in the strictest form possible and therefore recommended that such 
Act be made substantive non
-
bailable offence. The 
Committee 
suggested str
ucturing of an entire 
chapter on Offences and Penalties recommending a fine which may extend from Rs. 5 lacs upto Rs. 25 
lacs and an imprisonment which may extend upto 3 years. 
 

18
 
 
 
63.
 
Also, a 
Committee 
of experts headed by Shri Shyam Benegal was constituted
 
on 01.01.2016, to 
evolve broad guidelines/procedures for certification of films within the ambit of Cinematograph Act, 
1952 and the Cinematograph (Certification) Rules, 1983.  This 
Committee 
submitted report in June, 
2016. 
 
 
64.
 
As regards the status with
 
regard to implementation of the recommendations of these two 
Committees
, it has been informed that the Ministry examined the reports of both the 
Committee 
of 
Experts clause wise. The two Committees have given different recommendations on important issues 
relating to constitution of Board and Advisory Panel Members of the CBFC, classification and 
sanctioning of films, excisions and modification in film etc. It was felt that implementation of the 
recommendations especially those requiring important amendment
s in the Act/Rules be done after 
further consultations. A consultation meeting between Hon’ble Minister of Information and 
Broadcasting, Minister of Law and Justice, Minister of Finance and Minister of Human Resources 
Development was held on 16
th
 
March, 20
17 to deliberate on the issue of repeal/amendment of the 
Cinematograph Act. Another round of consultation in this regard by Hon’ble Minister with Hon’ble 
Chief Minister of Maharashtra and the representatives of Film Industries was held on 6
th
 
June, 2017 at
 
Mumbai. However, a consensus could not be arrived at in respect of many of the recommendations 
made by the Committees.
 
 
VI.
 
Online/Digital Piracy 
 
 
65.
 
With the growing global reach of Indian film industry and the growth of Indian diaspora abroad, 
international piracy of Indian content has emerged as a key challenge. Earlier, the origin of pirated 
copies emerged from prints sent to overseas markets, which made their way into the Indian markets 
shortly after the film release. This has changed in rece
nt times due to advancement in technology and 
hosting of pirated content on servers outside India.
 
 
66.
 
Ask
ed about the measures taken to 
address piracy occurring over Internet, the Ministry has 
stated that a
s informed by Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology, ISPs provide Internet 
Connectivity for accessing any Website or application on Internet. They are not authorised to monitor 
the content transmitted on their network and hence they are like a
 
dumb pipe providing transmission 
of data and information over the Internet and are not aware of any IPR infringing content or the 
website of their own. ISPs are Intermediaries within the definition of IT Act and are exempted from any 

19
 
 
punishment as they ar
e not aware of any unlawful content flowing over their network unless they are 
made aware of it.
 
 
67.
 
It was added that ISPs, however, can block access of websites (complete website and its 
domain) and hence access of information/ content within India. Tha
t means a website hosted from 
outside can be blocked in India through ISPs. There are however technical challenges as technologies 
like Virtual Private Network (VPN) etc. can be used to bypass the blocking. Further, ISPs work under the 
licence agreement wi
th Department of Telecommunication (DoT) and do block pirated sites as and 
when ordered by Courts in India. DoT being the licensor can ensure the compliance of these orders. In 
fact, a number of High Court orders have been passed in last two three years di
recting ISPs to block 
infringing websites.”
 
 
68.
 
Considering the limitation of Territorial Jurisdiction of Indian law, the Committee desired to 
know the effectiveness of the proposed amendments having its sources abroad. In respons, the 
Ministry has stated
 
to have 
observed that pirated sites immediately change their domain name/ 
website address and hence become available again. So the Agencies monitoring the pirated sites 
continue to find any such websites and ISPs can be continually informed/ ordered to bl
ock such sites. 
Speed of identification, communication and action by DoT/ ISPs is therefore of essence. Blocking at ISP 
level only partially effective because of multiple channels/ options through which such pirated material 
can be made available. However,
 
this is a common method practiced in the world besides other 
multiple actions including the one proposed in the proposed amendment.
 
 
69.
 
Highlighting the issues and concerns associated with Online/Digital piracy, a representative of 
the Department for Pro
motion of Industry and Internal t
rade (DPIIT), during evidence, 
submitted as 
under:
 
 
“Digital piracy is a very serious matter. These are problem creating services as you may see 
regarding youtube. Even, if there is any infringement material on youtube, the
 
site may not 
be blocked. There are the websites on which 60 to 80 per cent material may be 
infringement of copyright but they are open to anyone. As per our existing provision we 
have to get order from the court. These are the websites about which we do n
ot know 
anything. Who is controlling such websites? It may be that they are driven by any other 
countries. We make some efforts in this regard and these sites were identified and this 
work was entrusted to a cyber cell in Maharashtra. These were vetted. NI
XI is a body and 
under that there are many domain register in India. We provided data to them and asked 
to block the sites not meeting the KYC norms. On the basis of KYC such 235 websites were 
got blocked. Sir, you will be surprised that these websites wer
e taking 186 million hits in a 
month. There are a large number of websites that are required to be blocked. 
 

20
 
 
 
As you said there are cloudflare like services in U.S., operating their functions from there, 
but they also are unable to stop them. Regarding thi
s our efforts are to induct search 
engine services also in this field so that they may be asked to check figuring of such 
websites at initial four to five pages. They have provisions and we are liaison with them. 
Regarding I.S.P.
-
Internet Service providers
, I have to say that we are trying to induct them 
voluntarily 
but it is not in the law. They may be asked to block any external signals at the 
very much of its initial figuring stage. There are the websites about which we know that 
they are problem creator
 
and supply only infringing material. …….. It is possible to adopt 
judicial process in the case of one or two movies but it is not practical to go to court in 
every case. Thus with the help of industry stakeholders efforts is being made to identify 
these w
ebsites and after identification they may blocked administratively with joint efforts 
or may be blocked 
voluntarily 
with the help of the industry.”
 
 
70.
 
On the issue of piracy happening 
from
 
across border, one of the stakeholders, during evidence, 
submitted as under:
 
 
“
I come from Bengal and Bengal share a very long border with Bangladesh. We release our 
film on Friday and on Saturday, through Bangladesh, it is on the YouTube. Since we do not
 
have any international law or something like that, we cannot do anything. In this Bill, the 
cinema halls should also be taken into account. This is a biggest challenge. I am a 
producer. Due to piracy, we are very badly hit. Our revenues are very badly hit
. ….. Every 
new film that releases on Friday, it is there on the YouTube on Saturday through 
Bangladesh, not from India. All Hindi films and Bengali films are affected due to this. Since 
it is uploaded from Bangladesh, we cannot do anything
.”
 
 
71.
 
On the n
eed to negotiate with the neighboring countries, the Secretary, during evidence, 
submitted as under:
 
 
“Actually, in this digital world, the problem can be solved only when we have agreements 
with other countries. Our law cannot be enforced in Singapore, Du
bai or any other place 
where counterfeiting is taking place. But for that arrangement or any other agreement to 
take place, we should have a national law. My submission is, without a national law, we 
cannot negotiate at the international level.”
 
 
72.
 
When 
asked about the present status with regard to international obligations and anti
-
counterfeiting trade agreements with foreign countries, the 
Ministry has
 
informed that t
he Anti
-
Counterfeiting Trade Agreement (ACTA) was a proposed multilateral treaty for th
e purpose of 
establishing international standards for intellectual property rights enforcement. The agreement aims 
to establish an international legal framework for targeting counterfeit goods, generic medicines and 
copyright infringement on the Internet, 
and would create a new governing body outside existing 
forums, such as the World Trade Organization, the World Intellectual Property Organization, and the 
United Nations.
 

21
 
 
 
73.
 
It has further been informed that the agreement was signed in October 2011 by 
Australia, 
Canada, Japan, Morocco, New Zealand, Singapore, South Korea, and the United States. In 2012, Mexico, 
the European Union and 22 countries that are member states of the European Union signed as well. 
One signatory (Japan) has ratified (formally ap
proved) the agreement, which would come into force in 
countries that ratified it after ratification by six countries. The ACTA was rejected in 2012 by the 
European Parliament.”
 
 
74.
 
To a specific query, the Committee have been informed that 
India is not a 
signatory to the Anti
-
Counterfeiting Trade Agreement. Thus, obligations from the agreement would not have a bearing on 
the terms of the Cinematograph (Amendment) Bill 2019.
 
 
VII.
 
Publicity/Campaigns/Preparedness for new legislation 
 
 
75.
 
The Committee want
ed to know the preparedness of the Ministry to deal with the grievances 
that might emerge, when the Bill becomes an Act. In reply, the Ministry has stated that 
there is already 
a Grievance Redressal mechanism in place whereby any aggrieved person can lodge
 
a complaint. Any 
grievance which might emerge post implementation of the Bill would be adequately addressed in the 
Ministry. 
 
 
76.
 
It has further been informed that the Government of India approved an anti
-
piracy initiative in 
the audio
-
visual sector in 
the Development, Communication and Dissemination of Filmic Content 
(DCDFC) scheme. For creating awareness about the enforcement of the proposed legislation and to 
spread the message of anti
-
piracy to the masses, in addition to spelling out the said penalti
es for illegal 
camcording to discourage potential copyright violators, major activities including campaign on piracy 
through audio
-
visual, internet and print media; training programmes and workshops to sensitize the 
police, judicial, administrative officia
ls, multiplex and cinema hall owners; production of a 
film/documentary, etc. are envisaged.
 
In this regard, the Motion Pictures Distributor Association, 
during evidence have informed that they have trained their first
-
line of defence in the cinema halls. 
T
hrough a make
-
a
-
difference programme, they have trained about 8000 halls to detect piracy.
 
 
7
7.
 
As 
regards the
 
measures/steps being taken to educate the masses on copyright laws, the 
Ministry has stated that the Cell for IPR promotion and Management (CIPAM) assists in simplifying and 
streamlining of IP processes, in addition to undertaking steps for
 
furthering IPR
 
awareness, 
commercialization and enforcement. Further, scheme for Pedagogy and Research in IPR's for Holistic 
Education and Academia is a Central Scheme for intellectual property education, research, and public 
outreach, under Which IPR Chairs are set up 
to encourage the
 
study of IPR's in recognized educational 
institutions.
 
 

22
 
 
PART
-
II 
 
OBSERVATIONS/
RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
 
 
Introductory
 
 
1.
 
The Committee note that the Government proposes to  insert a new  section 6AA after 
section 6A of the Cinemato
graph Act, 1952 so as to provide 
that no person shall, without the 
written authorisation of the author, be permitted to use any audiovisual recording device in a 
place to knowingly make or transmit or attempt to make or transmit or abet the making or 
trans
mission of a copy of a film or a part thereof. It is further proposed to amend section 7 of the 
Principal Act so as to punish the persons who contravenes the provisions of section 6AA for a 
term which may extend to three years or with fine which may extend
 
to ten lakh rupees or with 
both. The Government has brought the Bill in question while considering the fact
 
that film piracy, 
particularly release of pirated version of films on internet, causes huge losses to the film industry 
and government exchequer. A
nd, in most cases, illegal duplication in cinema halls is the 
originating point of piracy. 
Hence, it is proposed to make
 
unauthorized duplication of films, a 
punishable offence.
 
 
 
The Committee however, observed that the Bill in its present form is not ambitious enough 
to cover wide range of issues concerning the general public and the dramatic transformation of 
the information and cinematography landscape in the present time. 
 
Addr
essing the concern of 
the committee that there is an urgent need to deal with these issues in the Principal Act which has 
become very old and obsolete, the Ministry admitted that the Act does require an overhaul. 
However, the Ministry justified the propose
d amendments by stating that they are taking up the 
issue of piracy now and the entire gamut of issues relating to the film certification as it is a much 
wider issue would be taken up subsequently. The Committee trust that the Ministry would keep 
its promi
se with all seriousness so that issues like film certification and piracy can be synchronized 
by amending the Principal Act.
 

23
 
 
2.
 
The Committee observe that the Government had constituted two expert Committees; 
one under the Chairmanship of Justice Mukul 
Mudgal, to examine the issues of certification under 
the Principal Act and other, the Shyam Benegal committee, to evolve broad 
guidelines/procedures for certification of film
s within the ambit of Act. The 
Committee are 
constrained to observe that though th
ese Committees had submitted their reports in September, 
2013 and June, 2016, respectively, no consensus has so far been made till date in res
pect of their 
recommendations. 
Taking into consideration Ministry’s own submission that the medium of 
cinema, the 
tools the technology associated with it and even its audience have undergone radical 
changes over a period of time and the certification process for public exhibition needs to be 
contemporized in order to make the process in tune with the changed time and 
also assurance 
given by the Secretary, I & B to take up film certification issues subsequently , the Committee are 
hopeful  that the Ministry would make continuous  efforts to build a consensus with the 
stakeholders in respect of the recommendations of the
 
above said expert Committees to resolve 
spectrum of issues relating to film certification without further delay.
 
Existing provisions to deal with Film Piracy
 
 
3.
 
The Committee observe that making a copy of a film on any medium by any means, 
including reco
rding of films in a theatre, is a punishable offence under the Copyright Act. 
The 
Ministry's attention was drawn to the 
Copyright Act, 1957 as amended in 2012, which provides 
civil remedies as well as criminal remedies to the copyright holder. Clause (c) o
f subsection (1) of 
Section 52 of the Copyright Act, 1957 read with Rules 75 of the Copyright Rules, 2013 are the 
provisions to deal with piracy of films. Also, under Section 63 of the Copyright Act, infringement 
of the copyright in a work is a cognizable 
offence and the offender shall be punishable with 
imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than six months but which may extend to three 

24
 
 
years and with fine which shall not be less than fifty thousand rupees but which may extend to 
two lakh rupees. 
However, the Ministry has justified the proposed amendment by stating that 
the 
Copyright Act has general provisions classifying the events  when a copyright is infringed under 
section 51 of the Act, whereas 
the proposed amendment is specific to offences of
 
piracy in the 
area of cinematography. The Ministry has pleaded that the objective of the Bill  is to tackle film 
piracy by including stringent penal provisions for unauthorised camcording and duplication of 
films, with imprisonment for a term which may ex
tend to three years or with fine which may 
extend to ten lakh rupees or with both, thereby increasing the pecuniary limit of the fine 
imposed. The Committee, however, are not convinced with the reasons cited for bringing  the 
proposed  amendment when there
 
already exists stringent penal provision in the Copyright Act, 
1957, for 
imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than six months but which may extend 
to three years.
 
4.
 
The Committee take note of the submission of the Ministry that 
the copyright law alone 
has proved to be insufficient in tackling  the  menace of film piracy as the amount of illegal 
camcording in movie theatres globally, which is considered a primary cause of movie piracy, is 
increasing and threatens the film industry
 
around the world.  Rather, the Committee feel that the 
related provisions in the Copyright Act have proved to be ineffective as they have not been 
implemented with the seriousness they deserve. The Committee also note that the United States 
of America, Ca
nada, the Czech Republic, Germany, Hong Kong, Italy, Japan, and the Philippines 
now have Anti
-
Camcording law and some others are actively considering similar legislation in this 
regard as it seems to be most effective in stopping the rapid increase of camc
ording piracy. While 
expressing concern over the inefficacy of the existing provisions of the Copyright law in tackling 
film piracy, the Committee would desire the Ministry to give serious consideration to the 

25
 
 
implementation aspect with regard to the provi
sions in  the Bill after it becomes an Act, by closely 
monitoring the implementation machinery which would function at the State level, for getting the  
desired results. Bottlenecks in this regard would have to be identified and removed.
 
5. 
 
The Committee 
take cognizance of the assurance given by the Ministry of I & B that the 
proposed amendment in the Principal Act would not override the 
provisions relating to copyright 
in the 
other Acts.
 
Further, there is no
 
legal or constitutional objection to the Bill a
s before the 
Cinematograph (Amendment) Bill, 2019 was finalised, the Ministry had
 
i
nter
-
ministerial 
consultation with 
Department for Promotion of Industry and Internal Trade
 
who are 
administering Copyright Act and Ministry of Electronics and Information Te
chnology who 
administers the Information Technology Act and it was also sent to the Department of Legal 
Affairs. Nevertheless, the Committee 
are of the considered view that there should be consistency 
in provisions of the existing Acts dealing with copyrig
ht infringement and film piracy.  The 
Committee, therefore, desire that the likely contradictions/overlapping/
uncertainty
 
with regard 
to the provisions of the Bill vis
-
a
-
vis  similar provisions in the other Acts ought to be looked into 
and addressed approp
riately to avoid any dissonance before placing the Bill for its passage by the 
Parliament,
 
 
Proposed Amendments
 
6.
 
The Committee note that the proposed section 1A in section 7 of the Principal Act 
prescribes that a person who contravenes the provisions of 
section 6AA shall be punishable with 
an imprisonment for a term which may extend to three year or with fine which may extend to ten 
lakh rupees or with both. However, the Committee find to their surprise that there is no mention 
of the 
minimum period for i
mprisonment and the minimum fine. The plea that the quantum of 
punishment may be decided by the Hon’ble Courts, is not convincing. The Committee note that in 

26
 
 
the 
Copyright Act, 1957, provisions 
to deal with piracy of films
 
do mention the minimum period 
for
 
imprisonment and also the minimum fine to punish the offenders. The Committee firmly 
believe that once the offence is established, then a minimum period of imprisonment or a 
minimum fine would surely act as a deterrent. Otherwise, it leaves the scope for 
the offenders 
getting away scot
-
free. Therefore, the Committee recommend to the Ministry to act accordingly.
 
7.
 
The Committee also note that the proposed section 1A in section 7 of the Principal Act 
does not mention the nature of the offence. 
I
n this 
context, Justice Mukul Mudgal committee 
constituted to examine issues of certification under the Cinematograph Act, 1952, in its report 
had strongly felt that piracy, illegal and unauthorized duplication of certified film should be 
treated in the strictest
 
form possible and recommended that such an Act be made substantive 
non
-
bailable offence. However, the Ministry has stated that t
he Legislative Department, Ministry 
of Law and Justice has informed that it is not necessary to specify the nature of the offen
ce in the 
Bill as it shall be as per the entries specified in Part I of the First Schedule to the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1973. The Committee are of the opinion that to avoid any ambiguity in the new 
legislation, the Ministry should examine in right ea
rnest the need to mention the nature of the 
offence to bring clarity in the proposed penal provision in the Bill and take the required steps. 
 
8.
 
The Committee find it a matter of great concern that 
the Indian film industry loses $2.8 
billion of its annual
 
revenue due to piracy 
as per the
 
FICCI
-
EY report in 2018 on India’s M&E 
Sector. In such circumstances, the Committee find that the maximum fine of Rs. 10 lakh proposed 
to punish the offenders, in Bill is insignificant and may not act as a deterrent for th
e pirators 
partic
ularly when they make huge sum money out of this
. In this context, 
even 
Justice Mukul 
Mudgal committee in their report to review film certification issues has recommended a fine 
which may extend from Rs. 5 lakhs to Rs. 25 lakhs. Taking int
o account the considerable loss to 

27
 
 
the Indian film industry due to film piracy, the Committee would suggest to the  Ministry to 
consider enhancing the maximum limit for fine in the proposed legislation suitably
, such as a 
range of 5 to 10 % of the audited 
gross production costs.
 
 
 
9.
 
The Committee expressed their view that the word ‘Knowingly” in the Bill needs to be well 
defined in the proposed amendment in the same manner, that the word ‘author’ has been 
defined else 
some
one may get punished because of in
advertent use. The Ministry has, however, 
explained that i
n a criminal offence, 
mens
rea is a necessary ingredient and it has to be there. 
Moreover, USA, UK and several other countries have similar provisions. The Ministry’s 
clarification that  
the term ‘kn
owingly’ has also been used in Section 63 of the Copyright Act, 
without being defined in the said Act, do not address the concern of the Committee. 
The 
Committee, therefore desire that word ‘knowingly’ should be given a more detailed explanation 
like “auth
or” in section    6 AA in order  to save the innocent public from being wrongly 
criminalised. 
 
Inclusion of ‘Fair Use’ Provision
 
 
10.
 
'F
air Use' permits limited use of copyrighted material without having to first acquire 
permission from the copyright 
holder. Fair Use is termed as one of the limitations to copyright, 
whose intention is to balance the interests of right holders with the general public interest, 
allowing Fair Use as a defense to copyright infringement claims to certain limited uses that m
ight 
otherwise be considered infringement. The Committee note that t
he Copyright Act, 1957 have a 
provision for 
fair dealing under clause (1) of Section 52, 
which says that fair dealing with any 
work, not being a computer programme 
shall not constitute an 
infringement of copyright
 
for the 
acts viz. 
private or personal use, including research; criticism or review, whether of that work or 

28
 
 
of any other work, the reporting of current events and current affairs, including the reporting of a 
lecture delivered in 
public. 
The Committee also note that Copyright(Amendment) Act of 2012 has 
extended the 'fair dealing' provision to all works and “work” as defined in the Copyright Act  is 
inter
-
alia, a cinematograph film.
 
Further,
 
there is no specific provision related to
 
‘Fair Use’ in the 
Cinematograph Act, 1952
. In view of the foregoing, the Committee feel that Contradictions will 
have to be reconciled and recom
mend that urgent suitable steps
 
need to be taken accordingly.
 
11.
 
The Committee observe
 
that the Cinematograph(
Amendment) Bill, 2019 as introduced in 
Rajya Sabha does not have a provision for 'Fair Use'. Thus, a
pprehensions were raised that in the 
absence of the 'Fair Use' provision in the Bill, there is no protection provided in the Bill to 
someone who forwards a 
film clip/short extract of movies as memes, jokes etc., for non
-
commercial purposes. The Ministry of I & B contended 
that 
incorporating such a provision would 
defeat the purpose of having an absolute anti
-
camcording provision with intention to create 
‘maki
ng a copy of a film’, an offence. By making such a provision a conditional one may result into 
uncertainty in principle itself. Even one minute as an exception would create the possibility of 
stitching of smaller clips and creating a commercially useable c
ontent online and that there are 
evidence
s 
in this regard.
 
Further, 
making copies of the work, in no way, contributes towards 
creating a narration or events in consequence. According to the Ministry, access to cinematograph 
works for educational purpose ca
n be obtained by legalized channels as well, such as purchasing a 
DVD, etc. and for that making infringing copies is not the only option.
 
 
The Committee do not dispute the veracity of the above facts. However, there is no 
denying the fact that everyday mor
e and more people in India get online. The number of persons 
with access to mobile internet is also increasing day by day.  Therefore, in the present era when a 
large Chunk of population is active on social media, the Committee would like the Ministry to 

29
 
 
e
nsure that unreasonable restrictions are not imposed on them.  Therefore,  the committee urge 
the Ministry of I & B to revisit the Bill and consider inclusion of ‘Fair Use’ provision to provide 
adequate safeguards to the innocent viewers  lest it should le
ad to confusion and misuse of the 
proposed provision in the Bill and related harassment of the innocent people for using film clip for 
non
-
commercial and other such purposes.
 
The Bill should not inadvertently make criminals out of 
ordinary citizens. 
 
Mecha
nism to tackle Film Piracy within India and from across border
 
 
12.
 
The Committee learn that at present there is no fool proof mechanism to tackle 
online/digital Film Piracy. Internet Service Providers (ISPs) are intermediaries and are not 
authorised to monitor the content transmitted on their network and therefore they ar
e not 
aware of any IPR infringing content flowing over their network unless they are made aware of 
it. ISPs can block a website hosted from outside and hence access of information/content 
within India, however, there are 
multiple channels/ options through 
which such pirated 
material can be made available. 
As informed,
 
this is a common method practiced in the world 
besides other multiple actions including the one proposed in the proposed amendment.
 
 
It is a matter of serious concern that the Government is  f
inding it difficult to be able to 
block many websites on you tubes containing 60 to 80 per cent materials of infringement of 
copyright. There are many websites whose driving source is not known.  DPIIT finally 
entrusted the work for identification of these
 
sites to a cy
ber cell in Maharashtra and 
these 
sites were vetted. National Internet Exchange of India(NIXI) was asked to block the sites not 
meeting the KYC norm and as a result, 235 websites, which were taking 186 million hits in a 
month, were blocked. F
urther, there are websites which supply only infringing materials. As 
stated, it is possible to adopt judicial process in the case of one or two movies, it is not 

30
 
 
practical to go to court in every case. Efforts are being made with the help of industry 
stak
eholders to identify such websites and thereafter, they may be blocked administratively 
with joint efforts or may be blocked voluntarily with the help of the industry. In this context, 
the Committee are of the view that Ministry of Electronics and Informat
ion Technology(Meity) 
and DoT who have a larger role to play may  come out with innovative technologies to curb 
online/digital piracy and hence Ministry of I & B should work closely and vigorously with Meity 
and DoT and take suitable corrective measures, w
herever warranted.
 
The Committee further 
desire that the Ministry may also study the copy right directives/national laws of other 
countries in this regard particularly of 
developed democracies
 
to find a solution.
 
 
13.
 
The Committee are given to understand 
that the problem of digital piracy from across 
the border can be solved only when India has 
anti
-
counterfeiting trade agreements 
with other 
countries. As has been informed, India is not a signatory to the Anti
-
Counterfeiting Trade 
Agreement and hence oblig
ations from the agreement would not have a bearing on the terms 
of the Cinematograph (Amendment) Bill 2019. While acknowledging the Ministry's stand that 
there should be a national law for negotiating at the international level, the Committee feel 
that 
the
 
Ministry need to give
 
a
 
serious thought to this issue 
with the support of Ministry of E 
and IT to formulate a national law on the lines of similar laws/acts e.g. Digital Economy Act 
adopted by a few developed countries like UK, USA etc. which would inter 
alia deal with all 
such issues and also can be used to negotiate with foreign countries. They feel that combating 
online piracy originating outside the country has a significant role in addressing the issue of 
film piracy holistically and therefore matter 
needs to be dealt with all seriousness.
 
 
 
 
 

31
 
 
Publicity/Campaigns/Preparedness for new legislation 
 
14.
 
The Committee note that there exists 
a Grievance Redressal mechanism in the 
Ministry of I & 
B where a complainant can lodge their complaint
. The Committee
 
hope that as assured, any 
complaint received, after passing of the Bill in Parliament, would be fully addressed in the Ministry
, 
which currently appears not to be the case.
 
 
15.
 
The Committee appreciate that the Ministry has approved an anti
-
piracy 
initiative in the 
audio
-
visual sector under the Development, Communication and Dissemination of Filmic Content 
(DCDFC) scheme. Further, the Ministry has envisaged major activities including campaign on piracy 
through audio
-
visual, internet and print media;
 
training programmes and workshops to sensitize the 
police, judicial, administrative officials, multiplex and cinema hall owners; production of a 
film/documentary, etc. The Committee are of the considered opinion that each of the areas/activities 
outlined 
above is a prerequisite for implementation of the proposed amendments in the Bill, in a true 
manner and therefore recommend for a strategic planning in this direction. The Committee trust that 
the Ministry would ensure sufficient allocation of funds for a 
meaningful exercise.
 
 
16.
 
The Committee also note that the Motion Pictures Distributors Association has informed to 
have trained about 8000 halls to detect piracy as their first
-
line of defence in the cinema halls. The 
Committee hope that the legislation w
ould continue to get support of the Film Industry stakeholders 
in a similar manner in future also.
 
 
17.
 
 
The Com
mittee have been informed that 
the proposed amendment
 
aims to check piracy at 
source, that is, 
originating from illegal duplica
tion in the cinem
a halls
. “Camcording” in the cinemas is 
one of the major sources of the leakage as over 90% of new release titles originate from cinema
 
theatre
s
. However, going by the phrase “Charity begins at home”, the Committee sound a word of 

32
 
 
caution that without havi
ng adequate ‘in house’ safeguards to plug the loopholes from all possible 
sources,
 
including the production house and the CBFC itself,
 
the very purpose of bringing this 
amendment wo
uld be defeated. They therefore
 
desire that  the Ministry need to first ens
ure ‘in 
house’ sanitisation  while preview  screening as well as in the supply chain
 
from lab to theatre
 
before 
screening with  no copying or collusion. 
 
 
18. With these comments and recommendations for change the Committee recommend that this Bill 
be proceeded with for enactment. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi;
 
  
DR. SHASHI THAROOR,
 
    
13
  
March
 
, 2020
______
 
 
Chairperson,
 
   
23
 
Phalguna, 1941(Saka)
 
Standing Committee on
 
Information Technology.
 

33
 
 
APPENDIX
-
I
 
 
A list of Stakeholders/Organisations/Individuals from whom Memoranda were received in 
response to the Press 
Communiqué
 
 
 
1.
 
Riya Dutta Ghosh
 
 
2.
 
Mayank Shekhar, 
 
Advocate cum Content
-
writer,
 
Bhagalpur, Bihar
 
 
3.
 
Sony Pictures Networks India Private Limited
 
 
Interface, Building No. 7, 4th Floor,
 
 
Off Malad Link Road, Malad (West)
 
 
Mumbai 400 064
 
 
4.
 
R. Ramamurthy, M.Sc, B.Ed, 
 
 
Retired Science Teacher,
 
 
No. 77/1, Vanniar Street, Kavanthandalam 
village, Magoral S.O., Kanchipuram district, Tamil Nadu
 
 
5. 
 
Indian Broadcasting Foundation (IBF)
 
 
b
-
304, ansal plaza, third floor, khelgaon marg, New Delhi
-
110049,
 
 
6.
 
Leena Jaisani,
 
 
Assistant Secretary General
 
 
Federation of Indian Chambers of Commerce 
and Industry, 
 
 
Federation House, 1, Tansen Marg, New Delhi
 
110001
 
 
7.
 
Ankit Sahni, Principal,
 
 
Ajay Sahni & Associates,
 
 
177, Lawyers' Chambers, Delhi  High Court, New Delhi 
-
 
110503
 
 
8.
 
Motion Pictures Association (MPA) Asia Pacific
 
9.
 
Kulmeet Makkar, CE
O, Producers Guild of India
 
 
1003
-
04, 10th Floor, Sri Krishna,, Fun Republic Lane, New Link Road, Andheri (West), 
 
 
Mumbai 
-
400053
 
 
10.
 
 
Aman Konark Modi
 
 
Pavitra Nagar Panna, Bundelkhand, Vindhyachal, Madhya Pradesh. 
 
 
Pin code 488001
 
 
11.
 
Gaurav Bhardwaj
 
 
SHIMLA (H.P)
 
12.
 
muthumuthu225@gmail.com
 
13.
 
Cdr Dinesh Swain, Retd,
 
 
Bhubaneswar, Odisha
 
 
 
 

34
 
 
APPENDIX
-
II
 
 
 
List of Non
-
Official Witnesses wh
o tendered Evidence on ''The Cinematograph(Amendment) Bill, 2019
 
 
 
Sl. No.
 
Names (Mr./Ms.)
 
Organisation
 
1
.
 
 
Shri 
Kulmeet Makkar
 
Chief Executive officer, The Film & Television Producers Guild of India 
Ltd
 
 
2
.
 
 
Shri Ravi Kottarakara
 
General Secretary, Film Federation of India
 
 
3
.
 
 
Shri Firdausul Hassan
 
President, Film Federation of India
 
 
4
.
 
 
Shri Gagan Sareen
 
Vice 
President
-
Legal, Viacom 18 Motion Pictures
 
 
5
.
 
 
Shri Uday Singh
 
 
Country Representative, Motion Picture Distributors Association India 
Pvt. Ltd.
 
 
6
.
 
 
Shri Aamod Gupte
 
Group General Counsel, Eros International Media Ltd.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

35
 
 
APPENDIX
-
III
 
Section 51 of the
 
Copyright Act, 1957
 
 
 
Section 51 of the
 
Copyright Act, 1957 states that:
 
“Copyright in a work shall be deemed to be infringed
-
 
(
a
)
 
when any person, without  a licence granted by the owner of the copyright or the Registrar of 
Copyrights under 
this Act or in contravention of the conditions of a licence so granted or of 
any condition imposed by a competent authority under this Act
-
 
 
i
.
 
does anything, the exclusive right to do which is by this Act conferred upon the owner of 
the copyright, or 
 
ii
.
 
permits for profit any place to be used for the communication of the work to the public 
where such communication constitutes an infringement of the copyright
 
in the work, 
unless he was not aware and had no reasonable ground for believing that such 
communication to the public would be an infringement of copyright; or
 
 
(
b
)
 
when any person
-
 
 
i
.
 
makes for sale or hire, or sells or lets for hire, or by way of trade displa
ys or offers for 
sale or hire, or
 
ii
.
 
distributers either for the purpose of trade or to such an extent as to affect 
prejudicially the owner of the copyright, or
 
iii
.
 
by way of trade exhibits in public, or
 
iv
.
 
imports into India, “any infringing copies of the work: [Pr
ovided that nothing in sub
-
clause (iv) shall apply to the import of one copy of any work, for the private and 
domestic use of the importer.
 
 
Explanation 
–
For the purposes of this section, the reproduction of a literary, dramatic, musical 
or artistic work i
n the form of a cinematograph fill shall be deemed to be an “infringing copy”.
 
 
 

36
 
 
APPENDIX 
-
 
IV
 
 
 
Anti 
–
 
Camcording Provisions
 
 
A.
 
South Korea’s Anti
-
Camcording Provision
 
 
Article 104
-
6 (Prohibition of Recording, etc. of Cinematographic Works)
 
No person 
shall record cinematographic works protected by copyright at a movie theater, etc. screening such works with a recording 
device without consent of the holder of author's economic right, or publicly transmit such works.
 
<This
 
Article
 
Newly
 
Inserted
 
by
 
Act
 
N
o.
 
11110,
 
Dec.
 
2,
 
2011>
 
 
Article 137 (Penalty Provisions)
 
(1) Any person who falls under any of the following subparagraphs shall be punished by imprisonment with labor up to one year
 
or by 
a fine up to ten million won:
 
<Amended by Act No. 9625, Apr. 22, 
2009; Act No. 11110, Dec. 2, 2011>
 
1
.
 
1. A person who makes a work public under the real name or pseudonym of a person other than the author;
 
2
.
 
2. A person who publicly performs or publicly transmits a performance, or distributes copies of performance under the
 
real name 
or pseudonym of a person other than the performer;
 
3
.
 
3. A person who violates Article 14 (2);
 
3
-
2. A person who conducts an act falling under subparagraph 3 of Article 104
-
4;
 
3
-
3. A person who violates Article 104
-
6;
 
4
.
 
4. A person who operates copyr
ight trust service without obtaining permission pursuant to Article 105 (1);
 
5
.
 
5. A person who commits an act deemed an infringement pursuant to Article 124 (2);
 
6
.
 
6. A person who obstructs the business of an online service provider by making a demand by inten
tion for the suspension or 
resumption of a reproduction or interactive transmission under Article 103 (1) or (3), upon knowing that he/she had no legiti
mate 
authority;
 
7
.
 
7. A person who violates Article 55
-
2 (including cases applied mutatis mutandis pursuant
 
to Articles 90 and 98).
 
(2) A person who attempts to commit a crime under paragraph (1) 3
-
3 shall be punished.
 
<Newly Inserted by Act No. 11110, Dec. 2, 2011>
 
 
 
B.
 
The United State’s Anti
-
Camcording Provision
 
18 U.S. Code
 
Section
 2319B
 
(a)
 
Offense.
—
Any 
person who, without the authorization of the copyright owner, knowingly uses or attempts to use an audiovisual 
recording device to transmit or make a copy of a motion picture or other audiovisual work protected under
 
title 17
 
, or any part 
thereof, from a performance of such work in a motion picture exhibition facility, shall
—
 
(1) be imprisoned for not more than 3 years, fined under this title, or both; or
 
(2) if the off
ense is a second or subsequent offense, be imprisoned for no more than 6 years, fined under this title, or both.
 
 
 
The possession by a person of an audiovisual recording device in a motion picture exhibition facility may be considered as ev
idence in 
any pr
oceeding to determine whether that person committed an offense under this subsection, but shall not, by itself, be sufficient
 
to 
support a conviction of that person for such offense.
 
 
(b)
 
Forfeiture and Destruction of Property; Restitution.
—
Forfeiture, des
truction, and restitution relating to this section shall be 
subject to section 2323, to the extent provided in that section, in addition to any other similar remedies provided by law.
 
 
(c)
 
Authorized Activities.
—
This section does not prevent any lawfully a
uthorized investigative, protective, or intelligence activity by an 
officer, agent, or employee of the United States, a State, or a political subdivision of a State, or by a person acting under
 
a contract 
with the United States, a State, or a political sub
division of a State.
 

37
 
 
 
(d)
 
Immunity for Theaters.
—
With reasonable cause, the owner or lessee of a motion picture exhibition facility where a motion picture 
or other audiovisual work is being exhibited, the authorized agent or employee of such owner or lesse
e, the licensor of the motion 
picture or other audiovisual work being exhibited, or the agent or employee of such licensor
—
 
(1) may detain, in a reasonable manner and for a reasonable time, any person suspected of a violation of this section with re
spect t
o 
that motion picture or audiovisual work for the purpose of questioning or summoning a law enforcement officer; and
 
(2) shall not be held liable in any civil or criminal action arising out of a detention under paragraph (1).
 
 
 
(e)
 
Victim Impact Statement.
—
 
(1)
 
In general.
—
During the preparation of the presentence report under rule 32(c) of the Federal Rules of Criminal 
Procedure, victims of an offense under this section shall be permitted to submit to the probation officer a victim impact 
statement that id
entifies the victim of the offense and the extent and scope of the injury and loss suffered by the victim, 
including the estimated economic impact of the offense on that victim.
 
(2)
 
Contents.
—
A victim impact statement submitted under this subsection shall 
include
—
 
(A) producers and sellers of legitimate works affected by conduct involved in the offense;
 
(B) holders of intellectual property rights in the works described in subparagraph (A); and
 
(C) the legal representatives of such producers, sellers, and ho
lders.
 
 
 
(f)
 
State Law Not Preempted.
—
Nothing in this section may be construed to annul or limit any rights or remedies under the laws of 
any State.
 
(g)
 
Definitions.
—
In this section, the following definitions shall apply:
 
(1)
 
Title 17
 
 
definitions.
—
The terms “audiovisual work”, “copy”, “copyright owner”, “motion picture”, “motion picture exhibition 
facility”, and “transmit” have, respectively, the meanings giv
en those terms in
 
section 101 of title 17
 
.
 
(2)
 
Audiovisual recording device.
—
The term “audiovisual recording device” means a digital or analog photographic or video camera, 
or any other technology or devi
ce capable of enabling the recording or transmission of a copyrighted motion picture or other 
audiovisual work, or any part thereof, regardless of whether audiovisual recording is the sole or primary purpose of the devi
ce.
 
 
(Added Pub. L. 109
–
9, title I, §
102(a), Apr. 27, 2005, 119 Stat. 218; amended Pub. L. 110
–
403, title II, §204, Oct. 13, 2008, 122 Stat. 
4261.)
 
 
 
C.
 
The Philippines’ Anti
-
Camcording Provision
 
Republic of the Philippines CONGRESS OF THE PHILIPPINES
 
Metro Manila
 
Fourteenth Congress Third 
Regular Session
 
 
Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty
-
seventh day of July, two thousand nine.
 
REPUBLIC ACT NO. 10088
 
AN ACT TO PROHIBIT AND PENALIZE THE UNAUTHORIZED USE, POSSESSION AND/OR CONTROL OF AUDIOVISUAL RECORDING 
DEVICES FOR THE U
NAUTHORIZED RECORDING OF CINEMATOGRAPHIC FILMS AND OTHER AUDIOVISUAL WORKS AND/OR THEIR 
SOUNDTRACKS IN AN EXHIBITION FACILITY, PROVIDING PENALTIES THEREFOR AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES
 
Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the Philippines i
n Congress assembled:
 
Section 1.
 
Short Title.
 
-
 
This Act shall be known as the "Anti
-
Camcording Act of 2010".
 
Section 2.
 
Definition of Terms.
 
-
 
For purposes of this Act:
 
(a)"Audiovisual work" means a work that consists of a series of related images which 
are intrinsically intended to be shown 
by the use of machines or devices such as projectors, viewers or electronic equipment, together with accompanying sounds, 
if any, regardless of the nature of the material objects, such as films or tapes, in which the 
works are embodied.
 

38
 
 
(b)"Audiovisual recording device" means a digital or analog photographic or video camera, or any other technology or 
device capable of enabling the recording or transmission of a cinematographic film or other audiovisual work, or any pa
rt 
thereof, regardless of whether audiovisual recording is the sole or primary purpose of the device.
 
(c)"Authorized person" means the members of the Philippine National Police (PNP) and the National Bureau of Investigation 
(NBI) and/or any other person du
ly authorized by the same to exercise powers conferred upon by this Act.
 
(d)"Camcording" means any of the unlawful acts enumerated under Section 3 of this Act.
 
(e)"Cinematographic film" means any audiovisual work consisting of a series of related images wh
ich, when shown in 
succession, impart an impression of motion, together with accompanying sounds, if any.
 
(f)"Copy" means any article or thing in which the visual images or sounds comprised in any cinematographic film or 
audiovisual work are embodied, and 
includes the making of a copy which is in electronic format or transient or incidental to 
some other use thereof.
 
(g)"Copyright owner" means any one who has the exclusive rights comprised in a copyright as provided under Republic Act 
No. 8293, otherwise kn
own as the Intellectual Property Code of the Philippines and related international treaties, 
conventions or agreements to which the Republic of the Philippines is a party.
 
(h)"Exclusive licensee" means a licensee who is authorized in writing and who, on be
half of the owner or prospective owner 
of copyright, to the exclusion of all other persons, is authorized to do an act within the Philippines that, by virtue of thi
s Act, 
the owner of the copyright would, but for the license, have the exclusive right to do
 
or to perform.
 
(i)"Exhibition facility" means any cinema, film theater, screening room, projection room or other venue that is used for the 
public exhibition of a cinematographic film or audiovisual work, whether or not a fee is chargeable.
 
(j)"Operator o
f an exhibition facility" means any person or entity who holds or is required to hold a license by the Securities 
and Exchange Commission CSEC, for companies and partnerships), the Department of Trade and Industry ('DTI', for sole 
proprietorships), the Mov
ie and Television Review and Classification Board (MTRCB) or any and all other relevant 
government offices that have, or will have jurisdiction over exhibition facilities to operate the exhibition facility.
 
(k)"Relevant authority" means the officers, membe
rs and responsible personnel of law enforcement agencies such as the 
PNP and their adjuncts and the NBI.
 
(l)'Transmit" means to convey by any means, whether over a path or a combination of paths, provided by a material 
substance or by wireless means or oth
erwise, and whether or not in response to a request made.
 
Section 3.
 
Acts Constituting Unauthorized Possession, Use and/or Control of Audiovisual Recording Devices.
 
-
 
It shall be unlawful for 
any person, at a time when copyright subsists in a cinematograph
ic film or other audiovisual work or its soundtrack and without the 
authorization of the copyright owner or exclusive licensee thereof, to:
 
(a)use or attempt to use an audiovisual recording device to transmit or make a copy of any performance in an exhibit
ion 
facility of such cinematographic film or other audiovisual work or its soundtrack, or any part thereof;
 
(b)have in his/her possession, an audiovisual recording device in an exhibition facility, with the intent of using or attempt
s 
to use the audiovisua
l recording device to transmit or make a copy of any performance in the exhibition facility of such 
cinematographic film or other audiovisual work or its soundtrack, or any part thereof; or
 
(c)aid, abet or connive in the commission of the acts prohibited u
nder this section.
 
Section 4.
 
Penalties.
 
-
 
A person who will be found guilty of violating the provisions of Section 3 shall be subject to a fine of Fifty 
thousand pesos (Php50,000.00) but not exceeding Seven hundred fifty thousand pesos (Php750,000.00) and
 
imprisonment of six (6) 
months and one (1) day to six (6) years and one (1) day.
 
If the purpose of the commission of the abovementioned acts is the sale, rental or other commercial distribution of a copy of
 
the 
cinematographic or audiovisual work or its s
oundtrack, or any part thereof, the penalty shall be imposed in the maximum.
 

39
 
 
If the offender is an alien, said person shall immediately be deported after payment of the fine and after serving his/her se
ntence. 
He/She shall thereafter be refused entry into 
the Philippines.
 
If the offender is a government official or employee, the penalty shall include perpetual disqualification from public office
 
and 
forfeiture of his/her right to vote and participate in any public election for a period of five (5) years.
 
Se
ction 5.
 
Presumptions as to the Subsistence of Copyright and/or Ownership of Copyright.
 
-
 
For purposes of Section 3, copyright shall 
be presumed to subsist in the subject cinematographic film or other audiovisual work or its soundtrack if the accused does 
not put in 
issue the question as to whether copyright subsists therein. However:
 
(a)where the accused puts such question in issue but does not satisfy the court that he/she does so in good faith, the 
presumption as to the subsistence of copyright herein sh
all apply, notwithstanding that the accused puts that question in 
issue;
 
(b)where the name of a person appears on copies of the subject cinematographic film or other audiovisual work or its 
soundtrack as made available to the public in such a way as to 
imply that the person was the maker thereof and, in the case 
of a person other than a body corporate, that name was his/her true name or a name by which he/she was commonly 
known, that person shall be presumed to be the maker thereof and the copyright owne
r thereof, unless the contrary is 
established; and/or
 
(c)where the accused puts in issue the question of whether copyright subsists in the subject cinematographic film or other 
audiovisual work or its soundtrack, or the ownership of the copyright therein, 
an affidavit made in behalf of the copyright 
owner in which he/she makes assertions of facts relevant to showing that: (1) copyright subsists in the work or other 
subject matter; and/or, as the case may be, (2) he/she is the owner of the copyright, shall b
e admitted in evidence and shall 
be
 
prima facie
 
proof of the matters stated therein until the contrary is proved, unless the court requires that 
oral/testimonial evidence be adduced to prove those matters.
 
Section 6.
 
No Defense on Account of Use for Privat
e or Domestic Purposes.
 
-
 
It shall not be a defense that the transmission or making 
of the copy of the cinematographic film or other audiovisual work or its soundtrack, or any part thereof, was for private or 
domestic 
purposes or in connection with a fair 
use deal.
 
Section 7.
 
Requirement for Posting of Notices in an Exhibition Facility on the Prohibition Against the Bringing into Said Exhibition 
Facility of Audiovisual Recording Devices and the Like.
 
-
 
All exhibition facilities, cinemas or theaters shall be
 
required to conspicuously 
post in at least two (2) areas in the exhibition facility including, but not limited to, the areas where tickets are sold and
 
the entrances 
of the exhibition facilities, notices or signages warning against the bringing of audiovi
sual recording devices into the cinematographic 
film/audiovisual screening/exhibition area, with a reservation that the management/operator of the exhibition facility will t
ake into 
preventive and temporary custody such audiovisual recording device/s until
 
the film/movie theater patron leaves the 
screening/exhibition area/facility.
 
Failure of the management/operator of the exhibition facility to comply with the foregoing requirement will subject said 
management/operator liable to pay a fine of Fifty thousan
d pesos (Php50,000.00).
 
Nothing in this Act shall prevent the management from performing such other precautionary measures so as to prevent the 
commission of the acts punishable herein.
 
Section 8.
 
Powers of Authorized Persons to Enter an Exhibition Facilit
y and Search the Same.
 
-
 
An authorized person, without a 
warrant and without payment of any admission fee or other charge, may enter and search any exhibition facility if the authori
zed 
person has reasonable ground to believe that any violation of this Act
 
has been or is being committed and, due to the delay necessary 
to obtain a warrant could result in the loss or destruction of evidence, or for any other reason it would not be reasonably p
racticable 
to obtain a warrant.
 
Section 9.
 
Other Powers of Authoriz
ed Persons.
 
-
 
An authorized person who has reasonable ground to believe that a violation under 
this Act has been or is being committed may:
 
(a)search any person if the person subject of the search has in his/her actual possession, any audiovisual recording
 
device, 
in respect of which an offense under this Act has been or is being committed;
 
(b)seize, remove or detain any audiovisual recording device or other object which appears to contain, or likely to contain 

40
 
 
evidence of an offense committed under this Ac
t;
 
(c)use reasonable force to remove any person or object obstructing the authorized person in the exercise of any power 
conferred upon him/her by this Act;
 
(d)detain any person, within a reasonable time not exceeding eighteen (18) hours, found in any plac
e which the authorized 
person is empowered to enter and search if, after inquiry made, said authorized person has reasonable ground to believe 
that the person subject of the search is connected with the subject matter of the search and it is considered nec
essary to 
detain the person subject of the search to be able to adequately perform the search; and
 
(e)require the operator of an exhibition facility or any other person who appears to be at the time responsible for the 
control or management of the exhibiti
on facility to give information or render assistance that may be necessary to enable 
the authorized person to carry out the functions under this Act.
 
Section 10.
 
Forfeiture and Disposal of Unauthorized Copy of Cinematographic Film or Other Audiovisual Work
 
/Audiovisual Recording 
Devices Used in the Commission of the Acts Penalized Under this Act.
 
-
 
The court before which a person charged with an offense in 
violation/contravention of this Act, whether or not said person charged is convicted of the offense, m
ay order that any copy of a 
cinematographic film or other audiovisual work in which copyright subsists, or parts thereof which appears to the court to be
 
an 
unauthorized copy, and any audiovisual recording device or other equipment in the possession of the
 
alleged offender or the court, 
be destroyed or delivered to the owner or the exclusive licensee of the copyright owner concerned or otherwise dealt with in 
such a 
manner as the court deems fit.
 
In the event that the court retains representative samples of
 
the unauthorized copy of a cinematographic film or other audiovisual 
work, or audiovisual recording devices or other equipment for evidentiary purposes in the prosecution of the offense for whic
h an 
accused is charged, the retained samples shall remain in
 
custodia legis
 
until the final resolution of the court proceedings thereon.
 
Section 11.
 
Enforcement.
 
-
 
The PNP, in coordination with the NBI, the Optical Media Board (OMB), operators of the cinemas, theaters 
or exhibition facilities and owners of the cine
matographic films or audiovisual works and other soundtracks, shall enforce the 
provisions of this Act. The PNP may deputize, for a defined period, the heads or personnel of such agencies and instrumentali
ties of 
government or private sector representative
s or stakeholders of rights over cinematographic films/audiovisual works and their 
soundtracks, to perform, the enforcement functions required under this Act.
 
Section 12.
 
Separability Clause.
 
-
 
If any provision of this Act is declared invalid, the other pa
rts or provisions hereof not affected 
thereby shall remain and continue to be in full force and effect.
 
Section 13.
 
Repealing Clause.
 
-
 
All laws, decrees, ordinances or rules and regulations which are inconsistent with or contrary to the 
provisions of this
 
Act are hereby amended or repealed.
 
Section 14.
 
Effectivity.
 
-
 
This Act shall take effect fifteen (15) days after its complete publication in at least two (2) newspapers of 
national circulation.
 
Approved,
 
 
,,
 
 
(Sgd.)
 
PROSPERO C. NOGRALES
 
Speaker of the 
House of Representatives
 
(Sgd.)
 
JUAN PONCE ENRILE
 
President of the Senate
 
 
This Act which is a consolidation of Senate Bill No. 3529 and House Bill No. 5699 was finally passed by the Senate and the Ho
use of 
Representatives on January 18, 2010 and January 
27, 2010, respectively.
 
 
 
 
(Sgd.)
 
EMMA LIRIO
-
REYES
 
Secretary of Senate
 
(Sgd.)
 
MARILYN B. BARUA
-
YAP
 
Secretary General
 
House of Representatives
 
 
Approved:
 
MAY 13 2010
 
(Sgd.)
 
GLORIA MACAPAGAL
-
ARROYO
 
President of the Philippines
 
 
 

41
 
 
APPENDIX
-
V
 
 
AS INTRODUCED IN
 
THE RAJYA SABHA
 
 
 
 
 
 
Bill No. XI of 2019
 
 
THE CINEMATOGRAPH (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2019
 
 
 
 
A 
 
BILL
 
 
 
further to amend the Cinematograph Act, 1952.
 
 
 
 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventieth
 
Year of the 
Republic of India as follows:
-
 
 
 
 
1
.
 
(1) This Act 
may be called the Cinematograph 
(Amendment) Act, 2019.
 
 
Short title and 
commencement.
 
 
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the 
Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint.
 
 
 
37 of 1952
 
2
.
 
After section 6A of the 
Cinematograph Act, 1952 
(hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), the 
following section shall be inserted, namely:
-
 
 
Insertion of new 
section 6AA.
 
 
‘6AA. Notwithstanding any law for the time being in 
force, no person shall, without the written 
autho
rization of the author, be permitted to use any 
audiovisual recording device in a place to knowingly 
make or transmit or attempt to make or transmit or 
abet the making or transmission of a copy of a film or a 
Prohibition of 
unauthorized 
recor
ding.
 

42
 
 
part thereof.
 
 
Explanation.
-
 
For the purposes of this sub
-
section, the 
expression “author” shall have the same meaning as 
assigned to it in clause (d) of section 2 of the Copyright 
Act, 1957.’.
 
 
 
14 of 1957
 
 
3
. In section 7 of the principal Act, after 
sub
-
section (1), 
the following sub
-
section shall be inserted, namely:
-
 
 
Amendment of 
section 7.
 
 
“(1A) If any person contravenes the provisions of section 
6AA, he shall be punishable with an imprisonment for a 
term which may extend to three years or with 
fine which 
may extend to ten lakh rupees or with both.”.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

43
 
 
STATEMENT OF OB
J
E
CTS AND REASONS
 
 
 
The Cinematograph Act, 1952 (the Act) was enacted with a view to make provisions 
for the certification of cinematograph films for exhibition and for 
regulating exhibitions by 
means of cinematographs.
 
 
2.
 
Section 3 of the Act provides for the constitution of 
a
 
Board of Film Certification 
which
 
certifies the films for public exhibition. The medium of cinema, the tools,
 
the 
technology associated with it a
nd its audience have undergone radical changes over a period 
of time and the certification process for public exhibition needs to be contemporised in order 
to make the process in tune with the changed time. There have also been many changes in the 
field of
 
cinema with the proliferation of T
elevision
 
channels and 
c
able network throughout the 
country. Further,
 
the film industry is facing huge losses due to the
 
advent of new digital 
technology, declin
e in
 
number of the people visiting cinema theatres, increase
 
in piracy, 
particularly release of pirated version of the films on internet, copyright violation, etc. 
which 
in turn 
causes lossto the government exchequer.  
 
 
3.
 
With a view to overcome the aforesaid difficulties and to prohibit the unauthorised 
recordin
g of films, it is proposed to amend the Cinematograph Act, 1952 
by a
 
Bill, namely, 
the Cinematograph (Amendment) Bill, 2019
,
 
which
 
provides for
–
 
 
(i)
 
insertion of a new section 6AA in the Act so as to provide that no 
person shall, without the written 
authorisation of the author, be permitted to 
use any audiovisual recording device in a place to knowingly make or transmit 
or attempt to make or transmit or abet the making or transmission of a copy of 
a film or a part thereof; and
 
 
(ii)
 
to amend section 7
 
of the Act so as to punish the persons who 
contravenes the provisions of section 6AA for a term which may extend to 
three years or with fine which may extend to ten lakh rupees or with both.
 
 
4
.
 
The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
 
 
Col. RAJYAV
ARDHAN RATHORE (Retd.)
 
New Delhi
 
The
 
8
th
 
February
, 2019
.
 
 
 
 
 

44
 
 
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
 
 
The Bill, if enacted would not involve any financial expenditure either recurring or 
non
-
recurring from the Consolidated Fund of India.
 
 
 
 
 

45
 
 
ANNEXURE
-
I
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON
 
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (2018
-
19)
 
MINUTES OF THE TWELFTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE
 
 
The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 06 March, 2019 from 1345 hours to 1410 
hours in Committee Room No. B, Parliament House Annexe, New
 
Delhi.
 
PRESENT
 
 
Shri Anurag Singh 
Thakur 
-
 
Chairperson 
MEMBERS
 
Lok Sabha
 
 
2
.
 
Shri Lal Krishna
 
Advani
 
3
.
 
Shri Shyama Charan Gupta
 
4
.
 
Dr. Sunil Baliram
 
Gaikwad
 
5
.
 
Dr. Anupam
 
Hazra
 
6
.
 
Shri Virender
 
Kashyap
 
7
.
 
Shri Harinder Singh
 
Khalsa
 
8
.
 
Shri. Abhishek
 
Singh
 
 
Rajya Sabha
 
 
9
.
 
Shri Santiuse
 
Kujur
 
10
.
 
Dr. Vinay P.
 
Sahasrabuddhe
 
11
.
 
Shri. Binoy
 
Viswam
 
 
SECRETARIAT
 
 
1
.
 
Smt. Abha
 
Singh
 
Yaduvanshi
 
-
 
Joint Secretary
 
2
.
 
Shri
 
Y.M.
 
Kandpal
 
-
 
Director
 
3
.
 
Dr.
 
Sagarika
 
Dash
 
-
 
Additional
 
Director
 
4
.
 
Smt.
 
Geeta
 
Parmar
 
-
 
Additional
 
Director
 
5
.
 
Shri.
 
Shangreiso
 
Zimik
 
-
 
Deputy
 
Secretary
 

(ij)
 
 
LIST OF WITNESSES
 
 
Ministry of Information and Broadcasting
 
Sl. No.
 
Name of the Officer/Official
 
Designation
 
1.
 
Shri Amit Khare
 
Secretary, I&B
 
2.
 
Shri Ashok R Parmar
 
Joint Secretary (Films)
 
3.
 
Shri 
G.C. Aron
 
Director (Films)
 
Central Board of Film Certification (CBFC)
 
4.
 
Shri Prasoon Joshi
 
Chairperson, CBFC
 
Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology
 
5.
 
Shri Rakesh Maheswar
 
Scientist and Group Coordinator
 
Department for Promotion of 
Industry and Internal Trade
 
6.
 
Shri Rajiv Aggarwal
 
Joint Secretary
 
 
2
.
 
At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the representatives of the 
Ministry of Information and Broadcasting (MIB) and other Departments to the 
sitting of the Committee convened for 
briefing on the Cinematograph 
(Amendment) Bill, 2019 as introduced in the Rajya Sabha on 12.02.2019 and 
referred to the Committee on 22.02.2019, for examination and Report within a 
period of two
 
months.
 
3
.
 
Thereafter, the Secretary, Ministry of Information an
d Broadcasting (MIB) 
made a PowerPoint presentation on the Bill under examination inter alia 
highlighting the issues of piracy and consequential losses to the film industry and 
to the Government exchequer, constitutional provisions for sanctioning of 
"Cine
matograph films for exhibition", regulation of licensing and exhibition of 
cinemas,  Cinematographs  Act 1952, Certification Rules 1983 and guidelines, 
recommendations of Justice Mukul Mudgal Committee with regard to prevention 
of piracy, objectives and pr
ovisions of the Cinematographic (Amendment) Bill 
2019. The Committee were informed that the Bill in question which provides for 
insertion of a new Section 6AA in the Cinematographic Act, 1952 and 
amendment of Section 7 of the Act would go a long way in pre
venting piracy of 
the
 
films.
 
4
.
 
The Chairperson, Central Board of Film Certification (CBFC) while briefing 
the Committee on various digital and technical aspects related to the piracy felt 
the need to seek cooperation and support of technical experts also bes
ides 
stakeholders to deal with this menace in view of the changing technology. The 
representatives from Department of Promotion of Industry and Internal Trade 

 
47
 
 
(DPIIT) brought to the notice of the Committee about several websites uploading 
materials by copy
right infringement which are working from outside the country 
which need to be identified and blocked administratively as well as collectively 
with the help of the film industry .
 
5
.
 
The representatives of MIB, CBFC, MeitY and DPIIT replied to the queries 
rai
sed by Members. The representatives also assured the Committee that the 
detailed views/suggestions on the Bill would be furnished, in writing, to the 
Secretariat. The Chairperson then thanked the witnesses for appearing before 
the Committee and putting for
thwith their views points on the Cinematograph 
(Amendment) Bill,
 
2019.
 
The witnesses, then withdrew.
 
 
6
.
 
The Committee after considering all aspects of the Bill in question 
felt the need to seek the views and suggestions of various associations/bodies, 
expert
s and stakeholders also both from the print and electronic media in order 
to have an in
-
depth and objective examination and to get a better insight. They 
however, wondered that  the two months time granted to the Committee for the 
same would not be suffice
 
in view of the forthcoming General Elections and 
inability of Members to attend the Committee’s sittings. The Committee, 
therefore, decided to leave the matter of examination of the Bill in question to 
their succeeding Committee in the 17th  Lok  Sabha an
d bring it to the kind 
notice of the Hon'ble Speaker, Lok Sabha and concerned Branch accordingly.
 
The Committee, then, adjourned.
 
 
A copy of verbatim record of the proceedings was kept on record.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
48
 
 
ANNEXURE
-
I
I
 
 
 
MINUTES OF THE SEVENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION 
TECHNOLOGY (2019
-
20) 
 
 
 
 
The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 30 October, 2019 from 1115 hours to 1220 
hours in Committee Room C, Ground Floor,  Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
 
PRESENT
 
 
Dr. Shashi Tharoor 
-
 
Chairperson
 
 
 
MEMBERS
 
 
Lok Sabha
 
2. Smt. Locket Chatterjee 
 
3. Shri Karti P. Chidambaram 
 
4. Dr. Nishikant Dubey 
 
5. Choudhary Mehboob Ali Kaiser 
 
6. Shri P. R. Natarajan 
 
7. Shri Santosh Pandey 
 
8.Col. Rajyavardhan Singh Rath
ore  
 
9.Shri L.S. Tejasvi Surya 
 
Rajya Sabha
 
10. Dr. Anil Agrawal 
 
11. Shri Suresh Gopi 
 
12. Shri Syed Nasir Hussain 
 
13. Shri D. Kupendra Reddy 
 
 
SECRETARIAT
 
1
.
 
Shri Ganapati Bhat
 
 
 
 
-
 
 
Additional Secretary
 
2
.
 
Shri Y.M. Kandpal
 
 
 
 
-
 
Director
 
3
.
 
Smt. 
Geeta Parmar
 
 
 
 
-
 
Additional Director
 
4
.
 
Shri Shangreiso Zimik
 
 
 
 
-
 
Deputy Secretary
 
 
LIST OF WITNESSES
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF INFORMATION AND BROADCASTING
 
1
.
Shri Amit Khare 
 
Secretary
 
2
.
Ms. T.C.A. Kalyani
 
JS(EW&B
-
I) & MD:NFDC
 
3
.
Shri Ashok Kumar R. Parmar
 
JS(Films)
 

 
49
 
 
EXPERTS ON THE SUBJECT
 
 
4
.
 
Shri Prasoon Joshi
 
Chairperson, Central Board of Film 
Certification(CBFC)
 
5
.
 
Shri Rakesh Maheshwari
 
Scientist and Group Coordinator, Ministry of 
Electronics and Information Technology(Meity)
 
6
.
 
Ms. Surabhi Sharma
 
Deputy Secretary, 
Department for Promotion of 
Industry and Internal Trade, Ministry of Commerce 
and Industry(DPIIT)
 
 
LIST OF NON
-
OFFICIAL WITNESSES
 
 
 
 
1.
 
Shri Kulmeet Makkar
 
Chief Executive officer, The Film & Television 
Producers Guild of India Ltd
 
2.
 
Shri Ravi 
Kottarakara
 
General Secretary, Film Federation of India
 
3.
 
Shri Firdausul Hassan
 
President, Film Federation of India
 
4.
 
Shri Gagan Sareen
 
Vice President
-
Legal, Viacom 18 Motion Pictures
 
5.
 
Shri Uday Singh
 
 
Country Representative, Motion Picture 
Distributors 
Association India Pvt. Ltd.
 
6.
 
Shri Aamod Gupte
 
Group General Counsel, Eros International Media 
Ltd.
 
 
2.
 
At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the representatives from all the 
Departments to the sitting of the Committee convened to have a 
briefing on Cinematograph 
(Amendment) Bill, 2019 as referred to the Committee for examination of Report.
 
3.
 
Thereafter, the Secretary, Ministry of Information and Broadcasting made a 
PowerPoint presentation highlighting the constitutional provisions to leg
islate in the 
matters pertaining to the sanctioning of films, enactments of Cinematograph Act in 1952, 
notification of Cinematograph (Certification) Rules, 1983 and guidelines for certification of 
films which came into effect from 6 December, 1991, Justice
 
Mukul Mudgal Committee 
Report, etc.  He also elaborated on the provisions of the Bill to tackle the piracy and the 
benefits film industry is going to derive after the same comes into force.  
 
4.
 
The Committee then sought clarifications on various issues p
ertaining to the Bill with 
particular reference to the “fair use”, need to have reconciliation of  the Bill  with other 
related Acts e.g. IT Act and the Copyright Act to avoid any inconsistency,  non
-
implementation of recommendations of Mukul Mudgal Commit
tee and Shyam Benegal 

 
50
 
 
Committee,  need to revisit the Copyright Act, 1957, measures taken by the Ministry to 
block rogue websites, anti
-
counterfeiting trade agreement with foreign countries, etc. 
 
The 
Committee  wondered if the Bill in the present form cov
ers the whole gamut of issues 
related to digital and other forms of piracy and if  the Ministry  have taken a comprehensive 
view in the matter to address piracy issue in totality .   
 
5.
 
The representatives of the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting, 
CBFC and 
MeitY replied to the various queries of the Members.
 
 
The witnesses then withdrew
 
6.
 
 
The Committee then reassembled after a tea break to hear the views of non
-
official 
witnesses on the Bill.  After welcoming them, the Chairperson brought to their
 
attention the 
confidentiality clause regarding the deliberations in the Committee and requested them to 
put their views/suggestions on the provisions of the Bill with particular reference to the 
absence of the  provision of  “fair use” in the bill.
 
7.
 
The
 
Committee then heard the views of the non
-
official witnesses one by one on the 
Bill.   The  witnesses were unanimous in their views that the proposed amendment is 
absolutely critical  to tap the source of piracy . They  informed the Committee that  though
 
in most of the cases the piracy takes place through the third party i.e. Cinema Hall yet 
despite having watermarking facility to check the source of piracy they are unable the catch 
the culprits in the absence of stringent laws. They were also of the opin
ion that the bill is 
just a beginning and will bring accountability in the value chain with the stakeholders. The 
Chairperson desired to know if  the absence of any exception clause in the bill would 
amount to criminalizing hundreds of millions of  Indians
 
who  forward little clips on their 
WatsApp. On this issue the witnesses were of the  view  that any such exception can be used 
as a rule.  On the issue of piracy which takes place through neighboring countries, the 
Committee expressed their concern over t
he same  and felt the need to have negotiations 
with them in this matter.  It was also brought to the notice of the Committee that  the real 
piracy happens on a group called  ‘Telegram’ which is anonymous and not encrypted. The 
Committee also sought the vi
ews of stakeholders on various other  issues such as; need for  
having reconciliation of the provisions of this bill  with Copyright Act and IT Act, save the 
interests of innocent public, need to check and block rogue sites active in piracy in the 
country 
etc. which were responded to by the witnesses.  
 
During the discussion on the Bill,  the Committee wondered if  the   intent of the 

 
51
 
 
expression in the word ‘knowingly’ can be given a much detailed expression like the word 
‘Author’ as defined in section 6AA in the Bill so that the legislative safeguards can be 
protected. 
 
8.
 
The Chairperson thanked the witnesses for appearing before the 
Committee and 
putting forth their valuable view points and desired that they may submit additional points 
to the Committee in writing, if any. 
 
 
A verbatim recording of the sitting of the Committee has been kept. 
 
The witnesses then withdrew.
 
The Committee
 
then adjourned.
 
 
 

 
52
 
 
 
ANNEXURE
-
III
 
 
MINUTES OF THE THIRTEENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION 
TECHNOLOGY (2019
-
20) HELD ON 6
th
 
FEBRUARY, 2020
 
 
 
 
The Committee sat on Thursday, the 6
th
 
February, 2020 from 1630 hours to 1730 
hours in Committee Room No. 62, Parliament House, New Delhi.
 
 
PRESENT
 
 
Dr. Shashi Tharoor 
-
 
Chairperson
 
 
 
MEMBERS
 
 
Lok Sabha
 
2
.
 
 
Dr. Nishikant Dubey 
 
3
.
 
 
Dr. Sukanta Majumdar
 
4
.
 
 
Shri Dhairyasheel Sambhajirao Mane
 
5
.
 
 
Ms. Mahua Moitra
 
6
.
 
 
Shri Santosh Pandey
 
7
.
 
 
Col. Rajyavardhan Singh Rathore  
 
8
.
 
 
Dr. Gaddam Ranjith Reddy
 
9
.
 
 
Shri MVV Satyanarayana
 
10
.
 
 
Shri Sanjay Seth
 
11
.
 
 
Dr. T. Sumathy (A) Thamizhachi Thangapandian
 
12
.
 
 
Shri Bhanu Pratap Singh Verma
 
 
Rajya Sabha
 
13
.
 
  
Dr. Subhash Chandra
 
14
.
 
  
Shri Md. Nadimul Haque 
 
15
.
 
  
Shri Syed Nasir Hussain 
 
 
SECRETARIAT
 
1
.
 
Shri Ganapati Bhat
 
 
 
-
 
 
Additional Secretary
 
2
.
 
Shri Y.M. Kandpal
 
 
 
-
 
Director
 
3
.
 
Smt. Geeta Parmar
 
 
 
-
 
Additional Director
 
4
.
 
Shri Shangreiso Zimik
 
 
-
 
Deputy Secretary
 
 
 
 
           
LIST OF WITNESSES
 
 
MINISTRY OF INFORMATION AND BROADCASTING
 
Sl. No.
 
Names
 
Designation
 
 
1.
 
Shri Ravi Mital
 
Secretary, I&B
 
2.
 
Shri Atul Kumar Tiwari
 
Additional Secretary
 
3.
 
Ms. T.C.A. Kalyani
 
Joint Secretary(Film)
 
4.
 
Shri P.K. Abdul Kareem
 
Economic Advisor
 

 
53
 
 
 
2
.
 
At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the 
Committee convened to take oral evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of 
Information and Broadcasting (MIB) in connection with the examination of 'The 
Ci
nematograph (Amendment) Bill, 2019' for examination and Report.
 
(The witnesses were then called in)
 
3.
 
Thereafter, the Chairperson welcomed the representatives of the Ministry of 
Information and Broadcasting. While drawing attention of the representative to the 
provisions of the Bill viz
-
a
-
viz other existing provisions and acts, the Chairperson observed 
tha
t the Bill was not ambitious enough to cover the entire gamut of issues.  He felt the need 
of amending the obsolete Cinematograph Act 1952 in the light of dramatic transformation 
of information and cinematography landscape and the recommendations of the Mu
kul 
Mudgal Committee and Shyam Benegal Committee on film certification issues.  The 
members of the Committee raised concern on various issues related to the Bill which 
inter 
alia
 
included provisions of fair use, need to have consistency with other related 
acts such as 
IT Act, Copyright Act, Telegraph Act, etc.  The Committee also observed that certain terms in 
the draft Amendment Bill such as exhibition facility, etc. are unclear and undefined and 
there is a need to give clear explanation of these terms in 
the Bill. The members were also 
of the view that the inadequate penalty provisions in the Bill need to be reviewed as the 
same are inconsistent with the huge investments made in making of a film and may not 
deter the piraters because of  the benefits they 
derive through piracy.  The Committee also 
wondered if the proposed amendment would also adequately address the issue of piracy 
which takes place inside the Censor Board and during the award screening of the films, etc. 
and desired to address the same with
 
suitable punitive arrangements. 
 
 
 
The
 
Committee also deliberated on other issues related to the Bill such as blocking of 
rogue websites, Anti
-
counterfeiting Trade Agreements with foreign countries, doctrine of 
fair use and need for enhancing penalties 
for the repeat offenders, etc.
 
 
The Secretary, MIB replied to the queries raised by the Chairperson. He informed the 
Committee
 
that the Bill is in consonance with the National Intellectual Property Rights Policy 
of 2016 and the Copyright Act as it takes a 
wider perspective on the possibility of 
unauthorized recording also. He justified the introduction of the provisions of the Bill by 
submitting that several countries had similar 
legal
 
provisions apart from Copyright Act 
wherein unauthorized audio
-
visual re
cording was punishable. The Ministry also clarified that 
blocking rogue websites falls under the IT Act and it is under the purview of the Ministry of 
Electronics and IT. The MIB also replied to the other queries of the Committee 
viz.
 
high rates 
of GST on 
cinema tickets, inadequacy of penal provisions, consistency with the Telegraph 
Act, amending of the provisions for certification of films, piracy of films through Censor 
Board and Film Awards, etc.
 
4
.
 
The 
Chairperson
, then, thanked the representatives of Mini
stry of Information and 
Broadcasting for deposing before the Committee and desired that written replies to the 
queries of the Committee which remained unanswered may be submitted to them at the 
earliest.  
 
 
 
 
 
The witnesses, then withdrew.
 
 
A copy of 
verbatim record of the proceedings was kept on record.
 
The Committee, then, adjourned.
 

 
54
 
 
ANNEXURE
-
I
V
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
 
(2019
-
20)
 
 
MINUTES OF THE NINETEENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE
 
-----------
 
 
 
The Committee sat on Friday, the 13
 
March, 2020 from 1000 hours to 1030 hours in Committee 
Room ‘E’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
 
 
PRESENT
 
Dr. Shashi Tharoor 
-
Chairperson
 
 
 
MEMBERS
 
 
 
Lok Sabha
 
 
2
.
 
 
Smt. Locket Chatterjee
 
3
.
 
Shri Karti P. Chidambaram
 
4
.
 
Dr. Nishikant Dubey 
 
5
.
 
Smt. Raksha Nikhil 
Khadse
 
6
.
 
Dr. Sukanta Majumdar
 
7
.
 
Ms. Mahua Moitra
 
8
.
 
Shri P. R. Natarajan
 
9
.
 
Shri Santosh Pandey
 
10
.
 
Shri Sanjay Seth
 
11
.
 
Dr. T. Sumathy (A) Thamizhachi Thangapandian
 
12
.
 
Shri Bhanu Pratap Singh Verma
 
 
Rajya Sabha
 
 
13
.
 
Shri Md. Nadimul Haque
 
14
.
 
Shri Syed Nasir Hussain
 
 
Secretariat
 
 
1
.
 
Shri Ganapati Bhat
 
 
-
 
Additional Secretary
 
2
.
 
Shri Y.M. Kandpal
 
 
-
 
Director
 
3
.
 
Smt. Geeta Parmar
 
 
-
 
Additional Director
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
55
 
 
2.
 
At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of the Committee 
convened to consider and adopt Draft Report on ‘The Cinematograph (Amendment) Bill, 2019’ 
relating to the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting. 
 
 
3.
 
The Committee, then
, took up the draft Report for consideration and adoption.
 
 
4.
 
The Committee, thereafter, adopted the above Report with some modifications.
 
 
5.
 
The Committee authorized the Chairperson to finalize the draft Report arising out of factual 
verification, if an
y, and present the Report to the House during the current Session of Parliament.
 
 
The Committee, then, adjourned.
 
 
 