1 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
COMMUNICATIONS AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(2022-23) 
 
 
SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
MINISTRY OF ELECTRONICS AND  
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the 
Committee contained in their Thirty Fifth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on 
‘Demands for Grants (2022-23)] 
 
FORTY-SECOND REPORT 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
 
 
February, 2023/Magha,1944 (Saka) 
 
 
 
42 


2 
 
 
FORTY-SECOND REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
COMMUNICATIONS AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(2022-23) 
 
 
SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
MINISTRY OF ELECTRONICS AND  
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the 
Committee contained in their Thirty Fifth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on 
‘Demands for Grants (2022-23)] 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on  09.02.2023 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on     09.02.2023 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
February, 2023/Magha, 1944 (Saka) 
 


3 
 
 
 
CONTENTS 
 Page 
No. 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
(ii) 
INTRODUCTION (iii) 
CHAPTER I Report………………………………………………………………………  
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government…………………………………………………………………… 
 
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of replies of the Government……………………………… 
 
CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and require 
reiteration ……………………………………………………………………. 
 
CHAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies are of 
interim in nature……………………………………………………………… 
 
 ANNEXURES  
I. Minutes of the seventh sitting of the Committee held on 7th February, 
2023. 
 
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in their Thirty fifth Report (Seventeenth 
Lok Sabha)  
 
             
 
 
 

4 
 
Composition of the Standing  Committee on Communications and  
Information Technology (2022-23) 
 
Shri Prataprao  Jadhav - Chairperson 
 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Smt. Sumalatha Ambareesh 
3. Shri Karti P. Chidambaram 
4. Dr. Nishikant Dubey 
5. Smt. Sunita Duggal 
6. Shri Jayadev Galla 
7. Smt. Raksha Nikhil Khadse 
8. Dr. Sukanta Majumdar 
9. Smt. Mahua Moitra 
10. Shri P. R. Natarajan 
11. Shri Santosh Pandey 
12. Col. Rajyavardhan Singh Rathore 
13. Dr. Gaddam Ranjith Reddy 
14. Shri Sanjay Seth 
15. Shri Ganesh Singh 
16. Shri Parvesh Sahib Singh 
17. Shri Shatrughan Prasad Sinha 
18. Shri L.S. Tejasvi Surya 
19. Dr. T. Sumathy (A) Thamizhachi Thangapandian 
20 Dr. M. K. Vishnu Prasad@ 
21. Vacant 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
22. Dr. Anil Agrawal 
23. Dr. Laxmikant Bajpayee 
24. Dr. John Brittas 
25. Shri Syed Nasir Hussain 
26. Shri Ilaiyaraaja 
27. Shri Jaggesh 
28. Shri Praful Patel 
29. Shri Kartikeya Sharma 
30. Shri Jawhar Sircar 
31. Shri Lahar Singh Siroya 
 
Secretariat 
 
1. Shri Satpal Gulati     - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. A. Jyothirmayi     - Director 
3. Shri Abhishek Sharma                       - Assistant Executive Officer 
 
 
___________________________________________________________________ 
Committee constituted w.e.f. 13th September, 2022 vide Para No.5288 of Bulletin Part-II dated                  
4th October, 2022. 
@   Dr. M. K. Vishnu Prasad has been nominated vice Dr. Shashi Tharoor vide Para No. 5311 
of Bulletin Part-II dated 12th October, 2022. 

5 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Communications and Information 
Technology (2022-23), having been authorised by the Committee, present this       
Forty-second Report on Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Thirty-fifth Report 
(Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants (2022-23)’ of the Ministry of 
Electronics and Information Technology. 
2. The Thirty-fifth Report was presented to Lok Sabha and also laid on the Table of 
Rajya Sabha on 21st March, 2022.  The Ministry of Electronics and Information 
Technology furnished their Action Taken Notes on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Thirty-fifth Report on 16th August, 2022.  
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their sitting held on 
7th February, 2023. 
4. For facility of reference and convenience, Observations/Recommendations of the 
Committee have been printed in bold in Chapter-I of the Report.  
5. An analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Thirty-fifth Report of the Committee is 
given at Annexure-II. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      New Delhi;   PRATAPRAO JADHAV,  
8 February, 2023 
19 Magha, 1944 (Saka) 
 Chairperson, 
       Standing Committee on 
Communications and Information Technology. 

1 
 
CHAPTER I 
REPORT 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Communications and Information 
Technology deals with the action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Thirty-fifth Report 
(Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants (2022-23) relating to the Ministry of 
Electronics and Information Technology. 
 
2. The Thirty-fifth Report was presented to Lok Sabha/laid in Rajya Sabha on                          
21 March, 2022.  It contained 18 Observations/Recommendations. Replies of the 
Government in respect of all the Observations/Recommendations have been received 
from the Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology and are categorized as 
under:- 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by 
the Government 
Rec. Sl. Nos.:- 1, 2, 3, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 14, 15, 16, 17 and 
18 
 
  Total -16 
Chapter-II 
 
 
 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the replies of the Government 
 
 
  Total - NIL 
Chapter-III 
 
 
 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and 
require reiteration 
Rec. Sl. Nos.:- 4  
 
  Total - 01 
Chapter-IV 
 
 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government are of interim in nature  
Rec. Sl. No.:- 13 
 
  Total – 01 
Chapter-V 
 

2 
 
 
3. The Committee trust that utmost importance would be given to 
implementation of the Observations/Recommendations accepted by the 
Government. The Committee further desire that Action Taken Statement on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in Chapter-I and final action taken 
replies to the Observations/Recommendations contained in Chapter-V of this 
Report should be furnished to them at an early date. 
 
4. The Committee will now deal with action taken by the Government on some of 
their recommendations.   
 
National Informatics Centre (NIC) 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 4) 
5. The Committee, in their 35th Report on the subject 'Demands For Grants (2022-
23)', had made following observation/recommendation:  
“The Committee note that National Informatics Centre provides ICT support to the 
Government at all levels to Central Ministries/Departments, 37 States/UTs and 720+ 
districts. NICNET, the nationwide Network comprises over 1000 LANs of Govt. offices 
and more than 5 lakh nodes across over 8000 locations. The data centres of NIC host 
more than 8000 websites of the Government in secure environment. The Ministry have 
informed the Committee that NIC’s main focus is in providing latest state-of-the-art ICT 
infrastructure. National Informatics Centre (NIC) under the Ministry of Electronics and 
Information Technology (MeitY) provides e-Governance support, state of the art 
solutions to Central Government, State Governments, UT Administrations, Districts and 
other Government bodies. NIC plays a pivotal role in development and implementation 
of Digital Platforms and Applications, in close collaboration with Central and State 
Governments, making the last-mile delivery of Government services to the citizens a 
reality. NIC is upgrading its infrastructure gradually to meet the increased demand. The 
Committee note that during the year 2022-23, the Ministry had projected an amount of 
Rs.1500 crore for NIC against which Rs. 1450 crore has been allocated at BE stage. 
The Ministry have informed that steps are being taken to ensure the adequate 
availability of funds for NIC during 2022-23. The Ministry have also informed that mainly 
the fund requirement under the Capital Budget has been reduced due to which the 
upgradation of ICT infrastructure in the Districts have to be taken up in a phased 
manner depending upon availability of funds. The Committee note that NIC has been an 
active catalyst and facilitator in e- Governance programme and digital ICT applications. 
It has been playing a pivotal role in the information revolution at Districts, State and 
national level so far as implementation of ICT projects of Government are concerned. 
However, it is unfortunate that the organization has been facing challenges in human 
resource, basic infrastructure and the scarcity of funds for the upgradation of District 
Centres to meet the ever increasing demand. In order to continue with their mission, 
NIC require constant support and encouragement. 
 

3 
 
 Keeping in view the critical role played by NIC as a provider of digital 
infrastructure and connectivity delivering un-interrupted seamless services during such 
difficult times, the Committee recommend that the Ministry need to be sensitive to NIC’s 
requirements and address the challenges faced by them, particularly infrastructure 
related concerns so that their ability to provide last mile delivery of Government services 
to the citizens gets strengthened. The Committee are disheartened to learn that in spite 
of their recommendation to undertake a comprehensive review of the human resource 
requirement and infrastructure needs of NIC, the Ministry have done little to address the 
above issues. The Committee once again recommend the Ministry to look into the issue 
of human resource shortage in NIC. With regard to infrastructure, the Committee are of 
the considered view that the Ministry need to impress upon the Ministry of Finance to 
increase allocation under the ‘Capital’ head for improvement of infrastructure at district 
level. The Committee desire the Ministry to take necessary measures to address both 
human resource and basic infrastructure constraints in NIC at the earliest. Keeping in 
view the fact that the earlier proposal for upgradation of human resource has got stuck 
without any tangible outcome, the Committee recommend that a fresh workable plan 
may be devised for addressing human resource needs of the organization by taking all 
stakeholders on board. The Committee may be apprised of the action taken in this 
regard". 
 
6. The Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology, in their Action Taken 
Reply, have stated  as under: 
"Data Centre and District Infrastructure Division: 
 
 Over the years number of projects has increased exponentially and their National 
roll-outs have necessitated the need for increased manpower resources across 
these and core services such as Data Centre, Network Operations, Cyber Security, 
Video Conferencing etc. Moreover, Digital India program has exponentially 
increased use of digital services in G-to-C and G-to-G. The increased adoption of 
ICT has also triggered the need to have specialized infrastructure set ups such as 
Network Operation Centre, Command and Control Centre, Centre of Excellence for 
Data Analytics, Artificial Intelligence, Open Stack, iGOT, Sandesh, Training etc. 
 
 NIC is facing tremendous shortage of space to accommodate manpower resources 
and critical infrastructure at the NIC(HQ) in CGO Complex, New Delhi. The space 
requirement could be addressed by re-construction/ re-development of Master Earth 
Station (MES) site of NIC located in CGO Complex, New Delhi. 
 
 The re-development of MES site will  provide only 35000 Sqft of usable space, which 
will partially address the space requirement of NIC. 
 
 In this regard, on request of NIC, CPWD has submitted a proposal to reconstruct the 
existing MES site at an estimated cost of Rs. 85 Crores. 
 
 Administrative Approval and Expenditure Sanction (AA&ES) has been conveyed to 
the CPWD after concurrence and approval of the layout and estimated cost of the 
proposed construction work by the competent authority. Handing over the site to 
CPWD is in process. 

4 
 
 
 Pre-construction activities like taking approvals from various agencies, tender 
preparation for selection of agency for construction work etc. have been initiated by 
CPWD.  
 
 There are 762 NIC District Centres (including newly created districts) all across the 
country and is manned by atleast two technical manpower in each District Centre, 
helping the district administration in its ICT requirement and e-Governance. NIC is 
providing the necessary Basic ICT Infrastructure to the District Centres in terms of 
ICT support, network connectivity etc to augment the District Administration. Space 
for the NIC District Centres are being provided by the respective District 
Administration. 
 
 In the period 2013-2018, 88 new NIC Districts Centres have been created across 17 
States. 
 
 In 2021-2022, 20 new NIC District Centres have been approved spread across 10 
States and are in the process of establishment. 
 
 Currently, establishment of 20 new NIC District Centres in 5 States are under 
process of approval. 
 
 Manpower constraints: 
  
The status of creation of 1407 (reworked now to 1392) posts in NIC was initiated in 
2014. The proposal was approved by the Hon’ble Minister, E&IT after due deliberations 
at all levels and submitted to the Ministry of Finance for concurrence. The proposal 
received back from Ministry of Finance seeking clarifications on some points have been 
examined by a duly constituted Internal Committee and the detailed clarifications have 
been resubmitted to Ministry of Finance through MeitY for further consideration in 
February, 2020. M/o Finance have made some observations and sought additional 
information, which has been compiled and re-submitted to Ministry of Finance through 
Administrative Ministry in September 2021. 
 
In addition to above, a proposal is being submitted for meeting the operational 
requirements by creation of 256 posts required for setting up new NIC District Centres 
for the 128 newly created districts at various States". 
 
7. The Committee, in their Original Report, had recommended that the 
Ministry need to be sensitive to requirements of NIC and address the challenges 
faced by them, particularly infrastructure related concerns so that their ability to 
provide last mile delivery of Government services to the citizens gets 
strengthened. The Committee were disheartened to learn that the Ministry had 
done little with respect to undertaking a comprehensive review of the human 
resource requirement and infrastructure needs of NIC and had recommended the 

5 
 
Ministry to look into the issue of human resource shortage in NIC. In their Action 
Taken Notes, the Ministry have informed that over the years the number of 
projects has increased exponentially and their National roll-outs have 
necessitated the need for increased manpower resources across these and core 
services such as Data Centre, Network Operations, Cyber Security, Video 
Conferencing etc. Moreover, Digital India program has exponentially increased 
use of digital services in G-to-C and G-to-G. The increased adoption of ICT has 
also triggered the need to have specialized infrastructure set ups such as 
Network Operation Centre, Command and Control Centre, Centre of Excellence 
for Data Analytics, Artificial Intelligence, Open Stack, iGOT, Sandesh, Training 
etc. Regarding the status of creation of 1407 (reworked now to 1392) posts in NIC 
which was initiated way back in 2014, it was informed that the proposal was 
approved by the Hon’ble Minister, E&IT after due deliberations at all levels and 
submitted to the Ministry of Finance for concurrence. The proposal received back 
from Ministry of Finance seeking clarifications on some points was examined by 
a duly constituted Internal Committee and the detailed clarifications were 
resubmitted to Ministry of Finance through MeitY for further consideration in 
February, 2020. However, M/o Finance had made some more observations and 
sought additional information, which had been compiled and re-submitted to 
Ministry of Finance through Administrative Ministry in September 2021. The 
Committee are surprised to find that even after a lapse of eight years since the 
proposal for creation of 1407 posts at NIC was initiated, it is still awaiting 
approval from M/o Finance for various reasons. In the light of the fact that NIC 
provides critical backbone infrastructure to meet the ICT requirements of the 
Government and the pivotal role played by it in ensuring business continuity 
during the Covid-19 induced lockdown, the Committee  reiterate that the Ministry 
take up necessary measures to address both human resource and basic 
infrastructure constraints in NIC at the earliest. 
 
e-Governance-DIGILOCKER  
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 11) 
8. The Committee, in their Original Report, had made following 

6 
 
observation/recommendation: 
“The Committee note that Digital Locker provides a dedicated cloud based 
platform as a personal space to residents for storage, sharing, verification of 
documents & certificates. The Committee note that 9.22 crore users have 
been registered and 486 crore documents issued by the Department are 
available with Digital Locker. The Committee appreciate the initiatives taken by 
the Ministry with respect to ‘DigiLocker’. While acknowledging the fact that 
DigiLocker by itself is a very potent instrument for enabling people to do away 
with the need to carry or look for paper records or look for printed certificates, 
and completely switch over to a digital way of working, the Committee also 
observe that ‘privacy’ remains a very important concern for the public at large. 
The Committee also note that it is an attempt to create convenience on the 
lines of Aadhaar as digital identity rather than a physical card. The Committee 
are given to understand that more and more State Governments have issued 
instructions and use of DigiLocker is going up progressively. DigiLocker is also 
facilitating setting up of eHealth Locker in the country. While taking note of the 
numerous benefits under the initiative, the Committee strongly recommend 
that privacy of individuals using ‘DigiLocker’ may be given top priority by the 
Ministry. The Committee also recommend the Ministry to make an effort to 
popularise Digital Locker so as to increase its user base. Further, when the 
country is moving toward One Nation, one digital platform for each of the core 
areas through initiatives such as DigiLocker, Digital Health Mission, National 
Public Digital Platform in Health, education, agriculture, e-courts and justice 
platforms, etc. securing the data services for seamless flow of information 
across sectors becomes very important. The Committee are given to 
understand that National Data Centre Policy and Hyper Scale Data Centre 
Schemes are ready. The Ministry already had an inter-ministerial consultation. 
The Committee desire that the above policies may be finalized and the 
schemes are concretized in a definite time frame". 
 
 
9. In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Electronics and Information 
Technology have submitted as under: 
“Regarding Privacy: For the sharing of the user’s documents with any department/ 
organization, the access mechanism of documents in DigiLocker follows the principle of 
user authentication and authorization by the user. Only upon the consent of the user, 
any data is shared. This ensures the privacy of the user’s data/ documents.  
Regarding Security: DigiLocker follows standard security practices and regularly 
undergoes security audits. Moreover, security in DigiLocker is ensured by steps such as 
Multi factor Authentication based Sign-Up and Sign-in, timed log out, hosting of 
DigiLocker system on ISO 27001 security certified data centre, X.509 RSA2048 bits 
secure socket layer (SSL) Encryption for information transmitted during any activity.  
Regarding increase of user base: MeitY has undertaken various interventions to bring 
regulatory/ policy level changes for the acceptance of digital documents from 
DigiLocker. Some of these are acceptance of DigiLocker by RBI, SEBI, BCAS, Ministry 

7 
 
of Railways, Ministry of Finance and MoRTH. Few key transformational decisions which 
would bolster the increase in consumption of digital documents are as under: DARPG 
has notified all the ministries/statutory bodies/PSUs to adopt DigiLocker to promote 
Citizen-centric services. Ministry of Education has announced that DigiLocker will be the 
sole repository for National Academic Depository. DBT Mission has also notified to 
utilize DigiLocker services for all its schemes. It is submitted that currently 12 crore 
users have been registered and 560 crore documents issued by the Department are 
available with Digital Locker. Further, to popularise Digital Locker and to increase its 
user base, following are being planned: Few of the departments such as MoD, MoH, 
EPFO, ITR, RGI, Soil Health Card, Voter ID Card, NREGA Job Card, SAI, NGDRS, e-
shram card, State Universities, etc. are interacted for bringing their services on 
DigiLocker. Currently, DigiLocker is also facilitating setting up of eHealth Locker in the 
country. 
Regarding finalization of the National Data Centre Policy and Hyper Scale Data 
Centre Schemes: Based on the inputs received during stakeholder consultation, the 
National Data Center and Cloud policy and the Date center scheme have been revised. 
The revised policy and scheme are under approval process in MeitY”. 
 
10. In their Thirty-fifth Report, the Committee, while acknowledging the fact 
that DigiLocker by itself is a very potent instrument for enabling people to do 
away with the need to carry paper documents and completely switch over to a 
digital way of working, had recommended the Ministry to make an effort to 
popularise Digital Locker so as to increase its user base and to prioritize privacy 
of individuals using ‘DigiLocker’ services. In their Action Taken Notes, the 
Ministry have stated that DigiLocker follows the principle of user authentication 
and authorization and employs measures such as Multi factor Authentication 
based Sign-Up and Sign-in, timed log out, hosting of DigiLocker system on ISO 
27001 security certified data centre, X.509 RSA2048 bits secure socket layer (SSL) 
Encryption for information transmitted during any activity etc. Regarding 
measures to popularize Digital Locker, it was stated that MeitY had undertaken 
various interventions to bring regulatory/ policy level changes for the acceptance 
of digital documents from DigiLocker. Some of these include acceptance of 
DigiLocker by RBI, SEBI, BCAS, Ministry of Railways, Ministry of Finance and 
MoRTH. It was also submitted that currently 12 crore users had registered and 
560 crore documents issued by the Department are available with Digital Locker. 
While lauding the security measures to ensure privacy of personal data on 

8 
 
DigiLocker, the Committee find that given the advantages offered by DigiLocker, 
its existing user base which presently stands at around 12 crore users is a bit too 
low and there is a need to promote its adoption through regulatory/policy level 
changes for broader acceptance of digital documents stored/kept in DigiLocker. 
There is also a need to give wide publicity with respect to advantages of using 
Digilocker services and also publicize its acceptance by the onboarded 
institutions/entities to increase the user base of DigiLocker.  
   
National Knowledge Network (NKN) 
 (Recommendation Sl. No. 13) 
 
11. The Committee, in their 35 th Report, had made following 
observation/recommendation: 
"The Committee note that the objective of the National Knowledge Network(NKN) is to 
inter-connect all knowledge institutions across the country through high speed data 
communications network to encourage sharing of resources and collaborative research. 
A high speed data communication network has been established to inter-connect 
institutions of higher learning and research. 1752links to institutions have been 
commissioned and made operational. 522 NKN links have been connected to NIC 
district centres across India. The Committee also note that NKN is the backbone 
network for all e-Governance initiatives in the country. In addition to educational 
institutions, NKN connects four National Data Centres (NDCs), 31 State Data Centres 
(SDCs), 30 SWANs State-wide Area Networks (SWANs), Ministries, Departments, and 
Mission oriented agencies, which include S&T, DRDO, Earth Sciences, Space, ICAR, 
MHRD, etc. The Ministry have informed the Committee that Digital Information Infoway 
(DII) which is the next phase of NKN is at advanced stage of approval. DII would 
address the need of effective Governance and facilitate collaboration and knowledge 
resource sharing among the Research and Educational institutions. The Committee 
note that against the proposed amount of Rs. 786 crore, an amount of Rs. 650 crore 
has been allocated at BE stage for NKN during 2022-23. The Committee have been 
informed that efforts would be made to seek additional funds in the Supplementary 
Demands for Grants. 
  
 The Committee are of the view that National Knowledge Network is fulfilling the 
twin objectives of providing robust and reliable network on the one hand and free 
access to information and knowledge to enrich knowledge in the country on the other 
hand. The Committee are of the view that the successful implementation of the project 
will strengthen the infrastructure for providing high speed backbone connectivity and 
stimulate research by facilitating knowledge sharing among the collaborative 
institutions. The Committee desire that the approval for next phase of NKN, i.e. Digital 
Information Infoway (DII) to create a unified Government Network which is at advance 
stage may be taken at the earliest. Since NKN is also the backbone network for all e-
governance initiatives in the country, it is imperative that NKN must be strengthened for 

9 
 
successful implementation of e-governance initiatives. In this regard, the Committee 
recommend the Ministry to take all necessary measures for allocation of requisite funds 
for successful implementation of this scheme during the current financial year". 
 
12. The Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology, in their Action Taken 
Reply, have submitted as under: 
"Noted. Action is being taken to expedite the proposal". 
 
13. The Committee, in their Original Report, had noted that the objective of the 
National Knowledge Network (NKN) is to inter-connect all knowledge institutions 
across the country through high speed data communications network to 
encourage sharing of resources and collaborative research. NKN also acts as the 
backbone network for all e-Governance initiatives in the country since in addition 
to educational institutions, NKN also connects four National Data Centres (NDCs), 
31 State Data Centres (SDCs), 30 SWANs State-wide Area Networks (SWANs), 
Ministries, Departments, and Mission oriented agencies, which include S&T, 
DRDO, Earth Sciences, Space, ICAR, MHRD, etc. It was also informed that Digital 
Information Infoway (DII) which is the next phase of NKN is at an advanced stage 
of approval. DII would address the need for effective Governance and facilitate 
collaboration and knowledge resource sharing among the Research and 
Educational institutions. The Committee were of the view that the successful 
implementation of the project will strengthen the infrastructure for providing high 
speed backbone connectivity and stimulate research by facilitating knowledge 
sharing among the collaborative institutions. In their Action Taken Notes, the 
Ministry have stated that action is being taken to expedite the proposal. The 
Committee urge to expedite the implementation of NKN project and the 
successive DII which assumes significant importance in the post-Covid-19 era, 
given the experiences the country had to face during the pandemic. 
 
 
******* 

10 
 
CHAPTER II 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN 
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 1) 
Budget Analysis 
 
 The Committee note that for the year 2022-23, the Ministry have laid Detailed 
Demands for Grants of Rs. 14300 crore consisting of Rs. 13911.99 crore under 
Revenue Section and Rs. 388.01 crore under Capital Section. The amount is Rs. 
4579.34 crore more than the allocation made at BE stage 2021-22. The revenue 
provision in BE 2022-23 has been increased by Rs. 4637. 33 crore when compared with 
the BE of 2021-22 mainly due to Rs.5300 crore earmarked for ‘PLI for Large Scale 
Electronics and IT Hardware’ scheme to boost indigenous production of electronics and 
IT hardware, whereas under the Capital Section the allocation has been reduced by Rs. 
58 crore during 2022-23. 
 
 With regard to the utilization of funds, the Committee note that an amount of Rs. 
9274.66 crore had been allocated at BE stage under the Revenue Section during 2021-
22 which was reduced to Rs. 9174.25 crore at the RE stage mainly due to the low pace 
of expenditure in the first two quarters in view of the second wave of Covid-19 pandemic 
and expenditure restrictions imposed by Ministry of Finance in the 2nd quarter. The 
actual utilization as on 31st January, 2022 has been Rs. 5559.42 crore only. Under the 
Capital Section, an amount of Rs. 446 crore had been allocated at BE stage for the year 
2021-22 which was reduced to Rs.407 crore at RE stage and actual utilization till 
January, 2022 has been Rs.157.21 crore only. The Committee note that during the year 
2021-22 there has been a gross under utilization of funds under several Plan Schemes 
such as ‘STQC Programme’, ‘Cyber security (Cert-In), NCCC and Data Governance’, 
‘Electronic Governance including EAP’, ‘Manpower Development’, ‘Promotion of 
Electronics & IT Hardware Manufacturing’, ‘Promotion of IT&ITeS’, ‘R&D in 
IT/Electronics/ CCBT’, ‘Promotion of Digital Payments’, etc. The Committee have further 
been informed by the Ministry that there has been a persistent underutilization of funds 
during the last three years w.r.t. BE under schemes like ‘Manpower Development’, 
‘Promotion of Electronics and IT Hardware Manufacturing’ and ‘Promotion of IT and 
ITeS Industries’. Amidst the slow pace of utilization during Financial Year 2021-22, the 
Ministry have proposed an amount of Rs.16223.21 crore for the year 2022-23 and they 
have been allocated Rs.14300 crore at BE stage. Schemes which have received major 
share of allocation are ‘Electronics Governance’, ‘National Knowledge Network’, ‘PLI for 
Large Scale Electronics and IT Hardware’, ‘UIDAI’, etc. The Committee also note that 
as per the updated information furnished by the Ministry, the final figure for the 
utilization of funds as on 24.02.2022 has settled at Rs.7,789 crore which comes to 
around 80 per cent of Revised Estimates for the year 2021-22. The Committee are 
given to understand that one major portion of expenditure that the Ministry had to incur 
was on the promotion of digital payments which was in the nature of reimbursement 
expenditure to banks and institutions involved in digital payments that dragged till the 
end of the financial year. 
 

11 
 
 While the explanation of the Ministry that some of the expenditure involved last 
minute reconciliation with banks and payment organizations, yet the overall 80 per cent 
spending is still a concern keeping in view the fact that the Ministry are implementing 
some of the flagship programmes of the Government. The Ministry have also candidly 
accepted that there has been persistent underutilization of funds over last couple of 
years under some of the ongoing schemes. That is a cause of concern for the 
Committee. The Committee are of the considered view that there is a need to keep a 
vigil on the pace of expenditure during the year 2022-23 since the allocations have been 
further enhanced. The Committee desire that the reduction of funds from BE to RE is 
strictly avoided so that implementation of schemes does not get affected. The 
Committee also recommend that the Ministry avoid any last minute rush in the financial 
year. The Committee may be apprised of the steps taken to address the above 
concerns. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 The esteemed views and observations of the Committee have been noted for 
compliance.  
 
 As regards compliance of the recommendations for avoiding reduction of funds at 
RE stage and rush of expenditure at the fag end of the financial year, it is stated that a 
revised procedure for flow of funds under Central Sector Schemes [except for Central 
Sector Schemes being implemented by Ministries/ Departments in Direct Benefit 
Transfer (DBT) mode or reimbursement mode] is presently being implemented by all 
Ministries/Departments as per the directions and instructions from Ministry of Finance 
(Annexure-I). The revised procedure for flow of funds would help Ministries in 
controlling expenditure w.r.t. parking of funds, and monitoring of utilization of funds 
released on real time basis. The revised procedure for flow of funds under Central 
Sector Scheme would be advantageous for the following reasons: 
 
 As per the revised procedure for flow of funds under the Central Sector 
Schemes, there would be no parking of funds under Central Sector Schemes. 
The releases to the beneficiaries/vendors under all the Central Sector schemes 
would be ‘just-in-time’ 
 
 Model I : Under the Schemes having an annual outlay of more than Rs.500 
crore, the releases would be made through Assignment Accounts opened by 
Central Nodal Agency to Sub Agencies in their Sub Assignment Accounts with 
Reserve Bank of India.  The unutilized assignments will lapse to the Government 
at the end of the year and will not be available for expenditure in the next 
financial year.  
 Model II : Under the Schemes having an annual outlay of less than Rs.500 
Crore, the releases would be made to Sub Agencies through Central Nodal 
Account opened by Central Nodal Agency in the Scheduled Commercial Banks. 
Funds would be released strictly on the basis of requirement and keeping in view 
the balance funds of the scheme available with CNA. In a Financial Year, at a 
time, Ministry should in no case release more than 25% of the earmarked budget 
under the scheme.  Further, additional funds (not more than 25% at a time) will 

12 
 
be released only upon utilization of at least 75% of the funds released earlier 
during that Financial Year. 
 
 
 Under the revised procedure for flow of funds, Ministries/Departments would be 
striving for making realistic estimation of Budget under the Central Sector Schemes. It is 
important to mention here that in view of just-in-time release of funds and other 
conditions of release w.r.t. the revised procedure for flow of funds, there would be no 
last minute rush of expenditure and utilization of funds can also be watched upon. 
 
 Periodical meetings are undertaken to review the expenditure position and 
necessary steps taken. In addition the Programme heads have been directed to review 
the same with the implementing agencies periodically. 
 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 2) 
 
Position of Outstanding Utilization Certificates (UCs) 
 
 The Committee note that as on 31st January 2022, a total of 220 Utilization 
Certificates amounting to Rs. 635.89 crore were due. The Ministry have informed that 
they have taken several initiatives for liquidation of pending UCs. These measures are 
proving to be fruitful as the pending UCs amount for any particular period is 
continuously on a decreasing trend. The Committee are given to understand that during 
the period from 01.04.2021 to 01.02.2022, Utilization Certificates amounting to Rs. 
684.86 crore have been liquidated. The Ministry are monitoring/reviewing 
implementation status of schemes/projects from time to time to ensure smooth 
implementation of various projects which further ensures that the grants released by 
MeitY are utilized in an effective manner. UC status is being reviewed from time to time 
to ascertain the utilization status of released grants to various agencies and aim the has 
been towards achieving zero pendency in UCs and minimum unspent balance with the 
grantee institutions. 
 
 While appreciating the efforts of the Ministry in liquidation of Utilization 
Certificates amounting to Rs. 684.86 crore during the period from April 2021 to February 
2022, the Committee desire that efforts shall continue in future also so as to ensure that 
release of subsequent grants to important Government schemes/projects is not 
adversely affected and gradual buildup of pendency in Utilization Certificates is strictly 
avoided. The Committee desire that continuous effort must be made by the Ministry 
towards nil pendency in UCs and minimum unspent balance with the implementing 
organizations/granter bodies. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The esteemed comments of the Committee have been noted for compliance. 

13 
 
 Regarding Ministry’s efforts towards NIL pendency in UCs and minimum unspent 
balance with the implementing organizations/grantee bodies, it is informed that 
Secretary, MeitY and Financial Adviser take review meetings with Group 
Coordinators/Programme Divisions from time to time to keep a watch on the progress of 
submission of UCs etc. 
 
 It is also informed that as per the revised procedure for flow of funds being 
implemented from 1st April, 2022 (as mentioned in reply to Recommendation No.1) at 
the end of Financial Year, the unspent balances, if any available with Implementing 
agencies would cease to exists under Model I and  would be returned to CFI by CNAs 
under Model II.  
(Recommendation Sl. No. 3) 
 
Internal and Extra Budgetary Resources (IEBR) 
 
 The Committee note that during 2021-22, as against the IEBR target 
ofRs.1615.43 crore set at BE stage which was reduced at Rs.1518.94 crore at RE 
stage, the actual achievement as on 31st December, 2021 has been Rs.1192.15crore 
i.e. 78.49 per cent w.r.t. RE. The Committee have been informed that the IEBR target 
has been reduced by Rs.96.49 crore from BE to RE stage for the year2021-22 owing to 
second spell of Covid-19 pandemic. However, the autonomous bodies have been 
making efforts to exceed the targets set at RE stage as has been the case in previous 
years. The Committee note that an IEBR target of Rs. 1632.98 crore has been fixed for 
the year 2022-23. This is Rs.17.50 crore more than the target fixed at BE stage for the 
previous year. The Ministry are hopeful that the IEBR achievements would be more 
than the target fixed for the current financial year. The Committee, while appreciating 
that the autonomous bodies have been successful in achieving the targets, desire that 
they continue to make efforts to generate more IEBR so as to reduce their dependence 
on Government grants. The Committee hope that IEBR targets set for 2022-23 are not 
reduced drastically and autonomous bodies make sustained efforts to exceed the target 
fixed for the current financial year. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 The observations of the Committee have been noted for compliance. It is 
noteworthy to mention that the actual IEBR achievements for the FY 2021-22 is 
Rs.2030.80 cr which is much more than the targets in BE (Rs.1615.43 cr) and RE 
(Rs.1518.94 cr). All autonomous bodies have been impressed upon to make sustained 
efforts to exceed the target fixed for the current financial year 2022-23. 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 5) 
 
Government Instant Messaging Service (Now named as Sandes) 
  
 The Committee note that Government Instant Messaging Service(GIMS)(Now 
named as Sandes) is an open source, secure, cloud enabled and indigenous platform 
developed by NIC for instant and secured messaging among Government and citizens. 

14 
 
The Sandes system comprises of the App Portal, the Gateway and the Web version. 
While replying to an earlier recommendation contained in the 30th Report of the 
Committee, the Ministry had informed that various e-Gov applications are being 
integrated with Sandes to send free and secured messages to the users. It is already 
registered with NIC email, DigiLockerand e-office and some of the e-gov application 
integrated with Sandes are courts, Parichay, BHUIAN (Chhatisgarh Land Records), 
Jeevan Praman etc. The Committee, however, note even if the service has been rolled 
out fully, there are not much users using the Messaging App. The Committee are also 
surprised tonote that even when NIC developed instant App for messaging, there is 
widespread usage of messaging Apps such as WhatsApp in Government 
establishments/Departments and very little awareness about the existence of Sandes 
App. The Ministry have informed that Secretary, IT had written to all theChief 
Secretaries of the State/UT administration and to the Secretaries of all theMinistries/ 
Department to adopt Sandes as official communication channel. 
 
 In this regard, the Committee, strongly recommend that due publicity within all 
branches of the Government may be given to Sandes to ensure that it reaches a 
minimum critical mass of users in order to make an impact in the already saturated 
instant messaging App space. The Committee would also like to be apprised of the 
response and feedback received from various Ministries/Departments regarding the 
progress made vis-à-vis adoption of Sandes as official communication platform by all 
concerned. The Committee also desire that the Ministry should keep trying for further 
improvement in the App in order to make it more user friendly and secured with 
advanced features. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 NIC have approached various Ministries, Organizations, and Departments and 
have given presentation and demonstration of Sandes. The Secretary IT has written to 
all the Chief Secretaries of State/UT Administration and to the Secretaries of all the 
Ministries/ Department to adopt Sandes as official communication channel. The Proof of 
Concept of Sandes for the testing and suitability purpose has been done by more than 
200 organizations. The feedback and suggestions received from them has been 
incorporated in the system.  
 
 The App is security audited by CIRA (Cyber Information Research Agency), 
DRDO and they have given clearance for usage. Also the App is tested for ethical 
hacking by CDAC and found secure. Sandes App is chosen by the committee chaired 
by Additional Secretary MeitY as the common App to be used by the Govt.  
 
Some of the enhancements and improvements done are: 
1. Audio and Video Group call secured by End to End Encryption introduced in the 
App. 
2. Improvement in  UI/UX. 
3. App has been further enhanced with auto-contact syncing, push notifications, 
message latency and improvement in decryption of messages . 
4. Message Tractability for Compliance to intermediary guidelines as per revised IT 
Act. 
5. Monitoring of Sandes production environment through Grafana. 

15 
 
6. Setup  and tested DR for present production environment.   
7. Introduced alternate mechanism for login at Portal by Nodal officers.   
8. Enhanced bulk records import facility on the Portal. 
9. Member Management module for managing groups for group admins.  
10. Procured 50 servers for Sandes dedicated infrastructure. Servers have been co-
located at Bhubaneswar data centre and the provisioning and deployment is in 
progress. 
11. Project proposal for roll out, operation and maintenance of Sandes for the next 2 
years is submitted for approval to MeitY. 
 
Integration of e-Gov application (G2C and C2G):  
Successfully implemented the service based model for G2C and C2G two way 
communication through e-Gov applications Till date more than 220 e-Gov applications 
are integrated with Sandes and efforts are being made to integrated more applications 
to enable the e-Gov applications to send free and secured messages to the target 
users. Some of the e-Gov application recently integrated with Sandes are e- 
Counseling, SPARROW, e-Office, e-Waybill, PFMS, e-Courts, GSTPrime, eSampark 
and eKalyani. 
 
Adoption of the System 
Constant efforts are being made to reach out to various Ministries and organisations by 
giving presentations, demos and hand holding. In December 2021, the Secretary IT 
has written to all the Chief Secretaries of State/UT Administration and to the 
Secretaries of all the Ministries/ Department to adopt Sandes as official communication 
channel. The user base has increased from 4.5 Lakhs (in May 2021) to 19.3 Lakhs and 
they have exchanged approximately 5.2 Cr messages using this platform.  
 
Recently, presentation was given to Department of Food and Public Distribution, 
Department of Telecommunication, Rajya Sabha and Lok Sabha, Ministry of Tribal 
Affairs, Ministry of Information and Broadcasting, CDAC, Ministry of Labour and 
Employment, CWC, and Indian Railways. Directorate of Information Technology - 
Puducherry, DDDSI (East, North and Central Zones) Army, Publication Division 
(Ministry of Information and Broadcasting), Office of Registrar General, India, Tripura 
Police, Ministry of Labour and Employment and Railway Board have recently started 
using Sandes for official communication. 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 6) 
Poshan Tracker 
 
 The Committee note that MeitY in coordination with the Ministry of Women and 
Child Development have launched an important project called Poshan Tracker which is 
targeted about 14 lakh Anganwadi workers across the country to monitor the progress 

16 
 
of the health condition and physical growth of children on providing nutrition to infants, 
young children, pregnant women and young mothers. Through this App, Anganwadi 
workers are able to monitor seven types of beneficiaries, viz. children up to 06 months, 
6 months to 3 years, 3 years to 6years, adolescent girl, pregnant woman and lactating 
mothers. The App is available in 22 languages. The Committee note that it has been 
developed in house and is a nationalised system. It has also been reported that about 
14 lakh Anganwadi workers have been on boarded on Poshan tracker. While 
appreciating the good work done by the Ministry, the Committee recommend that the 
reach of Poshan tracker may be increased in remote areas of the country, especially in 
tribal areas so that technology may be leveraged to extend benefits to maximum 
number of people. The Committee desire that they may be kept informed about the 
targets and on-field development/impact with regard to this initiative of the Ministry. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 Earlier project was with NIC Poshan team. Then it was transferred to National e-
Governance Division (NeGD). Poshan Tracker was launched on 1st March 2021. As of 
31st July, 2022, the latest update is as follows:-  
 
Eligible Beneficiaries 10,63,00,296 
Pregnant Women 93,57,756 
Lactating Mothers 49,71,938 
Children (0-6 Months) 40,96,668 
Children (6 Months - 3 
Years) 
4,05,63,578 
Children (3 - 6 Years) 4,01,03,459 
Adolescent Girls 72,06,897 
 
Poshan Tracker has been adopted by all Stated and UTs. Total Aadhaar Verified 
Beneficiary has reached at 5,61,15,074 i.e more than 50%. Total Anganwadi centers 
registered are 13,95,948 and Anganwadi Workers using Poshan Tracker 
are 13,82,358.  
 
 
Poshan Tracker’s few functionalities like daily tracking, Beneficiary creation and view of 
home visits have already been enabled in offline mode. However, there are few 
more features like health tracking and supplementary nutrition to be developed in 
offline mode.  
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 7) 
Regulatory Bodies 
Cyber Security (CERT-In), NCCC & Data Governance 
 
 The Committee note that Indian Computer Emergency Response Team(CERT-
In) under the Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology, Government of India 
has been designated under Section 70B of the Information Technology Act 2000 to 
serve as the national agency in the area of cyber security incident response. CERT-In 
issues alert and advisories regarding latest cyber threats, vulnerabilities and counter 

17 
 
measures to protect computers and network on regular basis. So far as the 
underutilization of funds under the head is concerned, an amount of Rs. 216 crore had 
been allocated at BE stage during2021-22, which was reduced to Rs. 213 crore at RE 
stage and actual utilization till January, 2022 has been 98.31 crore only. For the year 
2022-23, an amount of Rs.215 crore have been allocated at BE stage against the 
proposed Rs. 263 crore for procurement of capital IT infrastructure items as well as for 
establishment cost. 
 
 The Committee have been informed that additional funds will be required for 
capital equipment for CERT-In activities and same will be sought during RE stage. The 
Committee have also been informed that CERT-In is in urgent need of additional human 
resource to keep up with the rapid increase in the incidents and cyber security issues, 
urgent nature of incident response activities including onsite response, to sustain key 
current as well as planned new activities/projects and to address cyber security issues 
pertaining to emerging technologies and areas. To address the challenge, CERT-In has 
moved a proposal for additional creation of posts at various levels. 
 
 The Committee also feel that the scope and activities of CERT-In has increased 
manifold of late and it needs additional human resource to deal with the rapid increase 
in incidents of cyber crime, cyber theft and other mischievous activities on cyber 
platforms. It is imperative that activities/projects ongoing as well as futuristic being 
carried out by Cert-In under the aegis of Ministry to address cyber security concerns, 
must not suffer on account of human resource shortage. The Committee desire that the 
issue of additional human resource requirement of CERT-In are looked into with due 
importance and the proposal mooted by Cert-In for additional creation of posts may be 
considered and taken to a logical conclusion. Regarding the requirement of capital 
equipment for CERT-IN, the Committee hope that the Ministry shall impress upon the 
Ministry of Finance for additional funds at RE stage. Further progress on both the fronts 
maybe reported to the Committee. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 The scope and activities of CERT-In has increased manifold of late and the need 
for augmenting human resource at CERT-In has been recognized in the Ministry to deal 
with the rapid increase in cyber incidents, cyber theft and other mischievous activities 
on cyber platforms. In this connection, a proposal for creation of additional posts at 
various levels was submitted by CERT-In to MeitY. 
 
 The proposal of CERT-In has been discussed between the Ministry and CERT-In 
and deliberations have been made regarding human resource needed to sustain current 
work load, planned new activities/projects as well as to address cyber security issues 
pertaining to emerging technologies and areas. Based on the discussions and 
deliberations, the proposal of CERT-In is being updated to include a comprehensive 
justification supported with a rationale by showcasing critical nature of cases being dealt 
by CERT-In and future plans to ensure a Safe & Trusted cyberspace in the country.  
   
 In addition, a proposal for creation of 59 nos. of posts for NCCC project of CERT-
In is already submitted to Department of Expenditure, Ministry of Finance through 

18 
 
MeitY. Ministry of Finance has sought details from MeitY regarding manpower in all 
organisations of MeitY, which is being collated and will be submitted. 
Regarding utilization of funds, an amount of Rs. 213 Crores finalized at RE stage for the 
year 2021-22 out of which an amount of Rs. 193.70 Crores has been utilized as on 
31stMarch 2022. 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 8) 
 
National Cyber Coordination Centre (NCCC) 
 The Committee note that CERT-In is also setting up National Cyber Coordination 
Centre (NCCC) to generate necessary situational awareness of existing and potential 
cyber security threats and enable timely information sharing for proactive, preventive 
and protective actions by individual entities. The phase I of NCCC has been 
operationalized in July 2017. The full scale NCCC is envisaged to become operational 
by end of 2022 with expected availability of requisite funds and human resource. NCCC 
project has been merged with regular activities of CERT-In with effect from the F.Y. 
2021-22. The budget requirement of NCCC establishment component has also been 
merged with regular budget of CERT-In from F.Y. 2021-22. The Committee also note 
that for Cyber Security(NCCC & Others), the provision of funds has been enhanced 
from Rs. 200 crore at BE stage to Rs 339 crore at RE Stage for the year 2021-22. Also 
for the year2022-23, an amount of Rs 300 crore has been allocated at BE stage as 
against the amount of Rs 200 crore allocated at BE 2021-22 in view of the 
recommendations made by this Committee. The Committee note that CERT-In is 
currently undertaking various tasks for the full fledged implementation of the project and 
has initiated NCCC Phase-II Stage 2. 
 
 The Committee very strongly feel that there is a significant surge in cyber 
incidents and cyber security breaches and it is imperative that capabilities and resilience 
of the country to deal with imminent dangers on cyber space are enhanced 
proportionately. Cyber security has to remain at the forefront of agenda/priority items for 
the Ministry and no fund crunch should come in the way of ensuring a safe ecosystem 
as far as the cyberworld is concerned. In fact the Committee feel that the Ministry must 
dovetail their efforts to achieve a more secured cyberworld especially in the wake of 
renewed challenges in this space. The Committee, therefore, recommend that funds for 
cyber security may be increased on a year on basis to forestall any failures in this 
domain for sheer lack of funds. The Committee also recommend the Ministry to take all 
necessary measures for early setting up of full fledged NCCC so that the country is 
adequately equipped with infrastructure and necessary means for generating situational 
awareness to deal with cyber security threats and enable timely intervention. NCCC 
may also be provided with adequate resources and human resource on priority to deal 
with challenges in securing cyber space. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 Out of Rs. 300 Cr. allocated under Cyber Security (NCCC & Others) budget head 
in the current F.Y. 2022-23, Rs. 260 Cr. has been earmarked for NCCC. Activities for 

19 
 
procurement of capital equipment are in advanced stage and setting-up of full-fledged 
NCCC is targeted to be completed by end of the year 2022. There is immediate 
requirement of additional manpower for NCCC and a proposal for sanction of 59 posts 
(S&T and non-S&T) is under consideration at Department of Expenditure, Ministry of 
Finance. Ministry of Finance has sought details from MeitY regarding manpower in all 
organisations of MeitY, which is being collated and will be submitted. 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 9) 
 
Digital India Programme 
Electronics Governance including Externally Aided Project (EAP) 
 
 The Committee note that E-Governance is a sub-scheme under Digital India 
Programme which consists of various projects related to development of digital 
infrastructure such as State Wide Area Network(SWAN), National Data Centre(NDC) & 
State Data Centres (SDC), MeghRaj – Government of India Cloud initiative, e-mail 
solution of Govt. of India, PRAGATI VC, Digital Platforms such as MyGov, Digital 
Locker, e-Sign, e-Hospital, National Data Highway, UMANG,NCOG, Open Government 
data, e-Taal, Rapid assessment System(RAS), delivery of services through CSC, web, 
Kiosks & Mobile platform, Digital Village and Capacity Building programme etc. Each 
project has its own initiation date and deadline for completion. During 2021-22, an 
amount of Rs. 425 crore had been allocated at BE stage which was increased to Rs. 
535 crore at RE stage and actual utilization till January, 2022 has been Rs. 192.08 crore 
only. The Committee note that fund requirement has increased due to initiation of some 
new projects such as InCEP by MyGov, Secure eMail Services for GoI, Open 
Government Data(OGD 2.0), Enhancement of NIC National Cloud Services, etc. The 
Committee also note that an amount of Rs 525.0 crore has been allocated for Electronic 
Governance Scheme during BE 2022-23. It has also been informed that due to ongoing 
COVID-19 pandemic only essential new projects are being initiated and funds will be 
released to implementing agencies taking into consideration the status of pending UC 
and unspent balances with them. Keeping in view that several mission mode projects 
are being implemented to provide digital infrastructure for efficient delivery of e-services, 
shortfall in utilization of fund under e-Governance is a matter of concern. The 
Committee recommend the Ministry to address the challenges being faced under the 
scheme and ensure that funds allocated for 2022-23 are utilized fully. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 During the FY 2021-22, an amount of Rs. 316.78 crore has been utilized against 
allocated budget of Rs. 535 crore.  Further, it may be noted that for FY 2022-23, as on 
20th July, 2022, an amount of Rs. 293.22 crore has already been utilized against 
allocated budget of Rs. 525.00 crore under Electronic Governance Scheme. 
 
 
 

20 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 10) 
 
 The Committee note that the primary challenges faced for implementation of 
Electronics Governance Scheme are digital literacy and digital connectivity. Besides 
these challenges, the digital divide gap is also attributed to the fact that many citizens 
belonging to the weaker sections are deprived of availing the digital services. To tackle 
these challenges, Pradhan Mantri Gramin Digital Shaksharta Abhiyan (PMGDISHA) has 
been implemented to usher in digital literacy in rural areas with the objective of covering 
six crore rural households and BharatNet project with the aim to connect all 2.50 lakh 
Gram Panchayats (GPs) in the country. The Committee note that the Ministry are 
implementing various projects under E-Governance to provide digital infrastructure for 
delivery of e-services. Successful implementation of the scheme squarely depends on 
the digital literacy and digital connectivity. The Committee while acknowledging the 
efforts made by Government through the implementation of PMGDISHA exhort the 
Ministry to aggressively take all out steps to usher in digital literacy in the country 
especially rural areas. On the progress of the implementation of digital literacy scheme 
like PMGDISHA, the Committee are hopeful that substantial number of people must 
have been trained. However, it remains to be seen to that extent, the programme has 
been successful in ushering in digital literacy in the country. In the absence of any 
parameters to assess its impacts, it is difficult to objectively assess the benefits of the 
programme. Since the success of electronics governance greatly depends on the digital 
literacy and digital connectivity in the country, the Committee recommend that constant 
effort must be made by the Ministry by involving State Governments, NGOs and various 
entities for providing the requisite training. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 The recommendation w.r.t. PMGDISHA Scheme has been noted. Regarding the 
progress of the PMGDISHA Scheme, it is stated that, under the said Scheme, as of 
31.03.2022, around 5.80 crore candidates have been enrolled. Around 4.91 crore 
candidates have completed the training out of which more than 3.64 crore candidates 
have been certified by duly authorized 3rd party assessment agencies.  
 
 With reference to the assessment of impacts and benefits of the scheme, it is 
indicated that the Scheme guidelines stipulate that Impact Assessment Study(ies) of the 
scheme to be conducted by an independent Third Party and suitable 
institutions/organizations to carry out the study to be engaged by the Ministry of 
Electronics and Technology. In view of this, the scheme has been assessed by three 
agencies till date namely IIT Delhi, Council for Social Development (CSD) and Indian 
Institute of Public Administration (IIPA). 
 
 The last Impact Assessment study of the PMGDISHA scheme has been 
conducted by the Indian Institute of Public Administration (IIPA). The study report 
findings are given below: 
 
 PMGDISHA is an unique scheme due to its mass scale and use of remotely 
proctored examination. 
 18% fund used in SCSP, 12% for TSP and 11% for NER have made sure the 
empowerment of weaker sections. 

21 
 
 Women participation is very large and their inclusion at the rural level will open 
up the path for the learning of the whole family. 
  More than 55% of respondents cited a direct benefit to their livelihoods after 
PMGDISHA training. 
 Almost 50% respondents stated that PMGDISHA helped them get a better Job. 
 More than 40% of respondents empowered 1-5 people, 22.8% were able to help 
6-10 people, 12.9% were able to help 10-20 people with the knowledge from 
PMGDISHA. 
 PMGDISHA training has had a formidable impact on the use of ICT and other 
forms of digital media. 
 PMGDISHA has served the beneficiaries by facilitating their access to a wide 
range of information points and services for multitude of purposes. It has helped 
to decrease the overall digital divide in the country. 
 COVID 19 has put an unprecedented situation of uncertainty even in rural India. 
Digital initiatives have made a lot of things function even in the time of complete 
lockdown. Right from the banking systems, e-governance systems and PDS 
were aided immensely because of the availability of online processes. People in 
the rural areas have continued with their livelihood with the help of digital 
systems helping procure their produce, doorstep financial services, information 
gathering among other thing using digital technologies. The need of programs 
like PMGDISHA has become a necessity in times of such paradigm shifts in new 
environments. Understanding digital tools & ICT and using them effectively is the 
need of the hour and has proved as the saviour for the current crisis in 
supporting economic and social activities. 
 
 Further, it is stated that the scheme envisages the State /UT Governments to 
play an important role in implementation through their identified Implementing Agencies 
for achieving the targets in a time bound manner.  
 
 Similar efforts to spread digital Literacy in the country by Industry, NGOs and 
others are integrated under the Scheme and necessary coordination in this regard is 
done by CSC-SPV. The CSC-SPV coordinates and bring out necessary convergence of 
various partners in this regard. The candidates who are trained through such partners, 
Industry, NGOs etc. are awarded digital literacy certificates by the recognized Certifying 
Agencies. For such candidates, the training are imparted by these agencies through 
Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) funds. 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No. 10 of Chapter I) 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 11) 
 
e-Governance-DIGILOCKER 
 
 The Committee note that Digital Locker provides a dedicated cloud based 
platform as a personal space to residents for storage, sharing, verification of documents 
& certificates. The Committee note that 9.22 crore users have been registered and 486 
crore documents issued by the Department are available with Digital Locker. The 

22 
 
Committee appreciate the initiatives taken by the Ministry with respect to ‘DigiLocker’. 
While acknowledging the fact that DigiLocker by itself is a very potent instrument for 
enabling people to do away with the need to carry or look for paper records or look for 
printed certificates, and completely switch over to a digital way of working, the 
Committee also observe that ‘privacy’ remains a very important concern for the public at 
large. The Committee also note that it is an attempt to create convenience on the lines 
of Aadhaar as digital identity rather than a physical card. The Committee are given to 
understand that more and more State Governments have issued instructions and use of 
DigiLocker is going up progressively. DigiLocker is also facilitating setting up of eHealth 
Locker in the country. While taking note of the numerous benefits under the initiative, 
the Committee strongly recommend that privacy of individuals using ‘DigiLocker’ may be 
given top priority by the Ministry. The Committee also recommend the Ministry to make 
an effort to popularise Digital Locker so as to increase its user base. Further, when the 
country is moving toward One Nation, one digital platform for each of the core areas 
through initiatives such as DigiLocker, Digital Health Mission, National Public Digital 
Platform in Health, education, agriculture, e-courts and justice platforms, etc. securing 
the data services for seamless flow of information across sectors becomes very 
important. The Committee are given to understand that National Data Centre Policy and 
Hyper Scale Data Centre Schemes are ready. The Ministry already had an inter-
ministerial consultation. The Committee desire that the above policies may be finalized 
and the schemes are concretized in a definite time frame. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 The following actions have been taken by the Ministry:  
Regarding Privacy: For the sharing of the user’s documents with any department/ 
organization, the access mechanism of documents in DigiLocker follows the principle of 
user authentication and authorization by the user. Only upon the consent of the user, 
any data is shared. This ensures the privacy of the user’s data/ documents.  
Regarding Security: DigiLocker follows standard security practices and regularly 
undergoes security audits. Moreover, security in DigiLocker is ensured by steps such as 
Multi factor Authentication based Sign-Up and Sign-in, timed log out, hosting of 
DigiLocker system on ISO 27001 security certified data centre, X.509 RSA2048 bits 
secure socket layer (SSL) Encryption for information transmitted during any activity.  
Regarding increase of user base: MeitY has undertaken various interventions to bring 
regulatory/ policy level changes for the acceptance of digital documents from 
DigiLocker. Some of these are acceptance of DigiLocker by RBI, SEBI, BCAS, Ministry 
of Railways, Ministry of Finance and MoRTH. Few key transformational decisions which 
would bolster the increase in consumption of digital documents are as under: DARPG 
has notified all the ministries/statutory bodies/PSUs to adopt DigiLocker to promote 
Citizen-centric services. Ministry of Education has announced that DigiLocker will be the 
sole repository for National Academic Depository. DBT Mission has also notified to 
utilize DigiLocker services for all its schemes. It is submitted that currently 12 crore 
users have been registered and 560 crore documents issued by the Department are 

23 
 
available with Digital Locker. Further, to popularise Digital Locker and to increase its 
user base, following are being planned: Few of the departments such as MoD, MoH, 
EPFO, ITR, RGI, Soil Health Card, Voter ID Card, NREGA Job Card, SAI, NGDRS, e-
shram card, State Universities, etc. are interacted for bringing their services on 
DigiLocker. Currently, DigiLocker is also facilitating setting up of eHealth Locker in the 
country. 
Regarding finalization of the National Data Centre Policy and Hyper Scale Data 
Centre Schemes: Based on the inputs received during stakeholder consultation, the 
National Data Center and Cloud policy and the Date center scheme have been revised. 
The revised policy and scheme are under approval process in MeitY. 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No. 10 of Chapter I) 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 12) 
 
Manpower Development Scheme 
 The Committee note that under the Manpower Development Scheme, the 
activities are targeted to ensure availability of trained human resources for the 
manufacturing & service sectors of electronic and IT industry. Various schemes/projects 
pertaining to Human Resource Development for Electronics and ICT Sector have been 
approved and are under implementation. The Committee have been informed that 
during 2021-22, out of 3 lakh candidate targeted, 2.50 lakh candidates have been 
trained and utilized so far. A skill development target of 3.30 lakh candidates is 
proposed for the year 2022-23. With regard to utilization of funds, the Committee note 
that an amount of Rs. 400 crore had been allocated at BE & RE 2021-22 and actual 
utilization as on 31.01.2022 has been Rs. 85.15 crore only i.e. 21 per cent of the RE. 
During 2022-23, an amount of Rs. 350 crore has been allocated at BE against the 
proposed amount of Rs. 450crore. The Committee also note that MeitY and NASSCOM 
have jointly conceived a new initiative titled "FutureSkills PRIME (Programme for Re-
skilling/up-skilling ecosystem of IT Manpower for Employability)", which aims at creating 
a "reskilling/up-skilling eco system for B2C in 10 new/emerging technologies such as 
virtual reality, Internet of Things, Big Data Analytics, Artificial Intelligence, Robotic 
Process Automation, Additive Manufacturing/3D Printing, Cloud Computing, Social & 
Mobile, Cyber Security and Block chain, etc. to facilitate continuous skill as well as 
knowledge enhancement of professionals in line with their aspirations and aptitude in a 
self-paced skill environment. Out of 4.12 lakh beneficiaries envisaged, 108436 
candidates have completed their courses. 
 
 The Committee note that Manpower Development Scheme is an important 
initiative by the Ministry to ensure availability of trained human resource for the 
manufacturing and service sector of electronics and IT industry. The Committee are, 
however, concerned to note that the status of utilization till January, 2022under this 
scheme during 2021-22 has been abysmally low i.e. only 21 per cent of the amount 
allocated at RE. Certainly with this pace of utilization of fund, milestone achievement in 
human resource development seems a distant dream. The Committee desire the 

24 
 
Ministry to ensure optimum utilization of funds during 2022-23 and achieve the target for 
skill development of 3.30 lakh candidates. With regard to future skills PRIME, the 
Committee are of the view that due to the rapidly developing nature of electronics and 
IT Industry, re-skilling of workforce in IT becomes very important. The Committee feel 
that in order to reap the benefits of the digital economy, it is essential that the country 
must have well trained and skilled human resource. The Committee desire that the 
Ministry increase collaboration with NASSCOM in the field of skill development, 
especiallyin areas of new and emerging technologies. The Committee may be kept 
informed of the progress made in this regard. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The recommendation of the Standing Committee has been noted. In this regard, 
it is stated that against the target  for skill development of 3.00 lakh, more than 4.00 lakh 
candidates have been trained and certified during the financial year 2021-22. Under the 
Manpower Development Scheme, a total of Rs. 273.65 crore was utilized during the FY 
2021-22. As suggested, all efforts would be made to achieve the skill development 
target of 3.30 lakh candidates by optimally utilizing the funds during the financial year 
2022-23. 
 
 Further, it is stated that under the FutureSkills PRIME platform, so far more 
than 7 Lakh candidates have signed-up.  A total of 3.46 Lakh candidates have been 
enrolled in aligned and non-aligned courses, out of which 1.21 Lakh candidates have 
completed their courses.  Under this initiative, a blended learning programme has also 
been created with 40 Centres of CDAC and NIELIT as Resource Centres (Lead/ Co-
Lead Centres) to institutionalize the blended-learning training Programmes in a hub and 
spoke mode for the 10 emerging technologies. These centers have so far trained 524 
trainers and 4,292 Government officials. 
 
 With regard to suggestion for collaboration with NASSCOM, it is stated that 
NASSCOM is actively engaged under the FutureSkills PRIME initiative. Further, Human 
Resource Development Division, Meity has associated NASSCOM in all Skill 
Development projects/schemes as a member of all Project Review  & Steering Groups. 
 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 14) 
 
Promotion of Electronics and IT Hardware Manufacturing PLI for Large scale 
Electronics and IT Hardware 
 
 The Committee note that a budget of Rs. 4056 crore has been earmarked for 
2022-23 for PLI Scheme for Large Scale Electronics Manufacturing and PLI Scheme for 
IT Hardware. The two Production Linked Incentive (PLI) Schemes offer production 
linked incentives to boost domestic manufacturing and attract large investments in 
Mobile Phones & Specified Electronic Components, and IT Hardware respectively. 
Under the PLI Scheme for Mobile Phones & Specified Electronic Components notified 
on 1st April, 2020, incentives of 6% to 3% shall be extended on incremental sales (over 
the base year 2019-20) of goods manufactured in India and covered under the target 
segment to eligible companies for a period of five years. The Committee note that PLI 

25 
 
scheme for Large Scale Electronics Manufacturing (Mobile Phones and Components) 
has been a huge success in terms of immense interest received from Global as well as 
Domestic Mobile Manufacturing companies. Over the next 5 years, the Scheme is 
expected to lead to total production of about INR 10.5 lakh crore. The scheme is also 
expected to boost exports significantly. Out of the total production, more than 60% is 
expected to be contributed by exports of the order of INR 6.5 lakh crore. The Scheme 
will bring additional investment in electronics manufacturing to the tune of INR 11,000 
crore. PLI Scheme will also help in promotion of domestic champion companies by 
reviving Indian Brands and strengthening Indian EMS companies. The Committee 
further note that Union Cabinet has approved the Production Linked Incentive (PLI) 
Scheme for IT Hardware on 24.02.2021 in 10 key sectors, including 
Electronic/Technology Products, for enhancing India’s manufacturing capabilities and 
exports. The Committee have been informed thata total of 14 companies have been 
approved under the PLI Scheme for IT Hardware. Under this Scheme incentives of 4% 
to 2% shall be extended on incremental sales (over the base year 2019-20) of goods 
manufactured in India and covered under the target segments of Laptops, Servers, 
Tablets and All-in-One PCs to eligible companies for a period of four years. Over the 
next 4 years, the 14 approved companies under the Scheme are expected to lead to 
total production of about INR 1,60,000 crore. Out of the total production of INR 
1,60,000crore in the next 4 years, more than 37 per cent is expected to be contributed 
by exports of the order of INR 60,000 crore. The scheme is expected to bring an 
additional investment in electronics manufacturing to the tune of INR 2,500 crore. 
Generation of 36,066 additional direct jobs and four times indirect employment is 
expected under the PLI Scheme for IT Hardware. 
 
 The Committee note that while the Ministry are taking a number of initiatives for 
the promotion of electronics IT hardware manufacturing including the PLI Schemes to 
boost domestic manufacturing and attract large investments in mobile and specific 
components of IT hardware, these have not been able to create that much impact in 
boosting the domestic manufacturing as the country still remains a net importer of 
electronics including telecom equipment. The Committee note that electronics 
manufacturing is one of the most important pillars of Digital India and manufacturing 
sector needs a continuous push with overall thrust on promotion of ‘Make in India’. 
Apart from domestic value addition, this will contribute to GDP and employment 
generation. The Committee recommend that both the schemes are implemented in right 
earnest so that demand for electronic hardware is met through domestic production and 
India emerges as a global hub for electronic hardware manufacturing. The Committee 
are hopeful that the above two schemes will enable large scale electronics 
manufacturing, domestic supply chain of components and facilitate building of state of 
the art infrastructure for electronics ecosystem. The Committee recommend that the PLI 
scheme is implemented in a time bound manner and vigorous screening of the 
companies applying for the two PLI schemes may be done so as to avoid any defaulter 
in the long run. The Committee may be apprised of the targets achieved under these 
schemes. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 After the success of the First Round of PLI Scheme in attracting investments in 
mobile phone and electronic components manufacturing, Second Round of the PLI 

26 
 
Scheme for Large Scale Electronics Manufacturing was launched on 11.03.2021 for 
incentivising Electronic Components. Under the Second Round, incentives of 5% to 3% 
have been extended on incremental sales (over base year i.e., FY 2019-20) of goods 
manufactured in India and covered under the target segment, to eligible companies, for 
a period of four (4) years. 16 companies have been approved under the second round 
of PLI Scheme for Large Scale Electronics Manufacturing. 
  
 Over the tenure of Second Round, the 16 approved electronic component 
manufacturers are expected to generate a total production of up to INR 12,432 crore. 
The Second Round of the Scheme is expected to bring an additional investment in 
electronics manufacturing to the tune of INR 573 crore. 
  
 In accordance with the announcement made by Hon’ble Union Finance & 
Corporate Affairs Minister on 28.06.2021 to provide relief to companies approved under 
the PLI Scheme affected by the COVID-19 pandemic, the tenure of the PLI Scheme for 
Large Scale Electronics Manufacturing has been extended by one year i.e., from 2024-
25 to 2025-26. The notification in this regard was issued on 23.09.2021.  15 out of 16 
approved companies under the first round of PLI Scheme have opted for the aforesaid 
extension. 
  
 Further, by the end of March 2022, PLI Scheme for Large Scale Electronics 
Manufacturing has been able to bring an investment to the tune of INR 4,000 crore and 
an incremental production of INR 1,42,000 crore. 
 
 The PLI Scheme for Large Scale Electronics Manufacturing was notified on 
01.04.2020 and is under implementation. 32 companies have been approved under the 
Scheme including first and second round. The PLI Scheme for IT Hardware was notified 
on 03.03.2021 and in under implementation. 14 companies have been approved under 
the Scheme. 
 
Production Linked Incentive Scheme (PLI) for IT Hardware was notified on 3rd 
March, 2021. The PLI Scheme extends an incentive of 4% to 2% / 1% on net 
incremental sales (over base year i.e., FY 2019-20) of goods under target segments 
that are manufactured in India to eligible companies, for a period of four years (FY 
2021-22 to FY 2024-25). The target IT hardware segments under the Scheme include 
Laptops, Tablets, All-in-One Personal Computers (PCs) and Servers. Incentives are 
applicable under the Scheme from 01.04.2021. 14 companies have been approved 
under the PLI Scheme for IT Hardware. 
 
 
Both the PLI Schemes are being implemented through a Nodal Agency which is acting 
as a Project Management Agency (PMA). PMA is inter-alia responsible for the following 
for carrying out the activities related to the implementation of PLI Scheme: 
(i) Appraisal of applications and verification of eligibility for support under the 
Scheme. 

27 
 
(ii) Examination of claims eligible for disbursement of incentive under the 
Scheme. 
 
Compilation of data regarding progress and performance of the Scheme including 
Incremental Investment and Incremental Sales of Manufactured goods for companies 
under the Scheme. 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 15) 
 
Programme for development of Semiconductors and Display Manufacturing 
Ecosystem 
 
 The Committee note that in furtherance of the vision of Aatma Nirbhar Bharat, 
the Union Cabinet has approved Semicon India programme of INR 76,000crore for the 
development of sustainable semiconductor and display manufacturing ecosystem in the 
country. The programme aims at providing attractive incentive support to companies 
engaged in semiconductor and display manufacturing. This shall pave the way for 
India’s technological leadership in these areas of strategic importance and economic 
self-reliance. The Committee note that four schemes have been introduced under the 
aforesaid programme, namely, Scheme for setting up of Semiconductor Fabs in India, 
Scheme for setting up of Display Fabs in India, Scheme for setting up of Compound 
Semiconductors / Silicon Photonics / Sensors Fab and Semiconductor Assembly, 
Testing, Marking and Packaging (ATMP) / OSAT facilities in India, and Design Linked 
Incentive (DLI) Scheme . In addition to these schemes, the Committee have been 
informed that Government has also approved modernisation of Semi-Conductor 
Laboratory, Mohali as a brownfield Fab. Further, approval has also been granted for the 
setting up of India Semiconductor Mission (ISM) as an Independent Business Division 
within Digital India Corporation having administrative and financial autonomy to drive 
India’s strategies for developing semiconductors and display manufacturing ecosystem. 
Envisioned to be led by global experts in the Semiconductor and Display industry, the 
ISM will serve as the nodal agency for efficient, coherent and smooth implementation of 
the schemes. The Committee have been informed that the strength of India lies in 
semiconductors design. India is designing for the companies that comes from outside 
but are not making our own IP design and competing with the other companies. The 
Committee also note that semiconductor lab has been transferred from the Department 
of Space to the Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology. 
 
 The Committee note that semiconductors manufacturing in India is at an ascent 
stage and the country is yet to make a foray into this sector. There is an urgent need to 
promote semiconductors manufacturing facilities in the country. It is a matter of concern 
that so far no Indian company is manufacturing semiconductors in India though the 
strength of the country lies in semiconductor design. The Committee are of the view that 
at a time when there is global shortage of semiconductors and chips, the Government’s 
policy to incentivize the semiconductor and display design sector assumes great 
significance. This is also in tune with the vision of National Policy on Electronics, 2019 
to position India as a global hub for electronics design and manufacturing with 
semiconductor and chip designing at its core. The Committee recommend that the 
Ministry create an enabling environment for semiconductor ecosystem by coordinating 

28 
 
with all the stakeholders so as to facilitate production of semiconductors within the 
country. The significance of semiconductors in other related fields like automobiles, 
weapon systems, etc. is well known and keeping in view the future requirements of the 
economy, the Committee feel that the project deserves focussed attention of the 
Ministry. The Committee may be apprised of the progress made under each component 
of the scheme. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Progress of Programme for Development of Semiconductors and Display 
Manufacturing Ecosystem in India 
 
 The vision of AtmaNirbharta in electronics & semiconductors was given further 
momentum by the Union Cabinet, chaired by the Hon’ble Prime Minister, approving the 
Semicon India programme with a total outlay of INR 76,000 crore for the development of 
semiconductor and display manufacturing ecosystem in our country. The programme 
aims to provide financial support to companies investing in semiconductors, display 
manufacturing and design ecosystem. This will serve to pave the way for India’s 
growing presence in the global electronics value chains. 
 
Following four schemes have been notified on 21.12.2021 under the aforesaid 
programme: 
 
1. Scheme for setting up of Semiconductor Fabs in India provides fiscal support to 
eligible applicants for setting up of Semiconductor Fabs which is aimed at attracting 
large investments for setting up semiconductor wafer fabrication facilities in the country. 
Following fiscal support has been approved under the scheme:  
 28nm or Lower - Up to 50% of the Project Cost 
 Above 28 nm to 45nm - Up to 40% of the Project Cost 
 Above 45 nm to 65nm - Up to 30% of the Project Cost 
 
The application portal of the scheme was open for receiving application till 15.02.2022. 
Three companies viz., Vedanta in JV with Foxconn; IGSS ventures Pte., Singapore; 
ISMC Analog Fab Private Limited have submitted applications under the scheme for 
setting up of Semiconductor Fabs in India. The applications received under the scheme 
are under the evaluation and appraisal process.  
 
2. Scheme for setting up of Display Fabs in India provides fiscal support to eligible 
applicants for setting up of Display Fabs which is aimed at attracting large investments 
for setting up TFT LCD / AMOLED based display fabrication facilities in the country. The 
Scheme provides fiscal support of up to 50% of Project Cost subject to a ceiling of 
INR 12,000 crore per Fab. 
 
The application portal of the scheme was open for receiving application till 15.02.2022. 
Two companies viz., Vedanta and Elest have submitted applications under the scheme 
for setting up of Display Fabs in India. The applications received under the scheme are 
under the evaluation and appraisal process.  

29 
 
 
3. Scheme for setting up of Compound Semiconductors / Silicon Photonics / 
Sensors Fab and Semiconductor Assembly, Testing, Marking and Packaging 
(ATMP) / OSAT facilities in India: The Scheme provides a fiscal support of 30% of the 
Capital Expenditure to the eligible applicants for setting up of Compound 
Semiconductors / Silicon Photonics (SiPh) / Sensors (including MEMS) Fab and 
Semiconductor ATMP / OSAT facilities in India. 
 
The application portal of the scheme is open for receipt of application initially for a 
period of three years starting from 01.01.2022. Applications under the scheme shall be 
received and appraised on an ongoing basis. As of date, six companies have registered 
on the ISM portal under this Scheme. 
 
4. Design Linked Incentive (DLI) Scheme offers financial incentives, design 
infrastructure support across various stages of development and deployment of 
semiconductor design for Integrated Circuits (ICs), Chipsets, System on Chips (SoCs), 
Systems & IP Cores and semiconductor linked design. The scheme provides “Product 
Design Linked Incentive” of up to 50% of the eligible expenditure subject to a ceiling of 
₹15 Crore per application and “Deployment Linked Incentive” of 6% to 4% of net sales 
turnover over 5 years subject to a ceiling of ₹30 Crore per application.  
 
90 registration have been received out of which 9 companies have filed the application 
under this scheme. 
 
Semi-conductor Laboratory (SCL): In addition to the above schemes, Government 
has approved for modernization and commercialization of Semi-conductor Laboratory 
(SCL), Mohali. SCL, has been brought under the administrative control of Ministry of 
Electronics and Information Technology for exploring the possibility for the Joint Venture 
of SCL with a commercial fab partner to modernize the brownfield fab facility. 
 
India Semiconductor Mission: In order to drive the long-term strategies for developing 
a sustainable semiconductors and display ecosystem, a specialized and independent 
“India Semiconductor Mission (ISM)” has been set up under Digital India Corporation. 
The India Semiconductor Mission will be led by global experts in semiconductor and 
display industry. It will act as the nodal agency for efficient and smooth implementation 
of the schemes for setting up of Semiconductor and Display Fabs. The hiring process 
for leadership positions of ISM viz. Chief Executive Officer (CEO), Chief Technology 
Officer (CTO) and Chief Financial Officer (CFO) is under progress. 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 16) 
 
R&D in IT/Electronics/CCBT 
The National Language Translation Mission 
The Committee note that R&D in IT/Electronics/CCBT projects is being implemented in 
academic and R&D institutions. During 2021-22, an amount ofRs.700 crore had been 
allocated at BE as well as at RE and actual utilization as on31st January, 2021 has 

30 
 
been Rs.329.79 crore only i.e. 47 per cent of the allocation made at RE. The Committee 
have been informed that most of the academic institutions remained non-functional due 
to Covid-19 pandemic, resulting in the delay in utilization and under utilization of Grant-
in-Aid released to these institutions. For the year 2022-23, an amount of Rs.598.12 
crore has been allocated at BE against the proposed amount of Rs.1422.20 crore. The 
Committee have been informed that a pilot project for NLTM was initiated for developing 
roto-type Speech Technologies for Indian English, Tamil, Hindi languages for English-
Hindi; English-Marathi; Hindi-Telugu language pairs and Optical Character Recognition 
system for Kannada language. The National Language Translation Mission Bhashini 
has also been conceptualized to extend the above effort to 22 scheduled languages and 
is being initiated which aims at removing language barrier among all major Indian 
languages, particularly in the domains of governance-and-policy, science and 
engineering, education, healthcare etc. Under the Mission a National Public Digital 
Platform is proposed to be developed. The Ministry have stated that due to Covid19 
pandemic, pending UCs against the implementing agency and the budget cut occurred 
for all the schemes including R&D in IT/Electronics/CCBT scheme, the projects 
prioritized are progressing accordingly. The major impediment under NLTM is having a 
sufficient amount of language datasets for 22 recognized Indian Languages to build the 
AI based translation models. In this regard state language Missions are planned to be 
initiated along with crowd sourcing efforts for datasets. The National Language 
Translation Mission has been approved and a call for R&D proposals was made to 
implement the Mission and consequently recommended projects are being initiated. In 
order to initiate and sustain the Mission, the Ministry have requested that adequate 
budget outlay be allocated to TDIL Programme so that language computing tools and 
translation technologies could be developed in a time targeted manner. Highlighting the 
usefulness and end goal of the project, the Ministry informed the Committee during 
evidence that an illiterate grandmother in one part of the country should be able to 
speak to her counterpart with totally different language in other part of the country, and 
hopefully in real time also in near future. With regard to the timeline, the Committee 
have been informed that the Mission has a seven year goal, but it might be completed in 
the next 2-3years. 
 
 The Committee note that NLTM indeed is a pioneering initiative undertaken by 
the Ministry and early completion of this project will greatly help in overcoming language 
barriers for people residing in various parts of the country. 
 
 The Committee feel that making the content available in the domain of 
governance and policy, science and engineering, education, healthcare, etc. 
willimmensely benefit not only the common masses but also students and scholars 
pursuing studies in their regional languages. Since most of the content relating to the 
various subjects are in English, development of such an App will be a welcome initiative 
for bringing about an educational revolution in the country, apart from various other 
benefits. The Committee while recommending the Ministry to take measures for timely 
completion of this project also urge that adequate budget be allocated so that the 
project could be implemented in a time-bound manner. The Committee also desire that 
this application should be extended to various institutions in the country like Parliament, 
State Legislative Bodies, Government offices, etc. They further desire that this should 
also be extended to Indian Embassies across the world so that citizens of the country 
can avail various services in their regional languages. Efforts should also be made to 

31 
 
put the system into use in the tourism sector so that its true potential scan be 
harnessed. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 The National Language Translation Mission has started in March 2022 as a 
three-year mission with the vision of harnessing natural language technologies to create 
a diverse ecosystem of contributors, partnering entities and citizens for the purpose of 
transcending language barriers, thereby ensuring digital inclusion and digital 
empowerment in an AtmaNirbhar Bharat. To this end, the Mission aims to develop a 
public digital platform for enabling an easy and responsive ecosystem for translation 
among various Indian languages and English using the latest technologies. 
 
 In line with the above aim, the said public digital platform on Indian language 
technologies has recently gone live on the Bhashini platform (https://bhashini.gov.in), 
following launch of the Mission as Digital India Bhashini on 4.7.2022. The Bhashini 
platform currently offers 241 functional artificial intelligence (AI) models in 11 Indian 
languages and English for various purposes, such as text-to-text translation, speech-to-
text conversion, text-to-speech conversion, transliteration and optical character 
recognition. The said models are available as an open source repository, along with 
open Application Programming Interfaces (APIs). 
 
 Development and improvement of AI models is directly related to the size and 
quality of the available datasets of speech, text etc. in the language concerned. To give 
an impetus for rapid and sustained growth of Indian language datasets for the creation 
of better-performing models, a crowdsourcing initiative has also been launched 
simultaneously through BhashaDaan portal on Bhashini platform 
(https://bhashini.gov.in/bhashadaan). 
 
 Deployment of language technology using AI models will entail creation of 
solutions using these models to enable various services as well as customization for 
specific applications. Further, the technology will generate machine translation output 
which will also require human curation for many purposes, for which both technological 
capabilities and implementation capacities will have to grow on an ecosystem-wide 
basis. Therefore, the Mission also aims to create and nurture an ecosystem involving 
startups and government agencies working together to develop and deploy innovative 
products and services in Indian languages. 
 
  Since IT solutions/services are deployed at the instance of administrative 
departments/organisations concerned, who also commit necessary financial resources 
for creating and maintaining the same, deployment lies in the purview of the 
government department/organisation concerned. To kickstart and facilitate such 
deployment, the Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology is encouraging 
various IT solution/service providers to pursue the creation of Indian language 
interfaces for their public-facing applications/services. 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 17) 
Promotion of Digital Payments 

32 
 
 
The Committee note that digital payments have significantly increased in recent years 
as a result of coordinated efforts of the Government with all stakeholders. The total 
transaction volume increased from 2,071 crore in FY2017-18 to 5,554crore in FY 2020-
21. In FY 2021-22, total 6,380 crore digital payment transactions have been achieved, 
till 02.02.2022 (as per DIGIDHAN Dashboard). The Committee, while acknowledging 
the substantial increase in digital payments in the recent years, exhort the Ministry to 
take aggressive steps to ensure safe and secure digital payments so as to provide a 
safer ecosystem for the common citizen of the country. The Committee in their 30th 
Report had expressed their concern that there is a lack of unified approach in dealing 
with cases pertaining to digital payments and with increasing digital/online transactions, 
there is an urgent need to adopt a unified approach by way of having a centralized 
nodal agency/helpline to deal with all the cases pertaining to digital/online transactions 
which would not only help the victims of payments related cyber crimes but also help in 
faster resolution of such cases. The Committee had also recommended regarding 
provision of insurance coverage to the victims of cyber crime. In this regard the Ministry 
had informed the Committee that a meeting will soon be convened with MHA and 
Ministry of Finance (MoF) on these aspects and devise suitable mechanisms to make 
the digital payments ecosystem more safe, secure and trustworthy for the citizens. The 
Committee desire that they may be informed about the outcome of the inter-ministerial 
meeting and reiterate that concrete confidence building measures may be taken by the 
Ministry to instill confidence in the common citizenry with regard to secure digital 
payments. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
(i). Digital payments are growing exponentially on month to month basis and with the 
increase in digital transactions; it has also been that frauds are also increasing. In 
order to curb these frauds MeitY, RBI (Reserve Bank of India), NPCI (National 
Payments Corporation of India) and other ecosystem players have been running 
campaigns in media / social media campaigns as preventive measure for increasing 
customer awareness about safe banking.  
  
(ii). In order to safeguard, the customers, RBI has issued the directions on Limited 
Liability of a customer, i.e. where loss is due to the negligence of the customer, e.g. 
payment credentials are shared, the customer shall bear the entire loss only till the 
time unauthorized transaction is reported to the bank. Any loss after reporting of the 
unauthorised transaction shall be borne by bank.  
  
(iii). Further, Cyber Financial Frauds are part of Cyber Frauds which are investigated 
by LEAs (Law Enforcement Agencies) under the provisions of The Information 
Technology Act, 2000 & The Indian Penal Code, 1860 and as such matter relates to 
Ministry of Home Affairs. During interaction with MHA, it has been reported that in 
order to facilitate victims/complainants to report cyber crime complaints online, MHA 
has launched National Cyber Crime Reporting Portal which caters to complaints 
pertaining to cyber crimes only. Complaints reported on this portal are dealt by law 
enforcement agencies/ police based on the information available in the complaints.  
 

33 
 
The National Helpline and Reporting Platform provide a mechanism for persons 
cheated in cyber frauds to report such cases to prevent loss of their hard earned 
money. The reporting Platform works with active support and cooperation from the 
Reserve Bank of India (RBI), major banks, Payment Banks, Wallets and Online 
Merchants. The facility empowers both the banks and the police, by leveraging new-
age technologies for sharing online fraud related information and taking action in 
almost real time. The loss of defrauded money in online cheating cases can be 
stopped by chasing the money trail and stopping its further flow before it is taken out of 
the digital ecosystem by the fraudster. The success of the Helpline and Reporting 
Platform can be gauged from the fact that on several occasions, the cheated money 
has been stopped from reaching fraudsters even after it has been moved by the 
cheats to five different banks to hide the trail. 
  
(iv). Regarding provisions of insurance coverage to the victims of cyber crime or 
insurance, it is to be updated that IRDA (Insurance Regulatory and Development 
Authority) has issued guidelines on Product Structure for Cyber Insurance for 
insurers with the objectives to facilitate insurers in developing stand-alone cyber 
insurance products, specifically designed to address the evolving cyber risks & to 
improve the development of the cyber insurance market with new products and 
enhance benefits for policyholders including others. 
  
(v). It has been further directed that considering the demand for new cyber insurance 
products due to the dynamic nature of cyber-attacks and novel challenges, the general 
insurers shall continuously endeavour to design tailor-made products referring to 
model policy wordings and guidance provided in the document. The above objectives 
should be implemented by insurers in a manner that is fair and useful to policyholders. 
  
(Recommendation Sl. No. 18) 
 
Unique Identity Development Authority of India (UIDAI) 
 
 
 The Committee note that UIDAI has been allocated an amount of Rs. 1110crore 
at BE for the year 2022-23 as against the proposed amount of Rs. 1623.19crore. The 
Committee have also been informed that the allocation may not be sufficient to meet the 
requirement of UIDAI in view of hiring of new Managed Service Providers for various 
UIDAI services, tech refresh of Data Centres (DC’s),opening of new Aadhaar Sewa 
Kendras in various cities and higher volume of enrolment in North Eastern Region. The 
Ministry have stated that MoF would be requested to provide additional funds at 
appropriate stage based on the utilization of funds. The Committee are given to 
understand that there is almost an 85 per cent increase in the allocation as compared to 
last year. The Committee note that UIDAI’s equipment was about 10-12 years old which 
needed to be replaced and UIDAI at this point are in the midst of technology refresh 
cycle. So, this year as well as next year, UIDAI are being supported with a higher 
allocation to enable them to upgrade their hardware as well as the software and other 
cyber security and other measures around their systems. The Committee note that 
Aadhaar generation and updation is an ongoing process. Of late, Aadhaar has become 
a primary requirement for availing various services especially Government welfare 
schemes. The importance of Aadhaar for providing good governance, efficient, 

34 
 
transparent and targeted delivery of services has been increasingly emphasized by the 
Government. In this context, the Committee expect the Ministry to pursue the matter 
with the Ministry of Finance for adequate budgetary support to UIDAI in the coming 
fiscal years so that their crucial services and projects do not suffer. The Committee may 
also be informed about the progress of ongoing technology upgradation in UIDAI. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 It is informed that MeitY has been supporting UIDAI with additional/higher 
allocations to help UIDAI meet the expenditure relating to technology refresh cycle. As 
already noted by the Committee, the budget of UIDAI has been increased by 85% in BE 
2022-23 w.r.t. the provisions in BE 2021-22. It may also be noted that UIDAI was 
provided an additional sum of Rs.964.97 cr through Supplementary Demands for Grants 
during the financial year 2021-22 to meet the expenditure relating to technology refresh 
cycle partially. Moreover, the additional requirement of funds, if any, in respect of UIDAI 
would be taken up with Ministry of Finance at appropriate stage. 
 

35 
 
CHAPTER- III 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO 
PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 

36 
 
CHAPTER IV 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND REQUIRE 
REITERATION 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 4) 
 
National Informatics Centre (NIC) 
 
The Committee note that National Informatics Centre provides ICT support to the 
Government at all levels to Central Ministries/Departments, 37 States/UTs and 720+ 
districts. NICNET, the nationwide Network comprises over 1000 LANs of Govt. offices 
and more than 5 lakh nodes across over 8000 locations. The data centres of NIC host 
more than 8000 websites of the Government in secure environment. The Ministry have 
informed the Committee that NIC’s main focus is in providing latest state-of-the-art ICT 
infrastructure. National Informatics Centre (NIC) under the Ministry of Electronics and 
Information Technology (MeitY) provides e-Governance support, state of the art 
solutions to Central Government, State Governments, UT Administrations, Districts and 
other Government bodies. NIC plays a pivotal role in development and implementation 
of Digital Platforms and Applications, in close collaboration with Central and State 
Governments, making the last-mile delivery of Government services to the citizens a 
reality. NIC is upgrading its infrastructure gradually to meet the increased demand. The 
Committee note that during the year 2022-23, the Ministry had projected an amount of 
Rs.1500 crore for NIC against which Rs. 1450 crore has been allocated at BE stage. 
The Ministry have informed that steps are being taken to ensure the adequate 
availability of funds for NIC during 2022-23. The Ministry have also informed that mainly 
the fund requirement under the Capital Budget has been reduced due to which the 
upgradation of ICT infrastructure in the Districts have to be taken up in a phased 
manner depending upon availability of funds. The Committee note that NIC has been an 
active catalyst and facilitator in e- Governance programme and digital ICT applications. 
It has been playing a pivotal role in the information revolution at Districts, State and 
national level so far as implementation of ICT projects of Government are concerned. 
However, it is unfortunate that the organization has been facing challenges in human 
resource, basic infrastructure and the scarcity of funds for the upgradation of District 
Centres to meet the ever increasing demand. In order to continue with their mission, 
NIC require constant support and encouragement. 
 
Keeping in view the critical role played by NIC as a provider of digital infrastructure and 
connectivity delivering un-interrupted seamless services during such difficult times, the 
Committee recommend that the Ministry need to be sensitive to NIC’s requirements and 
address the challenges faced by them, particularly infrastructure related concerns so 
that their ability to provide last mile delivery of Government services to the citizens gets 
strengthened. The Committee are disheartened to learn that in spite of their 
recommendation to undertake a comprehensive review of the human resource 
requirement and infrastructure needs of NIC, the Ministry have done little to address the 
above issues. The Committee once again recommend the Ministry to look into the issue 
of human resource shortage in NIC. With regard to infrastructure, the Committee are of 
the considered view that the Ministry need to impress upon the Ministry of Finance to 

37 
 
increase allocation under the ‘Capital’ head for improvement of infrastructure at district 
level. The Committee desire the Ministry to take necessary measures to address both 
human resource and basic infrastructure constraints in NIC at the earliest. Keeping in 
view the fact that the earlier proposal 
for upgradation of human resource has got stuck without any tangible outcome, he 
Committee recommend that a fresh workable plan may be devised for addressing 
human resource needs of the organization by taking all stakeholders on board. The 
Committee may be apprised of the action taken in this regard. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Data Centre and District Infrastructure Division: 
 Over the years number of projects has increased exponentially and their National roll-outs 
have necessitated the need for increased manpower resources across these and core 
services such as Data Centre, Network Operations, Cyber Security, Video Conferencing 
etc. Moreover, Digital India program has exponentially increased use of digital services in 
G-to-C and G-to-G. The increased adoption of ICT has also triggered the need to have 
specialized infrastructure set ups such as Network Operation Centre, Command and 
Control Centre, Centre of Excellence for Data Analytics, Artificial Intelligence, Open Stack, 
iGOT, Sandesh, Training etc. 
 
 NIC is facing tremendous shortage of space to accommodate manpower resources and 
critical infrastructure at the NIC(HQ) in CGO Complex, New Delhi. The space requirement 
could be addressed by re-construction/ re-development of Master Earth Station (MES) site 
of NIC located in CGO Complex, New Delhi. 
 
 The re-development of MES site will  provide only 35000 Sqft of usable space, which will 
partially address the space requirement of NIC. 
 
 In this regard, on request of NIC, CPWD has submitted a proposal to reconstruct the 
existing MES site at an estimated cost of Rs. 85 Crores. 
 
 Administrative Approval and Expenditure Sanction (AA&ES) has been conveyed to the 
CPWD after concurrence and approval of the layout and estimated cost of the proposed 
construction work by the competent authority. Handing over the site to CPWD is in 
process. 
 
 Pre-construction activities like taking approvals from various agencies, tender preparation 
for selection of agency for construction work etc. have been initiated by CPWD.  
 
 There are 762 NIC District Centres (including newly created districts) all across the 
country and is manned by atleast two technical manpower in each District Centre, helping 
the district administration in its ICT requirement and e-Governance. NIC is providing the 
necessary Basic ICT Infrastructure to the District Centres in terms of ICT support, network 
connectivity etc to augment the District Administration. Space for the NIC District Centres 
are being provided by the respective District Administration. 
 

38 
 
 In the period 2013-2018, 88 new NIC Districts Centres have been created across 17 
States. 
 
 In 2021-2022, 20 new NIC District Centres have been approved spread across 10 
States and are in the process of establishment. 
 
 Currently, establishment of 20 new NIC District Centres in 5 States are under 
process of approval. 
 
 Manpower constraints: 
  
The status of creation of 1407 (reworked now to 1392) posts in NIC was initiated in 
2014. The proposal was approved by the Hon’ble Minister, E&IT after due deliberations 
at all levels and submitted to the Ministry of Finance for concurrence. The proposal 
received back from Ministry of Finance seeking clarifications on some points have been 
examined by a duly constituted Internal Committee and the detailed clarifications have 
been resubmitted to Ministry of Finance through MeitY for further consideration in 
February, 2020. M/o Finance have made some observations and sought additional 
information, which has been compiled and re-submitted to Ministry of Finance through 
Administrative Ministry in September 2021. 
 
In addition to above, a proposal is being submitted for meeting the operational 
requirements by creation of 256 posts required for setting up new NIC District Centres 
for the 128 newly created districts at various States. 
 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No. 7 of Chapter I) 

39 
 
CHAPTER V 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE INTERIM IN NATURE 
 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 13) 
 
National Knowledge Network (NKN) 
 
 The Committee note that the objective of the National Knowledge Network(NKN) 
is to inter-connect all knowledge institutions across the country through high speed data 
communications network to encourage sharing of resources and collaborative research. 
A high speed data communication network has been established to inter-connect 
institutions of higher learning and research. 1752links to institutions have been 
commissioned and made operational. 522 NKN links have been connected to NIC 
district centres across India. The Committee also note that NKN is the backbone 
network for all e-Governance initiatives in the country. In addition to educational 
institutions, NKN connects four National Data Centres (NDCs), 31 State Data Centres 
(SDCs), 30 SWANs State-wide Area Networks (SWANs), Ministries, Departments, and 
Mission oriented agencies, which include S&T, DRDO, Earth Sciences, Space, ICAR, 
MHRD, etc. The Ministry have informed the Committee that Digital Information Infoway 
(DII) which is the next phase of NKN is at advanced stage of approval. DII would 
address the need of effective Governance and facilitate collaboration and knowledge 
resource sharing among the Research and Educational institutions. The Committee 
note that against the proposed amount of Rs. 786 crore, an amount of Rs. 650 crore 
has been allocated at BE stage for NKN during 2022-23. The Committee have been 
informed that efforts would be made to seek additional funds in the Supplementary 
Demands for Grants. 
 
 The Committee are of the view that National Knowledge Network is fulfilling the 
twin objectives of providing robust and reliable network on the one hand and free 
access to information and knowledge to enrich knowledge in the country on the other 
hand. The Committee are of the view that the successful implementation of the project 
will strengthen the infrastructure for providing high speed backbone connectivity and 
stimulate research by facilitating knowledge sharing among the collaborative 
institutions. The Committee desire that the approval for next phase of NKN, i.e. Digital 
Information Infoway (DII) to create a unified Government Network which is at advance 
stage may be taken at the earliest. Since NKN is also the backbone network for all e-
governance initiatives in the country, it is imperative that NKN must be strengthened for 
successful implementation of e-governance initiatives. In this regard, the Committee 
recommend the Ministry to take all necessary measures for allocation of requisite funds 
for successful implementation of this scheme during the current financial year. 
 
 
 
 

40 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
Noted. Action is being taken to expedite the proposal. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      New Delhi;   PRATAPRAO JADHAV,  
8 February, 2023 
19 Magha, 1944 (Saka) 
 Chairperson, 
       Standing Committee on 
Communications and Information Technology. 

41 
 
Annexure-I 
  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON COMMUNICATIONS AND 
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(2022-23) 
MINUTES OF THE SEVENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
----------- 
 The Committee sat on Tuesday, the 07th February, 2023 from 1500 
hours to 1520 hours in Main Committee Room, Parliament House Annexe, 
New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
 
Shri Prataprao Jadhav- Chairperson 
 
 MEMBERS 
  
Lok Sabha 
 
2.  Smt. Sumalatha Ambareesh 
3.  Shri Karti P. Chidambaram 
4.     Smt. Sunita Duggal 
5.  Smt. Raksha Nikhil Khadse 
6.  Shri P. R. Natarajan 
7.  Shri Santosh Pandey 
8.  Shri Sanjay Seth 
9.      Shri Ganesh Singh 
10.      Dr. T. Sumathy (A) Thamizhachi Thangapandian 
11.  Dr. M.K. Vishnu Prasad 
 
Rajya Sabha 
12.  Dr. Anil Aggarwal 
13.     Shri Kartikeya Sharma  
 
 
 
 

42 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Satpal Gulati  - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Jyothirmayi  - Director 
3. Shri Nishant Mehra  - Deputy Secretary 
 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the sitting of 
the Committee convened to consider and adopt five Action Taken Reports 
which included four Draft Action Taken Reports on Demands for Grants 
(2022-23) relating to the Ministries/Departments under their jurisdiction and 
one Draft Action Taken Report on Twenty-Seventh Report on the subject 
‘Ethical Standards in Media Coverage’ of the Ministry of Information and 
Broadcasting. 
 
3. The Committee, then, took up the following draft Reports for 
consideration and adoption. 
(i)  xxxxx......xxxxx......xxxxx*  
(ii)  xxxxx......xxxxx......xxxxx 
(iii)  xxxxx......xxxxx......xxxxx 
(iv) xxxxx......xxxxx......xxxxx 
(v) Draft Action Taken Report on Thirty-Fifth Report on ‘Demands for 
 Grants (2022-23)’ relating to the  Ministry of Electronics and      
Information Technology. 
 
4. After due deliberations, the Committee adopted the Reports without any 
modifications. 
5. The Committee authorized the Chairperson to finalize the draft Action 
Taken Reports and present the same to the House during the current Session 
of Parliament. 
The Committee, then, adjourned. 
* Matters not related to the Report  

43 
 
Annexure-II 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE OBSERVATIONS/ 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THEIR THIRTY-FIFTH REPORT 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
[Vide Paragraph No. 5 of Introduction] 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government 
 
Rec. Sl. Nos.: 1, 2, 3, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 14, 15, 16, 17 and 18  
Total     16 
Percentage 88.88 
 
 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the replies of the Government 
 
          
Total NIL 
Percentage 0.00 
 
 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and require 
reiteration 
 
        Rec. Sl. Nos.:  4  
Total     01 
Percentage 5.56 
 
 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the replies of the 
Government are of interim in nature 
 
         Rec. Sl. Nos.: 13  
Total    01 
Percentage 5.56 
 
 
 
 