STANDING COMMITTEE ON COMMUNICATIONS  
AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY  
(2025-26) 
 
 
                                   EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
MINISTRY OF ELECTRONICS AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
    
 
 
 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the 
Committee contained in their Twenty-Fourth Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha)  
on ‘Demands for Grants (2026-27)’] 
 
 
THIRTY-FIRST REPORT 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
 
 
 
   August, 2026/ Sravana, 1948 (Saka) 
31 


THIRTY-FIRST REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
COMMUNICATIONS AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(2025-26) 
 
 
EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
MINISTRY OF ELECTRONICS AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
  
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the 
Committee contained in their Twenty-Fourth Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha)  
on ‘Demands for Grants (2026-27)’] 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 06.08.2026 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 06.08.2026 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
August, 2026/ Sravana, 1948 (Saka) 
 


 
CCIT No. 443 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
©2025 By Lok Sabha Secretariat 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok 
Sabha (Seventeenth Edition) and Printed by Lok Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi-110001 
 

 
CONTENTS 
 PAGE  
COMPOSITION OF THE 
COMMITTEE.................................................................................................. 
 
INTRODUCTION........................................................................................................................  
CHAPTER I Report………………………………………………………………………..........  
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government……………………………………………………………………....  
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the replies of the 
Government………………………………..........................  
CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and require 
reiteration ………….........  
CHAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in re spect of which replies of the 
Government are of interim in 
nature….........................................................................................  
 ANNEXURES  
I. *Minutes of the 15th Sitting of the Committee held on  
03.08.2026…......................... 
 
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in their Twenty-Fourth Report ( Eighteenth 
Lok Sabha).  
*Not Appended   
 
 
 
 

 Composition of the Standing Committee on Communications and  
Information Technology (2025-26) 
 
Dr. Nishikant Dubey - Chairperson 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri C.N. Annadurai 
3. Shri Anil Baluni 
4. Dr. Rabindra Narayan Behera 
5. Shri Anup Sanjay Dhotre 
6. Shri Gurmeet Singh Meet Hayer 
7. Shri Sanjay Haribhau Jadhav 
8. Shri S. Supongmeren Jamir 
9. Shri Appalanaidu Kalisetti 
10. Smt. Poonamben Hematbhai Maadam 
11. Shri G. Kumar Naik 
12. Shri Shafi Parambil 
13. Dr. M.K. Vishnu Prasad 
14. Ms. Kangna Ranaut 
15. Shri Radheshyam Rathiya 
16. Shri Ramasahayam Raghuram Reddy 
17. Shri Arun Kumar Sagar 
18. Shri Devesh Shakya 
19. Shri Vishnu Datt Sharma 
20. Shri Rajesh Verma 
21. Vacant 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
22. Shri Sanjay Bhatia@ 
23. Shri Rajeev Kumar@ 
24. Shri Christopher Manickam@  
25. Shri Amar Pal Maurya 
26. Shri Rajneesh Kumar Agrawal$ 
27. Shri Kanad Purkayastha 
28. Shri S. Niranjan Reddy 
29. Shri Kartikeya Sharma 
30. Shri Lahar Singh Siroya  
31. Shri Bhashyam Rama Krishna$ 
SECRETARIAT 
                1.  Shri Harish Chandra Bist     — Joint Secretary 
                             2.  Smt. A. Jyothirmayi         — Director 
                3.  Shri Salil Saroj                  — Under Secretary 
_____________________________________________________________________________ 
Committee constituted w.e.f. 26th September, 2025 vide Para No.3282 of Bulletin Part-II dated 1st October, 2025. 
@ Shri Sanjay Bhatia, Shri Rajeev Kumar and Shri  Christopher Manickam nominated to the Committee, w.e.f. 3 rd 
June, 2026 vide Para No. 5267 of Bulletin Part-II dated 4th June, 2026. 
$ Shri Rajneesh Kumar Agrawal and Shri Bhashyam Rama Krishna nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 23 rd July, 
2026 vide Para No. 5724 of Bulletin Part-II dated 24th July, 2026. 
 
 
 

INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Communications and Information 
Technology (2025-26), having been authorized by the Committee, present this Thirty-
First Report on Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Twenty-Fourth 
Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on the subject ‘Demands for Grants (2026 -27)’ relating 
to the Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology. 
2.  The Twenty-Fourth Report was presented to Lok S abha/laid in Rajya Sabha on 
16th March, 2026 . The Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology furnished 
their Action Taken Notes on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the 
Twenty-Fourth Report on 22nd June, 2026. 
3.  The Report was conside red and adopted by the Committee at their Sitting held 
on 3rd August, 2026. 
4.  For facility of reference and convenience, Observations/Recommendations of 
the Committee have been printed in bold in Chapter-I of the Report.  
5.  An analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Twenty-Fourth Report of the 
Committee is given at Annexure-II. 
 
 
 
 
 
     NEW DELHI; DR. NISHIKANT DUBEY, 
 05 August, 2026  Chairperson, 
 14 Sravana, 1948 (Saka) Standing Committee on  
Communications and Information Technology. 

1 
 
CHAPTER I 
REPORT 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Communications and Information 
Technology (2025 -26) deals with the action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committ ee contained in their Twenty -fourth 
Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on the Subject ‘Demands for Grants (2026 -27)’ relating 
to the Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology. 
 
2. The Twenty-fourth Report was presented to Lok Sabha and laid in Rajya Sabha  
on 16 th March, 2026. It contained 18 Observations/Recommendations. Action Taken 
Notes in respect of all the Observations/Recommendations, as contained in this Report, 
have been received from the Ministry of Electronic s and Information Technology  are 
categorized as under:- 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by 
the Government 
 
Rec. Sl. Nos.: – 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 
15,16, 17 and 18 
 
  Total – 18 
Chapter-II 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the replies of the Government 
 
Rec. Sl. No.:– NIL 
 
  Total — NIL  
Chapter-III 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of 
the Government have not been accepted by the Committee 
and require reiteration 
 
Rec. Sl. No.:– NIL 
 
  Total – NIL 
Chapter-IV 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of 
the Government are interim in nature  
 
Rec. Sl. No.:– NIL 
 
  Total – NIL 
Chapter-V 

2 
 
 
3. The Committee trust that utmost importance would be g iven for the 
implementation of the Observations/Recommendations accepted by the 
Government. The Committee further desire that Action Taken Notes on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in Chapter -I of this Report would be 
furnished at the earliest. 
4. The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government on some 
of their recommendations. 
BUDGET OVERVIEW AND DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2026-27) 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 2) 
5. The Committee, in their Original Report, made the following  
Observations/Recommendations:– 
 “While examining the funds allocation, it is seen that there has been a decrease 
in allocation of about Rs. 5736.79 crore under Revenue Section in RE against BE 
in FY 2005 -26. According to the Ministry of Electronics and Information 
Technology, this budgetary cut has been done by Ministry of Finance due to less 
expenditure incurred during the first two quarters of FY 2025 -26. Further, 
expenditure has been less under the Schemes namely; Modified Programme for 
Development of Semiconductors and Di splay Manufacturing Ecosystem in India, 
Production Linked Incentive Scheme (PLI)  and India AI Mission. The Committee 
are of the opinion that increase in allocation in the Revenue section will help the  
Ministry to ably cater to Training Expenses, procuremen t of Digital Equipment, 
Repair and Maintenance and Scholarships etc. Given the fact that Modified 
Programme for Development of Semiconductors and Display Manufacturing 
Ecosystem in India, Production Linked Incentive Scheme (PLI)  and IndiaAI 
Mission are imp ortant for providing financial support to companies investing in 
semiconductors, display manufacturing and design ecosystem for India’s growing 
presence in the global electronics value chains; to boost domestic manufacturing 
and attract large investments i n Mobile Phones & Specified Electronic 
Components and IT Hardware; and to establish a robust AI ecosystem through 
strategic programmes and partnerships across the public and private sectors 
respectively, the Committee may be apprised of the reasons for low  spending in 
them. The Committee also desire the Ministry to provide a comparative analysis 

3 
 
of targets set and reduced against Training Expenses, Digital Equipment, Repair, 
Maintenance and Scholarships during the last 5 Financial Years with respect to 
funds in Revenue Section.” 
6. In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Electronics and I nformation 
Technology submitted as under:– 
“The reasons for low spending in Modified Programme for Development of 
Semiconductors and Display Manufacturing Ecosystem in Ind ia, Production 
Linked Incentive Scheme (PLI) and IndiaAI Mission are as given below: 
 
Modified Programme for Development of Semiconductors and Display 
Manufacturing Ecosystem in India: 
In FY 2025 -26, the funds a llocated at BE stage were Rs. 7 000.00 crore which 
were reduced at RE stage to Rs. 4,300.08 crore. This Programme offers the 
fiscal support to approved companies on pari -passu basis, which requires legal 
agreements to be executed before the fiscal support can be released to the 
approved company. India  Semiconductor Mission, the nodal agency, executes 
necessary agreements such as Fiscal Support Agreement (FSA), Trust Retention 
Agreement etc., with the Applicant Company and Project Company for the 
disbursement of fiscal support under the programme. As Se miconductors 
manufacturing is a complex, technology-intensive sector which require significant 
and sustained investments, conditions stipulated in the approvals are to be 
fulfilled by the approved companies before signing of FSA and TRA agreements.  
Considering the complex nature of the projects and legal implications involved, 
the approved companies are taking significant amount of time for fulfilment of 
conditions leading to the delay in the execution of the Agreements. 
 
ISM is regularly monitoring the pr ogress/execution of the project through 
Fortnightly Coordination Meetings and Monthly Project Reviews. MeitY is 
providing all kind of support as requested by the approved companies by 
coordinating with other Ministries/Departments. With these efforts, more  than 97 
% of the allocated budget at RE stage has been utilized. 
 
Expenditure during FY 2025 -26 was significantly higher than the expenditure of 
FY 2024 -25. Further, with most of the process issues and documents 
requirement getting streamlined and the pro jects are taking off, the expenditure 
in the future years is likely to be increased. 
 
Production Linked Incentive Scheme (PLI): 
MeitY has been implementing PLI for Large Scale Electronics Manufacturing and 
PLI for IT Hardware. The details are as under: 
 
PLI for Large Scale Electronics Manufacturing Scheme:  BE for FY 2025 -26 was 
INR 8,875 Cr which was reduced at RE stage to INR 6,960 Cr.  Further, based 
on requirement an additional sum of INR 533.80 Cr was sought from Ministry of 
Finance and total expenditur e under the scheme in FY 2025 -26 is INR 7,493.30 
Cr. It may be noted that the actual expenditure incurred during FY 2025 -26 is 
INR 7493.30 Cr against RE allocations of INR 6960.00 Cr along with an 

4 
 
additional fund of INR 533.80 Cr allocated by Ministry of F inance later on. The 
incentives were disbursed to the companies which could achieve the investment 
and sales turnover threshold defined under the respective schemes and 
subsequent filing of the claim by the companies. 
 
PLI Scheme for IT Hardware: BE for FY 2025-26 was INR 115 Cr which was 
reduced to INR 40 Cr at RE Stage against the proposed RE 2025 -26 of INR 40 
Cr. The Actual Expenditure incurred under the scheme is Rs. 29.41 crore during 
FY 2025 -26. The budget allocated for FY 2025 -26 was based on projecti ons 
received from applicants for the scheme. However, the actual expenditure 
incurred is as per the incentives disbursed to the companies which could achieve 
the investment and sales turnover threshold defined under the scheme and 
subsequent filing of the claim by the companies. The IT hardware manufacturing 
ecosystem in India is still at a nascent stage and has been scaling up gradually. 
Further, two major players under the scheme had opted for a two -year gestation 
period. They have commenced their product ion in FY 2025 -26 and are likely to 
file incentive claims during the current financial year. 
 
IndiaAI Mission:  
Under the IndiaAI Mission FutureSkills pillar, fellowships are being awarded to 
UG, PG and PhD scholars to promote research in Artificial Intell igence and 
related technologies. In 2024, the target for UG fellowships was 5000, against 
which 150 candidates were selected; the target for PG fellowships was 2000, 
against which 140 candidates were selected; and for PhD fellowships, against a 
target of 1 00, 3 scholars were selected. In 2025, the t arget for UG fellowships 
was revised to 8000, against which 159 candidates were selected; the target for 
PG fellowships was revised to 5000, against which 101 candidates were 
selected; and for PhD fellowships, ag ainst a target of 167; 199 scholars were 
selected. 
 
The comparatively lower number of applications during the initial phase was 
primarily due to limited awareness among students regarding the IndiaAI 
Fellowship program me. To address this, IndiaAI has under taken extensive 
outreach initiatives through webinars and interactions with college deans, faculty 
members and students. In addition, awareness activities were conducted during 
the pre -summit events of the AI Impact Summit 2026 across the country to 
promote fellowship opportunities for AI-related research and projects. 
 
Further, the Mission has completed only about two years since its approval, and 
several key components are presently transitioning from the planning stage to 
full-scale implementation. As im plementation progresses and activities gain 
momentum, the corresponding financial requirements are expected to increase.  
The Ministry remains committed to ensuring optimal and strategic utilisation of 
funds under the Mission. A calibrated implementation ap proach has been 
adopted to align expenditure with the operational readiness and progress of 
various Mission initiatives. 
 
As far as a comparative analysis of targets set and reduced against Training 
Expenses, Digital Equipment, Repair & Maintenance and Scholarships during the 
last 5 Financial Years with respect to funds in Revenue Section is concerned, it is 

5 
 
stated that these are non-scheme and recurring expenditure. It is also stated that 
the heads, viz. “Training Expenses”, “Digital Equipment” and “Repair & 
Maintenance” were created w.e.f. FY 2023-24 after amendments to Delegation of 
Financial Powers Rules (DFPRs). However, the budget allocated and 
expenditure incurred since opening of these heads are given below: 
(Rupees in crore) 
 2021-22 2022-23 2023-24 2024-25 2025-26 
Budget 
Head 
BE RE AE BE RE AE BE RE AE BE RE AE BE RE AE 
Training 
Expenses 
 
Heads are not 
available 
 
Heads are not 
available 
19.62 16.90 12.37 18.90 18.95 17.64 26.08 21.71 18.15 
Digital 
Equipment 
22.00 22.25 7.63 24.66 12.20 10.04 13.68 11.05 9.81 
Repair & 
Maintenance 
36.45 47.55 40.52 47.85 45.85 40.20 52.58 48.40 44.54 
Scholarships 0.30 0.31 0.14 0.33 0.33 0.16 0.01 0.01 0.00 0.01 0.01 0.00 0.01 0.01 0.00 
BE – Budget Estimates, RE – Revised Estimates, AE – Actual Expenditure 
 
It is stated that the expenditure incurred under “Scholarships” during the years 
2021-22 and 2022 -23 was meant for providing stipends to the Interns in STQC 
Centres/Labs as there was one head “Scholarship/Stipend” before 2023 -24. 
However, after amendment of DFPRs in February 2024, no expenditure has 
been made under this head as “Stipend” has been separated from Scholarship 
and is covered under “Salaries” head. It is further stated that MeitY has been 
implementing a number of scholarship projects under the Sch emes, viz. Capacity 
Building and Skill Development Programme, Electronic Governance Programme, 
IndiaAI Mission, etc.” 
 
7. In response to the observation made by the Committee regarding less  
expenditure in the Scheme of ‘Modified Programme for Development of 
Semiconductors and Display Manufacturing Ecosystem in India’, the Ministry in 
its Action Taken Reply stated that the programme offers fiscal support to 
approved companies on pari-passu basis which require legal agreements to be 
executed before the fiscal support can be released to the approved company. It is 
also stated that Semiconductors manufacturing is a complex, technology -
intensive sector which requires significant and sustained investments and 
conditions stipulated in the approvals are to be fulfilled  by the approved 
companies before signing of FSA and TRA agreements. The Ministry has further 
stated that considering the complex nature of the projects and legal implications 
involved, the approved companies take significant amount of time for fulfillment  
of conditions leading to delay in the execution of these Agreements. Taking note 
of these submissions, the Committee opine that the Ministry make concerted 
efforts and continue discussing these issues in their fortnightly Coordination 
Meetings and Monthly  Project Reviews and necessary actions may be taken to 

6 
 
ease the process of signing of agreements. Regarding the PLI for Large Scale 
Electronics Manufacturing Scheme, the Committee appreciate the actual 
expenditure incurred during FY 2025 -26 is Rs. 7493.30 crore against RE 
allocations of Rs.6960 crore along with an additional fund of Rs.533.80 crore 
allocated later by the Ministry of Finance. 
While submitting reasons for reduced expenditure in the PLI Scheme for IT 
Hardware, the Ministry stated that IT hardw are manufacturing ecosystem in India 
is still at a nascent stage and has been scaling up gradually. It has also been 
conveyed that the budget allocated for it during FY 2025 -26 was based on 
projections received from applicants for the scheme, however, the actual 
expenditure incurred is as per the incentives disbursed to the companies which 
could achieve the investment and sales turnover threshold defined under the 
scheme and subsequent filing of the claim by the companies. 
As regards the IndiaAI Mission Fut ureSkills pillar, the Ministry stated that 
under this Mission, fellowships are being awarded to UG, PG and PhD scholars to 
promote research in Artificial Intelligence and related technologies. The Action 
Taken Reply indicates that the Mission has completed  only about two years since 
its approval and the comparatively lower number of applications for fellowships 
during the initial phase was primarily due to limited awareness among students 
regarding the IndiaAI Fellowship programme; which is being addressed by the 
IndiaAI through extensive outreach initiatives like webinars and interactions with 
college deans, faculty members and students. The Committee are apprised that to 
ensure optimal and strategic utilisation of funds under the Mission a calibrated 
implementation approach has been adopted to align expenditure with the 
operational readiness and progress of various Mission initiatives and awareness 
activities were also conducted to promote fellowship opportunities for AI -related 
research and projects. Notin g the reply of the Ministry, the Committee would like 
to be apprised of the outcomes of these efforts by the Ministry. 
 
STANDARDISATION, TESTING & QUALITY CERTIFICATION (STQC)  
(Recommendation Sl. No. 9) 
 
8. The Committee, in their Original Report, made the f ollowing 

7 
 
Observation/Recommendation:– 
“Scrutiny of allotted funds has revealed that the Ministry has not been able to 
completely utilize the funds allocated to them during the FY’s 2022-23 to 2024-25 
and only 50% of RE has been spent during the FY 2025 -26 till 31.12.2025. The 
Committee recommend the Ministry to take steps to effectively utilize the 
remaining funds in the last quarter. As seen, the proposed amount is increasing 
in FY 2026 -27 with regard to FY 2025 -26 but for the respective FY’s, the BE is 
diminishing. The Committee were apprised that there is no requirement of funds 
for the STQC, NOIDA building and the construction of the STQC building in 
Sector 62, Noida, is underway and is expected to be completed by Dec 2026. 
However, as per the Action Taken Notes on the Observations/Recommendations 
of the Committee contained in their Ninth Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on 
‘Demands for Grants (2025 -26)', the Ministry in its reply had submitted that 
reconstruction work of STQC, NOIDA building was in progress  through CPWD 
and it was anticipated to be completed in the FY 2025 -26. The Committee may 
be apprised of the status of completion of construction of STQC, NOIDA building. 
The Committee are further informed that the Approval of competent authority is 
being sought to pay an amount of Rs. 35.92 Cr (approx.) to Tamil Nadu State 
Government towards transfer of land & building of ETDC, Chennai and 
procurement of Renewal of 15 Licenses of already purchased Application 
Security Testing Tool (App Scan) for all STQC l abs are under progress. The 
Committee had also been apprised that STQC has been consolidating a list of 
Test/Calibration facilities and IT tools for getting “Make in India” exemption from 
the competent authority. In the context of the above -quoted informat ion, the 
Ministry may submit the present status of land & building of ETDC Chennai and 
procurement of Renewal of 15 Licenses. The current position of list of 
Test/Calibration facilities and IT tools for getting “Make in India” exemption under 
STQC may also  be furnished. The Committee would nevertheless urge the 
Ministry to take earnest steps and strive hard to complete all the pending projects 
in time so that the exercise initiated by STQC to contribute to strengthening the 
security, reliability, and trustw orthiness of key Government digital platforms, can 
be strengthened.” 
9. In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Electronics and I nformation 
Technology stated as under:– 

8 
 
“It is submitted that the reconstruction work of the STQC Noida Building is 
currently in progress through CPWD. However, the construction work is running 
approximately three months behind the scheduled completion timeline, primarily 
due to restrictions (ban) imposed on construction activities in Delhi -NCR region 
by the Commission for Air Q uality Management (CAQM) during the period from 
November 2025 to January 2026. Further, the approval of competent authority 
for the procurement of land & building pertaining to ETDC Chennai had been 
obtained and procurement had been completed in Mar 2026. With regards to the 
procurement case of purchasing 15 Licenses of Application Security Testing Tool 
(App Scan) for STQC labs, it is submitted that it could not be materialized in FY 
2025-26 due to some procedural/technical reason. However, procurement of 
same has been reinitiated in current financial year and expected to be completed 
by 2nd quarter of FY 2026 -27. With regard to seeking MII exemptions for the 
procurement of Test/Calibration facilities and IT Tools, it is submitted that STQC 
has been granted provisions under which procurement up to Rs. 50 lakhs can be 
carried out without seeking approval for MII exemption. Accordingly, a revised list 
of Test/Calibration facilities and IT Tools costing more than Rs. 50 lakhs, is under 
preparation and will be su bmitted to the Competent Authority for approval during 
FY 2026–27.” 
10. In their Original Report, the Committee had asked the Ministry to apprise 
the status of completion of construction of STQC, NOIDA  building and to submit 
the present status of land & buildi ng of ETDC Chennai and about procurement of 
Renewal of 15 Licenses of Application Security Testing Tool (App Scan) for STQC 
Labs. 
The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply stated that the reconstruction work 
of the STQC, NOIDA Building is currently in progres s through CPWD but is 
running approximately three months behind the scheduled completion timeline 
primarily due to restrictions (ban) imposed on construction activities in Delhi -
NCR region by the Commission for Air Quality Management (CAQM) during the 
period from November 2025 to January 2026. With regards to the procurement 
case of purchasing 15 Licenses of Application Security Testing Tool (AppScan) 
for STQC labs, the Ministry has submitted that due to some procedural/technical 
reason it could not be materialized in FY 2025 -26, however, procurement of the 
same has been reinitiated during  current financial year and expected to be 

9 
 
completed by 2nd quarter of FY 2026 -27. With regard to seeking Make in India 
exemptions for the procurement of Test/Calibration f acilities and IT Tools, the 
Ministry submitted that STQC has been granted provisions under which 
procurement up to Rs. 50 Lakhs can be carried out without seeking approval for 
MII exemption and accordingly a revised list of Test/Calibration facilities  and IT 
Tools costing more than Rs.50 lakhs is under preparation and will be submitted 
for approval during FY 2026-27. 
Keeping in view the above, t he Committee call upon the Ministry to 
expedite the works relating to STQC, NOIDA and ETDC Chenna i as it would 
provide crucial, G overnment-mandated testing, calibration, and cyber security 
certifications for IT and electronics hardware, driving compliance for India's 
digital economy. The Committee also hope the Ministry will adhere to the 
extended timeline for purchas e of 15 Licenses of Application Security Testing 
Tool (App Scan) for STQC labs. The Committee may be apprised of the progress 
made in this regard. 
CYBER SECURITY (CERT-In) 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 10) 
 
11. The Committee, in their Original Report, made the follo wing 
Observation/Recommendation:– 
“The Committee note that since FY 2023 -24, BE for CERT -In has constantly 
increased from Rs. 225.00 crore in FY 2023 -24 to Rs. 269.00 crore in FY 2026 -
27 and the trend of actual expenditure incurred by the Ministry in respect of RE is 
from FY 2023-24 (120%) to FY 2025-26 (83% as on 31.12.2025). The Committee 
are of the view that the CERT -In which have to deal with the complex and 
sophisticated cyber-attacks, sharing and exchange of threat intelligence, partners 
with overseas counterpart agencies as well as cyber security organizations from 
industry that are willing to work together and share information in a timely 
manner for preventing cyber -attacks as well as collaborating for providing swift 
response to cyber security inci dents, and therefore, the expenditure may 
commensurate to achieve these objectives. The Committee were apprised that 
CERT-In is facing a deficit of personnel to keep up with the rapid increase in the 
incidents and cyber security issues, urgent nature of in cident response activities 
including onsite response, to sustain key current as well as planned new 

10 
 
activities / projects and to address cyber security issues pertaining to emerging 
technologies and areas. The Committee are also informed that CERT -In has 
moved a proposal for creation of additional posts at various levels and action is 
being taken in this regard. The Committee desire to be apprised of the outcome 
of the action taken in this regard.”   
12. In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Electronics and I nformation 
Technology submitted as under:– 
“The Ministry of Finance has conveyed the approval of creation of 269 posts of 
Scientific & Technical (S&T) Group “A” in the grade of Sci. “B” to Sci. “F”, below 
Group “A” i.e. Scientist Officer “A”/Scientifi c Assistant and in Non -Scientific & 
Technical (Non -S&T) grade of Joint Director, Deputy Director, Section Officer, 
Administrative Officer,  ASO, SSA, JSA cadre in CERT-In. 
 
In order to fill the above vacancies, action has been taken and Recruitment Rules 
are being framed in consultation with the administrative Ministry i.e. Ministry of 
Electronics & Information Technology (MeitY) and Dept. of Legal Affairs (DOLA) 
for Legal vetting. The Recruitment Rules for Group “A” S&T Posts i.e. Scientist 
“B” to Scientis t “F” have been finalized. The Standard Operating Procedure 
(SOP) has also been finalized by the MeitY. For other S&T Posts Below Group 
“A” i.e. Scientific Assistant (L -6) and Scientific Officer -A (L-7), draft Recruitment 
Rules are under process in adminis trative Ministry i.e. MeitY and DOLA for legal 
vetting. Once draft  Recruitment Rules is finalized, advertisement will be 
published for filling up the posts.  
 
Separately, 07 vacancies from earlier recruitment drive have also been filled up 
in the grade of Scientist “B” in CERT-In and these candidates have joined CERT-
In.   
 
Action to fill 133 vacancies of Scientist “B” is at advance stage and advertisement 
is likely to be published shortly. For filling up 05 posts of Scientist “F” on direct 
recruitment basi s, proposal is under submission for approval of competent 
authority and advertisement is ready to be published on receipt of approval.” 
 
13. Having been informed that CERT -In is facing a deficit of personnel to keep 
pace with the rapid increase in the incident s and cyber security issues, the 

11 
 
Committee, in their Report, had asked the Ministry to apprise them about the 
outcome of action taken in this regard. 
The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has submitted that for filling up 
various posts in CERT -In, action has been taken to frame Recruitment Rules in 
consultation with MeitY and Department of Legal Affairs (DOLA) for legal vetting 
and once finalized, advertisement will be published for filling up the posts. They 
have conveyed that 7 vacancies from earlier rec ruitment drive have also been 
filled up in the grade of Scientist ‘B’ in CERT -In, whereas, action to fill 133 
vacancies of Scientist ‘B’ is at an advance stage. For filling up 05 posts of 
Scientist ‘F’ on direct recruitment basis, proposal is under submiss ion for 
approval of competent authority. 
Considering the critical role played by CERT -In in Indian Cyber Security 
System in providing swift action against sophisticated cyber attacks , the 
Committee urge the Ministry to expedite the action being taken for filling up of 
posts and apprise the Committee of the progress made in this regard. 
DATA PROTECTION BOARD (DPB) 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 11) 
 
14. The Committee, in their Original Report, made the following  
Observation/Recommendation:– 
“A detailed examination of t he Scheme has revealed that Data Protection Board 
(DPB) plays a significant role in protecting the rights of data principals while 
promoting responsible data governance in India’s digital ecosystem.  The 
Ministry has submitted that for 2026–27, the Government has set targets focused 
on full operational stabilization and effective enforcement of the Digital Personal 
Data Protection (DPDP) Act, 2023 through the Data Protection Board of India 
and the key targets include strengthening the Board’s institutional capacity, 
improving compliance levels among data fiduciaries, enhancing public 
awareness of data principal rights, and establishing a robust, technology -enabled 
adjudication and grievance redressal system. Further, the Ministry has also put 
forth the hurdl es faced in institutionalization of DPB which are in nascent nature 
of the regulatory framework, the need for capacity building and skilled manpower 
in data protection and digital technologies, development of supporting rules, 
procedures, and digital infra structure, and the challenge of creating awareness 

12 
 
and compliance readiness among stakeholders, especially smaller entities and 
start-ups. In order to address these challenges, the Ministry has taken several 
measures such as phased operationalization of th e DPDP Act, formulation and 
notification of supporting rules and standard operating procedures, recruitment 
and training of personnel with legal and technical expertise, and development of 
IT systems for complaint handling and adjudication. The Committee f ind that 
during the FY 2024-25, the amount sanctioned from proposed stage to BE stage 
remained same and no fund was spent. In the FY 2025-26, the proposed amount 
rose to Rs. 5.00 crore from 2.00 crore in 2024 -25, which remained same at BE 
stage, but at the RE stage, it again came down to 2.00 crore, similar to RE of FY 
2024-25. The Committee were given to understand that in the absence of notified 
DPDP Rules, the RE was proposed to reduce to Rs. 2.00 Cr from Rs. 5.00 Cr of 
BE. However, the DPDP Rules, 2025 has been notified on 13th November 2025 
and the Committee view that the creation of this entity will be accelerated. 
Further, with an amount of Rs. 2.00 crore in FY 2025 -26 and Rs. 10.00 crore in 
FY 2026-27 at BE stage, the Ministry is to create standard o perating procedures, 
recruit and train personnel with legal and technical expertise, and develop IT 
systems for complaint handling and adjudication. The Committee recommend 
that the Ministry may strengthen DPB which would play a pivotal role towards 
Digital Safety of 1.4 Billion people of India, where it is a digital challenge for the 
masses at large. DPB has a huge responsibility of ensuring the safety and 
security of personal data and mitigate the crimes like digital arrest, cyber frauds 
and digital scams. The Committee would like to prevail on the Ministry to allocate 
sufficient funds to DPB and apprise the Committee about the expenditure and 
progress made under DPB after the notification of the DPDP Rules, 2025 on 13th 
November 2025.” 
15. In their Action Tak en Reply, the Ministry of Electronics and I nformation 
Technology submitted as under:– 
“The esteemed views/recommendations of the Committee have been noted for 
compliance. It is, however, pertinent to mention that the non -utilisation of 
budgetary allocations earmarked for the establishment and operationalisation of 
the Data Protection Board of India under the Digital Personal Data Protection 
Act, 2023 may be attributed to the following administrative, procedural, and 
implementation-related factors: 

13 
 
 
1. Phased Implementation Approach 
The Act envisages a structured and phased operationalisation of its institutional 
mechanisms. Although the Digital Personal Data Protection Rules, 2025 were 
notified on 13 November 2025, preparatory activities such as finalisation  of 
operational guidelines, standard operating procedures, and internal frameworks 
required additional time before financial outlays could be meaningfully utilised. 
 
2. Delay in Finalisation of Institutional Framework 
The establishment of the Board necessi tates detailed decisions regarding its 
composition, selection procedures, service conditions of Chairperson and 
Members, and jurisdictional processes. These aspects required inter -ministerial 
consultations and approvals, leading to deferment in actual expenditure. 
 
3. Administrative and Regulatory Clearances 
Creation of a new statutory body involves multiple layers of approvals, including: 
 - Cabinet approval on DCN for Registrar post 
 - External Experts for search -cum-selection committee and notification o f 
the same through DoPT 
Delays in obtaining these clearances contributed to non -incurrence of 
expenditure during the relevant financial years. 
 
4. Absence of Fully Notified Operational Ecosystem During FY 2024-25 
During FY 2024 -25, the absence of notified rules meant that the legal and 
administrative basis for incurring expenditure on staffing, infrastructure, and 
operations was not fully in place. 
 
5. Lead Time Required for Infrastructure and Digital Systems 
The Board is envisaged as a largely digital adju dicatory body. Development of 
secure IT platforms, complaint management systems, and data handling 
infrastructure required detailed planning, vendor selection, and compliance with 
cyber security standards, resulting in time lag before funds could be utilised. 
 
6. Prudent Financial Management 
In the absence of readiness across legal, administrative, and technological 
dimensions, the Ministry exercised financial prudence by avoiding premature or 

14 
 
unproductive expenditure, ensuring that public funds are utilise d only when 
implementation is execution-ready. 
 
7. Ongoing Preparatory Work 
While no expenditure was booked under the specific budget head, preparatory 
work such as stakeholder consultations, drafting of subordinate legislation, and 
inter-departmental coor dination was undertaken using existing institutional 
resources. 
 
Therefore, the non -expenditure is attributable to the sequencing of statutory, 
regulatory, and administrative prerequisites rather than inaction. With the 
notification of the Rules and comple tion of foundational processes, the 
establishment and operationalisation of the Board is expected to be undertaken 
in a time -bound manner, and allocated funds are likely to be utilised in 
subsequent financial periods.” 
16. The Committ ee in their Report, pointe d out  that even though the Digital 
Personal Data Protection Rules, 2025 were notified on 13th November, 2025, the 
Ministry could not utilize  budgetary allocations earmarked for the establishment 
and operationalisation of the Data Protection Board of India and were of the view 
that the actions relating to its operationalisation may be accelerated. The 
Committee recommended that sufficient funds be allocated to the Data Protection 
Board and desired to be apprised of the progress made in this regard. 
The Minis try in its Action Taken Reply has informed that the non -
expenditure is attributable to the sequencing of statutory, regulatory and 
administrative pre -requisites. The Ministry has further stated that with the 
notification of the Rules and completion of foun dational processes, the 
establishment and operationalisation of the Board is expected to be un dertaken 
in a time -bound manner  and allocated funds are likely to be utilized in 
subsequent financial periods. 
Given the significance of the Data Protection Board  in protecting the rights 
of data principals while promoting responsible data governance in India’s digital 
ecosystem, the Committee desire to be apprised of the progress made regarding 
the operationalisation of the Board and finalization of operational gu idelines, 
standard operating procedures, and internal frameworks. 
 

15 
 
R & D IN IT/ELECTRONICS/CCBT 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 16) 
 
17. The Committee, in their Original Report, made the following  
Observation/Recommendation:– 
“The Committee note that there has been no ticeable upgradation of fund 
allocation at proposed and BE stage in FY 2024 -25 and FY 2025 -26. It is noted 
that the Ministry was able to utilize the funds optimally for FY 2024 -25.  As per 
the submission of the Ministry, want of upfront support from the in dustry for 
sharing domain knowledge, testing and commercialization of the developed 
technologies are key issues in this scheme. In order to address this challenge, 
the Ministry has given priority to projects with industry support and their 
involvement from the beginning. In addition, lack of Indian/International standards 
and MeitY's contribution in development of standards for the technologies 
developed in close consultation with BIS is also a barrier. The Committee 
strongly feel that to maintain a conduci ve and efficient environment for R&D, the 
Scheme must continuously evolve taking care of innovative policies, revision in 
R&D guidelines to make it stake holder friendly including new finding 
mechanisms, robust Intellectual Property frameworks, and support  for ethical, 
socially responsive research. The Committee urge the Ministry to regularly 
monitor the progress and streamline the release of funds. The Committee desire 
the Ministry to take a comprehensive approach to policy and audit to ensure 
proper resou rce utilization and continuous optimization of research and 
development outcomes and apprise the Committee in this regard.” 
18. In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Electronics and I nformation 
Technology submitted as under:– 
“The Ministry recognizes th e challenge involved in securing upfront industry 
support for sharing of domain knowledge, testing, and commercialization of 
developed technologies. To address this issue, the Ministry has been proactively 
involving industry participation and co -investment from the inception stage. This 
is toensurethatR&Doutcomesarealignedwithmarketneedsandhaveaviablepath for 
commercialization. The Ministry will continue to strengthen industry -academia-
government linkages to make the scheme more outcome-oriented. 
The absence of adequate Indian and International standards has been a barrier. 

16 
 
The Ministry is actively working in close consultation with the Bureau of Indian 
Standards (BIS) to facilitate the evolving of standards for technologies developed 
under the scheme. This collaborative approach will help in ensuring that 
indigenously developed technologies meet requisite quality and interoperability 
benchmarks, thereby facilitating their wider adoption. 
The Ministry fully concurs with the Committee's view that the R&D Schem e must 
continuously evolve to remain relevant and eﬀective. In this regard, the Ministry is 
in the process of revision of R&D Guidelines. The guidelines are being reviewed 
to make them more stakeholder -friendly, flexible, and responsive to emerging 
technological trends, including provisions for new funding mechanisms such as 
challenge grants, milestone-based disbursements, and public-private partnership 
models. In addition to this, the Ministry is working towards establishing a robust 
IP framework that clea rly delineates ownership, licensing and commercialization 
rights, encouraging innovators and institutions to participate actively. 
A comprehensive monitoring dashboard is being developed to track physical and 
financial progress in real-time.” 
19. The Committee noted that in order to address the issues of want of upfront 
support from the industry for sharing domain knowledge, testing and 
commercialization of the developed technologies, the Ministry has given priority 
to projects with industry support and their i nvolvement. In addition, lack of 
Indian/ International standards was also noted as a barrier. The Committee 
recommended that to maintain a conducive and efficient environment for R&D, 
the scheme must continuously evolve taking care of innovative policies, revision 
in R&D guidelines to make it stakeholder friendly including new finding 
mechanisms, robust Intellectual Property frameworks, and support for ethical, 
socially responsive research. The Committee urged the Ministry to regularly 
monitor the progress and streamline the release of funds and desired the Ministry 
to take a comprehensive approach to policy and audit to ensure proper resource 
utilization and continuous optimization of research and development outcomes 
and apprise the Committee in this regard. 
The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply stated that it recognizes the 
challenge involved in securing upfront industry support for sharing of domain 
knowledge, testing and commercialization of developed technologies and has 
been proactively involving indu stry participation and co -investment from the 

17 
 
inception stage in order to ensure that R&D outcomes are aligned with market 
needs. The Ministry while acknowledging the absence of adequate Indian and 
International standards as a barrier, stated that it is ac tively working in close 
consultation with the Bureau of Indian Standards (BIS) to facilitate the evolving of 
standards for technologies developed under the scheme which will help 
indigenously developed technologies meeting requisite quality and 
interoperability benchmarks. The Ministry has also informed that it is in the 
process of revision of R&D Guidelines; establishing a robust IP framework that 
clearly spells out ownership, licensing and commercialization rights, encouraging 
innovators and institutions to participate actively; and developing a 
comprehensive monitoring dashboard to track physical and financial progress in 
real-time. 
The Committee note that Research and Development (R&D) in IT, 
Electronics, and CCBT (Convergence, Communications & Broadband  
Technologies) drives technological sovereignty, economic growth, secure a 
nation's supply chain and result in indigenous innovation and self -reliance. The 
Committee, therefore, would like the Ministry to expedite the process of revising 
R&D Guidelines, ex plore a long -term action plan to accelerate technological 
advancement  and apprise them about the developments in this regard. 
 
IndiaAI MISSION 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 17) 
 
20. The Committee, in their Original Report, made the following  
Observation/Recommendation:– 
“17. The Committee note that in the IndiaAI Mission, the Ministry has been 
able to spend only 32% of the fund allocated at RE stage in FY 2025 -26 as on 
31.12.2025 and the amount sanctioned at BE stage in FY 2026 -27 is only half 
the amount proposed by  the MeitY. The Ministry has submitted that the target is 
to establish IndiaAI compute capacity of 10,000 or more GPUs and the AI 
Marketplace; augmentation of the existing GPU availability through CSPs with 
sovereign AI Compute infrastructure of 3000 GPUs;  development of foundational 
models with capacity of 100 billion+ parameters trained on datasets covering 
major Indian languages for priority sectors like healthcare, agriculture, 
governance etc.; and establishment of AI Curation Units (ACU) in 50 -line 

18 
 
ministries/departments and the IndiaAI Datasets Platform. As per the Budget 
Announcements 2026-27, a provision has been made for a tax holiday till 2047 to 
any foreign company that provides cloud services to customers globally by using 
data centre services fr om India. The Committee find that India’s Gross 
Expenditure on R&D as a percentage of GDP stands at an abysmal 0.64%, as 
per the Economic Survey presented in the Parliament, which is below the global 
average. The research funding is broadly for premier Ins titutions particularly IITs 
and national laboratories. The full impact of the new initiatives, such as 
Anusandhan National Research Foundation and the Research development and 
Innovation Fund, is yet to be seen. That the AI landscape is fast changing and 
witnessing real -life impact of AI, the Committee have concerns about the 
development of a sovereign AI model. Though, the Mission is aggressively 
working to establish a GPU cluster, the high cost of hardware, global supply 
chain delays, huge power and water  consumption by data centres and a tax 
holiday are significant issues. The Committee call upon the Ministry to have 
consultations with all stakeholders, academicians, environmentalists and budget 
experts to mitigate any possible adversities.”   
 
21. In their A ction Taken Reply, the Ministry of Electronics and I nformation 
Technology submitted as under:– 
“The Ministry acknowledges the Committee's recommendation and confirms  that 
it aligns perfectly with the proactive and consultative strategy that has been 
central to the IndiaAI Mission's implementation from the outset. This approach is 
not a new directive, but a continuation of the multiple, broad -based stakeholder 
consultations held over the last two years. For instance, during the last financial 
year, IndiaAI h eld extensive consultations with various stakeholders on critical 
themes such as 'Artificial Intelligence & the Future of Work' and its application in 
enhancing 'Public Service Delivery'. IndiaAI’s strategy is firmly rooted in the belief 
that this collabor ative engagement, covering both societal impact and technical 
execution, is essential for navigating the complexities of building a sovereign AI 
ecosystem and ensuring its success. 
 
The recent activities are a testament to this ongoing commitment. To foste r a 
federated and inclusive AI landscape, a series of webinars and discussions are 

19 
 
being held with various stakeholders to establish State -level Centres of 
Excellence (CoEs). The first of three planned workshops for this initiative was 
successfully conduct ed on May 20, 2026, with the next two scheduled for the 
upcoming week. These sessions are crucial for tailoring the national mission to 
regional strengths and needs, ensuring a bottom-up approach to innovation. 
 
Furthermore, to directly address the critica l infrastructure challenges highlighted  
by the Committee, the Ministry recently convened a dedicated consultation on 
April 21, 2026, with major OEM suppliers of GPUs and servers, various Cloud 
Service Providers (CSPs), and innovative startups. The explicit  purpose of this 
meeting was to collaboratively plan the next steps for building India's Sovereign 
AI Stack. By engaging directly with hardware providers and the startup 
ecosystem, we are actively working to mitigate supply chain risks and co-create a 
robust and scalable infrastructure plan. 
 
The Ministry remains dedicated to this holistic and inclusive process to ensure 
the responsible and effective rollout of the IndiaAI Mission.” 
 
22. The Committee in their Report observed that though IndiaAI Mission is 
aggressively working to establish a GPU cluster, the high cost of hardware, 
global supply chain delays, huge power and water consumption by data centres 
and a tax holiday are significant issues. Hence, the Committee had urged the 
Ministry to have consultations  with all stakeholders, academicians, 
environmentalists and budget experts to mitigate any such possible adversities. 
The Ministry, in its Action Taken Reply, while acknowledging the 
Committee’s recommendation stated that it aligns perfectly with the proac tive 
and consultative strategy that has been central to the IndiaAI Mission’s 
implementation. The Committee have been apprised that extensive consultations 
with various stakeholders on critical themes were held during the last financial 
year. The Ministry also conveyed  that to foster a federated and inclusive AI 
landscape, a series of webinars and discussions are being held with various 
stakeholders to establish State -level Centres of Excellence (CoEs). The 
Committee are further informed that the Ministry a lso recently convened a 
dedicated consultation on April 21, 2026 with major OEM suppliers of GPUs and 

20 
 
servers, various Cloud Service Providers (CSPs) and innovative startups to 
collaboratively plan the next steps for building India’s Sovereign AI Stack. 
The Committee would like to be apprised of the outcomes of dedicated 
consultations with major OEM (Original Equipment Manufacturers) suppliers of 
GPUs and servers, various  Cloud Service Providers (CSPs)  and innovative 
startups for building India’s Sovereign AI Stack. The Committee would also like to 
be enlightened about the progress made in mitigating supply chain risks and for 
co-creating a robust and scalable infrastructure plan. The Committee opine tha t a 
coordinated effort in this d irection to create the requisite encouraging 
environment will help achieve the targets under the IndiaAI Mission and would 
like to be apprised of the progress made in this regard. 
 
***** 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

21 
 
CHAPTER II 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN  ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 1) 
 
The Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology, under Demand No.27, has 
been allocated a total outlay of Rs. 21,632.96 crore for the Financial Year (FY) 2026 -27 
against the Proposed Budgetary Support of  Rs. 28,169.00 crore. According to the data 
provided by the Ministry, for the Financial Year (FY) 2025 -26, the Proposed Budgetary 
Support was Rs. 28,223.78 crore, which came down to Rs. 26,026.25 crore (which is 
92.21% of the Proposed Budgetary Support) at  the Budget Estimate (BE) stage, which 
further came down to Rs. 20,232.95 crore (which is 71.68% of the Proposed Budgetary 
Support). A general trend of reduction of funds by the Ministry of Finance to that 
proposed by the Ministry of Electronics and Inform ation Technology is seen. Further, 
the Ministry has been able to utilize Rs. 13,048.70 crore (as on 31.12.2025), which is 
only 64.49% of the Revised Estimate (RE) i.e., Rs. 20,232.95 crore. It is also 
noteworthy to see that in FY 2025 -26, against the Propo sed Budgetary Support of Rs. 
28,223.78 crore, BE was Rs. 26,026.25 which is Rs. 2197.53 crores and 7.78% lesser 
in contrast to the Proposed Budgetary Support. If the same data is compared for the FY 
2026-27, almost same amount of funds i.e., Rs. 28,169.00 crore was proposed but at 
BE stage, it remained only Rs. 21,632.96 crore, which is Rs. 4393.29 crore and 16.88% 
lesser in comparison to the BE of the Financial Year 2025 -26. It is a matter of concern 
that the Ministry of Electronics and Information Technol ogy has not been able to 
convince the Ministry of Finance about getting the requisite amount of funds at BE 
stage. The Committee are of the opinion that more funds allotted to the Ministry may 
help promote Digital Governance for empowering citizens, promot ing the inclusive and 
sustainable growth of the Electronics, IT & ITeS industries, enhancing India’s role in 
Internet Governance, adopting a multipronged approach that includes development of 
human resources, promoting R&D and innovation, enhancing efficie ncy through digital 
services and ensuring a secure cyber space.  This will ensure that the programmes are 
prioritized and the targets set against them are achieved in time. 
 
Reply of the Government 
MeitY agrees with the concern of the Committee that there is always a gap 
between the projection of funds by MeitY and actual allocation by MoF . It is stated that 
the allocations made by MoF depends upon various factors like expenditure made 
during the previous years, expenditure incurred during the first two qua rters of the 
current year, committed liabilities for the ongoing schemes, sector -wise funding plan of 
MoF, etc. However, the less allocation had never impacted the smooth implementation 
of various schemes as Ministries/Departments are allowed to seek more funds with 
details of expenditure and proper justification as and when required at any point of time 

22 
 
of the financial year through supplementary demands for grants, contingency advance, 
etc. 
(Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology  
OM No. 2(1)/2026-Budget(Vol. II) Dated: 22.06.2026) 
  
(Recommendation Sl. No. 2) 
While examining the funds allocation, it is seen that there has been a decrease in 
allocation of about Rs. 5736.79 crore under Revenue Section in RE against BE in FY 
2005-26. According to  the Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology, this 
budgetary cut has been done by Ministry of Finance due to less expenditure incurred 
during the first two quarters of FY 2025 -26. Further, expenditure has been less under 
the Schemes namely; Modi fied Programme for Development of Semiconductors and 
Display Manufacturing Ecosystem in India, Production Linked Incentive Scheme (PLI) 
and India AI Mission. The Committee are of the opinion that increase in allocation in the 
Revenue section will help the  Ministry to ably cater to Training Expenses, procurement 
of Digital Equipment, Repair and Maintenance and Scholarships etc. Given the fact that 
Modified Programme for Development of Semiconductors and Display Manufacturing 
Ecosystem in India, Production Li nked Incentive Scheme (PLI) and IndiaAI Mission are 
important for providing financial support to companies investing in semiconductors, 
display manufacturing and design ecosystem for India’s growing presence in the global 
electronics value chains; to boost domestic manufacturing and attract large investments 
in Mobile Phones & Specified Electronic Components and IT Hardware; and to establish 
a robust AI ecosystem through strategic programmes and partnerships across the 
public and private sectors respectivel y, the Committee may be apprised of the reasons 
for low spending in them. The Committee also desire the Ministry to provide a 
comparative analysis of targets set and reduced against Training Expenses, Digital 
Equipment, Repair, Maintenance and Scholarships  during the last 5 Financial Years 
with respect to funds in Revenue Section. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The reasons for low spending in Modified Programme for Development of 
Semiconductors and Display Manufacturing Ecosystem in India , Production Linked 
Incentive Scheme (PLI) and IndiaAI Mission are as given below: 
 
Modified Programme for Development of Semiconductors and Display 
Manufacturing Ecosystem in India: 
In FY 2025 -26, the funds allocated at BE stage were Rs. 7.000 Crore which were 
reduced at RE stage to Rs. 4,300.08 crore. This Programme offers the fiscal support to 
approved companies on pari -passu basis, which requires legal agreements to be 
executed before the fiscal support can be released to the approved company. India 
Semiconductor Mission, the nodal agency, executes necessary agreements such as 
Fiscal Support Agreement (FSA), Trust Retention Agreement etc., with the applicant 
company and project company for the disbursement of fiscal support under the 

23 
 
programme. As Semiconductors manufacturing i s a complex, technology -intensive 
sector which require significant and sustained investments, conditions stipulated in the 
approvals are to be fulfilled by the approved companies before signing of FSA and TRA 
agreements.  Considering the complex nature of the projects and legal implications 
involved, the approved companies are taking significant amount of time for fulfilment of 
conditions leading to the delay in the execution of the Agreements. 
  
ISM is regularly monitoring the progress/execution of the pro ject through Fortnightly 
Coordination Meetings and Monthly Project Reviews. MeitY is providing all kind of 
support as requested by the approved companies by coordinating with other 
Ministries/Departments. With these efforts, more than 97 % of the allocated  budget at 
RE stage has been utilized. 
 
Expenditure during FY 2025 -26 was significantly higher than the expenditure of FY 
2024-25. Further, with most of the process issues and documents requirement getting 
streamlined and the projects are taking off, the expenditure in the future years is likely to 
be increased. 
 
Production Linked Incentive Scheme (PLI): 
MeitY has been implementing PLI for Large Scale Electronics Manufacturing and PLI for 
IT Hardware. The details are as under: 
 
PLI for Large Scale Electroni cs Manufacturing Scheme:  BE for FY 2025 -26 was INR 
8,875 Cr which was reduced at RE stage to INR 6,960 Cr.  Further, based on 
requirement an additional sum of INR 533.80 Cr was sought from Ministry of Finance 
and total expenditure under the scheme in FY 20 25-26 is INR 7,493.30 Cr.  It may be 
noted that the actual expenditure incurred during FY 2025 -26 is INR 7493.30 Cr against 
RE allocations of INR 6960.00 Cr along with an additional fund of INR 533.80 Cr 
allocated by Ministry of Finance later on. The incen tives were disbursed to the 
companies which could achieve the investment and sales turnover threshold defined 
under the respective schemes and subsequent filing of the claim by the companies. 
 
PLI Scheme for IT Hardware: BE for FY 2025-26 was INR 115 Cr which was reduced to 
INR 40 Cr at RE Stage against the proposed RE 2025 -26 of INR 40 Cr. The Actual 
Expenditure incurred under the scheme is Rs. 29.41 crore during FY 2025 -26. The 
budget allocated for FY 2025 -26 was based on projections received from applica nts for 
the scheme. However, the actual expenditure incurred is as per the incentives 
disbursed to the companies which could achieve the investment and sales turnover 
threshold defined under the scheme and subsequent filing of the claim by the 
companies. T he IT hardware manufacturing ecosystem in India is still at a nascent 
stage and has been scaling up gradually. Further, two major players under the scheme 
had opted for a two-year gestation period. They have commenced their production in FY 
2025-26 and are likely to file incentive claims during the current financial year. 
 
 
IndiaAI Mission:  
Under the IndiaAI Mission FutureSkills pillar, fellowships are being awarded to UG, PG 
and PhD scholars to promote research in Artificial Intelligence and related techn ologies. 
In 2024, the target for UG fellowships was 5000, against which 150 candidates were 
selected; the target for PG fellowships was 2000, against which 140 candidates were 

24 
 
selected; and for PhD fellowships, against a target of 100, 3 scholars were sele cted. In 
2025, the target for UG fellowships was revised to 8000, against which 159 candidates 
were selected; the target for PG fellowships was revised to 5000, against which 101 
candidates were selected; and for PhD fellowships, against a target of 167; 1 99 
scholars were selected. 
 
The comparatively lower number of applications during the initial phase was primarily 
due to limited awareness among students regarding the IndiaAI Fellowship program. To 
address this, IndiaAI has undertaken extensive outreach i nitiatives through webinars 
and interactions with college deans, faculty members and students. In addition, 
awareness activities were conducted during the pre -summit events of the AI Impact 
Summit 2026 across the country to promote fellowship opportunities  for AI -related 
research and projects. 
 
Further, the Mission has completed only about two years since its approval, and several 
key components are presently transitioning from the planning stage to full -scale 
implementation. As implementation progresses an d activities gain momentum, the 
corresponding financial requirements are expected to increase.  The Ministry remains 
committed to ensuring optimal and strategic utilisation of funds under the Mission. A 
calibrated implementation approach has been adopted to  align expenditure with the 
operational readiness and progress of various Mission initiatives. 
 
As far as a comparative analysis of targets set and reduced against Training Expenses, 
Digital Equipment, Repair  & Maintenance and Scholarships during the last 5 Financial 
Years with respect to funds in Revenue Section  is concerned, it is stated that these are 
non-scheme and recurring expenditure. It is also stated that the heads, viz. “Training 
Expenses”, “Digital Equipment” and “Repair & Maintenance” were creat ed w.e.f. FY 
2023-24 after amendments to Delegation of Financial Powers Rules (DFPRs). However, 
the budget allocated and expenditure incurred since opening of these heads are given 
below: 
(Rupees in crore) 
 2021-22 2022-23 2023-24 2024-25 2025-26 
Budget 
Head 
BE RE AE BE RE AE BE RE AE BE RE AE BE RE AE 
Training 
Expenses 
 
Heads are not 
available 
 
Heads are not 
available 
19.62 16.90 12.37 18.90 18.95 17.64 26.08 21.71 18.15 
Digital 
Equipment 
22.00 22.25 7.63 24.66 12.20 10.04 13.68 11.05 9.81 
Repair & 
Maintenance 
36.45 47.55 40.52 47.85 45.85 40.20 52.58 48.40 44.54 
Scholarships 0.30 0.31 0.14 0.33 0.33 0.16 0.01 0.01 0.00 0.01 0.01 0.00 0.01 0.01 0.00 
BE – Budget Estimates, RE – Revised Estimates, AE – Actual Expenditure 
 
It is stated that the expen diture incurred under “Scholarships” during the years 2021 -22 
and 2022-23 was meant for providing stipends to the Interns in STQC Centres/Labs as 
there was one head “Scholarship/Stipend” before 2023 -24. However, after amendment 
of DFPRs in February 2024, n o expenditure has been made under this head as 
“Stipend” has been separated from Scholarship and is covered under “Salaries” head. It 
is further stated that MeitY has been implementing a number of scholarship projects 
under the Schemes, viz. Capacity Build ing and Skill Development Programme, 
Electronic Governance Programme, IndiaAI Mission, etc. 
 

25 
 
(Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology  
OM No. 2(1)/2026-Budget(Vol. II) Dated: 22.06.2026) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 7 of Chapter I)  
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 3) 
Allocation in Capital Section was decreased by Rs. 56.51 crore in RE 
corresponding to BE in FY 2025-26, due to less expenditure incurred during the first two 
quarters and this was attributed to non -finalization of some te nders for technical 
reasons. The Ministry has stated that the capital provision in BE 2026 -27 has been 
decreased by Rs. 44.33 crore from that was provided in BE 2025 -26. This variation is 
due to less requirement of capital funds by NIC in view of engagemen t of Managed 
Service Providers (MSPs) for carrying out the security operations of the Data Centres of 
NIC across the Country and anticipated less Information and Communications 
Technology (ICT) expenses.  
 
The Committee are of the considered opinion that  increase in allocation in the Capital 
section will help the  Ministry in establishing Machinery and Equipment, ICT equipment, 
Building and structures and Infrastructure Assets etc. The Committee would like the 
Ministry to provide a comparative analysis on ho w MSPs are saving and raising funds 
for Capital formation. The Ministry may also furnish details about the achievement of 
targets during the Financial Year 2025 -26 and the overall impact it will have in the 
ensuing Financial Year 2026-27 owing to reduction in funds.  
 
Reply of the Government 
The National Informatics Centre (NIC) facilitates various Ministries and Departments in 
implementing governance applications through its ICT infrastructure.  
Earlier, NIC established ICT infrastructure in a capital expen diture mode, by procuring 
ICT components at different stages/time frames for networks, data centres, 
cybersecurity, artificial intelligence, and other related activities. 
 
This infrastructure was managed through the engagement of technical manpower via 
agencies, Annual Maintenance Contracts (AMCs) with OEMs, or system integrators. 
However, this approach had limitations in terms of service quality, timely response to 
users, and ensuring high availability with minimal downtime. The absence of defined 
Service Level Agreements (SLAs) and associated penalties further constrained service 
upkeep. 
 
Over time, the quality and availability of services have become a top priority due to the 
growing dependence on digital infrastructure for critical and citizen -centric se rvices. 

26 
 
Additionally, the shortage of NIC’s own technical manpower, coupled with increasing 
workloads, has further impacted service delivery. 
 
To address these challenges, NIC has decided to engage Managed Service Providers 
(MSPs) with clearly defined SLAs . The engagement process was carried out through a 
competitive bidding mechanism, evaluated under the Quality and Cost Based Selection 
(QCBS) mode, with explicit SLA definitions and penalties for breaches.  
 
The MSP model ensured overall cost savings compar ed to earlier practices, as the 
expenditure was slip between revenue and capital expenditure. More services transition 
into the MSP mode. Hardware and other equipment/machinery required and services 
are provided as Managed Services with the SLAs.   Hence, the requirement for capital 
expenditure on equipment has correspondingly decreased marginally. 
 
(Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology  
OM No. 2(1)/2026-Budget(Vol. II) Dated: 22.06.2026) 
 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 4) 
 
 
According to the Ministry , it monitors/reviews implementation status of 
schemes/projects from time to time so as to ensure smooth implementation of various 
projects and make it mandatory that the grants released by MeitY are being utilized in a 
proper and productive manner. It fur ther stated that Secretary and Financial Adviser 
(MeitY) review the Utilization Certificate (UC) status from time to time in order to adhere 
to GFR provisions and ensure that Grants are released in installments for 
implementation of various projects, takin g into consideration the unspent balances with 
them. MeitY also stated that Project Review and Steering Committee (PRSC) monitors 
and evaluates the project progress and utilization of the funds as per approval and 
recommend for release of financial assista nce. The Committee note that the total 
Unspent Balance with implementing Agencies as on 03.02.2026 is Rs. 3002.70 crore for 
Financial Year 2025-26. Keeping in view the above, the Committee emphasize that the 
Ministry take all the necessary steps for obtain ing UCs with respect to utilization of 
money spent and record of unspent money lying with Implementing Agencies i.e. Rs. 
15.40 crore.  
Reply of the Government 
As per the revised procedure for flow of funds which has been implemented with 
effect from 1st Ap ril, 2022, the unspent balances, if any , available with Implementing 
agencies at the end of Financial Year, would cease to exist under Model I Schemes 
(having annual financial outlay of more than 100 cr). However, in case of Model -II 
Schemes (having annual  financial outlay of less than 100 cr), the unutilized funds will 
remain with Central Nodal Account of the respective schemes and will not be available 
to Implementing Agencies for utilization, as per the existing instructions. Hence, no 
unspent balance of grants released during the previous years is presently lying with the 

27 
 
implementing agencies except for Rs.15.40 cr in respect of two long -pending UCs with 
West Bengal Electronics Industry Development Corporation (WEBEL), a Government of 
West Bengal Enterprise.  The matter is being taken up with Government of West Bengal 
time and again for liquidation of these UCs. 
 
(Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology  
OM No. 2(1)/2026-Budget(Vol. II) Dated: 22.06.2026) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 10 of Chapter I)  
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 5) 
The Committee note that the percentage of actual expenditure with respect to RE 
in respect of IEBR has been declining from 118.37% in FY 2022 -23 to 106.76% during 
FY 2023-24 to 93.51% in FY 2024 -25 to 76% in FY 2025-26. The Ministry apprised the 
Committee that the IEBR target in RE 2025 -26 has been reduced by Rs. 269.97 crore, 
especially due to delay in sanction of grants in respect of some ongoing projects. The 
IEBR target in BE 2026 -27 is about Rs.48  crore less than that of in BE 2025 -26. The 
reduction is due to closure of some projects being implemented by the Autonomous 
Societies.  Taking cognizance of the facts that the IEBR plays a crucial role in 
supporting Infrastructure development and public s ector growth, the Committee would 
like to know the reason for delay in sanctioning of grants to certain ongoing projects.  
 
Reply of the Government 
The Internal and Extra Budgetary Resources (IEBR) targets are estimated by the 
Autonomous Bodies under the Ministry based on the funds likely to be received by them 
for the ongoing projects being implemented by them and the funds likely to be received 
by them in respect of some new projects. Since the projects being implemented by the 
Autonomous Bodies are major ly Government of India Projects under the administrative 
control of various Ministries/Departments, it may not be feasible to provide the exact 
reasons for delay in sanctioning of grants. As far as ongoing projects of MeitY are 
concerned, it is stated that  the Project Monitoring and Review Committee (PMRC) 
reviews the implementation status from time to time and addresses the issues/concerns 
for timely sanctioning of grants for timely implementation of projects. However, 
sometimes delays in sanctioning of gr ants do occur as every release is linked to 
achievement of certain milestones and if the milestones are not achieved due to one 
reason or other or implementing agency does not provide required documents or there 
is a requirement of enhancement of the proje ct outlays, then the sanctioning of grant 
may get delayed.  
(Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology  
OM No. 2(1)/2026-Budget(Vol. II) Dated: 22.06.2026) 
 

28 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 13 of Chapter I)  
 
 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 6) 
The Committee while analyzing the Demands for Grants note that percentage 
increase in various Programme Heads and Major Heads over the last 5 years shows 
that Semi Conductor laboratory (SCL), Promotion of IT & ITeS Industries, India AI 
Mission and Production Linked Incentive Scheme (PLI) have shown massive pruning of 
funds in FY 2026 -27 in comparison to FY 2025 -26 i.e., 16%, 31%, 50% and 83% 
respectively. All of these programmes are vital for enabling the continuous development 
of the electronics and I T industry. In case of Major Heads, barring Major Head 3451 - 
Secretariat Economic Services , all Major Heads i.e.,  Major Head 2552 – North Eastern 
Areas, Major Head 2852 – Industries, Major Head 3451 – Secretariat Economic 
Services, Major Head 3454 – Census Surveys and Statistics, Major Head 4859 – 
Capital Outlay on Telecommunication and Electronic Industries, Major Head 5475 – 
Capital Outlay on Other General Economic Services have shown extreme trimming of 
funds. The Committee call upon the Ministry to se ek more funds in future in the Major 
Heads to prioritize Electronics Component Manufacturing Scheme (ECMS), Modified 
Programme for Development of Semiconductors and Display Manufacturing Ecosystem 
in India, R&D in Information Technology, Electronics & CCBT , Cyber Security Projects 
and National Knowledge Network 2.0. The Committee urge the Ministry to look into the 
areas of concern and take necessary measures at the earliest so as to meet the targets 
set in the aforementioned Schemes and Programmes. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The esteemed recommendation of the Committee has been noted for 
compliance. MeitY would seek more funds for various schemes including incentive 
schemes as and when required. The areas of concern of various schemes are reviewed 
on regular basis by the Project Monitoring and Review Committee (PMRC) and 
necessary action is taken as per the recommendation of the PMRC. Further, the major 
issues are also being discussed in the weekly Group Coordinators’ meetings while 
reviewing the expenditure u nder those schemes and the concerned Divisions are 
directed to take necessary measures towards mitigating those concerns/issues.  
 
(Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology  
OM No. 2(1)/2026-Budget(Vol. II) Dated: 22.06.2026) 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No.7) 
 
The Committee are enlightened that there has been a reduction of  Rs. 5000 
crore in Modified Programme for Development of Semiconductors and Display 
Ecosystem in India Scheme in BE 2026 -27 as compared to proposed BE 2026 -27. The 
Ministry has submitted that Schemes are formulated as per the guidelines of Ministry of 

29 
 
Finance and the Working Group constituted for the projects’ evaluation for funding, 
recommends the mode of funding on the merit of proposal based upon the R&D needs 
of the industry, domestic and export markets and related socio-economic issues, etc.  In 
light of these, the Committee call upon the Ministry to streamline the R&D needs of the 
industry so as to get more funds. Further, since MeitY has constituted a Project review 
Steering Grou p for reviewing of respective projects, the Committee may be provided 
with the details and outcome of it.   
Reply of the Government 
For the Design Linked Incentive (DLI) Scheme, an allocation of ₹200 Cr was 
made in BE 2025-26, which was revised to ₹105 cro re at RE Stage 2025-26. During FY 
2025-26, against RE provisions of Rs.105 Cr, an expenditure of Rs.102.81 Cr (98% of 
RE Provisions) was made. Further, an allocation of ₹100 crore has been made in BE 
2026-27. 
 
The DLI Scheme has approved 24 projects from 2 3 companies for financial support. In 
addition, 105 companies have been provided access to advanced chip design tools 
through a centralized EDA infrastructure. The approved projects are reviewed quarterly 
by the Expert Committees, which assess progress against defined milestones. Financial 
disbursements are made on the basis of claims submitted by the applicants and 
achievement of the approved milestones which are further subject to verification and 
recommendation by the Expert Committees. 
 
It is further su bmitted that semiconductor chip design in India is still at a nascent stage  
and involves complex, technology -intensive projects requiring significant investments 
and compliance with stipulated pre -disbursement conditions. Given the technical, 
commercial, and legal complexities associated with these projects, some beneficiaries 
have taken longer than anticipated to fulfil the required conditions and execute the 
relevant agreements, resulting in a slower pace of fund disbursement in certain cases. 
 
(Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology  
OM No. 2(1)/2026-Budget(Vol. II) Dated: 22.06.2026) 
 
 (Recommendation Sl. No.8) 
Financial Allocation to NIC since FY 2023 -24 till FY 2026 -27 shows that there 
has been steady increase in the proposed amount i.e, in FY 2023-24    (Rs. 1600.00 
crore), FY 2024 -25 (Rs. 1840.00 crore), FY 2025 -26 (Rs. 190.00 crore) and 2026 -27 
(Rs. 2000.00 crore), but at the same time there has not been proportionate growth at 
BE in all these years. The Committee find that the Ministry c ould expend only 90% of 
RE in FY 2023 -24, 89.68% in FY 2024 -25 and 67.55% till 31.12.2025. The Committee 
apprehend that the Ministry may not be able to utilize the entire amount allocated for the 
FY 2025 -26 by 31 st March, 2026. Further, the Committee have been given to 
understand that under NIC, Centres of Excellence for application security and Computer 

30 
 
Emergency Response Team (NIC -CERT) have been established to continually protect 
over 10,000 NIC managed government ICT applications, portals and websites and other 
government cyber infrastructure from cyber -attacks/threats. The Committee also note 
that during FY 2025 -26, the RE allocation of NIC was decreased by Rs. 50.00 Crore 
and in FY 2026 -27, there is a gap of about  Rs. 405 crore between the amount 
proposed for NIC and the amount actually allocated. Since the mandate of NIC is to be 
Technology partner of the Government; Design and develop IT systems for the 
Government; Provide ICT infrastructure to the Government; and Explore & advise on 
the use of emerg ing technologies, the Committee call upon the Ministry to ensure that 
the shortage of funds in this scheme will not in any way affect the technical progress or 
the last-mile delivery of government services to the citizens. The Committee are of the 
concerted opinion that with the emerging technologies like Internet of Things (IoT), 
Artificial Intelligence (AI), Block chain technologies to enable uniformity in technical, 
design, and navigation standards for all the government sites, the Ministry need to give 
their best performance. The Committee while recommend for last mile connectivity, they 
desire the Ministry to ensure digital services with local languages support so that Digital 
Literacy is improved in the country. The Committee urge upon the Ministry to utilize 
funds allocated at the BE level effectively and efficiently so that requisite funds are 
allotted at RE stage. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
NIC will support the digital services in the local languages as per the Government 
Policy and Schemes. The funds  allocated at the BE level are being utilize d effectively 
and efficiently. 
(Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology  
OM No. 2(1)/2026-Budget(Vol. II) Dated: 22.06.2026) 
 
 (Recommendation Sl. No. 9) 
 
Scrutiny of allotted funds has revealed that t he Ministry has not been able to 
completely utilize the funds allocated to them during the FY’s 2022 -23 to 2024 -25 and 
only 50% of RE has been spent during the FY 2025 -26 till 31.12.2025. The Committee 
recommend the Ministry to take steps to effectively utilize the remaining funds in the last 
quarter. As seen, the proposed amount is increasing in FY 2026 -27 with regard to FY 
2025-26 but for the respective FY’s, the BE is diminishing. The Committee were 
apprised that there is no requirement of funds for the STQC, NOIDA building and the 
construction of the STQC building in Sector 62, Noida, is underway and is expected to 
be completed by Dec 2026. However, as per the Action Taken Notes on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Nint h Report 
(Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants (2025 -26)', the Ministry in its reply had 
submitted that reconstruction work of STQC, NOIDA building was in progress through 
CPWD and it was anticipated to be completed in the FY 2025 -26. The Committee  may 

31 
 
be apprised of the status of completion of construction of STQC, NOIDA building. The 
Committee are further informed that the Approval of competent authority is being sought 
to pay an amount of Rs. 35.92 Cr (approx.) to Tamil Nadu State Government towa rds 
transfer of land & building of ETDC, Chennai and procurement of Renewal of 15 
Licenses of already purchased Application Security Testing Tool (App Scan) for all 
STQC labs are under progress. The Committee had also been apprised that STQC has 
been conso lidating a list of Test/Calibration facilities and IT tools for getting “Make in 
India” exemption from the competent authority. In the context of the above -quoted 
information, the Ministry may submit the present status of land & building of ETDC 
Chennai an d procurement of Renewal of 15 Licenses. The current position of list of 
Test/Calibration facilities and IT tools for getting “Make in India” exemption under STQC 
may also be furnished. The Committee would nevertheless urge the Ministry to take 
earnest steps and strive hard to complete all the pending projects in time so that the 
exercise initiated by STQC to contribute to strengthening the security, reliability, and 
trustworthiness of key Government digital platforms, can be strengthened.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
It is submitted that the reconstruction work of the STQC Noida Building is 
currently in progress through CPWD. However, the construction work is running 
approximately three months behind the scheduled completion timeline, primarily due to 
restrictions (ban) imposed on construction activities in Delhi -NCR region by the 
Commission for Air Quality Management (CAQM) during the period from November 
2025 to January 2026. Further, the approval of competent authority for the procurement 
of land & building pertaining to ETDC Chennai had been obtained and procurement had 
been completed in Mar 2026. With regards to the procurement case of purchasing 15 
Licences of Application Security Testing Tool (App Scan) for STQC labs, it is submitted 
that it could not be  materialized in FY 2025 -26 due to some procedural/technical 
reason. However, procurement of same has been reinitiated in current financial year 
and expected to be completed by 2 nd quarter of FY 2026-27. With regard to seeking MII 
exemptions for the procurement of Test/Calibration facilities and IT Tools, it is submitted 
that STQC has been granted provisions under which procurement up to Rs. 50 lakhs 
can be carried out without seeking approval for MII exemption. Accordingly, a revised 
list of Test/Calibrati on facilities and IT Tools costing more than Rs. 50 lakhs, is under 
preparation and will be submitted to the Competent Authority for approval during FY 
2026–27.   
(Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology  
OM No. 2(1)/2026-Budget(Vol. II) Dated: 22.06.2026) 
  
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 16 of Chapter I) 
 

32 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 10) 
 
The Committee note that since FY 2023 -24, BE for CERT -In has constantly 
increased from Rs. 225.00 crore in FY 2023 -24 to Rs. 269.00 crore in FY 2026 -27 and 
the trend of actual expenditure incurred by the Ministry in respect of RE is from FY 
2023-24 (120%) to FY 2025-26 (83% as on 31.12.2025). The Committee are of the view 
that the CERT-In which have to deal with the complex and sophisticated cyber -attacks, 
sharing and exchange of threat intelligence, partners with overseas counterpart 
agencies as well as cyber security organizations from industry that are willing to work 
together and share information in a timely manner for preventing cyber -attacks as well 
as collaborating for providing swift response to cyber security incidents, and therefore, 
the expenditure may commensurate to achieve these objectives. The Committee were 
apprised that CERT-In is facing a deficit of personnel to keep up with the rapid  increase 
in the incidents and cyber security issues, urgent nature of incident response activities 
including onsite response, to sustain key current as well as planned new activities / 
projects and to address cyber security issues pertaining to emerging t echnologies and 
areas. The Committee are also informed that CERT -In has moved a proposal for 
creation of additional posts at various levels and action is being taken in this regard. 
The Committee desire to be apprised of the outcome of the action taken in this regard.   
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Ministry of Finance has conveyed the approval of creation of  269 posts of 
Scientific & Technical (S&T) Group “A” in the grade of Sci. “B” to Sci. “F”, below Group 
“A” i.e. Scientist Officer “A”/Scientific Assist ant and in Non -Scientific & Technical (Non -
S&T) grade of  Joint Director, Deputy Director, Section Officer, Admn. Officer, ASO, 
SSA, JSA cadre in CERT-In.  
 
In order to fill the above vacancies, action has been taken and Recruitment Rules are 
being framed in consultation with the administrative Ministry i.e. Ministry of Electronics & 
Information Technology (MeitY) and Dept. of Legal Affairs (DOLA) for Legal vetting. The 
Recruitment Rules for Group “A” S&T Posts i.e. Scientist “B” to Scientist “F” have been 
finalized. The Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) has also been finalized by the 
MeitY. For other S&T Posts Below Group “A” i.e. Scientific Assistant (L -6) and Scientific 
Officer-A (L-7), draft Recruitment Rules are under process in administrative Ministry i.e. 
MeitY and DOLA for legal vetting. Once draft RRs are finalized, advertisement will be 
published for filling up the posts.  
 
Separately, 07 vacancies from earlier recruitment drive have also been filled up in the 
grade of Scientist “B” in CERT-In and these candidates have joined CERT-In.  
 
Action to fill 133 vacancies of Scientist “B” is at advance stage and advertisement is 
likely to be published shortly. For filling up 05 posts of Scientist “F” on direct recruitment 

33 
 
basis, proposal is under submission  for approval of competent authority and 
advertisement is ready to be published on receipt of approval. 
 
(Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology  
OM No. 2(1)/2026-Budget(Vol. II) Dated: 22.06.2026) 
  
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 19 of Chapter I) 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 11) 
 
A detailed examination of the Scheme has revealed that Data Protection Board 
(DPB) plays a significant role in protecting the rights of data principals while promoting 
responsible data governance in India’s  digital ecosystem.  The Ministry has submitted 
that for 2026 –27, the Government has set targets focused on full operational 
stabilization and effective enforcement of the Digital Personal Data Protection (DPDP) 
Act, 2023 through the Data Protection Board of India and the key targets include 
strengthening the Board’s institutional capacity, improving compliance levels among 
data fiduciaries, enhancing public awareness of data principal rights, and establishing a 
robust, technology -enabled adjudication and g rievance redressal system. Further, the 
Ministry has also put forth the hurdles faced in institutionalization of DPB which are in 
nascent nature of the regulatory framework, the need for capacity building and skilled 
manpower in data protection and digital  technologies, development of supporting rules, 
procedures, and digital infrastructure, and the challenge of creating awareness and 
compliance readiness among stakeholders, especially smaller entities and start -ups. In 
order to address these challenges, th e Ministry has taken several measures such as 
phased operationalization of the DPDP Act, formulation and notification of supporting 
rules and standard operating procedures, recruitment and training of personnel with 
legal and technical expertise, and devel opment of IT systems for complaint handling 
and adjudication. The Committee find that during the FY 2024 -25, the amount 
sanctioned from proposed stage to BE stage remained same and no fund was spent. In 
the     FY 2025-26, the proposed amount rose to Rs. 5.00 crore from 2.00 crore in 2024-
25, which remained same at BE stage, but at the RE stage, it again came down to 2.00 
crore, similar to RE of FY 2024 -25. The Committee were given to understand that in the 
absence of notified DPDP Rules, the RE was propose d to reduce to Rs. 2.00 Cr from 
Rs. 5.00 Cr of BE. However, the DPDP Rules, 2025 has been notified on 13th 
November 2025 and the Committee view that the creation of this entity will be 
accelerated. Further, with an amount of Rs. 2.00 crore in FY 2025 -26 an d Rs. 10.00 
crore in FY 2026 -27 at BE stage, the Ministry is to create standard operating 
procedures, recruit and train personnel with legal and technical expertise, and develop 
IT systems for complaint handling and adjudication. The Committee recommend th at 
the Ministry may strengthen DPB which would play a pivotal role towards Digital Safety 
of 1.4 Billion people of India, where it is a digital challenge for the masses at large. DPB 

34 
 
has a huge responsibility of ensuring the safety and security of personal  data and 
mitigate the crimes like digital arrest, cyber frauds and digital scams. The Committee 
would like to prevail on the Ministry to allocate sufficient funds to DPB and apprise the 
Committee about the expenditure and progress made under DPB after the notification of 
the DPDP Rules, 2025 on 13th November 2025.  
 
Reply of the Government 
The esteemed views/recommendations of the Committee have been noted for 
compliance. It is, however, pertinent to mention that t he non -utilisation of budgetary 
allocations earmarked for the establishment and operationalisation of 
the Data Protection Board of India under the Digital Personal  Data Protection Act, 2023 
may be attributed to the following administrative, procedural, and implementation -
related factors: 
 
1. Phased Implementation Approach 
The Act envisages a structured and phased operationalisation of its institutional 
mechanisms. Although the Digital Personal  Data Protection Rules, 2025 were 
notified on 13 November 2025, preparatory activities such as finalisation of  
operational guidelines, standard operating procedures, and internal frameworks 
required additional time before financial outlays could be meaningfully utilised. 
 
2. Delay in Finalisation of Institutional Framework 
The establishment of the  Board necessitates detailed decisions regarding its 
composition, selection procedures, service conditions of Chairperson and 
Members, and jurisdictional processes. These aspects required inter -ministerial 
consultations and approvals, leading to deferment in actual expenditure. 
 
3. Administrative and Regulatory Clearances 
Creation of a new statutory body involves multiple layers of approvals, including: 
o Cabinet approval on DCN for Registrar post 
o External Experts for search -cum-selection committee and notification of 
the same through DoPT 
Delays in obtaining these clearances contributed to non -incurrence 
of expenditure during the relevant financial years. 
 
4. Absence of Fully Notified Operational Ecosystem During FY 2024-25 
During FY 2024 -25, the absence of notified rules meant that t he legal and 
administrative basis for incurring  expenditure on staffing, infrastructure, and 
operations was not fully in place. 
 
5. Lead Time Required for Infrastructure and Digital Systems 
The Board is envisaged as a largely digital adjudicatory body. Develo pment of 
secure IT platforms, complaint management systems, and  data handling 
infrastructure required detailed planning, vendor selection, and compliance with 
cybersecurity standards, resulting in time lag before funds could be utilised. 
 
6. Prudent Financial Management 
In the absence of readiness across legal, administrative, and technological 
dimensions, the Ministry exercised financial prudence by avoiding premature or 

35 
 
unproductive expenditure, ensuring that public funds are utilised only when 
implementation is execution-ready. 
 
7. Ongoing Preparatory Work 
While no  expenditure was booked under the specific budget head, preparatory 
work such as stakeholder consultations, drafting of subordinate legislation, and 
inter-departmental coordination was undertaken usin g existing institutional 
resources. 
 
Therefore, the non-expenditure is attributable to the sequencing of statutory, regulatory, 
and administrative prerequisites rather than inaction. With the notification of the Rules 
and completion of foundational process es, the establishment and operationalisation of 
the Board is expected to be undertaken in a time -bound manner, and allocated funds 
are likely to be utilised in subsequent financial periods. 
 
(Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology  
OM No. 2(1)/2026-Budget(Vol. II) Dated: 22.06.2026) 
  
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 22 of Chapter I) 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 12) 
 
The Ministry proposed Rs. 600.00 crore during FY 2026 -27 and were able to get 
the same amount of funds at BE stage. However in FY 2025-26, nearly same amount of 
funds were sought at proposal stage but it was reduced to  Rs. 575.00 crore and Rs. 
500.00 crore at BE and RE stage respectively. The Ministry would have to look for 
innovative approach since the objective of this s cheme is to build a robust talent 
pipeline and institutional ecosystem that supports high -tech industry growth, deep -tech 
innovation, and inclusive digital empowerment and the Ministry will have to look forward 
for getting necessary funds. According to the  Ministry, 5 Centres have been earmarked 
from FY 2026 -27 to FY 2030 -31 against the project of strengthening of ICT 
Infrastructure for capacity building, but against the project of Internet Governance and 
Digital Inclusion, no targets has been fixed by the Ministry for the next five FY’s starting 
from the current FY 2026-27. The Ministry has also stated that it has approved a project 
entitled “Skill Development of Unemployed Youth of Odisha, Jharkhand, West Bengal, 
and Bihar for Enhancing Employability and E nabling Entrepreneurship towards 
Sustainable Development of States.” The primary objective of the project is to 
implement a free Skill Development Programme for 50,040 youth (12,510 in each of the 
four states—Odisha, Jharkhand, West Bengal, and Bihar) over  a period of three years. 
The programme aims to enhance employability and promote entrepreneurship among 
the youth by providing training in various NSQF -aligned courses under the IT and 
Electronics domain. Out of the total beneficiary target of approximate ly 50,040, around 
35,028 candidates (8,757 per state) will belong to the SC/ST categories, while 15,012 

36 
 
candidates (3,753 per state) will be from the General/EWS categories. The Committee 
would like to know whether the 5 centres chosen under NIELET would b e in Tier -II/III 
cities and reasons for not setting any targets with respect to Internet Governance and 
Digital Inclusion for the next 5 years from FY 2026 -27. The Committee understand that 
skilling of women, SC/ST, PwDs, senior citizens and Aspirational D istricts through 
vernacular contents and culturally relevant model is a necessity of time and hence, they 
feel that it must be prioritized by the Ministry. The Committee recommend that the 
Ministry should expand rural and tribal digital literacy, integrate  digital payments and 
establish permanent capacity in upgraded institutions to continue programme delivery 
beyond Central funding cycles. The Committee understand that this scheme is essential 
for achieving India’s $ 1 trillion digital economy goal by 2030  and the Broader Viksit 
Bharat 2047 vision and hence advise the Ministry to take all necessary measures to 
achieve the targets well within time and within the allocated funds, so that India has a 
strong and dedicated Digitally Trained Workforce ready to meet the future challenges.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology (MeitY), under the Digital 
India Programme, is implementing the Capacity Building and Skill Development 
(CB&SD) Scheme as a flagship initiative to d evelop a future -ready workforce in 
Electronics and Information & Communication Technology (E&ICT). The Scheme caters 
to a wide range of beneficiaries, including researchers, students, professionals, 
government officials, marginalized communities, rural art isans and digitally excluded 
populations, thereby promoting both technological advancement and social inclusion. 
 
The Scheme focuses on Tier-II and Tier-III cities, alignment with the National Education 
Policy (NEP) 2020 and the National Skills Qualificati on Framework (NSQF), and 
creation of a large pool of certified trainers. It is addressing skill requirements in 
emerging domains such as Semiconductors, Quantum Technologies, Artificial 
Intelligence, Cybersecurity, 3D printing Technology, Nanoelectronics a nd other frontier 
technologies. 
 
To achieve these objectives, the Scheme has been structured into seven sub -schemes 
covering Manpower Development in Niche Areas, Professional Development, Skill 
Development for Employability, Empowerment of Women and Disadv antaged Sections, 
Livelihood Enhancement and Awareness Programme (LEAP), Strengthening of ICT 
Infrastructure and Internet Governance. The Scheme follows a modular and project -
based implementation model involving industry, academia, government agencies and 
training institutions. 
 
Inclusive Skilling and Digital Empowerment 
 
A key feature of the Scheme is its emphasis on inclusivity and regional outreach 
through blended learning models, virtual laboratories, Centres of Excellence, mobile ICT 

37 
 
units and digital platforms. Through implementation support from Implementing 
Agencies, skilling opportunities are being extended to youth, professionals, government 
officials and marginalized communities, particularly in Aspirational Districts, the North 
Eastern Region and other underserved areas. 
 
Dedicated interventions under the Empowerment and LEAP sub -schemes focus on 
women, SCs, STs, OBCs, EWS categories, specially -abled persons and senior citizens 
through digital literacy, domain -specific upskilling, entrepreneurship  support and ICT -
enabled livelihood initiatives. Continuity of training and skilling has also been built into 
the Scheme through the establishment and upgradation of ICT infrastructure, training 
laboratories and experiential learning platforms, thereby cre ating long-term institutional 
capacities beyond individual project cycles. 
Five (5) NIELIT Centres Earmarked under ICT Infrastructure Strengthening – Location 
in Tier-II/III Cities 
In response to the specific query of the Committee regarding whether the 5 Centres 
earmarked under the project of Strengthening of ICT Infrastructure for Capacity Building 
for the period FY 2026 -27 to FY 2030 -31 would be in Tier -II/III cities, the following 
clarification is submitted: 
 
(i) NIELIT, under the administrative guidance of  MeitY, has been consistently working 
to extend its institutional footprint beyond metropolitan cities to ensure equitable 
access to quality IECT education and training. The network of NIELIT Centres is 
already spread across locations including Kohima (Nag aland), Aurangabad 
(Maharashtra), Calicut (Kerala), Agartala (Tripura), Imphal (Manipur), Srinagar 
(J&K), Gorakhpur (Uttar Pradesh), and other Tier -II/III locations, demonstrating the 
Ministry’s commitment to geographical equity. 
(ii) The 5 new Centres proposed  to be set up under the ICT Infrastructure 
Strengthening project in the period FY 2026 -27 to FY 2030 -31 are envisaged to be 
established predominantly in Tier -II and Tier -III cities, in line with the mandate to 
provide ICT education and training to citizens  in underserved and aspirational 
regions. The specific locations will be finalised through a structured assessment 
considering population density, existing NIELIT presence, State Government 
support, and availability of suitable institutions or premises. 
(iii) The primary rationale for setting up these new Centres is to: (a) extend the reach of 
quality IECT education to geographically unserved regions, (b) build permanent 
institutional capacity for skill development that sustains beyond Central funding 
cycles, (c)  serve as nodal hubs for capacity building, digital literacy, and NSQF -
aligned certification in their respective regions, and (d) support India’s broader goal 
of inclusive digital empowerment and the Viksit Bharat 2047 vision. 
 
NIELIT Digital University Platform 
NIELIT has launched the NIELIT Digital University (NDU) Platform to provide online and 
blended, industry -aligned programmes in emerging technologies such as Artificial 
Intelligence, Cybersecurity, Cloud Computing and other frontier domains. The plat form 

38 
 
includes virtual laboratories for Semiconductor Design, Cybersecurity, Cyber Forensics 
and Industry 4.0 technologies, while providing anytime -anywhere access to NSQF -
aligned courses. More than 2.57 lakh candidates have registered on the platform so far. 
 
Background and Rationale for the Project:  Skill Development of Unemployed Youth of 
Odisha, Jharkhand, West Bengal, and Bihar for Enhancing Employability and Enabling 
Entrepreneurship towards Sustainable Development of States. 
The project is being implemented across more than 32 districts through NIELIT Centres 
and Study Centres located mostly in Tier -II and Tier-III cities. Inclusivity is embedded in 
the project’s design as approximately 70% of beneficiaries are SC/ST (35,028 
candidates; 8,757 per State ), a minimum 30% women target is mandated, training is 
delivered in regional languages, centres are also located in aspirational and backward 
districts. Digital payment literacy is integrated as a core module across all programs in 
alignment with the Digit al India vision. NIELIT infrastructure is being upgraded, and 
mobile outreach mechanisms are being explored for training delivery in remote and 
tribal areas. 
 
Internet Governance 
A dedicated sub -scheme for Internet Governance has been formulated for 
strengthening India’s participation in global Internet governance processes and in 
developing a robust domestic Internet ecosystem. A total outlay of ₹20 crore (inclusive 
of ₹5 crore for FY 2026 -27) is proposed for both ongoing and new initiatives over the 
period from FY 2026–27 to FY 2030–31 under the Sub-scheme. 
The Ministry actively engages in international multistakeholder platforms and 
organizations such as the Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers 
(ICANN), the Asia Pacific Network Information Centre (APNIC), the Internet Engineering 
Task Force (IETF), the World Summit on the Information Society (WSIS), and the 
United Nations Internet Governance Forum (IGF). Through these engagements, India 
contributes to global discussions on Internet governanc e, domain name system (DNS) 
security and stability, Internet resource management, and the development of technical 
standards and policies. 
 
At the regional level, MeitY engages with APNIC in policy development processes and 
collaborates with the National I nternet Exchange of India (NIXI) to promote adoption of 
IPv6, Resource Public Key Infrastructure (RPKI), and other measures for improving 
routing security and resilience. 
 
Ministry undertakes several initiatives towards revision of the Registrar Accreditat ion 
Agreement (RAA) for the .IN domain to improve transparency and accountability, and 
the introduction of sector-specific domain zones such as “bank.in” and “fin.in” to mitigate 
cyber fraud and enhance user trust. The Ministry is also implementing program mes 
aimed at strengthening India’s research and technical capacity in Internet governance 
such as Advanced Internet Operations Research in India (AIORI) and Next Generation 
Internet Names, Services and Standards (NGINSS). Further, MeitY is promoting a 

39 
 
multilingual Internet ecosystem through Universal Acceptance (UA) and  adoption of  
Internationalized  Domain Names (IDNs), including the “ भारत” domain across multiple 
Indian languages, thereby enhancing digital inclusion. 
 
Way Forward 
The Ministry is continuously monitoring and implementing projects under all seven sub -
schemes of the CB&SD Scheme to ensure the envisaged target achievement we ll 
within the timeline and within the allocated funds. These interventions are expected to 
significantly contribute towards the creation of a skilled digital workforce, strengthening 
of digital infrastructure, promotion of inclusive growth and realization of the objectives of 
Digital India and Viksit Bharat 2047. 
 
The Ministry is also ensuring optimal utilisation of available resources through phased 
release of grants, close monitoring of expenditure, and adherence to TSA -related fund 
flow norms so that programme implementation remains efficient and timely. 
  
(Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology  
OM No. 2(1)/2026-Budget(Vol. II) Dated: 22.06.2026) 
 
 
 (Recommendation Sl. No. 13) 
 
According to the Ministry, for this Scheme, in FY 2025 -26, the proposed amount 
was Rs. 567.52 crore and it was increased to Rs. 617.00 crore at BE stage. But in FY 
2026-27, the proposed amount of funds was Rs. 750.00 crore and it was decreased to 
Rs. 628.18 crore. The Ministry has submitted that the challenges faced for  
implementation of Electronics Governance Scheme are digital literacy, digital 
connectivity, accessibility to services, ease in availing the digital services and the 
awareness/ readiness amongst the Departments to adopt the services. Besides these 
challenges, the digital divide gap is also attributed to the fact that many citizens 
belonging to the weaker sections lag behind in availing these digital services due to 
various reasons. The Ministry has also submitted that the Government have already 
taken necessary measures to tackle these challenges through implementing “Pradhan 
Mantri Gramin Digital Saksharta Abhiyan (PMGDISHA)” to usher in digital literacy in 
rural India and BharatNet project with the aim to connect all 2,50,000 Gram Panchayats 
(GPs) in the C ountry with 100 Mbps connectivity. Government is also providing the 
services in assisted mode through Common Services Centres (CSCs) and taking steps 
through various other channels also. Further, it has also been submitted that the 
Government is striving h ard to create awareness amongst citizens through various 
modes including social media platforms, as well as through the Departments for on 
boarding and consumption of the digital services. The Committee note that, among 
other hurdles being faced in this sc heme, are Interoperability variance, Cyber/Privacy 
risk, Capacity and conformance and inclusivity gaps. The Ministry has submitted that 
these could be resolved. The Committee call upon the Ministry to take necessary action 
at the earliest and apprise the Committee about the same.  

40 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology (MeitY) has undertaken 
several initiatives to strengthen digital governance by promoting interoperability, 
accessibility, and standardization across government digital platforms. These efforts aim 
to enhance service delivery, improve citizen experience, and create a unified, secure, 
and inclusive digital ecosystem for government websites, applications, and digital 
services. Some of the key initiatives are as follows: - 
 
(i) For interoperability of different government applications, MeitY notified the ‘Policy on 
Open Application Programming Interfaces (APIs)’ in 2015 to encourage efficient data 
sharing among data owners, and inter - and intra -governmental agencies. Thereafter, 
MeitY initiated a project ‘API Setu’ being implemented by National e -Governance 
Division (NeGD) in 2020, wherein a dedicated platform API Setu has been developed, 
wherein 8646 APIs have been published. Currently 2,800 publisher, 8,4 99 consumer 
already on boarded. 
  
(ii) Further, for making portals and apps accessible, National Informatics Centre (NIC), 
an attached office under MeitY has formulated Guidelines for Indian Government 
Websites and Apps (GIGW). The guidelines have been not ified by Department of 
Administrative Reforms and Public Grievances (DARP&G) under Central Secretariat 
Manual of Office Procedure (CSMOP). These have been mandated for all government 
websites and apps.  
 
(iii) Under Government of India’s “Harmonizing Gover nment’s Digital Footprint and 
Branding” initiative which aims to create a unified, citizen -centric, and efficient digital 
ecosystem, Digital Brand Identity Manual (DBIM) was launched by Hon’ble MoS on 
February 18, 2025, which standardizes design, branding,  and content of the website. 
Currently, 85 ministries/ Departments website have been made accessible to public. 
 
(iv) Promoting Digital Literacy: The Government has taken several initiatives to provide 
skilling/upskilling to youth. These initiatives aim to  develop industry-ready manpower in 
emerging and advanced technology domains across the country. 
 
PMGDISHA: Pradhan Mantri Gramin Digital Saksharta Abhiyan (PMGDISHA) was 
launched in 2017 to ensure digital literacy. The scheme concluded on 31 st March 2024. 
The scheme was one of the world’s largest digital literacy initiatives. Against the target of 
training 6 Cr people, more than 6.39 Crore persons were trained nationwide. 
 
FutureSkills Prime: FutureSkills PRIME program is a collaborative initiative of Meit Y and 
National Association of Software and Service Companies (NASSCOM) aimed at making 
India a cutting -edge digital talent nation. Under the programme, so far, more than 32+ 

41 
 
lakh candidates have registered on the portal, out of which there have been 22+ la kh 
candidates enrolled/trained in various courses. 
 
(v) The policies of the Government of India aim to ensure an open, safe, trusted, and 
accountable cyberspace for users. The Digital Personal Data Protection Act, 2023 
(“DPDP Act”), together with the Digit al Personal Data Protection Rules, 2025 (“DPDP 
Rules”), establishes a comprehensive framework governing the processing of digital 
personal data in a manner that recognises both the right of individuals to protect their 
personal data and the need to process  such personal data for lawful purposes. The 
DPDP Act requires personal data to be processed for lawful purposes on the basis of 
free, specific, informed, unconditional and unambiguous consent, preceded or 
accompanied by a notice describing the personal da ta to be collected and the purpose 
of its processing. 
 
(vi) Cyber awareness: The Government has institutionalised a nationwide integrated and 
coordinated system to strengthen cybersecurity and digital resilience in public 
infrastructure which, inter alia, includes: 
 
 National Cyber Security Coordinator (NCSC) under the National Security Council 
Secretariat (NSCS) to ensure coordination amongst different agencies. 
 The Indian Computer Emergency Response Team (CERT -In) is designated as the 
national agency for r esponding to cyber security incidents under the provisions of 
section 70B of the Information Technology (IT) Act, 2000. 
 National Cyber Coordination Centre (NCCC), implemented by CERT-In, examines the 
cyberspace to detect cyber security threats. It shares t he information with concerned 
organizations, state governments and stakeholder agencies for taking action. 
 Cyber Swachhta Kendra (CSK) is the Botnet Cleaning and Malware Analysis Centre 
and helps to detect malicious programs and provides free tools to remo ve the same. 
It also provides cyber security tips and best practices for citizens and organisations. 
 Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA) has established Indian Cybercrime Coordination 
Centre (I4C) to deal with cybercrimes in a coordinated and effective manner. 
 The Government has established National Critical Information Infrastructure 
Protection Centre (NCIIPC) for protection of critical information infrastructure in the 
country under the provisions of section 70A of the IT Act, 2000. 
 Computer Security Incident Response Team in Finance sector (CSIRT -Fin) under 
CERT-In is operational since May 2020 to coordinate cyber incident response in the 
banking and financial sector. 
 ‘Information Security Education and Awareness (ISEA)’ project is being implemented 
by MeitY f or strengthening human resources in the area of Information Security and 
creating general awareness. Awareness material on various aspects of cyber hygiene 
& cyber security are disseminated through portals such as www.staysafeonline.in, 
www.infosecawareness.in and www.csk.gov.in. 
 

42 
 
(vii) Further, assisted service delivery through Common Services Centres (CSCs), along 
with various digit al awareness programmes, particularly focused on rural and 
underserved areas, has helped expand access to government services. In addition, 
citizen-centric platforms such as Unified Mobile Application for New -age Governance 
(UMANG) and other digital applic ations provide seamless and inclusive access to 
government services across the country. 
 
(Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology  
OM No. 2(1)/2026-Budget(Vol. II) Dated: 22.06.2026) 
 
 (Recommendation Sl. No. 14) 
 
The Ministry has significantly increased the proposed Budget for National 
Knowledge Network (NKN) to Rs. 700 crore during FY 2026 -27 in comparison to Rs. 
496.00 crore in FY 2025-26 and it has been able to get Rs. 665.00 crore at BE stage for 
FY 2026 -27. According to submission of the Mi nistry, the network includes: (i) Core 
links, (ii) 1869 links to Institutions, (iii) 681 links to NIC -districts etc. would be kept 
operational by using the funds amounting to Rs 665.00 crore (that have been allocated 
for NKN for FY 2025 -26 at RE stage). Fu rther, about Rs 217 cr (out of Rs. 665 crore 
allocated), would be utilised for procurement of network equipment which are already 
obsolete. After, FY 2025 -26, the remaining life of the network equipment would be 
utilised for NKN Phase -II which is under pro cess of approval. Further, as per the 
Ministry, the targets under NKN for FY 2026 -27 are Creation/ Upgradation of core 
backbone links on 10 -100 Gbps and districts links on 100Mbps -1 Gbps to furtherance 
the Digital Connectivity with greater speed. The Committee are given to understand that 
NKN has been instrumental in bridging the digital divide, ensuring equitable access to 
knowledge and technology across urban, semi -urban, and rural areas and it has 
strengthened telemedicine services, enabling real -time collaboration among healthcare 
professionals, hospitals, and research institutions. In the light of the submissions made 
by the Ministry, the Committee note that many educational and research institutions in 
rural and isolated locations still lack high -speed internet access to close the digital 
divide and guarantee that professionals, researchers, and students in small towns and 
villages have the same opportunities as those in larger cities, NKN must broaden its 
reach. As with connectivity to the remote Islan ds, more Points of Presence (PoPs) 
should be set up in isolated places, and satellite -based connectivity solutions should be 
used to guarantee access in geographically difficult areas. The Committee would like to 
caution that NKN must have foolproof Securi ty Framework to safeguard research data 
and government communications. The Committee also want the Ministry to make use of 
augmented Budgetary Provision to NKN for establishing a blockchain -based National 
Digital Research Repository (NDRR) that will enable  secure, cross -institutional 
knowledge sharing, evidencing greater collaboration and innovation among Indian 
researchers.  As on December 2025, 1869 links to Institutions (covering 1822 
institutions) have been commissioned and made operational (this includ es 371 links to 
institutions under ‘National Mission on Education through ICT (NMEICT)’, which have 

43 
 
been migrated to NKN).  It was further informed by the Ministry that 681 NKN links have 
also been connected to NIC District Centres across India. Taking not e of the 
submissions of the Ministry that no major hurdle is being encountered in the 
implementation of the Scheme, the Committee expect the Ministry to implement this 
Scheme in the right earnest and achieve the intended objectives.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
(i) NKN core backbone is being upgraded to 10 -100 Gbps bandwidth additionally the 
districts which are not connected to NKN would be connected under delta topology for 
redundancy with a bandwidth of 100Mbps – 1 Gbps. 
 
(ii) The NKN network is a government managed network, which has security features, 
but not limited to: 
 Managing Domain Name System (DNS) authoritative servers 
 Network Operations Centre (NOC) monitoring for network security 
 Secure Virtual Private Network (VPN) access 
 Distributed Denial of Service (DDoS) protection 
 Implementation of Uniform block list 
 
(iii) NKN has strived towards bridging the digital divide and providing high speed 
connectivity to the rural and remote areas of the nation, which include Institutes in the 
North-East Regions, h illy terrain, etc., where the access to high -speed network 
connectivity was not feasible. 
 
(iv) As decided in the 25th meeting of (High Level Committee) HLC for NKN, the cost for 
last mile connectivity to NKN beyond 31st March 2026 is to be borne by the re spective 
ministries.  Thus, to further strengthen the NKN reach to educational and research 
institutions in rural and isolated locations it is submitted that, the concerned ministries/ 
departments under which the respective institute comes may fund the cos t of last -mile 
connectivity to the nearest NKN Point of Presence (PoP). Once connected NKN will 
provide all the services to Institutes under its mandate. However, no commercial 
activity/use of links will be allowed for such Institutes connected to NKN. 
 
(v) NKN has already provided connectivity to the Island territories of Andaman & 
Nicobar Islands and Lakshadweep by Very Small Aperture Terminal (VSAT) 
connectivity. NKN has also availed 1 Gbps connectivity vide under sea cable which 
connects Chennai, Tamil Nadu to Port Blair, Andaman & Nicobar Islands. For 
connectivity to other islands through VSAT, Department of Telecommunications (DoT) 
may provide the VSAT to such Island with link termination at NKN PoP for providing 
access to e-Governance services. 
 
(vi) Regarding Innovation under NKN following action are envisaged: 

44 
 
 The feasibility for establishing block chain based National Digital Research 
Repository (NDRR) is being explored as per the recommendation of the third -
party assessment of the NKN project. 
 To explore open DNS services in partnership with National Internet Exchange of 
India (NIXI). 
 
NKN has facilitated the development of knowledge ecosystem for the nation, where the 
educational & research collaboration among the Institutes in India and Internatio nal 
research Institutions has been enabled through NKN and in this journey, International 
PoPs at Amsterdam, Geneva & Singapore have been established. 
 
(Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology  
OM No. 2(1)/2026-Budget(Vol. II) Dated: 22.06.2026) 
 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 15) 
 
The Committee find that the proposed funds for this scheme has was Rs. 246.00 
crore in FY 2022 -23, Rs. 285.08 crore in FY 2023 -24, Rs. 150.00 crore in FY 2024 -25 
and Rs. 130.00 crore in FY 2025 -26 to Rs. 120.00 crore in FY 2 026-27. The BE was 
Rs. 100.00 crore 4 years back and as on date, it has decreased to Rs. 90.00 crore. In 
each of these financial years the Ministry has reduced funds at RE stage than what was 
proposed.  Utilization of funds has revealed that 74% of RE was used in FY 2022 -23, 
46% in FY 2024 -25 and 94% in FY 2025 -26 upto 31.12.2025. The reasons that were 
attributed for variation from BE of Rs.130 crore to RE of Rs. 90.62 crore were that 
though several project proposals had recommendation of Division Working G roup, 
these are at consideration at different stages of approval. The Ministry has also stated 
that during 2026 –27, the scheme aims to support 200 technology startups through 
initiatives such as domain -specific Centres of Entrepreneurship (CoEs), iTamil Na du 
Technology Hub (iTNT HUB), Centres of Excellence with Startup Innovation Zones 
(CoE-SIZ), and the Digital Startup Accelerator Programme for the North East (Digi -
SAPNE). The Committee may be apprised about the current status of different 
proposals held u p at approval stage and steps taken by the Ministry for their early 
clearance. The Committee would like to impress upon the Ministry that it should take 
necessary steps in underperforming states and North Eastern states to strengthen the 
states’ IT ecosyst em and promote future growth. The Committee observe that the 
IT/ITeS sector currently contributes handsomely to India’s GDP and it is among the 
Country’s largest employment generators. Since India's status as a reliable and 
competitive global IT hub is cem ented by the Promotion of IT/ITeS Industries Scheme, 
which guarantees consistent employment creation, export growth, regional inclusion, 
and technological leadership, the Committee recommend that the Ministry utilize the 
amount dedicated to it in the most prudent manner to achieve the targets set under it 
within the set timelines.  
 

45 
 
Reply of the Government 
i. Acceleration of Deep tech startups by  MeitY with Academia and Industry 
(ADAMYA) 
The programme aims to create an enabling platform for startups to supp ort product 
development, particularly in the deep -tech domain, by leveraging research 
advancements from academia and facilitating their transition to the market, thereby 
contributing to India’s economic growth. The programme seeks to strengthen the R&D -
driven deep-tech startup ecosystem through enhanced academia –industry collaboration 
and faster lab -to-market transitions. It promotes the creation of innovative IP -based 
products, facilitates technology transfer for commercialization, and advances research 
in emerging areas such as AI, IoT, cybersecurity, semiconductor, and quantum 
technologies. Further, it aims to provide comprehensive lifecycle support to startups —
from research and development to scaling —and enable access to diverse funding 
avenues, including public-private co-funding and venture networks. The pilot ADAMYA 
with outlay of Rs 95 crore has received in -principle approval of Secretary, MeitY and is 
being processed by IFD, MeitY. 
ii. Enhancing Technology & AI transformation to Regional IT & Services Hubs 
The programme aims to incentivize the setting up and expansion of Information 
Technology (IT) and IT-enabled Services (ITeS) operations beyond metro cities, with an 
outlay of Rs. 500 crore for 5 years, to promote investment in the IT sector across 
emerging hubs and generate 1 lakh employment opportunities nationwide. The scheme 
provides financial support to eligible entities based on performance, particularly in terms 
of employment generation and creation of new economic activity. It also seeks to dr ive 
the transformation of the IT services industry through the adoption of emerging 
technologies, expand the base of the IT industry for balanced regional growth, promote 
the development of new IT hubs across States/UTs, and encourage collaboration 
between recognized academic institutions and IT companies for joint skilling initiatives 
and talent development. The programme is being processed by IndiaAI Mission after in -
principle approval of Secretary. 
iii. Promoting IT startups and SME at international events 
The proposal for setting up an “India Pavilion” at major global technology expos aims to 
enhance the global footprint of Indian IT companies, particularly SMEs and startups, by 
providing a platform for market access, brand building, and international co llaboration. 
The key objectives include promoting “Brand India” as a global technology leader, 
showcasing India’s strengths in Digital Public Infrastructure (DPI), facilitating business 
development through B2B engagements and networking, and supporting fas ter go-to-
market strategies in new geographies. The programme is proposed for a duration of one 
year (FY 2026 –27), covering participation in major global events such as London Tech 
Week, GITEX, VivaTech, and Intersekt. The total estimated outlay is Rs. 576 .5 lakh, 
with a contribution of Rs422.9 lakh from MeitY and Rs153.6 lakh from 
NASSCOM/industry partners. The programme is being processed. 

46 
 
iv. Centre of Entrepreneurship (CoE) in Technologies Empowering Industry 4.0 at 
Dehradun 
The CoE is envisaged as a ca talyst for promoting startups, innovation, product 
development, R&D, and implementation support. Its focus areas include establishment 
of an Industry 4.0 lab, development of technology platforms for Analytics, Machine 
Learning, and Artificial Intelligence,  and creation of platforms and microservices for 
Industry 4.0 implementation. On the industry side, it will cater to key industrial sectors 
and address applications in natural disaster domains such as landslides, cloudbursts, 
and forest fires. 
The CoE aims  to create a high -potential ecosystem for Industry 4.0, Analytics, Cyber 
Security, and AI -based solutions for both industry and startups, while also contributing 
to skill development and fostering entrepreneurship in the IT sector. It is further 
envisaged to function as a long-term resource centre in the identified focus areas. 
The duration of the project is proposed to be five years. The total project outlay is 
Rs2,054.00 lakh, with contributions of Rs.926.00 lakh from MeitY, Rs.928.00 lakh from 
the Govern ment of Uttarakhand, and Rs.200.00 lakh from STPI. The programme is 
under approval after concurrence of IFD. 
v. Centre of Entrepreneurship (CoE) in Assistive Technology (AT)” at Allahabad 
Assistive Technology (AT) is vital for enabling persons with disabil ities to lead 
independent and inclusive lives, and with over 2 billion people projected to need such 
solutions by 2030, there is a growing need particularly in India for affordable, locally 
developed AT to address challenges like high costs, import relianc e, and low 
awareness. To address these gaps, the proposed AT Centre of Entrepreneurship at IIIT 
Allahabad will promote innovation, research, startup incubation, and policy support by 
leveraging strengths in AI, robotics, and human-computer interaction, aiming through an 
outlay of Rs20 crore to support 50 startups and 10 research projects over five years 
while building a sustainable ecosystem that improves accessibility and reduces 
dependence on imports. The programme is under review process by SIPD working 
group. 
vi. MOTION 2.0 
The proposed CoE aims to strengthen India’s position in the automotive innovation 
ecosystem by providing advanced infrastructure, mentorship, and funding support to 
startups, fostering collaboration among industry, academia, and start ups. The project 
envisages supporting around 50 startups over five years, with a total outlay of Rs.38 
crore, to drive innovation, commercialization, and self -reliance in the automotive sector. 
The programme is under formulation and feedback has been provided to STPI. 
vii. Centre of Entrepreneurship (CoE) in IoT & Robotics at IIT Jammu 
The CoE will focus on the domain of Internet of Things (IoT) and Robotics, with a 
special emphasis on drone technology. It is envisioned as a collaborative initiative 
involving key stakeholders such as the Ministry of Electronics and Information 

47 
 
Technology (MeitY), Software Technology Parks of India (STPI), IIT Jammu, and the 
Information and Communication Technology Association of J&K, along with scope for 
onboarding additiona l partners. The project has a total budgetary outlay of Rs.22.86 
crore, with contributions from IIT Jammu (Rs.6.90 crore), MeitY (Rs.13.83 crore), and 
STPI (Rs.2.13 crore). The CoE is proposed to support 50 startups over a period of five 
years. It is desig ned to function as a centralized hub for incubation as well as R&D, 
providing domain expertise and infrastructure in emerging technologies related to 
robotics and allied fields. 
The initiative aims to foster a robust innovation ecosystem by promoting 
entrepreneurship, supporting technology development, and facilitating job creation. It 
will particularly focus on applications of emerging technologies in sectors such as 
agriculture, thereby contributing to research, innovation, and commercialization through 
incubation and experimentation. 
viii. NGIS Plus 
The Next Generation Incubation Scheme Plus (NGIS+) envisages to strengthen India’s 
technology startup ecosystem with a focused expansion into Tier -II and Tier -III cities. 
NGIS+ aims to support 500+ technology startups across 30 emerging locations over a 
period of 5 years, through a comprehensive support framework that includes financial 
assistance (stipends, grants, investments, and co -investments), mentoring, networking, 
and infrastructure support. With a tota l budgetary outlay of Rs.99.83 crore, NGIS+ 
seeks to catalyze regional innovation ecosystems, promote balanced growth, and 
position India as a global leader in technology -led product innovation. The programme 
is under formulation and feedback has been provided to STPI. 
ix. Women Entrepreneurship Program  
The Women Entrepreneurship Program aims to strengthen women’s participation in the 
technology-driven startup ecosystem by providing structured support across the 
entrepreneurial lifecycle. The programme seeks to promote innovation, enhance access 
to finance, mentorship, and market linkages, and enable women -led startups to scale 
from ideation to commercialization. It is designed as a five -tier support mechanism over 
a period of five years, covering early-stage ideation, prototype development, and scaling 
through accelerator support. The programme targets support to around 500 women -led 
startups, with a focus on deep -tech domains and increased participation from Tier -II/III 
regions. The total proposed budget o utlay is approximately Rs. 90 crore, covering 
startup funding, training, mentoring, market connect, and administrative support. The 
programme is under formulation. 
x. SAMRIDH 2.0 
The Startup Accelerator of MeitY for Product Innovation, Development and Grow th 2.0 
(SAMRIDH 2.0) aims to promote the development of indigenous products in priority 
sectors by strengthening the startup ecosystem through structured accelerator support. 
The programme seeks to enable leading accelerators to scale around 300 high-potential 
IT-based startups, facilitating their growth into globally competitive enterprises. It also 

48 
 
focuses on generating employment and enhancing India’s position in the global 
technology and innovation landscape. The scheme is proposed with a total outlay o f 
₹99 crore, to be implemented over a duration of four years. The programme is under 
formulation. 
The following proposal has been approved:- 
Centre of Entrepreneurship (CoE) in NextGen Intelligent Solutions for Core Sector 
at Nagpur 
The project titled “Centre of Entrepreneurship (CoE) in NextGen Intelligent Solutions for 
Core Sector at Nagpur” was approved on 25.03.2026 with a total budget outlay of 
₹5255 lakh, jointly funded by MeitY (₹2477.50 lakh), the Government of Maharashtra 
(₹2477.50 lakh), and STPI (₹300 lakh). The CoE is envisaged to support 60 startups 
over a period of five years (12 startups per year) and extend AI computing support to 
100 industries/MSMEs, which may also avail additional services such as mentoring, 
networking, and marketing on a chargeable basis. The focus areas include agriculture, 
healthcare, forestry & environment, mining, and other core sectors. GPU access will be 
facilitated through collaboration with the IndiaAI mission. The CoE will provide a 
comprehensive range of services  including incubation, access to labs and tools, 
mentoring, training, funding support, networking, technical assistance, skill 
development, and legal/IPR support.  
(Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology  
OM No. 2(1)/2026-Budget(Vol. II) Dated: 22.06.2026) 
 
 
 (Recommendation Sl. No. 16) 
 
The Committee note that there has been noticeable upgradation of fund 
allocation at proposed and BE stage in FY 2024 -25 and FY 2025-26. It is noted that the 
Ministry was able to utilize the funds optimally for F Y 2024-25.  As per the submission 
of the Ministry, want of upfront support from the industry for sharing domain knowledge, 
testing and commercialization of the developed technologies are key issues in this 
scheme. In order to address this challenge, the Mi nistry has given priority to projects 
with industry support and their involvement from the beginning. In addition, lack of 
Indian/International standards and MeitY's contribution in development of standards for 
the technologies developed in close consultat ion with BIS is also a barrier. The 
Committee strongly feel that to maintain a conducive and efficient environment for R&D, 
the Scheme must continuously evolve taking care of innovative policies, revision in 
R&D guidelines to make it stake holder friendly including new finding mechanisms, 
robust Intellectual Property frameworks, and support for ethical, socially responsive 
research. The Committee urge the Ministry to regularly monitor the progress and 
streamline the release of funds. The Committee desire th e Ministry to take a 
comprehensive approach to policy and audit to ensure proper resource utilization and 
continuous optimization of research and development outcomes and apprise the 
Committee in this regard. 
 

49 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The Ministry recogni zes the challenge involved in securing upfront industry 
support for sharing of domain knowledge, testing, and commercialization of developed 
technologies. To address this issue, the Ministry has been proactively involving industry 
participation and co -investment from the inception stage. This is to  ensure that R&D 
outcomes are aligned with market needs and have a viable path for 
commercialization. The Ministry will continue to strengthen industry -academia-
government linkages to make the scheme more outcome-oriented. 
The absence of adequate Indian and International standards has been a barrier. The 
Ministry is actively working in close consultation with the Bureau of Indian Standards 
(BIS) to facilitate the evolving of standards for technologies developed und er the 
scheme. This collaborative approach will help in ensuring that indigenously developed 
technologies meet requisite quality and interoperability benchmarks, thereby facilitating 
their wider adoption. 
The Ministry fully concurs with the Committee's vie w that the R&D Scheme must 
continuously evolve to remain relevant and eﬀective. In this regard, the Ministry is  in the 
process of revision of R&D Guidelines. The guidelines are being reviewed to make them 
more stakeholder -friendly, flexible, and responsive  to emerging technological trends, 
including provisions for new funding mechanisms such as challenge grants, milestone -
based disbursements, and public -private partnership models. In addition to this, the 
Ministry is working towards establishing a robust IP  framework that clearly delineates 
ownership, licensing and commercialization rights, encouraging innovators and 
institutions to participate actively. 
A comprehensive monitoring dashboard is being developed to track physical and 
financial progress in real-time. 
 
(Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology  
OM No. 2(1)/2026-Budget(Vol. II) Dated: 22.06.2026) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 25 of Chapter I) 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 17) 
 
The Committee note that in the IndiaAI Mission, t he Ministry has been able to 
spend only 32% of the fund allocated at RE stage in FY 2025 -26 as on 31.12.2025 and 
the amount sanctioned at BE stage in FY 2026 -27 is only half the amount proposed by 
the MeitY. The Ministry has submitted that the target is to  establish IndiaAI compute 
capacity of 10,000 or more GPUs and the AI Marketplace; augmentation of the existing 
GPU availability through CSPs with sovereign AI Compute infrastructure of 3000 GPUs; 
development of foundational models with capacity of 100 bil lion+ parameters trained on 
datasets covering major Indian languages for priority sectors like healthcare, agriculture, 

50 
 
governance etc.; and establishment of AI Curation Units (ACU) in 50 -line 
ministries/departments and the IndiaAI Datasets Platform. As pe r the Budget 
Announcements 2026-27, a provision has been made for a tax holiday till 2047 to any 
foreign company that provides cloud services to customers globally by using data centre 
services from India. The Committee find that India’s Gross Expenditure on R&D as a 
percentage of GDP stands at an abysmal 0.64%, as per the Economic Survey 
presented in the Parliament, which is below the global average. The research funding is 
broadly for premier Institutions particularly IITs and national laboratories. The f ull impact 
of the new initiatives, such as Anusandhan National Research Foundation and the 
Research development and Innovation Fund, is yet to be seen. That the AI landscape is 
fast changing and witnessing real -life impact of AI, the Committee have concern s about 
the development of a sovereign AI model. Though, the Mission is aggressively working 
to establish a GPU cluster, the high cost of hardware, global supply chain delays, huge 
power and water consumption by data centres and a tax holiday are significa nt issues.  
The Committee call upon the Ministry to have consultations with all stakeholders, 
academicians, environmentalists and budget experts to mitigate any possible 
adversities.   
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Ministry acknowledges the Committee's rec ommendation and confirms  that 
it aligns perfectly with the proactive and consultative strategy that has been central to 
the IndiaAI Mission's implementation from the outset. This approach is not a new 
directive, but a continuation of the multiple, broad -based stakeholder consultations held 
over the last two years. For instance, during the last financial year, IndiaAI held 
extensive consultations with various stakeholders on critical themes such as 'Artificial 
Intelligence & the Future of Work' and its appli cation in enhancing 'Public Service 
Delivery'. IndiaAI’s strategy is firmly rooted in the belief that this collaborative 
engagement, covering both societal impact and technical execution, is essential for 
navigating the complexities of building a sovereign  AI ecosystem and ensuring its 
success. 
 
The recent activities are a testament to this ongoing commitment. To foster a federated 
and inclusive AI landscape, a series of webinars and discussions are being held with 
various stakeholders to establish State -level Centres of Excellence (CoEs). The first of 
three planned workshops for this initiative was successfully conducted on May 20, 
2026, with the next two scheduled for the upcoming week. These sessions are crucial 
for tailoring the national mission to regional strengths and needs, ensuring a bottom-up 
approach to innovation. 
 
Furthermore, to directly address the critical infrastructure challenges highlighted  by 
the Committee, the Ministry recently convened a dedicated consultation  on April 
21, 2026, with major OEM suppliers of GPUs and servers, various Cloud Service 
Providers (CSPs), and innovative startups. The explicit purpose of this meeting was to 

51 
 
collaboratively plan the next steps for building India's Sovereign AI Stack. By engaging 
directly with hardware providers and the startup ecosystem, we are actively working to 
mitigate supply chain risks and co-create a robust and scalable infrastructure plan. 
 
The Ministry remains dedicated to this holistic and inclusive process to ensure the 
responsible and effective rollout of the IndiaAI Mission.    
(Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology  
OM No. 2(1)/2026-Budget(Vol. II) Dated: 22.06.2026) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 28 of Chapter I) 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 18) 
 
With respect t o Unique Identification Authority of India (UIDAI), the Ministry 
proposed Rs. 1200 crore in BE and has been allocated Rs. 572.41 crore. The Ministry 
has submitted that though the allocation of ₹ 572.41 crore for the FY 2026-27 will not be 
sufficient to mee t the requirements of UIDAI, yet UIDAI plan to meet the excess 
expenditure from its internal resources. Online verification of legal documents and API 
integration with Registrar General of India (RGI) remains the topmost challenges for 
UIDAI. The Ministry,  among the targets enumerated, has stated that a chieving 70% e -
KYC biometric authentication transaction and increasing DBT schemes is in priority . 
Given the fact that the current allocation of ₹ 572.41 crore is insufficient to meet 
operational needs, it is imperative that UIDAI must prioritize critical projects within the 
limited budget. Since online verification of legal documents takes priority along with API 
integration with the Registrar General of India (RGI), these require immediate funding. It 
is imperative that the Ministry ensure internal resource mobilization is strengthened to 
cover shortfalls. The Committee are of the opinion that efficiency audits shoul d be 
conducted to identify cost -saving opportunities or a fund should be created for 
unforeseen expenses. The Committee feel that Public -private partnerships can help 
finance technology upgradation and so, DBT (Direct Benefit Transfer) expansion should 
be aligned with authentication reliability. The Committee recommend that UIDAI should 
collaborate with State Governments for shared infrastructure and Performance -based 
funding requests may convince the Ministry for higher allocations. The Committee 
further recommend that UIDAI should publish transparent reports on fund utilization and 
prioritize projects with high citizen impact and Cost -benefit analysis must guide every 
new initiative.  
Reply of the Government 
 
1. Estimated amount of expenditure to be incurred by UIDAI was projected around 
Rs.2900 crore during FY 2026 -27 and out of that Budget Estimates (BE) Rs. 1200 
crore was requested to Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology (MeitY) with 

52 
 
a view to use  its internal revenue collected from various services to meet the 
remaining expenditure.  However, UIDAI has got the allocation of Rs. 572.41 crore 
(BE) for FY 2026–27.   
2. In line with the Committee’s recommendation on efficiency and cost optimization as fa r 
as possible will be observed. Further, all proposals received from Divisions and 
Regional Offices are rigorously examined by the Finance Division in accordance with 
extant Government financial rules and wherever required suggest them revisit 
proposals, e nsuring cost -effectiveness and prioritization of critical activities.  
Furthermore, UIDAI accords priority to high -impact and critical projects, including 
strengthening Enrolment and Updation and authentication infrastructure and related 
infrastructure. Fi nancial decisions are guided by cost -benefit considerations and 
alignment with organizational objectives.  
3. About transparency and accountability, details of Grants -in-Aid received from MeitY, 
and corresponding expenditure are regularly disclosed on the UID AI website. Further, 
Utilization Certificates (UCs) are submitted to the Ministry on a quarterly basis, 
ensuring financial discipline and transparency. CAG Audit report also be shared with 
Ministry to lay before both houses of parliament. 
 
(Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology  
OM No. 2(1)/2026-Budget(Vol. II) Dated: 22.06.2026) 
 
**** 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

53 
 
CHAPTER- III 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS  WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO 
PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
-NIL- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

54 
 
 
CHAPTER IV 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND REQUIRE 
REITERATION 
 
 
-NIL- 
 
 

55 
 
CHAPTER V 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES  
OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE INTERIM IN NATURE 
 
 
-NIL- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     NEW DELHI; DR. NISHIKANT DUBEY, 
  05 August, 2026  Chairperson, 
  14 Sravana, 1948 (Saka) Standing Committee on  
Communications and Information Technology. 

56 
 
ANNEXURE-II 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE OBSERVATIONS/ 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THEIR TWENTY FOURTH REPORT  
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
[Vide Paragraph No. 5 of Introduction] 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by  the 
Government 
 
 Rec. Sl. Nos.: 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14,15,16, 17,18 
Total 18 
Percentage    100 
(ii)  Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the replies of the Government 
 
         Rec. Sl. No.: NIL  
Total NIL 
Percentage 0 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and require 
reiteration 
        Rec. Sl. No.: NIL 
 
Total NIL 
Percentage 0 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in resp ect of which the replies of the 
Government are of interim in nature 
 
        Rec. Sl. Nos.: NIL  
Total NIL 
Percentage 0 
 
 