 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON COMMUNICATIONS  
AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY  
(2024-25) 
 
 
EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
MINISTRY OF COMMUNICATIONS  
(DEPARTMENT OF POSTS) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the 
Committee contained in their Second Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on 
‘Demands for Grants (2024-25)'] 
 
 
TWELFTH REPORT 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
 
 
 
     July, 2025/ Sravana, 1947 (Saka) 
 
 
12 
 
 


 
 
TWELFTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
COMMUNICATIONS AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(2024-25) 
 
 
EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
MINISTRY OF COMMUNICATIONS  
(DEPARTMENT OF POSTS) 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the 
Committee contained in their Second Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on 
‘Demands for Grants (2024-25)'] 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on          24.07.2025 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on            24.07.2025 
 
                    LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
                   NEW DELHI 
 
 
                 July 2025/ Sravana, 1947 (Saka) 
 
 


 
 
 
CCIT No. 413 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
©2025 By Lok Sabha Secretariat 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha 
(Seventeenth Edition) and Printed by Lok Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi-110001 

 
 
CONTENTS 
 PAGE  
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE.................................................................................................. (iii) 
INTRODUCTION.................................................................................................................................... (v) 
CHAPTER I Report………………………………………………………………………..................... 1 
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government……………………………………………………………………............... 10 
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in 
view of the replies of the Government……………………………….......................... 29 
CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee and require reiteration …………......... 30 
CHAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the Government 
are of interim in nature…......................................................................................... 31 
 ANNEXURES  
I. Minutes of the 20th Sitting of the Committee held on 26.06.2025............................  32 
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in their Second Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha).  34 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
Composition of the Standing Committee on Communications and 
Information Technology (2024-25)** 
 
Dr. Nishikant Dubey - Chairperson 
Lok Sabha 
  
2. Shri C.N. Annadurai 
3. Shri Anil Baluni 
4. Dr. Rabindra Narayan Behera 
5. Shri Anup Sanjay Dhotre 
6. Shri Gurmeet Singh Meet Hayer 
7. Shri Sanjay Haribhau Jadhav 
8. Shri S. Supongmeren Jamir 
9. Shri Appalanaidu Kalisetti 
10. Smt. Poonamben Hematbhai Maadam 
11. Ms. Mahua Moitra 
12. Shri G. Kumar Naik 
13. Shri Shafi Parambil 
14. Dr. M.K. Vishnu Prasad 
15. Ms. Kangna Ranaut 
16. Shri Radheshyam Rathiya 
17. Shri Ramasahayam Raghuram Reddy 
18. Shri Arun Kumar Sagar 
19. Shri Devesh Shakya 
20. Shri Vishnu Datt Sharma 
21. Shri Rajesh Verma 
Rajya Sabha 
22. Shri Saket Gokhale* 
23. Smt. Priyanka Chaturvedi 
24. Shri Ilaiyaraaja 
25. Shri Amar Pal Maurya 
26. Dr. Sasmit Patra 
27. Shri V. Vijayendra Prasad 
28. Shri S. Niranjan Reddy 
29. Shri Kartikeya Sharma 
30. Shri Lahar Singh Siroya  
31. Shri K.T.S. Tulsi 
SECRETARIAT 
1.  Shri Y.M. Kandpal  — Additional Secretary 
2.  Smt. A. Jyothirmayi  — Director 
3. Shri Amrish Kumar                 —        Deputy Secretary 
4.  Ms. Divya Rai                         —        Assistant Executive Officer  
 
**Committee constituted w.e.f. 26th September, 2024 vide Para No.833 of Bulletin Part-II dated 
26th September, 2024. 
* Shri Saket Gokhale  has been nominated vide Para No. 853 of Bulletin Part –II dated 03 rd 
October, 2024. 

 
 
INTRODUCTION 
I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Communications and Information 
Technology (2024-25), having been authorized by the Committee, present this Twelfth Report 
on Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the Committee 
contained in their Second Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants (2024 -25)’ 
relating to the Ministry of Communications (Department of Posts). 
2. The Second Report was presented to Lok Sabha and also laid on the Table of  
Rajya Sabha on 18 th December, 2024. The Ministry of Communications (Department of Posts) 
furnished their Action Taken Notes on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the 
Second Report on 16th April, 2025. 
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their Sitting held on 26 th June, 
2025. 
4. For facility of reference and convenience, Observations/Recommendations of the Committee 
have been printed in bold in Chapter-I of the Report.  
5. An analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Second Report of the Committee is given at Annexure-II. 
 
 
 
 
     NEW DELHI; DR. NISHIKANT DUBEY, 
     21 July, 2025  Chairperson, 
30 Asadha, 1947 (Saka) Standing Committee on  
Communications and Information Technology. 

1 
 
CHAPTER I 
REPORT 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Communications and Information 
Technology (2024-25) deals with the action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Second Report 
(Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on the ‘Demands for Grants (2024 -25)’ relating to the 
Department of Posts (Ministry of Communications). 
 
2. The Second Report was presented to Lok  Sabha and laid in Rajya  Sabha on                          
18thDecember, 2024.  It contained 1 3 Observations/Recommendations. Action Taken 
Notes in respect of all the Observations/Recommendations , as contained in this Report 
have been received from the Department of Posts and are categorized as under:- 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by 
the Government 
 
Rec. Sl. Nos.:– 1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9,10,11and 13 
 
  Total-12 
Chapter-II 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the replies of the Government 
 
 
Rec. Sl. No.:– NIL 
 
  Total — NIL  
Chapter-III 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of 
the Government have not been accepted by the Committee 
and require reiteration 
 
Rec. Sl. No.:– NIL 
 
  Total – NIL  
Chapter-IV 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of 
the Government are interim in nature  
 
Rec. Sl. No.:– 12 
 
  Total – 01 
Chapter-V 
 
3. The Committee trust that utmost importance would be given to 
implementation of the Observations/Recommendations accepted by the 
Government. The Committee also desire that Action Taken Notes on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in Chapter -I of this Report and final 
action taken replies to the Observations/Recommendations contained in                         
Chapter-V of this Report may be furnished to them at the earliest. 

2 
 
4. The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government on some 
of the important Recommendations. 
 
ESTATES MANAGEMENT  
(Recommendation Sl. No. 6) 
5. The Committee, in their Second Report, had recommended as under:- 
“While examining the issue, the Committee noted that the key objective of 
the Estates Management Scheme is to fulfill the Universal Service 
Obligation by providing a congenial environment for customer transaction 
and also provide a good working atmosphere to the employees. The thrust 
areas for the development of Postal Estates include (i) To provide 
functionally useful modern space for Post Office operations;  
(ii) To improve the general ambience and aesthetics of postal buildings; 
(iii) To provide convenient, modern facilities and amenities to the users 
like ATM rooms; (iv) To design buildings in such a manner that they are 
attractive to the customers resulting in increased footfall and retaining and 
attracting new customers to the Post Office for transacting business; (v) 
To prevent encroachments on prime land owned by the Department; and  
(vi) To preserve the heritage buildings owned by the Department. With 
respect to the budgetary allocations, the Committee note that during the 
year 2023-24, the fund allocation at BE stage and RE stage were Rs. 100 
crore and Rs. 115.00 crore respectively whereas the actual was Rs. 
119.06 crore. For the year 2024 -25, as against the proposed amount of 
Rs. 151.30 crore, the allocated sum is Rs. 133.50 crore. As far as the 
physical targets set during 2023-24 is concerned, the Committee note that 
the target for construction of 40 small Post Office buildings, 25 Rain Water 
Harvesting Structures, 50 Ramps & Rails, 59 ladies toilets and 29 feeding 
rooms were fully achieved.  In addition, the target for renovation of 40 
buildings and for installation of 32 Solar Power packs and Braille Signage 
in 500 post offices were fully achieved. Taking into consideration the 
performance of the Department in 2023 -24, the Committee are hopeful 
and expect the Department to achieve the targets set for the year 2024 -
25. Further, the Committee observed that the major challenges being 
encountered in the implementation of the projects were (a) not getting 
timely approval from Municipal Corporations and other State Government 
authorities for starting construction; (b) cancellation of tendering process 
due to single/high bidding; and (c) depleting man power strength of Civil 
Wing due to Group A cadre of the Civil Wing being declared Dying Cadre 
and consequent stopping of induction of new man power in Civil Wing. To 
overcome these hurdles, the Committee recommend ed that earnest 
efforts may be made to get timely approval from Municipal Corporations 
and other State Government authorities. With respect to cancellation of 
tendering process due to single/high bidding the Committee suggest ed 
that the Department should revisit the terms and conditions of the 
tendering document with special focus on cost benefit analysis. So far as 
other challenges being encountered in implementing the projects, the 
Committee recommend ed the Department to take up the issue with 

3 
 
appropriate authorities at the highest level and try to reach its early and 
logical conclusions”. 
 
6. In their Action Taken Reply, the Department of Posts submitted as under:– 
“The recommendations of the Committee have been noted. The 
Department is working closely with the concerned authorities to speed up 
the approval process for construction and other projects. The Department 
is committed to overcoming these challenges and achieving the objectives 
of the Estates Management Scheme”. 
 
7. The Standing Committee (2024 -25), in their Second Report, had 
recommended the Department to make earnest efforts towards getting timely 
approval from Municipal Corporations and other State Government authorities 
while also revisiting the terms and conditions of the tendering document with 
special focus on cost benefit analysis. The Committee had also recommended to 
work towards other challenges encountered in implementing the projects. In their 
Action Taken Reply, the Department has simply informed that they were working 
closely with the concerned authorities to speed up the approval process for 
construction and for other p rojects. It was committed to overcome  these 
challenges and also achieving the objectives of the Estates Management Scheme. 
While appreciating the steps being taken by the Department to address issues 
and challenges being faced in the implementation of the Estate Management 
Scheme, the Committee  find their reply devoid of concrete action being 
contemplated and therefore, desire to be apprised of the status of achievement of 
Physical Targets under this Scheme during the financial year 2024 -25 and also 
about the specific measures being adopted to address issues arising out of the 
human resource shortage being faced by the Civil Wing of the Department . The 
Committee further expect that special attention is given for preventing 
encroachments of the vacant lands/estates of the Department ; installation of 
solar panels on rooftops of Postal buildings and rain water harvesting 
infrastructure in Postal buildings / premises; addressing gender concerns 
through women -centric infrastructure in buildings such as feeding rooms, 
separate toilets ; and preservation of heritage buildings  etc. Status of the final 
outcome on these fronts may be furnished to the Committee  within six months of 
presentation of this Report in Parliament. 
 
 

4 
 
HERITAGE BUILDINGS 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 7) 
8. The Committee, in their Second Report, had recommended as under:- 
“On the issues pertaining to the Heritage Buildings, the Committee desired 
to know about the measures taken to address long delays in identifying 
and listing Heritage Buildings, restoring them and steps taken for its 
conservation. To this, the Department have informed that pursuant to the 
Report (No. 16 of 2023) of CAG, they have framed Conservation Policy for 
its heritage buildings in November, 2023 with provision for constitution of 
Circle Heritage Cells at Circle level and Postal Heritage Conservation 
Committee at National level and guidelines for carrying out restoration 
works of heritage buildings. The Circle Heritage Cells at Circle level and 
Postal Heritage Conservation Committee at National level are to identify 
and recommend postal buildings for inclusion in the list of Heritage 
Buildings of Department. The Department has signed MoU with Indian 
National Trust for Art and Cultural Heritage (INTACH) for getting expert 
guidance in restoration of Heritage Buildings. Further, detailed provisions 
to carry out restoration works of heritage buildings have been incorporated 
in the Conservation policy of the Department. The Department also 
informed that CPWD Academy, Ghaziabad has been requested to devise 
a training module for Civil Wing personnel of the Department to train them 
in conservation/restoration works of heritage buildings. These steps have 
necessitated the Department to seek more funds for Heritage Buildings for 
remodeling/retrofitting so as to preserve them. The Committee would like 
the Department to take up the need for additional funds in right earnest 
with the Ministry of Finance. The Committee desire to be apprised of the 
outcome of the action taken in pursuant to the Conservation Policy for 
Heritage Buildings”. 
 
9. In their Action Taken Reply, the Department of Posts submitted as under:– 
“The recommendation of the Committee to take up the need for additional 
funds with the Ministry of Finance for preservation of heritage buildings 
has been noted. The scheme fund requirement for estates management 
for the next 5 years will include the requirement for pres ervation of 
heritage buildings. Actions taken pursuant to the framing and 
implementation of Conservation Policy for Heritage Buildings has resulted 
in very positive outcomes for conservation of heritage buildings of the 
Department. Provision of an inspection book for inspection of heritage 
buildings and circulation of Do's and Don'ts for heritage buildings have 
resulted in their better upkeep. Standardized signage being installed at 
heritage buildings sites serve as information markers and provide 
historical context to visitors about the buildings”. 
 
10. In their Original Report, t he Committee had recommended to take up the 
requirement for additional funds with the Ministry of Finance and had also 
desired to be apprised of the outcome of the action taken in pursuant to the 
Conservation Policy for Heritage Buildings. In their Action Taken Re ply, the 

5 
 
Department of Posts have  informed that fund requirements for preservation  of 
heritage buildings have been met under the 5 years’ allocation made towards the 
Scheme on Estates Management and that actions taken pursuant to the framing 
and implementation of Conservation Policy for Heritage Buildings have yielded 
positive outcomes.  While lauding the efforts of the Department with regard to 
preservation and restoration of heritage Postal buildings, the Committee desire to 
be apprised of the  updated status of work done by the Department , such as 
remodeling/retrofitting under the Conservation Policy of Heritage Buildings . The 
Committee expect that the Postal Department would expedite to obtain the expert 
guidance from Indian National Trust for Art and Cultural Heritage at the earliest 
and pursue their efforts to accomplish the target for restoration of Postal Heritage 
Buildings throughout the Country in a time bound manner . The Committee would 
like to be apprised of the details in this regard. 
 
DORMANT ACCOUNTS 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 10) 
11. The Committee, in their Second Report, had recommended as under:- 
“According to the Department, as on 30.09.2022, there are 218.20 Lakh 
dormant/inactive accounts lying with DoP and the value and amount 
deposited in these dormant/inactive accounts for the same period is Rs. 
16,240.20 crore. When inquired about the efforts made by the Post Offices 
to ensure that the funds are restored to the rightful owners/nominees, the 
Department have informed that in accordance with the instructions 
contained in Saving Bank (SB) order No. 8/2019 dated 13.09.2019, all 
types of unclaimed accounts/certificates in small savings schemes are 
identified centrally and frozen. Postal Circles then download list of such 
accounts pertaining to the Post Offices falling under their jurisdiction and 
share the same with the concerned Post Offices. The concerned Post 
Office places the list on the Notice Board meant for public and tries to 
contact each of the account holder of the unclaimed account by all 
reasonable means at least two times within a span of sixty days of placing 
the list on the notice board. Door -to-door campaign and special drives are 
carried out at Divisional/Regional/Circle levels for settlement of such 
unclaimed accounts and periodical monitoring through Video 
Conferencing is also being done at Directorate levels. The Committee 
note that an amount of ₹ 2,697.04 crore has been released against 57.73 
Lakh accounts during last three financial years. Clarifying further, about 
the number of unclaimed deposits and the ways in which those funds were 
being spent, the Secretary, during evidence, informed the Committee that 
there exists a system, like in banks, where the money moves 
automatically into the Senior Citizens Welfare Fund and it is for the 
Finance Ministry to use that money to formulate schemes for senior 

6 
 
citizens, which is the case for all banks. The Department has also stated 
that whenever there is a request, it is followed up and money is pulled 
back. Further, with respect to the initiatives taken/planned for reducing the 
unpaid amount lying in dormant accounts in Post Offices, the Department 
have informed that proactive measures are being taken by them to contact 
beneficiaries of unclaimed or dormant accounts.  Appreciating the efforts 
undertaken by the Department in settlement of dormant accounts, the 
Committee urge the Department to continue their efforts with renewed 
vigour to find the legal heirs of the deceased persons. The Department 
may also explore the possibility to trace out legal heirs through publicity in 
media and settle the dormant accounts/unclaimed accounts while taking 
abundant precautions about false claims in the matter. The progress made 
in this regard be apprised to the Committee at the earliest”.  
 
12. In their Action Taken Reply, the Department of Posts submitted as under:– 
“As suggested by the Committee, the Department will make continued 
efforts, through all possible means, to help identify the claimant (nominees 
/ legal heirs) of the deceased persons whose accounts are dormant / 
inactive. As of March 2025, the cumulative settlement of SCWF unclaimed 
accounts is 51.41 lakh accounts and amountis₹1447.17 crore”. 
 
13. In their Second Report, with respect to the significant unclaimed deposits 
lying within dormant accounts, the Committee had recommended the Department 
to explore the possibility to trace out legal heirs of such accounts through 
publicity in media and settle the dormant accounts/unclaimed accounts while 
taking abundant precautions to prevent  false claims of money/account . In their 
Action Taken Replies, the Department  have informed that they would make 
continued efforts, through all possible means, to help identify the claimant 
(nominees / legal heirs) of the deceased persons whose accounts were dormant / 
inactive. The Department  have also submitted that a s of March 2025, the 
cumulative settlement of Senior Citizens Welfare Funds (SCWF) unclaimed 
accounts was 51.41 lakh accounts and the amount was Rs. 1447.17 crore. While 
noting the actions being taken by the Department to identify legal claimants of 
dormant/inactive accounts, the Committee desire to be apprised of the tangible 
outcome of steps taken to this effect and also about the latest position of the 
number of accounts lying dormant / inactive, the value of deposits lying therein, 
the number of legal heirs / nominees identified since March 2025 and the total 
amount of money moved into the Senior Citizens Welfare F unds (SCWF) so far . 
Keeping in view the rampant online frauds/bank frauds happening in our Country, 
the Committee may be enlightened whether any such fraud/attempt of fraud to 
fleece the money of dormant account holders happened in Postal Department and 
if so the steps taken to prevent such frauds. 

7 
 
NORTH EASTERN REGION (NER) 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 11) 
14. The Committee, in their Second Report, had recommended as under:- 
“An analysis of the financial allocations and utilisation under all the 
Schemes/projects being implemented in North-East Region reflect that the 
percentage of utilization w.r.t RE during 2019-20, 2020-21, 2021-22, 2022-
23 and 2023 -24 were 81.94%, 83.09%, 89.40%, 91.90% and 91.66% 
respectively. It is seen that the percentage of utilization of funds has 
increased during last five years and Department of Posts has been able to 
achieve more than 90% expenditure for last two years. The Committee 
note that in the North Eastern Region, IPPB services are available through 
a network of 7064 Branch Post Offices. In order to expand access to 
banking services to the population of North Eastern Region, Department 
intends to open 108 IPPB access points in Branch Post offices in 
Arunachal Pradesh (50), Manipur (18), Meghalaya (25) and Nagaland (15) 
and these would be made live before 31st December 2024.  
Responding to a specific concern of the Committee that candidates from 
other Hindi/English speaking State(s) join as Gramin  Dak Sevaks (GDSs) 
in State where Hindi/English is accepted as official language in the North -
East, the Department dealt in detail about the criteria adopted by them for 
recruiting GDSs. The Committee have been enlightened that in order to 
resolve the issue the Department prescribed that candidate seeking GDS 
appointment should possess knowledge of 'Hindi or English' and 'any one 
local dialects' notified as third language by the respective State 
Government. However, it has been observed that States which have their 
official language as ‘English’ face the issue of having GDS who are not 
localites. In order to overcome this lacunae, the Committee would like the 
Department to take up the matter with the concerned State Government(s) 
to find ways and means to circumvent this issue and arrive at a practical 
solution at the earliest while adhering to the constitutional provisions”. 
 
15. In their Action Taken Reply, the Department of Posts submitted as under:– 
“Three States of North East Region -Manipur, Nagaland and Sikkim -have 
English as one of their local languages. To address the concerns raised 
by the Committee, the following approach is being adopted and details are 
being worked out: 
(i)  In Manipur, proficiency in both Manipuri and English could be made 
mandatory for engagement of Gramin Dak Sevaks (GDS) in the State. 
(ii)  In Sikkim, knowledge of English along with any one of the following-
Bhutia, Lepcha, or Nepali- could be a requirement for GDS positions in the 
State. 
(iii)  For Nagaland, where the identified local languages are Hindi and 
English, the North East Postal Circle has been advised to engage with the 
State Government to arrive at a practical solution at the earliest, while 
ensuring adherence to constitutional provisions. 

8 
 
For the remaining States in the North Eastern Region, the issue has 
already been resolved”. 
 
16. The Committee had recommended the Department to take up the matter 
about appointment of local residents as Gra min Dak Sevaks (GDS) in the North 
Eastern Region (NER) with the concerned State Government(s) and to find ways 
to circumvent this issue so as to arrive at a practical solution while adhering to 
the Constitutional provisions. In their Action taken Reply, the Department have  
informed about the steps that were being taken to appoint Gramin  Dak Sevaks in 
the States on Manipur, Sikkim and Nagaland. While acknowledging the actions 
taken by the Department to appropriately address this particular issue, the 
Committee desire to be apprised of the tangible outcome with respect to State 
Government consultations made by  the North East Postal Circle particularly in 
the State of Nagaland.  They also desire that proper feedback mechanism should 
be put in place to elicit the views of public to this approach adopted by the 
Department. The Committee may be apprised of the timeline envisaged to achieve 
the desired outcome in this regard. 
AWARENESS GENERATION AND ADVERTISEMENTS 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 12) 
17. The Committee, in their Second Report, had recommended as under:- 
“During examination of Demands for Grants (2024 -25), it was observed by 
the Committee that the focus of Department of Posts on advertisement 
and publicity of their programme was not adequate. To this, the 
Department of Posts informed the Committee that their 
advertising/publicity budget during the year 2023 -24 was Rs 25.77 crore 
and for the year 2024 -25 it is Rs. 51 crore as they are going in for wider 
publicity and have increased their focus on social media. Further, a new 
agency is being engaged which will work in more detail in the awareness 
campaign to increase it further.  The Department also stated that apart 
from this, physical campaigns are being done in rural areas and there is a 
need to focus on urban areas as 10 percent of the Post Offices are in 
urban areas. While taking note of all futuristic plans of the Department, the 
Committee urge them to invariably expand their reach through 
advertisement and publicity campaigns both in Urban and Rural areas and 
make use of latest technologies to attract the masses.  The Department 
may make periodic assessment of the impact of work done by the new 
agency engaged by them for awareness and publicity campaigns. The 
Committee also desire to be kept apprised of all the initiatives taken during 
2024-25 along with the outcome of the same”. 
 
18. In their Action Taken Reply, the Department submitted as under:– 

9 
 
“Department is working in close coordination with the social media agency 
hired from the month of January, 2025. A wide range of social media 
campaigns are being carried out on various social media platforms to 
popularize Department’s products and services”. 
 
19. While observing that the focus of Department of Posts on advertisement 
and publicity of their programme s was not adequate , the Committee  had urged 
the Department to expand their reach through advertisement and publicity 
campaigns and to make periodic assessments of the impact of work done by the 
new agency engaged by them for this purpose. In their Action taken replies, the 
Department have informed that they were working in close coordination with the 
social media agency hired from the month of January, 2025  and a wide range of 
social media campaigns were being carried out on various social media platforms 
to popularize their products and servi ces. While noting the reply of the 
Department, the Committee opine that the measures may not be adequate. They , 
feel that more needs to be done to popularize India Post and the other valuable 
services being rendered by the Department in rural and urban areas alike through 
advertisements and campaigns on print, digital and social media. Further, the fact 
that the budgetary allocation towards advertisement and publicity was almost 
doubled from Rs. 25.77 crore in the FY 2023-24 to Rs. 51 crore in FY 2024 -25, 
which needs to be taken into account while formulating plans and policies 
regarding advertisements and awareness generation.  The Committee, therefore, 
reiterate their earlier recommendation and urge the Department to make 
concerted efforts along with the hired social and digital media agency to increase 
awareness regarding products and services being offered and also to undert ake 
periodic reviews to assess the impact of such efforts. The Committee would like 
to be apprised of the various initiatives, programmes and campaigns  undertaken 
so far and results achieved in this regard. 
      The Committee understand that for the successful financial progress of Postal 
Department, every public dealing official should be consumer friendly and 
business oriented, use latest technologies for optimum output, increase 
efficiency and commitment of officials through regular training, use modern 
marketing means, motivate officials by constituting best performance award for 
hard working and committed officials etc. Outcome of the above initiatives be 
communicated to the Committee within six months of presentation of the Action 
Taken Report. 

10 
 
CHAPTER II 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN  ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 1) 
 
Budget Analysis and Overview of Demands for Grants for 2024-25 
The Department of Posts (DoP) have laid the Demands for Grants (2024 -25) in 
Lok Sabha on 31st July, 2024 for a total amount of Rs. 38,917.24 crore consisting of Rs. 
37,654.64 crore under Revenue Section and Rs. 1,262.60 crore under Capital Section. 
An analysis of the budgetary allocation made for the previous year (2023 -24) indicates 
that under Revenue Section, the Gross Expenditure set at BE stage was Rs. 39,156.43 
crore which was reduced to Rs. 35,416.54 crore at RE stage and the actual expenditure 
was Rs. 35,645.52 crore. Under the Capital section, during the  same period, an amount 
of Rs. 1,396.95 crore had been allocated at BE stage which was increased to Rs. 
1,580.7 crore at RE stage and the actual utilization was Rs. 1,386.89 crore. The 
Committee note that the Gross Expenditure of the Department in respect of Revenue 
Section, has shown an increasing trend during the last five financial years that is from 
Rs. 29,139.74 crore in 2019 -20 to Rs. 35,645.52 crore in the year 2023 -24.  However, 
there has been a decrease in the BE 2024 -25 allotment when compared to the BE 
2023-24. The Committee have been informed that this decrease is primarily due to 
decrease in the allocation for the components of Salaries, Allowances and Pensionary 
Charges in BE 2024 -25 and these three items constitute 89.30% of the Department’s 
expenditure.  In Capital section, the Committee observe that the Gross expenditure 
during 2019-20 was Rs. 730.56 crore and during 2020 -21, 2021-22, 2022-23 and 2023-
24 the same were Rs. 897.41 crore, Rs. 885.55 crore, Rs. 1,476.67 crore and Rs. 
1,386.89 crore respectively.  The Committee further observe that there has been a 
decrease in Gross expenditure at BE 2024-25 when compared to   2023-24. 
The Committee note that the overall Capital Expenditure of the Department is 
focused on several key areas including Mail Operations, Estates Management, India 
Post Payments Bank, and the IT Induction & Modernization 2.0 initiative. The 
Committee are pleased to note the fact that during the year 2023 -24, over 90% of the 
allocated funds for these Schemes were utilized, indicating a strong commitment to 
project implementation. In this regard, the Department have informed that the 
monitoring mechanism for review of physical and financial targets under Schemes has 
been strengthened. Acco rding to the Department, a well placed mechanism of senior 

11 
 
officers meeting with programme divisions within the Postal Directorate and meeting 
with various Postal Circle Heads implementing the Schemes has been set up. The 
Committee, while lauding the overall efforts of the Department expect them to continue 
implementing the measures being taken to reduce the expenditure and also for effective 
and timely utilization of budget.  The Committee hope that the same trend will continue 
in coming years also by putting a robust monitoring mechanism for projects. 
Reply of the Government 
The Department is regularly monitoring the utilization of fund s through periodical 
reviews and video conferencing with Circles and the Postal Civil wing. Prior to allocation 
of funds for the financial year, the requirement of fund s for ongoing projects and 
readiness for new projects is assessed , in consultation with the Postal Circles  and 
execution agencies such as the Postal Civil wing, so as to ensure that the allotted funds 
are utilized effectively. 
The observations/recommendations of the Committee have been noted. The 
Department stands committed to improving efficiency and ensuring effective 
deployment of funds for  the fulfilment of targets . The Department will continue to  
strengthen its monitoring mechanism and ensure regular meetings to review the 
progress in achievement of physical and financial targets under the schemes and 
effective coordination between various scheme implementing divisions and with Postal 
Circles. 
(Department of Posts OM no. 28-5/ 2nd Report/2024/ Bgt dated 16.04.2025) 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 2) 
REVENUE SECTION [Revenue Receipts and Revenue Deficit] 
The Committee note that the Department is earning revenue through various 
items/heads which, inter -alia, include (i) Postal Services like Speed Post (Documents), 
Speed Post(Parcel), International Parcel, Business Parcel, Postage Realised in  Cash 
through Mass Mailing Services, Sale of Postage Stamps, Remotely Managed Franking 
Machines; (ii) Agency Services like remuneration received from Ministry of Finance for 
Small Savings Schemes and Cash Certificates; and (iii) Other Citizen Centric services 
such as Aadhaar enrollment and updation  Centres, Passport Seva  Kendras and 
Common Service Centres, etc. The Revenue Receipts during 2019 -20, 2020-21, 2021-
22, 2022-23 and 2023-24 were Rs. 13,558.20 crore, Rs. 10,632.50 crore, Rs. 10,860.80 

12 
 
crore, Rs. 10,917.89 crore and Rs. 11,321.35 crore respectively.  Further, the Revenue 
Receipts has reduced drastically when compared to 2019 -20. However, it is heartening 
to note that during the year 2023 -24, the Department achieved revenue of Rs. 
11,321.22 Crore against target of Rs. 11,408.04 Crore, which is more than 99% of the 
target. In addition, for the year 2024 -25, the Department has set targets for Rs. 
12238.77 crore at BE stage. 
During the last five financial years the Revenue Deficit has shown an increasing 
trend from Rs. 14,813.14 crore in 2019 -20 to Rs. 24,115.87 crore in 2023 -24. The 
items/heads on which the Department has incurred maximum expenditure are salaries, 
allowances and pension which are committed liabilities of the Government. Pension, 
salary and allowances constitute 33.35 %, 24.02% and 32.01% of the total revenue 
expenditure respectively. The remaining 11 % expenditure is related to recurring 
establishment costs.   
The Committee note that several measures are being taken to increase the 
revenue receipts and reduce revenue deficit  during 2024-25,  which inter-alia include (i) 
Usage of around 1.8 lakh mobile phones by delivery staff for real time updation of 
delivery status of Speed Post, Registered Post, Money Orders etc. through postman 
mobile app; (ii) Introduction of Application Programme Interface (API) Integration facility; 
(iii) Regular monitoring of articles through a well -defined set of Key Performance 
Indicators (KPIs) at HQ as well as Circle/Division levels; (iv) Introduction of Corporate 
Customer Specific MIS; (v) 24x7 CRM for bulk customers to upload complaints in bulk 
and monitor the status on CRM; (vi) Single Point of Contact for corporate customers 
having monthly business of Rs.10 lakh and above in all the Postal Circles; (vii) Revision 
of Registration process of bulk customer under Book Now Pay Later (BNPL) and 
National Account Facility (NAF) with DoP; (viii) Strengthening the marketing of the 
Speed Post/Registered letter; (ix) New age booking avenues such as Booking Kiosks 
and online booking of postal articles to attract new customers; (x) Revamped franchisee 
scheme with the revised commission structure to increase the revenue of various postal 
products including Speed post and Registered post; etc.   
The Committee expect that the above -mentioned measures by the Department 
would not only increase the revenue receipts but would also reduce the revenue deficit.  
The Committee, therefore, urge the Department to continue exploring ways to utilize 
their vast network and resources for revenue generation and also to regularly monitor 
their expenditure to control the revenue expenditure gap. In addition to the above, the 

13 
 
Committee also desire that an impact assessment of the initiatives being taken may be 
done periodically to gau ge their outcome and take suitable corrective steps to improve 
further as and when required. The Committee may be kept apprised about the 
quantifiable outcome of the initiatives taken during the year 2024-25. 
Reply of the Government 
 
Measures for improving mail and parcel services impact business across the 
country. The quantifiable outcomes of the measures taken are as under: 
i) 190 e -Commerce and Parcel hubs have been set -up and strengthened by 
introducing standard operational equipment such as Roller containers, Bag 
Opening Table, Package trolleys, Bag Stands and Sorting Cases.  
ii) 233 Nodal Delivery Centres have been operationalized for exclusive delivery of 
parcels across the country.  
iii) Postal Road Transport network has been designed to ensure speedy and safe 
and secure transmission of parcels. 76 (38*2) national routes involving daily run 
of over 56000 km are operational now. 
iv) Currently Parcel Packaging Units are operational at 1408 locations across the 
country. Customers can walk into designated PPUs and get their consignment 
packed by the staff.  
v) In order to ensure smooth data exchange, around 650 bulk customers are using 
API facility.  
vi) Around 5000 bulk customers are using Corporate Customer Specific MIS wherein 
customers can access booking and delivery MIS reports through their login 
credentials.  
I. The action taken to enhance revenue from POSB led to increase of 3.96%in 
2023-24, with the revenue increasing form Rs .6427.08 c rore to Rs .6878 crore 
(anticipated) in 2024 -25. The highest percentage increase is in Bihar circle. Under 
Postal Life Insurance ( PLI) and R ural PLI, the recoveries by the department rose by 
9.76% from Rs. 1115.18 c rore in 2023-24 to Rs 1223.98 c rore (anticipated) in 2024 -25 
with the highest increase in Delhi circle. In December 2023 , 6287 Aadhaar Kits were 
active and, t hrough action across Circles, this has been increased to 7025 in January, 

14 
 
2025.  The number of Post Office Passport Sewa  Kendras (POPSKs) has increased 
from 434 in 2023 to 442 in 2024-25.  
 
II. Various initiatives are being undertaken to strengthen the presence of the 
Department in the market and attract more customers/ business. The focus is on 
increased customer satisfaction and providing services at par with industry standards, 
which will lay the groundwork for sustained revenue growth.  
 
III. Impact assessment of each scheme will be carried out at the end of the approved 
scheme period. 
(Department of Posts OM no. 28-5/ 2nd Report/2024/ Bgt dated 16.04.2025 ) 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 3) 
CAPITAL SECTION  
Under Capital section, the Gross expenditure during 2019 -20 was Rs. 730.56 
crore and during 2020 -21, 2021-22, 2022-23 and 2023 -24 the same were Rs. 897.41 
crore, Rs. 885.55 crore, Rs. 1,476.67 crore and Rs. 1,386.89 crore respectively.   The 
Committee note the Department’s plan for reducing their expenses which, inter-alia, 
include (i) To study the network of all Post Offices for understanding their 
need/requirement and rationalize/merge the Post Offices, if needed; (ii) To shift towards 
usage of Solar Energy, which after initial capital expenditure will reduce the expenses; 
(iii) Mapping of each person through software to know whether the office is profit centric 
or not; and (iv) To ensure productivity of every individual. The Committee opine that 
these initiatives, if enforced in right earnest, would invariably bear tangible results in the 
direction of reducing expenses of the Department. However, the Department should 
also ensure that while taking measures to reduce expenses they do not wean off from 
their envisaged social responsibility of serving the common man. The Committee would 
like to be apprised about the status in this regard. 
Reply of the Government 
The Department has developed an online portal for establishment and income -cost 
review of Post Offices and the review exercise is expected to be completed in 2025 . 
Action for rationalization of the network through merger and relocation of Post Offices is 
carried out considering factors such as distance, population, and income -cost ratio. As 
on 31.12.2024, 378 Solar Power packs have been installed. 

15 
 
Software with features for mapping of each employee ’s productivity and assessment of 
each office using the profit centre approach is being developed. 
The Department will continue to fulfil its universal service obligation and ensure that all 
services are easily accessible and affordable for the common man. 
(Department of Posts OM no. 28-5/ 2nd Report/2024/ Bgt dated 16.04.2025) 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 4) 
IT Induction and Modernization  
1. The Committee note that the Department of Posts is placing thrust on IT 
modernization for the purpose of not only making its operations more efficient but also 
to enhance customer satisfaction and revenues. Nearly 53.45 % of the total scheme 
allocation for the financial year 2024 -25 has been earmarked for IT modernization. 
According to the Department, the Scheme – ‘IT Induction and Modernization Project 2.0’ 
has been approved by the Cabinet as continuation of IT Project 1.0 for a period of 8 
years w.e.f. from 01.04.2022. With respect to the budgetary allocations, for the year 
2023-24, the fund allocation at BE stage and RE stage were Rs. 653.02 crore and Rs. 
832.20 crore respectively whereas the actual expenditure was Rs. 704.84 crore. For the 
year 2024-25, as against the proposed amount of Rs. 748.00 crore, the allocated sum is 
Rs. 712.00 crore. With respect to impediments being encountered in implementing the 
project, the Department have informed that as there are several stakeholders involved 
in the Project such as IPPB, Centre for Excellence in Postal Technology, NIC, BSNL, 
etc., the coordination issues among these stakeholders are encountered sometimes. 
The Department have also informed that in order to resolve these issues, regular 
interaction among stakeholders is being ensured through various monitoring 
Committees. While admitting that there is a serious problem regarding slowing down of 
speed in ‘click and book’ website resulting in loss of business in the interim, the 
Department enlightened the Committee that the problem was rectified in coordination 
with CSI vendor and now the website is working smoothly. The Department further 
apprised the Committee that, under IT 2.0, a revamped India Post Portal is being 
developed by Centre for Excellence in Postal Technology (CEPT) to overcome such 
instances in future. 
Considering the fact that IT modernization is very vital and integral part of every 
business plan of the Department of Posts and the implementation of IT Modernization 

16 
 
project in all Post Offices will enhance the quality of services and productivity, the 
Committee urge the Department to ensure proper implementation of   IT Induction and 
Modernization Project 2.0. The Committee desire that the Department should aim at 
providing new and better services par with global industry standards through IT 
induction and networking of all Post Offices using client server system managed by 
technically sound and qualified personnel. The Committee would also like to emphasise  
that the works undertaken in this regard may be completed as envisaged and in a time 
bound manner so that the customers will get better, reliable and speedy services. 
Reply of the Government 
During the year 2023-24, under IT Modernization Project 2.0, out of the outlay of 
Rs. 707.81 Cr, Rs. 704.83 Cr was utilized. Further, for the year 2024 -25, Rs. 748.00 
crore was allocated under FG 2024 -25 under IT 2.0. More than 99% of the allocation 
has been utilized for carrying forward IT 2.0 . The project aims to combine applications, 
provide an i ntelligent platform and an interconnected ecosystem , so as to provide an 
inclusive, integrated single window view of postal and financial services to customers 
through multiple delivery channels. 
(Department of Posts OM no. 28-5/ 2nd Report/2024/ Bgt dated 16.04.2025) 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 5) 
Human Resources Management 
As far as the financial allocations and utilizations for Human Resource 
Management is concerned, the Committee note that during the year 2023 -24, the fund 
allocation at BE stage and RE stage were Rs. 34.00 crore and Rs. 38.27 crore 
respectively whereas the actual expenditure was Rs. 37.47 crore. For the year 2024 -25, 
the proposed amount of Rs. 42.00 crore has been allocated. The Committee note that 
the main aims and objectives of this Scheme are (i) Training in other Institutes/develop 
e-Learning module and employing iGOT  Karmyogi portal for online training in various 
other programmes; (ii) Upgrade and expand training facilities in Training Centres; / 
Setting up new Regional Training Centres (RTCs)/ Upgradation of Workplace Training 
Centres (WTCs); (iii) Training Centres building projects and its Upgradation; (iv) 
Outsourcing of trainers/Faculties, Housekeeping service vendors etc; (v) Travel 
Expenses to be covered; and (vi) Adequate funds need to be provided for the 
maintenance of buildings of Postal Training Centres. During the year 2023 -24, as 
against the target of training 1,10,000 officers/ Officials, 6,37,536 (including online) were 
trained. The Committee observe that as against the target of 15,000 training 

17 
 
programmes to be conducted, 23727 were conducted by the Department. The 
Committee further note that the physical target for the financial year 2024 -25 is to train 
1,10,000 officials. The Committee were apprised that the "Dak  Karmayogi" portal is 
being utilized for online training within the domain of the Department of Posts, catering 
to the training needs of officials which is indeed heartening. 
In order to cater to the growing business of Department of Posts, there is an 
urgent need to train officials in large number. The Committee are in sync with the 
Department about the need for rationalization of manpower by redeployment and re -
training of people so as to make them more productive. The Department also submitted 
that they would be able to rationalize manpower within a year though the impact will not 
be immediate. The Committee feel that since IT modernization is an important thrust 
area of the Department, the focus should be laid in getting the staff trained from reputed 
IT related Institutes so as to equip them with latest technology which will enable them to 
use IT tools in the day -to-day operations. The Committee desire that the selection of 
personnel for IT trainings should be done from all verticals and would like to be updated 
of the details of steps taken in rationalization of man power along with laid down criteria 
for selection of personnel for training and its outcome. 
Reply of the Government 
The Department is actively engaged in re -skilling and upskilling employees' 
competencies through retraining. 
Given the emphasis on IT modernization, the Department is set to roll out IT 2.0 
and plans to train Master Trainers at its own Centre of Excellence in Postal Technology 
(CEPT) in Mysuru. These trainers will be equipped with the necessary knowledge to 
handle the functionalities developed in IT 2.0. Subsequently, the Master Trainers will 
train other trainers, who will, in turn, train all employees of the Department. Since the 
Department's IT system is a specialized domain distinct from standard IT training 
provided by external institutes, CEPT Mysuru, as the Department's IT hub, is the 
preferred institute for conducting these training sessions. Additionally, workshops and 
training programs on Core System Integrator (CSI), Core Banking Solution (CBS), 
McCamish (for insurance services), Digital Advancement of Rural Post Office for a New 
India (DARPAN), AI, cyber  security, and other emerging technologies are organized at 
the Training Institutes of the department to keep employees updated with ongoing 
technological advancements. Employees have also attended training programs and 

18 
 
workshops at other institutes, including the "Digital Governance & Data Management" 
program at IIM Calcutta, the "Digital Government Senior Leaders' Programme" at IIM 
Bangalore, the "Digital Public Infrastructure - NISG" program at IIT Guwahati, and the 
"Application of AI/ML" program at IIM Vishakhapatnam. 
It is understood that for the smooth functioning of IT 2.0, all personnel across 
various verticals of the Department must receive the necessary training. Since every 
employee is responsible for performing specific tasks or a set of functions in their daily 
operations, it is essential to equip them with relevant skills and knowledge. To achieve 
this, the Department follows a structured approach, ensuring that training is provided to 
all employees, regardless of their role or designation, to promote uniform understanding 
and effective implementation of IT 2.0 and other technological advancements. 
The Department remains committed to ensuring the successful implementation of 
both manpower rationalization and IT training initiatives. 
(Department of Posts OM no. 28-5/ 2nd Report/2024/ Bgt dated 16.04.2025) 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 6) 
Estates Management 
While examining the issue, the Committee noted that the key objective of the 
Estates Management Scheme is to fulfill the Universal Service Obligation by providing a 
congenial environment for customer transaction and also provide a good working 
atmosphere to the employees. The thrust areas for the development of Postal Estates 
include (i) To provide functionally useful modern space for Post Office operations; (ii) To 
improve the general ambience and aesthetics of postal buildings; (iii) To provide 
convenient, modern facilities and amenities to the users like ATM rooms; (iv) To design 
buildings in such a manner that they are attractive to the customers resulting in 
increased footfall and retaining and attracting new customers to the Post Office for 
transacting business; (v) To prevent encroachments on prime land owned by the 
Department; and (vi) To preserve the heritage buildings owned by the Department. With 
respect to the budgetary allocations, the Committee note that during the year 2023 -24, 
the fund allocation at BE stage and RE stage were Rs. 100 crore and Rs. 115.00 crore 
respectively whereas the actual was Rs. 119.06 crore. For the year 2024 -25, as against 
the proposed amount of Rs. 151.30 crore, the allocated sum is Rs. 133.50 crore. As far 
as the physical targets set during 2023 -24 is concerned, the Committee note that the 

19 
 
target for construction of 40 small Post Office buildings, 25 Rain Water Harvesting 
Structures, 50 Ramps & Rails, 59 ladies toilets and 29 feeding rooms were fully 
achieved. In addition, the target for renovation of 40 buildings and for installation of 32 
Solar Power packs and Braille Signage in 500 post offices were fully achieved. Taking 
into consideration the performance of the Department in 2023 -24, the Committee are 
hopeful and expect the Department to achieve the targets set for the year 2024 -25.  
Further, the Committee observed that the major challenges being encountered in the 
implementation of the projects were (a) not getting timely approval from Municipal 
Corporations and other State Government authorities for starting construction; (b) 
cancellation of tendering process due to single/high bidding; and (c) depleting man 
power strength of Civil Wing due to Group A cadre of the Civil Wing being declared 
Dying Cadre and consequent stopping of induction of new man power in Civil Wing. To 
overcome these hurdles, the Committee recommend that earnest efforts may be made 
to get timely approval from Municipal Corporations and other State Government 
authorities. With respect to cancellation of tendering process due to single/high bidding 
the Committee suggest that the Department should revisit the terms and conditions of 
the tendering document with special focus on cost benefit analysis. So far as other 
challenges being encountered in implementing the projects, the Committee recommend 
the Department to take up the issue with appropriate authorities at the highest level and 
try to reach its early and logical conclusions. 
Reply of the Government 
The recommendation s of the Committee ha ve been noted. The Department is 
working closely with the concerned authorities to speed up the approval process for 
construction and other projects. The Department is committed to overcoming these 
challenges and achieving the objectives of the Estates Management Scheme. 
(Department of Posts OM no. 28-5/ 2nd Report/2024/ Bgt dated 16.04.2025) 
For comments of the Committee please see Para no. 7 of Chapter – I. 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 7) 
Heritage Buildings 
On the issues pertaining to the Heritage Buildings, the Committee desired to 
know about the measures taken to address long delays in identifying and listing 
Heritage Buildings, restoring them and steps taken for its conservation. To this, the 

20 
 
Department have informed that pursuant to the Report (No. 16 of 2023) of CAG, they 
have framed Conservation Policy for its heritage buildings in November, 2023 with 
provision for constitution of Circle Heritage Cells at Circle level and Postal Heritage 
Conservation Committee at National level and guidelines for carrying out restoration 
works of heritage buildings. The Circle Heritage Cells at Circle level and Postal Heritage 
Conservation Committee at National level are to identify and recommend postal 
buildings for inclusion in the list of Heritage Buildings of Department. The Department 
has signed MoU with Indian National Trust for Art and Cultural Heritage (INTACH) for 
getting expert guidance in restoration of Heritage Buildings. Further, detailed provisions 
to carry out restoration works of heritage buildings have been incorporated in the 
Conservation policy of the Department. The Department also informed that CPWD 
Academy, Ghaziabad has been requested to devise a training module for Civil Wing 
personnel of the Department to train them in conservation/restoration works of heritage 
buildings. These steps have necessitated the Department to seek more funds for 
Heritage Buildings for remodeling/retrofitting so as to preserve them. The Committee 
would like the Department to take up the need for additional funds in right earnest with 
the Ministry of Finance. The Committee desire to be apprised of the outcome of the 
action taken in pursuant to the Conservation Policy for Heritage Buildings. 
Reply of the Government 
 
The recommendation of the Committee to take up the need for additional funds 
with the Ministry of Finance for preservation of heritage buildings has been noted. The 
scheme fund requirement for estates management for the next 5 years will include the 
requirement for preservation of heritage buildings. Actions taken pursuant to the framing 
and implementation of Conservation Policy for Heritage Buildings has resulted in very 
positive outcomes for conservation of heritage buildings of the department. Provision of 
an inspection book for inspection of heritage buildings and circulation of Do's and Don'ts 
for heritage buildings have resulted in their better upkeep. Standardized signage being 
installed at heritage buildings sites serve as information markers and provide historical 
context to visitors about the buildings. 
(Department of Posts OM no. 28-5/ 2nd Report/2024/ Bgt dated 16.04.2025) 
For comments of the Committee please see Para no. 10 of Chapter – I. 
 

21 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 8) 
India Post Payments Bank (IPPB) 
The Department has set up India Post Payments Bank (IPPB) with a vision to 
build the most accessible, affordable and trusted bank for the common man in India, 
leveraging the last mile reach and penetration of the Postal network. As per the 
budgetary allocations, for this Scheme, the BE for 2023 -24 was Rs. 250 crore and the 
RE was same as the BE i.e. Rs. 250 crore. For the year 2024-25 also, the BE is Rs. 250 
crore. The Committee note that IPPB has 650 branches/controlling offices, almost one 
in each district in the country. Besides, it has enabled 1.62 lakh Post Offices (including 
1.30 lakh in rural areas) to provide Banking services at its counters. IPPB has also 
equipped nearly 1.89 lakh Postmen and Gramin  Dak Sevaks with smartphone and 
biometric devices to provide Doorstep Banking Services. With respect to the 
impediments being encountered in the implementation of this project, the Department 
have informed that Pricing intervention under MDR and NEFT/RTGS charges and price 
sensitivity towards doorstep banking charges put strain on the revenue streams of IPPB 
in the initial years. Further, the Payment Bank business model provides limited avenues 
for revenue generation. The Committee appreciate the fact that to overcome this, IPPB 
has identiﬁed alternate revenue streams like G2C services. The Department have also 
informed that there has been a consistent increase in the Bank’s revenue and the Bank 
turned proﬁtable in the 4th year of its operations.   
The Department has also informed that one of the prioritized Schemes for the year 
2024-25 is India Post Payments Bank (IPPB) which has enabled the Department to oﬀer 
DBT and Banking Facilities including AePS, Dakpay and door -step services to both 
existing as well as new customers. While examining the subject ‘Digital payment and 
online security measures for data protection’, the Standing Committee on 
Communications and Information Technology (2023 -24), in their 54 th Report had 
pointed out that the cases of frauds using AePS were on the rise.  To this, the Ministry 
of Home Affairs (MHA) had submitted that biometric cloning was by way of using 
dummy fingers or rubber fingers to withdraw money through the AePS system and they 
had assured that they were working with Aadhaar and NPCI to put an end to this and 
they hoped that there would be reduction in future (Rec. No. 4). The Ministry of 
Electronics and Information Technology (MeitY), in their Action Taken Note, informed 
that blocking of Biometric devices by UIDAI and NPCI was carried out actively and 
major banks have already disabled AePS set as “off”. They also informed that analysis 

22 
 
of complaints reported on NCRP shows that AePS frauds have reduced from around 
5,500 (Oct 2023) to around 2,180 per month (March 2024). While noting the submission 
of the MHA and MeitY w.r.t to AePS issue in the 54 th Report and the fact that major 
banks have already disabled AePS set as “off”, the Committee recommend the 
Department of Posts to work on foolproof system so as to protect the gullible and 
vulnerable citizens of rural areas especially because the vision of IPPB is to remove 
barriers to access basic ﬁnancial services in the unbanked/under banked areas.  The 
Committee also recommend that regular monitoring of IPPB may be done with a proper 
feedback mechanism from public regarding performance of the Branches for further 
improvement in its services. 
Reply of the Government 
IPPB has taken the following action, in compliance with the operating guidelines of 
NPCI to enhance the security of the AePS transactions: 
(i)  The Bank has implemented a solution for disabling AePS services (debit 
transactions set as "Off") for accounts without any transactions in the preceding 
12 months, while excluding DBT accounts. 
(ii)  The Bank has also provided an option to the customer to enable or disable 
AePS debit transactions in both self-service and assisted mode. 
(iii)  The cumulative monthly limit of ₹50,000 for AePS withdrawal transactions as 
prescribed by NPCI has been implemented. 
(iv)  The Bank has also implemented an alternate authentication mode through Face 
Authentication as per the guidelines of UIDAI and NPCI. 
(v)  Regular monitoring is done to ensure services are operational and adequate 
cash is made available at the banking outlets to service customers. 
(Department of Posts OM no. 28-5/ 2nd Report/2024/ Bgt dated 16.04.2025) 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 9) 
Philately Operations 
 
The Committee note that under Philately operations there are various activities 
which, inter -alia, include Dhai  Akhar, Deen  Dayal SPARSH Yojana, District level 
Exhibition, State level Exhibition, Release of Special Cover, Quiz/seminar/workshop, 
Opening of School Philately clubs, Opening of new PDA accounts, Activating dormant 
PDA account, Obtaining CMS business and Foreign Exhibition Participation.  Dhai  

23 
 
Akhar is a National Level Letter Writing Competition and Deen  Dayal SPARSH Yojana 
is a Scholarship for Promotion of Aptitude & Research in Stamps as a Hobby or 
SPARSH.  The financial allocations and utilizations in the year 2023 -24, reflects that 
there has been 100 percent fund utilization under both the activities (Dhai  Akhar and 
SPARSH). However, the physical targets are falling short. Under Dhai  Akhar for the 
year 2023 -24, the target allotted was 17,80,000 whereas the target achieved was 
5,60,000. The shortfall, according to the Department was due to less number of 
students/youth participating during 2023 -24. They also stated that efforts are being 
made to increase the participation this year and a Consultant has also been hired 
specially for this purpose. Under SPARSH, for the year 2023 -24, the target allotted was 
42820 whereas the target achieved was 52000.  
The Committee call upon the Department to achieve the targets set under Dhai  
Akhar for the year 2024 -25, which is 17,80,000 and apprise the reasons for not setting 
any target under SPARSH for the year 2024 -25.  On a related aspect, with respect to 
revenue generation from philately, the Committee learnt that in India it is yet to be 
exploited. In this regard, the Committee urge the Department to explore the possibilities 
for generating revenue and apprise them about the same. On the concerns raised about 
not conducting any meeting of the Philatelic Advisory Committee, the Department 
informed that the last meeting of the Philatelic Advisory Committee (PAC) was held on 
25.07.2022 at Vigyan  Bhawan, New Delhi but the term of the PAC ended in February, 
2024. The Department are in the process of conducting the next meeting of the PAC as 
it has been constituted on 28.10.2024. Further, it is seen that in order to avoid any 
adverse impact on release of the stamps and generation of revenue due to non -
conducting of PAC meeting, the urgent proposals deemed worthy for issue of 
Commemorative Postage Stamps have been processed separately for approval of 
Hon'ble Minister of Communications. Now that Philatelic Advisory Committee (PAC) has 
been constituted, the Committee recommend the Department to ensure that the 
meetings of Philatelic Advisory Committee are held periodically. The Committee would 
also like the Department to be proactive so that philately is not only promoted amongst 
students/youth through various exhibitions/motivational programmes but also to ensure 
that it provides a good opportunity to generate revenue for the Department. To this end, 
the Committee desire that the Department should make earnest efforts to popularize 
and make public aware about Philately Bureau, National Philately Museum and 

24 
 
Philatelic Deposit Accounts. Action taken in this regard may be submitted to the 
Committee at the earliest. 
Reply of the Government 
 
Dhai Akhar- In the year 2023 -24, the achievement of physical target  
was5,60,000, against the assigned target of 17,80,000. In 2024 -25, the achievement 
was 7,00,000, with the assigned target remaining unchanged. This marks a 9% 
increase compared to the previous year. Efforts are being made to encourage higher 
participation in letter -writing through various campaigns, including social media 
campaigns. 
SPARSH- In the year 2023 -24, the achievement was 52,000 against the 
assigned target of 42,820. In 2024 -25, the achievement was70,000, while the assigned 
target remained unchanged. This is a 42% increase from the previous year.  
Various activities like school level quiz competitions, seminars and workshops on stamp 
designing, opening of School Philately Clubs, District and State level  Philatelic 
Exhibitions, nationwide  letter writing competition, online opening of Philately Deposit 
Accounts, release of stamps on various themes and online sale of philatelic products 
etc.  have been set as priorities to connect  with students/ youth in large scale  and to 
increase the revenue of Department.  
(Department of Posts OM no. 28-5/ 2nd Report/2024/ Bgt dated 16.04.2025) 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 10) 
Dormant Accounts 
According to the Department, as on 30.09.2022, there are 218.20 Lakh 
dormant/inactive accounts lying with DoP and the value and amount deposited in these 
dormant/inactive accounts for the same period is Rs. 16,240.20 Crore. When inquired 
about the efforts made by the Post Offices to ensure that the funds are restored to the 
rightful owners/nominees, the Department have informed that in accordance with the 
instructions contained in Saving Bank (SB) order No. 8/2019 dated 13.09.2019, all types 
of unclaimed accounts/certificates in small savings schemes are identified centrally and 
frozen. Postal Circles then download list of such accounts pertaining to the Post Offices 
falling under their jurisdiction and share the same with the concerned Post Offices. The 
concerned Post Office places the list on the Notice Board meant for public and tries to 
contact each of the account holder of the unclaimed account by all reasonable means at 

25 
 
least two times within a span of sixty days of placing the list on the notice board. Door -
to-door campaign and special drives are carried out at Divisional/Regional/Circle levels 
for settlement of such unclaimed accounts and periodical monitoring through Video 
Conferencing is also being done at Directorate levels. The Committee note that an 
amount of ₹ 2,697.04 crore has been released against 57.73 Lakh accounts during last 
three financial years. Clarifying further, about the number of unclaimed deposits and the 
ways in which those funds were being spent, the Secretary, during evidence, informed 
the Committee that there exists a system, like in banks, where the money moves 
automatically into the Senior Citizens Welfare Fund and it is for the Finance Ministry to 
use that money to formulate schemes for senior citizens, which is the case for all banks. 
The Department has also stated that whenever there is a request, it is followed up and 
money is pulled back. Further, with respect to the initiatives taken/planned for reducing 
the unpaid amount lying in dormant accounts in Post Offices, the Department have 
informed that proactive measures are being taken by them to contact beneficiaries of 
unclaimed or dormant accounts.  Appreciating the efforts undertaken by the Department 
in settlement of dormant accounts, the Committee urge the Department to continue their 
efforts with renewed vigour to find the legal heirs of the deceased persons. The 
Department may also explore the possibility to trace out legal heirs through publicity in 
media and settle the dormant accounts/unclaimed accounts while taking abundant 
precautions abo ut false claims in the matter. The progress made in this regard be 
apprised to the Committee at the earliest.  
Reply of the Government 
As suggested by the Committee, the Department will make continued efforts, 
through all possible means, to help identify the claimant (nominees / legal heirs) of the 
deceased person s whose account s are  dormant / inactive. As o f March 2025, the 
cumulative settlement of SCWF unclaimed accounts is 51.41 lakh accounts and  
amountis₹1447.17 crore, 
(Department of Posts OM no. 28-5/ 2nd Report/2024/ Bgt dated 16.04.2025) 
For comments of the Committee please see Para no. 13 of Chapter – I. 
 
 
 

26 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 11) 
North Eastern Region (NER) 
An analysis of the financial allocations and utilization under all the 
Schemes/projects being implemented in North -East Region reflect that the percentage 
of utilization w.r.t RE during 2019 -20, 2020 -21, 2021 -22, 2022 -23 and 2023 -24 were 
81.94%, 83.09%, 89.40%, 91.90% and 91.66% respectively.  It is seen that the 
percentage of utilization of funds has increased during last five years and Department of 
Posts has been able to achieve more than 90% expenditure for last two years. The 
Committee note that in the North Eastern Region, IPPB services are available through a 
network of 7064 Branch Post Offices. In order to expand access to banking services to 
the population of North Eastern Region, Department intends to open 108 IPPB access 
points in Branch Post offices in Arunachal Pradesh (50), Manipur (18), Meghalaya (25) 
and Nagaland (15) and these would be made live before 31st December 2024.  
Responding to a specific concern of the Committee that candidates from other 
Hindi/English speaking State(s) join as Gramin  Dak Sevaks (GDSs) in State where 
Hindi/English is accepted as official language in the North -East, the Department dealt in 
detail about the criteria adopted by them for recruiting GDSs. The Committee have been 
enlightened that in order to resolve the issue the Department prescribed that candidate 
seeking GDS appointment should possess knowledge of 'Hindi or English' and 'any one 
local dialects' notified as third language by the respective State Government. However, 
it has been observed that States which have their official language as ‘English’ face the 
issue of having GDS who are not localities. In order to overcome this lacunae, the 
Committee would like the Department to take up the matter with the concerned State 
Government(s) to find ways and means to circumvent this issue and arrive at a practical 
solution at the earliest while adhering to the constitutional provisions.  
Reply of the Government 
Three states of North East Region Manipur, Nagaland and Sikkim -have English as one 
of their local languages. To address the concerns raised by the Committee, the 
following approach is being adopted and details are being worked out: 
(iv)  In Manipur, proficiency in both Manipuri and English could be made mandatory for 
engagement of Gramin Dak Sevaks (GDS) in the State. 
(v)  In Sikkim, knowledge of English along with any one of the following -Bhutia, 
Lepcha, or Nepali- could be a requirement for GDS positions in the State. 

27 
 
(vi)  For Nagaland, where the identified local languages are Hindi and English, the 
North East Postal Circle has been advised to engage with the State Government 
to arrive at a practical solution at the earliest, while ensuring adherence to 
constitutional provisions. 
For the remaining States in the North Eastern Region, the issue has already been 
resolved. 
(Department of Posts OM no. 28-5/ 2nd Report/2024/ Bgt dated 16.04.2025) 
For comments of the Committee please see Para no. 16 of Chapter – I. 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 13) 
Grievance Redressal Mechanism 
The Committee note that the total number of grievances with the Department of 
Posts during the year 2023 -24 stood at 14,10,147 which included 54,262 complaints 
from previous years and 13,55,885 received during 2023 -24. It has been observed that 
out of these, 13,85,551 cases have been settled and 24,596 remained pending. The 
Department have informed that a new SOP has been adopted in September 2023 with 
clear outcomes and strict monitoring has been introduced. As a result of efforts made, 
the complaint resolution time has been reduced from 16 to 9 days. However, it could be 
gathered from the data given by the Department that there are a few States like 
Jharkhand, Karnataka, West Bengal Circles, where the time given to resolve some 
cases is beyond 180 days. While noting the delay in resolving some cases in States like 
Jharkhand, Karnataka and West Bengal, the Committee recommend that the 
Department should have a strict monitoring mechanism for redressal of grievances. The 
Department should also fix responsibility in cases where there is an inordinate delay in 
redressal of grievances caused by deliberate actions of the staff.    The Committee may 
be apprised of the action taken for reducing the number of grievances pending with the 
Department of Posts.  The Committee would also like to be enlightened about the 
effectiveness of the SOP that has been introduced. 
Reply of the Government 
Continuous monitoring of grievance resolution and guidance to end users for 
adherence to the SOP has been maintained by the Department. Complaint resolution 
time norms for different types of complaints have been defined for granular monitoring 

28 
 
and greater responsiveness in complaint resolution. Aspirational internal targets for 
grievance redressal have been set with most of the complaints to be resolved, with the 
consent of the customer, within 3 -7 days. The Department is currently aligning its 
systems and people to adhere to the revised norms and resolution of complaints. For 
expeditious settlement of customer grievances and quality resolution, Department has 
scheduled fortnightly review of grievances, quality of resolution and appeals by senior 
officers in the Circles. The grievance cases are being monitored in Senior Officers 
Meetings at the level of Postal Services Board. 
While the average complaint resolution time has come down to 8 days , s ome 
cases take longer for resolution/closure due to involvement of external agencies and the 
need for detailed inquiries. Out of 14,33,403 grievances received through various 
portals and social media platforms during the period 01.04.2024 to 31.03.2025, 99.4% 
were resolved, with a pendency of 8,680 grievances as on 31.03.2025. 
(Department of Posts OM no. 28-5/ 2nd Report/2024/ Bgt dated 16.04.2025) 
***** 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

29 
 
 
CHAPTER- III 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THECOMMITTEEDO NOT DESIRE TO 
PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-NIL- 
  

30 
 
CHAPTER IV 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS  IN RESPECT OF  WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT  BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE  AND REQUIRE 
REITERATION 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-NIL- 
  

31 
 
CHAPTER V 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES  
OF THE  GOVERNMENT ARE INTERIM IN NATURE 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 12) 
AWARENESS GENERATION AND ADVERTISEMENTS 
 
 “During examination of Demands for Grants (2024 -25), it was observed 
by the Committee that the focus of Department of Posts on advertisement 
and publicity of their programme was not adequate. To this, the 
Department of Posts informed the Committee that their 
advertising/publicity budget during the year 2023 -24 was Rs 25.77 crore 
and for the year 2024 -25 it is Rs. 51 crore as they are going in for wider 
publicity and have increased their focus on social media. Further, a new 
agency is being engaged which will work in more detail in the awareness 
campaign to increase it further.  The Department also stated that apart 
from this, physical campaigns are being done in rural areas and there is a 
need to focus on urban areas as 10 percent of the Post Offices are in 
urban areas. While taking note of all futuristic plans of the Department, the 
Committee urge them to invariably expand their reach through 
advertisement and publicity campaigns both in Urban and Rural areas and 
make use of latest technologies to attract the masses.  The Department 
may make periodic assessment of the impact of work done by the new 
agency engaged by them for awareness and publicity campaigns. The 
Committee also desire to be kept apprised of all the initiatives taken during 
2024-25 along with the outcome of the same”. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
“Department is working in close coordination with the social media agency 
hired from the month of January, 2025. A wide range of social media 
campaigns are being carried out on various social media platforms to 
popularize Department’s products and services”. 
 
(Department of Posts OM no. 28-5/ 2nd Report/2024/ Bgt dated 
16.04.2025) 
 
For comments of the Committee please see Para no. 19 of Chapter – I. 
***** 
 
 
 
 
     NEW DELHI; DR. NISHIKANT DUBEY, 
     21 July, 2025  Chairperson, 
30 Asadha, 1947 (Saka) Standing Committee on  
Communications and Information Technology. 

32 
 
ANNEXURE – I 
  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON COMMUNICATIONS AND 
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (2024-25) 
 
MINUTES OF THE TWENTIETH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
----------- 
 
 The Committee sat on Thursday, the 26th June, 2025 from 1100 hours to 1410 hours 
in Main Committee Room, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Dr. Nishikant Dubey- Chairperson 
 
 MEMBERS 
  
 
LokSabha 
 
2. Shri Anil Baluni 
3. Dr. Rabindra Narayan Behera 
4. Shri Anup Sanjay Dhotre 
5. Shri S. Supongmeren Jamir 
6. Shri G. Kumar Naik 
7. Shri Radheshyam Rathiya 
8. Shri Ramasahayam Raghuram Reddy 
9. Shri Arun Kumar Sagar 
10. Shri Devesh Shakya 
11. Shri Vishnu Datt Sharma 
 
RajyaSabha 
 
12. Shri Saket Gokhale 
13. Shri Amar Pal Maurya 
14. Dr. Sasmit Patra 
15. Shri Kartikeya Sharma 
16. Shri Lahar Singh Siroya 
 
Secretariat 
 
 
1. Shri Y. M. Kandpal   - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri Amrish Kumar   -     Deputy Secretary 
 
 
           Welcoming members to the sitting of the Committee, the Chairperson drew their 
attention to the Agenda for the sitting which included consideration and adoption of the 4 

33 
 
Draft Action Taken Reports (ATRs) on DFG (2025 -26) and evidence of the representatives 
of Ministry of Electronics and Information and Technology (MeitY), Ministry of Home Affairs, 
Ministry of Defence and Ministry of Power on the Subject ‘Impact of emergence of Artificial 
Intelligence and related issues’.  
 
 The Committee then considered and adopted  the following Draft Action Taken 
Reports:- 
 
(i) Draft Report on Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Second 
Report (1 8th Lok Sabha) on “Demands for Grants (2024 -25)” relating to the 
Ministry of Communications (Department of Posts). 
(ii) XXXX………..XXXX…….XXXX…….XXXX….XXXX…..XXXX….XXXX….XXXX… 
(iii) XXXX………..XXXX…….XXXX…….XXXX….XXXX…..XXXX….XXXX….XXXX… 
(iv) XXXX………..XXXX…….XXXX…….XXXX….XXXX…..XXXX….XXXX….XXXX… 
 
2. The Committee also authorized Chairperson to finalize the reports and 
present/lay them in Lok Sabha/Rajya Sabha during the Monsoon Session of Parliament.  
 
3. XXXX………..XXXX…….XXXX…….XXXX….XXXX…..XXXX….XXXX….XXXX… 
 
The witnesses then withdrew. 
A copy of verbatim record of the proceedings was kept on record. 
The Committee, then, adjourned. 
****** 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

34 
 
ANNEXURE – II 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE OBSERVATIONS/ 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THEIR SECOND REPORT 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
[Vide Paragraph No. 5 of Introduction] 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by  the 
Government 
 
          Rec. Sl. Nos.: 1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9,10,11 and 13 
Total 12 
Percentage    92.30 
(ii)  Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the replies of the Government 
 
         Rec. Sl. No.: NIL  
Total NIL 
Percentage 0 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and require 
reiteration 
        Rec. Sl. No.: NIL 
 
Total NIL 
Percentage 0 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the replies of the 
Government are of interim in nature 
 
        Rec. Sl. No.: 12   
Total 01 
Percentage 7.69 
 
 
 