 
i 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON COMMUNICATIONS  
AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY  
(2024-25) 
 
 
EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
MINISTRY OF ELECTRONICS AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
 
 
 
 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the 
Committee contained in their Ninth Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands 
for Grants (2025-26)'] 
 
 
SEVENTEENTH  REPORT 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
August, 2025/ Sravana, 1947 (Saka) 
 
17 


 
ii 
 
SEVENTEENTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
COMMUNICATIONS AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(2024-25) 
 
 
EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
MINISTRY OF ELECTRONICS AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the 
Committee contained in their Ninth Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands 
for Grants (2025-26)'] 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on         19.08.2025 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on             19.08.2025 
 
                    LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
                   NEW DELHI 
 
 
                 August, 2025/ Sravana, 1947 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 


 
iii 
 
CCIT No. 421 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
©2025 By Lok Sabha Secretariat 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha 
(Seventeenth Edition) and Printed by Lok Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi-110001 

 
iv 
 
CONTENTS 
 PAGE  
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE.................................................................................................. (iii) 
INTRODUCTION.................................................................................................................................... (v) 
CHAPTER I Report………………………………………………………………………..................... 1 
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government……………………………………………………………………............... 11 
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in 
view of the replies of the Government……………………………….......................... 24 
CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee and require reiteration …………......... 25 
CHAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the Government 
are of interim in nature…......................................................................................... 26 
 ANNEXURES  
I. Minutes of the 21st Sitting of the Committee held on 11.08.2025............................ 31 
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in their Ninth Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha). 33 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
v 
 
Composition of the Standing Committee on Communications and 
Information Technology (2024-25)** 
 
Dr. Nishikant Dubey - Chairperson 
Lok Sabha 
  
2. Shri C.N. Annadurai 
3. Shri Anil Baluni 
4. Dr. Rabindra Narayan Behera 
5. Shri Anup Sanjay Dhotre 
6. Shri Gurmeet Singh Meet Hayer 
7. Shri Sanjay Haribhau Jadhav 
8. Shri S. Supongmeren Jamir 
9. Shri Appalanaidu Kalisetti 
10. Smt. Poonamben Hematbhai Maadam 
11. Ms. Mahua Moitra 
12. Shri G. Kumar Naik 
13. Shri Shafi Parambil 
14. Dr. M.K. Vishnu Prasad 
15. Ms. Kangna Ranaut 
16. Shri Radheshyam Rathiya 
17. Shri Ramasahayam Raghuram Reddy 
18. Shri Arun Kumar Sagar 
19. Shri Devesh Shakya 
20. Shri Vishnu Datt Sharma 
21. Shri Rajesh Verma 
Rajya Sabha 
22. Shri Saket Gokhale* 
23. Smt. Priyanka Chaturvedi 
24. Shri Ilaiyaraaja 
25. Shri Amar Pal Maurya 
26. Dr. Sasmit Patra 
27. Shri V. Vijayendra Prasad 
28. Shri S. Niranjan Reddy 
29. Shri Kartikeya Sharma 
30. Shri Lahar Singh Siroya  
31. Shri K.T.S. Tulsi 
SECRETARIAT 
1.  Shri Y.M. Kandpal  — Additional Secretary 
2.  Smt. A. Jyothirmayi  — Director 
3.  Shri Amrish Kumar                 — Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Salil Saroj  — Under Secretary  
 
**Committee constituted w.e.f. 26 th September, 2024 vide Para No.833 of Bulletin Part -II dated 
26th September, 2024. 
* Shri Saket Gokhale  has been nominated vide Para No. 853 of Bulletin Part –II dated 03 rd 
October, 2024. 

 
vi 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Communications and Information Technology 
(2024-25), having been authorized by the Committee, present this Seventeenth Report on Action 
Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in 
their Ninth Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants (2025 -26)’ relating to the 
Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology. 
2. The Ninth Report was presented to Lok Sabha and also laid on the Table of  
Rajya Sabha on 21st March, 2025 .  The Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology 
furnished their Action Taken Notes on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the 
Fourth Report on 16th June, 2025. 
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at thei r Sitting held on         
11th August, 2025. 
4. For facility of reference and convenience, Observations/Recommendations of the 
Committee have been printed in bold in Chapter-I of the Report.  
5. An analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Ninth Report of the Committee is given at Annexure-II. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     NEW DELHI; DR. NISHIKANT DUBEY, 
   11 August, 2025  Chairperson, 
   20  Sravana, 1947 (Saka) Standing Committee on  
Communications and Information Technology. 
 
 

 
1 
 
CHAPTER I 
REPORT 
This Report of the Standing Committee on  Communications and  Information 
Technology (2024-25) deals with the action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Ninth Report 
(Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on the ‘Demands for Grants (2025-26)’ relating to the Ministry of 
Electronics and Information Technology. 
2. The Ninth Report was laid in Rajya Sabha on 20th March, 2025 and presented 
to Lok Sabha on 21st March, 2025. It contained 12 Observations/Recommendations. 
3.  Action Taken Notes in respect of all the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Report have been received from the Ministry of Electronics and 
Information Technology and are categorized as under: 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government:— 
           Rec. Sl. Nos.: 1, 3, 4, 5, 8, 10, 11 and 12.               
                     
Total:  08 
       Chapter:II 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in 
view of the replies of the Government:— 
Rec. Sl.  No.: NIL                 
Total: NIL 
Chapter:III 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee and require reiteration:— 
Rec. Sl. No.: NIL                      
     Total: NIL 
            Chapter:IV 
 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the replies of the 
Government are of interim in nature:—  
Rec. Sl. Nos.: 2, 6, 7 and 9.              
Total: 04 
             Chapter:V 

 
2 
 
4. The Committee trust that utmost importance would be given to the 
implementation of the Observations/Recommendations accepted by the  
Government. In case where it is not possible for any reasons to implement the 
recommendations in letter and spirit, the matter shall be reported to the 
Committee with reasons for non -implementation. The Committee further desire 
that Action Taken Statement on the Observations/Recommendations contained in 
Chapter-I and final action taken replies to the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in Chapter-V of this Report be furnished to them at an early date. 
5. The Committee will now deal with action taken by the Government on 
some of their  Observations/Recommendations that require reiteration or merit 
comments. 
 
Budget Overview and Demands for Grants (2025-26) 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 2) 
6. The Committee, in their Original Report, had recommended as under:— 
“About the overall impact of reduced allocation of funds to important schemes, 
the Ministry has stated that the schemes under Digital India Programme, except 
National Knowledge Network (NK N), have been allocated funds keeping in view 
the Ministry’s requirement of funds projected by its Programme Divisions, status 
of various projects under the scheme, pace of expenditure in previous years etc. 
Since NKN scheme is closing in March 2025, a tok en sum has been earmarked 
for this scheme for FY 2025 -26 so that funds could be supplemented under this 
scheme, if the project duration is extended. As MoF has recently approved 
extension of the project duration of this scheme, MeitY would approach MoF for  
allocation of additional funds for this scheme through Supplementary Demands 
for Grants in FY 2025 -26. The primary reason for under/suboptimal utilization of 
allocated funds is mainly due to less expenditure under incentive schemes being 
implemented by Me itY. The Ministry has submitted that the focus areas during 
FY 2025 -26 would be to boost the global competitiveness of AI start -ups and 
researchers of India; enhance domestic manufacturing and attract large 
investments in mobile phones, specified electronic components and IT hardware; 
and provide attractive incentive support to companies or consortia that are 

 
3 
engaged in Silicon Semiconductor Fabs, Display Fabs, Compound 
Semiconductors, Silicon Photonics, Sensors, including MEMS, Fabs, Discrete 
Semiconductor Fabs, Semiconductor Packaging, ATMP or OSAT and 
Semiconductor Design. As the Ministry has submitted that it distributes the 
allocated funds under various schemes keeping in view the priority areas and 
unavoidable/committed expenditure under various scheme s, the Committee 
hope that the allocated funds are distributed properly and used judiciously so as 
to make our Nation world’s production centre of semiconductors and a leader in 
Artificial Intelligence.” 
7. In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Electronics and Information 
Technology submitted as under:– 
“It is submitted that Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs) has 
been requested to allocate additional funds to the tune of Rs.664.75 crore  for 
National Knowledge Network (NKN) Programme as MeitY has extended the 
project duration of this programme and enhanced its overall outlay  on the 
recommendation of Department of Expenditure. 
So far as pro per distribution of allocated  funds and its judicious utilization is 
concerned, it is stated that MeitY has distributed funds in respect of various 
schemes having committed liabilities as per the discussions held in th e Pre -
Budget meeting under the C hairmanship of Secretary  (Expenditure) and in the 
presence of Secretary(MeitY) and JS&FA(MeitY) on the scheme -wise estimated 
expenditure for FY 2025 -26  submitted by the Programme Divisions. Regular 
meetings are being taken by Secretary(MeitY) and JS&FA(MeitY) with the Group 
Coordinators to monitor execution of projects/schemes and ensure optimum and 
judicious utilisation of allocated funds.” 
8. The Ministry had apprised the Committee that  since National Knowledge 
Network ( NKN) scheme was closin g in March 2025 a token sum had  been 
earmarked for this scheme for FY 2025 -26 so that funds could be supplemented 
under this scheme, if the project duration was extended. The Ministry  has further 
explained that as the Ministry of Finance (MoF) had recently approved extension of 
the project duration of this scheme, it would approach MoF for allocation of 
additional funds through Supplementary Demands for Grants in FY 2025 -26. The 
Ministry in their Action Taken Notes  has submitted that Ministry o f Finance 
(Department of Economic Affairs) had  been requested to allocate additional funds 

 
4 
to the tune of Rs.664.75 crore for National Knowledge Netw ork (NKN) Programme 
as it had extended the project duration of this programme and enhanced its overall 
outlay on the recommendation of Department of Expenditure. The Committee 
would therefore like to be apprised of the current status of allocation of additional 
funds of Rs. 664.75 crore for NKN Programme.  To ensure optimum and proper 
utilization of these additional funds, the Committee hope that the Ministry would 
put in place a robust Project Monitoring Mechanism and encourage partnerships 
amongst stakeholders for effective use of NKN resources. 
Further, the Committee had hoped that the allocated funds are distributed 
properly and used judiciously so as to make our Nation World’s production centre 
for S emiconductors and a leader in Artificial Intelligence.  The Ministry , in this 
regard has submitted  that it has distributed funds in respect of various schemes 
having committed liabilities as per the discussions held in th e Pre-Budget meeting 
under the C hairmanship of Secretary(Expenditure)  in the presence of Secretary  
(MeitY) and JS&FA (MeitY) on the scheme-wise estimated expenditure for FY 2025-
26 submitted by the Progra mme Divisions. R egular meeting s were being 
conducted by Secretary (MeitY) and JS&FA (MeitY) with the Group Coordinators to 
monitor execution of projects/schemes and ensure optimum and judicious 
utilization of allocated funds. The Committee desire that the Ministry may apprise 
them about  the outcomes of these meetings and the effectiveness of these 
meetings in ensuring timely completion of projects / schemes. The Committee may 
be enlightened about various stages of completion of different ongoing projects 
under the National Knowledge Network Scheme and the guide map  for making our 
country world’ s production centre of Semiconductors and a leader in Artificial 
Intelligence at the earliest. 
 
Standardisation, Testing & Quality Certification (STQC ) – Establishment a nd 
Manpower  
Recommendation (Sl. No. 6) 
 9. The Committee, in their Original Report, had recommended as under:— 
 “STQC supports quality assurance of small and medium scale Electronics 
Industries.  Under STQC Directorate 4 Electronics Regional Test Laboratories 
(ERTLs) and 11 Electronic Test and Development Centres and one Centre for 

 
5 
Reliability (CFR) are functioning pan India. The Committee observe that the funds 
allocated to STQC has come down from  Rs. 175.00 crore in 2024 -25 to Rs. 
170.00 crore in FY 2025 -26. The Committee have been informed by the Ministry 
that Rs. 4.5 Crore was allocat ed under Building and Structures Head to STQC.  
Letter of Authorization was issued to CPWD for executing renovation works of 
Lab/Centres namely ETDC, Hyderabad, ERTL(East), ETDC, Solan, ETDC, 
Agartala, ERTL(South) and ERTL(North). The Ministry has stated t hat under ICT 
Head, from the allocation of Rs. 7.0 crore for the current FY, administrative 
approval for implementation of Lab Automation Process has been obtained from 
Competent Authority for an amount of  Rs. 3.0 crore and work order has been 
issued to Implementing Agency i.e. CDAC, NOIDA. Phase I roll out is expected in 
July, 2025. Similarly, construction of STQC building in NOIDA is expected to be 
completed by February, 2026. In addition to this, procurement of Application, 
Security Testing Tool for an amount of Rs.1.4 crore and   Source Code Analysis 
tool for an amount of Rs.1.6 crore is also in progress. The Committee observe that 
STQC plays a crucial role in supporting Ministry of Electronics & Information 
Technology’s initiatives in the key areas lik e e -Government, e -Industry, e -
Innovation / R&D, e -Learning, e -Security, e -Inclusion, Internet Governance 
through Quality & Security evaluations of IT systems and other projects of national 
importance. In view of this, the Committee also like the Ministry t o update about 
the status of work of STQC Building in different parts of the country. Further, the 
status of procurement of Application, Security Testing and Source Code Analysis 
tool may also be furnished. The Committee would also like to suggest the Mini stry 
to approach the Ministry of Finance for additional funds, if any required, for 
completion of these important projects timely and money should not be a 
constraint for the same.” 
10. In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Electronics and Information 
Technology submitted as under:– 
“I. As regards to the status of work of STQC buildings is concerned, it is 
submitted that the reconstruction work of STQC Noida building is in progress 
through CPWD and it is anticipated to be completed in the FY 2025 -26 and 80% 
of the scheduled renovation works in the FY 2024 -25 at ETDC Hyderabad & 
Solan, ERTL (E), (N) and (S) got completed through CPWD. The remaining work 
will be completed in the FY 2025-26.  

 
6 
II. As regards to the status of procurement of Application Security Testing tool 
is concerned, it is submitted that procurement of the same has been completed 
successfully for 9 STQC labs and in addition procurement towards renewal of 
licenses of already existing Application Security Testing tools pertaining to other 6 
STQC Labs was also carried out during the FY 2024-25. 
III. As regards to procurement of Source Code Analysis Tool is concerned, it is 
submitted that  the procurement could not be materi alised in FY 2024 -25 due to 
the failure of Proof of Concept (POC) demonstration of the said tool by the 
prospective vendors shortlisted through GEM.  However, this task is expected to 
be completed during the first half of the current Financial Year 2025-26.” 
11. The Co mmittee in their Original Report  had desir ed the Ministry to 
provide the latest status of work completion of Standardisation, Testing & Quality 
Certification ( STQC) Buildings in different parts of the Country and status of 
procurement of Application, Security Testing and Source Code Analysis tool. The 
Committee had also suggested the Ministry to approach the Ministry of Finance 
for additional funds, if any required, for completion of these important proj ects 
timely and money should not be a constraint for the same. The Ministry in its reply 
has submitted that reconstruction work of STQC , Noida building is in progress 
through CPWD and it is anticipated to be completed in the FY 2025 -26.  Further,  
80% of the scheduled renovation works in the FY 2024 -25 at ETDC Hyderabad & 
Solan, ERTL (E), (N) and (S) had been completed through CPWD. It has been also 
submitted that t he remaining work would  be completed in the FY 2025 -26. So far 
as procurement of S ource code Analysis Tool is concerned, the Ministry has 
submitted that the procurement could not materialize in FY 2024 -25 due to the 
failure of Proof of Concept (POC) demonstration of the said tool by the 
prospective vendors shortlisted through  GEM. The Ministry further conveyed that  
this task is expected to be completed during the first half of the current Financial 
Year 2025-26.  
The Committee are surprised to note the reply submitted by the Ministry on 
16.06.2025 that they are expecting to complete the STQC buildings during the first 
half of FY 2025 -26 even though the said period is about to be completed. The 
Committee find that the pendency as well as uncertainty in completion of STQC 
Buildings and delay in procurement of Source Code Analysis Tool apart from non-
operationalisation of STQC buildings are hindering the deployment of prospective 

 
7 
primary jobs of e-Government, e -Industry, e -Innovation / R&D,  e-Learning, e-
Security, e -Inclusion, Internet Governance , which could have been generated by 
STQC through Quality & Security evaluations of IT Systems and execution of other 
projects of national importance. The Committee  call upon the Ministry to ensure 
that the remaining works of these projects are completed during this financial year 
itself and that in no case further delayed . The Ministry may furnish  an updated 
status report in this regard to the Committee at the earliest. 
 Cyber Security Projects (NCCC & Others)  
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 10) 
12. The Committee, in their Original Report, had recommended as under:— 
“The Ministry informed the Committee that in FY 2024 -25 funds amounting Rs. 
759.00 crore was allocated under NCCC projects in BE 2024 -25, which has been 
revised at RE Stage to Rs. 322.00 crore . The Ministry further stated that reduction 
of Rs. 437.00 crore in allocation at RE stage was due to the delay in 
implementation of project on Collection, Storage and Analysis of Traffic Flows 
(1:1) data from Internet Service Provider (ISP) Gateways. Amon g the major 
impediments faced in this project, the Ministry stated that due to dependency on 
facilitating site readiness by remote organisations, integration of meta -data sites 
with NCCC has been delayed. Respective organisations are being pursued to 
provide support to the project team for completion of integration. The Ministry 
further informed the Committee that hiring of System Integrator (SI) for Information 
Communication Technology (ICT) infrastructure, and Multiprotocol Label 
Switching/ Internet Leased Line (MPLS/ILL) service provider under National Cyber 
Coordination Centre (NCCC) Phase-III – Request for Proposals (RFPs) are under 
process and completion of NCCC Phase -II for integration of remote sites – Data 
centre and Disaster Recovery centers are op erationalized and integration of 
remote sites targetted to be completed by March 2025. The Committee are given 
to understand that the implementation of NCCC project is closely monitored at 
senior levels in CERT -In and MeitY. Work for meeting the targets ha s been 
assigned to Project Execution Agency which is working in close coordination with 
CERT-In team. The Committee recommend that the Ministry may explore the 
feasibility of taking help of the emerging technologies like AI and successful 
systems in the wo rld to provide solutions for timely readiness of sites by remote 

 
8 
organisations and take concrete steps, after assessing the reasons of delay in 
integration of meta-data sites with NCCC, to timely reach the goal. The Committee 
maybe apprised of the updated status of hiring of System Integrator (SI) for 
Information Communication Technology (ICT) infrastructure, and Multiprotocol 
Label Switching/ Internet Leased Line (MPLS/ILL)service provider under NCCC 
Phase-III and the completion of NCCC Phase-II as the target is set to be achieved 
by March, 2025. The Committee may be enlightened about recent measures 
taken by Project Execution Agencies so that deadlines in each of the project 
under this scheme are met and inordinate delays are plugged.” 
 
13. In their Action  Taken Reply, the Ministry of Electronics and Information 
Technology submitted as under:– 
“NCCC phase II:  
With the thorough understanding of challenges being faced at remote 
organisations and ISPs, site readiness and organisation on -boarding processes 
have been streamlined. Primary Data centre and Disaster Recovery Centre are 
operationalised. Further, real -time monitoring and effective co -ordination has 
resulted in significant reduction in pendency of site integration. At present, 92% of 
the targeted 250 s ites as part of NCCC Phase -II have already been successfully 
integrated and integration of remaining sites are likely to be completed by June 
2025. 
NCCC phase III:  
Both CERT -In and Project Execution agencies have been working in close -
coordination to address the challenges, minimise the delays and meet the 
timelines. For hiring of System Integrator (SI) for Information Communication 
Technology (IC T) infrastructure, R FP evaluation through Government e -
Marketplace (GeM) is under process. After completion of Technical and 
Commercial evaluations, the contract will be awarded to the successful L1 bidder 
which is likely to be completed within Q1 of FY 2025-26.  
As regards t o the status of Multiprotocol Label Switching/ Internet Leased Line 
(MPLS/ILL) service provider, it is submitted that the contract has been awarded to 
the L1 bidder through GeM on 11.03.2025.” 

 
9 
14. The Committee in their Original Report had recommended that the 
Ministry may explore the feasibility of taking help of the emerging technologies 
like AI and successful systems in the world to provide solutions for timely 
readiness of sites by remote organisations and take concrete steps, after 
assessing the reasons for delay in integration of meta -data sites with NCCC, to 
timely reach the goal. The Committee had also desir ed to be apprised of the 
updated status of hiring of System Integrator (SI) for Information Communication 
Technology (ICT) infras tructure, and Multiprotocol Label Switching/ Internet 
Leased Line (MPLS/ILL)service provider under NCCC Phase -III and the completion 
of NCCC Phase-II as the target was set to be achieved by March, 2025. Further, the 
Committee sought to be enlightened about  recent measures taken by Project 
Execution Agencies so that deadlines in each of the project under this scheme are 
met and inordinate delays are plugged. In its reply, the Ministry has submitted  
that 92% of the targeted 250 sites as part of NCCC Phase -II have already been 
successfully integrated and integration of remaining sites was likely to be 
completed by June 2025. Regarding progress made in NCCC phase III, the Ministry 
has submitted that both CERT-In and  Project Execution agencies had  been 
working in close-coordination to address the challenges, minimise the delays and 
meet the timelines. For hiring of System Integrator (SI) for Information 
Communication Technology (ICT) infrastructure, RFP evaluation through 
Government e-Marketplace (GeM) wa s under process. Further, after completion of 
Technical and Commerc ial evaluations, the contract would  be awarded to the 
successful L1 bidder which was likely to be completed within Q1 of FY 2025-26.  
The Committee note from  the submission s made by the Ministry of 
Electronics and Information Technology that all the assignments in NCCC phase II 
and III were expected to be completed within Q1 of  FY 2025 -26. The Committee 
also note  that completion of these  assignments involved multifaceted steps like 
bidding, awarding of contracts, integration of sites and Technical and Commercial 
evaluations. The Committee , therefore  urge the Ministry of Electronics and 
Information Technology to take effective measures to ensure seamless completion 
of the  crucial projects as Cyber Security Projects have gained enormous 
significance and are impacting the common man and even highly educated people 
in one way or the other on a daily basis. The Committee call upon the Minist ry to 
ensure that these projects are completed in right earnest without any further delay  

 
10 
and take all necessary steps to expedite hiring of System Integrator (SI) for ICT 
infrastructure, including skilled Cyber Security professionals for making NCC, an 
effective body. 
 
******** 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
11 
CHAPTER II 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN  
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 (Recommendation Sl. No. 1) 
 
BUDGET OVERVIEW AND DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2025-26) 
 The Ministry of Electronics &  Information Technology, under Demand No.27, 
has been allocated a total outlay of Rs. 26,026.25 crore for the Financial Year (FY) 2025-
26 against the proposed budgetary support of Rs. 28,223.78 crore. A comparative 
analysis of the Budget Estimate (BE) of t he Ministry from FY 2020 -21 to FY 2025 -26 
shows that for the Financial Year 2025 -26, there has been around 14% decrease at the 
Budget Estimates stage in comparison with the BE of FY 2024 -25. The Financial Year -
wise allocation percentage increase w.r.t Prev ious Year has been 41% in 2021 -22, 47% 
in 2022 -23, 16% in 2023 -24, 33% in 2024 -25 and 19% in 2025 -26. While submitting 
reasons for increased allocation in FY 2021 -22, the Ministry stated that more funds were 
allocated for incentive schemes viz promotion or  Digital Payments and Promotion of 
Electronics and IT Hardware Manufacturing. With the launching of PLI scheme in FY 
2022-23 the percentage increase was even more as Rs. 5300 crore was allotted to this 
scheme. While furnishing details of Budget allocation in FY 2025 -26, the Ministry has 
stated that the overall increase in budget is about Rs. 4000 crore which is about 19% 
increase over the previous FY. Further, the Ministry has submitted that MEITY would 
manage with the allocation as per the Scheme -wise distribution of funds and in case of 
requirement of additional funds; the same would be taken up with Ministry of Finance at 
RE stage or through Supplementary Demands for Grants. The Committee hope that the 
Ministry would be able to utilise the allocated funds  as envisaged and if need be, with 
proper monitoring, the requirements may be assessed periodically and necessary action 
be taken timely. Noting the increased allocations made, the Committee observe that 
allocation to ‘Modified Programme for Development of  Semiconductors and Display 
Manufacturing Ecosystem in India’ and ‘AI Mission’ is to be fully utilised and implemented 
in right earnest. In this regard, the Committee urge the Ministry to periodically review the 
sufficiency of funds vis-a-vis execution of Programmes/Missions and take necessary 
steps to ensure that funds are adequate for implementation of the schemes. 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The esteemed comments of the Committee have been noted for compliance. It is 
informed that MeitY  has been reviewing scheme -wise expenditure on regular basis to 
ensure proper and optimum utilisation of allocated funds and adequacy of availability of 
funds under each scheme as well as to monitor the progress of execution of 
schemes/projects. 
Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology  
     OM No. 2(1)/2025-Budget(Vol. II) Dated: 16.06.2025 
 
 

 
12 
 (Recommendation Sl. No. 3) 
BUDGET OVERVIEW AND DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2025-26) 
 The Ministry has stated that as on 24.02.2025, there are 3 pending Utilization 
Certificates (UCs) amounting to Rs.28.76 crore pertaining to Governments of 
Chhattisgarh and West Bengal. The concerned State Governments and the 
implementing agencies are being pursued regularly for the settlement of these UCs. The 
Committee note that as on 24.02.2025, 54% of pending amount in UCs has been 
liquidated and yet a large percentage remains to be liquidated. The Committee, 
therefore, urge the Ministry to hold regular meetings with the concerned State 
Governments so as to ensure clearance of the pendency at the earliest. The Committee 
may be apprised of the outcome of the same. 
Reply of the Government 
  MeitY has been monitoring the progress of liquidation of pending UCs on regular 
basis and following it up with concerned grantee institutions and States for settlement of 
the pending UCs. 
 
 Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology  
     OM No. 2(1)/2025-Budget(Vol. II) Dated: 16.06.2025 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 4) 
NATIONAL INFORMATICS CENTRE (NIC)  
 NIC has been playing an instrumental role in executing key IT projects, in close 
collaboration with the Government, making the last -mile delivery of Government services 
to the citizens a reality, through a variety of digital solutions such as eShram, eWay Bill, 
National Scholarship Portal, Jeevan Pramaan Portal, e -Challan, PM Kisan etc. 
Understanding the significant role played by NIC across the Country in providing 
technology-driven solutions across key areas including core ICT infrastructure, whole of 
Government oriented digital services, cyber and information security, sectoral 
applications, and propagation of emerging technologies, the Committee note that funds 
to the tune of Rs. 149 crore has been decreased in allocation to NIC during        FY 
2025-26. Since the slashing of funds would jeopardise the working of NIC which 
undertakes design and development of IT systems for the Government; provide ICT 
infrastructure to the Government; explore and advise on the use of emerging 
technologies, the Committee sought to know how NIC would be able to fulfil its mandate 
of e-governance and ICT infrastructure and achieve the targets. Replying to the query, 
the Ministry stated that NIC will achieve its mandate of e -Governance ICT Infrastructure 
with the allocated bud get of Rs. 1600.00 crore during the FY 2025 -26. Since the funds 
allocated to NIC are mainly for establishment related expenses, any shortfall in budget 
requirements would be considered at RE stage. The Committee call upon the Ministry to 
ensure that the de creased allocation of funds to NIC ought not affect its mandate and 
targets. Realistic assessments may be made and adequate funds may be obtained at RE 
stage or through Supplementary Demands for Grants to meet additional requirements.  
 

 
13 
Reply of the Government 
 The total Budget allocated by MeitY to NIC during the financial year 2025 -26 is 
Rs. 1600.00 crore which is about 16% increase over the actual expenditure incurred by 
NIC during FY 2024-25 (Rs.1379.59 crore). NIC is likely to meet its establishment-related 
expenses as well as its mandate of e -Governance and ICT Infrastructure with the 
allocated budget during the current FY 2025 -26. However, if NIC requires any additional 
budget during the FY 2025-26, the same will be taken up with MoF at the RE Stage 
  
 Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology  
     OM No. 2(1)/2025-Budget(Vol. II) Dated: 16.06.2025 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 5) 
NATIONAL INFORMATICS CENTRE (NIC)  
 The Committee reiterate their earlier recommendation that Ministry should look 
into the possibility of creating a separate IT cadre under it for effective supervision and 
implementation of the Schemes and also to augment skilled IT professionals who can 
develop and manage ICT projects and support Digital initiatives of the Government. 
Taking note of the fact that NIC not only provide ICT infrastructure to Central and State 
Governments but it also explore and advise on use of Emerging Technologies, the 
Committee are of considered view that the funds and work allocated to NIC under IndiaAI 
Mission should be given the utmost priority to achieve the set targets. To achieve its 
mandate, the Committee feel that NIC should have adequate funds to support emerging 
technologies and sufficient human resources to strengthen our cyber system so as to 
ward off cyber security threats. The Committee, therefore, suggest that the funds 
allocated to NIC may be reviewed periodically and additional need of fund, if any, taken 
up timely with the Ministry of Finance so that IndiaAI Mission under its ambit becomes a 
successful Mission. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
  NIC will achieve the set targets to support emerging technologies and IndiaAI  
Mission as well as deploy sufficient human resources to strengthen its cyber system so 
as to ward off cyber security threats with the budget allocated to it and the funds 
available under the respective schemes. Moreover, review of budget allocation and 
expenditure in respect of schemes and non -schemes of MeitY and expenditure thereof 
are being done by Secretary(MeitY) regularly. Additional requirement of funds for NIC, if 
any, to fulfil its mandate during the FY 2025 -26, will be taken up with MoF at approp riate 
Stage. 
                                          Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology  
     OM No. 2(1)/2025-Budget(Vol. II) Dated: 16.06.2025 
 
 
 
 

 
14 
  
(Recommendation Sl. No.8) 
 
STANDARDISATION, TESTING &  QUALITY CERTIFICATION (STQC) – 
ESTABLISHMENT AND MANPOWER  
 
 The Committee were given to understand that the Ministry, with NASSCOM, 
NIELIT and other institutions like AICTE, is working across the country on 11 major 
technologies, which include setting up of AI Labs and also big data analytics. The 
Committee are of considered view that the Ministry should provide adequate handholding 
to NIELIT in the matter of adequate Budgetary Support to fulfil their mandate so that 
proper training could be imparted to the experts, engineers, scientists, technicians and 
other organ isations/institutions engaged in AI development, who would be undertaking 
the projects under IndiaAI Mission. Having noted the fact that NIELIT provide training in 
Capacity Building and Skill Development in the areas of IECT and courses at 
Degree/Diploma Levels as well as Skilling Courses and its presence over 50+ locations 
across the country, the Committee desire the Ministry to provide adequate infrastructure, 
manpower and the funds to them so that demands for trained human resources to be 
deployed in Ind iaAI Mission be met both qualitatively and quantitatively so that they 
would be able to contribute economically and efficiently. 
Reply of the Government 
 Over the past several years, India has taken concrete steps to encourage the 
adoption of AI in a respo nsible manner and build public trust in the use of this 
technology, placing the idea of ‘AI for All’ at its very core.  
 
India has taken major, formative steps towards facilitating the creation of a world -leading 
ecosystem for Trustworthy Artificial Intell igence (AI). India is a major hub of skilled 
workforce in AI, with a vibrant Startup ecosystem that has mushroomed from the 
established research networks that have been building AI applications that can be 
leveraged for enhanced public service delivery.  
 
The success of the government’s initiatives and approach is evident from India's rising 
position in global AI rankings and indices.  
 
In March 2024, the Government of India approved the IndiaAI Mission with the aim to 
build a precise and cohesive strategy for bridging the gaps in the existing AI ecosystem. 
The IndiaAI mission will establish a comprehensive ecosystem catalyzing AI innovation 
through strategic programs and partnerships across the public and private sectors. By 
democratizing computing access, improving data quality, developing indigenous AI 
capabilities, attracting top AI talent, enabling industry collaboration, providing startup risk 
capital, ensuring socially impactful AI projects and bolstering ethical AI, it will drive 
responsible, inclusive growth of India's AI ecosystem. 
 

 
15 
The IndiaAI Mission comprises of 7 pillars namely - IndiaAI Compute, IndiaAI Innovation 
Center, IndiaAI Dataset platform, IndiaAI Application development initiatives, IndiaAI 
FutureSkills, IndiaAI Startup Financing, and Safe & Trusted AI. 
 
The FutureSkills pillar is a cornerstone initiative under the IndiaAI Mission that focuses 
on building India's AI talent ecosystem and democratizing access to AI education 
nationwide. This comprehensive program aims to create a robust pip eline of AI -skilled 
professionals through strategic interventions at various educational levels - from 
undergraduate to doctoral studies. The initiative has been allocated a budget to establish 
specialized Data and AI Labs across Tier 2 and Tier 3 cities, provide fellowships to 
students from AICTE -recognized institutions, and develop industry -aligned curriculum 
and training programs. The pillar addresses the critical need for AI expertise by breaking 
down entry barriers, expanding AI education infrastructur e, and fostering partnerships 
between academia and industry. Through its fellowship program, it supports students 
working on practical AI applications across sectors like agriculture, healthcare, 
education, and finance, while simultaneously focusing on important aspects like AI ethics 
and responsible AI development. 
IndiaAI FutureSkills will coordinate with existing efforts in this sector to make AI 
education holistic and inclusive. 
 
a) Data and AI Labs: A data and AI lab in partnership with an industry partne r has been 
established in Karkardooma, Delhi, and is considered the model lab for the setup of 
other such labs. Establishment of 27 AI and Data labs across India in collaboration 
with NIELIT has been initiated, which are set to be operational from the end of June 
2025. Another 3 labs in Nagaland, Madhya Pradesh, and Mohali in collaboration with 
the industry partner are being established. Further, 174 ITIs/Polytechnics have been 
approved for the setting up of the labs across various States and UTs. 
b) AI and Da ta Courses: IndiaAI will be delivering foundational level Data & AI courses 
in IndiaAI Data Labs to be established in NIELIT and ITIs centers in Tier 2 and 
Tier 3 cities across, course curricula for 120 -hour courses for the roles of Data 
Annotator and Data  Curator, along with two 30 -hour courses focusing on sectors 
such as Healthcare, Education, Manufacturing  and Agriculture has been developed. 
The courses are NCVET approved. 
 
 
Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology  
     OM No. 2(1)/2025-Budget(Vol. II) Dated: 16.06.2025 
 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 10) 
BUDGET OVERVIEW AND DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2025-26) 
CYBER SECURITY PROJECTS (NCCC & OTHERS) 
 The Ministry informed the Committee that in FY 2024 -25 funds amounting Rs. 
759.00 crore was allocated under NCCC projects in BE 2024-25, which has been revised 

 
16 
at RE Stage to Rs. 322.00 crore. The Ministry further stated that reduction of Rs. 437.00 
crore in allocation at RE stage was due to the delay in implementation of project on 
Collection, Storage and Analysis of Traffic Flows (1:1) data from Internet Service 
Provider (ISP) Gateways. Among the major impediments faced in this project, the 
Ministry stated that due to dependency on facilitating site readiness by remote 
organisations, integration of meta -data sites with NCCC has been delayed. Respective 
organisations are being pursued to provide support to the project team for completion of 
integration. The Ministry further informed the Committee that hiring of System Integrator 
(SI) for Info rmation Communication Technology (ICT) infrastructure, and Multiprotocol 
Label Switching/ Internet Leased Line (MPLS/ILL) service provider under National Cyber 
Coordination Centre (NCCC) Phase -III – Request for Proposals (RFPs) are under 
process and comple tion of NCCC Phase -II for integration of remote sites – Datacentre 
and Disaster Recovery centers are operationalized and integration of remote sites 
targetted to be completed by March 2025. The Committee are given to understand that 
the implementation of NCCC project is closely monitored at senior levels in CERT -In and 
MeitY. Work for meeting the targets has been assigned to Project Execution Agency 
which is working in close coordination with CERT -In team. The Committee recommend 
that the Ministry may explo re the feasibility of taking help of the emerging technologies 
like AI and successful systems in the world to provide solutions for timely readiness of 
sites by remote organisations and take concrete steps, after assessing the reasons of 
delay in integrati on of meta -data sites with NCCC, to timely reach the goal. The 
Committee may be apprised of the updated status of hiring of System Integrator (SI) for 
Information Communication Technology (ICT) infrastructure, and Multiprotocol Label 
Switching/ Internet Leased Line (MPLS/ILL) service provider under NCCC Phase -III and 
the completion of NCCC Phase -II as the target is set to be achieved by March, 2025. 
The Committee may be enlightened about recent measures taken by Project Execution 
Agencies so that deadlines in each of the project under this scheme are met and 
inordinate delays are plugged. 
Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology  
     OM No. 2(1)/2025-Budget(Vol. II) Dated: 16.06.2025 
 
Reply of the Government 
NCCC phase II:  
With the thorough understanding of challenges being faced at remote organisations and 
ISPs, site readiness and organisation on -boarding processes have been streamlined. 
Primary Data centre and Disaster Recovery Centre are operationalised.  Further, real -
time monitoring and effective co -ordination has resulted in significant reduction in 
pendency of site integration. At present, 92% of the targeted 250 sites as part of 
NCCC Phase-II have already been successfully integrated and integration o f remaining 
sites are likely to be completed by June 2025. 
 
NCCC phase III:  
Both CERT-In and Project Execution agencies have been working in close -coordination 
to address the challenges, minimise the delays and meet the timelines. For hiring 
of System Int egrator (SI) for Information Communication Technology (ICT)  

 
17 
infrastructure, RFP evaluation through Government e -Marketplace (GeM ) is under 
process. After completion of Technical and Commercial evaluations, the contract will be 
awarded to the successful L1 bidder which is likely to be completed within Q1 of FY 
2025-26.  
 
As regards to the status of Multiprotocol Label Switching/ Int ernet Leased 
Line (MPLS/ILL) service provider, it is submitted that the contract has been awarded to 
the L1 bidder through GeM on 11.03.2025. 
 
Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology  
     OM No. 2(1)/2025-Budget(Vol. II) Dated: 16.06.2025 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 14 of Chapter I) 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 11) 
MODIFIED PROGRAMME FOR DEVELOPMENT OF SEMICONDUCTORS AND 
DISPLAY MANUFACTURING ECOSYSTEM IN INDIA 
 The Committee note that there has been a reduction of funds at BE stage to the 
tune of Rs. 1000.00 crore vis-à-vis the amount proposed for the Modified Programme for 
Development of Semiconductors and Display Manufacturing Ecosystem in India and this 
reduction is almost equal to BE for Promotion of Electronics & IT Hardware mfg. (MSIPS, 
EDF and Manufacturing Clusters) scheme and R&D in IT/Electronics/CCBT scheme. The 
Committee are given to understand that as per the Cabinet approval of the projects 
under the Programme, the companies have to furnish the necessary documents to India 
Semiconductor Mission before signing of Fiscal Support Agreement (FSA), and 
disbursement of funds. The Ministry further stated that these are complex projects 
requiring intensive pl anning for pilot and project sites and most of the approved 
companies are in various stages of implementation, including obtaining various statutory 
clearances. However, they have not yet claimed the funds so far from India 
Semiconductor Mission (ISM) and ISM is regularly monitoring the progress of the 
approved projects and providing necessary support in this regard. The Committee were 
enlightened that during  FY 2025 -26, it is targeted that investments to the tune of Rs. 
13,000 crore will be made by the 05 approved companies under different schemes of the 
Modified Programme for Development of Semiconductors and Display Manufacturing 
Ecosystem in India. Under the DLI scheme, 20 companies are expected to support for 
design and development of semiconductor IP Cores. The Committee understand that 
Semiconductor and Display manufacturing is a complex as well as technology driven 
initiatives which require intensive R&D and demands huge capital investments along with 
high risk, long gestation and payback periods, an d need for absorption of rapid changes 
in technology. The Committee note that the programme for Development of 
Semiconductors and Display Manufacturing Ecosystem in India has further been 
modified in view of the aggressive incentives offered by countries a lready having 
established semiconductor ecosystem and limited number of companies owning the 

 
18 
advanced node technologies. Further, the modified programme aims to provide financial 
support to companies investing in semiconductors, display manufacturing and d esign 
ecosystem. The Committee, in view of the submissions of the Ministry, recommend that 
they should ensure adequate funds for such programmes which will pave the way for 
India’s growing presence in the global electronics value chains. The Committee may be 
apprised of the progress of the approved projects under ISM and also about the 
investment to be done by 05 approved companies under different schemes of the 
Modified Programme for Development of Semiconductors and Display Manufacturing 
Ecosystem in Indi a and 20 companies under the DLI scheme supporting for design and 
development of semiconductor IP Cores. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 The recommendation of the committee regarding ensuring adequate funds for this 
programme is noted. The funds allocation under the Programme for a particular year, is 
generally based on the projections submitted by approved companies regarding their 
investments to be done in that year. In case of the requirement of additional funds, the 
same may be requested at the stage of RE 2025-26.  
 
Government has approved Five (5) Semiconductor Manufacturing units and Seventeen 
(17) Semiconductor design companies under the programme. The approved companies 
are under various phases of implementation. Follo wing are the investment details of the 
approved projects: 
 
 Micron Technology Inc.'s proposal for setting up an ATMP facility in Sanand, Gujarat, 
India with an investment of Rs. 22,516 crore was approved in June 2023. Micron’s 
facility in India will enable assembly and test manufacturing for both DRAM and 
NAND products and address demand from domestic and international markets with a 
production capacity of around 40 million per week. The revenue shipment has already 
started from the mini pioneer site.  As of  31st March, 2025, Rs. 1168.03 crore has 
been disbursed by the nodal agency. 
 
 Tata Electronics Private Limited (TEPL)’s proposal for setting up a Semiconductor 
Fab facility in Dholera, Gujarat, India with an investment of Rs. 91,526 crore was 
approved in F ebruary 2024. The fab facility will be set up in technology partnership 
with PSMC, Taiwan. PSMC is an established semiconductor company having 6 
semiconductor foundries in Taiwan. The production capacity of the project would be 
around 50,000 wafer starts per month (WSPM).  
 
 Tata Electronics Private Limited (TEPL)’s proposal for setting up of OSAT facility in 
Morigaon, Assam, India with an investment of Rs. 27,120 crore was approved in 
February 2024. The facility will use indigenous semiconductor packaging 
technologies with a production capacity of 48 million per day.  
 

 
19 
 CG Power and Industrial Solutions Limited’s proposal for setting up OSAT facility in 
Sanand, Gujarat, India with an investment of Rs 7,584 crore was also approved in 
February 2024. The facilit y will be set up as joint venture partnership with Renesas 
Electronics America Inc., USA, and STARS Microelectronic, Thailand. The 
Technology would be provided for this facility by Renesas Electronics Corporation, 
Japan and STARS Microelectronic, Thailand.  The production capacity would be 
around 15.07Million Units per day. 
  
 Kaynes Technology India Limited (KTIL) proposal of for setting up of Outsourced 
Semiconductor Assembly and Test (OSAT) facility at Sanand, Gujarat for Wire bond 
Interconnect, Substrate Based Packages was approved in September,2024. The 
Technology would be provided by ISO Technology Sdn. Bhd. and Aptos Technology 
Inc. This facility will be setup with an investment of Rs 3,307 crore. The facility will 
have the capacity to produce more than 6.33 million chips per day. 
 
Under the Design Linked Incentive (DLI) Scheme, 67 companies have been approved for 
centralized access of the Electronic Design Automation (EDA) tool. Out of these, 17 
companies have been approved for financial support for des ign and development of 
semiconductor designs for automotive, mobility and compute areas with expected 
investment of Rs. 556.85 Crore with approved funding commitment from the DLI Scheme 
of Rs. 203.21 Crore. About 39 Crore of financial incentives have been disbursed and Rs. 
72 Crore of design infrastructure support (including EDA tools and IP Cores) have been 
enabled under the DLI Scheme.  These companies have raised about Rs 265 Crore of 
Venture Capital investment and are at advanced stage of design semicon ductor 
Application-Specific Integrated Circuit (ASICs) and System on Chips (SoCs). 
 
Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology  
     OM No. 2(1)/2025-Budget(Vol. II) Dated: 16.06.2025 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 12) 
IndiaAI Mission 
 The Committee note  that “IndiaAI Mission” aims to propel innovation and build 
domestic capacities to ensure the tech sovereignty of India. It aims to create highly 
skilled employment opportunities to harness the demographic dividend of the Country. 
IndiaAI Mission will help  India demonstrate to the world how this transformative 
technology can be used for social good and enhance its global competitiveness. 
Observing the gaps between Central and State Governments with respect to functioning 
in Digital Governance and AI Mission , the Committee sought to know whether the 
Ministry had any plan under IndiaAI Mission to proactively engage with State 
Governments for a unified approach and coherence towards achieving targets in Digital 
Governance and Artificial Intelligence. 
While making their submissions, the Ministry stated that given the critical role that 
AI will play in shaping the future, the Government of India launched the IndiaAI Mission, 
a comprehensive national -level program with an outlay of over INR 10,371 crore to 

 
20 
democratize and catalyze the AI innovation ecosystem in the country. The IndiaAI 
Mission will be implemented through seven key pillars: - i) IndiaAI Compute Capacity; ii) 
IndiaAI Innovation Centre; iii) IndiaAI Datasets Platform; iv) IndiaAI Application 
Development Initiative; v) IndiaAI FutureSkills; vi) IndiaAI Startup Financing; and viii) 
Safe & Trusted AI. 
The Committee were given to understand the risks and challenges in the 
implementation of AI i.e. issues of anomaly & fraud detection, security case selection,  
TDS applications, enhancing AI in Data Analytics and Risk Assessment, Optimizing AI 
and ML for seamless user interactions and expanding accessibility with a Multilingual 
interface, increasing correlation due to widespread use of similar AI models leading to 
financial stability risks, lack of interpretability of AI models and data quality concerns; 
issues of Data privacy, cyber security, spread of disinformation in the Financial Sector; 
and growing third -party dependencies and market concentration, skill ga ps and 
requirement of huge amount of power for  
 
setting up of AI data centres in the field of New and Renewable Energy. In view of the 
above, the Committee recommend that AI Safety Institute’s (AISI’s) five safety projects 
such as real -time deep fake dete ction, AI -generated content water -marking, ethical AI 
frameworks and red teaming AI models should be adopted without any further delay. The 
Committee also suggest that projects like machine unlearning, synthetic data generation 
for bias mitigation, AI bias  mitigation in healthcare systems and AI algorithm audition 
tools should be developed as early as possible in consultation with all the stakeholders 
so that India can enrich each sector with aplomb options which will put India at the 
forefront in use of AI  technology for the welfare of humanity. Further, the Committee 
opine that young talents of premier institutions across the Country may be roped in for 
exchange of technological know -how and for effective and coordinated outcomes. The 
Committee may be apprised of the developments in this project. 
Reply of the Government 
1. Funds pertaining to the first quarter have been duly disbursed for all 8 projects 
selected against the First Expression of Interest (EOI) issued under the 'Safe & 
Trusted AI' Pillar of the IndiaAI Mission. 
2. All implementing agencies have been requested to submit Utilisation Certificates 
(UCs) along with fund requirements for the upcoming financial year (FY 2025 -26). 
A detailed breakup of projected fund requirements for the ensuing 6 months ma y 
also be furnished separately. 
3. The Project Review and Steering Group (PRSG) for monitoring and evaluation of 
the aforementioned projects has been duly constituted. The first project review 
meeting was convened on the 1st and 2nd of May 2025. Detailed tech nical 
progress reports have been solicited from all project leads as a follow -up to the 
deliberations held therein. 
 
 
 

 
21 
 
Project-Wise Details: 
 
1. Project Name: Development of Responsible Artificial Intelligence for Bias Mitigation in 
Health Care Systems 
 
Theme: AI Bias Mitigation Strategy 
Project Participant(s): National Institute of Technology (NIT) Raipur 
Duration of Project: 2 years 
Total Budget (Lakhs): Rs 22,94,112 
Funds Released Thus Far: Rs 1,30,980 
Budget Spent (Lakhs): Rs 92,940 
Technical Progress : Literature survey of various AI Bias mitigation techniques, current 
softwares used, performance metrics 
 
2. Project Name: Design and Development of Method for Generating Synthetic Data for 
Mitigating Bias in Datasets and Framework for Mitigating Bias in Machine Learning 
Pipeline for Responsible AI 
 
Theme: Synthetic Data Generation 
Project Participant(s): Indian Institute of Technology (IIT) Roorkee 
Duration of Project: 2 years 
Total Budget (Lakhs): Rs 75,96,000 
Funds Released Thus Far: Rs 1,50,000 
Budget Spent (Lakhs): Rs 1,50,000 
Technical Progress: Development of the algorithm that generates synthetic data for the 
IVL (Intelligent Virtual Laboratory) model, which reduces training dataset bias 
 
3. Project Name: Enabling Explainable and Privacy Preserving AI for Security and 
Surveillance 
 
Theme: Explainable AI Framework 
Project Participant(s): Defence Institute of Advanced Technology (DIAT) & Mind graph 
Technologies 
Duration of Project: 1 year 6 months 
Total Budget (Lakhs): Rs 34,28,100 (DIAT) + Rs 55,35,000 (Mind graph Technologies) 
Funds Released Thus Far: Rs 7,38,525 (DIAT) + Rs 5,52,745 (Mind graph 
Technologies) 
Budget Spent (Lakhs): Rs.2,52,771 (DIAT) + Rs 11,76,363 (Mind graph Technologies) 
Technical Progress:  
DIAT: 
a) Study of existing AI models for Human Activity Recognition (HAR) for Video data. 
b) Selection of Data parameters and its impact on outcomes. 
c) Evaluate the performance parameters. 
d) Progress Report Writing and Evaluation. 
Mind graph Technologies: 

 
22 
a)  Initial Privacy Preserving Framework. 
b) Data Collection Framework Documents. 
c) Initial UI. 
 
4. Project Name: NishPaksh: Tools for assessing fairness of AI models 
 
Theme: AI Ethical Certification 
Project Participant(s): Indraprastha Institute of Technology (IIIT) Delhi & 
Telecommunications Engineering Centre (TEC) 
Duration of Project: 2 years 
Total Budget (Lakhs): Rs 32,92,704 
Funds Released Thus Far: 0 (due to delays pertaining to the bank account at the 
institutional level) 
Budget Spent (Lakhs): 0 
Technical Progress: Basic design of NishPaksh 
 
5. Project Name: Machine Unlearning in Generative Foundation Models 
 
Theme: Machine Unlearning 
Project Participant(s): Indian Institute of Technology (IIT) Jodhpur 
Duration of Project: 2 years 
Total Budget (Lakhs): Rs. 57,05,700 
Funds Released Thus Far: Rs 5,00,000 
Budget Spent (Lakhs): Rs 4,33,654 
Technical Progress:  
a) Problem Formulation: Literature review in image and audio domain. 
b) Data Scraping and curation: Generated initial datasets for image domain. 
 
6. Project Name: Robust Privacy-Preserving Machine Learning Models 
 
Theme: Privacy Enhancing Strategy 
Project Participant(s): Indian Institute of Technology (IIT) Delhi, Indraprastha Institute of 
Technology (IIIT) Delhi, Indian Institute of Technology (IIT) Dharwad, 
Telecommunications Engineering Centre (TEC) 
Duration of Project: 2 years 
Total Budget (Lakhs): Rs. 74,62,944 (for all institutions) 
Funds Released Thus Far: Rs 1,50,000 (IIT Delhi) + Rs 85,000 (IIT Dharwad) 
Budget Spent (Lakhs): Rs 25,000 (IIT Delhi) 
Technical Progress:  
a) Completed literature survey for developing robust distributed learning protocols.  
b) Developed a new algorithm for robust aggregation strategies. 
 
7. Project Name: “Track -LLM”, Transparency, Risk Assessment, Context & Knowledge 
for Large Language Models 
 
Theme: AI Governance Testing Framework 

 
23 
Project Participant(s): Amrita Vishwa Vidyapeetham & Telecommunications Engineering 
Centre (TEC) 
Duration of Project: 2 years 
Total Budget (Lakhs): Rs 98,92,800 
Funds Released Thus Far: Rs 6,70,000 
Budget Spent (Lakhs): Rs. 6,59,067 
Technical Progress:  
a) Literature Survey. 
b) Evaluation metrics and measures for gender bias detection. 
c) Initial Implementation of gender bias evaluation. 
d) Implementation on multiple LLMs to calculate performance. 
 
8. Project Name: Parakh AI:  An Open-Source Participatory Algorithmic Auditing 
Framework 
 
Theme: AI Algorithm Auditing Tool 
Project Participant(s): Civic Data Labs 
Duration of Project: 1 year 6 months 
Total Budget (Lakhs): Rs. 1,05,00,000 
Funds Released Thus Far: Rs. 24,75,000 
Budget Spent (Lakhs): Rs. 24,75,000 
Technical Progress:  
a) Internal Kick off and team alignment. 
b) 1st Public Stakeholder Consultation for Enabling AI Auditing. 
c) Comparative analysis of Global Legislation framework for defining High -Risk and 
AI auditing. 
d) AI Auditing Landscape. 
e) Working Group Initiation.  
 
 Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology  
     OM No. 2(1)/2025-Budget(Vol. II) Dated: 16.06.2025 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
24 
 
CHAPTER III 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS  WHICH  THE  COMMITTEE  DO  NOT  DESIRE  TO 
PURSUE  IN  VIEW  OF  THE  REPLIES  OF  THE  GOVERNMENT 
 
 
-Nil- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
25 
 
CHAPTER IV 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS I IN RESPECT OF  WHICH  REPLIES  OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE  NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE  COMMITTEE  
AND REQUIRE REITERATION 
 
 
-Nil- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
26 
CHAPTER V 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES  OF THE  
GOVERNMENT ARE INTERIM IN NATURE 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 2) 
BUDGET OVERVIEW AND DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2025-26) 
 About the overall impact of reduced allocation of funds to important schemes, the 
Ministry has stated that the schemes under Digital India Programme, except National 
Knowledge Network (NKN), have been allocated funds keeping in view the Ministry’s 
requirement of funds projected by its Programme Divisions, status of various projects 
under the scheme, pace of expenditure in previous years etc. Since NKN scheme is 
closing in March 2025, a token sum has been earmarked for this scheme for FY 2025 -26 
so that fund s could be supplemented under this scheme, if the project duration is 
extended. As MoF has recently approved extension of the project duration of this 
scheme, MeitY would approach MoF for allocation of additional funds for this scheme 
through Supplementary  Demands for Grants in FY 2025 -26. The primary reason for 
under/suboptimal utilization of allocated funds is mainly due to less expenditure under 
incentive schemes being implemented by MeitY. The Ministry has submitted that the 
focus areas during FY 2025 -26 would be to boost the global competitiveness of AI start -
ups and researchers of India; enhance domestic manufacturing and attract large 
investments in mobile phones, specified electronic components and IT hardware; and 
provide attractive incentive support to companies or consortia that are engaged in Silicon 
Semiconductor Fabs, Display Fabs, Compound Semiconductors, Silicon Photonics, 
Sensors, including MEMS, Fabs, Discrete Semiconductor Fabs, Semiconductor 
Packaging, ATMP or OSAT and Semiconductor Design . As the Ministry has submitted 
that it distributes the allocated funds under various schemes keeping in view the priority 
areas and unavoidable/committed expenditure under various schemes, the Committee 
hope that the allocated funds are distributed proper ly and used judiciously so as to make 
our Nation world’s production centre of semiconductors and a leader in Artificial 
Intelligence. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 It is submitted that Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs) has been 
requested to allocate additional funds to the tune of Rs.664.75 crore for National 
Knowledge Network (NKN) Programme as MeitY has extended the project duration of 
this programme and enhanced its overall outlay on the recommendation of Department 
of Expenditure.  
 
So far as proper distribution of allocated of funds and its judicious utilisation is 
concerned, it is stated that MeitY has distributed funds in respect of various s chemes 
having committed liabilities as per the discussions held in the Pre -Budget meeting under 
the chairmanship of Secretary(Expenditure) and in the presence of Secretary(MeitY) and 
JS&FA(MeitY) on the scheme -wise estimated expenditure for FY 2025 -26  submitted by 

 
27 
the Programme Divisions. Regular meeting are being taken by Secretary(MeitY) and 
JS&FA(MeitY) with the Group Coordinators to monitor execution of projects/schemes 
and ensure optimum and judicious utilisation of allocated funds.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             
 
 
Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology  
     OM No. 2(1)/2025-Budget(Vol. II) Dated: 16.06.2025 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 8 of Chapter I) 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 6) 
STANDARDISATION, TESTING &  QUALITY CERTIFICATION (STQC) – 
ESTABLISHMENT AND MANPOWER  
 
 STQC supports quality assurance of small and medium scale Electronics 
Industries.  Under STQC Directorate 4 Electronics Regional Test Laboratories (ERTLs) 
and 11 Electronic Test and Development Centres and one Centre for Reliability (CFR) 
are functioning pan India. The Committee observe that the funds allocated to STQC has 
come down from  Rs. 175.00 crore in 2024 -25 to Rs. 170.00 crore in FY 2025 -26. The 
Committee have been informed by the Ministry that Rs. 4.5 Crore was allocated under 
Building and Structures Head to STQC.  Letter of Authorization was issued to CPWD for 
executing renovation works of Lab/Centres namely ETDC, Hyderabad, ERTL (East), 
ETDC, Solan, ETDC, Agartala, ERTL(South) and ERTL(North). The Ministry has stated 
that under ICT Head, from the  allocation of Rs. 7.0 crore for the current FY, 
administrative approval for implementation of Lab Automation Process has been 
obtained from Competent Authority for an amount of  Rs. 3.0 crore and work order has 
been issued to Implementing Agency i.e. CDAC , NOIDA. Phase I roll out is expected in 
July, 2025. Similarly, construction of STQC building in NOIDA is expected to be 
completed by February, 2026. In addition to this, procurement of Application, Security 
Testing Tool for an amount of Rs.1.4 crore and   Source Code Analysis tool for an 
amount of Rs.1.6 crore is also in progress. The Committee observe that STQC plays a 
crucial role in supporting Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology’s initiatives in 
the key areas like e-Government, e-Industry, e-Innovation / R&D, e-Learning, e-Security, 
e-Inclusion, Internet Governance through Quality & Security evaluations of IT systems 
and other projects of national importance. In view of this, the Committee also like the 
Ministry to update about the status of  work of STQC Building in different parts of the 
country. Further, the status of procurement of Application, Security Testing and Source 
Code Analysis tool may also be furnished. The Committee would also like to suggest the 
Ministry to approach the Ministr y of Finance for additional funds, if any required, for 
completion of these important projects timely and money should not be a constraint for 
the same. 
  

 
28 
Reply of the Government 
I.  As regards to the status of work of STQC buildings is concerned, it is 
submitted that the reconstruction work of STQC Noida building is in progress 
through CPWD and it is anticipated to be completed in the FY 2025 -26 and 80% 
of the scheduled renovation wor ks in the FY 2024 -25 at ETDC Hyderabad & 
Solan, ERTL (E), (N) and (S) got completed through CPWD. The remaining work 
will be completed in the FY 2025-26.  
II. As regards to the status of procurement of Application Security Testing tool is 
concerned, it is subm itted that procurement of the same has been completed 
successfully for 9 STQC labs and in addition procurement towards renewal of 
licenses of already existing application Security testing tools pertaining to other 6 
STQC Labs was also carried out during the FY 2024-25. 
 
III. As regards to procurement of Source code Analysis Tool is concerned, it is 
submitted that t the procurement could not be materialised in FY 2024 -25 due to 
the failure of Proof of Concept (POC) demonstration of the said tool by the 
prospective vendors shortlisted through GEM.  However, this task is expected to 
be completed during the first half of the current Financial Year 2025-26. 
 
Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology  
     OM No. 2(1)/2025-Budget(Vol. II) Dated: 16.06.2025 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 11 of Chapter I) 
 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 7) 
STANDARDISATION, TESTING & QUALITY CERTIFICATION (STQC) – 
ESTABLISHMENT AND MANPOWER 
  
 The Committee observe that the major impediment being faced by STQC is 
shortfall in the Human Resources due to retirements. Approximately 102 vacant Group 
“B” positions have been identified for recruitment through NIELIT up to 31.12.2025. 
Further, the majority of Test/Calibration facilities as well as the IT Test Tools are no t 
available in “Make in India” Scheme and for this STQC has been consolidating a list of 
Test/Calibration facilities and IT tools for getting “Make in India” exemption from the 
competent authority. At the outset, the Committee would like to know why the st aff 
requirement due to retirements was not factored into earlier as it has become one of the 
persistent problems for the functioning of STQC. The Committee would like to be 
apprised whether the vacant 102 Group ‘B’ posts and Group ‘A’ posts became vacant i n 
December, 2025 and how STQC intends to achieve the set targets without adequate 
human resources. The Committee, therefore, desire that the matter may be continuously 
followed up with NIELIT for recruitments. 

 
29 
Reply of the Government 
 As regards to staff r equirement / recruitment is concerned, it is submitted 
that due diligence was paid by STQC in the identification of vacant posts arising out of 
superannuation and the recruitment process was completed well in time. Accordingly, 
STQC has completed recruitme nt process of ‘63’ group B in the FY 2022 -23 and ‘45’ 
group A posts in the FY 2023 -24 and 80 group C posts during the FY 2024 -25 through 
NIELIT.   However, the higher attrition rate of new recruits at group B, over and above 
the superannuation in the year 2024 has contributed to the creation of such vacancies 
and STQC has taken up recruitment process these vacancies through NIELIT and is 
expected to be complete the same before the end of the FY 2025-26.    
 
Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology  
     OM No. 2(1)/2025-Budget(Vol. II) Dated: 16.06.2025 
 
 (Recommendation Sl. No. 9) 
NATIONAL KNOWLEDGE NETWORK (NKN) 
 
 The Committee understand that in FY 2025 -26, NKN has been allocated merely 
Rs. 0.25 crore which is abysmally low in comparison with the allocation of Rs. 240.26 
crore in FY 2024 -25. Though, the Ministry had proposed estimated outlay of Rs. 665.16 
crore in FY 2025 -26 allocation has been only to the tune of Rs. 0.25 crore. MeitY has 
submitted that NKN has been subsumed under the Digital India Programme and it would 
allocate funds from the savings under any of the seven Digital India Programme 
components and is taking up requirement of funds to the tune of Rs. 665.16 crore for 
NKN through Fir st Supplementary Demand for Grants in FY 2025 -26. The Committee 
note that NKN fulfils the needs of the Government network [National Government 
Network (NGN)], and the Research & Education Network (REN). NKN carries the digital -
traffic of National/State Dat a Centres (NDCs/SDCs), State -Wide Area Networks 
(SWANs) and provides connectivity to various Digital India initiatives, and carry digital -
traffic of various G2G (Government to Government) and G2C (Government to Citizen) 
services, District Connectivity, etc . The Committee were apprised that the overall 
financial outlay for NKN project now stands enhanced to Rs. 7188 crore and Department 
of Expenditure suggested MeitY may use the savings under any of the seven Digital 
India Programme components to make funds available up to Rs. 665.16 crore for NKN 
up to 31.03.2026. The Committee were further informed that the Integrated Finance 
Division, MeitY is taking up the requirement of funds to the tune of Rs. 665.16 crore for 
NKN through first Supplementary Demand during FY 2025-26. The Committee would like 
to know what kind of savings and extra funds would be allocated to NKN in order to 
ensure smooth and efficient continuity of the project. The Committee suggest that the 
Ministry should review all the components of Di gital India Programme thoroughly so that 
the scope of savings from these components is met and those savings could be 
judiciously utilized for NKN. The Committee desire the Ministry to take up First 
Supplementary Demand with the Ministry of Finance in righ t earnest as NKN inter -
connects all knowledge institutions across the country through high -speed data 

 
30 
communications network to encourage sharing of resources and collaborative research; 
and India cannot wait to grab the opportunity to be a Digital Hub due to paucity of funds. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 Cabinet Committee had approved Rs.14903.25 crore for Digital India Umbrella 
Programme for the XVth Finance Commission cycle (2021 -22 to 2025-26). Since NKN is 
a part of this umbrella programme  and have already consumed its allocated budget, 
MeitY has identified the likely overall savings in respect of this umbrella programme after 
taking into consideration the expenditure incurred during the last four years and the 
funds allocated in the Budget  Estimates for the current financial year 2025 -26. MoF has 
also been requested to provide additional funds for NKN Programme without breaching 
the approved outlay of Rs.14903.25 crore in respect of Digital India Umbrella Programme 
for the XVth Finance Commission cycle. 
 
 
  
Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology  
     OM No. 2(1)/2025-Budget(Vol. II) Dated: 16.06.2025 
 
 
******** 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     NEW DELHI; DR. NISHIKANT DUBEY, 
   11 August, 2025  Chairperson, 
   20  Sravana, 1947 (Saka) Standing Committee on  
Communications and Information Technology. 

 
31 
ANNEXURE I 
  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON COMMUNICATIONS AND  
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (2024-25) 
 
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY- FIRST SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
----------- 
 The Committee sat on Monday, the 11 th August, 2025 from 1 530 hours to 1550              
hours in Committee Room No. ‘B,  Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
DR. NISHIKANT DUBEY- Chairperson 
 MEMBERS 
  
Lok Sabha 
 
 
2. Shri C.N. Annadurai 
3. Shri Anup Sanjay Dhotre 
4. Shri S. Supongmeren Jamir 
5. Shri Appalanaidu Kalisetti 
6. Smt. Poonamben Hematbhai  Maadam 
7. Shri G. Kumar Naik 
8. Dr. M.K. Vishnu Prasad 
9. Ms. Kangna Ranaut 
10. Shri Ramasahayam Raghuram Reddy 
11. Shri Arun Kumar Sagar 
12. Shri Devesh Shakya 
 
Rajya Sabha 
  
13. Smt. Priyanka Chaturvedi 
14. Shri Amar Pal Maurya 
15. Dr. Sasmit Patra 
16. Shri V. Vijayendra Prasad  
17. Shri Kartikeya Sharma 
18. Shri Lahar Singh Siroya 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Y.M. Kandpal   - Additional Secretary 
2. Smt. A. Jyothirmayi   - Director 
3. Shri Amrish Kumar             - Deputy Secretary 
 

 
32 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the Sitting of the 
Committee convened to consider and adopt  one draft Subject Report relating to Ministry of 
Communications ( Department of Posts) and  four draft Action Taken Reports on Demands 
for Grants (20 25-26) relating to the Ministries/Department s under the  jurisdiction of the 
Committee. 
 
3. The Committee, then, took up the following five draft Reports for consideration and 
adoption:- 
 
(i) XXXXXX……. XXXXXX……. XXXXXX……. XXXXXX……. XXXXXX……. XXXX. 
(ii) Draft Report on Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Ninth Report  
(18th Lok Sabha) on “Demands for Grants (2025 -26)” relating to the Ministry of 
Electronics and Information Technology. 
(iii) XXXXXX……. XXXXXX……. XXXXXX……. XXXXXX……. XXXXXX……. XXXX. 
(iv) XXXXXX……. XXXXXX……. XXXXXX……. XXXXXX……. XXXXXX……. XXXX. 
(v) XXXXXX……. XXXXXX……. XXXXXX……. XXXXXX……. XXXXXX……. XXXX. 
4. The Committee adopted the Reports without modifications. 
 
5. The Committee authorized the Chairperson to finalize the draft Reports and present 
the same to the House during the current Session of Parliament. 
 
 
 
 
The Committee, then, adjourned. 
 
**** 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
______________________________________________________________________ 
XXXX- Matter not related to this Report. 
 
 
 

 
33 
 
ANNEXURE II  
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THEIR 
NINTH REPORT 
(EIGHTEENTH  LOK SABHA) 
[Vide Paragraph No. 5 of Introduction]  
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government:–  
Recommendation S.l No. 1,3,4,5,8,10,11 and 12   
 
08 
 Percentage of total: 66.67% 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the replies of the Government:– 
Recommendation Sl. No.: NIL 
 
NIL 
 Percentage of total: 0% 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and require 
reiteration:–  
Recommendation Sl. Nos.: NIL 
 
  00 
 Percentage of total: 0% 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the  replies of the 
Government are of interim in nature:– 
Recommendation Sl. Nos.: 2,6,7 and 9. 
 
04 
 Percentage of total: 33.33% 
 
 