 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON COMMUNICATIONS  
AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY  
(2025-26) 
 
 
EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
MINISTRY OF COMMUNICATIONS 
   (DEPARTMENT OF POSTS) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the 
Committee contained in their Twentieth Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha)  
on ‘Real Estate Management in the Department of Posts’] 
 
 
TWENTY-NINTH REPORT 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
 
 
 
August, 2026/ Sravana, 1948 (Saka) 
 
 
29 
 


 
 
TWENTY-NINTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
COMMUNICATIONS AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(2025-26) 
 
 
EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
MINISTRY OF COMMUNICATIONS 
 (DEPARTMENT OF POSTS) 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the 
Committee contained in their Twentieth Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha)  
on ‘Real Estate Management in the Department of Posts’] 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on           06.08.2026 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on             06.08.2026 
 
 
 
                    LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
                   NEW DELHI 
              
    August, 2026/ Sravana, 1948 (Saka) 
 


 
 
CCIT No. 441  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
©2025 By Lok Sabha Secretariat 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok 
Sabha (Seventeenth Edition) and Printed by Lok Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi-110001 
 
 

 
 
CONTENTS 
 PAGE  
COMPOSITION OF THE 
COMMITTEE.................................................................................................. 
 
INTRODUCTION........................................................................................................................
............ 
 
CHAPTER I Report………………………………………………………………………..........
........... 
 
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government……………………………………………………………………....
...........  
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the replies of the 
Government………………………………..........................  
CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and require 
reiteration ………….........  
CHAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government are of interim in 
nature….........................................................................................  
 ANNEXURES  
I. *Minutes of the 15th Sitting of the Committee held on   
03.08.2026............................ 
 
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in their Twentieth Report ( Eighteenth Lok 
Sabha). 
* Not appended 
  
 
 
 

 
 
 Composition of the Standing Committee on Communications and  
Information Technology (2025-26) 
 
Dr. Nishikant Dubey - Chairperson 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri C.N. Annadurai 
3. Shri Anil Baluni 
4. Dr. Rabindra Narayan Behera 
5. Shri Anup Sanjay Dhotre 
6. Shri Gurmeet Singh Meet Hayer 
7. Shri Sanjay Haribhau Jadhav 
8. Shri S. Supongmeren Jamir 
9. Shri Appalanaidu Kalisetti 
10. Smt. Poonamben Hematbhai Maadam 
11. Shri G. Kumar Naik 
12. Shri Shafi Parambil 
13. Dr. M.K. Vishnu Prasad 
14. Ms. Kangna Ranaut 
15. Shri Radheshyam Rathiya 
16. Shri Ramasahayam Raghuram Reddy 
17. Shri Arun Kumar Sagar 
18. Shri Devesh Shakya 
19. Shri Vishnu Datt Sharma 
20. Shri Rajesh Verma 
21. Vacant 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
22. Shri Sanjay Bhatia@ 
23. Shri Rajeev Kumar@ 
24. Shri Christopher Manickam@  
25. Shri Amar Pal Maurya 
26. Shri Rajneesh Kumar Agrawal$ 
27. Shri Kanad Purkayastha 
28. Shri S. Niranjan Reddy 
29. Shri Kartikeya Sharma 
30. Shri Lahar Singh Siroya  
31. Shri Bhashyam Rama Krishna$ 
Secretariat 
1.  Shri Harish Chandra Bist — Joint Secretary 
2.  Smt. A. Jyothirmayi  — Director 
3.  Shri Salil Saroj               —            Under Secretary 
____________________________________________ 
Committee constituted w.e.f. 26 th September, 2025 vide Para No.3282 of Bulletin Part -II dated                  
1st October, 2025. 
@ Shri Sanjay Bhatia, Shri Rajeev Kumar and Shri  Christopher Manickam nominated to the Committee, 
w.e.f. 3rd June, 2026 vide Para No. 5267 of Bulletin Part-II dated 4th June, 2026. 
$ Shri Rajneesh Kumar Agrawal and Shri Bhashyam Rama Krishna nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 
23rd July, 2026 vide Para No. 5724 of Bulletin Part-II dated 24th July, 2026. 
 
 

 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Communications and Information 
Technology (2025-26), having been authorized by the Committee, present this Twenty-
ninth Report on Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Twentieth Report 
(Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on the subject ‘Real Estate Management in the Department of 
Posts’ relating to the Department of Posts (Ministry of Communications). 
2.  The Twentieth Report was presented to Lok Sabha /laid in Rajya Sabha on 19 th 
August, 2025 . The Department of Posts (Ministry of Communications)  furnished their 
Action Taken Notes on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the Twentieth 
Report on 17th April, 2026. 
3.  The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their Sitting held 
on 03.08.2026. 
4.  For facility of reference and convenience, Observations/Recommendations of 
the Committee have been printed in bold in Chapter-I of the Report.  
5.  An analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Twentieth Report of the Committee is 
given at Annexure-II. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     NEW DELHI; DR. NISHIKANT DUBEY, 
    05 August, 2026  Chairperson, 
14 Sravana, 1948 (Saka) Standing Committee on  
Communications and Information Technology. 

1 
 
CHAPTER I 
REPORT 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Communications and Information 
Technology (2025-26) deals with the action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Twentieth Report 
(Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on the Subject ‘Real Estate Management in the Department of 
Posts’ relating to the Department of Posts (Ministry of Communications). 
 
2. The Twentieth Report was presented to Lok  Sabha and laid in Rajya Sabha on 
19th August, 2025. It contained 1 7 Observations/Recommendations. Action Taken 
Notes in respect of all the Observations/Recommendations, as contained in this Report, 
have been received from the Department of Posts and are categorized as under:- 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by 
the Government 
 
Rec. Sl. Nos.:– 1, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 16 and 17 
 
  Total – 13 
Chapter-II 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the replies of the Government 
 
 
Rec. Sl. No.:– NIL 
 
  Total — NIL  
Chapter-III 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of 
the Government have not been accepted by the Committee 
and require reiteration 
 
Rec. Sl. No.:– 2, 9 and 15 
 
  Total – 03 
Chapter-IV 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of 
the Government are interim in nature  
 
Rec. Sl. No.:– 3 
 
  Total – 01 
Chapter-V 
 
3. The Committee trust that utmost importance would be given to 
implementation of the Observations/Recommendations accepted by the 
Government. The Committee also desire that Action Taken Notes on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in Chapter -I of this Report and final 
action taken replies to the Observations/Recommendations contained in                         
Chapter-V of this Report be furnished at the earliest. 

2 
 
 
4. The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government on some 
of the important Recommendations. 
 
CONSTRUCTION OF NEW POSTAL BUILDINGS 
 
(Recommendation No. 2) 
5. The Committee, in Recommendation No.2 in their Twentieth Report, had 
recommended as under:- 
“The Committee note that new buildings have been constructed for Post Offices 
and staff quarters by Department of Posts and it has enabled shifting of post offices 
from rented buildings to Departmental buildings with user friendly amenities. The 
Committee understand that Estates Division monitors the progress of building projects 
at Postal Directorate / Postal Circle level with quarterly review meetings. Building Co -
ordination meetings are also held in each of the Circles to monitor its progress. The 
Department has informed that approximately Rs. 198 crores were spent on construction 
of new buildings from Financial Years 2021 -22 to 2024 -25 and against a set target of 
120 a total of 192 postal buildings were constructed during that period. 
The Committee further observe that according to the Circle -wise data provided 
by the Department of Posts, from Financial Years 2020 -21 to 2024 -25, a total of 223 
Postal buildings were constructed by the Department with the maximum number of 
constructions being 40 in the Circle of Gujarat followed by 20 each in the Circles of 
Assam and Uttar Pradesh; and the third highest number of Postal buildings was 18 
constructed in the Circle of Karnataka. However, in the same duration, no constructions 
were done within the Circle of Haryana and only 1 building each was constructed in 
Punjab and Uttarakhand Circles, respectively. 
Acknowledging the accomplishment of targets related to overall construction of 
new Postal buildings across the Country, the Committee, however, note with concern 
that the Circle -wise data shows significant inequalities among Postal Circles in the 
number of new buildings constructed. The Committee recommend that the Department, 
with the help of the Estates Division, undertake a detailed examination of ground 
realities and create a Circle -wise data regarding requirement of Postal buildings within 
individual Postal Circles along with a timeline and required budgetary support for 
achieving the same. It will ensure that benefits under this Scheme are distributed 
equitably as per requirement and not cornered by bigger Postal Circles in the Country.  
The Committee desire to be apprised of the action taken and progress made in this 
regard within six months of laying of this Report in Parliament.” 
 
6. In its Action Taken Reply, the Department of Posts submitted as under:– 
i. “The Department is regularly reviewing process towards  achieving targets for 
construction of new postal buildings across the country.  

3 
 
ii. The Department has prepared a Memorandum for Expenditure Finance 
Committee under “Estates Management”, for the next 5 years (FY 2026-27 to 
2030-31) which will provide budgetary support for construction of new and postal 
buildings along with providing other facilities  subject to the approval of fund by 
the Ministry of Finance through EFC Memo. 
iii. It will also ensure that benefits under this scheme are distributed equitably as per 
requirement.” 
 
7. The Committee in their Report, while stressing the need for equitable 
facilities in the construction of new postal buildings under the scheme across 
Postal Circles had recommended the Department to undertake a detailed 
examination of ground realities and to create a Circle -wise data regarding 
requirement of Postal buildings within individual Postal Circles. In order to 
ensure that benefits under this Scheme are distributed equitably as per 
requirement and not restricted to bigger Postal Circles in the Country, the 
Committee had also urged the Department to fix a timeline and ascertain required 
budgetary support for achieving the goal for construction of new postal building 
across the Country. 
In its Action Taken Reply, the Department has informed that it is regularly 
reviewing process towards achieving targets for construction of new postal 
buildings across the Country and working towards ensuring that benefits under 
this scheme are distributed equitably as per requirement. The Department has 
also informed about seeking budgetary support through an Expenditure Finance 
Committee (EFC) Memorandum submitted for approval of the Ministry of Finance. 
While observing the actions taken by the Department, the Committee note that 
the Department is yet to furnish details regarding Circle-wise data for requirement 
of Postal buildings within individual Postal Circles. The Committee, therefore, 
reiterate their recommendation that the Department, with the help of its Estates 
Division, undertake a detailed examination of ground realities and create a Circle -
wise data regarding requirement of Postal buildings within individual Postal 
Circles along with a timeline and required budgetary support for achieving the 
same. The Committee would like to be apprised of the steps taken and progress 
made in this regard. 
  

4 
 
WELFARE COMPONENTS IN BUILDING DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION – 
OBLIGATION TOWARDS SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT 
 
Sugamya Bharat Abhiyan – Installation of Braille Signages and Ramps & Rails 
(Recommendation No. 8) 
8. The Committee, in Recommendation No.8 in their Twentieth Report, had 
recommended as under:- 
“The Committee observe that under the welfare component of Sugamya  Bharat 
Abhiyan, the Department is focusing on promoting inclusivity and making postal 
infrastructure more accessible for differently -abled and elderly customers by installing 
facilities such as ramps, rails, low height lifts and Braille Signages as envisaged under 
the Rights of Persons with Disabilities Act, 2016. The Committee have been apprised by 
the Department that up to FY 2024 -25, Braille Signages have been provided in 1256 
Post Offices and Ramps & rails have been retrofitted in 1617 post offices. 
The Department informed that in order to promote inclusivity in terms of facilities 
in Post Offices for the differently -abled, construction of rail and ramps are mandatory for 
all new buildings. Old as well as new buildings are being retrofitted with such facilities 
and Braille signages are being installed. While noting the efforts made by the 
Department of Posts in improving consumer friendly accessibility of Postal buildings and 
promoting inclusivity through modified infrastructure, the Committee urge upon the 
Department to fix a timeframe within which these objectives are aimed to be achieved. 
They may work out the additional budgetary requirements for construction of the above 
facilities particularly in old and in rented Postal buildings. The Committee would like to be 
apprised of the details related to budgetary allocations, Physical targets set and 
achieved and also other steps being taken towards fulfilling the said objectives under 
Sugamya Bharat Abhiyan.” 
9. In its Action Taken Reply, the Department of Posts submitted as under:– 
i. “The proposed investment plan aligns with and compliments several national 
priorities and schemes and promotes inclusivity and fulfils the objective of 
Sugamya Bharat Abhiyan. 
ii. The details of Budgetary allocation in last few years is as under: 
(Rs in crore) 
S. No. Activity 2023-24 2024-25 2025-26 
1 Rail and Ramps 1.18 1.35 1.22 
2 Braille Signages 0.51 0.5 0.52 
 
iii. The Physical targets set for installation of Rail and Ramps and Braille Signages 
during FY 2023-24 to FY 2024-25 are as under: 
Activity 
2023-24 2024-25 
Targets set Achieved Targets set Achieved 
Installation of Rail 
and Ramps 60 79 60 79 
Installation of 522 657 522 607 

5 
 
Braille 
iv. Fund requirements for construction of rail and ramps , braille signages for 
persons with disabilities and senior citizens are projected in the Expenditure 
Finance Committee Memorandum for the next 5 years (FY 2026 -27 to 2030 -31) 
for the Estates Management scheme.   
v. Existing buildings are being retrofitted with such facilities and Braille signages are 
being installed for persons with disabilities and senior citizens.  This will ensure 
greater inclusivity in terms of access to existing Post Offices. Construction of rail 
and ramps are mandatory for all new buildings.  
vi. Fulfilment of these obligations will depend on the receipt of funds under the 
scheme.” 
 
10. While taking note of the efforts made by the Department under the welfare 
component of Sugamya Bharat Abhiyan for improving accessibility of Postal 
buildings and promoting inclusivity through modified infrastructure, the 
Committee had urged upon the Department to fix a timeframe within which these 
objectives are aimed to be achieved and  workout additional budgetary 
requirements for achieving the objectives related to the construction of Braille 
Signages, rails and ramps particularly in old as well as rented Postal buildings. 
In its Action Taken Reply, the Department has stated that the proposed  
investment plan aligns with and compliments several national priorities and 
schemes and promotes inclusivity and fulfills the objective of Sugamya Bharat 
Abhiyan. The Department in its reply has also furnished details regarding 
budgetary allocations in last few financial years and achievement of physical 
targets related to installation of Rails, Ramps and Braille Signages under the 
Sugamya Bharat Abhiyan. The Committee note that for ‘Installation of Rail and 
Ramps’ during the financial years 2023 -24 and 2024 -25, the Department has 
achieved a physical target of 79 for both the years as against set target of 60 for 
both the years. 
As regards the physical targets set for ‘Installation of Braille Signages’ 
during the financial year 2023-24, the Department could achieve 657 against set 
target of 522 and during the financial year 2024-25, it could achieve 607 as against 
set target of 522. It has also been stated in the reply that the fund requirements 
for these facilities are projected in the Expenditure Finance Committee 
Memorandum for the next 5 years (FY 2026 -27 to 2030 -31) for the Estates 
Management Scheme. While construction of rail and ramps are mandatory for all 
new buildings, existing buildings are being retrofitted with these facilities as well 
as braille signages and the fulfillment of these obligations would depend on 

6 
 
receipt of funds under the Scheme. 
While appreciating the steps being taken to improve accessibility of Postal 
infrastructure under the Sugamya  Bharat Abhiyan, the Committee desire to be 
apprised of the updated status of buildings retrofitted with these facilities so far. 
 
WELFARE COMPONENTS IN BUILDING DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION – 
OBLIGATION TOWARDS SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT 
 
Addressing Gender concerns in Postal Offices and new building constructions 
(Recommendation No. 9) 
11. The Committee, in Recommendation No.9 in their Twentieth Report, had 
recommended as under:- 
“The Committee observe that keeping in view a large number of female 
employees in the Department of Posts, there is a need to address gender -sensitive 
concerns and provide appropriate facilities such as separate ladies’ toilets, feeding 
rooms for lactating mothers and crèches in existing as well as new Postal buildings. 
Further, during the Sitting, when information was sought about setting a timeline for total 
coverage of gender sensitive infrastructure in Postal Buildings, the Department of Posts 
apprised the Committee that these were priority areas and should be possible within the 
normal five-year plan period. 
The Committee note that whereas data for the total coverage of ladies’ toilets 
and feeding rooms in Departmental buildings was provided by the Department, no data 
was furnished regarding the number of crèches presently functional or those being 
proposed to be built in Departmental buildings in future. Circle -wise data regarding 
gender-sensitive infrastructure in Postal buildings, as provided by the Department, 
shows that as on 31st March, 2025, the Circle of Rajasthan had a total of 206 buildings 
where not even a single separate ladies’ toilet was available. Similarly, 183 buildings in 
the Circle of Bihar and 156 buildings in the Circle of Gujarat remained devoid of the 
facility of separate ladies’ toilets. Further, in the Jammu Kashmir and North East Circles, 
the provision of separate ladies’ toilets was available only in 8 buildings respectively. 
The Committee are disheartened to note that within the Circles of Punjab, 
Haryana and Karnataka there were absolutely no Postal buildings where feeding rooms 
were available for the use of lactating mothers among employees and customers alike.  
Furthermore, as on 31st March, 2025, there exist a total number of 1,804 Postal 
buildings across Circles with no facility for separate ladies’ toilets and a total number of 
2,368 buildings country -wide across Circles where there are no provisions for feeding 
rooms for lactating mothers. Dismayed with the present precarious status of gender -
sensitive infrastructure in Postal buildings across the Country, the Committee 
recommend the Department to draw up accurate data showing latest Circle -wise 

7 
 
position of gender -sensitive infrastructure in Postal buildings including ladies’ toilets, 
feeding rooms and crèches while also ascertaining the budgetary support required for 
setting up the same. The Department may also provide a timeline to bridge the gap 
between demand and availability of gender -sensitive Postal infrastructure in all Postal 
buildings of the Country. The Committee would like to be apprised of the details of 
action taken and progress made in this regard.” 
12. In its Action Taken Reply, the Department of Posts submitted as under:– 
“(a) The details showing latest Circle -wise position of gender -sensitive 
infrastructure in Postal buildings including ladies’ toilets, feeding rooms and 
crèches are as under: 
(i)        Details of ladies’ toilets and feeding rooms (as on 31.03.2025)  
S. 
No. Circle 
No of 
buildings 
where 
ladies’ 
toilets are 
required 
No of 
buildings 
where 
ladies’ 
toilets are 
available 
No of 
buildings 
where 
ladies’ 
toilets are 
not available 
No of 
buildings 
where 
feeding 
rooms are 
required 
No of 
buildings 
where 
Feeding 
rooms are 
available 
No of 
buildings 
where 
Feeding 
rooms are 
not available 
I II III IV V VI VII VIII 
1 Andhra Pradesh 164 124 40 105 2 103 
2 Assam 200 61 139 19 2 17 
3 Bihar 226 43 183 174 6 168 
4 Chhattisgarh 48 35 13 48 2 46 
5 Delhi 132 61 71 100 6 94 
6 Gujarat 361 205 156 144 1 143 
7 Haryana 79 60 19 37 0 37 
8 Himachal 
Pradesh 69 46 23 52 1 51 
9 Jammu & 
Kashmir 37 8 29 37 3 34 
10 Jharkhand 75 29 46 75 1 74 
11 Karnataka 296 191 105 42 16 26 
12 Kerala 255 181 74 110 2 108 
13 Madhya Pradesh 200 135 65 191 3 188 
14 Maharashtra 335 239 96 106 7 99 
15 North East 86 8 78 87 2 85 
16 Odisha 182 132 50 98 11 87 
17 Punjab 175 130 45 80 0 80 
18 Rajasthan 320 114 206 57 4 53 
19 Tamil Nadu 243 184 59 226 11 215 
20 Telangana 154 97 57 64 3 61 
21 Uttar Pradesh 298 159 139 218 2 216 
22 Uttarakhand 54 38 16 44 1 43 
23 West Bengal 176 62 114 151 4 147 

8 
 
  Total 4165 2342 1823 2265 90 2175 
(ii) Details of Creches presently functional (as on 31.03.2025) 
S. No. Name of Circle. 
No of Creches presently 
functional as on 
31.03.2025 
Proposed to be built in 
Departmental buildings in 
future 
1 Andhra Pradesh 0 0 
2 Assam 0 0 
3 Bihar 0 1 
4 Chhattisgarh 0 0 
5 Delhi 0 1 
6 Gujarat 3 1 
7 Haryana 0 0 
8 Himachal Pradesh 1 1 
9 Jammu & Kashmir 0 0 
10 Jharkhand 0 0 
11 Karnataka 2 0 
12 Kerala 0 0 
13 Madhya Pradesh 0 0 
14 Maharashtra 1 1 
15 North-East 0 0 
16 Odisha 0 0 
17 Punjab 0 0 
18 Rajasthan 0 0 
19 Tamil Nadu 1 1 
20 Telangana 1 0 
21 Uttar Pradesh 1 2 
22 Uttarakhand 0 5 
23 West Bengal 1 0 
Total 11 13 
 
(b) Fund requirements for addressing gender concerns are projected in the 
Expenditure Finance Committee Memorandum for the next 5 years (FY 2026 -27 
to 2030-31) for the Estates Management scheme.  Budgetary support will aid in 
bridging the gap between demand and availability of gender -sensitive 
infrastructure in all Postal buildings. 
(c)  Fulfilment of these obligations will depend on the receipt of funds under the 
scheme.” 
 
13. While taking note of the precarious status of gender -sensitive 
infrastructure existing in Postal buildings across the Country as on 31st March, 
2025, the Committee had urged the Department to provide the accurate data 
showing latest Circle -wise position of gender -sensitive infrastructure in Postal 
buildings including ladies’ toilets, feeding rooms and crèches while also 

9 
 
ascertaining the budgetary support required for setting up the same. The 
Committee had also desired to be apprised of the timeline s fixed by the 
Department to bridge the gap between demand and availability of gender -
sensitive Postal infrastructure in all Postal buildings of the Country. 
In its Action Taken Reply, although the Department has supplied data 
regarding availability of gender -sensitive infrastructure including ladies ’ toilets, 
feeding rooms and crèches as on 31.03.2025, the Department could have  
furnished the data till 31.03.2026 . Further, regarding budgetary support, the 
Department has replied that fund requirements for addressing gender concerns 
are projected in the Expenditure Finance Committee Memorandum for the next 5 
years (FY 2026-27 to 2030-31) for the Estates Management scheme and fulfillment 
of these obligations will depend on the receipt of funds under the scheme. 
In view of the Action Taken Reply  indicating that the latest position regarding 
availability of gender -sensitive infrastructure is yet to be furnished by the 
Department, the Committee reiterate their earlier recommendation that data 
showing latest Circle -wise position of gender -sensitive infrastructure in Postal 
buildings including ladies’ toilets, feeding rooms and crèches may be furnished 
along with details of the timelines fixed in order to bridge the gap between 
demand and availability of gender -sensitive Postal infrastructure in all Postal 
buildings across the Country. The Committee may be apprised of the latest 
position in this regard. The Committee desire that the Department may vigorously 
pursue their demand for budgetary support with the Expenditure Finance 
Committee so that the gender sensitive concerns can be addressed at the 
earliest. 
 
TOTAL ASSET BASE OF THE DEPARTMENT OF POSTS & MONETIZATION OF 
ASSETS 
(Recommendation No. 10) 
14. The Committee, in  Recommendation No. 10 in their Twentieth  Report, had 
recommended as under:- 
“The Committee understand that the total asset base of the Department stands at 
120.9 lakh square meters which amounts to about 0.57% of the assets held by the 
Railways and consists of 1,460 vacant plots amounting to 22 lakh square meters. The 
Committee also note that according to the Circle-wise data of Postal assets furnished by 
the Department, the Circle of Maharashtra stands with the highest amount of asset base 

10 
 
of 12.85 lakh sq. meters followed by Karnataka at 12.79 lakh sq. meters and Gujarat 
with 11.37 lakh sq. meters. The Department of Posts has apprised the Committee that, 
so far, no exercise has been carried out for determining the market capitalization of 
Postal assets across the Country. So far as valuation and disposal of obsolete/old and 
dilapidated buildings and non -performing postal estates/buildings are concerned, the 
Department stated that Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs) are being followed 
wherein when a building is proposed to be dismantled, a survey report is prepared and 
submitted for approval of the Competent Authority. Upon the sanction of such a survey 
report, a reserve price is determined and approved followed by an online invitation of 
bids through an open tender where the best offered bid is accepted by the Competent 
Authority as per provisions of Delegation of Financial Power. 
 Considering the total asset base held by the Department of Posts having huge 
potential for monetisation, the Committee are disappointed to note that so far, no 
exercise has been carried out for determining the market capitalization potential of 
Postal assets across the Country. Similarly, no information has been furnished about 
initiation of any exercise for valuation and disposal of obsolete/old and dilapidated 
buildings/materials and non -performing postal estates/buildings. The Committee, 
therefore, earnestly recommend the Department to take up focused and time bound 
exercise for determining market capitalization of Postal assets; and for valuation of 
obsolete and non -performing Postal estates/materials across the Country. In this 
regard, the Department may also explore the feasibility of seeking the help of experts in 
the field for an efficient, time bound and scientific market -based assessment of Postal 
assets and evolve an effective monetisation strategy. The Committee would like to be 
apprised of the time frame defined for the exercise along with the details of action taken 
and outcome achieved in this regard.” 
15. In its Action Taken Reply, the Department of Posts submitted as under:– 
“i. Department of Posts is currently in the process of finalizing the 
monetization policy approved by Postal Services Board. Concurrently, comments 
of the other stakeholders are also being collated. In addition, Department is in the 
process of generating revenue through certain initiatives. 
ii. Department has signed an MOU with NBCC, a PSU under Ministry of 
Housing and Urban Affairs (MoHUA), for conducting feasibility studies before 
undertaking development/ redevelopment for the use of the Department and for 
commercial utilization.  
iii. The Department has identified 40 post offices under PoC (proof of 
concept). These Post Offices will be developed as per Unified Design and 
Branding transformation based on School of Planning and Architecture SPA 
recommendations, ensuring improved navigation and enhanced service 
experience for the customers. Further, the design manual recommended by SPA 
has been circulated to Circles for all upcoming projects. Development of 27 Post 
Offices as per new Design Manual are anticipated to be completed by April, 2026 
and remaining 13 by June, 2026.  
iv. The Department is also working on revenue generation based on 
utilization of Floor Area Ration as a Proof of concept and creation of co -working 
space. 
v. Further, Department has identified about 200 properties for monetization 

11 
 
during next year. The Monetization will be carried out through three steps 
process, i.e. Legal Due Diligence, Land Valuation and Transaction Adviser. The 
process is underway.  
vi. The valuation and disposal of obsolete/old and dilapidated buildings and 
non-performing assets is done based upon the Standard Operating Procedures 
(SOPs) laid down in CPWD works manual.” 
 
16. The Committee in their Report while considering the total asset base held 
by the Department of Posts having huge potential for monetization, noted that no 
exercise was carried out for determining the market capitalization potential of 
Postal Assets across the Country. The Committee while also noting that no 
information was furnished about the initiation of exercise for valuation and 
disposal of obsolete/ old and dilapidated buildings/materials and non -performing 
postal estates/buildings,  had recommended the Department to take up focused 
and time bound exercise for determining  the market capitalization of Postal 
assets  and   to explore the feasibility of seeking the help of experts in  the field 
for an efficient, time bound and scientific market -based assessment of Postal 
assets and evolve an effective monetization strategy. 
In its Action Taken Reply, the Department has submitted that it is in the 
process of finalizing the monetization policy approved by the Postal Services 
Board and has also signed an MoU with NBCC for conducting feasibility studies 
before undertaking development/redevelopment for the use of the Department 
and for commercial utilization. Further, the Department has stated that it has 
identified 40 post offices which will be developed as per Unified Design and 
Branding transformation based on recommendations of School of Planning and 
Architecture to ensure improved navigation and enhanced service experience for 
the customers. It is also stated that the Department hope to complete 27 Projects 
by April, 2026 and remaining 13 by June, 2026. The Department has also stated 
that it is also working on revenue generation based on utilizing Floor Area Ratio 
(FAR) as a Proof of concept and creation of co -working space. The Department 
has further apprised of having identified 200 properties for monetization during 
the next year for which the process is underway. It has also been stated that 
valuation and disposal of obsolete/old and dilapidated buildings and non -
performing assets is done on the basis of Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs) 
laid down in the CPWD Works Manual.  
The Committee while taking note of the Action Taken Reply submitted by 
the Department, desire to be kept apprised of the outcome of the exercise being 

12 
 
carried out in determining the market capitalization potential of Postal Assets 
across the Country. The Committee may also be enlightened about the progress 
made after the MoU signed with NBCC for development/ redevelopment of postal 
assets. The Committee would also like to be communicated about the outcome of 
the efforts made by the Department for revenue generation and also regarding 
monetization of the identified properties.  
TOTAL ASSET BASE OF THE DEPARTMENT OF POSTS & MONETIZATION OF 
ASSETS 
(Recommendation No. 11) 
17. The Committee, in  Recommendation no. 11 in their Twentieth  Report, had 
recommended as under:- 
“The Committee observe that so as to ensure record -keeping and management 
of land records for monetization of assets, the Department has undertaken an exercise 
to obtain mutation records of postal estates and to assess the Floor Area Ratio (FAR). 
In order, to achieve financial viability through monetization of postal assets an 
‘Expression of Interest’ (EOI) had been submitted in February, 2025, for hiring 
consultants to develop a monetization strategy for maximizing revenue potential through 
development / redevelopment of real estate postal assets. However, this EOI had failed 
due to inability of applicants to meet prescribed criteria and hence a Revised 
Expression of Interest (REOI) was floated by the Department in April, 2025 calling for 
interested participants to submit their EOI till 26th May, 2025. The Committee may be 
apprised of the outcome in this regard. 
Further, the Committee note that while an exercise for obtaining mutation records 
for postal estates and assessing Floor Area Ratios (FAR) for the purpose of 
monetization has been undertaken, no timeframe has been set for conclusion of the 
same. The Committee firmly believe that monetization of real estate postal assets is one 
of the most effective approaches towards solving the long -standing financial distress 
being faced by the Department of Posts. Therefore, while considering the efforts of the 
Department of Posts in the direction of hiring professional consultants for developing a 
monetization strategy to maximize revenue potential of real estate postal assets, the 
Committee recommend the Department to conduct a focused and time bound exercise 
for obtaining mutation records for postal estates, as early as possible, from respective 
authorities while also assessing Floor Area Ratios (FAR) for the purpose of 
monetization. The Committee would like to be apprised of the time frame defined and 
action taken in this regard. The final outcome about development of a monetization 
strategy by the Department of Posts for boosting its revenue generation to minimize the 
income and expenditure gap may be furnished at the earliest.” 
 
18. In its Action Taken Reply, the Department of Posts submitted as under:– 
“i. Department of Posts is currently in the process of finalizing the 
monetization policy approved by Postal Services Board. Concurrently, comments 

13 
 
of the other stakeholders are also being collated. In addition, Department is in the 
process of generating revenue through certain initiatives. 
ii. Department has signed an MOU with NBCC, a PSU under Ministry of 
Housing and Urban Affairs (MoHUA), for conducting feasibility studies before 
undertaking development/ redevelopment for the use of the Department and for 
commercial utilization.  
iii. The Department has identified 40 post offices under PoC (proof of 
concept). These Post Offices will be developed as per Unified Design and 
Branding transformation based on School of Planning and Architecture SPA 
recommendations, ensuring improved navigation and enhanced service 
experience for the customers. Further, the design manual recommended by SPA 
has been circulated to Circles for all upcoming projects. Development of these 40 
Post Offices as per the new Design Manual are anticipated to be completed by 
June, 2026.  
iv. The Department is also working on revenue generation based on 
utilization of Floor Area Ration as a Proof of concept and creation of co -working 
space. 
v. Further, Department has identified about 200 properties for monetization 
during next year. The Monetization will be carried out through three steps 
process, i.e. Legal Due Diligence, Land Valuation and Transaction Adviser. The 
process is underway.” 
 
19. The Committee in the Report, while acknowledging the efforts of the 
Department of Posts in hiring professional consultants for developing a 
monetization strategy had recommended that a focused and time bound exercise 
be conducted for obtaining mutation of records for postal estates from respective 
authorities while also assessing Floor Area Ratios (FAR) and  had sought to know 
the final outcome about development of a monetization strategy by the 
Department of Posts for boosting its revenue generation to minimize the income 
and expenditure gap.  
In its Action Taken Reply, the Department has submitted that it is in the 
process of finalizing the monetization policy approved by the Postal Services 
Board and has also signed an MoU with NBCC for conducting feasibility studies 
before undertaking development/redevelopment for the use of the Department 
and for commercial utilization. Further, the Department has informed that work 
related to development of 40 post offices as per new Design Manual is expected 
to be completed by June, 2026. It has also been stated that the Department is also 
working on revenue generation based on utilizing Floor Area Ratio as a Proof of 
concept and creation of co-working space.  
While noting the efforts made by the Department with respect to 
development of monetization strategy, the Committee wish to be apprised of the 

14 
 
time frame for obtaining mutation of records for Postal Estates while also 
assessing Floor Area Ratios (FAR) and also wish to be enlightened about  the 
progress made in the development of monetization strategy.  
VACANT PLOTS OF LAND, POSTAL BUILDINGS AND ISSUES RELATED TO 
THEIR PROTECTION AND ENCROACHMENT 
 
(Recommendation No. 13) 
20. The Committee, in Recommendation no. 13 in their Twentieth Report, had 
recommended as under:- 
“The Committee observe that presently, out of the total number of 1,460 vacant 
plots of Postal land, 209 plots hold land area of a considerable size which is more than 
2000 sq. meters. Further, presently the total number of encroached vacant land and 
buildings of the Department of Posts stands at 278, of which, dispute is sub -judice in 82 
cases which are managed by hired lawyers and through participation in Lok Adalats. 
Regarding proactive measures taken to check illegal encroachments and unauthorized 
use of postal land/estates, the Department of Posts informed that apart from 
constructing boundary walls on vacant lands, it approaches concerned revenue 
authorities, public representatives and local administration while also resorting to judicial 
remedies available for eviction of encroachment. The Department also submitted that 
illegal encroachment is checked by Estate Officers nominated in each Postal Circle to 
deal with cases related to unauthorized occupation of departmental lands and buildings. 
While replying about the role of local administration in mitigating conflicts arising out of 
illegal encroachments, the Department has informed that the local administration is the 
custodian of land records and ensures proper land monitoring including maintaining 
accurate and accessible land records while also working as a law enforcing agency. 
Local bodies facilitate dispute resolution through mediation and community engagement 
and their intervention is sought for removing illegal encroachments. 
The Committee also note that in order to prevent encroachments on vacant 
lands, the Department has been constructing boundary walls and postal buildings in a 
phased manner on its vacant plots thereby reducing expenditure on rent. Further, during 
the Sitting, the Committee were apprised of innovative ways being adopted by the 
Department to curtail encroachments which included collaborating with State 
Governments to invite for constructive usage of vacant plots. The Department also 
informed that mapping of vacant plots was being contemplated to ascertain viability of 
plots and vacant plots were being considered for letting out to respective State 
Governments for undertaking activities such as rearing nurseries or horticultural 
produce, temporary constructions etc. The Committee note with concern that the 
Department failed to undertake mapping of its vacant plots as well as other plots during 
this digital era. 
Taking cognizance of the efforts made by the Department towards curbing and 
removing illegal encroachments on vacant plots of Postal lands, the Committee feel that 

15 
 
encroachments not only lead to excessive loss of limited valuable land resources but 
also obscure losses of potent revenue channels such as rented incomes. Therefore, 
taking a serious view of the situation, the Committee recommend the Department to 
prioritize checking and prevention of illegal encroachments of vacant plots with respect 
to their respective resolutions in terms of legal recourse; intervention from local 
representatives; mitigation through local administration and Police authorities; 
collaboration with State Governments for constructive usage of vacant lands; and cost 
effective construction of boundaries/barbed wire fencing and small buildings; and work 
towards targeted solutions to prevent encroachments on its vacant plots within a 
specified time span. Besides these, initiatives for creating public awareness, reviewing 
and updating property records ensuring accurate documentation and mapping of postal 
properties to prevent further encroachment may also be taken up with the concerned 
agency/Departments. The Committee desire to be apprised of the steps taken by the 
Department of Posts and outcomes achieved in this regard within six months of laying 
of this report in Parliament.” 
21. In its Action Taken Reply, the Department of Posts submitted as under:– 
i. “The Department acknowledges the suggestion of the committee to prioritize 
checking and prevention of illegal encroachments of vacant plots with respect to 
their respective resolutions in terms of legal recourse; intervention from local 
representatives; mitigation through local administration and Police authorities; 
collaboration with State Governments for constructive usage of vacant lands; and 
cost effective construction of boundaries/barbed wire fencing and small buildings; 
and work towards targeted solutions to prevent encroachments on its vacant 
plots within a specified time span. Besides these, action for creating public 
awareness, reviewing and updating property records ensuring accurate 
documentation and mapping of postal properties to prevent further encroachment 
is also being taken, in coordination with the concerned agency/Departments.  
ii. All Circles are taking practical and sustainable measures to safeguard vacant 
plots and postal buildings and to prevent encroachments, including legal action, 
coordination with local administration and police, intervention through local 
representatives, collaboration with State Governments for productive use of 
vacant land, and cost-effective boundary fencing or small constructions.  
iii. Efforts are also being made to create public awareness and to review and update 
property records through proper documentation and mapping, in coordination 
with concerned agencies, to prevent future encroachments. 
iv. The Circle wise Action taken and Outcome achieved in this regard is placed at 
Annexure III.” 
22. The Committee in their Report had recommended the Department to take 
necessary steps towards curbing and removing illegal encroachments on vacant 
plots of Postal lands and to ensure accurate documentation and mapping of 
postal properties to prevent further encroachment.  
In its Action Taken Reply, the Department has submitted that efforts are 
being made to create  public awareness and to review and update property 

16 
 
records through proper documentation and mapping, in coordination with 
concerned agencies , in order to prevent encroachments. The Department has 
also informed that all Postal Circles are taking practical and sustainable 
measures including legal action, coordination with local administration and 
police, intervention through local representatives, collaboration with State 
Governments for productive use of vacant land, and cost -effective boundary 
fencing or small constructions in order to safeguard vacant plots and postal 
buildings from illegal encroachments. The Department in its reply has also 
annexed circle-wise details of barbed wire/fencing and action taken by the Circle 
and outcome achieved according to the recommendation.  
The Committee w hile taking note of the efforts being made by the 
Department and progress made with respect to tackl ing cases of illegal 
encroachment and its prevention, note that matters related to illegal 
encroachment are still pending for final action in some Postal Circles. The 
Committee, therefore, desire to get  apprised of the  steps taken and final 
outcomes achieved in this regard. 
REVENUE GENERATION THROUGH COMMERCIAL UTILIZATION OF VACANT 
PLOTS OF LAND / BUILDINGS AND INCREASING ACCESSIBILITY OF POST 
OFFICES 
 
(Recommendation No. 14) 
23. The Committee, in Recommendation no. 14 in their Twentieth Report, had 
recommended as under:- 
“The Committee are given to understand that the Department is working on renting out 
extra space in its buildings for earning extra revenue and is in the process of hiring a 
Consultant to aid and advise for development/redevelopment of real estate assets for 
revenue generation through measures such as using postal buildings as well as vacant 
plots of land as co -working spaces for entrepreneurs etc. The Committee also note the 
plans of the Department about using vacant plots and vast real estate for public value 
creation in partnership with State Governments for building State Infrastructure like 
PHCs, Schools, Horticulture hubs, nurseries etc. The Department of Posts, however, 
have intimated that no proposal has been received in this regard from any State 
Government so far. During the Sitting, the Committee were apprised that the 
Department was in the process of signing an MoU (Memorandum of Understanding) 
with the National Buildings Construction Corporation (NBCC) under the Ministry of 
Housing and Urban Affairs (MoHUA) for the development of 22 vacant plots which have 
been found viable in Tier -I cities, and that a development plan for every individual plot 
would be shared. 

17 
 
 While responding to a question about revenue generation from renting out or 
leasing surplus postal land or buildings, the Department informed that a leasing and 
licensing policy to lease out surplus space to earn extra revenue has been implemented 
with the head of the Postal Circles being the competent authority for renting / leasing of 
surplus spaces. So far as the due process followed in this respect, the Department 
submitted that after examination and certification of an identified space as surplus by 
the Head of the Postal Division, an Internal Committee reviews and recommends 
whether the surplus space can be offered on a license basis while also proposing the 
minimum license fee based on prevailing market rates. Based on Internal Committee’s 
recommendation, final allotment of the surplus space is done through a transparent 
Open Tendering process. The Department further informed that revenue generation 
was also augmented by effective service delivery through prompt redressal of 
grievances and concerns. The Department has also submitted that out of Rs. 479 
crores allotted towards the Estates Management Scheme for the current Financial Year, 
it was left with only Rs. 123 crore which would be completely utilized during this 
Financial Year and thus the Department was in dire need of funds to carry out planned 
activities towards the objective of revenue generation. The Committee appreciate that 
the Department is striving towards revenue generation through steps such as partnering 
with State Governments for gainful utilization of vacant plots of land; attempts to hire 
consultants for advising on redevelopment of assets; developing viable vacant plots in 
Tier-I cities through partnering with the NBCC; and generating revenue through renting 
surplus spaces and qualitative service delivery. The Committee, however, feel that, the 
planning of the Department for augmenting revenue generation still remains at a 
nascent stage in paper only and hence a significant outcome / achievement is yet to be 
seen. Similarly, the Committee are surprised to note that the Department could not find 
consultants for advising on redevelopment of its assets. Therefore, the Committee 
would like to impress upon the Department to expedite processes through regular 
monitoring and follow up actions and set attainable goals with respect to each of these 
initiatives in the upcoming five -years of the Estates Management Scheme. The 
Committee also urge the Department to factor in these ideas in totality while drafting the 
PIB Memo for this Scheme for the next five years. The Committee would like to be 
apprised of the steps taken and progress made with respect to achievement of set 
targets in this regard. 
 The Committee observe that the monetization of the heritage buildings/properties 
of the Department of Posts is a grey area which requires immediate drastic attention 
and concern. The Heritage buildings of the Department hold a great potential for 
monetization through proper publicity and creating a better public visibility and 
awareness.  In order to generate revenue, the Department , while preserving the 
heritage buildings may also consider the feasibility of monetization of their heritage 
properties by initiating several cultural and merchandising activities like Digital 
Exhibitions, Guided tours, Light and Sound shows, promoting Films shootings and 
Photography shoots, leasing out heritage buildings for promoting and advertising 
various Government flagship programmes/schemes and for various socio -cultural  
events like holding philately exhibitions, art and crafts shows, paintings and music 
shows etc. Besides, the Committee urge upon the Department of Posts to make a 

18 
 
provision for a separate budgetary head for Heritage Maintenance and ensure sufficient 
fund allocation for the same. The Committee would like to be apprised of the action 
taken and progress made in this regard.” 
24. In its Action Taken Reply, the Department of Posts submitted as under:– 
“i. Department of Posts is currently in the process of finalizing the 
monetization policy approved by Postal Services Board. Concurrently, comments 
of the other stakeholders are also being collated. In addition, Department is in the 
process of generating revenue through certain initiatives. 
ii. Department has signed an MOU with NBCC, a PSU under Ministry of 
Housing and Urban Affairs (MoHUA), for conducting feasibility studies before 
undertaking development/ redevelopment for the use of the Department and for 
commercial utilization.  
iii. The Department has identified 40 post offices under PoC (proof of 
concept). These Post Offices will be developed as per Unified Design and 
Branding transformation based on School of Planning and Architecture SPA 
recommendations, ensuring improved navigation and enhanced service 
experience for the customers. Further, the design manual recommended by SPA 
has been circulated to Circles for all upcoming projects. Development of 40 Post 
Offices as per new Design Manual is anticipated to be completed by June, 2026.  
iv. The Department is also working on revenue generation based on 
utilization of Floor Area Ration as a Proof of concept and creation of co -working 
space. 
v. Further, Department has identified about 200 properties for monetization 
during next year. The Monetization will be carried out through three steps 
process, i.e. Legal Due Diligence, Land Valuation and Transaction Adviser. The 
process is underway.  
vi. The Department welcomes the suggestion of generating revenue through 
feasibility of monetization of their heritage properties by initiating several cultural 
and merchandising activities like Digital Exhibitions, Guided tours, Light and 
Sound shows, promoting Films shootings and Photography shoots, leasing out 
heritage buildings for promoting and advertising various Government flagship 
programmes/schemes and for various socio -cultural  events like holding philately 
exhibitions, art and crafts shows, painting and music shows etc.  
vii. A separate budgetary head for Heritage Maintenance and Restoration of 
Heritage buildings has been created and will be effective from next financial year 
i.e. 2026-27.” 
25. Regarding monetization of heritage postal buildings, the Committee had 
urged the Department to initiate various cultural and merchandising activities in 
the heritage buildings in order to generate revenue and also make a provision for 
a separate budgetary head for Heritage Maintenance and ensure sufficient fund 
allocation for the same. 
In its Action Taken Reply, the Department, while informing about various 

19 
 
steps being taken to generate revenue through monetization of heritage postal 
assets, also submitted that a separate budgetary head for Heritage Maintenance 
and Restoration of Heritage buildings has been created and will be effective from 
Financial Year 2026-27. 
The Committee understand that the Department of Posts have identified 
200 properties during FY 2026 -27 for enhanced service experience and for 
enhancing navigation. They are also obtaining comments from different 
stakeholders. While appreciating the efforts made by the Department with respect 
to preservation of heritage buildings and their monetization for earning revenue, 
the Committee desire to be updated about the budgetary allocations along with 
the details of expenditure planned therein for FY 2026-27. Further, list of identified 
properties, comments of stakeholders received, status of three steps process 
underway etc. may also be communicated to the Committee. The Committee 
would also like to be apprised of the updated status of 40 Post Offices as per new 
Design Manual which is scheduled to be completed by June, 2026. 
REVENUE GENERATION THROUGH COMMERCIAL UTILIZATION OF VACANT 
PLOTS OF LAND / BUILDINGS AND INCREASING ACCESSIBILITY OF POST 
OFFICES 
 
(Recommendation No. 15) 
26. The Committee, in Recommendation no. 15 in their Twentieth Report, had 
recommended as under:- 
“The Committee note that viability -based rationalization and relocation of Post Offices 
along with improving their accessibility for general public are important aspects to 
consider in view of augmenting revenue generation of the Department of Posts. The 
Department has apprised the Committee about work being done to increase Postal 
network in rural areas and a resultant addition of 11,000 offices, while also working 
towards improving the viability of the Postal network in urban areas through the process 
of rationalization which entails merging of Post Offices based on its viability. With 
respect to mandate for presence of Post Offices in rural areas, the Department of Posts 
informed that a rural Post Office is supposed to be present within 5 km distance from 
every village and that a Country -wide household survey is being conducted to assess 
the needs of citizens regarding Postal services. So far as problems being faced in 
relocating post offices are concerned, the Department informed about the difficulties in 
finding suitable buildings of the desired dimensions on the ground floor for running post 
offices and other postal offices at a fair rent. 
 Regarding steps taken to increase accessibility of post offices, the Department 
submitted that it is working towards increasing physical accessibility of post offices for 
the differently -abled and the elderly while also working towards increasing access in 

20 
 
terms of marketability through efforts such as improving service delivery, building 
infrastructure, visibility through signages and improved branding etc. The Committee 
are of the view that revenue generation of the Department can be boosted through 
measures such as rationalization and relocation aimed at improving viability of the 
Postal network and increasing accessibility of Post Offices for consumers. While taking 
note of the efforts of the Department in these areas, the Committee would like the 
Department to fix a timeline and work on undertaking a Circle -wise study to ascertain 
the needs and viability of Post offices in rural as well as urban areas, improving physical 
accessibility through upgradation of Postal infrastructure with installations of ramps, 
rails, low-height lifts, wheelchairs, Braille signages etc., and improving marketability of 
Postal services through visibility, branding, efficient delivery, customer friendly 
approach, customer satisfaction etc. The Committee desire to be apprised of the action 
taken and progress made in these aspects. The Committee also desire to be apprised 
of the outcome of the Country -wide household survey being conducted by the 
Department to assess the needs of citizens regarding Postal services.” 
 
27. In its Action Taken Reply, the Department of Posts submitted as under:– 
“I. Improved infrastructure, visibility and branding of rural post offices has 
been included for approval of EFC for next five years 2026-27 till 2030-31. 
II.  As regards, upgradation of Postal infrastructure with installations of 
ramps, rails, low -height lifts, wheelchairs, Braille signages etc., these are 
included in the Memorandum for the Estates Management Scheme 2026 -27 to 
2030-31 
III. The details of Circle-wise study to ascertain the needs and viability of Post 
offices in rural as well as urban areas, improving physical accessibility through 
upgradation of Postal infrastructure with installations of ramps, rails, low -height 
lifts, wheelchairs, Braille signages etc., is placed at Annexure IV.” 
 
28. Recognizing the steps being taken by the Department to improve the 
physical accessibility of post offices for  persons with disability and the  elderly, 
the Committee had recommended the Department to fix a timeline to improve 
physical accessibility through upgradation of Postal infrastructure  with 
installations of ramps, rails, low -height lifts, wheelchairs, Braille signages etc. ; 
improving marketability of Postal services through visibility, branding, efficient 
delivery, customer friendly approach, customer satisfaction etc. and also to 
furnish details regarding outcome of the Country -wide household survey being 
conducted by the Department  to assess the needs of citizens regarding Postal 
services. 
In its Action Taken Reply, the Department has stated that improved 
infrastructure, visibility and branding of rural post offices along with 
requirements for upgradation of Postal infrastructure have  been included in the 
Memorandum for the Estates Management Scheme for next five years from FY 

21 
 
2026-27 till 2030 -31 and this is pending for approval of Expenditure Finance 
Committee (EFC). The Department in its reply has also annexed details of circle -
wise study relating to 4881 Post Offices to ascertain the needs and viability of 
Post Offices in rural as well as urban areas, improving physical accessibility 
through upgradation of Postal infrastructure with installations of ramps, rails, 
low-height lifts, wheelchairs, Braille signages etc.  
The Committee note that many post offices still remain inaccessible for 
persons with disabilities and the elderly for want of disabled friendly  facilities. 
The Committee , therefore, reiterate their earlier recommendation that the 
Department fix a timeline to achieve the target in improving physical accessibility 
through upgradation of Postal infrastructure and also furnish latest details 
regarding outcome of the Country -wide household survey to assess the needs of 
citizens regarding Postal services. 
CURBING RENTAL EXPENDITURE & REDUCING DEPENDENCE ON HIRED / 
RENTED POSTAL BUILDINGS 
 
(Recommendation No. 16) 
29. The Committee, in Recommendation  no. 16 in their Twentieth Report, had 
recommended as under:- 
“The Committee observe that due to non -availability of land at the appropriate location 
and insufficiency of funds for construction of new buildings, many Post Offices and its 
other offices are housed in rented buildings. While answering about steps taken for 
systematically reducing dependency on rented buildings for running postal operations, 
the Department informed that a policy has been formulated for utilizing vacant plots of 
land for constructing small post office buildings through budgetary support and such 
buildings range in area from 50.37 sq. metres to 81.04 sq. metres with basic facilities 
like Counters, toilets, Ramps and rail but without staff quarters, inspection quarters etc. 
The Department submitted that every year 40 to 45 small posts offices are being 
constructed and post offices functioning from rented premises are being shifted there to 
reduce rental liability. On being asked about there being a fixed timeline for reducing 
usage of rented properties in a phased manner, the Department informed that since 
budgetary support to construct new post office buildings could be expected after 
extension of the Estates Management Scheme, the usage of rented properties was 
expected to be reduced over the next 5 years. Regarding post offices in rural areas the 
Department informed that some offices are running in Panchayat Bhawans or free 

22 
 
spaces provided by the village. The Department also informed about written 
communications between the Minister of Communications and Chief Ministers of 
respective State Governments seeking Panchayat Bhawans and other available free 
spaces for the use of the Department. The Department also stated that Brach Offices 
are housed in Panchayat Bhawans and other local buildings where space is available at 
a low cost. 
 While replying to a question about creating sustainable low cost infrastructure in 
rural areas, the Department informed that after the revision of guidelines of MPLADS 
(Members of Parliament Local Area Development Scheme) by Ministry of Statistics and 
Programme Implementation w.e.f. 01.04.2023, "Post Offices and related utilities/ 
facilities" has been included in the list of work permissible under MPLADS and 
therefore, in November, 2023 the Department has framed a guideline for availing funds 
under MPLADS for constructing post offices. Acknowledging the impediments faced by 
the Department in reducing dependence on rented premises, the Committee note with 
concern that the quantum of rental expenditure incurred by the Department from 
Financial Years 2020-21 to FY 2024-25 amounts to Rs. 976.29 crore which is more than 
double the amount of funds allocated towards the Estates Management Scheme during 
the five-year period (FYs 2021-22 to 2025-26) of its implementation, i.e. Rs. 479 crores. 
Therefore, taking a prudent view of the situation, the Committee recommend the 
Department to focus on preparing a Circle-wise data regarding rental expenditure during 
the last 5 financial years as well as availability of vacant plots within each Postal Circle. 
After performing a cost benefit analysis, the Department may make all out efforts 
towards construction of low -cost postal infrastructure wherever suitable, while 
simultaneously pursue with respective State Governments to provide space in 
Panchayat Bhawans and wherever possible, to provide space/vacant lands to the 
Department free of cost. Action taken and outcome achieved in this regard may be 
submitted to the Committee at the earliest.” 
30. In its Action Taken Reply, the Department of Posts submitted as under:– 
i. “The Department is trying to make all out efforts towards construction of low -cost 
postal infrastructure.  
ii. The Department has formulated a policy for utilizing its vacant plots of land for 
constructing small post offices buildings ranging in area from 50.37 sq. meter to 
81.04 sq. meter with basic facilities like counters, Rail and Ramps, toilets etc. 
through budgetary support.  
iii. Fund requirements for FY 2026 -27 to 2030 -31 have been projected in the 
Memorandum for the Expenditure Finance Committee, including the requirement 
for construction of departmental post offices buildings on vacant sites.  

23 
 
iv. There is also a leasing and licensing policy of the Department to lease out the 
surplus space to earn extra revenue. The head of the Circles is the competent 
authority to rent, lease out the surplus space to generate extra revenue.  
v. After the issue of revised guidelines of MPLADS by  Ministry of Statistics and 
Programme Implementation which came into effect from 01.04.2023 that 
included "Post Offices and related utilities/ facilities"  in list of work permissible 
under MPLADS, the Department has framed guidelines for availing funds under 
MPLADS for constructing post office in November, 2023. The Department 
welcomes funds under MPLADS for its projects. 
vi. The details of Circle -wise data regarding rental expenditure during the last 5 
financial years as well as availability of vacant plots within each Postal Circle is 
placed below: 
 
31. The Committee, in their Report, while t aking note of the quantum of rental 
expenditure incurred by the Department from FY 2020 -21 to FY 2024 -25, had 
Table 
Circle wise data regarding rental expenditure during last 5 Financial years as well as availability of Vacant Plots 
  (Rs. in crore)   
S. 
No. 
Name of Circles 2020-
21 
2021-
22 
2022-23 2023-24 2024-25 Total  Availability of 
Vacant plots  
1 Andhra Pradesh 7.51 8.26 7.88 11.97 10.29 45.92 94 
2 Assam 3.74 3.22 2.50 3.30 2.93 15.69 14 
3 Bihar  2.62 2.42 2.31 3.07 3.60 14.01 64 
4 Chhattisgarh 1.08 1.16 0.86 1.73 1.36 6.18 5 
5 Delhi 19.24 24.14 17.33 43.03 24.87 128.61 14 
6 Gujarat 6.22 6.40 6.49 7.20 8.17 34.48 53 
7 Haryana 2.11 5.38 4.60 5.60 3.15 20.85 19 
8 Himachal Pradesh 1.30 1.33 1.49 1.48 1.98 7.57 23 
9 Jammu & Kashmir 1.11 1.43 1.40 2.15 2.09 8.18 5 
10 Jharkhand 1.26 1.47 1.13 2.81 1.15 7.82 34 
11 Karnataka 20.50 15.40 12.52 19.63 17.38 85.43 308 
12 Kerala 8.00 8.76 10.74 11.20 11.67 50.36 134 
13 Madhya Pradesh 3.41 3.75 3.18 4.68 3.65 18.67 37 
14 Maharashtra 23.99 23.82 20.17 25.41 23.48 116.87 77 
15 North East 1.58 1.17 1.34 1.26 1.57 6.94 19 
16 Orissa 3.53 4.59 4.03 6.76 5.48 24.37 25 
17 Punjab 2.77 3.27 2.79 3.65 3.13 15.61 14 
18 Rajasthan 9.17 5.05 5.38 9.21 4.85 33.65 131 
19 Tamil Nadu 16.09 18.91 17.40 27.42 26.21 106.03 140 
20 Telangana 4.41 8.44 5.19 9.39 9.74 37.17 93 
21 Uttar Pradesh 24.43 14.87 26.60 35.34 33.19 134.43 18 
22 Uttarakhand 2.36 1.84 2.40 1.75 1.81 10.16 66 
23 West Bengal 12.76 11.66 14.06 12.54 11.18 62.19 73 
TOTAL 179.16 176.74 171.79 250.57 212.92 991.18 1460 

24 
 
recommended the Department to focus on preparing a Circle -wise data regarding 
rental expenditure during the last 5 financial years as well as availability of vacant 
plots within each Postal Circle. The Committee also recommended that the 
Department may  undertake a cost benefit analysis and to make all out efforts 
towards construction of low -cost postal infrastructure wherever suitable, while 
simultaneously pursuing with respective State Governments to provide space in 
Panchayat Bhawans and wherever possible, to provide space/vacant lands to the 
Department free of cost.  
It is heartening to note in the Action Taken reply that as per revised 
guidelines of MPLADS issued by the Ministry of Statistics and Programme 
Implementation which came into effect from 01.04.2023 incorporated “Post Offices 
and related utilities/facilities” in the list of work permissible under MPLADS. 
Accordingly, the Postal Department had framed guidelines in November, 2023 for 
availing funds under MPLADS for constructing Post Offices. However, it appears 
from the Action Taken Reply that the Department could not obtain even a single 
contribution from MPLAD Scheme till date. The Committee, therefore, urge upon 
the Department of Posts to proactively approach Honorable Members of 
Parliament to obtain/sanction funds from MPLADS for construction of Post Offices 
and related utilities/facilities where they are in need in their respective 
constituencies so that recurring rental expenditure can be saved to the extent 
possible. 
In its Action Taken Reply, the Department has apprised that it is trying to 
make all out efforts towards construction of low -cost infrastructure. The 
Department has also submitted that it has formulated a policy for utilizing its 
vacant plots of land for constructing small post offices buildings  and is making 
efforts towards construction of low-cost postal infrastructure. The Department has 
also informed that while the total number of vacant plots of postal land is 1460, the 
total rental expenditure incurred by the Department of Posts from  Financial Year 
2020-21 to 2024-25 amounts to Rs. 991.18 crore. 
Taking note of the replies regarding efforts being made by the Department 
towards curbing rental expenditure through construction of small low -cost postal 
buildings, the Committee hope that concerted efforts made by the Department will 
pay off well. 

25 
 
As regards the recommendation of the Committee to undertake a cost 
benefit analysis while pursuing State Governments to provide space in Panchayat 
Bhawans and wherever possible, to provide space/vacant lands to the Department 
free of cost for construction of low cost postal infrastructure, the Department is 
yet to apprise the Committee in this regard. The Committee may, therefore, be 
apprised of the details of action taken and blueprint made in this regard. 
******* 

26 
 
CHAPTER II 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN  ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT 
 
(Recommendation No. 1) 
ESTATES MANAGEMENT SCHEME  
 
The Committee note that the Estates Management Scheme of the Department of 
Posts is a Central Sector Scheme approved for the period from Financial Years 2021-22 
to 2025-26, with a financial outlay of Rs.479 crore. The key objectives of the Scheme 
are to: (i) ensure development of appropriate infrastructure; (ii) provide a congenial work 
environment; (iii) improve the delivery of postal services in a cost -effective way; and (iv) 
implement various statutory provisions of Gender concerns and improving accessibility 
and public facility in Post Offices under Sugamya Bharat Abhiyan. To cater to these 
objectives, initiatives such as construction of postal buildings and residences for 
employees of the Department, preservation and conservation of heritage buildings, 
installation of roof top solar power packs and rain water harvesting structures to 
contribute towards sustainable development, provision of Braille signage and ramps and 
rails under the Sugamya Bharat Abhiyan for improving the accessibility of Post Offices 
and construction of separate toilets and retiring rooms for ladies along with construction 
of crèches for addressing gender concerns are being undertaken by the Department. 
 The Committee appreciate that against the approved provision of Rs. 479 crores 
under the Scheme from FY 2021 -22 to FY 2025 -26, the percentage utilization of 
allocated funds for each financial year, up to FY 2024 -25, has consistently been over 
95% with the exception being 91.81% during Financial Year 2021 -22. This is also 
corroborated by a significant accomplishment of Physical Targets set against two 
Scheme components viz ‘construction of new Postal buildings’ and ‘renovation of postal 
buildings’. The Committee, however, note that against the total Scheme components, 
namely, Construction of new postal buildings; Renovation of Post Office buildings/staff 
quarters; Preservation and conservation of heritage buildings; and Welfare components 
in Building design and construction including Installation of Roof top Solar Power Packs; 
Construction of Rain Water Harvesting Structures; Installation of Braille signages and 
Ramps & Rails; and Gender concerns in infrastructure such as feeding rooms and 
ladies’ toilets, the Department has furnished data regarding Physical Targets about two 
components only.          

27 
 
Further, the Committee observe that in order to fulfill set objectives, the 
Department needs higher allocation of fund under the Scheme during the upcoming 
financial years. Taking cognizance of the importance of the Scheme on Estates 
Management, the Committee feel that strengthening of this Scheme is unavoidable in 
providing not only a congenial working atmosphere for employees of the Department 
but also to ensure effective delivery of postal services to customers thereby making 
India Post a bankable and reputable brand. The Committee, therefore, recommend the 
Department to vigorously pursue for increased budgetary allocation for this Scheme 
with the Ministry of Finance while setting realistic and achievable targets for its 
implementation in the upcoming financial years. The Committee would like to be 
apprised of the progress made in this regard within six months of laying of this Report in 
Parliament. 
 
Reply of the Government 
i. The Department of Posts acknowledges the Committee’s observations and 
appreciates the recognition of the Estates Management Scheme’s role in 
infrastructure development, employee welfare, and service delivery. 
ii. The detailed data  of Physical targets set and achieved under the Estates 
Management Scheme during the FY 2023 -24 to 2024 -25 pertaining to all the 
Scheme componentsnamely, Construction of new postal buildings; Renovation of 
Post Office buildings/staff quarters; Preservation and conservation of heritage 
buildings; and Welfare components in Building design and construction including 
Installation of Roof top Solar Power Packs; Construction of Rain Water 
Harvesting Structures; Installation of Braille signages and Ramps & Rails; and 
Gender concerns in infrastructure such as feeding rooms and ladies’ toilets are 
as below:  

28 
 
 
iii. The objectives of the Scheme are pivotal to improving both employee welfare 
and public service delivery. The Department is working towards setting realistic 
and achievable targets for each component of the Scheme for the remaining 
financial years, aligning them with broader goals of infrastructure modernization, 
service excellence, and inclusive accessibility. The Department has prepared a 
Memorandum for Expenditure Finance Committee under “Estates Management”, 
for the next 5 years (FY 2026-27 to 2030 -31) which will provide budgetary 
Activity 
2023-24 2024-25 
Targets set Achieved Targets set Achieved 
Construction of Post 
office buildings 
40 75 40 57 
Renovation of postal 
building 
40 84 40 115 
Renovation and 
preservation of 
Heritage buildings 
4 4 4 4 
Installation of Rail and 
Ramps 
60 79 60 79 
Installation of Braille 522 657 522 607 
Installation of Solar 
Power Packs 
40 33 40 119 
Construction of Rain 
water harvesting 
structures 
25 25 25 24 
Ladies’ toilets 60 59 39 52 
Feeding rooms 30 29 22 30 

29 
 
support for construction and renovation of new and existing postal buildings 
along with providing other facilities subject to the approval of fund by the Ministry 
of Finance through EFC Memo. 
(Department of Posts F. No. 28-5/ 20thReport/2025/ Bgt dated 17.04.2026) 
 
(Recommendation No. 4) 
RENOVATION OF POST OFFICE BUILDINGS 
According to the Circle-wise data furnished by the Department regarding building 
renovations from Financial Years 2020-21 to 2024-25, the Committee note that a total of 
397 Postal buildings were renovated with the maximum number of building renovations 
being 36 in the Circle of Assam followed by 29 in the Circle of Uttar Pradesh and the 
third highest number of 28 building renovations being carried out in the Circle of 
Karnataka. In the same duration, only 4 buildings each were renovated in the respective 
Circles of Jammu & Kashmir and Uttarakhand and only 8 buildings were renovated in 
the Postal Circle of Chhattisgarh. Taking note of the lopsided pattern of building 
renovations among Postal Circles, the Committee would urge the Department to 
undertake an exercise to determine Circle -wise data for renovation of Postal 
infrastructure and draw up separate figures for the number of Departmental buildings 
and rented buildings, respectively, that are in need of repair, restoration and 
reconstruction so that fund allocation and renovation activities can be accordingly 
apportioned judiciously and legitimately to suit the needs of individual Circles. The 
Committee would like to be apprised of the Circle-wise details in this regard. 
Reply of the Government 
i. The Department is regularly reviewing the progress in achieving targets of 
renovation of postal buildings across the country . Circle-wise data indicates 
significant disparities in the number of buildings renovated, primarily due to 
variations in geographical area, actual number and age of buildings in a Circle , 
delays in obtaining municipal approvals, mutation of postal land records, 
encroachments, and other local administrative constraints. In addition, certain 
Circles face geographical and logistical challenges such as hilly and difficult 
terrain, high-altitude locations, remote and inaccessible areas, adverse weather 
conditions, and transportation constraints, which affect the pace of renovation 
work. 

30 
 
ii. Larger Postal Circles such as Karnataka, Uttar Pradesh, and Assam have a 
greater number of buildings available for renovation owing to their larger 
geographical coverage. In contrast, Circles such as Jammu & Kashmir, 
Chhattisgarh, the North Eastern Region, and Uttarakhand have comparatively 
fewer buildings renovated due to their smaller geographical area as well as the 
above-mentioned geographical and administrative constraints. 
iii. The department has undertaken an exercise and chosen department and rented 
buildings, respectively that are in need of repair, restoration and reconstruction 
which is apportioned judiciously and legitimately to suit the needs of individual 
circles.  
iv. The Department has also identified 3427 other Departmental buildings requiring 
comprehensive repair and 111 buildings that require demolition and 
reconstruction for which budgetary support ha s been sought in the Expenditure 
Finance Committee memo for scheme the next 5 years (FY 2026 -27 to 2030-31) 
for renovation, repair and reconstruction of Departmental buildings. Further, the 
fund requirement has also been projected for upgradation and branding 19,556 
rented buildings. 
v. On receipt of approval for continuation of the scheme for the next 5 years, as per 
the outlay for 2026 -27, funds will be allocated and apportioned judiciously and 
appropriately among the Postal Circles for the renovation and reconstruction 
activities based on their respective requirements.  This will enhance life span of 
the buildings and improve available postal infrastructure to provide modern 
facilities and amenities both for staff and customers improve the image and 
branding of post offices while providing a safe environment. Upgradation of 
rented buildings will enhance the look and feel of rented post offices and improve 
the image of the Department and Central government as a whole. 
(Department of Posts F. No. 28-5/ 20thReport/2025/ Bgt dated 17.04.2026) 
 
(Recommendation No. 5) 
RENOVATION AND CONSTRUCTION OF STAFF QUARTERS 
While tendering evidence before the Committee, the representative of the 
Department voiced concern about the dilapidated condition of staff quarters especially 
in the States of Himachal Pradesh and in the North -East and informed that out of a total 
of 820 Postal colonies, 793 are in need of major renovations and some of them need to 

31 
 
be demolished and reconstructed. The Committee while reviewing the details of the 
Scheme on Estates Management note that infrastructure development, included 
provision of residences for employees of the Department of Posts and that due to 
scarcity of funds only Rs. 19.37 crores have been spent from FYs 2021 -22 to 2024 -25 
for renovation of 54 Postal colonies. Further, two of the key objectives under the 
Scheme on Estates Management envisage ‘development of appropriate infrastructure’ 
and ‘providing congenial work environment’ which remain unachieved in the absence of 
decent livable staff quarters. Taking a serious view of the precarious condition of staff 
quarters, the Committee urge the Department of Posts to prioritize funds for renovation 
and construction of staff quarters to cater to the needs of its employees and also to set 
up a dedicated unit / division to monitor renovation/reconstruction so as to ensure its 
completion within a given time frame. The Committee would like to be apprised of the 
timeline set for achievement of this objective along with year -wise details of physical 
targets set for renovation and construction of Staff quarters for each State and Union 
Territory. 
Reply of the Government 
i. The Department has sought approval of the fund requirement for 200 Postal staff 
colonies/ quarters which need extensive renovation and maintenance all over 
India in the Expenditure Finance Committee Memorandum  for scheme for the 
period 2026-27 to 2030-31. 
ii. On receipt of approval for continuation of the scheme for the next 5 years, as per 
the outlay for 2026 -27, funds will be allocated and apportioned judiciously and 
appropriately among the Postal Circles for construction and renovation of staff 
quarters based on their respective requirements. 
iii. Budgetary support for renovation and construction of Postal colonies/staff 
quarters will ensure  congenial living conditions and safety for employees and 
their families and improve employee satisfaction. 
(Department of Posts F. No. 28-5/ 20thReport/2025/ Bgt dated 17.04.2026) 
 
 (Recommendation No. 6) 
PRESERVATION AND CONSERVATIONOFHERITAGEBUILDINGS 
 
During the course of examination, the Committee noted that some post offices 
are being operated from very old buildings of historical importance and 44 such 

32 
 
buildings have been identified as heritage buildings. Further, as per the policy for 
Conservation of Heritage Buildings framed in November 2023, the Postal Heritage 
Conservation Committee (PHCC) has recommended for inclusion of five new buildings 
in the list of heritage buildings, thus bringing the total to 49. The Department has 
informed that no heritage buildings have remained unfunded and uncategorized. 
Furthermore, for specialized work of restoration/preservation of heritage buildings, the 
Department is seeking assistance from Archaeological Survey of India (ASI), Central 
Public Works Department (CPWD), State Archaeological Departments and Indian 
National Trust for Arts and Cultural Heritage (INTACH), in addition to its own P&T Civil 
Wing. Rs. 51.73 crore have been spent on renovation work of heritage buildings from 
FYs 2021-22 to 2024-25. However, during the Sitting of the Committee, the Department 
of Posts informed that only four heritage buildings out of the 49 could be restored and 
the Department is in dire need of funds for taking up restoration activities in the 
remaining heritage Postal buildings. 
While pursuing their earnest efforts for arranging funds for restoration works of 
heritage Postal buildings, it has been observed by the Committee that the Ministry of 
Culture was approached by the Department of Posts for providing funds through the 
National Culture Fund (NCF) in 2024. However, NCF denied the request on the ground 
that no separate fund was available with them for upkeep of heritage buildings and 
advised that funds be arranged from corporate entities under their Corporate Social 
Responsibility (CSR) Programs. Regrettably, no donor (corporate entity) came forward 
to fund the upkeep of heritage postal buildings. The Committee further take note that 
the Department has approached Public Sector Banks and Public Sector Undertakings 
(PSUs) directly for support through their CSR funds and accordingly received two 
responses viz one from National Hydroelectric Power Corporation (NHPC), a PSU 
under the Ministry of Power and another from Oil India Limited, a PSU under Ministry of 
Petroleum and Natural Gas. While Oil India Limited has also been requested and 
conveyed the details of the project as well as engagement modalities, final response 
from both PSUs are awaited. 
While recognizing the importance of preservation and conservation of heritage 
Postal buildings, the Committee understand that this being a specialized activity which 
is not only time consuming but also cost as well as labour intensive. It involves 
specialized technical assistance from multiple agencies such as Archaeological Survey 
of India (ASI), Central Public Works Department (CPWD), State Archaeological 

33 
 
Departments and Indian National Trust for Arts and Cultural Heritage (INTACH) under 
the overall supervision of P&T Civil Wing. It is beyond doubt about the need for 
preservation and protection of our grand old heritage buildings of Postal Department. 
Well preserved heritage Postal buildings not only help revenue generation through 
numerous ways but also augur well for the brand image of India Post. Regular structural 
audit of all heritage buildings is the need of the hour to assess the quality and strength 
of such buildings so that timely repair and renovation of the same can be undertaken. 
Therefore, while appreciating the earnest efforts made by the Department to seek 
external help for funding the renovation and restoration activities, the Committee 
recommend the Department to prepare a detailed report about the quantum of 
restoration work required for each heritage building. The Department may pursue 
vigorously approach the PSUs for procuring funds under CSR head. Committee urge 
upon the Department to draw up a realistic timeline for completing the restoration and 
preservation works in each of the heritage Postal building. The Committee recommend 
the Department to seek help from the Ministry of Culture to pursue the common agenda 
on heritage preservation and conservation so that costs can be shared so that neither 
entity is overburdened in the long run. 
Reply of the Government 
 
i. Preserving the legacy of India Post and the city/town concerned, preservation of 
the local architectural identity of the place and improvement of the Department 
and Central Government as a whole.  
ii. Status of work done by the Department under the Conservation Policy of 
Heritage Buildings: 
(a) Restoration of one heritage building namely Jharsuguda PO has been 
completed. 
(b) Restoration work of Mumbai GPO, Shimla GPO, CPMG Office Kerala, CPMG 
Office Karnataka and New Delhi GPO heritage buildings is being undertaken 
with the help of INTACH, CPWD, Kerala State Archaeological Department 
and INTACH, respectively.  
iii. Systematic structural audit of heritage buildings will be carried out in consultation 
with ASI, State Archaeological Department and other specialized agencies such 
as Indian National Trust for Art and Cultural Heritage (INTACH). Adequate 
budgetary support is required to preserve and restore these heritage buildings 

34 
 
that are cultural heritage of the nation and to provide a safe environment for 
customers and employees. 
iv. Department has prepared a detailed report about the quantum of restoration 
work required for each heritage building. Department of Posts has prepared cost 
estimates for renovation of 48 heritage buildings. The estimated cost of 
renovation of these 48 heritage buildings has been projected to Department of 
Expenditure through the memorandum for consideration of Expenditure Finance 
Committee while soliciting funds under Estates Management Scheme for the 
period 2026-27 to 2030-31 which is under process and is subject to the approval 
of Government.  
v. Department of Posts had approached Ministry of Culture to obtain funds through 
National Culture Fund (NCF)  and under Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR), 
but this has not yet materialized due to lack of donors. 
(Department of Posts F. No. 28-5/ 20thReport/2025/ Bgt dated 17.04.2026) 
 
(Recommendation No. 7) 
 
 
WELFARE COMPONENTS IN BUILDING DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION – 
OBLIGATION TOWARDS SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT 
Installation of Rooftop Solar Power Packs & Construction of Rain Water 
Harvesting Structures 
 The Committee observe that the Department of Posts addresses environmental 
concerns through energy conservation and waste management. Installations of Solar 
Power Packs for use of renewable energy in Postal buildings, construction of Rain water 
Harvesting System for conservation of ground water in their land and maintaining 
afforestation in open areas etc. are appreciable steps taken by the Department of Posts. 
The Department also apprised the Committee that newly constructed buildings are 
being equipped with Solar Power Packs and Rain water harvesting facilities. 
Accordingly, as on 31 st March, 2025, 452 Solar Power Packs and a total of 662  
rainwater harvesting structures were constructed by the Department. While explaining 
about adherence to designated standards for Postal buildings, the Department stated 
that it follows relevant guidelines of the Ministry of New and Renewable Energy 
(MNRE), Central Public Works Department (CPWD) and other Government bodies for 
Solar Power Pack installation works. Rain water harvesting systems in postal buildings 
are provided as per norms and approval of local body/Municipal Corporations. 

35 
 
The Committee observe that till financial year 2024 -25, 378 Solar Power Packs 
have been installed in Postal buildings and accordingly the total energy produced was 
5.3 million units resulting in Rs. 3.00 crore estimated savings on electricity bills per year 
and in some cases, additional electricity produced was shared with the local power 
grids. While narrating details about Solar Projects being undertaken by the Department , 
the representative shared that after completing assessment of solar projects, it has 
prepared a list of buildings for installation of solar power packs. They have further 
conveyed that all tasks related to planning of major solar projects and identification of 
clear sites for such installations have been completed. The Committee note that after 
completion of preparations for installations of energy efficient fittings in Postal buildings, 
the Department has sought funds for the same. The Committee note with concern that 
while replying to the question about the need for regular annual maintenance of the 653 
rainwater harvesting structures, the Department gave a partial reply that some of the 
rainwater harvesting structures were being maintained regularly by the respective 
Circles to ensure optimum harvesting of rainwater. Keeping in view the steps taken for 
installation of energy efficient fittings in Postal buildings, the Committee feel that the 
work of the Department does not end with mere construction of rainwater harvesting 
structures and installation of solar power packs as it requires regular maintenance and 
upkeep. The Committee are of the opinion that besides equipping all new and existing 
post offices with Solar Power Packs and Rainwater harvesting structures, the 
Department should come up with a workable plan for its annual maintenance and 
upkeep. Funds may be sought accordingly and the obligation towards sustainable 
development may be fulfilled effectively. The Committee would like to be apprised of the 
action taken and progress made on each of these areas. 
 
Reply of the Government 
i. The Department welcomes the suggestion of the Committee that besides 
equipping all new and existing post offices with Solar Power Packs and 
Rainwater harvesting structures there should be a workable plan for annual 
maintenance and upkeep.  
ii. The Department allocates funds under Estates Management Scheme to the 
Circles as per their requirement for construction of rainwater harvesting 
structures and installation of solar power packs . The Circles utilizes the fund as 
per requirement for regular maintenance and upkeep  of Solar Power Packs and 
Rain Water Harvesting structures. 

36 
 
iii. Fund projections in the  Expenditure Finance Committee Memorandum for the  
continuation of the Estates Management scheme for the next 5 years (FY 2026 -
27 to 2030-31) includes the requirement for activities such as installation of Solar 
Power Packs and Rain Water Harvesting structures to fulfil obligation towards 
sustainable development effectively.  
 
iv. Upon receipt of funds, allocations will be made in a phased manner for the 
installation of the more SPPs and Rain Water harvesting structures as per the 
requirement of the Circles and also for their regular maintenance and upkeep of 
buildings and execution of associated activities.  
v. Fulfilment of obligations towards sustainable development  will depend on the 
receipt of funds. 
(Department of Posts F. No. 28-5/ 20thReport/2025/ Bgt dated 17.04.2026) 
 
 
(Recommendation No. 8) 
WELFARE COMPONENTS IN BUILDING DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION – 
OBLIGATION TOWARDS SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT 
Sugamya Bharat Abhiyan – Installation of Braille Signages and Ramps & Rails 
 The Committee observe that under the welfare component of Sugamya  Bharat 
Abhiyan, the Department is focusing on promoting inclusivity and making postal 
infrastructure more accessible for differently -abled and elderly customers by installing 
facilities such as ramps, rails, low height lifts and Braille Signages as envisaged under 
the Rights of Persons with Disabilities Act, 2016. The Committee have been apprised by 
the Department that up to FY 2024 -25, Braille Signages have been provided in 1256 
Post Offices and Ramps & rails have been retrofitted in 1617 post offices. 
The Department informed that in order to promote inclusivity in terms of facilities in Post 
Offices for the differently-abled, construction of rail and ramps are mandatory for all new 
buildings. Old as well as new buildings are being retrofitted with such facilities and 
Braille signages are being installed. While noting the efforts made by the Department of 
Posts in improving consumer friendly accessibility of Postal buildings and promoting 
inclusivity through modified infrastructure, the Committee urge upon the Department to 
fix a timeframe within which these objectives are aimed to be achieved. They may work 
out the additional budgetary requirements for construction of the above facilities 
particularly in old and in rented Postal buildings. The Committee would like to be 

37 
 
apprised of the details related to budgetary allocations, Physical targets set and 
achieved and also other steps being taken towards fulfilling the said objectives under 
Sugamya Bharat Abhiyan. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
i. The proposed investment plan aligns with and compliments several national 
priorities and schemes and promotes inclusivity and fulfils the objective of 
Sugamya Bharat Abhiyan.  
ii. The details of Budgetary allocation in last few years is as under: 
(Rs in crore) 
S. No. Activity 2023-24 2024-25 2025-26 
1 Rail and Ramps 1.18 1.35 1.22 
2 Braille Signages 0.51 0.5 0.52 
 
iii. The Physical targets set for installation of Rail and Ramps and Braille Signages 
during FY 2023-24 to FY 2024-25 are as under: 
Activity 
2023-24 2024-25 
Targets set Achieved Targets set Achieved 
Installation of 
Rail and Ramps 60 79 60 79 
Installation of 
Braille 522 657 522 607 
 
iv. Fund requirements for construction of rail and ramps, braille signages for 
persons with disabilities and senior citizens are projected in the Expenditure Finance 
Committee Memorandum for the next 5 years (FY 2026-27 to 2030-31) for the Estates 
Management scheme.   
v. Existing buildings are being retrofitted with such facilities and Braille signages are 
being installed for persons with disabilities and senior citizens. This will ensure greater 
inclusivity in terms of access to existing Post Offices. Construction of rail and ramps are 
mandatory for all new buildings.  
vi. Fulfilment of these obligations will depend on the receipt of funds under the 
scheme. 

38 
 
 
(Department of Posts F. No. 28-5/ 20thReport/2025/ Bgt dated 17.04.2026) 
For comments of the Committee please see Para no. 10 of Chapter – I. 
 
(Recommendation No. 10) 
TOTAL ASSET BASE OF THE DEPARTMENT OF POSTS & MONETIZATION OF 
ASSETS 
The Committee understand that the total asset base of the Department stands at 
120.9 lakh square meters which amounts to about 0.57% of the assets held by the 
Railways and consists of 1,460 vacant plots amounting to 22 lakh square meters. The 
Committee also note that according to the Circle-wise data of Postal assets furnished by 
the Department, the Circle of Maharashtra stands with the highest amount of asset base 
of 12.85 lakh sq. meters followed by Karnataka at 12.79 lakh sq. meters and Gujarat 
with 11.37 lakh sq. meters. The Department of Posts has apprised the Committee that, 
so far, no exercise has been carried out for determining the market capitalization of 
Postal assets across the Country. So far as valuation and disposal of obsolete/old and 
dilapidated buildings and non -performing postal estates/buildings are concerned, the 
Department stated that Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs) are being followed 
wherein when a building is proposed to be dismantled, a survey report is prepared and 
submitted for approval of the Competent Authority. Upon the sanction of such a survey 
report, a reserve price is determined and approved followed by an online invitation of 
bids through an open tender where the best offered bid is accepted by the Competent 
Authority as per provisions of Delegation of Financial Power. 
 Considering the total asset base held by the Department of Posts having huge 
potential for monetisation, the Committee are disappointed to note that so far, no 
exercise has been carried out for determining the market capitalization potential of 
Postal assets across the Country. Similarly, no information has been furnished about 
initiation of any exercise for valuation and disposal of obsolete/old and dilapidated 
buildings/materials and non -performing postal estates/buildings. The Committee, 
therefore, earnestly recommend the Department to take up focused and time bound 
exercise for determining market capitalization of Postal assets; and for valuation of 
obsolete and non -performing Postal estates/materials across the Country. In this 
regard, the Department may also explore the feasibility of seeking the help of experts in 
the field for an efficient, time bound and scientific market -based assessment of Postal 
assets and evolve an effective monetisation strategy. The Committee would like to be 

39 
 
apprised of the time frame defined for the exercise along with the details of action taken 
and outcome achieved in this regard. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
i. Department of Posts is currently in the process of finalizing the monetization 
policy approved by Postal Services Board. Concurrently, comments of the other 
stakeholders are also being collated. In addition, Department is in the process of 
generating revenue through certain initiatives. 
ii. Department has signed an MOU with NBCC, a PSU under Ministry of Housing 
and Urban Affairs (MoHUA), for conducting feasibility studies before undertaking 
development/ redevelopment for the use of the Department and for commercial 
utilization.  
iii. The Department has identified 40 post offices under PoC (proof of concept). 
These Post Offices will be developed as per Unified Design and Branding 
transformation based on School of Planning and Architecture SPA 
recommendations, ensuring improved navigation and enhanced service 
experience for the customers. Further, the design manual recommended by SPA 
has been circulated to Circles for all upcoming projects. Development of 27 Post 
Offices as per new Design Manual are anticipated to be completed by April, 2026 
and remaining 13 by June, 2026.  
iv. The Department is also working on revenue generation based on utilization of 
Floor Area Ration as a Proof of concept and creation of co-working space. 
v. Further, Department has identified about 200 properties for monetization during 
next year. The Monetization will be carried out through three steps process, i.e. 
Legal Due Diligence, Land Valuation and Transaction Adviser. The process is 
underway.  
vi. The valuation and disposal of obsolete/old and dilapidated buildings and non -
performing assets is done based upon the Standard Operating Procedures 
(SOPs) laid down in CPWD works manual. 
(Department of Posts F. No. 28-5/ 20thReport/2025/ Bgt dated 17.04.2026) 
For comments of the Committee please see Para no. 16 of Chapter – I. 
 
 
 
 

40 
 
(Recommendation No.11) 
TOTAL ASSET BASE OF THE DEPARTMENT OF POSTS & MONETIZATION OF 
ASSETS 
 
The Committee observe that so as to ensure record-keeping and management of 
land records for monetization of assets, the Department has undertaken an exercise to 
obtain mutation records of postal estates and to assess the Floor Area Ratio (FAR). In 
order, to achieve financial viability through monetization of postal assets an ‘Expression 
of Interest’ (EOI) had been submitted in February, 2025, for hiring consultants to 
develop a monetization strategy  for maximizing revenue potential through development 
/ redevelopment of real estate postal assets. However, this EOI had failed due to 
inability of applicants to meet prescribed criteria and hence a Revised Expression of 
Interest (REOI) was floated by the Department in April, 2025 calling for interested 
participants to submit their EOI till 26 th May, 2025. The Committee may be apprised of 
the outcome in this regard. 
Further, the Committee note that while an exercise for obtaining mutation records 
for postal estates and assessing Floor Area Ratios (FAR) for the purpose of 
monetization has been undertaken, no timeframe has been set for conclusion of the 
same. The Committee firmly believe that monetization of real estate postal assets is one 
of the most effective approaches towards solving the long -standing financial distress 
being faced by the Department of Posts. Therefore, while considering the efforts of the 
Department of Posts in the direction of hiring professional consultants for developing a 
monetization strategy to maximize revenue potential of real estate postal assets, the 
Committee recommend the Department to conduct a focused and time bound exercise 
for obtaining mutation records for postal estates, as early as possible, from respective 
authorities while also assessing Floor Area Ratios (FAR) for the purpose of 
monetization. The Committee would like to be apprised of the time frame defined and 
action taken in this regard. The final outcome about development of a monetization 
strategy by the Department of Posts for boosting its revenue generation to minimize the 
income and expenditure gap may be furnished at the earliest. 
Reply of the Government 
 
i. Department of Posts is currently in the process of finalizing the monetization 
policy approved by Postal Services Board. Concurrently, comments of the other 
stakeholders are also being collated. In addition, Department is in the process of 
generating revenue through certain initiatives. 

41 
 
ii. Department has signed an MOU with NBCC, a PSU under Ministry of Housing 
and Urban Affairs (MoHUA), for conducting feasibility studies before undertaking 
development/ redevelopment for the use of the Department and for commercial 
utilization.  
iii. The Department has identified 40 post offices under PoC (proof of concept). 
These Post Offices will be developed as per Unified Design and Branding 
transformation based on School of Planning and Architecture SPA 
recommendations, ensuring improved navigation and enhanced service 
experience for the customers. Further, the design manual recommended by SPA 
has been circulated to Circles for all upcoming projects. Development of these 40 
Post Offices as per the new Design Manual are anticipated to be completed by 
June, 2026.  
iv. The Department is also working on revenue generation based on utilization of 
Floor Area Ration as a Proof of concept and creation of co-working space. 
v. Further, Department has identified about 200 properties for monetization during 
next year. The Monetization will be carried out through three steps process, i.e. 
Legal Due Diligence, Land Valuation and Transaction Adviser. The process is 
underway. 
(Department of Posts F. No. 28-5/ 20thReport/2025/ Bgt dated 17.04.2026) 
For comments of the Committee please see Para no. 19 of Chapter – I. 
 
 
(Recommendation No.12) 
 
VACANT PLOTS OF LAND, POSTAL BUILDINGS AND ISSUES RELATED TO 
THEIR PROTECTION AND ENCROACHMENT  
 
The Committee note that land records of 1,460 vacant plots of the Department of 
Posts are being maintained at Circle / Regional level. Further, according to the Circle -
wise details of vacant plots submitted by the Department, the Committee note that 
Karnataka Circle holds the maximum number of vacant plots of land i.e. 308, followed 
by 140 vacant plots held by the Tamil Nadu Circle and 134 by the Kerala Circle, 
respectively. Conversely, the Circles of Chhattisgarh and Jammu Kashmir hold the least 
number of vacant plots, i.e. 5 each. 
The Committee understand that even though the Department possesses digital 
address codes of vacant plots, no exercise for mapping of vacant plots has been 
undertaken by the Department till date. The Department submitted that in order to 

42 
 
safeguard vacant plots it constructs boundary walls and small post offices. The 
Department further stated that construction activity, however, is subject to availability of 
funds, benefit to cost ratio of the preferred post office, building, priority, public demand 
as taken up by public representatives, threat of encroachment, issues of accessibility, 
etc. Taking note of the fact that the Department not only holds 1460 vacant plots 
currently but is also in possession of its digital address codes, the Committee, call upon 
the Department to undertake GIS -based mapping and monitoring of these valuable 
plots and postal buildings in a time bound manner. Further, the Committee desire that 
after seeking inputs from respective Postal Circles, the Department also propose 
practical and sustainable solutions for safeguarding these vacant plots and buildings 
bearing in mind the geographical location, needs of the local population and financially 
viable option. Circle -wise deployment of sufficient staff may be ensured for regular 
inspections of vacant plots and postal buildings; field surveys; and checking and 
prevention of encroachment activities. Boundary walls, barbed wire fencing should be 
erected to ward off encroachments in Postal properties. The Committee would like to be 
apprised of Circle-wise details of the action taken and outcome achieved in this regard. 
Similarly, details of pending court cases on encroachment of Postal properties and its 
outcome may also be furnished to the Committee. 
The Committee observe that disaster management provisions are a very 
essential part of preservation and protection of the huge assets of postal buildings 
across the Country. The Committee, therefore, urge upon the Department of Posts to 
take urgent necessary steps/measures to ensure regular Fire drills as well as 
Earthquake drills in its buildings periodically as per SOPs in this regard to avert any 
probable fire/earthquake disasters in the postal buildings thereby avoiding any loss to 
lives and properties. 
Reply of the Government 
 
a) In alignment with this vision, the Department has already undertaken significant 
steps by uploading the data of its land and buildings under the Government Land 
Information System (GLIS). These efforts mark crucial progress toward 
developing a centralized and data-rich platform for real estate oversight. 
b) All Circles are working on practical and sustainable measures to safeguard 
vacant plots and postal buildings, including deployment of staff and regular 
inspections. Inputs from Postal Circles regarding practical and sustainable 

43 
 
solutions for safeguarding vacant plots and postal buildings and Circle wise 
deployment of staff and regular inspection of vacant plots and postal buildings 
are placed at Annexure I. 
c) Details of pending court cases on encroachment of Postal properties and its 
outcomes are placed at Annexure II. 
d) Postal Circles have also been instructed to conduct regular fire and earthquake 
drills in their buildings as per the Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs), to 
ensure preparedness and prompt response during emergencies. 
 
(Department of Posts F. No. 28-5/ 20thReport/2025/ Bgt dated 17.04.2026) 
 
(Recommendation No.13) 
VACANT PLOTS OF LAND , POSTAL BUILDINGS AND ISSUES RELATED TO 
THEIR PROTECTION AND ENCROACHMENT  
 
The Committee observe that presently, out of the total number of 1,460 vacant 
plots of Postal land, 209 plots hold land area of a considerable size which is more than 
2000 sq. meters. Further, presently the total number of encroached vacant land and 
buildings of the Department of Posts stands at 278, of which, dispute is sub -judice in 82 
cases which are managed by hired lawyers and through participation in Lok Adalats. 
Regarding proactive measures taken to check illegal encroachments and unauthorized 
use of postal land/estates, the Department of Posts informed that apart from 
constructing boundary walls on vacant lands, it approaches concerned revenue 
authorities, public representatives and local administration while also resorting to judicial 
remedies available for eviction of encroachment. The Department also submitted that 
illegal encroachment is checked by Estate Officers nominated in each Postal Circle to 
deal with cases related to unauthorized occupation of departmental lands and buildings. 
While replying about the role of local administration in mitigating conflicts arising out of 
illegal encroachments, the Department has informed that the local administration is the 
custodian of land records and ensures proper land monitoring including maintaining 
accurate and accessible land records while also working as a law enforcing agency. 
Local bodies facilitate dispute resolution through mediation and community engagement 
and their intervention is sought for removing illegal encroachments. 
 The Committee also note that in order to prevent encroachments on vacant 
lands, the Department has been constructing boundary walls and postal buildings in a 

44 
 
phased manner on its vacant plots thereby reducing expenditure on rent. Further, during 
the Sitting, the Committee were apprised of innovative ways being adopted by the 
Department to curtail encroachments which included collaborating with State 
Governments to invite for constructive usage of vacant plots. The Department also 
informed that mapping of vacant plots was being contemplated to ascertain viability of 
plots and vacant plots were being considered for letting out to respective State 
Governments for undertaking activities such as rearing nurseries or horticultural 
produce, temporary constructions etc. The Committee note with concern that the 
Department failed to undertake mapping of its vacant plots as well as other plots during 
this digital era. 
Taking cognizance of the efforts made by the Department towards curbing and 
removing illegal encroachments on vacant plots of Postal lands, the Committee feel that 
encroachments not only lead to excessive loss of limited valuable land resources but 
also obscure losses of potent revenue channels such as rented incomes. Therefore, 
taking a serious view of the situation, the Committee recommend the Department to 
prioritize checking and prevention of illegal encroachments of vacant plots with respect 
to their respective resolutions in terms of legal recourse; intervention from local 
representatives; mitigation through local administration and Police authorities; 
collaboration with State Governments for constructive usage of vacant lands; and cost 
effective construction of boundaries/barbed wire fencing and small buildings; and work 
towards targeted solutions to prevent encroachments on its vacant plots within a 
specified time span. Besides these, initiatives for creating public awareness, reviewing 
and updating property records ensuring accurate documentation and mapping of postal 
properties to prevent further encroachment may also be taken up with the concerned 
agency/Departments. The Committee desire to be apprised of the steps taken by the 
Department of Posts and outcomes achieved in this regard within six months of laying 
of this report in Parliament. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
i. The Department acknowledges the suggestion of the committee to prioritize 
checking and prevention of illegal encroachments of vacant plots with respect to 
their respective resolutions in terms of legal recourse; intervention from local 
representatives; mitigation through local administration and Police authorities; 
collaboration with State Governments for constructive usage of vacant lands; and 

45 
 
cost effective construction of boundaries/barbed wire fencing and small buildings; 
and work towards targeted solutions to prevent encroachments on its vacant 
plots within a specified time span. Besides these, action for creating public 
awareness, reviewing and updating property records ensuring accurate 
documentation and mapping of postal properties to prevent further encroachment 
is also being taken, in coordination with the concerned agency/Departments.  
ii. All Circles are taking practical and sustainable measures to safeguard vacant 
plots and postal buildings and to prevent encroachments, including legal action, 
coordination with local administration and police, intervention through local 
representatives, collaboration with State Governments for productive use of 
vacant land, and cost-effective boundary fencing or small constructions.  
iii. Efforts are also being made to create public awareness and to review and update 
property records through proper documentation and mapping, in coordination 
with concerned agencies, to prevent future encroachments. 
iv. The Circle wise Action taken and Outcome achieved in this regard is placed at 
Annexure III. 
(Department of Posts F. No. 28-5/ 20thReport/2025/ Bgt dated 17.04.2026) 
For comments of the Committee please see Para no. 22 of Chapter – I. 
 
(Recommendation No.14) 
 
REVENUE GENERATION THROUGH COMMERCIAL UTILIZATION OF VACANT 
PLOTS OF LAND  / BUILDINGS  AND INCREASING ACCESSIBILITY OF POST 
OFFICES 
 
The Committee are given to understand that the Department is working on 
renting out extra space in its buildings for earning extra revenue  and is in the process of 
hiring a Consultant to aid and advise for development/redevelopment of real estate 
assets for revenue generation through measures such as using postal buildings as well 
as vacant plots of land as co-working spaces for entrepreneurs etc. The Committee also 
note the plans of the Department about using vacant plots and vast real estate for public 
value creation in partnership with State Governments for building State Infrastructure 
like PHCs, Schools, Horticulture hubs, nurseries etc. The Department of Posts, 
however, have intimated that no proposal has been received in this regard from any 
State Government so far. During the Sitting, the Committee were apprised that the 

46 
 
Department was in the process of signing an MoU (Memorandum of Understanding) 
with the National Buildings Construction Corporation (NBCC) under the Ministry of 
Housing and Urban Affairs (MoHUA) for the development of 22 vacant plots which have 
been found viable in Tier -I cities, and that a development plan for every individual plot 
would be shared. 
 While responding to a question about revenue generation from renting out or 
leasing surplus postal land or buildings, the Department informed that a leasing and 
licensing policy to lease out surplus space to earn extra revenue has been implemented 
with the head of the Postal Circles being the competent authority for renting / leasing of 
surplus spaces. So far as the due process followed in this respect, the Department 
submitted that after examination and certification of an identified space as surplus by 
the Head of the Postal Division, an Internal Committee reviews and recommends 
whether the surplus space can be offered on a license basis while also proposing the 
minimum license fee based on prevailing market rates. Based on Internal Committee’s 
recommendation, final allotment of the surplus space is done through a transparent 
Open Tendering process. The Department further informed that revenue generation 
was also augmented by effective service delivery through prompt redressal of 
grievances and concerns. The Department has also submitted that out of Rs. 479 
crores allotted towards the Estates Management Scheme for the current Financial Year, 
it was left with only Rs. 123 crore which would be completely utilized during this 
Financial Year and thus the Department was in dire need of funds to carry out planned 
activities towards the objective of revenue generation. The Committee appreciate that 
the Department is striving towards revenue generation through steps such as partnering 
with State Governments for gainful utilization of vacant plots of land; attempts to hire 
consultants for advising on redevelopment of assets; developing viable vacant plots in 
Tier-I cities through partnering with the NBCC; and generating revenue through renting 
surplus spaces and qualitative service delivery. The Committee, however, feel that, the 
planning of the Department for augmenting revenue generation still remains at a 
nascent stage in paper only and hence a significant outcome / achievement is yet to be 
seen. Similarly, the Committee are surprised to note that the Department could not find 
consultants for advising on redevelopment of its assets. Therefore, the Committee 
would like to impress upon the Department to expedite processes through regular 
monitoring and follow up actions and set attainable goals with respect to each of these 
initiatives in the upcoming five -years of the Estates Management Scheme. The 

47 
 
Committee also urge the Department to factor in these ideas in totality while drafting the 
PIB Memo for this Scheme for the next five years. The Committee would like to be 
apprised of the steps taken and progress made with respect to achievement of set 
targets in this regard. 
 The Committee observe that the monetization of the heritage buildings/properties 
of the Department of Posts is a grey area which requires immediate drastic attention 
and concern. The Heritage buildings of the Department hold a great potential for 
monetization through proper publicity and creating a better public visibility and 
awareness.  In order to generate revenue, the Department , while preserving the 
heritage buildings may also consider the feasibility of monetization of their heritage 
properties by initiating several cultural and merchandising activities like Digital 
Exhibitions, Guided tours, Light and Sound shows, promoting Films shootings and 
Photography shoots, leasing out heritage buildings for promoting and advertising 
various Government flagship programmes/schemes and for various socio -cultural  
events like holding philately exhibitions, art and crafts shows, paintings and music 
shows etc. Besides, the Committee urge upon the Department of Posts to make a 
provision for a separate budgetary head for Heritage Maintenance and ensure sufficient 
fund allocation for the same. The Committee would like to be apprised of the action 
taken and progress made in this regard. 
Reply of the Government 
 
i. Department of Posts is currently in the process of finalizing the monetization 
policy approved by Postal Services Board. Concurrently, comments of the other 
stakeholders are also being collated. In addition, Department is in the process of 
generating revenue through certain initiatives. 
ii. Department has signed an MOU with NBCC, a PSU under Ministry of Housing 
and Urban Affairs (MoHUA), for conducting feasibility studies before undertaking 
development/ redevelopment for the use of the Department and for commercial 
utilization.  
iii. The Department has identified 40 post offices under PoC (proof of concept). 
These Post Offices will be developed as per Unified Design and Branding 
transformation based on School of Planning and Architecture SPA 
recommendations, ensuring improved navigation and enhanced service 
experience for the customers. Further, the design manual recommended by SPA 

48 
 
has been circulated to Circles for all upcoming projects. Development of 40 Post 
Offices as per new Design Manual is anticipated to be completed by June, 2026.  
iv. The Department is also working on revenue generation based on utilization of 
Floor Area Ration as a Proof of concept and creation of co-working space. 
v. Further, Department has identified about 200 properties for monetization during 
next year. The Monetization will be carried out through three steps process, i.e. 
Legal Due Diligence, Land Valuation and Transaction Adviser. The process is 
underway.  
vi. The Department welcomes the suggestion of generating revenue through  
feasibility of monetization of their heritage properties by initiating several cultural 
and merchandising activities like Digital Exhibitions, Guided tours, Light and 
Sound shows, promoting Films shootings and Photography shoots, leasing out 
heritage buildings for promoting and advertising various Government flagship 
programmes/schemes and for various socio -cultural  events like holding philately 
exhibitions, art and crafts shows, painting and music shows etc. 
vii. A separate budgetary head for Heritage Maintenance and Restoration of 
Heritage buildings has been created and will be effective from next financial year 
i.e. 2026-27.  
(Department of Posts F. No. 28-5/ 20thReport/2025/ Bgt dated 17.04.2026) 
For comments of the Committee please see Para no. 25 of Chapter – I. 
 
 
(Recommendation No.16) 
 
CURBING RENTAL EXPENDITURE & REDUCING DEPENDENCE ON HIRED / 
RENTED POSTAL BUILDINGS 
 
The Committee observe that due to non -availability of land at the appropriate 
location and insufficiency of funds for construction of new buildings, many Post Offices 
and its other offices are housed in rented buildings. While answering about steps taken 
for systematically reducing dependency on rented buildings for running postal 
operations, the Department informed that a policy has been formulated for utilizing 
vacant plots of land for constructing small post office buildings through budgetary 
support and such buildings range in area from 50.37 sq. metres to 81.04 sq. metres with 
basic facilities like Counters, toilets, Ramps and rail but without staff quarters, 
inspection quarters etc. The Department submitted that every year 40 to 45 small posts 
offices are being constructed and post offices functioning from rented premises are 

49 
 
being shifted there to reduce rental liability. On being asked about there being a fixed 
timeline for reducing usage of rented properties in a phased manner, the Department 
informed that since budgetary support to construct new post office buildings could be 
expected after extension of the Estates Management Scheme, the usage of rented 
properties was expected to be reduced over the next 5 years. Regarding post offices in 
rural areas the Department informed that some offices are running in Panchayat 
Bhawans or free spaces provided by the village. The Department also informed about 
written communications between the Minister of Communications and Chief Ministers of 
respective State Governments seeking Panchayat Bhawans and other available free 
spaces for the use of the Department. The Department also stated that Brach Offices 
are housed in Panchayat Bhawans and other local buildings where space is available at 
a low cost. 
 While replying to a question about creating sustainable low cost infrastructure in 
rural areas, the Department informed that after the revision of guidelines of MPLADS 
(Members of Parliament Local Area Development Scheme) by Ministry of Statistics and 
Programme Implementation w.e.f. 01.04.2023, "Post Offices and related utilities/ 
facilities" has been included in the list of work permissible under MPLADS and 
therefore, in November, 2023 the Department has framed a guideline for availing funds 
under MPLADS for constructing post offices. Acknowledging the impediments faced by 
the Department in reducing dependence on rented premises, the Committee note with 
concern that the quantum of rental expenditure incurred by the Department from 
Financial Years 2020-21 to FY 2024-25 amounts to Rs. 976.29 crore which is more than 
double the amount of funds allocated towards the Estates Management Scheme during 
the five-year period (FYs 2021-22 to 2025-26) of its implementation, i.e. Rs. 479 crores. 
Therefore, taking a prudent view of the situation, the Committee recommend the 
Department to focus on preparing a Circle-wise data regarding rental expenditure during 
the last 5 financial years as well as availability of vacant plots within each Postal Circle. 
After performing a cost benefit analysis, the Department may make all out efforts 
towards construction of low -cost postal infrastructure wherever suitable, while 
simultaneously pursue with respective State Governments to provide space in 
Panchayat Bhawans and wherever possible, to provide space/vacant lands to the 
Department free of cost. Action taken and outcome achieved in this regard may be 
submitted to the Committee at the earliest. 
 

50 
 
Reply of the Government 
i. The Department is trying to make all out efforts towards construction of low -
cost postal infrastructure.  
ii. The Department has formulated a policy for utilizing its vacant plots of land for 
constructing small post offices buildings ranging in area from 50.37 sq. meter 
to 81.04 sq. meter with basic facilities like counters, Rail and Ramps, toilets 
etc. through budgetary support.  
iii. Fund requirements for FY 2026-27 to 2030 -31have been projected in the 
Memorandum for the Expenditure Finance Committee, including the requirement 
for construction of departmental post offices buildings on vacant sites.  
iv. There is also a leasing and licensing policy of the Department to lease out the 
surplus space to earn extra revenue. The head of the Circles is the competent 
authority to rent, lease out the surplus space to generate extra revenue.  
v. After the issue of revised guidelines of MPLADS by  Ministry of Statistics and 
Programme Implementation which came into effect from 01.04.2023 that 
included "Post Offices and related utilities/ facilities"  in list of work permissible 
under MPLADS, the Department has framed guidelines for availing funds under 
MPLADS for constructing post office in November, 2023. The Department 
welcomes funds under MPLADS for its projects. 
vi. The details of Circle -wise data regarding rental expenditure during the last 5 
financial years as well as availability of vacant plots within each Postal Circle is 
placed below: 
Table 
Circle wise data regarding rental expenditure during last 5 Financial years as well as availability of 
Vacant Plots 
  (Rs. in crore)   
S. 
No. 
Name of Circles 2020-
21 
2021-
22 
2022-
23 
2023-24 2024-25 Total  Availability of 
Vacant plots  
1 Andhra Pradesh 7.51 8.26 7.88 11.97 10.29 45.92 94 
2 Assam 3.74 3.22 2.50 3.30 2.93 15.69 14 
3 Bihar  2.62 2.42 2.31 3.07 3.60 14.01 64 
4 Chhattisgarh 1.08 1.16 0.86 1.73 1.36 6.18 5 
5 Delhi 19.24 24.14 17.33 43.03 24.87 128.61 14 
6 Gujarat 6.22 6.40 6.49 7.20 8.17 34.48 53 
7 Haryana 2.11 5.38 4.60 5.60 3.15 20.85 19 
8 Himachal Pradesh 1.30 1.33 1.49 1.48 1.98 7.57 23 
9 Jammu & Kashmir 1.11 1.43 1.40 2.15 2.09 8.18 5 
10 Jharkhand 1.26 1.47 1.13 2.81 1.15 7.82 34 

51 
 
 
(Department of Posts F. No. 28-5/ 20thReport/2025/ Bgt dated 17.04.2026) 
For comments of the Committee please see Para no. 31 of Chapter – I. 
(Recommendation No.17) 
 
MANAGEMENT OF POSTAL ESTATES HELD BY THE DEPARTMENT 
 
The Committee observe that steps being taken for Real Estate Management in 
the Department of Posts include utilization of vacant land for construction of small post 
office buildings for reducing dependence on rented premises, preservation and 
conservation of heritage Postal infrastructure, construction of Postal buildings such as 
Post Offices, Staff quarters, efforts towards valuation of Postal assets for monetization 
and addressing problems of encroachment with the help of local authorities and courts. 
The Committee also note the involvement of other allied Government agencies such as 
CPWD, Local bodies, Municipal authorities, State Archaeological Departments, NBCC 
etc. in the management of estates / land, buildings and vacant plots of Postal lands. 
Regarding the role of technology in effective management of real estate properties, the 
Department has informed that it has geo -tagged its own buildings in Government Land 
Information System (GLIS Portal). The Department has also submitted that under its 
project on Digital Address Code, it has initiated the task of GIS mapping of every single 
location and this will not only help in mapping the vacant plots of postal lands but will 
also prove helpful in Disaster Management. Elaborating on disaster proofing of Postal 
infrastructure, the Department submitted that regular drills are being undertaken to aid 
efforts towards disaster management. The Committee feel that real estate management 
is a mixed bag of challenges and opportunities as it is plagued with multifarious issues, 
11 Karnataka 20.50 15.40 12.52 19.63 17.38 85.43 308 
12 Kerala 8.00 8.76 10.74 11.20 11.67 50.36 134 
13 Madhya Pradesh 3.41 3.75 3.18 4.68 3.65 18.67 37 
14 Maharashtra 23.99 23.82 20.17 25.41 23.48 116.87 77 
15 North East 1.58 1.17 1.34 1.26 1.57 6.94 19 
16 Orissa 3.53 4.59 4.03 6.76 5.48 24.37 25 
17 Punjab 2.77 3.27 2.79 3.65 3.13 15.61 14 
18 Rajasthan 9.17 5.05 5.38 9.21 4.85 33.65 131 
19 Tamil Nadu 16.09 18.91 17.40 27.42 26.21 106.03 140 
20 Telangana 4.41 8.44 5.19 9.39 9.74 37.17 93 
21 Uttar Pradesh 24.43 14.87 26.60 35.34 33.19 134.43 18 
22 Uttarakhand 2.36 1.84 2.40 1.75 1.81 10.16 66 
23 West Bengal 12.76 11.66 14.06 12.54 11.18 62.19 73 
TOTAL 179.16 176.74 171.79 250.57 212.92 991.18 1460 

52 
 
especially the financial crunch, and yet it holds immense potential for drastically 
improving the trajectory of growth for the Postal sector. Therefore, taking a holistic view 
of the situation, the Committee recommend the Department to explore the possibility of 
developing a ‘Real Estate Management Information System’ (RE -MIS) for effectively 
preserving, protecting and managing the most valuable Postal estates and also for 
ensuring that all activities related to this aspect are listed and effectively monitored 
along with their individual outcomes in a time bound manner. The Committee would like 
to be apprised of the steps taken for the development of RE -MIS and the timelines 
envisaged for making it operational for the use of the Department. 
Reply of the Government 
 
i. The Department welcomes the suggestion of the Standing Committee on 
developing a ‘Real Estate Management Information System’ (RE -MIS) that will 
enable effective preservation, protection, and optimized utilization of valuable 
postal estates. Such a system will ensure that all related activities are 
systematically catalogued, tracked, and evaluated, thereby enhancing 
accountability, operational efficiency, and strategic decision -making in real estate 
management. The Department will examine it in consultation with its Technology 
Division. 
ii. In alignment with this vision, the Department has already undertaken significant 
steps by uploading the data of its land and buildings under the Government Land 
Information System (GLIS). These efforts mark crucial progress toward 
developing a centralized and data-rich platform for real estate oversight. 
(Department of Posts F. No. 28-5/ 20thReport/2025/ Bgt dated 17.04.2026) 
 
 
 
 
 
 

53 
 
CHAPTER III 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONSWHICHTHECOMMITTEEDONOTDESIRETO 
PURSUEINVIEWOFTHEREPLIESOFTHEGOVERNMENT 
 
 
-NIL- 

54 
 
CHAPTER IV 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONSIN RESPECT OF WHICHREPLIESOFTHE 
GOVERNMENTHAVENOTBEENACCEPTEDBYTHECOMMITTEEANDREQUIRE 
REITERATION 
 
(Recommendation No. 2) 
CONSTRUCTION OF NEW POSTAL BUILDINGS 
The Committee note that new buildings have been constructed for Post Offices 
and staff quarters by Department of Posts and it has enabled shifting of post offices 
from rented buildings to Departmental buildings with user friendly amenities. The 
Committee understand that Estates Division monitors the progress of building projects 
at Postal Directorate / Postal Circle level with quarterly review meetings. Building Co -
ordination meetings are also held in each of the Circles to monitor its progress. The 
Department has informed that approximately Rs. 198 crores were spent on construction 
of new buildings from Financial Years 2021 -22 to 2024 -25 and against a set target of 
120 a total of 192 postal buildings were constructed during that period. 
The Committee further observe that according to the Circle -wise data provided 
by the Department of Posts, from Financial Years 2020 -21 to 2024 -25, a total of 223 
Postal buildings were constructed by the Department with the maximum number of 
constructions being 40 in the Circle of Gujarat followed by 20 each in the Circles of 
Assam and Uttar Pradesh; and the third highest number of Postal buildings was 18 
constructed in the Circle of Karnataka. However, in the same duration, no constructions 
were done within the Circle of Haryana and only 1 building each was constructed in 
Punjab and Uttarakhand Circles, respectively. 
Acknowledging the accomplishment of targets related to overall construction of 
new Postal buildings across the Country, the Committee, however, note with concern 
that the Circle -wise data shows significant inequalities among Postal Circles in the 
number of new buildings constructed. The Committee recommend that the Department, 
with the help of the Estates Division, undertake a detailed examination of ground 
realities and create a Circle -wise data regarding requirement of Postal buildings within 
individual Postal Circles along with a timeline and required budgetary support for 
achieving the same. It will ensure that benefits under this Scheme are distributed 
equitably as per requirement and not cornered by bigger Postal Circles in the Country. 

55 
 
The Committee desire to be apprised of the action taken and progress made in this 
regard within six months of laying of this Report in Parliament. 
Reply of the Government 
 
i. The Department is regularly reviewing process towards  achieving targets for 
construction of new postal buildings across the country.  
ii. The Department has prepared a Memorandum for Expenditure Finance 
Committee under “Estates Management”, for the next 5 years (FY 2026-27 to 
2030-31) which will provide budgetary support for construction of new and postal 
buildings along with providing other facilities  subject to the approval of fund by 
the Ministry of Finance through EFC Memo. 
iii. It will also ensure that benefits under this scheme are distributed equitably as per 
requirement. 
(Department of Posts F. No. 28-5/ 20thReport/2025/ Bgt dated 17.04.2026) 
 
For comments of the Committee please see Para no. 7 of Chapter – I. 
 
 
(Recommendation No. 9) 
WELFARE COMPONENTS IN BUILDING DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION  – 
OBLIGATION TOWARDS SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT 
Addressing Gender concerns in Postal Offices and new building constructions 
The Committee observe that keeping in view a large number of female 
employees in the Department of Posts, there is a need to address gender -sensitive 
concerns and provide appropriate facilities such as separate ladies’ toilets, feeding 
rooms for lactating mothers and crèches in existing as well as new Postal buildings. 
Further, during the Sitting, when information was sought about setting a timeline for total 
coverage of gender sensitive infrastructure in Postal Buildings, the Department of Posts 
apprised the Committee that these were priority areas and should be possible within the 
normal five-year plan period. 
 The Committee note that whereas data for the total coverage of ladies’ toilets 
and feeding rooms in Departmental buildings was provided by the Department, no data 
was furnished regarding the number of crèches presently functional or those being 

56 
 
proposed to be built in Departmental buildings in future. Circle -wise data regarding 
gender-sensitive infrastructure in Postal buildings, as provided by the Department, 
shows that as on 31 st March, 2025, the Circle of Rajasthan had a total of 206 buildings 
where not even a single separate ladies’ toilet was available. Similarly, 183 buildings in 
the Circle of Bihar and 156 buildings in the Circle of Gujarat remained devoid of the 
facility of separate ladies’ toilets. Further, in the Jammu Kashmir and North East Circles, 
the provision of separate ladies’ toilets was available only in 8 buildings respectively. 
The Committee are disheartened to note that within the Circles of Punjab, 
Haryana and Karnataka there were absolutely no Postal buildings where feeding rooms 
were available for the use of lactating mothers among employees and customers alike.  
Furthermore, as on 31 st March, 2025, there exist a total number of 1,804 Postal 
buildings across Circles with no facility for separate ladies’ toilets and a total number of 
2,368 buildings country -wide across Circles where there are no provisions for feeding 
rooms for lactating mothers. Dismayed with the present precarious status of gender -
sensitive infrastructure in Postal buildings across the Country, the Committee 
recommend the Department to draw up accurate data showing latest Circle -wise 
position of gender -sensitive infrastructure in Postal buildings including ladies’ toilets, 
feeding rooms and crèches while also ascertaining the budgetary support required for 
setting up the same. The Department may also provide a timeline to bridge the gap 
between demand and availability of gender -sensitive Postal infrastructure in all Postal 
buildings of the Country. The Committee would like to be apprised of the details of 
action taken and progress made in this regard. 
Reply of the Government 
 
(a) The details showing latest Circle-wise position of gender -sensitive 
infrastructure in Postal buildings including ladies’ toilets, feeding rooms and 
crèches are as under: 
(i) Details of ladies’ toilets and feeding rooms (as on 31.03.2025) 
Gender concern data (as on 31.03.2025) 
S.NO. Circle 
No of 
buildings 
where 
ladies 
toilets are 
required 
No of 
buildings 
where 
ladies 
toilets 
are 
available  
No of 
buildings 
where 
ladies 
toilets 
are not 
available  
No of 
buildings 
where 
feeding 
rooms are 
required 
No of 
buildings 
where 
Feeding 
rooms 
are 
available  
No of 
buildings 
where 
Feeding 
rooms are not 
available  

57 
 
I II III IV V VI VII VIII 
1 Andhra 
Pradesh 164 124 40 105 2 103 
2 Assam 200 61 139 19 2 17 
3 Bihar 226 43 183 174 6 168 
4 Chhatisgarh 48 35 13 48 2 46 
5 Delhi 132 61 71 100 6 94 
6 Gujarat 361 205 156 144 1 143 
7 Haryana 79 60 19 37 0 37 
8 Himachal 
Pradesh 69 46 23 52 1 51 
9 Jammu & 
kashmir 37 8 29 37 3 34 
10 Jharkhand 75 29 46 75 1 74 
11 Karnataka 296 191 105 42 16 26 
12 Kerala 255 181 74 110 2 108 
13 Madhya 
Pradesh 200 135 65 191 3 188 
14 Maharashtra 335 239 96 106 7 99 
15 North East 86 8 78 87 2 85 
16 Odisha 182 132 50 98 11 87 
17 Punjab 175 130 45 80 0 80 
18 Rajasthan 320 114 206 57 4 53 
19 Tamil Nadu 243 184 59 226 11 215 
20 Telangana 154 97 57 64 3 61 
21 Uttar Pradesh 298 159 139 218 2 216 
22 Uttarakhand 54 38 16 44 1 43 
23 West Bengal 176 62 114 151 4 147 
  Total 4165 2342 1823 2265 90 2175 
 
(ii) Details of Creches presently functional (as on 31.03.2025) 
S.No. Name of Circle. 
No of Creches presently 
functional as on 
31.03.2025 
Proposed to be built in 
Departmental buildings in 
future 
1 Andhra Pradesh 0 0 
2 Assam 0 0 
3 Bihar 0 1 
4 Chhattisgarh 0 0 
5 Delhi 0 1 
6 Gujarat 3 1 
7 Haryana 0 0 
8 Himachal Pradesh 1 1 
9 Jammu & Kashmir 0 0 
10 Jharkhand 0 0 
11 Karnataka 2 0 

58 
 
12 Kerala 0 0 
13 Madhya Pradesh 0 0 
14 Maharashtra 1 1 
15 North-East 0 0 
16 Odisha 0 0 
17 Punjab 0 0 
18 Rajasthan 0 0 
19 Tamil Nadu 1 1 
20 Telangana 1 0 
21 Uttar Pradesh 1 2 
22 Uttarakhand 0 5 
23 West Bengal 1 0 
Total 11 13 
 
 
(b) Fund requirements for addressing gender concerns are projected in the 
Expenditure Finance Committee Memorandum for the next 5 years (FY 2026 -
27 to 2030-31) for the Estates Management scheme .  Budgetary support will 
aid in bridging the gap between demand and availability of gender -sensitive 
infrastructure in all Postal buildings. 
(c) Fulfilment of these obligations will depend on the receipt of funds under the 
scheme. 
(Department of Posts F. No. 28-5/ 20thReport/2025/ Bgt dated 17.04.2026) 
 
For comments of the Committee please see Para no. 13 of Chapter – I. 
 
 (Recommendation No. 15)  
REVENUE GENERATION THROUGH COMMERCIAL UTILIZATION OF VACANT 
PLOTS OF LAND / BUILDINGS AND INCREASING ACCESSIBILITY OF POST 
OFFICES 
The Committee note that viability -based rationalization and relocation of Post 
Offices along with improving their accessibility for general public are important aspects 
to consider in view of augmenting revenue generation of the Department of Posts. The 
Department has apprised the Committee about work being done to increase Postal 
network in rural areas and a resultant addition of 11,000 offices, while also working 
towards improving the viability of the Postal network in urban areas through the process 
of rationalization which entails merging of Post Offices based on its viability. With 
respect to mandate for presence of Post Offices in rural areas, the Department of Posts 

59 
 
informed that a rural Post Office is supposed to be present within 5 km distance from 
every village and that a Country -wide household survey is being conducted to assess 
the needs of citizens regarding Postal services. So far as problems being faced in 
relocating post offices are concerned, the Department informed about the difficulties in 
finding suitable buildings of the desired dimensions on the ground floor for running post 
offices and other postal offices at a fair rent. 
 Regarding steps taken to increase accessibility of post offices, the Department 
submitted that it is working towards increasing physical accessibility of post offices for 
the differently -abled and the elderly while also working towards increasing access in 
terms of marketability through efforts such as improving service delivery, building 
infrastructure, visibility through signages and improved branding etc. The Committee 
are of the view that revenue generation of the Department can be boosted through 
measures such as rationalization and relocation aimed at improving viability of the 
Postal network and increasing accessibility of Post Offices for consumers. While taking 
note of the efforts of the Department in these areas, the Committee would like the 
Department to fix a timeline and work on undertaking a Circle -wise study to ascertain 
the needs and viability of Post offices in rural as well as urban areas, improving physical 
accessibility through upgradation of Postal infrastructure with installations of ramps, 
rails, low-height lifts, wheelchairs, Braille signages etc., and improving marketability of 
Postal services through visibility, branding, efficient delivery, customer friendly 
approach, customer satisfaction etc. The Committee desire to be apprised of the action 
taken and progress made in these aspects. The Committee also desire to be apprised 
of the outcome of the Country-wide household survey being conducted by the 
Department to assess the needs of citizens regarding Postal services. 
 
Reply of the Government 
I. Improved infrastructure, visibility and branding of rural p ost offices has been 
included for approval of EFC for next five years 2026-27 till 2030-31. 
II.  As regards, upgradation of Postal infrastructure with installations of ramps, rails, 
low-height lifts, wheelchairs, Braille signages etc. , these are included in the 
Memorandum for the Estates Management Scheme 2026-27 to 2030-31 
III. The details of Circle -wise study to ascertain the needs and viability of Post 
offices in rural as well as urban areas, improving physical accessibility through 

60 
 
upgradation of Postal infrastructure with installations of ramps, rails, low -height 
lifts, wheelchairs, Braille signages etc., is placed at Annexure IV. 
(Department of Posts F. No. 28-5/ 20thReport/2025/ Bgt dated 17.04.2026) 
 
For comments of the Committee please see Para no. 28 of Chapter – I. 
 

61 
 
CHAPTER V 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES  
OF THE  GOVERNMENT ARE INTERIM IN NATURE 
 
(Recommendation No. 3) 
RENOVATION OF POST OFFICE BUILDINGS 
The Committee note that approximately Rs. 158 crores were spent on renovation 
of Postal buildings from Financial Years 2021 -22 to 2024-25 during which, against a set 
target of 180 a total of 362 Postal buildings were renovated. While deposing before the 
Committee during the Sitting, the representatives of the Department informed that out  of 
4,373 Departmental Buildings, 1,895 need substantial repairs, 674 need comprehensive 
repairs and a total of 110 buildings need to be demolished for reconstruction. Further, 
regarding maintenance of Sri Vijaya Puram, Head Post Office (erstwhile Port Blair HPO) 
as raised by the Committee during their Study Visit to the Union Territory of Andaman 
and Nicobar, the Department clarified that it is not a heritage building and that an 
amount of Rs. 64.28 lakh has been spent on its maintenance from FYs 2021 -22 to 
2024-25. 
 The Committee are given to understand that the Department has to adhere to the 
maximum expenses limit of Rs. 50,000 while renovating a rented building and 
renovation in rented Postal properties is often delayed due to denial or delayed consent 
of landlords as they are not willing to pay for the renovation. While deposing about the 
timeline for completion of renovation activities in Postal buildings across the Country, 
the Department has informed that it plans to complete renovation and installation 
activities in postal buildings across the Country over the next 5 years.  Moreover, with 
respect to estimated funds that would be needed to suitably upgrade and renovate 
existing Postal infrastructure, the Department has submitted that a Public Investment 
Board (PIB) Memorandum for the Estates Management Scheme for the next 5 years is 
under preparation and the NITI Aayog has been approached for Third Party Evaluation 
of the performance of the Scheme for the period from FYs 2021 -22 to 2025-26, as this 
is a requirement for continuation of the Scheme beyond 2025 -26. While acknowledging 
the accomplishment of physical targets in renovation of Postal buildings from FYs 2021 -
22 to 2024 -25, the Committee are concerned about the difficulties faced by the 
Department in renovation of rented postal buildings. The Committee, therefore, call 
upon the Department to focus on assessing whether rented postal infrastructure can be 

62 
 
suitably renovated and upgraded within the given expenditure limit of Rs. 50,000 over 
the next 5 years, as planned; and accordingly prepare the PIB Memorandum containing 
the total estimate of funds required for renovating country -wide postal infrastructure 
under the Estates Management Scheme and expeditiously take up the matter to 
enhance the expenditure limit of Rs. 50,000 to an appropriate level. The Committee 
desire to be apprised of the time frame for completion of this exercise and submission of 
the PIB Memo along with details. 
 
Reply of the Government 
i. The expenditure limit generally ranges from ₹ 50,000 to ₹5,00,000 for rented post 
offices depending upon the size of post office and required renovation work by 
installing fixtures, signage, and other necessary elements to improve the overall 
look and feel of the infrastructure.  
ii. The Department has prepared a Memorandum for the Expenditure Finance 
Committee (EFC) under the Estates Management scheme for the next five years 
(FY 2026–27 to 2030 –31). The proposal inter alia seeks budgetary support for 
the renovation of post office buildings, including the upgradation and branding of 
post offices functioning in rented premises. These activities will be undertaken 
subject to the approval of funds by the Ministry of Finance through the EFC 
memorandum. 
 
(Department of Posts F. No. 28-5/ 20thReport/2025/ Bgt dated 17.04.2026) 
 
 
****** 
 
 
 
     NEW DELHI; DR. NISHIKANT DUBEY, 
    05 August, 2026  Chairperson, 
14 Sravana, 1948 (Saka) Standing Committee on  
Communications and Information Technology. 

63 
 
ANNEXURE – II 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE OBSERVATIONS/ 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THEIR TWENTY-SECOND REPORT  
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
[Vide Paragraph No. 5 of Introduction] 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by  the 
Government 
 
          Rec. Sl. Nos.:1,4,5,6,7,8,10,11,12,13,14,16 &17 
Total 13 
Percentage    76.47 
(ii)  Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the replies of the Government 
 
         Rec. Sl. No.: NIL  
Total 0 
Percentage 0 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and require 
reiteration 
        Rec. Sl. No.: 2,9 & 15 
 
Total  01 03 
Percentage 17.64 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the replies of the 
Government are of interim in nature 
 
        Rec. Sl. Nos.:3  
Total 01 
Percentage 5.88 
 
 