STANDING COMMITTEE ON COMMUNICATIONS  
AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY  
(2024-25) 
 
 
EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF COMMUNICATIONS  
(DEPARTMENT OF POSTS) 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
of the Committee contained in their Fifty-seventh Report (Seventeenth Lok 
Sabha) on ‘Department of Posts-Initiatives and Challenges’ 
 
FIRST REPORT 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
 
 
December 2024/ Agrahayana 1946 (Saka) 
 
1 
 


 
FIRST REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
COMMUNICATIONS AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(2024-25) 
 
 
EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
MINISTRY OF COMMUNICATIONS  
(DEPARTMENT OF POSTS) 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
of the Committee contained in their Fifty-seventh Report (Seventeenth Lok 
Sabha) on ‘Department of Posts-Initiatives and Challenges’ 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on           18.12.2024 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on              18.12.2024 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
December, 2024/Agrahayana,1946 (Saka) 


CCIT No. 402 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
©2024 By Lok Sabha Secretariat 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in 
Lok Sabha (Seventeenth Edition) and Printed by Lok Sabha Secretariat, New 
Delhi-110001. 

 
CONTENTS 
 Page 
No. 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (ii) 
INTRODUCTION (iii) 
CHAPTER I Report………………………………………………………………………  
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government…………………………………………………………………… 
 
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of replies of the Government……………………………… 
 
CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and require 
reiteration ……………………………………………………………………. 
 
CHAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies are of 
interim in nature……………………………………………………………… 
 
 ANNEXURES  
I. Minutes of the Seventh Sitting of the Committee held on 16.12.2024  
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in their Fifty -seventh Report 
(Seventeenth Lok Sabha)  
             
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
Composition of the Standing  Committee on Communications and  
Information Technology (2024-25) 
 
Dr. Nishikant Dubey - Chairperson 
 
Lok Sabha 
  
2. Shri C.N. Annadurai 
3. Shri Anil Baluni 
4. Dr. Rabindra Narayan Behera 
5. Shri Anup Sanjay Dhotre 
6. Shri Gurmeet Singh Meet Hayer 
7. Shri Sanjay Haribhau Jadhav 
8. Shri S. Supongmeren Jamir 
9. Shri Appalanaidu Kalisetti 
10. Smt. Poonamben Hematbhai Maadam 
11. Ms. Mahua Moitra 
12. Shri G. Kumar Naik 
13. Shri Shafi Parambil 
14. Dr. M.K. Vishnu Prasad 
15. Ms. Kangna Ranaut 
16. Shri Radheshyam Rathiya 
17. Shri Ramasahayam Raghuram Reddy 
18. Shri Arun Kumar Sagar 
19. Shri Devesh Shakya 
20. Shri Vishnu Datt Sharma 
21. Shri Rajesh Verma 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
22. Shri Saket Gokhale* 
23. Smt. Priyanka Chaturvedi 
24. Shri Ilaiyaraaja 
25. Shri Amar Pal Maurya 
26. Dr. Sasmit Patra 
27. Shri V. Vijayendra Prasad 
28. Shri S. Niranjan Reddy 
29. Shri Kartikeya Sharma 
30. Shri Lahar Singh Siroya  
31. Shri K.T.S. Tulsi 
 
Secretariat  
 
1. Shri Y. M. Kandpal                   - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. A. Jyothirmayi     - Director 
3. Smt. Rinky Singh                       - Executive Officer 
____________________________________________________________________ 
Committee constituted w.e.f. 26 th September, 2024 vide Para No.833 of Bulletin Part -II dated                  
26th September, 2024. 
* Shri Saket Gokhale has been nominated vide Para No. 853 of Bulletin Part –II dated 03rd October, 2024. 
 
 
 
 

 
INTRODUCTION 
I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Communications and Information 
Technology (2024 -25), having been authorized by th e Committee, present this  First 
Report on Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ Recommendations of 
the Committee contained in their Fifty -seventh Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on the 
subject ‗Department of Posts - Initiatives and Challenges‘   relating to the Ministry of 
Communications (Department of Posts). 
2. The Fifty-seventh Report was presented to Lok Sabha and also laid on the Table 
of Rajya Sabha on 8 th February, 2024.  The Ministry of Communications (Department of 
Posts) furnished thei r Action Taken Notes on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Fifty-seventh Report on 8th May, 2024. 
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their Sitting held on 
16th December, 2024. 
4. For facility of reference and conven ience, Observations/Recommendations of the 
Committee have been printed in bold in Chapter-I of the Report.  
5. An analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Fifty-seventh Report of the Committee 
is given at Annexure-II. 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
New Delhi;    DR. NISHIKANT DUBEY, 
 16  December, 2024 Chairperson, 
25  Agrahayana, 1946 (Saka) Standing Committee on  
Communications and Information Technology. 

1 
 
CHAPTER I 
REPORT 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Communi cations and Information 
Technology deals with the action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Fifty-Seventh 
Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on ‗Department of Posts - Initiatives and Challenges ' 
relating to the Ministry of Communications (Department of Posts). 
 
2. The Fifty-seventh Report was presented to Lok Sabha/laid in Rajya Sabha on                          
8th February, 202 4.  It contained 15 Observations/Recommendations. Replies of the 
Government in respect of all the Observations/Recommendations have been received 
from the Ministry of Communications (Department of Posts) . All the 15 
Recommendations have been categorized as accepted and have been placed under 
Chapter-II. However, in view of the Act ion Taken Reply of the Department, some of the 
Recommendations (Nos. 2, 6, 7, 9 & 11) have been commented upon in Chapter-I of the 
Report. Categorization of all the Observations/Recommendations is as under. 
 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been  accepted by 
the Government 
 
Rec. Sl. Nos.:– 1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8, 9,10,11,12,13,14 and 15 
 
  Total-15 
Chapter-II 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the replies of the Government 
 
 
Rec. Sl. No.:– NIL 
 
  Total — NIL  
Chapter-III 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of 
the Government have not been accepted by the Committee and 
require reiteration 
 
Rec. Sl. No.:– NIL 
 
  Total – NIL 
Chapter-IV 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in r espect of which replies of 
the Government are of interim in nature  
 
Rec. Sl. No.:– NIL 
 
  Total – NIL 
Chapter-V 
 

2 
 
3. The Committee trust that utmost importance would be given to 
implementation of the Observations/Recommendations accepted by the 
Government. The Committee further desire that Action Taken Statement on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in Chapter -I of this Report should be 
furnished to them at an early date. 
 
4. The Committee will now deal with action taken by the Government on some of 
their recommendations.   
 
Roadmap for Revenue Generation  
 (Recommendation Sl. No. 2) 
5. The Committee, in their Fifty-seventh Report, had recommended as under: 
―The Committee note that the Department have introduced various citizen 
centric services such as Aadh aar facility in the Post Offices, Post Offices 
Passport Seva Kendras (POPSK) which has not only enhanced the social 
relevance of the Department but also led to increase in revenue. Opening 
of more savings bank accounts including Senior Citizen Savings 
Schemes/Sukanya Samridhi Yojana Accounts for senior citizen and the 
girl child is being undertaken for increased remuneration from Ministry of 
Finance. The Department are continuously trying to diversify its business 
area and products to increase the revenue g eneration. The Department 
are adopting modern technological methods and upgrading its physical 
infrastructure for improvement in Mail Delivery System. With the 
implementation of core system integration and dedicated road transport 
network, it is trying to improve the efficiency in the delivery as well as real 
time monitoring of mail system which will help in achieving 10% market 
share in the parcel and mail segments by 2024. A major part of the 
expenditure of the Department i.e. 91% goes into salary and pen sion and 
other allowances. Department has also forayed into citizen centric 
services like CSC (Common Service Centre). Post offices are being 
developed as the centre of financial inclusion by means of IPPB and 
POSB banking facilities. By carrying out all t hese activities, the 
Department is trying to earn revenue and reduce its deficit.  
 The Committee further note that the Department are earning 
revenue from various postal services/products like Speed Post; Business 
Post; Express Parcel; Business Parcel; Bi ll Mail Service; e -Post; Postage 
through Franking Machines and Pre -postage; Sale of Stamps; 
Commemorative Stamps; My Stamps; Philatelic Ancillaries; Money Order 
& Indian Postal Order; Retail Post; Logistic Post; E -Bill Collection; Railway 
ticket booking; M GNREGA; Net Receipts / Payments to Other Postal 
Administration (Other Countries); Savings Bank & Cash Certificate 
Remuneration etc. The major obstacles being faced by the Department in 
revenue generation are online submission of Job application, Online 
money transmission, Digital payments through RTGS, NEFT, IMPS, 
Competition with private courier service s and availability of instantaneous 
communication through messaging apps and social media. The 

3 
 
Committee are aware , the Department are planning to take meas ures to 
remove the obstacles and contain the revenue deficit. Due to considerable 
slowdown in economic activities during the pandemic which badly 
impacted the postal services, the financial activities reduced considerably.  
The Department are streamlining all its activities to improve the efficiency 
and periodically review their services and products keeping in view the 
changing market scenario, customer needs, industry benchmarks etc. and 
takes steps/action to modify service features to improve the postal 
services and boost the revenue growth of the Department. Technology 
integration and infrastructure up -gradation is also being done in a 
systematic manner to increase the efficiency and reduce the cost of 
operation. The Department have focused approach to c ater to the needs 
of the emerging markets viz. e-Commerce to increase revenue. 
 The Committee while expressing hope that these initiatives will be 
helpful in increasing the profitability of the Department, recommend that 
the Department should form tie -ups with Government agencies like KVIC, 
Tribes India, etc. which could be a big potential revenue driver for them 
paired with aggressive marketing. The Committee feel that monetisation of 
land parcels, construction of warehouses on land owned by the 
Department will mobilize much needed funds for the Dept t.  The 
Committee are of the opinion that the Department should exploit their 
unparalleled reach by tie up with e-commerce companies to augment their 
revenue earn ings. The use of Post Office buildings to provide  retail 
services should also be explored. The Committee recommend that the 
Department should aggressively explore such opportunities in the market 
for growing business and continue with efforts to augment revenue and 
reduce deficit.‖  
 
6. In their Action Taken Reply, the Department of Posts submitted as under:– 
―The Department is fully committed to make continued efforts as advised 
by the Committee. Out of 1000 DNKs enabled for exports, 904 have 
already received booking from customers.  The Revenue accrued to  the  
Department is around Rs. 25 Crore so far has considerable growth 
potential with stabilization of the scheme.  Integrations with e -commerce 
companies, online customs clearance and documentation, cost savings 
and value -added offerings contribute to the financial sustainability of the 
Department while facilitating exports. 
Department aims to streamlining its activities by periodic review of 
services and products, adapting to changing market scenarios and 
customer needs, which are crucial aspects for reven ue growth.  
Additionally, aggressive marketing and strategic partnerships, such as tie -
ups with e -commerce companies, banks and other Govt. agencies will 
further enhance revenue generation opportunities.  Technology induction 
and infrastructure upgrade for  maintaining its unparalleled reach and 
service quality are other key aspects to revenue generation.  Establishing 
a dedicated road transport network & set up of nodal delivery centers, real 
time monitoring etc are some other factors to enhance the efficie ncy of the 
Mail Delivery System, which shall eventually lead to growth in business 
and revenue generation. 
The Department is making necessary technological upgradations to match 
industry standards and garner a l arger share of the Courier, Express and 
Parcel (CEP) market. Application Programming Interface (APIs) are being 

4 
 
developed for data exchanges between the Department of Posts and its 
ecommerce partners and other customers. APIs have been developed for 
parcel services such as Pick -up, Tariff Calculation , PIN code validation, 
Parcel Scan events, Routing, Label Generation and Cancellation. A 
Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) between Department of Posts and 
Tribal Co-operative Marketing Development Federation of India (TRIFED) 
for delivery of tribal product s of the artisans of North -Eastern India was 
signed on 06.06.2023. The Department of Posts has entered in 
partnership with 14 regional offices of TRIBES India and is providing 
logistics support to artisans to connect their products with the market. 
Apart f rom this, Department is also working with major e -commerce 
companies like Amazon, Shiprocket, Decathlon etc.  
The Department is using its vacant land for construction of Postal 
buildings to reduce its rental liability. The Department has 25081 
Departmental Post Offices, out of this 19324 Post Offices are functioning 
from rented buildings. In last 5 years, 182 new Postal buildings have been 
constructed.‖ 
 
7. The Standing Committee on Communications and Information Technology 
(2023-24), in their Fifty-seventh Report, had taken note of the initiatives of the 
Department for containing the revenue deficit and for improving the efficiency of its 
services and products . They  had hoped that the se initiatives would help in 
augmenting their profitability. Some of the othe r suggestions made by the 
Committee were (a) to form tie -ups with Government agencies like KVIC, Tribes 
India, etc .; (b) to monetize  land parcels and construct warehouses on the land 
owned by the Department to mobilize funds; (c) to exploit their unparalle led reach 
by tie up with e -commerce companies to augment their revenue earnings ; (d)  to 
explore the use of post office building s to provide retail services; and (e) to 
aggressively seek opportunities in the market for growing business and continue 
with efforts to augment revenue and reduce deficit.  
The Department of Posts , in their Action Taken Reply , submitted that they 
are fully committed to make efforts as advised by the Committee. They have also 
submitted that they are (i) making necessary technological upgradations to match 
industry standards an d garner a larger share of the Courier, Express and Parcel 
(CEP) market; (ii) developing Application Programming Interface for data 
exchanges between the Department of Posts and its e -commerce partners and 
other customers; (iii) aiming to streamlin e their activities by periodic review of 
services and products, adapting to changing market scenarios and customer 
needs, which are crucial aspects for revenue growth ; (iv)  a Memorandum of 
Understanding (MoU) between D epartment of Posts and Tribal Co -operative 
Marketing Development Federation of India (TRIFED) for delivery of tribal products 

5 
 
of the artisans of North -Eastern India was signed on 06.06.2023 ; (v) entered in 
partnership with 14 regional offices of TRIBES Ind ia and is providing logistics 
support to artisans to connect their products with the market ; (vi) Working with 
major e -commerce companies like Amazon, Shiprocket, Decathlon , etc.; and (vii) 
using its vacant land for construction of Postal buildings to redu ce its rental 
liability.  
Having taken note of the various steps taken by the Department w.r.t. their 
Recommendations, the Committee desire to be apprised of the updated status on 
all initiatives mentioned by them [from point (i) to (vii)] particularly about the MoU 
with TRIFED and partnership with 14 regional offices of TRIBES India.  The 
Committee note that the Department is silent in replying to the recommendation to 
monetise the land parcels and construct warehouses on the land owned by the 
Department to  mobilise funds. The response/action taken in this regard may be 
communicated to the Committee.  Further, while noting that out of  25,081 
Departmental Post Offices, 19 ,324 are functioning from rented buildings  and 182 
new Postal buildings have been construc ted during last 5 years , the Committee 
would like to call upon the Department to continue their efforts for utilising its 
vacant land for  constructing new Postal Buildings so that their rental liabilities  
could be reduced and enlighten the Committee about the outcome along  with the 
updated details of their vacant land. 
 
Encroachment of Post Office Lands 
 (Recommendation Sl. No. 6) 
8. The Committee , in their Original Report, had made the following 
Observation/Recommendation:– 
―The Committee note that the number  of encroached plots owned by 
Department of Posts is the highest in Karnataka (38) and in Bihar (27) for 
the last three years. The Department have informed that they are making 
all-out efforts to remove encroachment with the help of public 
representatives, local administrations and judicial remedies available. In 
order to check the threat of encroachment, Estate Officers have been 
appointed/nominated in each Circle under the Public Premises (Eviction of 
Unauthorized Occupants) Act, 1971 and notified in the Gazette of India to 
exercise the powers of Estate Officers to deal with cases related to 
unauthorized occupation of Departmental lands and buildings. Also, 
boundary walls are being constructed on the vacant lands. To utilize the 
vacant lands, Department is  constructing Head Post Office buildings 
(where they are presently being operated from rented buildings) and small 
Post Offices with locally available materials for working strength up to 5 
persons. The Committee further note that the Department had paid R s. 

6 
 
167 crore as rent in 2017 -18, 161 crore in 2018 -19, 169 crore in 2019 -20 
and 90 crore till December, 2020.  
The Committee further note that the Department is lagging behind  in the 
implementation of the Sugamya Bharat Abhiyan where 310 buildings were 
retrofitted in 2018-19, 33 in 2019 -20 and 34 in 2020 for the use of the 
differently-abled. The Committee exhort the Department to make renewed 
efforts to reclaim the la nds encroached by unscrupulous  elements and 
take pre -emptive measures of fencing the plots and employing security 
personnel. The Committee also  recommend that the Department may 
speed up the retrofitting of buildings to the  benefit of the differently 
abled and make them more accessible thereby increasing the customer 
base and building brand i mage as a disabled friendly organiza tion. The 
Committee also press upon the Department to conduct access audits for 
the post office buildings on an annual basis and take follow up actio n to 
the best of its abilities.‖ 
 
9. The Department of Posts, in their Action Taken Reply, submitted as under:– 
―The recommendation of the Committee has been noted. Department is 
making all -out efforts to remove encroachment with the help of public 
representatives, local administrations and judicial remedies available. In 
order to check the threat of encroachment, (a) Estate Officers have been 
appointed/nominated in each Circle under the Public Premises (Eviction of 
Unauthorised Occupants) Act, 1971 and notified in the Gazette of India to 
exercise the powers of Estate Officers to  deal with cases related to 
unauthorized occupation of departmental lands and buildings and (b) 
boundary walls are being constructed on the vacant lands. Department is 
constructing Post Office buildings on vacant lands which ultimately check 
the encroachme nt. Department has constructed 182 Postal Buildings in 
last 5 years. 
 
Department of Posts constructs ramps and rails, under ―Sugamya Bharat 
Abhiyan‖, for making post offices accessible to the differently abled 
persons. Construction of rail and ramps are ma ndatory for all new 
buildings constructed in the Department of Posts, while old buildings are 
also retrofitted with such facilities. 397 Braille Signages have been 
constructed by the Department in the buildings making them easily 
accessible to differently abled persons. The details are as under: 
Sl. 
No. 
Activity Constructed during last 3 years and 
up to 31.03.2024 
1 Ramps and railings 1514 
2 Adaptive Restrooms 283 
3 Tactile floorings 285 
Circle have set a monitoring committee for the implementation of t he 
accessibility norms in accordance with the Rights of person with 
Disabilities Act, 2016. As on December 2023, 728 Access Audits have 
been conducted by the Circles at their levels.‖ 
 

7 
 
10. The Committee, in their Original Report, had noted that the number of 
encroached plots owned by Department of Posts was the highest in Karnataka (38) 
and in Bihar (27) and they were lagging behind in the implementation of the 
Sugamya Bharat Abhiyan where in 310 buildings were retrofitted with ramps and 
railings in 2018-19, 33 in 2019-20 and 34 in 2020 for the use of the differently-abled. 
The Committee, therefore, had exhorted the Department to make renewed efforts 
to reclaim the lands encroached by unscrupulous elements  and  to take pre -
emptive measures of fencing the plots , employing security personne l and 
amelioration of Service Conditions of Gramin Dak Sevaks . The Committee had 
also recommended the Department to speed up the retrofitting of buildings to the 
benefit of the differently -abled and to conduct a ccess audits for th e Post Office 
buildings on an annual basis.  
Taking note of  the efforts made by the Department  for removing 
encroachment with the help of public representatives, local administrations and 
judicial remedies available, the Committee observe that in order to make buildings 
easily accessible to differently -abled persons , Monitoring C ommittee for the 
implementation of the accessibility norms in accordance with the Rights of Person 
with Disabilities Act, 2016  has been set up.  Further,  as on December , 2023, 728 
Access Audits have been conducted by the Circles at their levels. The Committee 
desire to have an updated status about the Monitoring Committee that was set up 
for the implementation of the accessibility norms and also furnish the action taken 
on the 728 Ac cess Audits that have been conducted by the Circles till December , 
2023. 
 
Amelioration of service conditions of Gramin Dak Sevaks including financial 
upgradation 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 7) 
11. The Committee , in their Original Report, made the following 
observations/recommendations:–  
―The Committee note that at present, 2.37 lakh Gramin Dak Sevaks (GDS) 
are working in the Department of Posts. The major duties of the Gramin 
Dak Sevak s are sm ooth and timely functioning of Post Offices, overall 
management of postal facilities, maintenance of records, marketing postal 
services, procurement of business, conveyance and delivery of mail at 
doorstep, deposits/payments/other transactions under IPPB. The GDS 
work for a minimum of four hours and maximum five hours a day an d are 
being paid Time Related Continuity Allowance (TRCA). The Committee 
note that a  Committee was set up to examine the TRCA structure, long 

8 
 
pending issues and other service conditions of Gramin Dak Sevaks under 
the Chairmanship of Shri Kamlesh Chandra, Retired Member, Postal 
Services Board, vide Gazette Notification dated 19.11.2015. The said 
Committee submitted its report on 24.11.2016.  Some of the  
recommendations of Kamlesh Chandra Committee Report have been 
implemented like Time Related Continuity A llowance (TRCA), 
enhancement of GDS Gratuity, Service Discharge Benefits, 180 days 
Maternity Leave to female GDS, Composite Allowance, Cash Conveyance 
Allowance, Combined Duty Allowance, Risk and Hardship Allowance, 
Issuance of Identity Cards, Voluntary Di scharge Scheme, Children 
Education Facilitation Allowance, Limited Transfer Facility and Emergency 
leave.  
The Committee appreciate that the Department has taken welfare 
measures for the GDS such as Maternity leave for female GDS  and 
Children Education Fa cilitation Allowance, Risk and Hardship Allowance 
and other allowances like Office maintenance, stationery, boat , cycle 
maintenance, combined duty allowance etc. However, the Committee still 
feel that a lot of ground needs to be covered in the matter as t he GDS 
have not been provided any group health insurance.  The Committee 
expect the Dept. to pay attention to the financial upgradation of GDS on 
completion of 12 years, 24 years and 36 years of engagement. The 
Committee are also perturbed to note that the GDS are not covered  under 
the Employees‘ Provident Fund Act or Employees‘ State Insurance Act 
and expect the Department to examine the matter.  
The Committee further recommend that the scope of Circle Welfare fund 
be extended to cover immediate family me mbers such as dependent 
daughter in law, dependent separated/unmarried daughter and dependent 
grandchildren to protect them from destitution in the unfortunate event of 
death of the Gramin Dak Sevak. The Department may keep the 
Committee apprised of the progress made in the matter.‖ 
 
 
12. The Department of Posts, in their Action Taken Reply, submitted as under:– 
―The Department has recently introduced a Gramin Dak Sevak (Grant of 
Financial Upgradation) Scheme, 2024 on 15.03.2024.  Under the Scheme, 
every GDS wi ll be eligible for three financial upgradations of a fixed 
amount of Rs. 360/ -, Rs. 460/- and Rs. 600/- on completion of 12, 24 and 
36 years of his engagement. The scheme will remove stagnation in their 
service conditions.‖ 
 
13. The Committee, in their Original Report, had noted that there were 2.37 lakh 
Gramin Dak Sevaks (GDS s) working in the Department of Posts . To examine long 
pending issues and other service conditions of Gramin Dak Sevaks  a Committee 
under the Chairmanship of  Shri Kamlesh Chandra, Retd Mem ber, Postal Services  
Board was set up on 19.11.2015 and it had submitted its Report on 24.11.2016.  
Some of the recommendations  of the Kamlesh Chandra Committee Report were 
implemented. H owever, the Committee find that the Department has been silent 
regarding group health insurance.  Further, t he Committee had also expected the 
Department to examine the matter wherein the GDSs were not covered under the 

9 
 
Employees’ Provident Fund Act or Employees’ State Insurance Act  and had 
recommended that the scope of Cir cle Wel fare Fund be extended to cover 
immediate family members such as dependent daughter in law, dependent 
separated/unmarried daughter and dependent grandchildren to protect them from 
destitution in the unfortunate event of death of the Gramin Dak Sevak.  
On the other hand, t he Department  have merely stated that  ‘Gramin Dak 
Sevak (Grant of Financial Upgradation) Scheme, 2024 ’ was introduced on 
15.03.2024, wherein every GDS would be eligible for three financial upgradations 
of a fixed amount of Rs. 360/ -, Rs. 460/- and Rs. 600/- on completion of 12, 24 and 
36 years respectively of his engagement  and this scheme will remove stagnation 
in their service conditions . The Committee note  with concern  that except for the  
information on a meagre financial upgradation of GDS, the reply of the Department 
is silent on all other aspects . The Committee would like  to be apprised of the 
status of action taken on all the suggestions/concerns expressed  by the 
Committee. 
Strategic Role and building image of the Department of Posts 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 9) 
14. The Committee , in their Original Report, made the following 
observation/recommendation:– 
―The Committee note that Department of Posts (DoP) had traditionally 
been a carrier of mails and documents and the entire transmission,  
processing and delivery network was built for documents and small 
packets. As market has now shifted to merchandise parcels, entire 
transmission, processing and delivery infrastructure is being created 
afresh for handling parcels. Department has successfu lly implemented 
computerization & networking of its more than 1.64 lakh Post Offices in 
order to provide doorstep services to its customers. In order to introduce 
flexibility & agility in its financial services, services of IPPB are delivered to 
the custom ers at their doorsteps through Postmen and Gramin Dak 
Sevaks of Department of Posts. IPPB in a very short span of time has 
opened more than 4.50 crore accounts & delivered more than Rs. 12,000 
crore cash at the doorsteps of customers having account in any bank 
through Aadhaar Enabled Payment System (AePS).  
The Committee find it commendable that NEFT -RTGS (National 
Electronic Fund Transfer -Real Time Gross Settlement) have been rolled 
out for POSB in order to integrate it with the mainstream banking system,  
strengthening the POSB IT system especially in the area of mobile and 
internet banking and offering POSB and PLI/RPLI services at the 
doorsteps through Postmen and GDS and forging partnerships with 
Election Commission of India for Election Photo Identity Card (EPIC) 
delivery. The Committee also note that the Department have plans to 

10 
 
enhance parcel building capacity by setting  up 32 additional Nodal 
Delivery Centres, extending to tier 2 and 3 cities, 12 National and 84 State 
level Postal Road Transport Net work (RTN) to be set up and setting up of 
Dak Ghar Niryat Kendras (DNK) at district level in order to provide 
international e -Commerce export booking facility to small 
traders/artisans/MSMEs.  
The Committee note that the image -building exercises have been 
undertaken to improve the perception of the post office in the eyes of the 
consumers including social media. Pan India TV Campaigns 
(Doordarshan & Digital Cinema Theaters) and radio jingle campaigns are 
being run to disseminate information about postal pro ducts and services. 
Activities such a Stamp design competition, letter writing competitions are 
organised at various levels across the country by Department of Posts 
throughout the year. Through social media, Department of Posts has 
undertaken various image building exercises to improve the perception of 
the post office in the eyes of consumers, such as awareness about India 
Post's products and services under umbrella campaign 
#AapkaDostIndiaPost & #DigitalDostIndiaPost, depicting success stories, 
providing clarity for dos and don'ts, prohibited articles, etc., assisting the 
customers during Covid pandemic and spreading awareness for the same 
through Covid related campaigns #CovidMeinAapkaDost and 
#Unite2FightCorona on social media channels. Department of Po sts 
brings out digital publicity material on specific products and services for 
the information of the Customers. It has also brought out eBooks like 
"India Post Meets Covid -19 Challenge" and disseminated widely on the 
ways in which Department extended ser vices to the public during the 
pandemic, especially during lock down period. 
The Committee are happy with the meticulous manner in which the 
Postal Department has turned out to be a media savvy organization 
projecting its distinctive role in the apparatus.  The Committee admire the 
methodical approach with which the doorstep service model has been 
executed by the IPPB and hope that the Department would extend the 
service to school/college students for payment of fees and/or delivery of 
course material/assignments to aid e-learning. The Committee advise that 
the services of Post Office may also be utilized by Central Government 
Health Scheme, ESI and Ayushmaan Bharat Yojana for delivery of 
medicines to the elderly and the needy to avoid them travelling long 
distances particularly through unfriendly terrain. The Committee 
recommend that the able bodied postmen may also be utilized for disaster 
relief in flood stricken areas for delivery of essential food items and may 
be apprised of the progress in this regard. ― 
 
15. The Department of Posts, in their Action Taken Reply, submitted as under:– 
―The Dak Ghar Niryat Kendra schemes of Department of Posts, initiated in 
2022-23, is in sync with Government strategy and schemes like ‗One 
District One Product‘, ‗Districts as E xport Hubs‘ (DEH) and promotion of 
‗Geo-Tagged‘ (GI) products by extending the reach of export points 
through Post Offices across the country upto district level. 
DNK scheme is leveraging physical and digital infrastructure of DoP to 
strategically contribu te in Government of India vision to utilize the vast 
postal network for Public Service Delivery by boosting exports. 

11 
 
The PLI Dte is taking utmost efforts to reach to the common citizens of the 
nation through various online and offline modes.  The customer 
satisfaction through various insurance facilities and suitable online/offline 
grievances redressal platforms is functional. 
The Mail Operations of the Department of Posts plays a n important 
role in shaping and enhancing the image of the Department, serving  as 
the backbone of its service delivery mechanism.  In an era of digital 
communication, the efficiency, reliability, and innovative displayed in mail 
handling and mechanized delivery processes directly influence public 
perception and trust in the Departme nt.  By ensuring timely and secure 
delivery of parcels and letters, optimizing logistics through technological 
integration, and maintaining standards of customer service, Mail 
Operations not only uphold the Department‘s legacy of connecting people 
across d istances but also strengthen its relevance and reliability in the 
digital age. 
The Department has taken a comprehensive view of the parcel 
value chain and has established exclusive facilities for processing and 
delivery of parcels which are Parcel Hubs and  Nodal Delivery Centers 
respectively. It has also developed standard operating procedures, 
introduced mechanization and necessary IT interventions for supporting 
operations in these facilities and integrating with customers‘ systems 
through API.  Products and services of Department are available to all for 
last mile delivery.‖ 
 
16. The Committee, in their Original Report, had appreciated the 
methodical approach with which the doorstep service model ha d been 
executed by the India Post Payments Bank (IPPB) and the manner in which 
the Postal Department turned out to be a media savvy organization . The 
Committee had hoped that the Department would extend the service to 
school/college students for payment of fees and/or delivery of course 
material/assignments to aid e -learning and the services of Post O ffice may 
also be utilized by Central Government Health Scheme, ESI and 
Ayushmaan Bharat Yojana for delivery of medicines to the elderly and the 
needy who could avoid travelling long distances particularly through 
unfriendly terrain. The Committee had also recommended that able -bodied 
postmen may be utilized for disaster relief in flood stricken areas for 
delivery of essential food items.  
In the Action Taken Note, the Department have provided details of 
some of the Schem es which inter-alia include (i) ‘ The Dak Ghar  Niryat 
Kendra S cheme’ (ii) Efforts of the PLI Directorate to reach the common 
citizens of the nation through various online and offline modes ; (iii) 
Suitable online/offline grievances redre ssal platforms; (iv) Role of Mail 
Operations of the Department of Posts in shaping and enhancing the image 

12 
 
of the Department ; (iv) Parcel value chain; etc. However, the reply of the 
Department is silent w.r.t. utilizing the services of Post O ffice for Central 
Government Health  Scheme, ESI and Ayushmaan Bharat Yojana for 
delivery of medicin es to the elderly and the needy . Similarly, the 
Department have not responded to the recommendation of the Committee 
about the need for utilization of services of able bodied postmen for 
delivery of essential food and other relief items to the needy persons 
during disaster/flood relief operations.  The Committee would like to  look 
into the feasibility of these services and apprise them accordingly.  
Cyber Security in the Department of Posts 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 11) 
17. The Committee , in their  Original Report, had made the following 
Observation/Recommendation:– 
―The Committee note that a slew of policies have been framed by the 
Department of Posts in order to ensure the data security and to guard 
against unauthorized access/ threats. It includes a Data Classification 
Policy where all data assets must be inventoried, assigned an asset 
owner, classified, and documented to ensure that each receive the 
appropriate level of protection. It also includes a data encryption policy 
which defines the Security requirements for data encryption on laptops, 
physical (portable and removable) media and Secure File Transfer within 
India Post Domain. This policy ensures the confidentiality and integrity of 
India Post‘s data/ information through the implementation of cryptographic 
controls. It further encompasses a Patch and Vulnerability Management 
Policy under which the discovery of a new vulnerability, disclosure of a 
new exploit or emergence of a new malware threat an d the capability to 
incorporate protection from them on a real time basis fall under Threat and 
Vulnerability Management.  
 The Committee further note that the Department has an Application 
Security Policy which provides a security framework for applicatio ns 
developed or purchased by India Post and a Database Security Policy by 
which all databases are secured to ensure the confidentiality of customer 
information, the integrity of the business processes, and the availability of 
the systems. In addition, ther e is a Password Policy that establishes a 
standard for creation of strong passwords, the protection of those 
passwords, and the frequency of change of the passwords. 
 The Committee appreciate the fact that the cyber security policy of 
the Department outlin es the guidelines and provisions for preserving the 
security of data and technology infrastructure of Department of Post. This 
policy delineates security requirements, roles, and responsibilities 
necessary to protect enterprise data and information systems  from 
unauthorized access, inappropriate disclosure, or compromise.  The 
Committee find it praiseworthy that this policy is defined in the context of 
complying with the policy framework requirements considering best 
practices adopted by IT industry and per iodic Vulnerability assessment is 

13 
 
carried out, analysed and risks addressed for mitigation. The Department 
participates in the CERT-In drills to understand the security posture.  
 The Committee find it heartening that both Nanyatha App and 
Postman Mobile App (PMA) have been developed ‗in house‘ by the Centre 
of Excellence in Postal Technology (CEPT), Mysore and the Apps have 
been able to achieve their objective of monitoring the clearance of letter 
boxes and to update the delivery status of articles on real-time basis.  
 The Committee note that the postal staff are being trained in Cyber 
Security at various levels. All officers of the Department during their 
probation are attached to CEPT for imparting training on various 
technology related activities. For rest of the staff, basic training is imparted 
at Postal Training Centres on IT Security with the objective of ensuring 
end point security. CEPT has conducted Master Development program 
twice where Circle SPOCs have been trained in various disciplines, who in 
turn train the local Post office staff. DoP engaged Core System Integrator 
(CSI) for implementation and monitoring of all Security tools at the Data 
Centre and Post Offices. 
 The Committee are well pleased with the initiatives taken by the 
Department to protect its data from outside threats and expect the 
Department to continue with their efforts with zeal and vigor thereby 
emerging as the leading Government entity in cyber security initiatives. 
The Department may also consider involving subject matter ex perts as 
consultants in order to keep abreast of the latest developments in the field 
of cyber security. The Committee bank on the Department to continue the 
training of employees on an ongoing basis to refresh their knowledge with 
the current security threats.‖ 
 
18. The Department of Posts , in their Action Taken Reply , submitted as 
under:– 
―DoP has its Information Security Management Policy (ISMP) and Cyber 
Crisis Management Plan (CCMP) in place.  Besides, Cyber Security 
Guidelines for Govt. Employees issued b y MeitY has also been shared 
with all concerned to ensure its compliance.  Further Technology Division 
is also considering to engage SME‘s as consultants to assist CISO and 
other staff in cyber security matters in future.  For now, consultants from 
PWC are assisting in cyber security issues.‖ 
 
19. In their Original Report, the Committee had appreciated the ‘Cyber Security 
Policy’ of the Department of Posts  and had expected them to continue with the 
initiatives to protect their data from outside threats and also training of 
employees. The Department, in their Action Taken Note, informed the Committee 
that they have Information Security Management Policy (ISMP) and Cyber Crisis 
Management Plan (CCMP) in place  and have shared  Cyber Security Guidelines  
(issued by Me itY) with all concerned to ensure its compliance.  Further , the 
Committee note that the Technology Division of the Department is considering to 
engage SME ’s as Consultants to assist CISO and other staff in cy ber security 
matters in future . The Committee would like to be apprised of the steps taken in 
this regard and the outcome of the same. 

14 
 
CHAPTER II 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN  ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 1) 
Relevance of the Department of Posts in the changing scenario 
 
 The Committee note that the Department have taken various initiatives to stay 
relevant in the current scenario to retain mail business and  provide financial and 
ecommerce services as per the market requirements. The Department have tried to 
amalgamate technology in traditional mail business by adopting methods like sending 
SMS notifications of booking and delivery information to the customers, real time delivery 
updation through Postman Mobile App , tracking facility, COD facility, setting up of Nod al 
Delivery Centres with four wheelers for door delivery of parcels etc.  Besides, the 
Department have entered into agreements with various banks in the country for delivery 
of cheque books, debit and credit cards, with UIDAI for delivery of Aadhaar cards,  with 
different High Courts for delivery of notices/summons, with Supreme Court for delivery of 
judgements, with Regional Tran sport Authorities in different States for delivery of driving 
licenses/vehicle Registration Certificates and traffic challans, etc.  
 The Committee further note that 190 Parcel hubs have been set up for 
streamlining the processing and expeditious delivery of parcels and improve capacity to 
handle ecommerce business.  During COVlD-19, to meet the urgent national requirement 
at a critical time, a dedicated nationwide Road Transport Network (RTN) for shipment of 
essential items especially ventilators, medicines, Covid Kits etc. was planned and 
operationalized. 219 Nodal Delivery Centres (NDCs) are operational for mechanized 
delivery of p arcels. Smart Post Booking Kiosks as well as delivery boxes have been 
started. Core Banking System (CBS) has been implement ed in all Post Offices. The 
Department have also started providing ATM, e -banking, Mobile Banking facility which 
enables customer to avail services 24x7 hours. The Department have implemented 
various e-modes to customers like NEFT and RTGS. The Department have extended all 
its savings schemes to all Branch Post Offices. Further, in order to facilitate old aged 
pensioners, Department hav e migrated to online submission of Jeevan Pramaan 
Certificate by introducing biometric enabled digital service. The Committee note that the 
Department have pro vided mobile devices to Branch Post Offices in the rural areas for 
carrying out online postal and financial transactions.  
 It has also been noted that the Department has on -boarded the National 
Automated Clearing House (NACH) Platform of National Payment Corporation of India 
(NPCI) in December 2016 and Aadhaar Payments Bridge System (APBS) in Decembe r 
2017 for seamless disbursement of Social Sector Pension payments including Mahatma 
Gandhi National Rural Employment Genera tion Scheme (MGNREG S), Pradhan Mantri 
Matru Vandana Yojana (PMMVY) and other schemes sponsored by various Ministries 
through Post Office Savings Bank accounts. In pursuance of the decision of the Cabinet 
Committee on Securi ty, Department has opened 1789 Post Offices in Panchayat 
Headquarters in 32 worst affected Left Wing Extremism (LWE) districts. Further, to 
strengthen its vast Rural  Postal Network, Department has opened 810 Post Offices by 
relocation / redeployment, 983 Franchise Outlets in urban areas and new infrastructure 
was supplied to 52,721 rural Branch Post Offices. 
 Commendably, the Post Office has diversified into delivery of citizen centric 
services like Aadhaar enrolment, Common Service Centres and Passenger Reservation 

15 
 
System for Indian Rail. The Committee note that the Department, being the behemoth 
that it is, faces a host of legacy issues which are being overcome throu gh optimisation of 
mail network , implementation of Core System Integration for Railway Mail Service, real 
time exchange of data for delivery updation, introduction of barcoded bag labels for 
unregistered mail, setting up of parcel hubs, Core Insurance Sol ution for premium 
payment for PLI and RPLI, setting up of new Foreign Post Offices and Radio Frequency 
identification based tracking.  
 The Committee are impressed with the efforts made by the Department in this 
direction and appreciate the constructive ap proach of the Dept. The Committee expect 
the Department to continue the efforts and are all praises for the measures taken which 
will go a long way in building the image of the Department as technology savvy and 
customer friendly. The Committee place on re cord the stellar role played by the 
Department in establishing the communication network of the country in a competitive 
landscape and hope that the Department will rise to even greater heights in the future. 
Reply of the Government 
 The Department is fully committed to make conti nued efforts as advised by the 
Committee. 
 Department of Posts has launched a scheme to set up 1000 Dak Ghar Niryat 
Kendra (DNKs) in selected Post Offices to promote Commercial exports utilizing post 
office network.  This has expan ded the reach and access of postal export facilities to 
artisans, craftsmen, small producers and business units across the country to sell local 
products directly in global markets through digitized and simplified export processes and 
documentation.  By end of February, 2024, around 3.75 lakh commercial shipmen ts with 
export value of Rs. 83 crore have been exported through DNKs. 
 Core Insurance Solution has been introduced for PLI/RPLI services.  Technology 
section, PLI Directorate on the recommendations/in puts from Circles/Customers 
regarding improvisations in the system, has made several advancements/changes which 
have facilitated the PLI/ RPLI Policy holders.  Further, in the light of changing 
technological environment, Technology section, PLI Directorate is fully committed to 
ensure smooth and advanced PLI/RPLI technological operations. 
 The Department of Posts plays a crucial role in today‘s communication and 
logistics landscape.  By adopting technology, like SMS alerts and article tracking   
Department ha ve made sending and receiving mail easier and more efficient.  
Department have also collaborated with banks and government agencies to offer a wide 
range of services, making life simpler for customers.  During emergencies like COVID -
19, Department of Posts  shown agility by setting up Road Transport Network which 
ensure timely delivery system for essential items.  Despite facing challenges, the Postal 
Department keeps improving its network and systems, ensuring it remains a vital part of 
our communication in frastructure and providing reliable and essential services delivery 
system for all. 
a. Aadhaar Centres: Efforts are being made to increase the efficiency of 
Aadhaar Centres by increasing Aadhaar enrolment and Updation and 
also shifting Aadhaar Centres from lo w potential locations to high 
potential locations such as Branch Post Offices and Field Post Offices 
served by Army Postal Services. 
b. India Post Passenger Reservation System: Department is also 
considering to expand the IP -PRS service through common service  
centres to increase the reach of railway ticket booking for customers. 
c. Post Office Passport Seva Kendras: Department of Posts and 
Ministry of External Affairs have mutually decided to open 491 POPSK 
in different Parliamentary Constituency of the country.  Currently, 

16 
 
POPSKs are operationalized in 437 locations.  Efforts are being made 
to open POPSKs at remaining feasible locations also.  Further, 
provisions have been made to run selected POPSKs on all 6 days 
(Mon-Sat) to cater public demands and increase th e efficiency of 
POPSK.  Department has also introduced a new service i.e. Police 
Clearance Certificate since September 2022 to meet the demand of 
the public.  The infrastructure is made Divyangjan friendly. 
 
    Department of Posts has initiated several steps to bring about reliability, visibility 
and improvement in parcel operations. To expedite processing and door step delivery of 
parcels, Nodal Delivery Cent res have been established across the country for exclusive 
delivery of parcels. These delivery cen tres have been provided with appropriate 
equipment for processing parcels. The delivery agents have been provided with 
mechanized two wheelers and four wheelers for making doorstep delivery. A network 
consisting of 190 Parcel Hubs including 77 (Level -1) and 113 (Level -2) hubs has been 
made operational for expedited and safe processing of parcels. The Parcel Hubs have 
been provided equipment including semi -automatic sorting systems, where required, for 
efficient and exclusive processing of parcels. Further, new Parcel Hubs are also being 
introduced as required, from time to time. Department has also developed a dedicated 
Road Transport Network to ensure timely and secure transmission of parcels to all the 
Parcel Hubs in the country. Several security, operatio nal and technological measures 
have been taken to ensure safe, efficient and seamless transmission of parcels . The 
Department is also taking steps to increase its parcel handling capacity from existing 
nearly 3.97 lakh parcels per day in 2023 -24 to approximately 5.3 lakh parcels per day by 
2025-26. 
 
 (Ministry of Communications (Department of Posts) 
 O.M. No28-5/2024/BGT/D-7230 dated 08.05.2024) 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 2) 
Roadmap for Revenue Generation  
 
The Committee note that the Department have introduce d various citizen centric 
services such as Aadhaar facility in the Post Offices, Post Offices Passport Seva 
Kendras (POPSK) which not only enhanced the social relevance of the Department but 
also led to increase in revenue. Opening of more savings bank accounts including Senior 
Citizen Savings Schemes/Sukanya Samridhi Yojana Accounts for senior citizen and the 
girl child is being undertaken for increased remuneration from Ministry of Finance. The 
Department are continuously trying to diversify its business area and products to 
increase the revenue generation. The Department are adopting modern technological 
methods and upgrading its physical infrastructure for improvement in Mail Delivery 
System. With the implementation of core system integration and dedicated road transport 
network, it is trying to improve the efficiency in the delivery as well as real time 
monitoring of mail system which will help in achieving 10% market share in the parcel 
and mail segments by 2024. A major part of the expenditure of the D epartment i.e. 91% 
goes into salary and pension and other allowances. Department has also forayed into 
citizen centric services like CSC (Common Service Centre). Post offices are being 
developed as the centre of financial inclusion by means of IPPB and POS B banking 
facilities. By carrying out all these activities, the Department is trying to earn revenue and 
reduce its deficit.  
 The Committee further note that the Department are earning revenue from various 
postal services/products like Speed Post; Busines s Post; Express Parcel; Business 
Parcel; Bill Mail Service; e -Post; Postage through Franking Machines and Pre -postage; 

17 
 
Sale of Stamps; Commemorative Stamps; My Stamps; Philatelic Ancillaries; Money 
Order & Indian Postal Order; Retail Post; Logistic Post; E -Bill Collection; Railway ticket 
booking; MGNREGA; Net Receipts / Payments to Other Postal Administration (Other 
Countries); Savings Bank & Cash Certificate Remuneration etc. The major obstacles 
being faced by the Department in revenue generation are onlin e submission of Job 
application, Online money transmission, Digital payments through RTGS, NEFT, IMPS, 
Competition with private courier service and availability of instantaneous communication 
through messaging apps and social media. The Committee are aware  that the 
Department are planning to take measures to remove the obstacles and contain the 
revenue deficit. Due to considerable slowdown in economic activities during the 
pandemic which badly impacted the postal services, the financial activities reduced 
considerably.  The Department are streamlining all its activities to improve the efficiency 
and periodically review their services and products keeping in view the changing market 
scenario, customer needs, industry benchmarks etc. and takes steps/action to modify 
service features to improve the postal services and boost the revenue growth of the 
Department. Technology integration and infrastructure up-gradation is also being done in 
a systematic manner to increase the efficiency and reduce the cost of operat ion. The 
Department have focussed approach to cater to the needs of the emerging markets viz. 
e-Commerce to increase revenue. 
 The Committee while expressing hope that these initiatives will be helpful in 
increasing the profitability of the Department, rec ommend that the Department should 
form tie-ups with Government agencies like KVIC, Tribes India, etc. which could be a big 
potential revenue driver for them paired with aggressive marketing. The Committee feel 
that monetisation of land parcels, constructio n of warehouses on land owned by the 
Department will mobilize much needed funds for the Dept.  The Committee are of the 
opinion that the Department should exploit their unparalleled reach by tie up with e -
commerce companies to augment their revenue earning s. The use of post office 
buildings to provide retail services should also be explored. The Committee recommend 
that the Department should aggressively explore such opportunities in the market for 
growing business and continue with efforts to augment revenue and reduce deficit.  
Reply of the Government 
 The Department is fully committed to make continued efforts as advis ed by the 
Committee. Out of 1000 DNKs enabled for exports, 904 have already receive d booking 
from customers.  The revenue accrued to Department is around Rs. 25 crore so far has 
considerable growth potential with stabilization of the scheme.  Integrations with e -
commerce companies, online customs clearance and documentation, cost savings and 
value-added offerings contribute to the financial s ustainability of the Department while 
facilitating exports. 
 Department aims to streamlining its activities by periodic review of services and 
products, adapting to changing market scenarios and customer needs, which are cruc ial 
aspects for revenue growth.  Additionally, aggressive marketing and strategic 
partnerships, such as tie -ups with e -commerce companies, banks and other Govt. 
agencies will further enhance revenue generation opportunities.  Technology induction 
and infrastructure upgrade for maintainin g its unparalleled reach and service quality are 
other key aspects to revenue generation.  Establishing a dedicated road transport 
network & set up of nodal delivery cent res, real time monitoring etc are some other 
factors to enhance the efficiency of the Mail Delivery System, which shall eventually lead 
to growth in business and revenue generation. 
 The Department is ma king necessary technological up gradations to match 
industry standards and garner a larger share of the courier, express and parcel (CEP) 
market. Application Programming Interface (APIs) are being developed for data 

18 
 
exchanges between the Department of Posts and its ecommerce partners and other 
customers. APIs have been developed for parcel services such as Pick -up, Tariff 
Calculation, PIN code  validation, Parcel Scan events, Routing, Label Generation and 
Cancellation. A Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) between Department of Posts 
and Tribal Co -operative Marketing Development Federation of India (TRIFED) for 
delivery of tribal products of the a rtisans of North -Eastern India was signed on 
06.06.2023. The Department of Posts has entered in partnership with 14 regional offices 
of TRIBES India and is providing logistics support to artisans to connect their products 
with the market. Apart from this, Department is also working with major e -commerce 
companies like Amazon, Shiprocket, Decathlon etc.  
 The Department is using its vacant land for construction of Postal buildings to 
reduce its rental liability. The Department has 25 ,081 Departmental Post Of fices, out of 
this 19,324 Post Offices are functioning from rented buildings. In last 5 years, 182 new 
Postal buildings have been constructed. 
 
(Ministry of Communications (Department of Posts)  
O.M. No28-5/2024/BGT/D-7230 dated 08.05.2024) 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 7 of Chapter I) 
 
 (Recommendation Sl. No. 3) 
Role of the Post Office during the Pandemic 
 
 The Committee note that during the unprecedented situation caused by spread of 
Covid-19 pandemic and the consequential nationwide loc kdown, rail, road and air 
connectivity initially came to a halt. Since the Department of Posts has traditionally relied 
on railways and airlines to transport mails and parcels across the country, with restricted 
trains services and air services, mail and parcel movement across the country also came 
to a stand -still. To retain a reliable communication link of migrant workers with their 
homes and also to transfer goods to their families and to meet the urgent national 
requirement at a critical time, a dedicat ed nationwide Road Transport Network (RTN) for 
shipment of essential items especially ventilators, medicines, Covid Kits etc. was 
planned and operationalized by the Department for the first time in its history of 166 
years. 76 National Routes have been operationalised. 
 Further, the Committee note that for disasters like a pandemic, India Post 
Payments Bank (IPPB) has created Disaster Resilient Financial infrastructure. More than 
1.36 lakh Post Offices across the country have been enabled as Bankin g Touch p oints 
and more than 2 lakh Postmen and Gramin Dak Sewaks (GDS) have been trained as 
Doorstep Banking service providers. These access points and Doorstep agents have 
been provided with Micro ATMs and Biometric Devices through which they can perform 
Inter-Operable Banking service transactions for any Bank. This has effectively brought all 
banks at the doorstep of every citizen thus reducing the distance to the Bank to zero. 
The platform thus created has been tested for its interoperability and resilience in c ritical 
and disaster situations such as the recent CoVID -19 induced Lockdown. Aadhaar 
Enabled Payment System (AePS) of IPPB can aid cash payment of DBT and social 
security beneficiaries at their doorstep in various States. Special focus has been given to 
providing Doorstep Banking services through AePS in the sealed/containment areas, 
migrant labour camps and Hotspots so that the population affected due to restrictions 
imposed do not suffer adversely. During the recent lockdown this Financial Infrastructure  
was able to take multiple times additional load and performed  flawlessly. More than Rs 

19 
 
8000 crore were disbursed to customers of various Banks during April -Dec 2020 period, 
focusing on the Elderly, Disabled, Hotspots and Containment Zones including the Di rect 
Benefits Transfers under Pradhan Mantri Garib Kalyan Yojana which also include 
migrant workers. 
 The Committee further note that the Post Office provided doorstep services 
through the India Post Payment Bank in North Eastern Region, Left Wing Extremis m 
(LWE) districts and aspirational districts of the country during the Covid -19 pandemic. 
During March to November 2020, 59.02 lakh transactions were done in the NER with 
cash withdrawal amounting to Rs. 106 crore approx. For the LWE districts, 1.84 crore 
transactions were performed with Rs. 383 crore as the withdrawal amount. For the 
aspirational districts, 2.52 crore transactions were performed with Rs. 540 crore as the 
amount withdrawn. The Committee note that IPPB has functioned as the lifeline for the 
citizens of these areas at the times when they were isolated from the rest of the country.  
 The Committee admire the manner in which India Post have made  special efforts 
to offer services to migrant workers and thereby tap a  niche market in times of the  
ongoing pandemic when the migrant  workers find it difficult to establish and retain a 
reliable communication link with their distant ho mes and also to transfer money and 
goods to their families. The Committee while appreciating the efforts made by the 
Department hope that the Department would continue with their efforts and turn these 
calamitous times into an unprecedented opportunity to showcase their unique role in the 
Indian economy.   
Reply of the Government 
 The Department is fully committed to make continued efforts as advised by the 
Committee. India Post Payments Bank (IPPB) & Department of Posts (DoP) have 
continued the cash delivery through Aadhaar Enabled Payment System (AePS) to 
customers of any Bank a nd have performed more than 10 crore transac tions and 
delivered more than Rs. 30,000 crore of cash to the doorstep of customers.  Other 
Government to Citizen services like Aadhaar Mobile Number update and Digital Life 
Certificate services are also deliver ed by IPPB -DoP and more than 7 crore customer s 
have been beneficiary of these services. 
(Ministry of Communications (Department of Posts) 
O.M. No28-5/2024/BGT/D-7230 dated 08.05.2024) 
 
 (Recommendation Sl. No. 4) 
Accessibility of the Post Office in Remote Areas 
 The Committee note that the Postal Department has been able to fulfil the 
Government objective of having an interoperable banking access point within 5 KM of 
any household and creating alternate accessibility for customers of any bank. As per the 
data available from National Informatics Centre  (NIC), IPPB coverage is there in 
5,03,973 villages within the existing available records for more than 5.53 lakhs villages. 
In addition, a call centre is being operated by IPPB where anyone can call for opening of 
accounts and if required the postman or s ome other officer will visit the people to assist 
them in opening the bank accounts and delivery of banking services at door step thus 
effectively bringing distance to the Bank to ZERO. It is also observed that Aadhaar 
enabled payment service is also avail able with IPPB which helps customers of other 
banks also to avail the banking service through IPPB. 
 However, as opposed to the laudable role played by the IPPB, the Committee 
have noted that the area covered per post office varies greatly Statewise. It wa s the 
highest for the UT of Jammu and Kashmir where a single post office has to cater to an 

20 
 
area of 130.73 square km. The North East came a close second where 60.51 sq km was 
covered by a post office.  
 The Committee underscore the achievements made by IPPB and recognize it as a 
bulwark to provide banking services to the hinterlands. However, the Committee are 
perturbed by the challenges posed in serving large geographical areas by a single post 
office in the J&K and NER. The Committee urge the Department t o pay attention to 
neglected areas where due to various reasons, the establishment of post offices has 
been neglected in the past and hope that the Dept. would improve its physical presence 
by opening more Branch offices in these UT/States and apprise the Committee about the 
progress made in this matter.  
Reply of the Government 
 
 As on 31.03.2023, there are a total of 1,64,972 post offices throughout the 
country, 1,49,478 of which are located in rural areas. On an average, a post office in 
India serves an area of 19.93 sq. km and a population of 8,415 people. 
 The norms for opening and retention of a post office have been relaxed in respect 
of opening of post offices in hilly, tribal, desert and inaccessible areas. In addition to the 
aforementioned relaxations, the Ministry of Finance approved the opening of 5746 new 
branch post offices in rural areas of the country in March 2023, in accordance with the 
government‘s mandate to bring all villages within 5 km of a brick and mortar bank branch 
or post office. A gainst this sanction, 5551 new branch post offices have already been 
opened and 30 of these new post offices are in the UT of J&K, and 1428 in the North 
Eastern Region. Therefore, the average area covered by a post office has been reduced. 
Further, rationa lization of the Post Office network to ensure improved access is a 
continuing process. 
(Ministry of Communications (Department of Posts)  
O.M. No28-5/2024/BGT/D-7230 dated 08.05.2024) 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 5) 
 
Building physical infrastructure for parcel delivery paying special attention to NER 
and aspirational districts 
 The Committee note that for the augmentation of parcel delivery mechanism, the 
Department have planned and executed their own dedicated Road Transport Network 
which worked as a crucial s upply chain available for shipment of essential goods, 
medicines , COVID kits , ventilators etc during the lockdown. It enabled pharmaceutical 
companies (including ePharma companies) and ICMR to operate and serve the nation 
during the lockdown and thereafter. These national routes involved a daily run of over 
25000 Km per day. More than 93 Tonnes of essential items were shipped in around 
20000 bags per day during lockdown up to end of May, 2020. Around 36,000 tonnes of 
essential items, medicines and medical  equipment were distributed during pandemic 
through Road Transport Network including special arrangements of supply chain 
vehicles made during the period. To monitor the movement of vehicles and timely 
shipment of essential items being carried, an online m onitoring Dashboard was created 
by the Department.  
 To further strengthen this dedicated road transport connectivity up to tier 2, tier 3 
cities, the Department is in process of setting up a bigger nationwide Road Transport 
Network which will have 68 Nati onal routes and 350 regional routes connecting with 
these routes in a hub & spoke manner. The new network will connect 400 cities and will 
be a crucial national infrastructure available to take the gains of e -Commerce to the 
smaller cities and rural areas. The Committee note that the Department have undertaken 
Mail and Parcel Network Optimization projects and development of infrastructure for 
warehousing and logistics scheme to develop the physical infrastructure for mail 

21 
 
processing concerning Speed Post, R egistered Post and Unregistered Mail. More than 
50,000 mobile phones have been supplied to the postmen in the urban areas and more 
than 1 lakh in the rural areas for realtime delivery updation.  
 With reference to the North Eastern States, LWE areas and ge ographically 
disadvantaged locations, the Department have created 190 Parcel hubs out of which 10 
are in the NER and LWE areas. 09 locations have been identified in NE states, 10 each 
in LWE areas and Aspirational Districts for setting up of Nodal Delivery  Centres (NDCs) 
through mechanized delivery of parcels. These are being established to improve the 
performance of doorstep delivery on the day of receipt of parcels in the destination post 
office using two wheelers and four wheelers.  
 The Committee is wel l aware of the fact that the North Eastern States stand at a 
disadvantage due to their location and various other reasons. The Committee take 
cognizance of the fact that the LWE areas, aspirational districts and NER have long been 
neglected and exhort that they may be given priority in building physical infrastructure for 
parcel delivery which would consequently promote the growth of e -commerce. While 
appreciating the efforts made to reach the remote and under developed areas, the 
Committee hope that the Department will focus and persist on bringing financial inclusion 
to these areas. The Department may apprise the Committee of the development in this 
regard.  
Reply of the Government 
 The Department is fully committed to make conti nued efforts as advised by the 
Committee. The Department would like to inform Committee the continued efforts made  
in last few years for expansion of network, through opening of new Branch Post Offices, 
with particular emphasis on remote and underdeveloped areas, have brought the po st 
offices closer to citizens. 
 The Department has taken set up ten (10) Nodal Delivery Centres in North East 
Region (Agartala, Kohima, Imphal, Shillong , Aizawl, Silchar, Nagaon, Guwahati, 
Dibrugarh and Gangtok) for expedited and mechanized delivery of par cels using two -
wheeler and four -wheeler vehicles. Nine Nodal Delivery Cent res have been established 
in aspirational districts i.e. Vishakhapatnam, Purnia, Muzaffarpur, Begusarai, Gaya, 
Nawada, Ranchi, Firozepur and Haridwar. 16 (8x2) routes are being opera ted by the 
Department in North Eastern Region covering a total distance of 9,782 Kms per day 
connecting the region with other parts of the country. Department has tied -up with the 
Tribes India, the online portal of Tribal Co -Operative Marketing Development Federation 
of India Limited (TRIFED) for providing logistics support for booking, transmission and 
delivery of the products and artifacts from North -Eastern region to the rest of the country 
and abroad. 
 Department has constructed 23 Post Offices in last 5 years in the North East. 
Year wise details are as under: 
S.NO. State 2019-20 2020-21 2021-22 2022-23 2023-24 Total 
1 North East 0 4 5 6 8 23 
(Ministry of Communications (Department of Posts)  
O.M. No28-5/2024/BGT/D-7230 dated 08.05.2024) 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 6) 
Encroachment of Post Office Lands 
 The Committee note that the number of encroached plots owned by Department 
of Posts is the highest in Karnataka (38) and in Bihar (27) for the last three years. The 
Department have informed that they are making all-out efforts to remove encroachment 
with the help of public representatives, local administrations and judicial remedies 
available. In order to check the threat of encroachment, Estate Officers have been 

22 
 
appointed/nominated in each Circle under the Public Premises (Eviction of Unauthorized 
Occupants) Act, 1971 and notified in the Gazette of India to exercise the powers of 
Estate Officers to deal with cases related to unauthorized occupation of Departmental 
lands and buildings. Also, boundary walls ar e being constructed on the vacant lands. To 
utilize the vacant lands, Department is constructing Head Post Office buildings (where 
they are presently being operated from rented buildings) and small Post Offices with 
locally available materials for working strength up to 5 persons. The Committee further 
note that the Department had paid Rs. 167 crore as rent in 2017 -18, 161 crore in 2018 -
19, 169 crore in 2019-20 and 90 crore till December, 2020.  
 The Committee further note that th e Department is lagging beh ind in the 
implementation of the Sugamya Bharat Abhiyan where 310  buildings were retrofitted in  
2018-19, 33 in 2019 -20 and 34 in 2020 for  the use of the differently -abled. The 
Committee exhort the Department to make renewed efforts to reclaim the lands 
encroached by unscrupulous elements and take pre -emptive measures of fencing the 
plots and employing security personnel. The Committee also recommend that the 
Department may speed up the retrofitting of buildings to the benefit of the differently 
abled and make them more accessible thereby increasing the customer base and 
building brand image as a disabled friendly   organization. The Committee also press 
upon the Department to conduct access audits for the post office bu ildings on an annual 
basis and take follow up action to the best of its abilities.  
Reply of the Government 
(a) The recommendation of the Committee has been noted. Department is making all-
out efforts to remove encroachment with the help of public representatives, local 
administrations and judici al remedies available. In order to check the threat of 
encroachment, (a) Estate Officers have been appointed/nominated in each Circle under 
the Public Premises (Eviction of Unauthorised Occupants) Act, 1971 and notified in the 
Gazette of India to exercise the powers of Estate Officers to deal with cases related to 
unauthorized occupation of departmental lands and buildings and (b) boundary walls are 
being constructed on the vacant lands. Department is constructing Post Office buildings 
on vacant lands which  ultimately check the encroachment. Department has constructed 
182 Postal Buildings in last 5 years. 
(b) Department of Posts constructs ramps and rails, under ―Sugamya Bharat 
Abhiyan‖, for making post offices accessible to the differently abled persons. 
Construction of rail and ramps are mandatory for all new buildings constructed in the 
Department of Posts, while old buildings are also retrofitted with such facilities. 397 
Braille Signages have been constructed by the Department in the buildings making them 
easily accessible to differently abled persons. The details are as under: 
S.NO. Activity Constructed during last 3 years 
and up to 31.03.2024 
1 Ramps and railings 1514 
2 Adaptive Restrooms 283 
3 Tactile floorings 285 
 
(c) Circle have set a monitoring committ ee for the implementation of the accessibility 
norms in accordance with the Rights of person with Disabilities Act, 2016. As on 
December 2023, 728 Access Audits have been conducted by the Circles at their levels. 
(Ministry of Communications (Department of Posts)  
O.M. No28-5/2024/BGT/D-7230 dated 08.05.2024) 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 10 of Chapter I) 

23 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 7) 
Amelioration of Service Conditions of Gramin Dak Sevaks including financial 
upgradation  
The Committee note tha t at present, 2.37 lakh Gramin Dak Sevaks (GDS) are 
working in the Department of Posts. The major duties of the Gramin Dak Sevak are 
smooth and timely functioning of post office, overall management of postal facilities, 
maintenance of records, marketing po stal services, procurement of business, 
conveyance and delivery of mail at doorstep, deposits/payments/other transactions 
under IPPB. The GDS work for a minimum of four hours and maximum five hours a day 
and are being paid Time Related Continuity Allowance (TRCA). The Committee note that 
a  Committee was set up to examine the TRCA structure, long pending issues and other 
service conditions of Gramin Dak Sevaks under the Chairmanship of Shri Kamlesh 
Chandra, Retired Member, Postal Services Board, vide Gazett e Notification dated 
19.11.2015. The said Committee submitted its report on 24.11.2016.  Some of the  
recommendations of Kamlesh Chandra Committee Report have been implemented like 
Time Related Continuity Allowance (TRCA), enhancement of GDS Gratuity, Serv ice 
Discharge Benefits, 180 days Maternity Leave to female GDS, Composite Allowance, 
Cash Conveyance Allowance, Combined Duty Allowance, Risk and Hardship Allowance, 
Issuance of Identity Cards, Voluntary Discharge Scheme, Children Education Facilitation 
Allowance, Limited Transfer Facility and Emergency leave.  
The Committee    appreciate that the Department has taken welfare measures for 
the GDS such as Maternity leave for female GDS  and Children Education Facilitation 
Allowance, Risk and Hardship Allowan ce and other allowances like Office maintenance, 
stationery, boat , cycle maintenance, combined duty allowance etc. However, the 
Committee still feel that a lot of ground needs to be covered in the matter as the GDS 
have not been provided any group health insurance.  The Committee expect the Dept. to 
pay attention to the financial upgradation of GDS on completion of 12 years, 24 years 
and 36 years of engagement. The Committee are also perturbed to note that the GDS 
are not covered  under the Employees‘ Prov ident Fund Act or Employees‘ State 
Insurance Act and expect the Department to examine the matter.  
The Committee further recommend th at the scope of Circle Welfare Fund be 
extended to cover immediate family members such as dependent daughter in law, 
dependent separated/unmarried daughter and dependent grandchildren to protect them 
from destitution in the unfortunate event of death of the Gramin Dak Sevak. The 
Department may keep the Committee apprised of the progress made in the matter. 
Reply of the Government 
The Department has recently introduced a Gramin Dak Sevak (Grant of Financial 
Upgradation) Scheme, 2024 on 15.03.2024.  Under the Scheme, every GDS will be 
eligible for three financial upgradations of a fixed amount of Rs. 360/ -, Rs. 460/- and Rs. 
600/- on completion of 12, 24 and 36 years of his engagement. The scheme will remove 
stagnation in their service conditions. 
(Ministry of Communications (Department of Posts)  
O.M. No28-5/2024/BGT/D-7230 dated 08.05.2024) 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 13 of Chapter I) 
 
 

24 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No.8) 
 
Settlement of Dormant Accounts in Post Office Savings Bank and settlement of 
deceased claims 
The Committee note that if a matured account / certificate in Post Office Savings 
Bank is not closed within 10 years from the date of maturity, the account is treated as 
Unclaimed Account and the proceeds of such account are transferred to Senior Citizen 
Welfare Fund (SCWF).  However, the account / certificate holder at any point of time can 
approach post office  to claim the maturity proceeds within 25 years from the date of 
transfer of account to SCWF. Thereafter, the amount is permanently transferred to 
SCWF. 3.01 crore unclaimed accounts / certificates are identified under Senior Citizens 
Welfare Fund (SCWF) a s on 30.09.2022. A total balance of Rs. 19,828 Crore is lying 
unclaimed as on 30.09.2022. The Committee further note that all -out efforts are being 
made to settle maximum unclaimed accounts by giving wide publicity and by launching 
special drives at Circle, Region, Division, Post Office level including notices and publicity 
in newspapers. Door to door campaign and special drives are also being launched at 
Post Office / Divisional/Regional/Circle level through the Gramin Dak Sevaks/Postmen. 
Continuous correspondences are also being made with all the Head of the Circles from 
the Directorate for settlement of maximum accounts as per the existing rules. The 
Committee are perturbed to note that the number of accounts not having KYC are 
approximately 15 crore for POSB Savings Accounts and 9 crore for POSB savings 
certificates. Similarly, the number of accounts not having nomination are 22 crores for 
POSB Savings Accounts, 5.2 crores for POSB Savings Certificates and 3 crores for 
IPPB Accounts. 
The Committee note th at the process of settlement of deceased claim cases has 
already been reviewed and streamlined for smooth operation as well as early settlement. 
The present process being followed for settlement of deceased claim cases has been 
implemented since August, 20 20 which has further been streamlined by delegating the 
powers of sanction of deceased claim cases to lower level sanctioning authorities in 
November, 2020. As such, the claims which were earlier sent to PMG / CPMG for 
sanction are now being settled at Div isional level only. All claims are now being settled 
either in the post office (all nomination cases) and Divisional Office in case of no 
nomination cases. Provision of ‗nomination‘ has been made mandatory at the time of 
opening of new accounts that will h elp in settlement of deceased claim cases within one 
working day. The Department further informed that deceased claim cases having 
nomination are settled in 1 working day and deceased claim cases where no nomination 
exists are settled in 7 working days. In  case no nomination exists in POSB 
Accounts/Certificates, the deceased claim cases are settled on the basis of obtaining 
prescribed legal evidence documents. If no legal evidence document is available and the 
eligible amount to be paid exceeds Rs. 5 lakh, claim is settled on obtaining Succession 
Certificate issued by the court and if the amount is up to Rs. 5 lakh, claim is settled on 
obtaining the letter of indemnity, affidavit and letter of disclaimer. Turn -around time is 7 
days if the claim falls under t he financial powers of the post office. If the sanctioning 
authority is other than the post office, the claim will be forwarded to the authority 
concerned who will sanction the claim within 7 days from the date of receipt of the claim 
application. 
The Comm ittee are satisfied to note that the Department have simplified  the 
process of claim settlement thereby avoiding unnecessary hassles to the family of the 
deceased person and thus project the Department as a customer centric company. 
However, it is evident  that the enormous number of accounts not having KYC and/or 
nomination  will eventually lead to problems in settlement of claim. The Committee 
emphasize that the Department needs to pay urgent attention to the matter and collect 
KYCs on an annual basis fro m the account holders in order to steer clear of the 

25 
 
possibility of more dormant accounts in the future. Pre -emptive action now will prevent 
fire fighting later. The Committee stress that the Department may make renewed efforts 
to settle dormant accounts b y tracing the legal heirs through regular advertisements in 
print and electronic media.  
Reply of the Government 
Although, Reserve Bank of India does not prescribe to make nomination 
mandatory, however, India Post Payments Bank still makes the facility to avail 
nomination prominently available to customer during the opening of the account itself. 
(a) India Post Payments Bank is extensively doing social media to spread 
awareness among the customers with respect to the Importance of adding 
nominee in an account. 
(b) In targeted manner, India Post Payments Bank sends SMS to customer not 
having availed nomination facility and urges them to avail the facility. 
(c) India Post Payments Bank is also educating the Gramin Dak Sevak during all 
their trainings and regular interacti ons with the Bank that they need to ask the 
customers/encourage customers to update nominee details while opening an 
account. 
 
A detailed KYC policy is already in place in the Department of Posts.  Master 
Circular on KYC norms in POSB/SC under Anti-Money Laundering (AML)/Combating the 
Financing of Terror (CFT) regime had been revised vide SB order 12 of 2023.  The 
revised KYC norms complied with the guidelines of Financial Intelligent Unit -India (FIU-
IND) and Financial Action Task Force (FATF).  The KYC pol icy of POSB was declared 
on the following elements: 
a. Customer Acceptance Policy 
b. Risk Management 
c. Customer Identification Procedure 
d. Monitoring of Transactions: Record keeping and Reporting 
For the purpose of KYC, the customer is categorized with the perspecti ve of risk 
involved.  The categorization is as under:- 
i. Low Risk- Where the customer is having account(s) and savings certificate (s) 
having total balance not exceeding Rs. 50,000/-. 
ii. Medium Risk - Where the customer is having account(s) and savings 
certificate(s) having total balance exceeding Rs. 50,000/ - and upto Rs. 10 
Lakh. 
iii. Where the customer is having account(s) and savings certificate(s) having total 
balance exceeding Rs. 10 lakh. 
The process of collecting KYC and nomination of POSB customers is carried  out 
as per the KYC policy of the department.  Besides, w.e.f. 01.04.2023, all POSB account 
holders have to mandatorily furnish Aadhar or the proof of application of enrolment of 
Aadhar at the time of opening of account, and if Aadhar enrolment proof is submitted, the 
account holder shall furnish Aadhar within a period of six months from the date of 
opening of Account.  Existing depositors who had not submitted Aadhar were also 
requested to sumit Aadhar through duly filled -in SB-KYC form, to continue the ope ration 
of their account.  Besides, no transaction is allowed if mobile number is not present in the 
account of the customer.  For the settlement of dormant accounts, the post office 
attempts to contact the account holder by all reasonable means of communic ation.  Any 
post office savings account, in which no transaction take place for three consecutive 
financial years is treated as silent.  As advised by the committee, continued efforts would 
be made to revive such accounts. 
(Ministry of Communications (Department of Posts)  
O.M. No28-5/2024/BGT/D-7230 dated 08.05.2024) 

26 
 
 (Recommendation Sl. No.9) 
Strategic Role and building image of the Department of Posts 
 The Committee note that Department of Posts (DoP) had traditionally been a 
carrier of mails and documen ts and the entire transmission, processing and delivery 
network was built for documents and small packets. As market has now shifted to 
merchandise parcels, entire transmission, processing and delivery infrastructure is being 
created afresh for handling pa rcels. Department has successfully implemented 
computerization & networking of its more than 1.64 lakh Post Offices in order to provide 
doorstep services to its customers. In order to introduce flexibility & agility in its financial 
services, services of I PPB are delivered to the customers at their doorsteps through 
Postmen and Gramin Dak Sevaks of Department of Posts. IPPB in a very short span of 
time has opened more than 4.50 crore accounts & delivered more than Rs. 12,000 crore 
cash at the doorsteps of c ustomers having account in any bank through Aadhaar 
Enabled Payment System (AePS).  
The Committee find it commendable that NEFT -RTGS (National Electronic Fund 
Transfer-Real Time Gross Settlement) have been rolled out for POSB in order to 
integrate it with the mainstream banking system,  strengthening the POSB IT system 
especially in the area of mobile and internet banking and offering POSB and PLI/RPLI 
services at the doorsteps through Postmen and GDS and forging partnerships with 
Election Commission of Ind ia for Election Photo Identity Card (EPIC) delivery. The 
Committee also note that the Department have plans to enhance parcel building capacity 
by setting  up 32 additional Nodal Delivery Centres, extending to tier 2 and 3 cities, 12 
National and 84 State level Postal Road Transport Network (RTN) to be set up and 
setting up of Dak Ghar Niryat Kendras (DNK) at district level in order to provide 
international e-Commerce export booking facility to small traders/artisans/MSMEs.  
The Committee note that the imag e-building exercises have been undertaken to 
improve the perception of the post office in the eyes of the consumers including social 
media. Pan India TV Campaigns (Doordarshan & Digital Cinema Theaters) and radio 
jingle campaigns are being run to dissemina te information about postal products and 
services. Activities such a s Stamp design competition, letter writing competitions are 
organised at various levels across the country by Department of Posts throughout the 
year. Through social media, Department of P osts has undertaken various image building 
exercises to improve the perception of the post office in the eyes of consumers, such as 
awareness about India Post's products and services under umbrella campaign 
#AapkaDostIndiaPost & #DigitalDostIndiaPost, depi cting success stories, providing 
clarity for dos and don'ts, prohibited articles, etc., assisting the customers during Covid 
pandemic and spreading awareness for the same through Covid related campaigns 
#CovidMeinAapkaDost and #Unite2FightCorona on social media channels. Department 
of Posts brings out digital publicity material on specific products and services for the 
information of the Customers. It has also brought out eBooks like "India Post Meets 
Covid-19 Challenge" and disseminated widely on the ways in which Department 
extended services to the public during the pandemic, especially during lock down period. 
The Committee are happy with the meticulous manner in which the postal 
department has turned out to be a media savvy organization projecting its di stinctive role 
in the apparatus. The Committee admire the methodical approach with which the 
doorstep service model has been executed by the IPPB and hope that the Department 
would extend the service to school/college students for payment of fees and/or de livery 
of course material/assignments to aid e-learning. The Committee advise that the services 
of post office may also be utilized by Central Government Health Scheme, ESI and 
Ayushmaan Bharat Yojana for delivery of medicines to the elderly and the needy to avoid 

27 
 
them travelling long distances particularly through unfriendly terrain. The Committee 
recommend that able bodied postmen may also be utilized for disaster relief in flood 
stricken areas for delivery of essential food items and may be apprised of t he progress in 
this regard.  
Reply of the Government 
The Dak Ghar Niryat Kendra schemes of Department of Posts, initiated in 2022 -
23, is in sync with Government strategy and schemes like ‗One District One Product‘, 
‗Districts as Export Hubs‘ (DEH) and prom otion of ‗Geo -Tagged‘ (GI) products by 
extending the reach of export points through post offices across the country upto district 
level. 
DNK scheme is leveraging physical and digital infrastructure of DoP to 
strategically contribute in Government of India vision to utilize the vast postal network for 
Public Service Delivery by boosting exports. 
The PLI Dte is taking utmost efforts to reach to the common citizens of the nation 
through various online and offline modes.  The customer satisfaction through vario us 
insurance facilities and suitable online/offline grievances redressal platforms is in 
functional. 
The Mail Operations of the Department of Posts plays an important role in shaping 
and enhancing the image of the Department, serving as the backbone of its  service 
delivery mechanism.  In an era of digital communication, the efficiency, reliability, and 
innovative displayed in mail handling and mechanized delivery processes directly 
influence public perception and trust in the Department.  By ensuring timely  and secure 
delivery of parcels and letters, optimizing logistics through technological integration, and 
maintaining standards of customer service, Mail Operations not only uphold the 
Department‘s legacy of connecting people across distances but also stren gthen its 
relevance and reliability in the digital age. 
The Department has taken a comprehensive view of the parcel value chain and 
has established exclusive facilities for processing and delivery of parcels which are 
Parcel Hubs and Nodal Delivery Cen tres respectively. It has also developed standard 
operating procedures, introduced mechanization and necessary IT interventions for 
supporting operations in these facilities and integrating with customers‘ systems through 
API.  Products and services of Department are available to all for last mile delivery. 
(Ministry of Communications (Department of Posts) 
O.M. No28-5/2024/BGT/D-7230 dated 08.05.2024) 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 16 of Chapter I) 
 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 10) 
 
Modernisation of e-post office through self booking kiosks and smart delivery 
boxes 
The Committee note that a gamut of measures have been implemented by the 
Department for the modernization of e -post offices. They include the self booking kiosk 
where the user can key in t he details of address in the kiosk or alternatively can pre -fill 
the details using a web or mobile App of India Post and feed it in the kiosk through a 
Token ID. The user thereafter selects the option of article type and can generate the 
relevant barcode. The user will paste the barcode on the article and will scan the same 
by using the scanner installed in the Kiosk. User will then drop the article inside a slot in 
the Kiosk. The Kiosk calculates the postal charges and displays the same for payment. 

28 
 
The us er will have to complete the payment process through UPI (QR option). On 
successful payment of the amount, a transaction receipt is generated. A message is also 
sent to user on the mobile number and through e-mail. Postal officials will thereafter clear 
the articles from the Kiosk at pre-fixed time and hand over the articles to Postal Assistant 
of the attached Post office for further processing and dispatch. Another initiative is the 
Smart Delivery Box where postman will deposit the article in the slots of  Smart Delivery 
Box after capturing the article number & addressee mobile number on the App. A text 
message will be sent to the addressee that an article addressed to him/her has been 
deposited in the Smart Delivery Box and the article can be collected 24x7 . Addressee 
can access the Box through the Self Delivery Box App, to be downloaded from Google 
Play Store. While collecting the article, the addressee will open the App and enter the 
mobile number. After successful authentication through an OTP, access sha ll be 
granted. The addressee will open the slot in Smart Delivery Box through the App and 
collect the article from Smart Delivery Box. 
The Committee compliment the Department on the milestones covered in the 
modernization of post offices and the progress m ade to adopt the best practices in the 
industry. The Department has exemplified the best in the Government sector and is at 
the front in the implementation of IT to boost operational efficiency, increase automation 
and promote the enduring value of mail. T he Committee expect the Department to carry 
on their efforts and look forward to more progressive dynamism in the area. 
Reply of the Government 
The Department is fully committed to make conti nued efforts as advised by the 
Committee.  The Department of Posts has taken signifi cant steps towards modernizing 
Post Offices through the intro duction of self -booking kiosks.  These innovations aim to 
streamline postal services and enhanc e customer convenience.  With the self -booking 
kiosks, users can easily book their article at their own, make payments via UPI, and 
receive transaction receipts, improving efficiency and reducing waiting times.  30 Self 
Booking Kiosks has already been installed at prominent locations and the D epartment 
has planned to install 70 more such  machines in coming months at the identified 
locations for ease of customers.  These advancements signify the Department‘s 
commitment in embracing technology and ensuring a more efficient and user -friendly 
postal experience. 
Department is installing Smart Parcel Delivery Kiosks at selected locations in 
major cities of the country. These kiosks will be installed in Post Office premises or other 
public places having high footfall to enable the customers to collect their parcels 24x7 at 
their convenience. 
(Ministry of Communications (Department of Posts)  
O.M. No28-5/2024/BGT/D-7230 dated 08.05.2024) 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 11) 
Cyber Security in the Department of Posts 
The Committee note that a slew of policies have been framed by the Department 
of Posts in ord er to ensure the data security and to guard against unauthorized 
access/threats.  It includes a Data Classification Policy where all data assets must be 
inventoried, assigned an asset owner, classified, and documented to ensure that each 
receive the appropriate level of protection. It also includes a data encryption policy which 
defines the Security requirements for data encryption on laptops, physical (portable and 
removable) media and Secure File Transfer within India Post Domain. This policy 
ensures the confidentiality and integrity of India Post‘s data/ information through the 
implementation of cryptographic controls. It further encompasses a Patch and 
Vulnerability Management Policy under which the discovery of a new vulnerability, 
disclosure of a new e xploit or emergence of a new malware threat and the capability to 

29 
 
incorporate protection from them on a real time basis fall under Threat and Vulnerability 
Management.  
The Committee further note that the Department has an Application Security 
Policy which provides a security framework for applications developed or purchased by 
India Post and a Database Security Policy by which all databases are secured to ensure 
the confidentiality of customer information, the integrity of the business processes, and 
the availability of the systems. In addition, there is a Password Policy that establishes a 
standard for creation of strong passwords, the protection of those passwords, and the 
frequency of change of the passwords. 
The Committee appreciate the fact that the cy ber security policy of the 
Department outlines the guidelines and provisions for preserving the security of data and 
technology infrastructure of Department of Post. This policy delineates security 
requirements, roles, and responsibilities necessary to pro tect enterprise data and 
information systems from unauthorized access, inappropriate disclosure, or compromise.  
The Committee find it praiseworthy that this policy is defined in the context of complying 
with the policy framework requirements considering best practices adopted by IT industry 
and periodic Vulnerability assessment is carried out, analysed and risks addressed for 
mitigation. The Department participates in the CERT -In drills to understand the security 
posture.  
 The Committee find it heartening  that both Nanyatha App and Postman Mobile 
App (PMA) have been developed ‗in house‘ by the Centre of Excellence in Postal 
Technology (CEPT), Mysore and the Apps have been able to achieve their objective of 
monitoring the clearance of letter boxes and to up date the delivery status of articles on 
real-time basis.  
The Committee note that the postal staff are being trained in Cyber Security at 
various levels. All officers of the Department during their probation are attached to CEPT 
for imparting training on v arious technology related activities. For rest of the staff, basic 
training is imparted at Postal Training Centres on IT Security with the objective of 
ensuring end point security. CEPT has conducted Master Development program twice 
where Circle SPOCs have  been trained in various disciplines, wh o in turn train the local 
Post Office staff. DoP engaged Core System Integrator (CSI) for implementation and 
monitoring of all Security tools at the Data Centre and Post Offices. 
The Committee are well pleased with t he initiatives taken by the Department to 
protect its data from outside threats and expect the Department to continue with their 
efforts with zeal and vigor thereby emerging as the leading Government entity in cyber 
security initiatives. The Department may  also consider invol ving subject matter experts 
as Consultants in order to keep abreast of the latest developments in the field of cyber 
security. The Committee bank on the Department to continue the training of employees 
on an ongoing basis to refresh their knowledge with the current security threats.  
Reply of the Government 
DoP has its Information Security Management Policy (ISMP) and Cyber Crisis 
Management Plan ( CCMP) in place.  Besides, Cyber Security Guidelines for Govt. 
Employees issued by MeitY has  also been shared with all concerned to ensure its 
compliance.  Further Technology Division is also considering t o engage SME‘s as 
Consultants to assist CISO and other staff in cyber securit y matters in future.  For now, 
Consultants from PWC are assisting in cyber security issues‖. 
(Ministry of Communications (Department of Posts)  
O.M. No28-5/2024/BGT/D-7230 dated 08.05.2024) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No. 19 of Chapter I) 

30 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 12) 
Pending projects in Estate Management 
The Committee note that twenty two projects of Post Office buildings have been 
pending for the past 10 years. Out of these, the most glari ng cases are that of four Post 
Offices in Kerala namely Karamana, Poojappura, Sasthamangalam and Kalpetta which 
were a nnounced in the Twelfth Five Year Plan. The Department have provided 
implausible reasons for the delay like revision in drawing, slow municipal approval which 
are not convincing to the Committee. The Committee are unhappy to note that the said 
projects have been delayed for an inexplicably long duration of time and have unjustly 
deprived a large portion of the populace of Kerala from postal services.  
The Committee have further noted that the yearly outflow on rent of postal 
buildings is approximately Rs.10 5.07 Crore. 10179 buildings have been rented by the 
Department for more than 20 years.  The Committee find it entirely unreasonable that the 
Department has been paying enormous sums of money on rent for a considerable 
number of years. Consequently, the num bers add up and lead to a revenue deficit in the 
long run. At the same time, the Department could have constructed and utilized its own 
buildings on its own lands demarcated for official use but instead, the construction is 
being delayed and the land is be ing encroached by unscrupulous elements due to 
apathy of the post office personnel.  
The Committee are dissatisfied by the state of affairs at the Estate Management 
Division and strongly emphasise that the Department should prioritise the completion of 
projects and move its operations from rented buildings to owned ones to reduce costs. 
The Committee may be apprised of the headway made in this matter.  
Reply of the Government 
(a) 182 new buildings have been constructed in last 05 years to reduce the rental 
liability. 45 Post Office buildings constructed during the FY  2022 -23 and 55 Post Office 
buildings constructed during the FY 2023 -24 under Estates Management Scheme. The 
list of the Postal buildings constructed during financial year 2022 -23 and 2023 -24 is as 
follows: 
TABLE-I 
Post Office Construction Projects completed in the year 2022-23 
S. No. Name of circle Project Name  
1 
Bihar 
Majhaulia 
2 Bhagalpur 
3 Kurnaul 
4 Holiday Home Nalanda 
5 
Delhi 
Dilshad Garden, Delhi 
6 Kirby Place 
7 Maharashtra Vijaynagar, Pune 
8 
Telangana 
Ramayampet 
9 Echoda 
10 
ANDHRA PRADESH 
Chintapalle 
11 Bhavanipuram 

31 
 
12 V. Kota 
13 
Assam 
Badulipar 
14 Puranigudam 
15 Sualkachi 
16 Moirabari 
17 
GUJARAT 
Vav 
18 Ranuj 
19 Thara 
20 Malpur 
21 Umarpada 
22 Ilav 
23 Sarigam 
24 Unai 
25 Thamna 
26 Palaj 
27 Malpur 
28 
Karnataka 
Brahma Sagra 
29 Mudho, Bagalkot Dn 
30 
North East 
Mechuka, Arunachal Pradesh 
31 Mamilt, Mizoram 
32 
Odisha 
Narasinghpur, Cuttack South 
33 Patnagarh 
34 Manamunda 
35 
Uttar Pradesh 
Baragaon, Jhansi 
36 Sahpau Mathura 
37 Bhamora, Bareilly 
38 Pilibhit City 
39 Ramnaga, Bareilly 
40 Barnapur, Bahraich Dn. 
41 Dhammaur Bazar 
42 Panwari 
43 Kichhauchha, Faizabad Division 
44 
West Bengal 
Chakbhrigu 
45 Hili 

32 
 
TABLE-II 
Post Office buildings constructed in 2023-24 
Sl.No. Circle Name of the Building 
1 
Assam 
Sarupathar 
2 Nakachari 
3 Pathalipam 
4 Jamunamukh 
5 Bihar Khushruppur 
6 Motihari Holiday Homes 
7 
Gujarat 
Khimat 
8 Sector-23, Gandhinagar 
9 Type-VI Qtr at Saurastra University rajkot 
10 Vadia 
11 
Himachal 
Sarahan 
12 Chowki Maniar 
13 Haripur 
14 Jharkhand Godda 
15 Rohini 
16 
Karnataka 
Cambridge Layout, Halasuru Bazar 
17 Vertical expansion of BG RO 
18 Arehalli 
19 Karwar 
20 Lachyan 
21 Alnavar 
22 Sulahpet 
23 Padubiri 
24 
Kerala 
Kalpetta 
25 Karamana 
26 Kunnicode 
27 Edathua 
28 Madhya Pradesh Jatara 
29 Maharashtra Satpur 
30 
North east 
Kakching 
31 North Vanliaphai 
32 Thingsulthiah 
33 East Lungdar 
34 Punjab Sanghol 
35 
Rajasthan 
Sankhu 
36 Kundal 
37 Dushwakhara 
38 Rawatsar 
39 Jojawar 
40 Bambora 
41 Dantaramgarh 
42 Tamil Nadu Villivakkam 

33 
 
43 Nidamangalam 
44 Tirumanilaiyur 
45 Sultanpet 
46 Pudupalayam 
47 Valmiki Nagar 
48 Manaduthandapathu 
49 Jawahar Nagar 
50 Silamarathupati 
51 Telangana Nawabpet 
52 Boath 
53 
Uttar Pradesh 
Rampur Mathura 
54 C/o NDC and Parcel hub Rapti nagar in 
Gorakhpur 
55 Maharajganj 
 
(b) The status of four post offices of Kerala namely Karamana, Poojappura, 
Sasthamangalam and Kalpetta are as follows: 
 
S.NO. Project Present Status 
1 Poojappura  Poojappura is a multistory building which consists 
of G + 5 floors. The roof slab of five floors have 
been casted and final slab casting work is under 
progress. 
2 Sasthamangalam Sasthamangalam is a G+3 buildi ng.  The building 
is constructed upto  slab height from front side. 
From back side, three number of slabs have been 
casted and remaining fourth and final slab is to be 
casted. 
3 Karamana Work completed. 
4 Kalpetta Work completed. 
(Ministry of Communications (Department of Posts) 
O.M. No28-5/2024/BGT/D-7230 dated 08.05.2024) 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 13) 
Role played by the post office in achieving Sustainable Development Goal and 
Reduction in Emissions 
 The Committee note that the Department of Posts is a member of the Universal 
Postal Union (UPU). The UPU being a specialized agency of United Nations also 
contributes in attainment of the relevant Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) through 
some of their activities. As regards the goals of ‗no poverty‘, ‗ze ro hunger‘ and ‗reducing 
inequality‘, there is a large role of Post Offices in financial inclusion and literacy among  
the citizens through Post Offices Savings Bank Schemes, Direct Benefit Transfer, 
Pension Payments, Aadhaar enabled Payment System (AePS) at the doorstep through 
India Post Payments Bank and Postal Life Insurance. Department have also been 
creating employment for people through post office agents and franchise. With respect to 
goals for ‗Gender Equality‘, ‗Qual ity Education‘, all Women Post Offices have been 
opened and facilities created for women employees to promote gender sensitivity and 

34 
 
equality. Postal Department have also been promoting Sukanya Samriddhi Yojana (SSY) 
through Post Offices to open accounts for the girl child and secure their future and quality 
education. Regarding the goals for ‗Affordable and Clean Energy‘, ‗Climate Action‘, 
activities have been undertake n for rain water harvesting in Post Office premises and 
instalment of solar panels on rooftop of Post Offices to genera te clean energy. With 
regards to the goals for ‗Decent Work and Economic Growth‘, ‗Industry, Innovation and 
Infrastructure‘, in order to promote exports through postal channel, the number of 
Foreign Post Office gateways (Offices of Exchange) have been incr eased from five to 
eight and at 19 locations Customs clearance facilities in Foreign Post Offices have been 
made operational to facilitate small exporters and MSMEs. 
 The Committee note that the Department have not quantified its  CO2 emissions. 
However, with introduction of IT systems in the Department, usage of paper & printing 
has been substantially reduced in the last five years.  Also, with introduction of CNG 
vehicles and a modern fleet of vehicles, total emissions have been reduced. The 
Department ins talls roof top solar power packs on departmental buildings, wherever 
feasible which further contribute towards reduction in carbon footprint. Department have 
proposed to induct Electric/CNG vehicles in its fleet from 2021 -22 to 2025 -26 to reduce 
fuel consumption. Small Post O ffice concept of the Department is based on maximizing 
use of local building materials for construction, in order to reduce the environmental 
impact.   
 The Committee recognize that the diverse network and presence of Posts make 
them a potentially strategic driver of the SDG agenda and are impressed with the 
commitment shown by the Department towards building a sustainable future and foster 
social advancement and human well -being. The Committee expect the Department to 
align their strategies in order to benefit MSMEs through offering affordable trade services 
and thereby aiding socio -economic growth. Doing so, they would fulfil their obligation to 
the world and responsibility to the future.  
 The Committee observe that the Department is i n a nascent stage when it comes 
to cutting the emissions and offsetting the carbon. They need to ramp up their efforts 
considerably in order to achieve reduced consumption of natural resources  and use of 
renewable energy in its operations. The Committee w ould like to be apprised of the 
endeavours of the Department to reduce consumption of fossil fuels. The Committee 
would like to know the roadmap to develop postal infrastructure which has the lowest 
possible environmental impact alongwith recycling and was te reduction as part of its 
Social Responsibility. 
Reply of the Government 
 The Department is committed to use renewable energy resources to reduce 
carbon footprint. All newly constructed buildings are having equipped with Solar Power 
packs and Rain Water Harvesting structures. Solar Power Packs are also being installed 
in existing buildings to ensure the sustainable development. During last 5 years, 355 
Solar Power Packs and 637 Rain water Harvesting Structures have been constructed/ 
installed in the Circles.  
 The Department directly and indirectly targets achievement of the SDGs. Through 
its tie ups with e-commerce players, many of whose sellers are artisans, self help groups 
(SHG), Micro, Small & Medium Enterprises (MSME), small start -ups, bodies such as  
TRIFED and reaching their products to the market, the Department plays a role in 
reducing poverty and inequality. With extensive computerisation of its post office 
counters, processing hubs and delivery offices, the Department has significantly reduced 
its usage of paper. With elimination of lac seals for closing bags with lead seals, the 

35 
 
Department has provided for a clean and healthy working environment for its staff and 
eliminated polluting discharge into the air. 
 The Department of Post s is committed t o the relevant S ustainable Development 
Goals.  The Use of technology in customer convenience and overall satisfaction comes 
to its top priority.  The use of E -office/Email in official correspondence will reduce the 
paper/stationary usage gradually.  In thi s way Department of Posts will continue to 
contribute even better towards the social responsibility and natural obligations to 
reduce/control carbon emissions. 
 The Department of Posts has made significant strides towards reducing emissions 
and promoting s ustainability through the introduction of CNG vehicles in its fleet.  
Department has purchased 30 such vehicles for mail operations.  These vehicles 
contribute to reduction in fuel consumption and emissions, aligning with goals for 
‗Affordable and Clean En ergy‘ and ‗Climate Action‘.  As part of its social responsibility, 
the Department continues to explore initiatives aimed at minimizing resource 
consumption, promoting renewable energy, and adopting eco -friendly practices 
throughout its operations. 
(Ministry of Communications (Department of Posts)  
O.M. No28-5/2024/BGT/D-7230 dated 08.05.2024) 
 
 (Recommendation Sl. No. 14) 
Role of the Department of Posts in Dissemination of information and Gender 
Equality 
 The Committee note the role of India Post in promoti ng e- Govt. initiatives and the 
dissemination of information on welfare schemes. India Post has played an important 
role in promoting Government initiatives and dissemination of information on welfare 
schemes by displaying information about them through di splays and banners on more 
than 1.64 lakh Post Offices across the country. India Post participated in several welfare 
campaigns such as Beti Bachao Beti Padhao Campaign, Department of Consumer 
Affairs‘ consumer legal rights awareness campaign, information and promotion of 
Ministry of MSME‘s ST/SC Entrepreneur‘s Hub, Pradhan Mantri Garib Kalyan Anna 
Yojana, Jan Andolan 1.0 & 2.0 Campaign, Free vaccination for all, etc. Banners and 
posters were displayed in Post Offices across the country to provide awareness  and 
information about these Government schemes to public visiting the Post Offices. LED 
display Boards are set up on top of the building and in the public hall of the Post Offices. 
As and when creatives with instructions are received from MIB, they are di sseminated 
digitally through Web Banner on the website of Department of Posts (indiapost.gov.in), 
through social media handles (Twitter, Koo, Instagram, Facebook) and through LED 
display. Recently MIB has shared creatives on Jan Andolan 2.0 and on the mess age of 
free vaccination for all which was disseminated widely. 
 The Committee further note that DOP pro motes Girl Child Welfare and 
Development Programs. DOP has taken up campaigns promoting Women and Child 
Development. The Beti Bachao Beti Padhao Campaign  is widely disseminated.  The 
Sukanya Samriddhi Yojana is a flagship scheme for securing the future of Girl Children. 
Under this scheme a Sukanya Samriddhi Account (SSA) is opened for the girl children in 
Post Offices.  Department of Posts has opened 2.04 Crore (FY 2020 -2021) accounts 
through more than 1.5 lakh Post Offices across the country. In fact, 84% of SSA 
accounts in the country are opened in Post Offices. It has been instructed to all Postal 
Circles to raise awareness on SSA and include maximum num ber of girl children under 
the fold of SSA. To achieve it, various initiatives, programs, events are conducted by 
Postal Circles in partnerships with Women and Child Development Departments and 

36 
 
School Education Departments of several State Governments. Pan India radio jingles are 
also being run to raise awareness on SSA and its benefits. Apart from this, social media 
creatives are also regularly shared regarding SSA. 
 The Committee appreciate the initiatives taken by the Department in the 
dissemination of information and the welfare of the girl child. The Committee understand 
that due to expansive network and public service mandate, DoP can help promote 
education of women, help end discrimination, exploitation and violence through 
information campaigns and u se their Universal Service Obligation to ensure that all 
women have access to reproductive health resources and social welfare. Department of 
Posts, being a major employer, can take steps to ensure that women are encouraged 
and supported to work for them. The Committee acknowledge that Department of Posts 
can help to bridge the gap between the people in need and the organizations trying to 
reach them which includes programs targeted to raise awareness of gender equality and 
promote inclusion and empowerment  of women. The Committee look forward to 
continuing active participation of the Department in this regard.  
Reply of the Government 
 In furtherance to vision and mission of the Bank, India Post Payments Bank is 
committed to further Financial Literacy to la st mile and last person in the country.  In 
conduct of financial literacy camps, India Post Payments Bank practices three guiding 
principles for spreading financial literacy: 
i. Awareness: Spreading the knowledge of financial products and services. 
ii. Attitude: Creating a positive attitude towards adaptation of financial 
products for life cycle needs, goals and a secure future. 
iii. Conduct: Encourage to practice learnings in day to day life. 
iv. encourage for saving and investment. 
v. apply financial discipline. 
vi. prevention against various frauds such as Phishing, online scams, internet 
banking fraud, OTP related frauds to protect and save their hard -earned 
money. 
vii. Explaining debt management. 
 These Camps are done focusing mainly Youngsters/Females/Senior 
Citizens/Farmers/Workers.  These camps are organized at places like schools, 
Panchayats, Degree colleges, Universities, Factories and other such potential areas to 
impart financial awareness.  India Post Payments Bank has conducted more than 20,000 
camps. 
 For Post Office Savi ngs Bank (POSB), the interest rates are fixed by Department 
of Economic Affairs, Ministry of Finance based on various factors and Department of 
Posts functions as an agency on their behalf.  In respect of Sukanya Samriddhi Account 
(SSA), it is being submitted that the interest rate of 8.2% on SSA w.e.f. 01.01.2024 is the 
highest being offered on any POSB Scheme.  There are 3.12 crore live SSA Accounts 
with the Department as on 31.12.2023. 
 For the welfare of women and girl child, a new scheme named Mahila S amman 
Savings Certificate (MSSC) was introduced w.e.f. 01.04.2023.  Account under this 
scheme can be opened by a woman for herself or by the guardian on behalf of a minor 
girl.  On an application to the Post Office, a Single Holder Type Account may be open ed 
on or before 31.03.2025.  A minimum of One Thousand Rupees and any sum in 
multiples of One Hundred Rupees may be deposited in an account and no subsequent 
deposit is allowed.  An individual may open any number of accounts in the scheme 
subject to a maximum limit for deposit of Rs. 2 lakh in one account or in all the accounts 
under this scheme held by an account holder.  There is a time gap of three months 
between the existing account and the opening of another account.  The rate of interest 
applicable is  7.5 per cent per annum, which shall be compounded on quarterly basis.  

37 
 
Premature withdrawal is allowed for a maximum of 40 per cent of the eligible balance 
after expiry of one year from the date of opening of account.  Under this scheme, 
accounts can be o pened through internet banking by existing SB account holder having 
e-Banking facility.  22.80 lakh such accounts have been opened by 31.12.2023. 
 The Department would make sincere efforts to implement the recommendations of 
the committee for taking initia tives to raise awareness of gender equality and promote 
inclusion and empowerment of women and all field units would be asked to implement it 
and increase the share of women in all other POSB schemes as well. 
 Department of Posts is playing an important ro le promoting Government initiatives 
and dissemination of information on welfare schemes with special focus on Girl Child 
welfare and development programs such as Beti Bachao Beti Padhao Campaign, etc.   
 Further with special focus on Sukanya Samriddhi Yoja na (SSA), Mahila Samman 
Savings Certificate (MSSC) DoP is striving for awareness through its vast network. 
 
(Ministry of Communications (Department of Posts)  
O.M. No28-5/2024/BGT/D-7230 dated 08.05.2024) 
 
 (Recommendation Sl. No. 15) 
Review of functioning of Post Office Common Service Centres 
 The Committ ee note that the 1,21,133 Post Offices are providing Common 
Service Centre(CSC) services in the  country which includes 22,382 Departmental Post 
Offices and 98, 751 Branch Post Offices in rural areas. Further, the Committee are given 
to understand that 1,38,906 postal employees (35,162 Departmental employees and 
1,03,744 Gramin Dak Sevaks) have been trained t o provide CSC services through Post 
Offices.  The Committee have also been informed that the revenue earned for 
transactions done on CSC platform related to Common Service Centre services is 
shared between CSC -SPV and Department of Posts in the ratio of 20:80. The 
Department have informed that the revenue earned by the CSCs operated by the 
Department of Posts is Rs. 7,45,351.39 in 2020-21, Rs. 38,87,621.46 in 2021-22 and Rs. 
59, 23, 788.58 in 2022 -23 till December, 2022 which totals up to Rs. 1,05, 56, 761.43 
since the inception of PO -CSC. The Committee have also been informed that a total of 
81 services a re being offered by PO -CSCs which include Digital Seva Portal, Election, 
Labour, Pension and Employment services , E -District, bill payments, tour and travels, 
FASTag, Educational, banking, insurance services, Income Tax return etc. They have 
also submitte d that the availability of power supply and internet connectivity in post 
offices and the demand for CSC services are the major challenges faced by post offices 
while delivering CSC services.  
 The Committee based on their Study Visit observed that the PO -CSCs visited by 
the Committee were largely focused on bill payment services.  If this is the case, then the 
Committee would like that such CSCs need to enlarge the scope of services being 
delivered to comply to the manda te of CSCs provided under the M oU si gned for that 
effect.  The Committee emphasise on the need of training for delivery of CSC services.  
 Further, it is observed that the Department of Posts, being a behemoth 
organization, is capable of discharging the responsibilities entrusted to the CSC -SPV 
independently. The Department have, time and again, reaffirmed their abilities to provide 
the gamut of e -Governance services on their own.  The Committee empha sise that 
instead of sharing 20 % of the revenue with the CSC which is a private entity, the 
business model and MoU between the Department and the CSC needs to be revisited 
and  the possibility of handing over the CSC services to the Department of Post may be 

38 
 
explored.  The Committee would highly appreciate if the desired action is taken at the 
earliest.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Presently, over 1.4 lakh Post offices, including departmental and branch post 
offices, are providing services through the Digital Seva Portal of Common Service Centre 
(CSC) in the country. Apart from bill payments, service s related to passport, PAN Card, 
registration for National Pension Scheme (NPS), renewal of general insurance products 
and booking of Bus/railway/flight tickets are also undertaken at the PO-CSC counters. All 
the post office counters providing CSC services  have been manned by a pool of trained 
employees. The directions of the Committee on need for regular training have been 
noted and periodic training to post office staff on CSC related services is being provided 
through physical as well as online mode by CSC-SPV. The revenue earned by the CSCs 
operated by the Department of Posts was about Rs. 76 lakh in 2022 -23 and Rs. 51 lakh 
in 2023-24. The Postal Circles and field units of CSC -SPV have been taking marketing 
initiatives to promote and publicize citizen -centric CSC services being provided through 
post offices, so as to bring awareness and increase the demand for such services other 
than bill payments, especially in the rural areas. The observations of the Committee in 
this regard have been noted for compliance. 
 
(ii)  CSC e -Governance Services India Limited is a Special Purpose Vehicle 
underCompanies Act, 1956, set up by the Ministry of Electronics and Information 
Technology (MeitY) to oversee the implementation of the Common Service Center 
scheme that is a part of the Digital India Project, and necessary support including funds 
etc are provided to them by MeitY. Handing over of services provided by CSC -SPV to 
DoP would involve examination of legal, administrative and operational issues by MeitY. 
The implications with respect to the tie ups of CSC eGovernance Services India Limited 
with a large number of private/ business entities to provide B2C services like Utility bill 
collection, booking of tour and travels tickets, mobile and DTH recharge, insurance 
premium collection; various educational institutions for running coaching classes, 
diploma courses etc will also have to be examined by MeitY. DoP provides Post Office 
Savings Bank (POSB) services as an agency function of Ministry of Finance. Further, 
India Post Payments Bank (IPPB) which is a payments bank owned by Govt. of India, 
offers banking services and insurance and other third party products through the network 
of post offices. CSCs other than the CSCs functioning in Post Offices, offer banking and 
financial services of other entities that are similar to the services offered by DoP and 
IPPB. Hence, if the CSC services are handed over to DoP, conflict of interest may arise 
with IPPB and POSB, which are playing significant role in financial inclusion. 
  (Ministry of Communications (Department of Posts) 
O.M. No28-5/2024/BGT/D-7230 dated 08.05.2024) 

39 
 
CHAPTER- III 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS  WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO 
PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
-NIL- 

40 
 
 
CHAPTER IV 
OBSERVATIONS/RE COMMENDATIONS  IN RESPECT OF  WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND REQUIRE 
REITERATION 
 
 
-NIL- 
 
 

41 
 
CHAPTER V 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF  WHICH REPLIES   
OF THE  GOVERNMENT ARE INTERIM IN NATURE 
 
 
-NIL- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Delhi;  DR. NISHIKANT DUBEY, 
 16    December, 2024 Chairperson, 
25   Agrahayana, 1946 (Saka) Standing Committee on  
Communications and Information Technology 
 

42 
 
ANNEXURE – I 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON COMMUNICATIONS AND  
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(2024-25) 
MINUTES OF THE SEVENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
----------- 
 The Committee sat on Monday, the 16 December, 2024 from 1015 hours to           
1045 hours in Committee Room No. ‗C‘, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
DR. NISHIKANT DUBEY- Chairperson 
 MEMBERS 
  
Lok Sabha 
 
 
2. Dr. Rabindra Narayan Behera 
3. Shri Anup Sanjay Dhotre 
4. Shri S. Supongmeren Jamir 
5. Shri G. Kumar Naik 
6. Dr. M.K. Vishnu Prasad 
7. Shri Ramasahayam Raghuram Reddy 
8. Shri Devesh Shakya  
9. Shri Vishnu Datt Sharma 
 
 
Rajya Sabha 
  
10. Shri Amar Pal Maurya 
11. Dr. Sasmit Patra 
12. Shri V. Vijayendra Prasad  
13. Shri Lahar Singh Siroya 
14. Shri K.T.S. Tulsi 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Y.M. Kandpal   - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. A. Jyothirmayi                       - Director 
3. Shri Rajesh Mohan             - Deputy Secretary 
 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the Sitting of the Committee 
convened to consider and adopt one draft Action Taken Report on Fifty -Seventh Report 
(17th Lok Sabha) relating to the Department of Posts and four draft Report s on Demands for 
Grants (2024-25) relating to the Ministries/Department under the jurisdiction of Committee. 

43 
 
 
3. The Committee, then, took up the following five draft Reports for consideration and 
adoption:- 
 
(i) Draft Report on Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Fifty - 
Seventh Report (17 th Lok Sabha) on ―Department Of Posts – Initiatives and 
Challenges‖ relating to the Ministry of Communications (Department of Posts). 
(ii) XXXX….XXXX….. XXXX….XXXX….. XXXX….XXXX….. XXXX….XXXX 
(iii) XXXX….XXXX….. XXXX….XXXX….. XXXX….XXXX….. XXXX….XXXX 
(iv) XXXX….XXXX….. XXXX….XXXX….. XXXX….XXXX….. XXXX….XXXX  
(v) XXXX….XXXX….. XXXX….XXXX….. XXXX….XXXX….. XXXX….XXXX 
4. The Committee adopted the Reports without modifications. 
 
5. The Committee authorized the Chairperson to finalize the draft Action Taken Reports 
and present the same to the House during the current Session of Parliament. 
 
6. XXXX….XXXX….. XXXX….XXXX….. XXXX….XXXX….. XXXX….XXXX 
 
The Committee, then, adjourned. 
 
**** 
 
 
 
 
 
 
________________________________________________________________________ 
XXXX….XXXX     Matter not related to the Report. 

44 
 
ANNEXURE – II 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE OBSERVATIONS/ 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THEIR FIFTY-SEVENTH REPORT  
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
[Vide Paragraph No. 5 of Introduction] 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by  the 
Government 
 
          Rec. Sl. Nos.: 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14 and 15 
Total 15 
Percentage    100 
(ii)  Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the replies of the Government 
 
         Rec. Sl. No.: NIL  
Total NIL 
Percentage 0 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and require reiteration 
        Rec. Sl. No.: NIL 
 
Total NIL 
Percentage 0 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the replies of the 
Government are of interim in nature 
 
        Rec. Sl. Nos.: NIL  
Total NIL 
Percentage 0 
 