 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON COMMUNICATIONS  
AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY  
(2024-25) 
 
 
EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
MINISTRY OF INFORMATION AND BROADCASTING 
 
 
 
 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the 
Committee contained in their Third Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands 
for Grants (2024-25)'] 
 
 
THIRTEENTH REPORT 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     July, 2025/ Sravana, 1947 (Saka) 
13 
 


 
 
 
THIRTEENTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
COMMUNICATIONS AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(2024-25) 
 
 
EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
MINISTRY OF INFORMATION AND BROADCASTING 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the 
Committee contained in their Third Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands 
for Grants (2024-25)'] 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on           24.07.2025 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on              24.07.2025 
 
                    LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
                   NEW DELHI 
 
 
                 July 2025/ Sravana, 1947 (Saka) 
 
 


 
 
CCIT No. 414 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
©2025 By Lok Sabha Secretariat 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha 
(Seventeenth Edition) and Printed by Lok Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi-110001 

 
 
CONTENTS 
 PAGE  
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE.................................................................................................. (iii) 
INTRODUCTION.................................................................................................................................... (v) 
CHAPTER I Report………………………………………………………………………..................... 1 
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government……………………………………………………………………............... 10 
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in 
view of the replies of the Government……………………………….......................... 27 
CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee and require reiteration …………......... 28 
CHAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the Government 
are of interim in nature…......................................................................................... 29 
 APPENDICES  
I. Revised Policy Guidelines for setting up Community Radio Stations in India 35 
 ANNEXURES  
I. Minutes of the 20th Sitting of the Committee held on 26.06.2025............................ 42 
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in their Third Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha). 44 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
Composition of the Standing Committee on Communications and 
Information Technology (2024-25)** 
 
Dr. Nishikant Dubey - Chairperson 
Lok Sabha 
  
2. Shri C.N. Annadurai 
3. Shri Anil Baluni 
4. Dr. Rabindra Narayan Behera 
5. Shri Anup Sanjay Dhotre 
6. Shri Gurmeet Singh Meet Hayer 
7. Shri Sanjay Haribhau Jadhav 
8. Shri S. Supongmeren Jamir 
9. Shri Appalanaidu Kalisetti 
10. Smt. Poonamben Hematbhai Maadam 
11. Ms. Mahua Moitra 
12. Shri G. Kumar Naik 
13. Shri Shafi Parambil 
14. Dr. M.K. Vishnu Prasad 
15. Ms. Kangna Ranaut 
16. Shri Radheshyam Rathiya 
17. Shri Ramasahayam Raghuram Reddy 
18. Shri Arun Kumar Sagar 
19. Shri Devesh Shakya 
20. Shri Vishnu Datt Sharma 
21. Shri Rajesh Verma 
Rajya Sabha 
22. Shri Saket Gokhale* 
23. Smt. Priyanka Chaturvedi 
24. Shri Ilaiyaraaja 
25. Shri Amar Pal Maurya 
26. Dr. Sasmit Patra 
27. Shri V. Vijayendra Prasad 
28. Shri S. Niranjan Reddy 
29. Shri Kartikeya Sharma 
30. Shri Lahar Singh Siroya  
31. Shri K.T.S. Tulsi 
SECRETARIAT 
1.  Shri Y.M. Kandpal  — Additional Secretary 
2.  Smt. A. Jyothirmayi  — Director 
3.  Smt. Rinky Singh                — Executive Officer  
 
**Committee constituted w.e.f. 26 th September, 2024 vide Para No.833 of Bulletin Part -II dated 
26th September, 2024. 
* Shri Saket Gokhale  has been nominated vide Para No. 853 of Bulletin Part –II dated 03 rd 
October, 2024. 
 

 
 
INTRODUCTION 
I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Communications and Information Technology 
(2024-25), having been authorized by the Committee, present this Thirteenth Report on Action 
Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in 
their Third Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on ‘Demands for Grants (2024 -25)’ relating to the 
Ministry of Information and Broadcasting. 
2. The Third Report was presented to Lok Sabha and also laid on the Table of  
Rajya Sabha on 18 th December, 2024.  The Ministry of Information and Broadcasting furnished 
their Action Taken Notes on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the Third Report 
on 30th March, 2025. 
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their Sitting held on               
26th June, 2025. 
4. For facility of reference and convenience, Observations/Recommendations of the Committee 
have been printed in bold in Chapter-I of the Report.  
5. An analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Third Report of the Committee is given at Annexure-II. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     NEW DELHI; DR. NISHIKANT DUBEY, 
    21 July, 2025  Chairperson, 
  30 Asadha, 1947 (Saka) Standing Committee on  
Communications and Information Technology. 

1 
 
CHAPTER I 
REPORT 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Communications and Information 
Technology deals with the action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Third Report 
(Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on the ‘Demands for Grants (2024-25)’ relating to the Ministry of 
Information and Broadcasting. 
 
2. The Third Report was presented to Lok Sabha/laid in Rajya Sabha on                          
18th December, 202 4.  It contained 16 Observations/Recommendations. Action Taken 
Notes contained in the Report in respect of all the Observations/Recommendations have 
been received from the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting and are categorized as 
under:- 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by 
the Government 
 
Rec. Sl. Nos.:– 1,2,3,5,6,7,8,13,14 & 15 
 
  Total-10 
Chapter-II 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the replies of the Government 
 
 
Rec. Sl. No.:– NIL 
 
  Total — NIL  
Chapter-III 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of 
the Government have not been accepted by the Committee and 
require reiteration 
 
Rec. Sl. No.:– NIL  
 
  Total – NIL  
Chapter-IV 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of 
the Government are of interim in nature  
 
Rec. Sl. No.:– 4,9,10,11,12 &16 
 
  Total – 06 
Chapter-V 
 
3. The Committee trust that utmost importance would be given for the  
implementation of the Observations/Recommendations accepted by the 
Government. The Committee further desire that Action Taken Notes on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in Chapter -I of this Report and final 
action taken replies to the Observations/Recommendations contained in                         
Chapter-V of this Report would be furnished at the earliest. 

2 
 
4. The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government on some of 
their recommendations.   
DIGITIZATION OF ARCHIVES OF DOORDARSHAN (DD)  
(Recommendation Sl. No. 8) 
5. The Committee, in their Third Report, had recommended as under:- 
“The Ministry informed the Committee that all the DD channels are 
digitized and all possible efforts are being made to complete the remaining 
digitization at the earliest. The Ministry also submitted before the 
Committee that the archival content of public interest is being showcased 
through Social Media platforms like YouTube. The interested persons can 
approach Central Archives through email in order to purchase the 
recordings/media under the ambit of various archival policies. Information 
to this effect has been made public on Prasar Bharati website. Regarding 
archives of DD, the Ministry submitted that the archives have been 
digitised to the extent possible and efforts are being made to complete the 
remaining digitisation at the earliest. The Committee have long been 
demanding that all archives of DD may be digitized at the earliest. 
However, the process of digitization is still incomplete. The Committee, 
therefore, reiterate that the Ministry should expedite the process of 
digitization of all DD archives without any further delay so that archival 
contents are available to public for use. The Committee learn that social 
media platforms are being used to showcase the archival contents which 
are of public interest. The Committee wish to know what steps have been 
taken by the Ministry to take it to those sections of the society who are not 
using social media but are interested in watching these contents”. 
 
6. In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of information and Broadcasting 
submitted as under:– 
“In addition to linear TV transmission, Doordarshan Channels are now 
being integrated in Prasar Bharati Over -The-Top (OTT) platform WAVES. 
Programmes telecast by regional/ State channels of North-East region can 
be viewed by viewers through various modes like DTH platform, Cable TV 
Network and OTT.          
Digitization of Archives of Doordarshan,  
           a. Digitization setup at Prasar Bharati: 
 
1. Prasar Bharati Archives have been set up to ensure digitization and 
preservation of Media Assets produced for the broadcast 
purposes/operations by Akashvani and Doordarshan. 
 
2. All the content at Prasar Bharati Archives have been digitized 
3. AIR & DD Kendras have been provided with requisite hardware & 
software facility to digitize and preserve the content at their level. 
4. To further strengthen digitization and archival setup, suitable provision 
has been requested under BIND scheme. 
5. The process of digitization of remaining media available at Kendra level 
shall be taken up in time bound manner. 
 

3 
 
b. Accessibility of archival content to the public: 
 
1. Archival Content is curated and sent to Akashvani and Doordarshan 
Kendras for making it available to the public through linear broadcasting. 
The content is consumed by the section of society, not available on soc ial 
media and digital platform. 
2. Prasar Bharati has launched OTT platform “WAVES”, wherein archival 
content of Akashvani and Doordarshan is made available in digital mode 
for public free of cost. Content from other Ministries have also been 
published on the platform in order to make the public aware of schemes 
and initiatives taken by Govt. of India. 
3. Content of public interest is being curated and made available to the 
masses through YouTube channels and other Social Media platforms”. 
 
7. The Committee (2024-25), in their Third Report, had recommended to expedite 
the process of digitization of all DD archives so that archival contents are 
available to public for use . The Ministry , in their Action Taken Note , have 
informed that in addition to linear TV transmission, Doordarshan Channels are 
now being integrated in Prasar Bharati Ov er-The-Top (OTT) platform WAVES 
and programmes telecast by regional/ State channels of North-East region can 
be viewed by viewers through various modes like DTH platform, Cable TV 
Network and OTT platform. Besides, Prasar Bharati Archives have been set up 
to ensure digitization and preservation of Media Assets produced for the 
broadcast purposes/operations by Akashvani and Doordarshan . The Ministry 
has also stated that a ll the content at Prasar Bharati Archives have been 
digitized and t he process of digitization of remaining media available at 
Kendra level shall be taken up in a time bound manner. While appreciating the 
launch of OTT  platform ‘WAVES’, wherein archival content of Akashvani and 
Doordarshan is being made available in digital mode for public , free of cost , 
the Committee call upon the Ministry to take initiatives to popularize their OTT 
platform (WAVES) for greater reach  among the masses. Further, the 
Committee, while noting that all the content at Prasar Bharati Archives have 
been digitized, would like the Ministry to set a time frame for early completion 
of digitization process for remaining media available at Kendra level and 
apprise them of the same. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

4 
 
ADULT CONTENT ON OTT PLATFORMS 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 14) 
8. The Committee, in their Original Report, made the following 
Observation/Recommendation:–  
“The Ministry informed the Committee that Part III of the Information 
Technology (Intermediary Guidelines and Digital Media Ethics Code) 
Rules, 2021 under the Information Technology Act, 2000 relates to 
publishers of online curated content, commonly known as OTT platforms. 
It was further submitted that OTT platforms providing access to content 
which has an “A” rating shall take all efforts to restrict access to such 
content by a child through the implementation of appropriate access 
control measures and in March 2024, the Ministry had taken action to 
block 18 OTT platforms publishing obscene, and, in some instances, 
pornographic content. 19 websites, 10 apps (7 on Google Play Store, 3 on 
Apple App Store), and 57 social media accounts associated with these 
platforms were disabled for public access in India. In view of the above 
information, the Committee harps upon the point that Ministry may furnish 
the details of preventive measures adopted by them so that the pervasion 
of restricted content  among children be stopped. The Committee would 
also like to know if such content  blocked by the Ministry on 18 OTT, 19 
websites and 10 apps are easily available on social media and other 
media platforms like Telegram Channel. If so, the Committee may be 
apprised of how this situation could be dealt with. The Committee would 
further like to know whether the existing Legal Framework is ample 
enough to deal with this issue or more stringent laws are required to deal 
with this issue especially in view of the latest technologies in the field. The 
Committee may be informed of the contemplated action by the Ministry in 
this regard. The Committee would like to advise the Ministry that provision 
for some sort of deterrent punishment should be put in place for the 
repeated offenders in this regard. The Committee would also like to know 
whether the OTT platforms committing the same mistake under the guise 
of changing the name of programmes, changing the means of 
dissemination and changing the IP address etc., with the help of Artificial 
Intelligence (AI) are strictly dealt with. The Committee would like to be 
apprised of the details in this regard”. 
 
9. The Ministry of Information and Broadcasting , in t heir Action Taken Reply , 
submitted as under:-  
"Code of Ethics prescribed under part -III of IT Rules, 2021 provides for 
publishers of online curated content (OTT platforms) which, inter alia, 
require the publishers not to transmit any content which is prohibited by 
law for the time being in force and to undertake age-based classification of 
content into 5 categories, based on general guidelines provided in the 
Appendix to the Rules. The Schedule prescribed under the IT Rules, 2021 
inter-alia provides for the following sets of guidelines  for Classification of 
any curated content namely ‘Context’, ‘Theme’ and ‘Tone and impact’. 
Theme: Classification decisions may take into the theme of any content 
but will depend significantly on the treatment of that theme, especially the 
sensitivity of its presentation. The most challenging themes (for example, 

5 
 
drug misuse, violence, pedophilia, sex, racial or communal hatred or 
violence etc.) are unlikely to be appropriate at the junior levels of 
classification. 
Part-II of the Schedule prescribed under the IT Rules, 2021 provides for 
the Issue Related Guidelines.  
(a) Discrimination: The categorical classification of content shall take into 
account the impact of a film on matters such as caste, race, gender, 
religion, disability or sexuality that may arise in a wide range of works, and 
the classification decision will take account of the strength or impact of 
their inclusion.  
(b) Psychotropic substances, liquor, smoking and tobacco: Films or 
serials, etc. that as a whole portray misuse of psychotropic substances, 
liquor, smoking and tobacco would qualify for a higher category of 
classification.  
(c) Imitable behaviour:  
(1) Classification decisions may take into account any portrayal of criminal 
and violent behaviour with weapons. 
 (2) Portrayal of potentially dangerous behaviour that are likely to incite the 
commission of any offence (including suicide, and infliction of self -harm) 
and that children and young people may potentially copy, shall receive a 
higher classification. 
(3) Films or serials with song and dance scenes comprising lyrics and 
gestures that have sexual innuendos would receive a higher classification. 
Provision under part-III of IT Rules, 2021 to restrict certain curated content 
by a child  
Display of Classification: 
● The publisher of online curated content making available content 
that is classified as U/A 13+ or higher shall ensure that access control 
mechanisms, including parental locks, are made available for such 
content. 
● A publisher of online curated content w hich makes available 
content or programme that is classified as “A” shall implement a reliable 
age verification mechanism for viewership of such content. 
● Restriction of access to certain curated content by a child: Every 
publisher of online curated conte nt providing access to online curated 
content which has an “A” rating shall take all efforts to restrict access to 
such content by a child through the implementation of appropriate access 
control measures. 
2. The Ministry of Information and Broadcasting, on 19.02.2025, 
issued advisory to Online Curated Content Publishers (OTT Platforms) on 
adherence of Indian Laws and the Code of Ethics prescribed under the 
Information Technology (Intermediary Guidelines and Digital Media, Ethics 
Code) Rules, 2021. 
3. While the Ministry took action to block 18 OTT Platforms publishing 
obscene content, the copies of the same was also marked to Delhi Police 
for appropriate action regarding unlawful content being published. 
4. The Ministry has received various grievances through multiple 
channels that the platforms blocked by it are still operating by changing 
name or IP address and the Ministry is reviewing the same for appropriate 
action on such platforms.  
5. Further, Hon’ble Minister of Information and Broadcasting while 
replying to Lok Sabha Starred Question #21 on 27.11.2024 has stressed 
on the need for strengthening the editorial checks in respect of the content 

6 
 
being published on social media and OTT platforms. It was mentioned that 
such editorial checks which used to be there in the past are no more there 
in the era of social media and OTT platforms, leading to freedom of 
speech being misused to spread vulgar content on OTT platforms and 
fake news on social media. The Hon’ble Minister stated that there is a 
need to make the existing laws more stringent, and for this purpose there 
is a need for building a societal consensus, suggesting that this issue 
could be considered by the Parliamentary Committees.”. 
 
10. The Committee (2024-25), had asked the Ministry to furnish details of 
preventive measures adopted to stop the pervasion of restricted content among 
children and had desired to know if the content s blocked by the Ministry were 
easily available on social media and other media platforms like Telegram Channel. 
The Committee had also desired to know whether the existing Legal Framework 
was enough to deal with this issue especially in view of the latest technologies . 
The Ministry, in their Action Taken Note, informed that the Code of Ethics 
prescribed under part-III of IT Rules, 2021 provides for publishers of online curated 
content (OTT platforms) which, inter-alia, requires the publishers not to transmit 
any content which is prohibited by law for the time being in force and to undertake 
age-based classification of content into 5 categories. The Ministry also shared 
details about Part-II of the Schedule prescribed under the IT Rules, 2021, which 
stipulates guidelines to deal with  discrimination/Psychotropic 
substances/liquor/smoking/tobacco/imitable behavior  and about Part-III of IT 
Rules, 2021 , which contains provisions  for ‘Restriction of access to certain 
curated content by a child ’. The Committee note that the Ministry , on 19.02.2025 , 
had also issued advisory to Online Curated Content Publishers (OTT Platforms) 
about the need for  adherence of Indian Laws and the Code of Ethics prescribed 
under the Information Technology (Intermediary Guidelines and Digital Media, 
Ethics Code) Rules, 2021.  Further, action has also been taken to block 18 OTT 
Platforms publishing obscene content and the copies of the same marked to Delhi 
Police for appropriate action . Grievances regarding the blocked platforms being 
still operati onal by changing name or IP address  are also being reviewed for 
appropriate action . Further, it has been informed that the Hon’ble Minister of 
Information and Broadcasting while replying to Lok Sabha Starre d Question #21 
on 27.11.2024 ha d stressed on the need for strengthening the editorial checks in 
respect of the content being published on social media and OTT platforms. He had 
also stated that there was a need to make the existing laws more stringent and for 
this purpose , a societal consensus  is to be built and suggested that this issue 

7 
 
could be considered by the Parliamentary Committees. 
The Committee, while taking note of  the aforesaid provisions of ‘IT Rules, 
2021’ to deal with erring  publishers of online curated content (OTT platforms), 
desire to be updated about: (i) Number of pending grievances and action taken by 
the Ministry and Delhi Police against OTT platforms that are blocked but still 
operating by chang e of name or IP address; and (ii) Action Taken by the Ministry 
consequent upon Honorable  Minister’s reply to a Parliamentary Questions 
highlighting the need for strengthening the existing law/editorial checks in respect 
of the content being published on social media and OTT platforms. While the issue 
is under its active consideration, the Committee would like to be enlightened as to 
whether the Ministry have taken up the same with Editorial Boards of OTT 
platforms to prevent misuse of speech, spreading/proliferating vulgar content and 
fake news etc. 
 
OVERHAULING OF COMMUNITY RADIO STATIONS (CRSs)   
(Recommendation Sl. No. 15) 
11. The Committee , in their Original Report, made the following 
Observation/Recommendation:– 
“The Committee learn that for CRSs in 2022 -23, the percentage of Actual 
Expenditure in respect of Budget Estimate was 52.08% while in respect of 
Revised Estimate, it was 66.66% and these figures in 2023 -24 reached up 
to 84.80% for Budget Estimate and Revised Estimate. The Committee 
note that the Ministry have failed consistently over the years to utilize the 
entire fund allocated to them in CRSs. The Committee would like to know 
the reasons for the same and advise them to take appropriate corrective 
steps to address the issues which are responsible for surrender of funds 
and ensure optimum utilization of allocated funds.  
The Committee were also explained by the Ministry that a total number of 
29 applications for Community Radio Stations are pending with the 
Ministry, which are at various stages of processing for grant of permission 
for setting up of Community Radio Stations. The Committee would like to 
know the reasons for pendency of these 29 applications and also advise 
the Ministry to prepare a proper Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) to 
deal with such requests in future so that time lag could be minimized”. 
 
12. The Ministry of Information and Broadcasting , in their Action Taken Reply , 
submitted as under:– 
“ The major reasons of underutilization of funds and road map to increase 
the utilization of funds are listed below:- 
a) One of the components of the Scheme is to provide financial 
assistance to the Community Radio (which is demand driven completely). 
The Community Radio Stations submit their cases for financial assistance 
(after minimum three months of functioning) for the expenditure incurred 

8 
 
by them on setting up Community Radio Station as per policy/guidelines. 
Thus, utilization depends upon the demand submitted by the CRS also. 
Ministry is approaching to all the operating CRs to make them aware of 
this scheme through all possible means emails, social media, and 
conducting conferences and workshops.  
 
b) Ministry has also taken several steps for strengthening the 
Community Radio Movement and also to increase the utilization of funds. 
The amount of financial assistance given to a Community Radio Station 
has also been increased from Rs. 10 Lakhs to an amount varying from Rs. 
16.20 Lakhs to Rs. 24 Lakhs as per eligibility by its revised policy dated 
23.09.2024. The incentives have been also provided for use of Green 
Energy and women participation in revised policy. In addition to this, to 
facilitate research, innovation and skilling in the sec tor, the Government of 
India ha ve launched fellowship programmes and internship programmes 
under the Scheme.  
 
c) During last two financial years conferences were also being 
organized in the Virtual Mode which also led to saving of the funds. 
However, in this year physical workshops and conferences were planned 
and organized to increase the awareness and capacity building.  
 
d) Ministry is plann ing to shif t on purely online mode for granting 
permission to set up community radio through Broadcast Seva Portal like 
signing of LoI and upgrading to better monitoring and analysis to reduce 
delay in each step. The other measures like conducting in -house trainings 
to Standardize/uniform handling of application, frequent interaction with 
applicants to reduce delay. These measures are important as increasing 
the numbers of operational Community Radio and speedy finalization of 
applications has a direct relationship with utilization of funds. However, as 
per the guidelines, the applications are required to be cleared from MHA, 
Ministry of Defence (MOD) and Ministry of Communications. It is pertinent 
to mention that after obtaining LOI, applicant applies to Ministry of 
Communication for Wireless Operating License before commissioning the 
CRS. The License for operating CRS is issued by the Ministry of 
Communication, but sometimes the clearance from WPC/ MHA/MOD 
takes time. 
 
a. The Status of the applications is given in the tabular format as 
Annexure-I. 
 
b. Every application received through Broadcast Seva Portal has to 
pass through broadly four stages as per Para 3 of Guidelines (available on 
https://mib.gov.in and placed at Annexure-II) 
 
i. Initial Verification of documents/proofs submitted by applicants 
through portal takes one Month but substantial numbers of applications 
are being received with inaccurate/mismatched data/documents/proof, 
then application returned (online) for clarification& correction, so delay 
happens in such cases.  
ii. Forward the application to WPC, MHA, MOD for clearances and 
time specified in guidelines is 3 months. However, only WPC Clearance is 
required in the cases of Government entities.  
iii. 3rd Stage is (a) Conducting Screening Committee (SCM) for the 
NPOs case, which got all clearances from concerned Ministry (b) Inter - 
Ministerial Committee approve/reject the cases of NPOs cleared by SCM 

9 
 
but in case of Government entities like Central/Army Schools or 
Universities directly taken at IMC bypassing SCM.  Then LoI is issued to 
successful applicant which files for DL/SACFA through online portal. 
iv. 4th and Final Stage: Once cleared stage 3, applicant approach MIB 
for signing of Grant of Permission Agreement (GoPA). After clearing all 
stages applicant can install and commission the community Radio.  
 
c. The SoP mentioned above steps are very clear and transparent 
(Para 3 of Revised Policy Guidelines for setting up Community Radio 
Stations in India dated 13.02.2024 (available on https://mib.gov. in and 
attached as Annexure-II)”. 
 
13. In their Original Report, the Committee  had sought reasons from  the 
Ministry for consistent under -utilization of  funds allocated to Community Radio 
Stations (CRSs) as well  as to take appropriate corrective steps to address the 
issue. The Committee had also desired to know the reasons for the pendency of 29 
applications for CRSs and had advised the Ministry to prepare a proper Standard 
Operating Procedure (SOP ) for minimizing the time lag. According to the Action 
Taken Note of the Ministry, it has been observed that one of the components of the 
Scheme is to provide financial assistance to the Community Radio (which is 
demand driven completely) and the Community Radio Stations  (CRSs) submit 
their cases for financial assistance (after minimum three months of functioning) 
for the expenditure incurred by them in setting up Community Radio Station as per 
policy/guidelines. Thus, utilization depends upon the demand submitted by the 
CRS also. The Ministry has submitted that for this, they are approaching all the 
operating CRSs to make them aware of this Scheme. Further, they have also taken 
several steps for strengthening the Community Radio Movement  and to increase 
the utilization of funds . While hoping that the steps taken by the Ministry would 
bring out the intended outcome, the Committee desire to be apprised of the final 
result of the aforesaid initiatives  so as to ensu re optimum utilization of allot ted 
funds.  
Further, with respect to pendency of appli cations for CRSs, the Committee  
note that the Ministry  is planning to shift to purely online mode for granting 
permission to set up Community Radio through Broadcast Seva Portal. The Action 
Taken Note states  that every application received through Broadcast Seva Portal 
has to pass through broadly four stages as per Para 3 of Guidelines [Revised 
Policy Guidelines for setting up Community Radio Stations in India dated 
13.02.2024 - Appendix-I]. On the  issue of pending applications for CRSs,  the 
Committee recall their observation [Rec. No. 8 made in their 11 th Report on DFG 
(2025-26) of MIB] that there were 77 applications pending during the financial year 

10 
 
2024-25 which indicates an increasing trend of pendency from the previous year.  
The Committee hope that the action taken by the Ministry to shift to online mode 
for granting permission  for setting up of CRSs , would reduce the  pendency of 
applications. As per the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting’s reply, one of 
the reasons for delay in granting permission to set up Community Radio Station is 
the time taken to get clearances from Wireless Planning and Coordination Wing  
(WPC)/Ministry of Home Affairs ( MHA)/Ministry of Defence ( MoD). The Committee, 
therefore, urge the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting to have a common 
portal/website with them so that they can observe the cause of delay and 
accordingly reduce the delay in granting permission to set up Community Radio 
Stations. The Committee desire to be kept apprised about the outcome of all the 
initiatives taken to reduce the pendency  along with the updated number  of the 
applications pending for CRSs . The Committe e also hope that proper impact  
assessment of this movement is periodically done by the Ministry to gauge its 
impact and address the challenges, if any, in order to achieve its objective of 
community empowerment, development and social change.  
 
***** 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

11 
 
CHAPTER II 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN  ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 1) 
 
BUDGET OVERVIEW AND DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2024-25) 
The Ministry of Information and Broadcasting (MIB) is the focal point regarding 
policy matters relating to private broadcasting, administering the public broadcasting 
service (Prasar Bharati), multimedia advertising and publicity of the policies and 
programmes of the Government of India, film promotion and certification and regulation 
of print and digital media. The Ministry also handles the task of disseminating information 
about Government policies, schemes and programmes through different media vehicles. 
It plays a pivotal role in dissemination and free flow of information via radio, television, 
films, press and print publications, digital and social media, posters, advertising, and 
traditional modes of communication such as dance, drama, folk recitals, puppet shows. 
The expenditure of the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting and its attached/sub -
ordinate offices and autonomous/grantee bodies, including Prasar Bharati is covered 
under Demand No. 61. For the Financial Year 2024 -25, an amount of Rs. 4342.55 crore 
has been identified for MIB at the Budget Estimate stage as against the proposed sum of 
Rs. 5017.64 crore. During the year 2023-24, the allocations at Budget Estimate (BE) and 
Revised Estimate (RE) stages were Rs. 4692.00 crore and Rs. 4449.76 crore 
respectively and the actual utilization was Rs. 4314.24 crore which is 96.95% of RE 
allocation. The Committee appreciate the fact that for the last few years the overall trend 
of actual expenditure has been above 90 percent of the allocations made at RE stage 
and expect the same trend will be continued during 2024-25. 
 
Reply of the Government 
Budget allocation for the Ministry for FY 2024-25 is ₹4342.55 crore and as per the 
analysis of requirement, Ministry of Finance agreed to increase the allocation in Revised 
Estimates for 2024 -25 as ₹4626.71 crore. Expenditure as on 28.03.2025 is ₹ 4270.43 
crore against the Final allocation i.e. ₹4265.69 crore. 
 
(File No. H-11013/27/2024- PC Cell dated 30.03.2025) 
 
 (Recommendation Sl. No. 2) 
 
The Committee, in their Third Report, had recommended as under:- 
For the Financial Year 2024 -25, as against the proposed amount of Rs. 5017.64 
crore, the Ministry at BE stage received Rs. 4342.55 crore which is approximately Rs. 
700 crore lesser than the proposed amount. Out of this amount, Rs. 566.41 crore has 
been earmarked for the ‘Establishment Expenditure of the Centre’ against the proposed 
sum of Rs. 640.80 crore; Rs. 1004.31 crore has been allotted for the ‘Central Sector 
Schemes’ against the proposed amount of Rs. 1576.24 crore and Rs. 2771.83 crore is 
allotted for ‘Other Central Expenditure [including those on Central Public Sector 
Enterprises (CPSEs) and Autonomous Bodies] against the proposed sum of Rs. 2800.60 
crore. The Committee observe that the Ministry has been able to utilize more than 95 

12 
 
percent of RE allocation in all the three categories during the Financial Year 2023 -24, 
which the Committee find as a healthy trend and believe that this trend would be 
repeated during current Financial Year also. The Ministry submitted that with advent of 
new forms of media, the requirement of Budget and funds dissemination has expanded 
hugely but the Ministry has not been able to get adequate funds for it.  
The Committee have been assured by the Ministry that efforts would be made to 
utilize the allocated funds from the commencement of financial year itself and the 
Monitoring mechanism has been strengthened and review of progress of projects is 
taken up periodically. The Committee were informed that budgetary expenditure has 
been meticulously and categorically planned. Prasar Bharati has adopted digital 
techniques for prudent use of funds making it more efficient and transparent. 
The Committee further note that for three Central Sector Schemes; 
(i) Development Communication and Dissemination of Filmic Content;                  
(ii) Broadcasting Infrastructure and Network Develop ment (BIND); and (iii) Supporting 
Community Radio Movement in India, there has been under -utilisation of funds during 
the financial year 2023 -24 to the extent that the actual expenditure for these schemes 
were 97.10 per cent, 72.71 per cent, and 84.80 per cent respectively of the Revised 
Estimate allocation. In light of this observation, the Committee may be apprised of the 
roadmap for effective and optimum utilisation of funds during financial year 2024 -25. The 
Committee would also like to know how the reduced allocation of Rs. 571 crore under 
Central Sector Schemes of the Ministry during financial year 2024 -25 will affect their 
schemes/plans. 
The Ministry informed the Committee that they have exhausted their funds for the 
schemes which will not last for more than two years and approached the Finance 
Department. The Ministry have further submitted that certain new schemes related to 
information dissemination in Digital Media and Social Media are in pipeline, for which a 
Revised Allocation of Budget would be proposed. The Committee, therefore, desire that 
the Ministry may approach the Ministry of Finance seeking additional funds at RE stage 
to meet additional expenditure for these schemes as well as for other scheme i.e. ‘Other 
Central Expenditure including those on Central Public Sector Enterprises (CPSEs) and 
Autonomous Bodies’, ‘Central Sector Schemes’ and ‘Establishment Expenditure of the 
Centre’ so that these schemes do not suffer for want of funds and apprise them the 
results accordingly.  
The Committee also note that as per decision taken in the Ministry, separate 
budget line entry has been created for Principal Accounts Office from financial year 
2024-2025 onwards, which was earlier, included in the allocation of main Secretariat till 
financial year 2023 -2024.  The Committee may be enlightened about the  rationale 
behind this decision”. 
Reply of the Government 
In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of information and Broadcasting 
submitted as under:– 
“Various efforts made for optimum utilization of funds allocated under various 
schemes of MIB are as follows -  
● Monitoring mechanism is strengthened and review of progress of projects 
is taken up periodically. 
● The forecast of the budget expenditure was done meticulously to arrive at 
the correct requirement of the budget. GFR provisions are followed for the expen diture 
incurred to ensure correct utilization of the budget. 

13 
 
● Ministry of Information and Broadcasting has been reviewing the 
expenditure of Prasar Bharati periodically and Prasar Bharati has been advised to 
regularly review the projects through an annual  action plan to be undertaken and 
monitored at least on a monthly basis both from physical and financial progress point of 
view. The progress of expenditure is also being monitored closely at the senior officer 
levels. 
● Prasar Bharati has adopted digital techniques in office functioning such as 
e-office, email, CAS (Centralized Accounting Software) and TSA for fund release for the 
scheme. These have made the system fast, efficient and transparent.  
● A comprehensive content procurement policy has been approved by Prasar 
Bharati which clearly defines the processes and guidelines for procurement of content 
under different procurement models.  
● Further, multiple new policies have been approved by Prasar Bharati Board 
(PBB) to streamline content procurement as mentioned below:   
i. Policy Guidelines for Commissioning of Programmes under DAP (Direct 
Assignment Process) and an Online Portal has been launched for the same 
ii. Policy Guidelines for acquisition of Licensed Ready -Made Audio -Visual 
Content and an Online Portal has been launched for the same 
iii. Policy for Procurement of Feature Films for Prasar Bharati Platforms on 
Fixed License Fee - 2021 
Proposed budget allocation for the Ministry for financial year 2024 -25 for i ts 
schemes was ₹1576.24 crore and revised to ₹1004.31 crore with a reduction of ₹571.93 
crore based on the analysis of expenditure. Expenditure under these schemes is 
₹670.26 crore as on 28.03.2025. 
Budget allocation for the Ministry for FY 2024 -25 is ₹4342.55 crore and as per the 
analysis of requirement, Ministry of Finance agreed to increase the allocation in Revised 
Estimates for 2024 -25 as ₹4626.71 crore. Expenditure as on 28.03.2025 is ₹ 4270.43 
crore against the Final allocation i.e. ₹4265.69 crore. 
To improve operational efficiency, better disclosure, financial independence and 
accounting setup in Principal Accounts office of this Ministry. Similar practices are being 
followed in most of the other Ministries. Some of the Ministries are M/o Health and 
Family Welfare, M/o Skill Development and Entrepreneurship, M/o Labour and 
Employment and Department of Youth Affairs”. 
 
(File No. H-11013/27/2024- PC Cell dated 30.03.2025) 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 3) 
The Committee have been informed that the Central Bureau of Communication 
(CBC) earlier known as the Bureau of Outreach and Communication was formed in 2017 
by integration of the erstwhile Directorate of Advertising and Visual Publicity (DAVP), 
Directorate of Field Publicity (DFP) and Song & Drama Division (S&DD) with the aim to 
provide 360 -degree communication solutions to the Ministries/Departments/ Public 
Sector Undertakings (PSUs)/autonomous bodies of the Government of India and engage 
in informing people, both rural and urban, about the Government’s policies and 
programmes to enhance their participation in developmental activities. The Committee 
have been apprised that for the Financial Year 2024 -25, the RE for CBC is Rs. 192.67 
crore which has been granted against the BE of Rs. 200.11 crore, whereas the actual 

14 
 
expenditure till 12.09.2024 stands at Rs. 90.19 crore only. The Committee would like to 
know the action plan for utilization of Rs. 110 crore (approx.) by the Ministry in the 
remaining period of the financial year and recommend making sincere efforts to ensure 
optimal utilization of balance funds. The Committee would also like to know whether the 
integration of DAVP, DFP and S&DD into one unit i.e, CBC has yielded the desired 
results with better functionality and has eventually proved to be a cost saving measure. 
The Committee also emphasise that the funds allocated may be utilised judiciously and 
optimally. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 CBC has ensured the optimal utilization of funds. The Establishment Expenditure 
of CBC as on 23.03.2025 vis -à-vis Final Grant 2024 -25 is tabulated below which 
indicates that the approx. 96.16% funds have been utilized. 
(Rs. in crores) 
Establishment BE 
2024-25 
RE 
2024-25 
FG 
2024-25 
Expenditure 
as on 
23.03.2025 
% of expenditure 
over FG 2024-25 
Central Bureau 
of 
Communication 
(CBC) 
200.11 192.75 193.37 185.96 96.16 
 
Central Bureau of Communication (CBC) was created in December, 2017 by 
integrating the erstwhile Directorate of Advertising and Visual Publicity (DAVP), 
Directorate of Field Publicity (DFP) and Song and Drama Division (S&DD). After this 
integration 23 Regional Offices (ROs) and 148 Field Offices (FO) were created to put in 
place mechanism for clearly defined control and regulating mechanism for pooling of 
resources and efficient execution of campaigns by CBC at regional and local level as per 
requirement. After integration, CBC is able to carry the information and awareness 
campaigns about the policies and programmes of the Government more efficiently at 
regional and field levels and this has helped the Government in ensuring enhanced 
participation of people in development and welfare activities of the Government. 
   
(File No. H-11013/27/2024- PC Cell dated 30.03.2025) 
 
 (Recommendation Sl. No. 5) 
EFFECTIVE UTILIZATION OF FUNDS  
Even though, the Ministry had proposed Rs. 5017.64 crore under the Budget 
Estimate, they were allocated Rs. 4342.00 Cr. for the financial year 2024 -25, which is 
Rs. 675.64 crore lesser than the amount sought. The Ministry in the thrust areas has 
highlighted on Artificial Intelligence (AI) based communication hub; overhauling of IIMC; 
formulation of National Policy for the growth of AVGC -XR in the country; and Promotion 
of Ease of Filming through India Cine Hub (ICH) portal among others. The Ministry 
informed the Committee about reviewing the expenditure of Prasar Bharati periodically 
and Prasar Bharati has been advised to regularly review the projects through an annual 
action plan and monitored at least on a monthly basis both from physical and financial 
progress point of view. The progress of expenditure is also being monitored closely at 
the senior officer levels. The Committee are given to understand that the Ministry have to 
utilize the funds judiciously to meet the targets fixed for thrust areas. The thrust areas 

15 
 
enumerated by the Ministry are mostly technology driven which would require man power 
with specialized skills. The Committee while observing that Prasar Bharati is facing a 
huge challenge in engaging technical staff due to paucity of funds for its day -to-day 
programmes and functioning are a bit apprehensive about the shortage of manpower to 
handle the thrust areas. The Committee would, therefore, like to know about the action 
plan drawn by the Ministry to achieve desired results in these thrust areas in the absence 
of technically qualified personnel.  
 
 The Committee also urge the Ministry to ensure judicious utilisation of their 
resources and its output which should not suffer due to lack of funds.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Artificial Intelligence 
 
All the manpower required for various components of Artificial Intelligence driven 
communication hub at New Media Wing will be engaged on outsourcing basis through an 
agency. Therefore, no shortage of manpower is envisaged 
 
IIMC 
Indian Institute of Mass Communication (IIMC) was converted into Deemed to be 
university under distinct category. Two master degree courses (MA in Media Business 
Studies and MA in Strategic Communication) were launched in the academic session 
2024-25. Construction of Additional academic and administrative block at IIMC, Delhi 
and campus at IIMC, Amravati by CPWD is under process. New equipments have been 
provided at all campuses in the financial year 2024 -25. New master degree program in 
New Media will be started from academic session 25 -26 at Delhi, Aizawl, Jammu and 
Kottayam campuses. 20 teaching posts have advertised and filling of posts is under 
process. 
 
IIMC offers specialised courses. Industry leaders and media professionals are 
invited for guest lectures. Master classes/ Workshops are conducted on emerging trends 
like crisis communication, digital marketing, AI in media and collaborate with industry in 
media campaign planning. 
 
Indian Cine Hub 
The Ease of Filming through India Cine Hub (ICH) Portal has been a key initiative 
to streamline the film production process in India. As part of this effort, the FFO web 
portal ( https://ffo.gov.in/en) was originally launched as India’s single -window clearance 
and facilitation mechanism for both international and domestic filmmakers.  
To improve accessibility and usability, the portal was revamped and relaunched 
as indiacinehub.gov.in in November 2024. The revamped India Cine Hub portal features 
a modern, intuitive design and a user-friendly interface. 
 
Notable features of the portal are as follows : 
a. Easy application for filming permissions – The portal is integrated with permission 
portals of various states, union territories, and central agencies such as Railways and the 
Archaeological Survey of India (ASI).  
b. Online application for incentives – Filmmakers can apply for government incentives 
directly through the platform.  
c. Incentive Final Disbursal Module - Enables applicants to file all necessary 
permissions and documentation required for the final disbursal of approved incentives 

16 
 
through a single interface. Document Verification Workflow Further Incorporates 
automated checks for completeness and compliance, reducing delays caused by missing 
or incorrect documentation. 
d. Real-Time Application Tracking : Provides applicants with status updates and 
progress tracking for their disbursal applications. 
e. Integrated Communication Channels : Facilitates direct communication between 
applicants and authorities for resolving queries and expediting the approval process. 
f. Repository of filmic and non -filmic resources  – A comprehensive database of 
locations, facilities, and industry contacts is available to aid filmmakers  
g. Crowdsourcing facility – Users can contribute and update information on filmic and 
non-filmic resources, enhancing the database’s accuracy and reach. The Ministry is 
working towards further refining the portal’s capabilities and ensure seamless service 
delivery. 
h. Incentive Calculator- Provides a user-friendly interface for filmmakers to input project 
details and receive tailored estimates of potential incentives based on policies and 
eligibility criteria. Scenario Simulation  which further allows users to simulate multiple 
scenarios by altering key parameters, enables informed decision -making during project 
planning.  
Projects like  AI Chatbox Integration, GIS Based location Compendium and 
intuitive search on the portal using AI/ Machine Learning are in the pipeline. 
  
National Policy for the growth of AVGC-XR 
 
The Union Cabinet had approved the establishment of the National Centre of Excellence 
(NCoE) for Animation, Visual Effects, Gaming, Comics and Extended Reality (AVGC-XR) 
now known as In dian Institute of Creative Technologies (IICT). The IICT is being set up 
with a one -time budgetary support of ₹391.15 crore at Dadasaheb Phalke Chitranagari 
(Film City), Goregaon, Mumbai. An interim campus of IICT will be setup in the coming 
quarter at the  NFDC campus in Mumbai. The campus will largely focus on train -the-
trainer activities and upskilling of industry professionals in addition to other high -end 
emerging media technology training.  
 
(File No. H-11013/27/2024- PC Cell dated 30.03.2025) 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 6) 
IPMC (INTEGRATED PROJECT MONITORING CELL) 
The Ministry apprised the Committee that it is the constant endeavour of Prasar 
Bharati to complete the projects within the specified time frame for which monitoring 
mechanism has been strengthened considerably and procurement procedures have 
been streamlined. The Ministry further conveyed that Project review meetings are held 
regularly at Zonal and HQ levels and various activities involved in procurement of capital 
equipment and execution of works are critically assessed and targets are fixed. The 
frequency of monitoring meetings has been increased at all levels of Directorate and 
Prasar Bharati Secretariat. Use of digital platform viz e -office, e-tendering, procurement 
through GEM, Video conference has also been utilized. In addition to above, a dedicated 
IPMC (Integrated Project Monitoring Cell) has been created under the Chairmanship of 
CEO (PB) to monitor the progress of projects and improvement in their implementation. 
The Committee were further informed that Monitoring of progress in respect of various 
targeted projects being undertaken in BIND Scheme (2021 -26) for FY 2024 -25. On 
ground status report with regard to the projects and difficulties being faced/ their 
solutions in execution of projects were deliberated among participants. The Committee 

17 
 
would like to know about the achievements after the creation of IPMC. The Committee 
may be communicated about the composition of IPMC and wonder whether the Ministry 
have explored the possibility of including outside domain experts in this Cell for expert 
guidance.  
The Committee also learn that the Visual Radio project being a first -of-its-kind 
initiative for Akashvani, was hindered initially due to it being a novel concept. However, 
the initial issues have been addressed by revising and firming up its design 
specifications. Its procurement has commenced through the Government e -Marketplace 
(GeM) portal and is expected to be completed within this financial year. The status of 
this project may be submitted at the earliest in their Action Taken Report. The 
Committee would also like to know whether any work study for technical manpower 
requirement, training component, etc. has been done before launching this new project. 
If not, the Committee would like to suggest Ministry to factor into these requirements 
before launching the same and apprise them accordingly.  
 
Reply of the Government  
As regards IPMC, the Integrated Project Monitoring Cell (IPMC) in Prasar Bharati 
was established to strengthen the monitoring Mechanism of ongoing BIND 2021-26 
Projects in year 2022.  
 
IPMC has been instrumental for  efficient execution of projects by different project wings 
by resolving several issues such as obtaining necessary approvals (IFD, MIl etc.) and 
timely completion of various stages (preparation of specs, floating of tenders, issue of 
purchase orders, supply of equipment installation etc.). 
Further, an "Apex committee" comprising of senior officers of Procurement Division, 
Design Divisions of DD and AIR, Finance Divisions of Prasar Bharati Sectt., AIR and DD, 
has been formed for better monitoring of projects of DD and AIR under BIND 2021 -26. 
Meetings of the committee are held regularly at least once in fortnight.  
  
The status of the Visual Radio project to be submitted to the Committee is given below: 
S. 
No. 
No. of Stations Status  
South Zone 
1 06 Stations Order placed for phone in console. 
Order placed for servers.  PDI completed. Receipt of servers 
expected at site shortly. 
Tender for Microphone, Headphone & Smart TV to be 
floated. 
Procurement of Production consoles. 
North Zone 
2 10 Stations Server-Bid Published Under TEC 
East Zone 
3 04 Stations Microphone, Headphone & Smart TV procured.  Servers 
delivered at site.  Installation of server is in progress. 
North Zone 
4 08 Stations Order for server placed in February, but firm has not yet 
offered for PDI despite several reminders.  Delivery not likely 
in CFY due to remote locations of some station and no flight 
connectivity.  Order for Head phone and TV sets placed. 

18 
 
West Zone 
5. 05 Stations Procurement of Server for 5 Capital Akashvani Stations.  
Done through GeM. Technical evaluation completed.  
Financial sanction accorded after the recommendation of 
purchase committee. 
 
Procurement of phone in console, smart TV to be taken up. 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 7) 
FULL UTILIZATION OF FUNDS FOR NORTH EAST REGION (NER) UNDER BIND 
SCHEME  
 The Ministry stated that in the FY 2023 -24 around 50% funds were utilized for 
content creation under BIND. Some projects of Doordarshan (DD) for content creation, 
though not adversely affected, got delayed in NER. The NE Region was given these 
BIND Scheme works for the first time. The expenditure mechanism for BIND being 
altogether different from that of IEBR and shortage of programme staff at each NER 
Kendra led to inevitable delays. However, since these DDKs have been trained 
adequately and the expenditure mechanism is now fully in place, it is expected that from 
the current financial year 2024 -25, full funds allocated under BIND scheme to 
Doordarshan Kendras of North -East Region would be utilized in content creation. Hiring 
of programme professionals on contract basis is also being done to support content 
creation.  The Committee call upon the Ministry to take immediate steps to address the 
issue of staff crunch in technically driven schemes of the Ministry and would like to know 
if any preference to local people would be given while hiring programme professionals on 
contract basis for NE Region. Regarding the mechanism for full utilization of funds under 
BIND scheme for NER from the next Financial Year, the Committee would like to be 
informed of the status. 
 
Reply of the Government  
Programme professionals for Doordarshan Kendras of North -East region will be 
selected by a committee chaired by Zonal Head (Content Ops.) of North -East Zone. 
Further for the posts of Broadcast Executive, Videographer, Video Post Production 
Assistant, Creative Editor (Graphics) proficiency in local language has been desired. 
  
For the NER Equipments worth Rs.23.19 crores under BIND scheme have been 
procured in 2024-25, and procurement of many equipments are in different stages. Apart 
from this, status of some of the major Akashvani projects in NER as under: 
  
1. Setting up of 10 kW  FM Transmitter at Kokrajhar:   The project has been 
completed and the transmitter has been commissioned on 03.01.2025. 
2. Setting up of 1 kW FM Transmitter at Namsai:    Construction of building work 
completed and other civil work like False ceiling, DG platform and shed work has 
also been completed. Work order issued for erection of 50M SS Tower at Namsai. 
3. Refurbishing of Akashvani Studios at 7 Akashvani stations:   At 6 stations (Tezu, 
Itanagar, Dibrugarh, Jorhat and Silchar) work order has been issued and at Tura 
work order is under approval. 
4. Replacement of AC Plant:    Work order has been issued at Imphal, Shillong, 
Shillong (Jazz Studio), Mokokchung has been issued and at Gangtok is under 
approval. 

19 
 
5. Replacement of Generator Set:  62.5 KVA DG at Gangtok is under procurement. 
6. Visual Radio System:    Setting up of Visual Radio System at Guwahati, Gangtok, 
Shillong, Kohima, Ahartala, Itanagar, Imphal and Aizawal is under 
implementation.  Specification has been framed and SITC for the project is under 
tendering process. Servers are under procurement and Industrial feed back has 
been sought for procurement of 33 digital console, as no bidder has participated in 
the previous tendering process due to low cost and IFD has recommended for 
cancellation of the tender. 
  
It is the constant endeavour of Doordarshan to complete the projects within the 
specified time frame. Monitoring mechanism has been strengthened considerably. 
Procurement procedures have been streamlined. Project review meetings are held 
regularly at Zonal level & HQ level and various activities involved in procurement of 
capital equipment and execution of works are critically assessed & targets are fixed. The 
frequency of monitoring meetings has been increased at all levels of Directorate & 
Prasar Bharati Sectt. Use of digital platform viz e -office, e -tendering, procurement 
through GEM, Video conference is also being utilized. 
 
In addition to above, an Apex committee has been constituted to monitor the 
progress of projects under the Scheme.  It is Prasar Bharati endeavour to give priorities 
to local people for content generation for NER region.  
 
(File No. H-11013/27/2024- PC Cell dated 30.03.2025) 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 8) 
DIGITIZATION OF ARCHIVES OF DOORDARSHAN (DD) 
The Ministry informed the Committee that all the DD channels are digitized and all 
possible efforts are being made to complete the remaining digitization at the earliest. The 
Ministry also submitted before the Committee that the archival content of public interest 
is being showcased through Social Media platforms like YouTube. The interested 
persons can approach Central Archives through email in order to purchase the 
recordings/media under the ambit of various archival policies. Information to this effect 
has been made public on Prasar Bharati website. Regarding archives of DD, the Ministry 
submitted that the archives have been digitised to the extent possible and efforts are 
being made to complete the remaining digitisation at the earliest.  The Committee have 
long been demanding that all archives of DD may be digitized at the earliest. However, 
the process of digitization is still incomplete. The Committee, therefore, reiterate that the 
Ministry should expedite the process of digitization of all DD archives without any further 
delay so that archival contents are available to public for use. The Committee learn that 
social media platforms are being used to showcase the archival contents which are of 
public interest. The Committee wish to know what steps have been taken by the Ministry 
to take it to those sections of the society who are not using social media but are 
interested in watching these contents. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 In addition to linear TV transmission, Doordarshan Channels are now being 
integrated in Prasar Bharati Over -The-Top (OTT) platform WAVES. Programmes 
telecast by regional/state channels of North -East region can be viewed by viewers 
through various modes like DTH platform, Cable TV Network and OTT. 
Digitization of Archives of Doordarshan,  
  

20 
 
      a. Digitization setup at Prasar Bharati: 
 
         1. Prasar Bharati Archives have been set up to ensure digitization and preservation 
of Media Assets produced for the broadcast purposes/operations by Akashvani 
and Doordarshan. 
 
         2. All the content at Prasar Bharati Archives have been digitized 
 
         3. AIR & DD Kendras have been provided with requisite hardware & software facility 
to digitize and preserve the content at their level. 
 
        4. To further strengthen digitization and archival setup, suitable provision has been 
requested under BIND scheme. 
 
         5. The process of digitization of remaining media available at Kendra level shall be 
taken up in time bound manner. 
  
b. Accessibility of archival content to the public: 
 
         1. Archival Content is curated and sent to Akashvani and Doordarshan Kendras for 
making it available to the public through linear broadcasting. The content is 
consumed by the section of society, not available on social media and digital 
platform. 
 
  2. Prasar Bharati has launched OTT platform “WAVES”, wherein archival content of 
Akashvani and Doordarshan is made available in digital mode for public free of 
cost. Content from other Ministries have also been published on the platform in 
order to make the public aware of schemes and initiatives taken by Govt. of 
India. 
 
  3. Content of public interest is being curated and made available to the masses 
through YouTube channels and other Social Media platforms.  
 
                                                      (File No. H-11013/27/2024- PC Cell dated 30.03.2025) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No. 7 of Chapter-I) 
 
 
 (Recommendation Sl. No. 13) 
THE CINEMATOGRAPHY (AMENDMENT) ACT, 2023 
The Ministry informed the Committee that the Cinematography (Amendment) Act, 2023 
provides for (a) provisions to check unauthorised recording and exhibition of Films 
amounting to piracy; (b) age -based certification of films; (c) aligning with the Supreme 
Court judgements; (d) perpetual validity of certificates; (e) change of category of film for 
television; and (f) reference to Jammu and Kashmir. The Committee would like to be 
apprised of the efficacy of this Act in addressing the challenges being faced by the Film 
Industry and whether further views/suggestion of all the stakeholders have been 
obtained regarding the same. The Committee further want the Ministry to explain what 
measures have been taken to curb the explicit circulation of films not meant for 
viewership of children in any form in the market. The Ministry may also provide a detail of 

21 
 
certificates of perpetual validity issued during the last 5 years along with the criteria set 
for issuance of these certificates. Further, the Committee wish to know what steps have 
been taken to contain adults contents aired on Social, Digital and Electronic media and 
action taken/being taken against the channels which are persistent lawbreakers in terms 
of violating the norms laid down in the Cinematography (Amendment) Act, 2023. 
Reply of the Government  
1. The enactment of the Cinematograph (Amendment) Act, 2023 has introduced 
substantial changes by addressing certification issues and providing better clarity 
and protection for film industry stakeholders. A key amendment under the Act is the 
introduction of a new age -based rating system, which splits the existing UA category 
into three sub -categories, viz. UA 7+, UA 13+, and UA 16+. These age -based 
markers are aimed to assist parents and guardians in making informed decisions 
about the suitability of films for their children, ensuring age -appropriate content 
consumption. Additionally, the Act imp oses stricter penalties for piracy of films. 
Violations can now result in imprisonment ranging from three months to three years 
and fines starting at ₹3 lakhs and going up to 5% of the audited gross production 
cost. These measures aim to enforce accountability and uphold content integrity. To 
identify and address the challenges faced by the film industry stakeholders following 
the enactment of the Cinematograph (Amendment) Act, 2023, it is crucial to seek 
their views and suggestions through meetings and int eractions. This approach will 
help ensure that the changes are practical, beneficial, and representative of the 
industry’s diverse interests.  
2. The Central Board of Film Certification (CBFC) sanctions films in accordance with 
the provisions of the Cinematograph Act, 1952, the Cinematograph (Certification) 
Rules, 2024, and the Guidelines issued thereunder. During the examination of films, 
the CBFC strives to ensure that films not meant for children are appropriately 
classified, and necessary modifications are recommended to ensure compliance with 
the relevant guidelines. 
3. However, the explicit circulation of films not suitable for children in the market falls 
outside the ambit of the CBFC. The scope of the Cinematograph Act, 1952 does not 
extend to content circulated on social media platforms or other digital mediums. The 
provisions of the Cinematograph Act 1952, the Cinematograph Certification Rules 
2024, and the Guidelines issued thereunder are restricted to cinematograph films. 
The jurisdiction of CBFC does not extend to the contents on OTT and online/digital 
media platforms.  Regulatory measures for such platforms are governed by the 
separate authorities and legal frameworks. 
4. Prior to the enactment of the Cinematograph (Amendment) Act, 2023, sub -section 3 
of section 5A of the Act prescribed that the certificate issued by the Board is valid for 
ten years. However, as per a notification issued by this Ministry in September 1984, 
the Central Government had exempted all films in respect of which certification have 
been or may be granted by the Board, from the validity of 10 years. The redundant 
provision in the Act was therefore amended through the Cinematograph 
(Amendment) Act, 2023 to remove the stipulation of 10 years validity. In pursuance 
of the aforesaid notification, certificates issued to all films by the CBFC are already 
being granted perpetual validity. The criteria for issuing certificates by CBFC include 
adherence to the certification process as outlined under the relevant provisions of the 
Cinematograph Act and associated guidelines. The process ensures that the films 
meet content standards, are in accordance with public interest, and comply with age -

22 
 
appropriate viewing categories. Once certified, these films retain their validity 
indefinitely, eliminating the need for periodic renewal of their certification. 
5. The regulation of adult content on social, digital, and electronic media does not fall 
under the ambit of the Cinematograph Act, 1952 or the Cinematograph (Amendment) 
Act, 2023. The Central Board of Film Certification (CBFC) is tasked solely with the 
certification of films for public exhibition in cinemas, as mandated by these Acts. 
Consequently, the CBFC has no jurisdiction over content released on over -the-top 
(OTT) platforms or other digital mediums. The content on OTT platforms is governed 
by a separate regulatory framework under the Information Technology (Intermediary 
Guidelines and Digital Media Ethics Code) Rules, 2021 notified on 25.02.2021. Part-
II of the Rules is related to the user generated content on Social  Media and is 
governed by the Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology. Part -III of the 
Rule provide for a Code of Ethics for publishers of OTT platforms, and a three  level 
institutional mechanism for redressal of grievances relating to violation of the Code of 
Ethics. The Code of Ethics requires OTT platforms not to transmit any content which 
is prohibited by law and undertake age -based classification of content, based on 
general guidelines provided in the Schedule to the Rules which have specific 
provisions relating to higher ratings for sexually explicit content. Further, Ministry also 
takes action under the provisions of Section 79(3)(b) of the Information Technology 
Act, 2000 against OTT platforms for hosting content that is in violation of various 
Acts/Rules in the country that is flagged by various nodal officers from time to time. 
This Ministry, in March 2024, being the appropriate Government in respect of ‘Digital 
News Publishers’ and ‘Publishers of OTT platforms’, had taken action against 18 
OTT platforms for carrying content that was in violation of Acts such the Information 
Technology Act, 2000, Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita (BNS) and Indecent Representation 
of Women Act, etc. 
                                        (File No. H-11013/27/2024- PC Cell dated 30.03.2025) 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 14) 
ADULT CONTENTS ON OTT PLATFORMS  
The Ministry informed the Committee that Part III of the Information Technology 
(Intermediary Guidelines and Digital Media Ethics Code) Rules, 2021 under the 
Information Technology Act, 2000 relates to publishers of online curated content, 
commonly known as OTT platforms. It was further submitted that OTT platforms 
providing access to content which has an “A” rating shall take all efforts to restrict access 
to such content by a child through the implementation of appropriate access control 
measures and in March 2024, the Ministry had taken action to block 18 OTT platforms 
publishing obscene, and, in some instances, pornographic content. 19 websites, 10 apps 
(7 on Google Play Store, 3 on Apple App Store), and 57 social media accounts 
associated with these platforms were disabled for public access in India. In view of the 
above information, the Committee harps upon the point that Ministry may furnish the 
details of preventive measures adopted by them so that the pervasion of restricted 
contents among children be stopped. The Committee would also like to know if such 
contents blocked by the Ministry on 18 OTT, 19 websites and 10 apps are easily 
available on social media and other media platforms like Telegram Channel. If so, the 
Committee may be apprised of how this situation could be dealt with. The Committee 
would further like to know whether the existing Legal Framework is ample enough to 
deal with this issue or more stringent laws are required to deal with this issue especially 
in view of the latest technologies in the field. The Committee may be informed of the 
contemplated action by the Ministry in this regard. The Committee would like to advise 

23 
 
the Ministry that provision for some sort of deterrent punishment should be put in place 
for the repeated offenders in this regard. The Committee would also like to know 
whether the OTT platforms committing the same mistake under the guise of changing 
the name of programmes, changing the means of dissemination and changing the IP 
address etc., with the help of Artificial Intelligence (AI) are strictly dealt with. The 
Committee would like to be apprised of the details in this regard. 
Reply of the Government  
Code of Ethics prescribed under part -III of IT Rules, 2021 provides for publishers 
of online curated content (OTT platforms) which, inter alia, require the publishers not to 
transmit any content which is prohibited by law for the time being in force and to 
undertake age -based classification of content into 5 categories, based on general 
guidelines provided in the Appendix to the Rules. The Schedule prescribed under the IT 
Rules, 2021 inter-alia provides for the following sets of guidelines for Classification of any 
curated content namely ‘Context’, ‘Theme’ and ‘Tone and impact’. 
Theme: Classification decisions may take into the theme of any content but will 
depend significantly on the treatment of that theme, especially the sensitivity of its 
presentation. The most challenging themes (for example, drug misuse, violence, 
pedophilia, sex, racial or communal hatred or violence etc.) are unlikely to be 
appropriate at the junior levels of classification. 
Part-II of the Schedule prescribed under the IT Rules, 2021 provides for the Issue 
Related Guidelines.  
(a) Discrimination: The categorical classification of content shall take into account the 
impact of a film on matters such as caste, race, gender, religion, disability or sexuality 
that may arise in a wide range of works, and the classification decision will take account 
of the strength or impact of their inclusion.  
(b) Psychotropic substances, liquor, smoking and tobacco: Films or serials, etc. that as a 
whole portray misuse of psychotropic substances, liquor, smoking and tobacco would 
qualify for a higher category of classification.  
(c) Imitable behaviour:  
(1) Classification decisions may take into account any portrayal of criminal and 
violent behaviour with weapons. 
 (2) Portrayal of potentially dangerous behaviour that are likely to incite the 
commission of any offence (including suicide, and infliction of self -harm) and that 
children and young people may potentially copy, shall receive a higher 
classification. 
(3) Films or serials with song and dance scenes comprising lyrics and gestures 
that have sexual innuendos would receive a higher classification. 
Provision under part -III of IT Rules, 2021 to restrict certain curated content by a 
child  
Display of Classification: 
● The publisher of online curated content making available content that is 
classified as U/A 13+ or higher shall ensure that access control mechanisms, 
including parental locks, are made available for such content. 

24 
 
● A publisher of online curated content which makes available content or 
programme that is classified as “A” shall implement a reliable age verification 
mechanism for viewership of such content. 
● Restriction of access to certain curated content by a child: Every publisher of 
online curated content providing access to online curated content which has an 
“A” rating shall take all efforts to restrict access to such content by a child 
through the implementation of appropriate access control measures. 
2. The Ministry of Information and Broadcasting, on 19.02.2025, issued advisory to 
Online Curated Content Publishers (OTT Platforms) on adherence of Indian Laws and 
the Code of Ethics prescribed under the Information Technology (Intermediary 
Guidelines and Digital Media, Ethics Code) Rules, 2021. 
3. While the Ministry took action to block 18 OTT Platforms publishing obscene 
content, the copies of the same was also marked to Delhi Police for appropriate action 
regarding unlawful content being published. 
4. The Ministry has received various grievances through multiple channels that the 
platforms blocked by it are still operating by changing name or IP address and the 
Ministry is reviewing the same for appropriate action on such platforms.  
5. Further, Hon’ble Minister of Information and Broadcasting while replying to Lok 
Sabha Starred Question #21 on 27.11.2024 has stressed on the need for strengthening 
the editorial checks in respect of the content being  published on social media and OTT 
platforms. It was mentioned that such editorial checks which used to be there in the past 
are no more there in the era of social media and OTT platforms, leading to freedom of 
speech being misused to spread vulgar content on OTT platforms and fake news on 
social media. The Hon’ble Minister stated that there is a need to make the existing laws 
more stringent, and for this purpose there is a need for building a societal consensus, 
suggesting that this issue could be considered by the Parliamentary Committees. 
(File No. H-11013/27/2024- PC Cell dated 30.03.2025) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No. 10 of Chapter-I) 
 
 (Recommendation Sl. No. 15) 
OVERHAULING OF COMMUNITY RADIO STATIONS (CRSs)  
The Committee learn that for CRSs in 2022 -23, the percentage of Actual 
Expenditure in respect of Budget Estimate was 52.08% while in respect of Revised 
Estimate, it was 66.66% and these figures in 2023 -24 reached up to 84.80% for Budget 
Estimate and Revised Estimate. The Committee note that the Ministry have failed 
consistently over the years to utilize the entire fund allocated to them in CRSs. The 
Committee would like to know the reasons for the same and advise them to take 
appropriate corrective steps to address the issues which are responsible for surrender of 
funds and ensure optimum utilization of allocated funds.  
The Committee were also explained by the Ministry that a total number of 29 
applications for Community Radio Stations are pending with the Ministry, which are at 
various stages of processing for grant of permission for setting up of Community Radio 
Stations. The Committee would like to know the reasons for pendency of these 29 

25 
 
applications and also advise the Ministry to prepare a proper Standard Operating 
Procedure (SOP) to deal with such requests in future so that time lag could be 
minimized. 
Reply of the Government 
The major reasons of underutilization of funds and road map to increase the 
utilization of funds are listed below 
a) One of the components of the Scheme is to provide financial assistance to the 
Community Radio (which is demand driven completely). The Community Radio 
Stations submit their cases for financial assistance (after minimum three months of 
functioning) for the expenditure incurred by them on setting up Community Radio 
Station as per policy/guidelines. Thus, utilization depends upon the demand 
submitted by the CRS also. Ministry is approaching to all the operating CRs to make 
them aware of this scheme through all possible means emails, social media, and 
conducting conferences and workshops.  
 
b) Ministry has also taken several steps for strengthening the Community Radio 
Movement and also to increase the utilization of funds. The amount of financial 
assistance given to a Community Radio Station has also been increased from Rs. 10 
Lakhs to an amount varying from Rs. 16.20 Lakhs to Rs. 24 Lakhs as per eligibility by 
its revised policy dated 23.09.2024. The incentives have been also provided for use 
of Green Energy and women participation in revised policy. In addition to this, to 
facilitate research, innovation and skilling in the sector, the Government of India has 
launched fellowship programmes and internship programmes under the Scheme.  
 
c) During last two financial years conferences were also being organized in the Virtual 
Mode which also led to saving of the funds. However, in this year physical workshops 
and conferences were planned and organized to increase the awareness and 
capacity building.  
 
d) Ministry is planning to shifted on purely online mode for granting permission to set up 
community radio through Broadcast Seva Portal like signing of LoI and upgrading to 
better monitoring and analysis to reduce delay in each step. The other measures like 
conducting in-house trainings to Standardize/uniform handling of application, frequent 
interaction with applicants to reduce delay. These measures are important as 
increasing the numbers of operational Community Radio and speedy finalization of 
applications has a direct relationship with utilization of funds. However, as per the 
guidelines, the applications are required to be cleared from MHA, Ministry of Defence 
(MOD) and Ministry of Communications). It is pertinent to mention that after obtaining 
LOI, applicant applies to Ministry of Communication for Wireless Operating License 
before commissioning the CRS. The License for operating CRS is issued by the 
Ministry of Communication, but sometimes the clearance from WPC/ MHA/MOD 
takes time. 
 
a. The Status of the applications is given in the tabular format as Annexure-I. 
 
b. Every application received through Broadcast Seva Portal has to pass through 
broadly four stages as per Para 3 of Guidelines (available on https://mib.gov.in and 
placed at Annexure-II) 
 

26 
 
i. Initial Verification of documents/proofs submitted by applicants through portal 
takes one Month but substantial numbers of applications are being received 
with inaccurate/mismatched data/documents/proof, then application returned 
(online) for clarification& correction, so delay happens in such cases.  
ii.  Forward the application to WPC, MHA, MOD for clearances and time 
specified in guidelines is 3 months. However, only WPC Clearance is required 
in the cases of Government entities.  
iii. 3rd Stage is (a) Conducting Screening Committee (SCM) for the NPOs case, 
which got all clearances from concerned ministry (b) Inter Ministerial 
Committee approve/reject the cases of NPOs cleared by SCM but in case of 
Government entities like Central/Army Schools or Universities directly taken at 
IMC bypassing SCM.  Then LoI is issued to successful applicant which files for 
DL/SACFA through online portal. 
iv. 4th and Final Stage: Once cleared stage 3, applicant approach MIB for signing 
of Grant of Permission Agreement (GoPA). After clearing all stages applicant 
can install and commission the community Radio.  
 
c. The SoP mentioned above steps are very clear and transparent (Para 3 of Revised 
Policy Guidelines for setting up Community Radio Stations in India dated 13.02.2024 
(available on https://mib.gov.in and attached as Annexure-II). 
 
           (File No. H-11013/27/2024- PC Cell dated 30.03.2025) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
 
(Please see Para No. 13 of Chapter-I) 
*****

27 
 
 
CHAPTER- III 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS  WHICH THE  COMMITTEE   DO NOT DESIRE TO 
PURSUE IN  VIEW  OF THE  REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
-NIL- 

28 
 
 
CHAPTER IV 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS      IN RESPECT OF  WHICH    REPLIES   OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE   NOT BEEN   ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND REQUIRE 
REITERATION 
 
-NIL- 
 
 

29 
 
CHAPTER V 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF  WHICH REPLIES   
OF THE  GOVERNMENT ARE INTERIM IN NATURE 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 4) 
BIND SCHEME- CHALLENGES AND MEASURES 
While examining the Budgetary allocation for financial year 2024 -25 and financial 
year 2023 -24, the Committee observed that there was reduction of funds under two 
categories. Allocation of the Ministry was reduced by Rs. 100.69 crore under Central 
Sector scheme i.e., Broadcasting Infrastructure and Network Development (BIND) 
Scheme and Rs. 279.67 crore was reduced under the other Central Expenditure. In their 
submission, the Ministry stated that the reduction under the ‘Other Central Expenditure 
Budget’ was due to retirement of government employees who were on deemed 
deputation in Prasar Bharati, resulting in reduced demand in respect of pay and 
allowances as well as retirement benefits. While explaining about reasons for reduced 
allocation under BIND scheme, it was inter -alia stated by the Ministry that they were due 
to (i) time taken in framing specifications of new projects; (ii) delay in erection of towers 
due to technical and administrative issues; and (iii) multiple attempts made for tender 
procurement of 1,20,000 DTH sets for distribution in tribal, remote and Left  Wing 
Extremism areas. Further, it has been submitted that the Ministry is considering adopting 
the DBT mode for distributing STBs for DD Free Dish and the modalities are being 
worked out in consultation with MHA and there are a number of pending litigations 
against the Ministry. 
The Committee were enlightened that the Ministry is considering distribution of DD 
Free Dish Set -Top Boxes in Direct Benefit Transfer (DBT) mode and modalities of the 
distribution are being worked out by Prasar Bharati. Consultations are also being done 
with the Ministry of Home Affairs to collect the beneficiary bank details and finalize 
payment eligibility criteria for the beneficiaries. Prasar Bharati is also in consultation with 
Consumer Electronics and Appliances Manufacturers Association (CEAMA) and India 
Cellular and Electronics Association (ICEA) to ensure availability of DD Free Dish Set -
Top Boxes in remote border areas and arrangement of installation and after -sales 
services of the Set -Top Boxes. The Ministry elaborated about enhancing the viewership 
and popularization of DD Free Dish Platform in VVP (Vibrant Village Programme) areas, 
BADP (Border Area Development Programme), North -East Region, LWE (Left Wing 
Extremism) affected areas, J&K, and other strategic areas. Distribution of 8.7 Lakhs DD 
Free Dish Receive sets was sanctioned under the BIND Scheme. The data of around 
8.10 lakh beneficiaries has been collected through an online portal.  Earlier distribution 
plan progressed in Supply Inspection Testing and Commissioning (SITC) mode, 
however, now it is being planned under the Direct Benefit Transfer (DBT) mode for 
enhanced transparency and efficiency. Prasar Bharati is working on modalities for 
distribution of DD Free Dish DTH, with a decentralized model of delivery involving District 
Administration. 
The Committee appreciate the efforts of the Ministry to connect the border areas 
with the main population of the country, but at the same time they would like to know 
about security measures taken/proposed to be taken by the Ministry to control the issues 
of hacking or proliferation via wi -fi across the border. The Committee would like the 
Ministry to address the various challenges encountered by projects under BIND scheme 
including procurement of 1,20,000 DTH sets and seek adequate funds from Ministry of 
Finance for the same in the next Financial Year with proper justification. The Committee 

30 
 
also expect that the Integrated Project Monitoring Cell (IPMC) may also look into these 
challenges with all seriousness as it deserves. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 Meetings in Prasar Bharati, DBT Mission and MIB were held to sort out various 
associated issues for Set Top Box distribution in DBT Mode. Revised draft of modalities 
was submitted to Ministry on 26.12.2024. Meetings were held in MIB on 31.12.2024. The 
matter of finalizing the modalities for STB distribution in DBT Mode is getting expedited. 
As regards issues of hacking or proliferation via Wi -Fi across the border of such STBs, it 
is submitted that typical DD Free Dish STBs take RF input through LNB/Dish Antenna 
and do not work on Wi-Fi. 
 
IPMC (Integrated Project Monitoring Cell) was established to strengthen the monitoring 
mechanism. IPMC has a limited role of monitoring the progress of projects on periodical 
basis and encourage various project units to expedite the activities for timely completion 
of projects. However, the suggestions of committee regarding challenges being faced in 
implementation of projects will be duly considered for various Doordarshan projects 
under the BIND scheme. 
 
(File No. H-11013/27/2024- PC Cell dated 30.03.2025) 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 9) 
MONETISATION OF ASSETS OF DOORDARSHAN KENDRAS (DDKs) 
The Ministry, while informing the Committee about whether any study had been 
conducted to assess the assets which were in idle state for a long time under 
Doordarshan Kendras in India, stated that no study has so far been conducted to assess 
the assets under Doordarshan Kendras in India. The Committee were further informed 
that Prasar Bharati Board has approved a draft monetization plan including feasibility 
study of Prasar Bharati land assets (both Akashvani & Doordarshan). The Committee 
were apprised that the draft monetization plan included that the Prasar Bharati will 
monetize land assets on PPP model without alienating the land and the revenue 
generated will be used by Prasar Bharati making it sustainable. The Committee would 
like to be apprised of the status of draft monetization plan and its intended objectives as 
well as outcomes. The Committee would also earnestly recommend that the Ministry 
should conduct study of all their assets which are lying in idle state for a long time in all 
Akashvani and Doordarshan Kendras by forming a Committee of experts and apprise 
them accordingly at the earliest. 
Reply of the Government 
 
 Prasar Bharati intends to monetize its underutilized land assets to generate 
additional revenue, enhancing its financial sustainability and enabling it to fulfill its role as 
public service broadcaster.  
Prasar Bharati is conducting a prefeasibility study for the monetization of identified 
underutilized assets of Doordarshan and Akashvani. Following, the prefeasibility study, 
monetization of identified land parcel and building asset will be undertaken for financially 
viable assets. As per established framework, the appraisal and approval will be taken 
from the appropriate Competent Authority on a case-to-case basis. 
 For monetization of Prasar Bharati’s non core assets, consultations have been 
held with the stakeholders and on their comments, Ministry is preparing a consolidated 
note for requesting Cabinet Secretariat to convene a CoS meeting. 
 
(File No. H-11013/27/2024- PC Cell dated 30.03.2025) 

31 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No.10) 
RECRUITMENT OF STAFF IN PRASAR BHARATI 
While submitting on the shortage of staff in Doordarshan Kendras, the Ministry 
deposing before the Committee stated that with change in technology, introduction of 
alternative platforms etc. manpower requirement has changed with passage of time. The 
Ministry further submitted that in Doordarshan Kendras, there is shortage of staff in 
programme, engineering, and administrative cadres. Promotions till recent times in 
programme/engineering cadre and departmental exams for promotion in administrative 
cadre could not take place mostly due to pending court cases. Apart from this, filling up 
of the posts earmarked through direct recruitment has also stopped due to dissociation of 
UPSC and SSC in respect of Prasar Bharati being an autonomous body. The Ministry 
further elaborated that the process of rationalization of staff as per the recommendations 
of Manpower Audit (MPA) report is under consideration. Detailing about the problems of 
recruitment in Prasar Bharati, the Ministry explained that officials are regularly retiring on 
superannuation and since there is no fresh recruitment taking place, the young talent are 
in short. The Ministry further submitted that to rationalize these problems, Prasar Bharati 
Recruitment Board was constituted on 01.07.2020 in accordance with Ministry of 
Information & Broadcasting notification dated 12.02.2020 and the process of recruitment 
to fill up the backlog vacancies for physically impaired persons was initiated by the 
Board. 
The Committee observe that there is overall shortage of manpower in Prasar 
Bharati and that is being managed by re -deploying available manpower and hiring 
persons on assignment basis for assisting in production and day -to-day work of the 
Doordarshan Kendras. The Committee observe that the Manpower Audit of Prasar 
Bharati had recommended several steps to phase out obsolete technologies and 
unviable services, automate and IT enabled key operations and to outsource non - core 
activities so as to bring the man power requirements in line with global best practices in 
Public Broadcasting. The Committee urge the Ministry to make a holistic assessment of 
staff required in various cadres consequent upon change in technology. The Committee 
may be apprised of the follow up actions taken by the Ministry to sort out the problem of 
shortage of manpower and look into the feasibility of hiring and appointing staff on 
contractual basis. The Committee also propose that necessary steps should be taken for 
hiring specialists on contract for new roles required by Prasar Bharati in line with the 
proposed structural change and build an effective mix of full time and contractual 
manpower till full time staff are recruited by Prasar Bharati Recruitment Board. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 Prasar Bharati Recruitment Board had been constituted for filling up vacancies for 
the posts in Akashvani and Doordarshan, having scale of pay less that that of the Joint 
Secretary to the Govt. of India, through Direct Recruitment/ Departmental Competitive 
Examination/ Deputations, as per the extant Recruitment Rules. 
 
To assess optimal number of posts in various streams and levels as per the 
current and future requirement of Prasar Bharati, the exercise of HR Transformation is 
underway. This exercise will also assess and prescribe modalities for roping in 
specialists on contract for new roles, where internal expertise are not available, in line 
with the proposed structural changes and to build an effective mix of full time and 
contractual manpower. Only on conclusion and acceptance of the recommendations of 
this exercise, a clear picture on the vacancies to be filled will emerge and accordingly, 
appropriate action will be taken. 

32 
 
 
However, to tide over the acute manpower shortage, Prasar Bharati is engaging 
professionals in various categories under Contractual Engagement Policy (CEP 2021) on 
short-term contracts to meet its urgent requirement of skilled and professional 
manpower. 
(File No. H-11013/27/2024- PC Cell dated 30.03.2025) 
 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 11) 
MIGRATION TOWARDS DIGITAL TERRESTRIAL TV 
While furnishing details regarding action taken on the recommendations of the 
Sub-Group Committee in respect of the Terrestrial Broadcast of Prasar Bharati, the 
Ministry envisioned that any further expansion of Digital Terrestrial Transmission by 
Doordarshan should be undertaken only after finalization of a viable policy on Digital 
Terrestrial TV, identification of areas where such transmission will be continued and 
choice of appropriate technology.  The Ministry further informed the Committee that 
Prasar Bharati has signed an MoU with IIT, Kanpur for collaborative activities in various 
areas and Proof of Concept (PoC) for Next Generation Technology - Direct to Mobile 
Broadcasting (D2M) was carried out by IIT, Kanpur in Bengaluru and Delhi. 
 
The Committee observe that the Ministry is in the process of finalizing a suitable 
policy on Digital Terrestrial TV along with identifying areas where such transmission 
would continue with choice of appropriate technology. The Committee also note that for 
Direct to Mobile Broadcasting, IIT Kanpur has been assigned the collaborative activities 
and has initiated it in some of our cities. The Committee would like to be apprised about 
the outcome of these initiatives and depending on its success, the Ministry may initiate 
the Direct Mobile Broadcasting in more cities of India. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 This Ministry has advised Prasar Bharati to prepare a road map for offering D2M 
service as a public service after taking into consideration the various issues raised by 
stakeholder Ministries. 
 
(File No. H-11013/27/2024- PC Cell dated 30.03.2025) 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 12) 
SHORTAGE OF STAFF IN ALL INDIA RADIO (AIR) AND GRIEVANCE OF AIR 
EMPLOYEES 
The Ministry informed the Committee, while giving details on the issues with AIR 
regarding Grievance Redressal Mechanism for its employees, that Akashvani is facing 
acute shortage of Staff in all its cadres and wings.  The Ministry further submitted that 
attempt is being made to overcome the same to some extent by engaging officials on 
short term contract basis. While elaborating on Grievance Redressal and Access 
Mechanism, the Ministry informed the Committee that it has been functioning in 
accordance with the guidelines of Department of Administrative Reforms & Public 
Grievance and monitored through the Centralized Public Grievances Redressal and 
Monitoring System (CPGRAMS). Dwelling further on this matter, the Ministry explained 
that Public grievances and pension redressal petitions are being attended to promptly 
and disposed of at the earliest and Grievance redressal status reports on disposal of 
Grievances are submitted to the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting as and when 

33 
 
sought. The Committee note that the Ministry have to hire officials on a short term 
contract basis to overcome the problem of shortage of staff, which is pervasive in all 
cadres, wings and Kendras of Akashvani.  
In the light of the poor condition of staff management in Akashvani, the Committee do 
opine that it should be taken up with the DoPT for bridging the gap of recruitment that is 
adversely affecting the functioning of Akashvani and resultantly the quality of its 
programmes. The Committee would also like to know the outcome of the request of the 
Ministry in September, 2022 for financial help which was submitted to the concerned 
Department to enable recruitment initially for critical posts and subsequently for other 
posts. 
Reply of the Government 
 
Prasar Bharati Recruitment Board had been constituted for filling up vacancies for 
the posts in Akashvani and Doordarshan, having scale of pay less than that of the Joint 
Secretary to the Govt. of India, through Direct Recruitment/ Departmental Competitive 
Examination/ Deputations, as per the extant Recruitment Rules. 
 
To assess optimal number of posts in various streams and levels as per the 
current and future requirement of Prasar Bharati, the exercise of HR Transformation is 
underway. This exercise will also assess and prescribe modalities for roping in 
specialists on contract for new roles, where internal expertise are not available, in line 
with the proposed structural changes and to build an effective mix of full time and 
contractual manpower. Only on conclusion and acceptance of the recommendations of 
this exercise, a clear picture on the vacancies to be filled will emerge and accordingly, 
appropriate action will be taken. 
 
However, to tide over the acute manpower shortage, Prasar Bharati is engaging 
professionals in various categories under Contractual Engagement Policy (CEP 2021) on 
short-term contracts to meet its urgent requirement of skilled and professional 
manpower. 
 
(File No. H-11013/27/2024- PC Cell dated 30.03.2025) 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 16) 
 
AMENDMENT TO THE ALLOCATION OF BUSINESS RULES 
 
The Central Government vide Notification dated July 28, 2023 has amended the 
‘Allocation of Business Rules’ with respect to the subject relating to online 
advertisements. Thus, content made available by online content providers/publishers has 
been brought under the mandate of Ministry of Information and Broadcasting. The 
revised entry under Allocation of Business Rules of the Ministry are:-  
 
VA. Digital/Online Media 
22A. Films and Audio -Visual programmes/content made available by online 
content providers/publishers.  
22B. News and current affairs content on online platforms 
22C. Online Advertisements. 
 
In this regard, it is stated that Ministry of Information and Broadcasting is in the 
process of formulation of Rules for regulation of online advertisements as per allocation 

34 
 
of Business. The Committee would like to be apprised of the status of formulation of 
these Rules for regulations of online advertisements. 
 
Reply of the Government 
The Rules or regulation of online advertisements are currently in the Inter-Ministerial 
Consultation stage and the draft rules are being finalized by the Ministry. 
 
(File No. H-11013/27/2024- PC Cell dated 30.03.2025) 
 
***** 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     NEW DELHI; DR. NISHIKANT DUBEY, 
    21 July, 2025  Chairperson, 
  30 Asadha, 1947 (Saka) Standing Committee on  
Communications and Information Technology. 

35 
 
APPENDIX-I 
 
Revised Policy Guidelines for setting up Community Radio Stations in India 
Foreword 
(a) In December 2002, the Government of India approved a policy for the grant of 
licenses for  setting up of Community Radio Stations to well established 
educational institutions including IITs/IIMs. 
(b) The matter was reconsidered in the year 2006 and the Government decided to 
broad base the policy by bringing ‘Non -profit’ organisations like civil society 
organisations and voluntary organisations etc, under its ambit in order to allow 
greater participation by the civil society on issues  relating to development & 
social change. The revised Policy Guidelines were issued in the year 2006. 
The Policy Guidelines issued in the year 2006, were subsequently amended 
in the year 2017, 2018 and 2022. 
(c) To ensure financial sustainability of Community Radio Stations and to ensure 
growth of the Community Radio Sector, the Government has carried out 
further amendments in the Policy Guidelines. Now, the Revised  Policy 
Guidelines are as under :- 
 
1. Basic Principles 
 
An organisation desirous of operating a Community Radio Station (CRS) must be 
able to satisfy and adhere to the following principles: 
 
a) It should be explicitly a ‘not-for-profit’ organisation and should have a 
proven record of at least three years of service to the local community; 
b) The CRS, to be operated by it, should be designed to serve the local 
community in its coverage area; 
c) It should have an ownership and management structure that is reflective 
of the community that the CRS seeks to serve; 
d) It must be a Legal Entity i.e. it should be registered under any such act 
relevant to the purpose and the registration, at the time of application, 
should be at least three years old; 
e) NGOs, registered societies and Public Charitable Trusts shall be registered 
on NITI Aayog's NGO Darpan portal and the  applicant shall provide its 
Unique ID along with the application. 
 
2. Eligibility Criteria 
 
a) The following types of organisations shall be eligible to apply for 
Community Radio licences: 
(i) Community based organizations, which satisfy the basic principles 
listed in para 1  above, shall be considered eligible for making an 
application for grant of permission for setting up Community Radio 
Stations in India. These would include State  Agriculture Universities 
(SAUs), Indian Council of Agricultural Research (ICAR) institutions, 
Krishi Vigyan Kendras, Autonomous Bodies, Civil Society 
Organisations, Voluntary Organisations, Registered Societies, Public 
Charitable Trusts, not -for-profit organizations set up by Self Help 
Groups (SHGs) and not -for-profit Farmer Producer Organizations 
(FPOs); 

36 
 
(ii) Educational Institutions. 
b) The following shall not be eligible to run a CRS: 
(i) Individuals; 
(ii) Political Parties and their affiliate organisations; [including students, 
women’s, trade unions and such other wings affiliated to these 
parties.]; 
(iii) Organisations operating with a motive to earn profit; 
(iv) Organisations expressly banned by the Union and State Governments; 
and 
(v) Religious bodies. 
 
3. Selection Process & Processing of the applications 
 
a) The applicants shall be required to apply online, on a portal specified by the 
Ministry of Information & Broadcasting (MIB), with a processing fee of Rs. 
2500/- and the applications shall be processed in the following manner: 
(i) An Inter -Ministerial Committee (IMC) shall be constituted under 
Chairmanship of Secretary (I&B) to consider applications from eligible 
organizations. 
(ii) Applications received from Government institutions/ Organisations shall 
be placed before IMC. After approval by IMC, Letter of Intent (LOI) 
shall be issued, subject to availability  of Frequency spot, provided by 
Ministry of Communication, at the location proposed by the applicant 
in its application. 
(iii) Applications received from Private institutions/ Organisations shall be 
placed before IMC.  After approval by IMC, Letter of Intent (LOI) 
shall be issued subject to receiving clearance from Ministries of 
Home Affairs, Defence and subject to availability of Frequency 
spot provided by Ministry of Communication, at the location proposed 
by the applicant in its application. 
b) A time schedule for obtaining clearances shall be as follows:- 
(i) Within one month of receipt of the application, the MIB shall process 
the application and either communicate to the applicant deficiencies, if 
any, or will forward the application to the other Ministries for clearance 
as prescribed in para 3(a)(ii) and 3(a)(iii) above, as the case may be. 
(ii) The Ministries concerned shall communicate their comments/ 
clearance within three months of receipt of the application. However, in 
the event of the failure of the concerned  ministry to  grant the 
comments/clearance within the stipulated period of three months, the 
case shall be referred to the IMC for a decision for issue of LOI. 
(iii) The validity of LOI shall be one year from the date of its issue. The 
validity of LOI may be extended for another period of three months, on 
the request of the applicant giving reasons thereof, which may be 
considered on case to case basis. 
(iv) The LOI holder shall be required to sign  a Grant of Permission 
Agreement (GOPA) with the MIB and submit a bank guarantee for a 
sum of Rs. 25,000/- for a period of ten 
(10) years, which will enable the LOI Holder to seek Wireless Operating License  
(WOL) from the Ministry of Communication after deposit of requisite fees, as  
applicable. The Community Radio Station can be  made operational only after the 

37 
 
receipt of WOL from the Ministry of Communication. 
(v) Within one year from the issue of LOI or within six months of the 
signing of GOPA, whichever is earlier, the Permission Holder shall 
operationalize the Community Radio Station  and shall intimate the 
date of commissioning of the Community Radio Station to the MIB. In 
case the applicant fails to operationalize the CRS within the above 
stipulated period, it may seek permission for extension of time for 
another three months stating the reason. The request for extension 
of time for commissioning of CRS may be considered on case to case 
basis. 
(vi) Failure to comply with time schedule prescribed above shall make the 
LOI/GOPA holder liable for cancellation of its LOI/GOPA and forfeiture 
of the Bank Guarantee. 
 
4. Grant of Permission Agreement conditions 
 
a) The Initial period for “Grant of Permission Agreement (GOPA)” shall be for 
ten (10) years. 
b) Grant of Permission Agreement shall be extended for a period of five (5) 
years at a time. Extension shall be granted on the basis of an application 
and verification of adherence to the terms and conditions of the permission. 
The application for extension shall be submitted one year  before the expiry 
of existing GOPA. The GOPA of existing CRS will remain valid as per the 
agreement signed with the licensee. 
c) A report on continuous operation of CRS may be sought by Ministry from 
local Akashvani Kendra or a person/officer deputed by the Ministry during 
the GOPA period. 
d) The Grant of Permission Agreement and the Permission letter shall be non-
transferable. 
e) No permission fee shall be levied on the Permission Holder. However, 
the Permission Holder will be required to pay the spectrum usage fee to 
WPC wing of Ministry of Communication. 
f) In case the permission holder shuts down broadcasting activity for more 
than 3 months after commencement of operation, its permission is liable to 
be cancelled. 
g) An eligible organization/ institution that operates in multiple districts shall be 
allowed to set  up a maximum of six (6) CRS in different districts of 
operation, provided it fulfils the following conditions 
 
(i) Continuous operation of the previous commissioned CRS for at 
least one year at the time of applying for setting up subsequent 
CRS. The licenses for multiple CRSs would not be issued en 
masse but one at a time. Only one CRS per district will be allowed 
to the organisation. 
 
(ii) The organizations setting up multiple  CRS should ensure  
participation of  the local community and broadcast content 
relevant to the community served by the respective CRS. 
 
h) The organization seeking to setup multiple CRS may be required to submit 

38 
 
an undertaking, confirming that the programs shall be prepared locally. 
i) The Permission Holder shall be required to submit compliance report on 
the GOPA conditions as and when sought by the Ministry of Information and 
Broadcasting in the prescribed format. 
 
5. Content regulation & monitoring 
 
a) The programmes should be of immediate relevance to the community.  The 
emphasis should  be on developmental, agricultural, health, educational, 
environmental, social welfare, community development and cultural 
programmes. The programming should reflect the  special interests and 
needs of the local community. 
b) The Licensee shall setup an advisory and content committee comprising 
members from the local  community which will decide upon the content 
being broadcasted on Community Radio. At least half of the members of 
Advisory and Content Committee should be women. 
c) At least 50% of content shall be generated with the participation of the local 
community, out of which at least half of the content should be focussed on 
women empowerment and the themes should go beyond nutrition, 
breastfeeding, pregnancy, recipes and beauty. 
d) Programmes should preferably be in the local language and dialect(s). 
e) The Permission Holder shall have to adhere to the provisions of the 
Programme and Advertising Code as prescribed by Prasar Bharati 
for Akashwani. 
f) The Permission Holder shall preserve all programmes broadcast by 
the CRS for three months from the date of broadcast. 
g) The Permission Holder shall not broadcast any progammes, which relate 
to ‘news and current affairs’ and are otherwise political in nature. However, 
CRS can broadcast news and current  affairs contents sourced exclusively 
from Akashwani in its original form or translated into  the local 
language/dialect. Akashwani shall  source its news  to CRS without any  
charges. It will be the responsibility of the CRS permission holder to 
ensure that the news is not distorted or edited during translation. 
The broadcast pertaining to the following categories will be treated as non -‘news and 
current affairs’ broadcast and will therefore be permissible: 
(i) Information pertaining to sporting events excluding live coverage. 
However live commentaries of sporting events of local nature may be 
permissible; 
(ii) Information pertaining to Traffic and Weather; 
(iii) Information pertaining to and coverage of local cultural events, festivals; 
(iv) coverage of topics pertaining to examinations, results, admissions, 
career counselling; 
(v) Availability of employment opportunities; 
(vi) Public announcements pertaining to civic amenities like electricity, 
water supply, natural calamities, health alerts etc. as provided by the 
local administration, 
(vii) Such other categories not permitted at present that may 
subsequently be specifically permitted by Ministry of Information and 
Broadcasting from time to time. 
h) The Permission Holder shall ensure that nothing is included in the 

39 
 
programmes broadcast which: 
(i) Offends against good taste or decency; 
(ii) Contains criticism of friendly countries; 
(iii) Contains attack on religions or communities or visuals or words 
contemptuous of religious groups or which either promote or result in 
promoting communal discontent or disharmony; 
(iv) Contains anything obscene, defamatory, deliberate, false and 
suggestive innuendoes and half-truths; 
(v) Is likely to encourage or incite violence or contains anything against  
maintenance of law and order or which promote-anti-national attitudes; 
(vi) Contains anything amounting to contempt of court or anything 
affecting the integrity of the Nation; 
(vii) Contains aspersions against the dignity of the President/Vice 
President and the Judiciary; 
(viii) Criticises, maligns or slanders any individual in person or certain 
groups, segments of social, public and moral life of the country; 
(ix) Encourages superstition or blind belief; 
(x) Denigrates women; 
(xi) Denigrates children; 
(xii) May present/depict/suggest as  desirable the use of  drugs including 
alcohol, narcotics and tobacco or may stereotype, incite, vilify or 
perpetuate hatred against or attempt to demean any person or group 
on the basis of ethnicity, nationality, race, gender, sexual preference, 
religion, age or physical or mental disability. 
i) The Permission Holder shall ensure that due care is taken with respect to 
religious programmes with a view to avoid: 
(i) Exploitation of religious susceptibilities; and 
(ii) Committing offence to the religious views and beliefs of those 
belonging to a particular religion or religious denomination. 
 
6. Imposition of penalty/revocation of Permission Agreement 
 
a) In case there is any violation of conditions cited in 5(a) to 5(i), 
Government may suo- moto or on basis of complaints take cognisance and 
place the matter before the Inter -Ministerial Committees on Programme and 
Advertising Codes for recommending appropriate penalties. On the 
recommendation of the Committee a decision to impose penalties shall be 
taken. However, before the imposition of a penalty the Permission Holder 
shall be given an opportunity to represent its case. 
b) The penalty shall comprise of: 
(i) Temporary suspension of Permission for operating the CRS for a 
period up to one month in the case of the first violation. 
(ii) Temporary suspension of Permission for operating the CRS for a 
period up to three months in the case of the second violation 
depending on the gravity of violation. 
c) Revocation of the Permission for any subsequent violation. 
d) In case of revocation of Permission, the Permission Holder will not be 
eligible to apply  directly or indirectly for a fresh permission in future for a 
period of five years. “Provided the penalty imposed as per above provision 

40 
 
shall be without prejudice to any penal action under applicable  laws 
including the Indian Telegraph Act 1885 and Indian Wireless Telegraphy 
Act 1933, as modified from time to time”. 
e) In the event of suspension of permission as mentioned in para 6(b)(i) & 
6(b)(ii), the  permission holder will continue to discharge its obligations 
under the Grant of Permission Agreement during the suspension period 
also. 
 
7. Transmitter Power and Range 
 
a) CRS shall be expected to cover a range of 5 -10 km. For this, a transmitter 
having maximum Effective Radiated Power (ERP) of 100 W would be 
adequate. However, in case of a proven need  where the applicant 
organisation is able to establish that it needs to serve a larger area or the 
terrain so warrants, higher transmitter wattage with maximum ERP up to 
250 Watts can be considered on a case -to-case basis, subject to availability 
of frequency and such other clearances  as necessary from the Ministry of 
Communication. Requests for higher transmitter power above 100 Watts 
and up to 250 Watts shall also be subject to approval by  the IMC 
constituted under the Chairmanship of Secretary, Ministry of Information & 
Broadcasting. 
b) The maximum height of antenna permitted above the ground for the CRS 
shall not exceed 30 meters. However, minimum height of Antenna above 
ground should be  at least 15 meters  to prevent possibility of biological 
hazards of RF radiation. 
 
8. Funding & Sustenance 
 
a) Applicants will be eligible to seek funding from multilateral aid agencies. 
Applicants seeking foreign funds for setting up the CRS will have to obtain 
FCRA clearance under Foreign Contribution Regulation Act, 1976. 
b) Transmission of sponsored programmes shall not be permitted except 
programmes sponsored  by central & state Governments and other 
organisations to broadcast public interest information. In addition, limited 
advertising and announcements relating to local events, local businesses 
and services and employment opportunities shall be allowed. The maximum 
duration of such limited advertising will be restricted to 12 (twelve) minutes 
per hour of broadcast. 
c) Revenue generated from advertisement and announcements as per Para 
8(b) shall be utilized only for the operational expenses and capital 
expenditure of the CRS. After meeting the full financial needs of the CRS, 
surplus may, with prior written permission of the Ministry of Information  & 
Broadcasting, be ploughed into the primary activity of the organization 
i.e. for education in case of educational institutions and for furthering the 
primary objectives for which the NGO concerned was established. 
d) Government shall strive to build an ecosystem for continual growth of CRS 
and encourage sharing of content among the CR community. 
9. Other Terms & Conditions 
 
a) The basic objective of the Community Radio broadcasting would be to serve 
the cause of the community in the service area of the Permission Holder by 
involving members of the community in the broadcast of their programmes. 

41 
 
For this purpose, community shall mean people  living in the zone of the 
coverage of the broadcasting service  of the Permission Holder.  Each 
applicant will have to specify the geographical community or the 
community of interest it wants to cover. The Permission Holder shall provide 
the services of his CRS on free-to-air basis. 
b) Though the Permission Holder will operate the service under these 
guidelines and as per the terms and conditions of the Grant of Permission 
Agreement signed, the permission shall be subject  to the condition that as 
and when any regulatory authority to regulate and monitor the broadcast 
services in the country is constituted, the permission holder will adhere to 
the norms, rules and regulations prescribed by such authority from time to 
time. 
c) The Permission Holder shall provide such information to  the Government 
on such intervals, as may be  required. In this connection, the Permission 
Holder is required to preserve recording of programmes broadcast during 
the previous three months failing which  Permission Agreement is liable to 
be revoked. 
d) The Government or its authorized representative shall have the right to 
inspect the broadcast facilities of the Permission Holder and collect such 
information as considered necessary in public and community interest. 
e) The Government reserves the right to take over the entire services and 
networks of the Permission Holder or revoke/terminate/suspend the 
Permission in the interest of national security or in the event of national 
emergency/ war or low intensity conflict or under similar type of situations. 
f) All foreign personnel likely to be deployed by way of appointment, 
contract, consultancy etc. by the Permission Holder for installation, 
maintenance and operation of the Permission Holder’s services shall be 
required to obtain prior security clearance from Government of India. 
g) The Government reserves the right to modify, at any time, the terms and 
conditions if it is necessary to do so, in public interest or for the proper 
conduct of broadcasting or for security considerations. 
h) Notwithstanding anything contained anywhere else in the Grant of 
Permission Agreement, the  Government shall have the power to direct 
the permission holder to broadcast any special  message as may be 
considered desirable to meet any contingency arising out of natural 
emergency, or public  interest or natural disaster and the  like, and the  
Permission holder shall be obliged to comply with such directions. 
i) The permission holder shall be required to submit their audited annual 
accounts to the Government in respect of the organization/division running 
the CRS. The accounts shall  clearly show the income and expenditure 
incurred and the Assets and Liabilities in respect of the CRS. 
j) A Permission Agreement will be subject to such other conditions as may 
be determined by the Government. 
K) The Government shall make special arrangements for monitoring and 
enforcement of the ceiling on advertisements, particularly in those areas 
where private FM radio stations have been granted licenses. 
 
 
 
 

42 
 
ANNEXURE – I 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON COMMUNICATIONS AND 
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (2024-25) 
 
MINUTES OF THE TWENTIETH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
----------- 
 
 The Committee sat on Thursday, the 26th June, 2025 from 1100 hours to 1410 hours 
in Main Committee Room, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Dr. Nishikant Dubey- Chairperson 
 
 MEMBERS 
  
 
LokSabha 
 
2. Shri Anil Baluni 
3. Dr. Rabindra Narayan Behera 
4. Shri Anup Sanjay Dhotre 
5. Shri S. Supongmeren Jamir 
6. Shri G. Kumar Naik 
7. Shri Radheshyam Rathiya 
8. Shri Ramasahayam Raghuram Reddy 
9. Shri Arun Kumar Sagar 
10. Shri Devesh Shakya 
11. Shri Vishnu Datt Sharma 
 
RajyaSabha 
 
12. Shri Saket Gokhale 
13. Shri Amar Pal Maurya 
14. Dr. Sasmit Patra 
15. Shri Kartikeya Sharma 
16. Shri Lahar Singh Siroya 
 
Secretariat 
 
 
1. Shri Y. M. Kandpal   - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri Amrish Kumar   -     Deputy Secretary 
 
 
           Welcoming members to the sitting of the Committee, the Chairperson drew their 
attention to the Agenda for the sitting which included consideration and adoption of the 4 
Draft Action Taken Reports (ATRs) on DFG (2025 -26) and evidence of the representatives 
of Ministry of Electronics and Information and Technology (MeitY), Ministry of Home Affairs, 

43 
 
Ministry of Defence and Ministry of Power on the Subject ‘Impact of emergence of Artificial 
Intelligence and related issues’.  
 
 The Committee then considered and adopted  the following Draft Action Taken 
Reports:- 
 
(i) XXXX………..XXXX…….XXXX…….XXXX….XXXX…..XXXX….XXXX….XXXX… 
(ii) Draft Report on Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Third Report 
(18th Lok Sabha) on “Demands for Grants (2024 -25)” relating to the Ministry of 
Information and Broadcasting. 
(iii) XXXX………..XXXX…….XXXX…….XXXX….XXXX…..XXXX….XXXX….XXXX… 
(iv) XXXX………..XXXX…….XXXX…….XXXX….XXXX…..XXXX….XXXX….XXXX… 
 
2. The Committee also authorized Chairperson to finalize the reports and present/lay 
them in Lok Sabha/Rajya Sabha during the Monsoon Session of Parliament.  
 
3. XXXX………..XXXX…….XXXX…….XXXX….XXXX…..XXXX….XXXX….XXXX… 
 
The witnesses then withdrew. 
A copy of verbatim record of the proceedings was kept on record. 
The Committee, then, adjourned. 
****** 

44 
 
 
ANNEXURE – II 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE OBSERVATIONS/ 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THEIR THIRD REPORT  
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
[Vide Paragraph No. 5 of Introduction] 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by  the 
Government 
 
          Rec. Sl. Nos.: 1,2,3,5,6,7,8,13,14 and 15 
Total 10 
Percentage    62.50 
(ii)  Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the replies of the Government 
 
         Rec. Sl. No.: NIL  
Total NIL 
Percentage 0 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and require reiteration 
        Rec. Sl. No.: NIL 
 
Total NIL 
Percentage 0 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the replies of the 
Government are of interim in nature 
 
        Rec. Sl. Nos.: 4,9,10,11,12 and 16  
Total 06 
Percentage 37.50 
 
 
 
 
 
 