 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON COMMUNICATIONS AND  
             INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
          (2024-25) 
 
 
 
EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
 
             MINISTRY OF ELECTRONICS AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the 
Committee contained in their Fifty-Fourth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on 
‘Digital Payment and Online Security Measures for data Protection’ ] 
 
 
SEVENTH  REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
             LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
             NEW DELHI 
 
 
 
 
 
                  March, 2025/ Phalguna, 1946 (Saka) 
 
 
7 
 


 
SEVENTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
COMMUNICATIONS AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(2024-2025) 
 
EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA 
MINISTRY OF ELECTRONICS AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the 
Committee contained in their Fifty-fourth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on  
‘Digital Payment and Online Security Measures for data Protection’] 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on   11 .03.2025 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on      11 .03.2025 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
 
 
 
March, 2025/Phalguna,1946 (Saka)  


 
CCIT No. 408 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
©2025 By Lok Sabha Secretariat 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha 
(Seventeenth Edition) and Printed by Lok Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi-110001 
 

 
CONTENTS 
 PAGE  
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE.................................................................................................. (iii) 
INTRODUCTION.................................................................................................................................... (v) 
CHAPTER I Report………………………………………………………………………..................... 1 
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government……………………………………………………………………............... 15 
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in 
view of the replies of the Government……………………………….......................... 34 
CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee and require reiteration …………......... 35 
CHAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the Government 
are of interim in nature…......................................................................................... 36 
 ANNEXURES  
I. Minutes of the 15th Sitting of the Committee held on 05.03.2025. 41 
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in their Fifty -fourth Report (Seventeenth Lok 
Sabha). 43 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 Composition of the Standing Committee on Communications and 
Information Technology (2024-25)* 
 
Dr. Nishikant Dubey – Chairperson 
 
Lok Sabha 
  
2. Shri C.N. Annadurai 
3. Shri Anil Baluni 
4. Dr. Rabindra Narayan Behera 
5. Shri Anup Sanjay Dhotre 
6. Shri Gurmeet Singh Meet Hayer 
7. Shri Sanjay Haribhau Jadhav 
8. Shri S. Supongmeren Jamir 
9. Shri Appalanaidu Kalisetti 
10. Smt. Poonamben Hematbhai Maadam 
11. Ms. Mahua Moitra 
12. Shri G. Kumar Naik 
13. Shri Shafi Parambil 
14. Dr. M.K. Vishnu Prasad 
15. Ms. Kangna Ranaut 
16. Shri Radheshyam Rathiya 
17. Shri Ramasahayam Raghuram Reddy 
18. Shri Arun Kumar Sagar 
19. Shri Devesh Shakya 
20. Shri Vishnu Datt Sharma 
21. Shri Rajesh Verma 
Rajya Sabha 
22. Shri Saket Gokhale** 
23. Smt. Priyanka Chaturvedi 
24. Shri Ilaiyaraaja 
25. Shri Amar Pal Maurya 
26. Dr. Sasmit Patra 
27. Shri V. Vijayendra Prasad 
28. Shri S. Niranjan Reddy 
29. Shri Kartikeya Sharma 
30. Shri Lahar Singh Siroya  
31. Shri K.T.S. Tulsi 
SECRETARIAT 
 1.  Shri Y.M. Kandpal   — Joint Secretary 
2.  Smt. A. Jyothirmayi   — Director 
3. Shri Amrish Kumar   — Deputy Secretary 
4.  Shri Salil Saroj                         — Under Secretary  
 
*Committee constituted w.e.f. 26 th September, 2024 vide Para No.833 of Bulletin Part -II dated 26 th 
September, 2024. 
** Shri Saket Gokhale  has been nominated vide Para No. 853 of Bulletin Part –II dated 03 rd October, 
2024. 

 
INTRODUCTION 
I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Communications and Information Technology 
(2024-25), having been authorized by the Committee, present this Seventh Report on Action 
Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in 
their Fifty -fourth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on the Subject ‘Digital Payment and Online 
Security Measures for data Protection ’ relating to the Ministry of Electronics and Information 
Technology. 
2. The Fifty-fourth Report was presented to Lok Sabha and also laid on the Table of  
Rajya Sabha on 8th February, 2024 .  The Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology 
furnished their Action Taken Notes on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the 
Fifty-fourth Report on 7th January, 2025. 
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their Sitting held on      
5th March, 2025. 
4. For facility of reference and convenience, Observations/Recommendations of the 
Committee have been printed in bold in Chapter-I of the Report.  
5. An analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Fifty-fourth Report of the Committee is given at 
Annexure-II. 
 
 
 
     NEW DELHI; DR. NISHIKANT DUBEY, 
   7th  March, 2025  Chairperson, 
 16 Phalguna, 1946 (Saka) Standing Committee on  
Communications and Information Technology. 

 
1 
  
CHAPTER I 
REPORT 
This Report of the Standing  Committee on  Communications and  Information 
Technology (2024 -25) deals with the action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Fifty-fourth Report 
(Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on the ‘Digital Payment and Online Security Measures for Data 
Protection’ relating to the Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology. 
2. The Fifty-fourth Report was presented to Lok Sabha/laid in Rajya Sabha on                  
8th February, 2024. It contained 16 Observations/Recommendations. 
3.  Updated Action Taken Notes in respect of all the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Report have been received from the 
Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology and are categorized as under: 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government:— 
Rec. Sl. Nos.: 1, 2, 3, 4, 6, 7, 8, 10, 11, 12, 13, 15 and 16     
   Total:  13 
       Chapter:II 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in 
view of the replies of the Government:— 
Rec. Sl.  No.: NIL                  
Total: NIL 
Chapter:III 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee and require reiteration:— 
Rec. Sl. No.: NIL                      
     Total: NIL 
            Chapter:IV 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the replies of the 
Government are of interim in nature:—  
Rec. Sl. Nos.: 5, 9 and 14              
Total: 03 
             Chapter:V 
 
 

 
2 
  
4. The Committee trust that utmost importance would be given to the 
implementation of the Observations/Recommendations accepted by the 
Government. In case where it is not possible for any reasons to implement the 
recommendations in letter and spirit, the m atter shall be reported to the 
Committee with reasons for non -implementation. The Committee further desire 
that Action Taken Statement on the Observations/Recommendations contained in 
Chapter-I and final action taken replies to the Observations/Recommendat ions 
contained in Chapter-V of this Report be furnished to them at an early date. 
5. The Committee will now deal with action taken by the Government on 
some of their Observations/Recommendations that require reiteration or merit 
comments. 
 
Aadhaar Enabled Payment System (AePS) frauds 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 4) 
6. The Committee, in their Original Report, had recommended as under:— 
“The Committee note that the Aadhaar System is a Unique Data Collection and 
Storage System which has enabled the Government to l aunch Aadhaar enabled 
payment system (AePS) for financial inclusion in rural and remote areas of the 
country.  An AePS facilitates customers to carry out financial transactions from 
their Aadhaar linked accounts and biometric authentication. While examinin g 
this, the Committee pointed out that the cases of frauds using AePS were on the 
rise.  To this, the Ministry of Home Affairs submitted that biometric cloning was 
by way of using dummy fingers or rubber fingers to withdraw money through the 
AePS system.  The Ministry assured that they were working with Aadhaar and 
National Payment Corporation of India (NPCI) to put an end to this and they 
hoped that there would be reduction in future. Further, expressing concern with 
regard to security and privacy of Aadha ar data of citizens, the Committee 
pointedly asked whether there was any breach of Aadhaar Card Holders’ data. 
To this, the Ministry has categorically stated that there has been no breach of 
Aadhaar Card Holders’ data from the Central Identities Data Repos itory (CIDR) 
maintained by the UIDAI in which the data base of biometric and demographic 
information of Aadhaar is maintained. Further, it was stated that CERT -In 
received threat intelligence reports regarding sale of personal data with samples 

 
3 
  
claiming to  be of Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR) and ICMR was 
notified of the same and were suggested remedial measures. It was also added 
then CERT -In is coordinating incident analysis with law enforcement agency. 
The Committee were apprised that as per N ational Payments Corporation of 
India’s (NPCI) Circular dated 26.10.2023, banks had been directed to disable 
AePS services for accounts with No AePS debit transactions in the preceding 12 
months by 30.11.2023 except for the accounts which had received DBT credits 
and PMJDY, BSBDA accounts. Among the measures taken to prevent AePS 
frauds, the Committee have been apprised that UIDAI had asked acquirer banks 
to enforce stringent guidelines/checks for on -boarding of Business 
Correspondent agents and Corporate B usiness Correspondents and to ensure 
the use of verifiable and reliable identity. UIDAI had also suggested for 
mandatory need of reporting of frauds to law enforcement agencies. Taking note 
that the Ministry had put certain concrete measures in place, the Committee urge 
the Ministry to enforce these measures to the hilt so that there would be tangible 
outcomes. Expressing surprise with regard to submission of the Ministry in 
respect of data breach, the Committee do call upon the Ministry to remain 
vigilant and ensure the safety of Aadhaar Card Holders’ data. Regarding 
intelligence reports received by CERT-In with regard to sale of personal data, the 
Committee may be apprised about the outcome of the measures suggested and 
the finding of the analysis by CERT-In.” 
7. In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Electronics and Information 
Technology submitted as under:– 
“The Indian Computer Emergency Response Team (CERT -In) received threat 
intelligence reports in October 2023, regarding sale of personal data wi th samples 
claiming to be of Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR) and notified ICMR of 
the same and coordinated incident response measures.  
Analysis of the incident revealed certain security gaps that include insecure 
application design and inadequate security controls. Necessary remedial 
measures were suggested to ICMR as below: 
CERT-In recommended ICMR to create and regularly update a clear and 
documented comprehensive security policy, adopt a risk -based approach to 
security by conducting r egular risk assessments and implementing appropriate 
controls, ensure security by design for application development & operations, 

 
4 
  
conduct security audit by scoping the entire ICMR ecosystem, apply proper 
Authentication, Authorization, and accounting mecha nisms , ensure security 
practices during the entire data lifecycle i.e., during data collection, usage, 
storage, sharing, archival and disposal. 
The analysis report was also shared with Law enforcement Agency for 
investigation.” 
8. The Committee in their r ecommendation had asked the Ministry to 
enforce the measures for reporting of frauds to law enforcement agencies so that 
there would be tangible outcomes. The Committee, in respect of data breach, had 
urged the Ministry to remain vigilant and ensure the sa fety of Aadhaar Card 
Holders’ data and also wished to be apprised about the outcome of the measures 
suggested and the finding of the analysis by CERT -In with regard to sale of 
personal data. The Ministry have informed the Committee that ICMR has been 
recommended by CERT -In to have a comprehensive security policy which may 
ensure security practices during the entire data lifecycle i.e, during data collection, 
usage, storage, sharing, archival and disposal. The Committee would like to be 
apprised of the analy sis report shared with Law enforcement Agency for 
investigation and also whether the security gaps that include insecure application 
design and inadequate security controls were checked and the number of cases of 
Data breach that has reduced. The Committee  desire to be informed about what 
security practices have been adopted by the Ministry so as to ensure fool proof 
security measures during the entire data life cycle and steps taken for its effective 
monitoring and enforcement. The Committee would also lik e to be apprised of the 
preventive measures taken by CERT -In, UIDAI and acquirer banks in this regard 
along with the constraints being faced in its implementation and the outcome of 
collaboration between Aadhar and NPCI to check financial frauds through th e 
AePs system. 
Cyber Security Framework 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 6) 
 9. The Committee, in their Original Report, had recommended as under:— 
 “While examining the Operating Systems being used by financial institutions, the 
Committee sought to know whether these financial institutions were using updated 

 
5 
  
software for strengthening security. The Committee were informed that RBI had 
issued comprehen sive guidelines as part of Cyber Security Framework, 2016 
wherein emphasis was laid on maintaining up -to-date security including 
application of latest patches and not using End of Life/End of Support Software. It 
was added that the banks had been advised t o continuously monitor the release 
of patches by various vendors/Original Equipment Manufacturers and also 
periodically evaluate critical devices such as firewalls, network switches, security 
devices and so on, so as to ensure that their configurations are  appropriate to 
achieve the desired levels of security. It was also added that this was being 
monitored through offsite returns and during onsite IT Examination of supervised 
entities. Outlining the role of nodal officers in Banks/Financial institutions wi th 
regard to financial frauds, the Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology 
submitted that guidelines had been issued by RBI to regulated entities with regard 
to reporting of payment fraud data to Central Payments Fraud Information 
Registry (CPFIR). Elaborating on this, the Committee were informed that all the 
RBI authorized payment system operators/providers and payment system 
participants operating in India are required to report all payment frauds including 
attempted incidents irrespective of v alue either reported by their customers or 
detected by the entities by themselves.  The guidelines included that the 
responsibility to submit the reported payment for transaction was with the issuer of 
bank/PPI issuer/credit card issuing NBFCs, whose payme nt instruments have 
been used in the fraud. Before reporting to RBI on individual transaction basis, 
entities are required to validate the payment fraud information reported by the 
customer in their own system to ensure authenticity and completeness. Furth er, 
the timeline specified was that entities are required to report payment frauds both 
domestic and international to CPFIR within 7 calendar days from the date of 
reporting by customer/date of detection by the entity. Noting the various steps 
taken by the Ministry with regard to strengthening security in financial institutions, 
the Committee would like to know to what extent these measures have been 
successful in checking financial frauds/helped in reporting frauds so as to ensure 
that the customers are put to least trouble. The Committee may be apprised of the 
action taken in this regard.” 
10. In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Electronics and Information 
Technology submitted as under:– 
“Various steps taken by RBI in this regard are as follows: 

 
6 
  
i. Central Payments Fraud Information Registry (CPFIR), a web -based 
payment-related fraud reporting solution, has been put in place with effect from 
March 23, 2020. Accordingly, RBI authorised payment system operators / 
providers and payment system particip ants operating in India are required to 
report all payment frauds (either reported by their customers or detected by the 
entities themselves) through CPFIR. The Reserve Bank has also commenced 
publication of information on payment frauds, from September 20 22 onwards, with 
a view to enhancing awareness about frauds. 
ii. Under the Reserve Bank’s Payments Vision 2025, an enhancement in 
CPFIR has been envisaged in terms of creating a negative database of fraudulent 
beneficiaries using the suspect / beneficiary information reported to CPFIR and to 
share the same with supervised entities. However, in view of the Supreme Court 
judgement in the case State Bank of India and Ors. v. Rajesh Agarwal and Ors 
(2023), it is understood that the principles of natural justice, particularly the Rule of 
audi alteram partem (opportunity to be heard), would be required to be followed by 
RBI before a beneficiary is identified as “suspect / fraudulent beneficiary” and 
included in the negative registry.” 
11. Noting the various steps taken by the Ministry with regard to 
strengthening cyber security in financial institutions, the Committee in their 
Original Report had sought to be apprised of to what extent these measures were 
successful in checking financial fr auds/ reporting frauds so as to ensure that the 
customers are put to least trouble. The Ministry has informed the Committee that 
under the Reserve Bank’s Payments Vision 2025, an enhancement in Central 
Payments Fraud Information Registry (CPFIR) has been e nvisaged in terms of 
creating a negative database of fraudulent beneficiaries using the suspect / 
fraudulent beneficiary information reported to CPFIR and to share the same with 
supervised entities. The Ministry has further stated that in view of the Supre me 
Court judgment in the case State Bank of India and Ors. v. Rajesh Agarwal and Ors 
(2023), it is understood that the principles of natural justice, particularly the Rule 
of audi alteram partem (opportunity to be heard), would be required to be followed 
by RBI before a beneficiary is identified as “suspect / fraudulent beneficiary” and 
included in the negative registry. The Committee would like to know the measures 
that have been taken by the Ministry against the suspect / fraudulent beneficiaries 
within the ambit of the judgment delivered by the Supreme Court. The Committee 
would like the Ministry to apprise them about the steps including penal actions 

 
7 
  
proposed to deal with such cases. The Committee also desire to have details of 
the number of cases registered against Financial Frauds through CPFIR during the 
last five years and the progress/ status update in such cases. 
Cyber Security of Android Play Store  
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 7) 
 
12. The Committee, in their Original Report, had recommended as under:— 
“Dwelling on the incidents of cyber fraud, the Committee pointed out the number 
of incidents related to malwares were significantly higher in Android phones and 
sought the comments of Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology.  
Elaborating on thi s, the Ministry submitted that Android platforms provide side 
loading installation feature which is exploited by cyber criminals for creating 
Malicious Financial Apps.  These apps are developed by cyber criminals and sent 
to victims via links on messengers /SMSs. Upon installation of these apps by the 
citizens, sensitive information of phone like SMS, call logs etc gets compromised. 
I4C, MHA has started maintaining a repository of android and banking malwares 
causing threat to digital payment security.  I4C periodically sends hash values of 
these apps to Google for appropriate action. More than 200 android and banking 
malwares have been identified and shared with Google and LEAs. Illegal and 
fraudulent lending apps are found on both Google Play store and Appl e App Store 
and these are being regularly sent to these entities for urgent action against such 
apps. From the submissions of the Ministry, it is seen that MHA has started 
maintaining a repository of Android and banking malwares which are causing 
threat to  digital payment security.  The Committee would like to know how 
effective has this measure been in containing/checking such frauds.  The 
Committee would also like to know the action taken by Google and Law 
Enforcement Agencies with regard to the informati on that has been sent to them 
for taking urgent action.” 
13. In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Electronics and Information 
Technology submitted as under:– 
“More than 250, android and banking related malwares, which were generally 
circulated thro ugh third -party Application Stores, have been blocked, as per the 
recommendations of 14C. All the android malwares notices by 14C are being 

 
8 
  
intimated to Google to patch up its android platform. National Malware repository 
is also being updated. Intimation about the malware is also being shared with 
other Stakeholders. 
Google Play Store is also misused by cyber criminals to host instant loan 
applications using the names of random Non -Banking Financial Services 
Companies (NBFCs). These instant loan apps are e xploiting users by misusing 
critical app permissions, and the harvested credentials and data may also be used 
for future cybercrime. More than 130 suspicious loan apps have been suspended 
for violation of Google policy, as recommended by 14C through its te chnical 
analysis. 
RBI has been requested by I4C to whitelist all mobile apps for instant loan. RBI 
has also been requested to complete the exercise of identifying non -active 
defunct, non-complaint NBFCs, since these are being used for cyber financial for 
by un-registered entities.” 
14. The Committee in their Original Report had desired to know about how 
effective the measures of MHA were i.e. with regard to maintaining of a repository 
of Android and Banking Malwares which were causing threat to digital paym ent 
security.  The Committee also wanted to be apprised of the action taken by Google 
and Law Enforcement Agencies with regard to the information that was sent to 
them for taking urgent action regarding fraudulent lending apps. The Ministry in 
their submis sion stated that more than 250, android and banking related 
malwares, which were generally circulated through third -party Application Stores, 
were blocked and all the android malwares notices are being intimated to Google 
to patch up its android platform. In this connection, the Ministry informed the 
Committee that the National Malware repository is also being updated and 
intimation about the malware is also being shared with other Stakeholders. The 
Committee would like to be apprised of the efficacy and ou tcome of these 
measures and the action initiated by the stakeholders once the intimation about 
malware has been shared with them. The Committee further desire to know 
whether the information is shared only with the Big Tech companies like Google or 
it has also been done for local and indigenous search engines, if any, or with the 
agencies working for Digital Connectivity in rural areas of the Country. 
The Committee, from the submission of the Ministry, find that RBI had been 
requested to whitelist all mobile apps for instant loan and complete the exercise of 

 
9 
  
identifying non -active, defunct and non -complaint NBFCs, since these are being 
used for cyber financial fraud by un -registered entities. The Committee may be 
apprised of the action taken by RBI in this r egard and also of the delays, if any. 
The Committee would also like to be enlightened about enforcement and penal 
actions taken by law enforcement agencies under MHA with regard to cybercrimes 
of fraudulent lending Apps. 
 
Compliance to guidelines issued by RBI from Banks 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 8) 
15. The Committee, in their Original Report, had recommended as under:— 
“While dwelling on the issue of regulation of the payment sector, the Committee 
have been informed that Reserve Bank of India issues guideli nes related to safe 
and secure digital banking system from time to time to all the Scheduled 
Commercial Banks, Cooperative Banks, Payment system operators and others. 
RBI also regulates online fintech companies involved in Digital Payment sector 
having no physical presence. Further, the Committee have been informed that as 
per the draft Master Directions on Cyber Resilience and Digital Payment Security 
Controls for Payment System Operators (PSOs), shall appoint dedicated nodal 
officer(s) to function on 24x7 x365 basis for instant resolution of 
unauthorized/fraudulent transactions reported by customers and also to facilitate 
prompt response to Law Enforcement Agencies (LEAs). The Committee would 
like to emphasize on the significance of nodal officers for not o nly redressal of 
grievances of citizens related to cyber frauds but also for prompt response by Law 
Enforcement Agencies. The Committee would also like to be apprised once these 
draft directions are finalized and issued for compliance. Further, the Committ ee 
would like to stress that these directions may be formulated wherein lack of 
compliance of these guidelines would be taken seriously and dealt sternly with the 
Payment System operators, banks and other financial entities. The Committee 
may be apprised of the action taken in this regard.” 
16. In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Electronics and Information 
Technology submitted as under:– 
“The updated Action Taken Report is submitted as following: 

 
10 
  
(i) Master Directions on Cyber Resilience and Digit al Payment Security 
Controls for non - bank Payment System Operators (PSOs) have been issued by 
RBI on July 30, 2024. These Directions aim to improve safety and security of the 
payment systems operated by non -bank PSOs by providing a framework for 
overall information security preparedness with an emphasis on cyber resilience. 
The Directions also cover baseline security measures for ensuring system 
resilience as well as safe and secure digital payment transactions. 
(ii) Paragraph 27(d) of the Master Direction s mentions that “The PSO shall 
have a manned facility to function on 24x7x365 basis for facilitating swift 
resolution of unauthorised / fraudulent transactions reported by customers and 
also to provide prompt response to Law Enforcement Agencies (LEAs)”, w hich 
addresses the Committee’s emphasis on the significance of nodal officers in terms 
of not only ensuring swift redressal of grievances of citizens related to cyber 
frauds but also for ensuring due engagement with Law Enforcement Agencies. 
(iii) The Mast er Directions require compliance of authorised non -bank PSOs 
with regard to Cyber Resilience and Digital Payment Security Controls. The status 
of regulatory compliance by PSOs is assessed by RBI on an ongoing basis 
including during periodic onsite inspecti on of these entities. Any observed 
divergence from the regulation shall be suitably dealt with in accordance with the 
existing supervisory mechanism regarding PSOs.” 
17. The Committee in their Original Report had emphasized on the 
significance of nodal officers for not only redressal of grievances of citizens 
related to cyber frauds but also for prompt response by Law Enforcement 
Agencies. The Committee had desired to be apprised of Master Directions on 
Cyber Resilience and Digital Payment Security Controls for Payment System 
Operators (PSOs), which shall appoint dedicated nodal officer(s) to function on 
24x7x365 basis for instant resolution of unauthorized/fraudulent t ransactions 
reported by customers and also to facilitate prompt response to Law Enforcement 
Agencies (LEAs). To this, the Ministry has submitted that Master Directions on 
Cyber Resilience and Digital Payment Security Controls for non - bank Payment 
System O perators (PSOs) have been issued by RBI on July 30, 2024. These 
Directions aim to improve safety and security of the payment systems operated by 
non-bank PSOs by providing a framework for overall information security 
preparedness with an emphasis on cyber resilience. The Directions also cover 

 
11 
  
baseline security measures for ensuring system resilience as well as safe and 
secure digital payment transactions. Further, the Ministry has submitted that any 
observed divergence from the regulation shall be suitably dealt with in accordance 
with the existing supervisory mechanism regarding PSOs. The Committee desire 
to know how the Ministry proposes to deal with such divergences along with the 
details of actions taken so far against such divergences reported till now.  The 
Committee would also like to comprehend what penal provisions have been put in 
place by the Ministry and MHA to deal with fraudsters, PSOs and Banks found 
involved in Cyber fraud so as to ensure that  the Master Directions on Cyber 
Resilience and Digi tal Payment Security Controls for Payment System Operators 
(PSOs) become more effective and deterrent. 
 
Use of fintech apps/platforms to sensitize users about safe and secure 
transactions 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 15) 
18. The Committee, in their Original Report, had recommended that:— 
“The Committee note that cyber frauds emanating from digital payments are a 
serious issue as it not only results in financial loss to vulnerable but also result in 
loss of trust in the whole ecosystem of digital payments forcing  the people to 
revert back to cash transactions. Owing to quantum of this issue, there is an 
urgent need to tackle it to provide safe and secure digital payment ecosystem. 
The Committee have been informed that as precursor to cyber frauds, users fall 
prey to Greed (e.g. Investment scam), Fear (e.g. disconnection of electricity/KYC) 
and Ignorance. The Committee while deliberating on the issue emphasized that to 
address any issue, preventive action is one of the major aspect that can really 
make a difference.  Prevention is the first line of defence and one of the major 
preventive actions in tackling cyber frauds can be creation of awareness among 
the users. The Committee have been apprised by the Ministry about the initiatives 
that are being taken by MEITY, MH A and other stakeholders to sensitize people 
about safe digital transactions on social media and other platforms like mygov. 
The Committee, however emphasize on the generation of awareness regarding 
the fintech apps and platforms such as Paytm, Phonepe and  Googlepay itself. 
Use of fintech apps and platforms for financial transactions have increased 
multifold due to accessibility and convenience provided by them. Moreover, these 

 
12 
  
apps/platforms or companies operating them run commercial ads to attract 
attention of citizens towards convenience of using them for financial transactions. 
These apps also contain details of bank accounts and other personal information 
of individual users linked to them. The Committee consider that interfaces of these 
apps can be very significant for generation of awareness regarding not only about 
safe transactions methods but also about bogus methods being used by 
fraudsters to dupe people. The Committee, in view of the foregoing recommend 
the Ministry of Electronics and Information  Technology to come up with guidelines 
for Banks/fintech companies/apps/platforms to focus mainly on generating 
awareness in the form of creative, pop ups etc. among general public at the 
interface of apps promoted by them. Further, the Committee are of th e considered 
view that generation of awareness in local/regional languages to users in rural and 
remote areas of the country can curb the cases of social engineering to certain 
extent. The action taken of the Ministry in this regard may be submitted at the  
earliest.” 
19. In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of Electronics and Information 
Technology submitted as under:– 
“i.    Apart from the previous shared status, it may be noted that RBI vide its 
circular  
DPSS.CO.OD.No.1934/06.08.005/2019-20 dated June 22, 2020 on ‘Increasing 
Instances of Payment Frauds – Enhancing Public Awareness Campaigns Through 
Multiple Channels’ has advised payment system operators and participants 
(banks and non -banks) to undertake targeted multi -lingual campaigns by way of 
SMSs, advertisements in print and visual media, etc., to educate their users on 
safe and secure use of digital payments. The Bank further engages with these 
stakeholders to encourage them to utilize their mobile apps, social media profiles 
and other channels to disseminate awareness related material. 
ii. Besides, the Reserve Bank has launched a mission “Har Payment Digital” 
as part of observance of Digital Payment Awareness Week (DPAW) every year in 
the month of March. This is part of RBI’s endeavour to make  every person in India 
a user of digital payments. During the DPAW, Regional Offices of the RBI 
conducted awareness and outreach programmes which also formed part of ‘Jan 
Bhagidari’ events under the Indian G20 presidency. Similar initiatives were 
undertaken by the bank and non-bank payment system operators. 

 
13 
  
iii. The Reserve Bank had also initiated a ‘75 Digital Villages’ programme in 
observance of 75 years of Independence. Under this programme, Payment 
System Operators (PSOs) had adopted 75 villages across the country and 
converted them into digital payment enabled villages. 
iv. The theme for this year is “Digital Payment, Surakshit Payment”. The 
awareness programmes aimed at creating awareness around safety and security 
of digital payments. The goal was to reach out and empower every individual with 
the knowledge and tools necessary to navigate this digital payments landscape 
with confidence and ease.” 
20. The Committee in the Original Report had observed that interfaces of 
fintech apps can be very significa nt for generation of awareness regarding not 
only about safe transactions methods but also about fraudulent methods used by 
fraudsters to cheat people. Hence, it was recommended that the Ministry of 
Electronics and Information Technology ought to come up w ith guidelines for 
Banks/fintech companies/apps/platforms to focus mainly on generating awareness 
in the form of creative features, campaigns, pop ups etc. among general public on 
interface of apps promoted by them. The Committee had also opined that the 
generation of awareness in local/regional languages to users in rural and remote 
areas of the country can curb the cases of social engineering to certain extent. In 
their Action Taken Reply, the Committee have been informed that RBI vide its 
circular dated 22 June, 2020 had advised payment system operators and 
participants (banks and non-banks) to undertake targeted multi -lingual campaigns 
by way of SMSs, advertisements in print and visual media, etc. In this regard, the 
Committee desire that multi -lingual campaigns should also include the vernacular 
languages and dialects keeping in view the fast growth of the Digital Literacy in 
the country.  
The Ministry has submitted that Regional Offices of RBI conducted 
awareness and outreach programmes which also forme d part of ‘Jan Bhagidari’ 
events under the Indian G20 presidency and similar initiatives were undertaken by 
the bank and non -bank payment system operators. The Committee would like to 
know the effects and outcome of such programmes on the common man in 
ensuring that Digital Payment is an easier way of carrying out any financial 
transaction. 

 
14 
  
Further, the Committee note that under the aegis of the ‘75 Digital Villages’ 
programme of Reserve Bank of India,  Payment System Operators (PSOs) had 
adopted 75 village s across the country and converted them into digital payment 
enabled villages. The Committee would like to be apprised of the facilities that 
have been provided to the villagers and how these facilities helped them overcome 
the problem of Digital Fraud and  increased the Digital inclusivity.  While 
appreciating the efforts of Reserve Bank of India in converting 75 villages into 
digital payment enabled villages across the country, the Committee would like to 
know about RBI’s action plan to bring large number of villages under the Digital 
Villages Programme. Further, the Committee would also like to be apprised of the 
awareness and sensitization programmes in this regard for users and 
stakeholders initiated/organized by MHA, MeITY including NIC and CERT -In which 
are under the purview of Ministry and the tangible outcomes thereof. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
15 
  
CHAPTER II 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN  
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 (Recommendation Sl. No. 1) 
Introductory 
 Digital India programme, launched in 2015 aims at ushering India towards a 
digitally empowered society and knowledge economy by making available digital 
infrastructure, digital governance and digital services to every citizen. Under the domain 
of Digital India, promotion of digital means for payments is one of the significant 
components to formalise Indian economy. Government in coordination with other 
stakeholders have undertaken several efforts to promote digital transactions such as 
concession on Merchant Discount Rate, launch of BHIM UPI a nd so on. Accordingly, 
efforts by Government are fructifying as digital transactions have become primary means 
for business and retail transactions in India. Digital payment transaction volumes have 
grown from 2,071 Crore in FY 2017-18 to 13,462 Crore in FY 2022-23 and crossed 7437 
Crore number of digital transactions during current financial year i.e. FY 2023-24 (till 24th 
September, 2023). However, success in promotion of digital payments has been facing 
enormous challenges with the rising online financia l frauds, Cyber scams and social 
engineering tactics to extort money. The Committee are concerned to note that the 
volume and value of money lost in cyber frauds are very high in comparison to recovery 
rate which has been abysmally low. According to the su bmissions made to the 
Committee, cyber frauds of Rs. 5574 Crore has been reported in the current financial 
year till September, 2023 on ‘National Cybercrime Reporting Portal’ which is very much 
higher than Rs. 2296 Crore of cyber frauds reported in the yea r 2022. Further, the 
recovery rate has been about 10.4 per cent of the transactions reported over the last 
three years i.e. 2020, 2021 and 2022. This scenario brings about a trust deficit in the 
digital payment system which needs to be attended to at the e arliest.  In view of this, the 
Committee took up for an in depth examination of the subject ‘Digital payment and online 
security measures for data protection’. The various issues dealt with are brought out in 
the following paragraphs. 
Reply of the Government 
NIL 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 2) 
Need for a multipronged approach to deal with cyber-crime 
 According to MeitY, Digital payments have significantly increased in recent years 
owing to coordinated efforts of the Government with all stakeholders. The total payment 
transactions volume had increased from 2,071 crore in FY 2017-18 to 13,462 crore in FY 
2022-23 and crossed 7437 Crore during current Financial year till 24 th Sept., 2023.  
Further, digital payments in India are expected to grow over threefold by 2025 due to 
growing smartphone penetration, COVID -led changes in consumer behaviour and 

 
16 
  
Government policies for financial inclusion. The Ministry has submitted that 
coordinated efforts of eco system partners had led to increase in digital payments 
acceptance infrastructure in the country.  This shows that there is a growing 
penetration of digital payments which is a big step towards formalization of Indian 
economy. However, the rising cases of cyber frauds is a big challenge to it.  Online 
financial frauds as reported on National Cybercrime Reporting portal (NCRP) 
constitute more than 60% of the total cyber -crime complaints reported. As per Indian 
Cyber Crime Coordination Centre (14C), cyber fra uds that were reported increased 
by 128% in 2022 in comparison to 2021. This exponential increase of cyber frauds is 
alarming and the Committee see a necessity to have multipronged approach to deal 
with the issues of cyber frauds. With a view to tackle thi s, opining that punitive 
measures are long drawn, time consuming and less effective, the Committee 
emphasize on having a multipronged approach with effective coordination of all 
stakeholders to deal with cyber frauds.  The Committee call upon the various 
Ministries involved to focus on preventive measures to ensure that cyber frauds are 
held under check and the action taken in this regard may be submitted at the 
earliest.  
Reply of the Government 
  ‘Police’ and ‘Public order’ are State subjects under the Se venth Schedule to the 
Constitution of India.  Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA)  is supplementing the efforts of 
States/UTs along with several Ministries/departments by taking action in co -ordination 
with each other. 
Further, the subject matter “Promotion of D igital Payments” is transferred to the 
Department of Financial Services (DFS) as per Gazette Notification dtd. 17.07.2023. 
Based on the inputs from various Ministries/Departments, reply is as under : 
A. Various steps taken by Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA)  in this regard is 
provided below : 
i. Indian Cybercrime Coordination Centre  (I4C) has been  established by 
MHA interacts regularly with various stakeholders like DoT, TRAI, TSPs, 
ISPs, MeitY, Cert -IN, NPCI, NCIIPC, SEBI, Banks, Financial Institutions, 
Intermediaries, etc. for effective coordination. 
ii. I4C carries out the analysis of various cyber threats at regular intervals and 
issues advisories on cybercrime trends, modus operandi with States/UTs, 
Para Military Forces, banks, financial intermediaries and other re levant 
stakeholders at regular intervals. 
iii. For immediate reporting of financial frauds and to stop siphoning off fund 
by the fraudsters, Citizen Financial Cyber Fraud Reporting and 
Management System (CFCFRMS) module has been launched by National 
Cyber Crime  Division as a part of NCRP  (National Cyber Crime 
Reporting Portal  - www.cybercrime.gov.in),. CFCFRMS is a common 
integrated platform where all concerned stakeholders i.e., Law 
Enforcement Agencies (LEAs), banks, RBI, financial intermediaries, 
payment wallets, NPCI, etc., work in tandem; to ensure that quick decisive 

 
17 
  
and system -based effective action is taken to prevent flow of money 
siphoned off from innocent citizens to the fraudsters.  
iv. A Cyber Fraud Mitigation Centre (CFMC)  has been established and set 
up at I4C where representatives from major banks, financial intermediaries, 
payment aggregators, telecom service providers (TSPs), IT intermediaries 
and law enforcement agencies (LEAs) of States/UTs are working together 
to combat cybercrime through prompt action and continuous collaboration. 
The Dashboard at the CFMC (i) alerting about issues that require 
immediate intervention, (ii) monitor the performance of CFMC participants. 
The CFMC help address major cyber financial fraud complaints in near real 
time with the help of all critical stakeholders and resolve operational issues. 
The CFMC serve as an example of ‘Cooperative Federalism’. 
  
B. Various steps have been taken by Reserve Bank of India (RBI)  to enhance 
security of digital  payment transactions (including card transactions, online 
transactions, etc.) and reduce frauds as given below, in addition to the previous 
inputs sent : 
 
i. In terms of RBI circular dated July 24, 2024 and October 5, 2011 on 
Domestic Money Transfer (DMT) framework Reserve Bank has advised all 
authorised payment system participants to undertake enhanced due 
diligence of customers by way of registering them with a verified mobile 
number and officially valid document  (OVD), besides mandating that 
every transaction be validated by additional  factor of authentication 
(AFA), include appropriate flagging of cash pay- in service as cash-based 
remittances. The measures are expected to provide due visibility over such 
remittances and prevent misuse of DMT framework. 
 
ii.      The payments ecosystem (Banks, NPCI, Card Networks, Payment 
Aggregators, Payment Apps, etc.,) have independently put in place fraud 
risk management systems. As these systems are working in silos, they lack 
network-level intelligence across  the payment systems as also real -time 
sharing of data, which can prevent fraudulent  transactions. In order to pre-
empt these frauds, a need for network-level intelligence and real -time data 
sharing across payment systems is felt. It was, therefore, announced in the 
Bi-monthly Monetary Policy Announcement  that a Digital Payments 
Intelligence Platform will be set up by harnessing advanced technologies to 
mitigate payment fraud risks.  This platform will be classified as a Digital 
Public Infrastructure.  To take this initiative forward, a Committee [Chair: 
Shri A.P. Hota, CGM (Retd.,), RBI and former MD & CEO of NPCI] was 
constituted to examine the various aspects of setting up this Platform.  The 
Committee has since submitted a report, and its recommendations are 
being examined by RBI. 
 
C. The steps being taken by the National Payments Corporation of India (NPCI)  
(which operates UPI payment system) to enhance the security of UPI transactions: 

 
18 
  
  
i.      Stringent device binding where a customer’s mobile number (as registered 
with his / her respective bank) is linked with his / her device which ensures 
that transaction cannot be done from any device other than that of the 
actual customer. 
ii.       Use of two factor authentication where a UPI pin is also needed to 
complete the transaction. This ensures that even if a customer’s mobile is 
stolen, transaction cannot be carried out from it since the UPI pin set by the 
customer would not be known. 
iii.       Resolution of a UPI id for the payer to find out actual beneficiary’s name as 
per bank records – this helps the customer to be sure that payment is being 
made to the intended beneficiary. 
iv.       A prominent message is displayed before entering UPI pin indicating to the 
customer that his / her account shall be debited by the amount entered on 
keying in the UPI pin. 
 
(Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology  
O.M. No. 18 (8)/ 2021-DEDPD dated 07.01.2025) 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 3) 
Rationalisation of Micro-ATMs and Banking correspondents in hotspots  
 During the course of examination of the subject, the Committee dealt on the 
various types of cyber frauds that were taking place in the country and were desirous 
to know the details about them and their origin. To this, the representatives of 
Ministry of Home Affairs submitted that there were two major pockets where the 
frauds were taking place within the country and named them as Mewat region in 
Rajasthan, Haryana and U.P. and Jamtara region in Jharkhand and Bihar.  It was 
added that now it had spread to other regions like West Bengal also. The 
representatives of MHA elaborated that frauds committed by Indian fraudsters were 
mainly customer care no. and KYC based frauds; remotely accessing the phone, 
sextortion, largely by Mewat, Aadhar – AEPS frauds, largely from Jharkhand and 
Bihar; online booking, fake franchise, QR based frauds and recent addition was 
writing android malwares al so. The Committee were given to understand that cyber 
scams of local origin were of low value but high volume. Elaborating on the subject 
further, the Committee were informed that Micro -ATMs installed in these hotspots for 
the convenience of general public  were being used for siphoning off money through 
cyber frauds. Exhibiting concern on this emerging pattern of exploiting resources 
meant for financial inclusion and last mile connectivity in rural and remote areas of 
the country, the Committee urge MeitY t o thoroughly look into the matter and 
formulate region specific strategies to arrest reoccurrence of cyber frauds in these 
regions.  The Committee would also like to urge the Ministry to ensure that these 
cyber frauds are dealt with sternly. The Committee would like to be apprised of the 
action taken in this regard. 
 

 
19 
  
Reply of the Government 
‘Police’ and ‘Public order’ are State subjects under the Seventh Schedule to the 
Constitution of India.  Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA)  is supplementing the efforts of 
States/UTs along with several Ministries/departments by taking action in co -ordination 
with each other. The following steps have been taken by MHA: 
i. I4C also provides intelligence support of different types of various LEAs to take 
action against Cyber Criminals.  
ii. Abuse of Banking System by cyber criminals has been on area of intense focus by 
MHA. To identify the highlight the ATMs, Bank Branches holding mule accounts, 
Branches where defrauded money is withdrawn using cheques, I4C’s Samanway 
Platform has utilized PM Gatishakti Platform. Through its Pratibimb Module all 
such banking nodes are being plotted on a map (Geo Located) along with relevant 
Details to facilitate action.  
iii. All the banks concerned and jurisdictional Police have complete visibility of such 
abuse. Banks are being regularly requested to take action against the abuse. 
 
                          (Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology  
O.M. No. 18 (8)/ 2021-DEDPD dated 07.01.2025) 
 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 4) 
Aadhaar Enabled Payment System (AePS) frauds 
 
  The Committee note that the Aadhaar System is a Unique Data Collection and 
Storage System which has enabled the Government to launch Aadhaar enabled 
payment system for financial inclusion in rural and remote areas of the country.  A n 
AePS facilitates customers to carry out financial transactions from their Aadhaar linked 
accounts and biometric authentication. While examining this, the Committee pointed out 
that the cases of frauds using AePS were on the rise.  To this, the Ministry o f Home 
Affairs submitted that biometric cloning was by way of using dummy fingers or rubber 
fingers to withdraw money through the AePS system.  The Ministry assured that they 
were working with Aadhaar and NPCI to put an end to this and they hoped that ther e 
would be reduction in future. Further, expressing concern with regard to security and 
privacy of Aadhaar data of citizens, the Committee pointedly asked whether there was 
any breach of Aadhaar Card Holders’ data. To this, the Ministry has categorically s tated 
that there has been no breach of Aadhaar Card Holders’ data from the Central Identities 
Data Repository (CIDR) maintained by the UIDAI in which the data base of biometric and 
demographic information of Aadhaar is maintained. Further, it was stated th at CERT-In 
received threat intelligence reports regarding sale of personal data with samples claiming 
to be of Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR) and ICMR was notified of the same 
and were suggested remedial measures. It was also added then CERT -In is coordinating 
incident analysis with law enforcement agency. The Committee were apprised that as 
per National Payments Corporation of India (NPCI) Circular dated 26.10.2023, banks 
had been directed to disable AePS services for accounts with No AePS debit  
transactions in the preceding 12 months by 30.11.2023 except for the accounts which 

 
20 
  
had received DBT credits and PMJDY, BSBDA accounts. Among the measures taken to 
prevent AePS frauds, the Committee have been apprised that UIDAI had asked acquirer 
banks to enforce stringent guidelines/checks for on -boarding of Business Correspondent 
agents and Corporate Business Correspondent and to ensure the use of verifiable and 
reliable identity. UIDAI had also suggested for mandatory need of reporting of frauds to 
law enforcement agencies. Taking note that the Ministry had put certain concrete 
measures in place, the Committee urge the Ministry to enforce these measures to the hilt 
so that there would be tangible outcomes. Expressing surprise with regard to submission 
of the Ministry in respect of data breach, the Committee do call upon the Ministry to 
remain vigilant and ensure the safety of Aadhaar Card Holders’ data. Regarding 
intelligence reports received by CERT -In with regard to sale of personal data, the 
Committee may be apprised about the outcome of the measures suggested and the 
finding of the analysis by CERT-In. 
 
Reply of the Government 
The Indian Computer Emergency Response Team (CERT-In) received threat intelligence 
reports in October 2023, regarding sale of personal data with samples claiming to be of 
Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR) and notified ICMR of the same and 
coordinated incident response measures.  
Analysis of the incident revealed certain security gaps that include insecure application 
design and inadequate security controls. Necessary remedial measures were suggested 
to ICMR as below : 
CERT-In recommended ICMR to create and regularly update a clear and documented 
comprehensive security policy, adopt a risk -based approach to security by cond ucting 
regular risk assessments and implementing appropriate controls, ensure security by 
design for application development & operations, conduct security audit by scoping the 
entire ICMR ecosystem, apply proper Authentication, Authorization, and accounti ng 
mechanisms , ensure security practices during the entire data lifecycle i.e, during data 
collection, usage, storage, sharing, archival and disposal. 
The analysis report was also shared with Law enforcement Agency for investigation. 
 
                                              (Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology  
O.M. No. 18 (8)/ 2021-DEDPD dated 07.01.2025) 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No.6) 
Cyber Security Framework  
 
 While examining the Operating Systems being used by financial institutions, the 
Committee sought to know whether these financial institutions were using updated 
software for strengthening security. The Committee were informed that RBI had issued 
comprehensive guidelines as part of Cyber Security Framework, 2016 wherein emphasis 
was laid on maintaining up -to-date security including application of latest patches and 

 
21 
  
not using End of Life/End of Support Software. It was added that the banks had been 
advised to  continuously monitor the release of patches by various vendors/Original 
Equipment Manufacturers and also periodically evaluate critical devices such as 
firewalls, network switches, security devices and so on, so as to ensure that their 
configurations are appropriate to achieve the desired levels of security. It was also added 
that this was being monitored through offsite returns and during onsite IT Examination of 
supervised entities. Outlining the role of nodal officers in Banks/Financial institutions wit h 
regard to financial frauds, the Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology 
submitted that guidelines had been issued by RBI to regulated entities with regard to 
reporting of payment fraud data to Central Payments Fraud Information Registry 
(CPFIR). Elaborating on this, the Committee were informed that all the RBI authorized 
payment system operators/providers and payment system participants operating in India 
are required to report all payment frauds including attempted incidents irrespective of 
value either reported by their customers or detected by the entities by themselves.  The 
guidelines included that the responsibility to submit the reported payment for transaction 
was with the issuer of bank/PPI issuer/credit card issuing NBFCs, whose paymen t 
instruments have been used in the fraud. Before reporting to RBI on individual 
transaction basis, entities are required to validate the payment fraud information reported 
by the customer in their own system to ensure authenticity and completeness. Furthe r, 
the timeline specified was that entities are required to report payment frauds both 
domestic and international to CPFIR within 7 calendar days from the date of reporting by 
customer/date of detection by the entity. Noting the various steps taken by the Ministry 
with regard to strengthening security in financial institutions, the Committee would like to 
know to what extent these measures have been successful in checking financial 
frauds/helped in reporting frauds so as to ensure the customers are put to l east trouble. 
The Committee may be apprised of the action taken in this regard. 
 
Reply of the Government 
Various steps taken by RBI in this regard are as follows: 
i. Central Payments Fraud Information Registry (CPFIR), a web -based payment -
related fraud reporting solution, has been put in place with effect from March 23, 
2020. Accordingly, RBI authorised  payment system operators / providers and 
payment system participants operating in India are required to report all payment 
frauds (either reported by their customers or detected  by the entities themselves) 
through CPFIR. The Reserve Bank has also commenced publication of information 
on payment frauds, from September 2022 onwards , with a view to enhancing 
awareness about frauds. 
ii. Under the Reserve Bank’s Payments Vision 2025, an enhancement in CPFIR has 
been envisaged in terms of creating a negative database of fraudulent 
beneficiaries using the suspect / beneficiary information reported to CPFIR and 

 
22 
  
to share the same with supervised  entities. However, in view of the Supreme 
Court judgement in the case State Bank of India and Ors. v. Rajesh Agarwal and 
Ors (2023), it is understood that the principles of natural justice, particularly the 
Rule of audi alteram partem (opportunity to be heard), would be required to be 
followed by RBI before a beneficiary is identified as “suspect / fraudulent 
beneficiary” and included in the negative registry. 
 
                                              (Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology  
O.M. No. 18 (8)/ 2021-DEDPD dated 07.01.2025) 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 7) 
Cyber Security of Android Play Store  
 
 Dwelling on the incidents of cyber fraud, the Committee pointed out the number of 
incidents related to malwares were significantly higher in Android phones  and sought the 
comments of Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology.  Elaborating on this, 
the Ministry submitted that Android platforms provide side loading installation feature 
which is exploited by cyber criminals for creating Malicious Finan cial Apps.  These apps 
are developed by cyber criminals and sent to victims via links on messengers/SMSs. 
Upon installation of these apps by the citizens, sensitive information of phone like SMS, 
call logs etc gets compromised. I4C, MHA has started maintaining a repository of android 
and banking malwares causing threat to digital payment security.  I4C periodically sends 
hash values of these apps to Google for appropriate action. More than 200 android and 
banking malwares have been identified and shared wit h Google and LEAs. Illegal and 
fraudulent lending apps are found on both Google Playstore and Apple App Store and 
these are being regularly sent to these entities for urgent action against such apps. From 
the submissions of the Ministry, it is seen that MH A has started maintaining a repository 
of Android and banking malwares which are causing threat to digital payment security.  
The Committee would like to know how effective has this measure been in 
containing/checking such frauds.  The Committee would also  like to know the action 
taken by Google and Law Enforcement Agencies with regard to the information that has 
been sent to them for taking urgent action. 
 
Reply of the Government 
More than 250, android and banking related malwares, which were generally cir culated 
through third-party Application Stores, have been blocked, as per the recommendations 
of 14C. All the android malwares notices by 14C are being intimated to Google to patch 
up its android platform. National Malware repository is also being updated.  Intimation 
about the malware is also being shared with other Stakeholders. 
Google Play Store is also misused by cyber criminals to host instant loan applications 
using the names of random Non-Banking Financial Services Companies (NBFCs). These 
instant loa n apps are exploiting users by misusing critical app permissions, and the 
harvested credentials and data may also be used for future cybercrime. More than 130 

 
23 
  
suspicious loan apps have been suspended for violation of Google policy, as 
recommended by 14C through its technical analysis. 
RBI has been requested by I4C to whitelist all mobile apps for instant loan. RBI has also 
been requested to complete the exercise of identifying non -active defunct, non-complaint 
NBFCs, since these are being used for cyber financial for by ‘un-registered entities. 
 
                                              (Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology  
O.M. No. 18 (8)/ 2021-DEDPD dated 07.01.2025) 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 8) 
Compliance to guidelines issued by RBI from Banks 
 
 While dwelling on the issue of regulation of the payment sector, the Committee 
have been informed that Reserve Bank of India issues guidelines related to safe and 
secure digital banking system from time to time to all the Scheduled Commercial Banks, 
Cooperative Banks, Payment system operators and others. RBI also regulates online 
fintech companies involved in Digital Payment sector having no physical presence. 
Further, the Committee have been informed that as per the draft Master Directions on 
Cyber Resilience and Digital Payment Security Controls for Payment System Operators 
(PSOs), shall appoint a dedicated nodal officer(s) to function on 24x7x365 basis for 
instant resolution of unauthorised/fraudulent transactions reported by customers and also 
to facilitate prompt response to Law Enforcement Agencies (LEAs). The Committee 
would like to emphasize on the significance of nodal officers for not only redressal of 
grievances of citizens related to cyber frauds but also for prompt response by Law 
Enforcement Agencies. The Committee would also like to be apprised once these draft 
directions are finalized and issued for compliance. Further, the Committee would like to 
stress that these directions may be formulated wherein lack of compliance of these 
guidelines would be taken seriously and dealt sternly with the Payment System 
operators, banks and other financial entities. The Committee may be apprised of the 
action taken in this regard. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 The updated Action Taken Report is submitted as following : 
 
(i) Master Directions on Cyber Resilience and Digital Payment Security Controls for 
non- bank Payment System Operators (PSOs) have been issued by RBI on  July 
30, 2024. These  Directions aim to improve safety and security of the payment 
systems operated by non -bank PSOs by providing a framework for overall 
information security preparedness with an emphasis on cyber resilience. The 
Directions also cover baseline security  measures for ensuring system resilience 
as well as safe and secure digital payment transactions. 
(ii) Paragraph 27.d of the Master Directions mentions that “The PSO shall have a 
manned facility to function on 24x7x365 basis for facilitating swift resolution of 
unauthorised / fraudulent  transactions reported by customers and also to provide 

 
24 
  
prompt response to Law Enforcement Agencies (LEAs)”, which addresses the 
committee’s emphasis on the significance of nodal officers in terms of not only 
ensuring swift redressal of grievances of citizens related to cyber frauds but also 
for ensuring due engagement with Law Enforcement Agencies. 
(iii) The Master  Directions require compliance of authorised non -bank PSOs with 
regards to Cyber Resilience and Digital Payment Security Controls. The status of 
regulatory compliance by PSOs is assessed by RBI on an ongoing basis including 
during periodic onsite inspection of these entities. Any observed divergence from 
the regulation shall be  suitably dealt with in accordance with the existing 
supervisory mechanism regarding PSOs. 
(Source : RBI) 
 
(Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology  
O.M. No. 18 (8)/ 2021-DEDPD dated 07.01.2025) 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 10) 
Coordination among the agencies involved in tackling cybercrimes 
 The Committee note that in this era of digital India, there is increasing threat of 
online financial frauds, cyber scams and social engineering tactics to extort money for 
financial gains and nefarious motives. Further, there are several methods being 
employed by fraudsters to dupe people. The quantum and magnitude of cyber frauds are 
increasing at an alarming rate. Accordingly, to combat these cyber frauds a 
multistakeholder approach is required to tackle scamsters. The Committee note that 
issues related t o cyber security are diverse in nature ranging from hacking of critical 
digital infrastructure to social engineering techniques to lure people for quick financial 
gains. It is not possible for a single agency to focus on all aspects of cyber security. 
Accordingly, multiple agencies such as MEITY,I4S, DFS,CERT -In, RBI and NPCI are 
involved in promotion of Digital Payments, ensuring cyber security and tackling issues 
related to cyber frauds. The Committee were informed that Indian Cyber Crime 
Coordination Cen tre under Ministry of Home Affairs is the nodal agency which works 
closely with MEITY and CERT -In along with various banks, RBI and NPCI to ensure 
reduction and mitigation of incidents related to cyber frauds. All these organizations have 
taken different i nitiatives at their level to tackle and combat issues related to cyber 
security and cyber frauds. However, the Committee are concerned to note that effective 
coordination among the different agencies which is required to tackle cybercrimes is 
found wanting  going by the rising magnitude of cybercrimes. To fight the menace of 
cybercrimes, better management and coordination among all the agencies involved are 
sine qua non. The Committee would like the Ministry to see the feasibility of having a 
nodal centre wh ich houses representatives of all the agencies and address issues 
holistically.  The Ministry may apprise the Committee of the action taken in this regard. 
Reply of the Government 
 A Cyber Fraud Mitigation Centre (CFMC) has been established and set up at 
I4C where representatives from major banks, financial intermediaries, payment 

 
25 
  
aggregators, telecom service providers (TSPs), IT intermediaries and law 
enforcement agencies (LEAs) of States/UTs are working together to combat 
cybercrime through prompt action and continuous collaboration. The Dashboard at 
the CFMC (i) alerting about issues that require immediate intervention, (ii) monitor 
the performance of CFMC participants. 
 The CFMC he lp address major cyber financial fraud complaints in near real 
time with the help of all critical stakeholders and resolve operational issues.  
 The CFMC serve as an example of ‘Cooperative Federalism’. 
As awareness is the first line of defence, I4C has coll aborated with various agencies 
to generate awareness among the masses against the latest modus operandi of 
cybercrimes and also the helpline number 1930 and the NCRP 
www.cybercrime.gov.in . 
 
(Source : MHA) 
(Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology  
O.M. No. 18 (8)/ 2021-DEDPD dated 07.01.2025) 
 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 11) 
Cyber-attacks on Government agencies  
 The Committee while deliberating on the significance of cyber security of 
Government digital infrastructure in the wake of emphasis on Digital India have been 
apprised by the representatives of CERT -In that attempts are made every day to hack 
government websites. Even the websites of Indian Space Research Organization were 
targeted during the launch of Chandrayaan Mission. The Committee while pointing out 
the issues related to cyber hacking of Government Infrastructure, enquired about the 
number of incident s that have been reported in the last five years in the country. The 
Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology have submitted that a total number of 
110, 54, 59, 42, 50 and 58 website hacking incidents of Central Ministries/Departments 
and State Government organizations were observed during the years 2018, 2019, 2020, 
2021, 2022 and 2023 (upto September) respectively. Appreciating the efforts of 
Government agencies to fight this cyber battle on daily basis with state and non -state 
cyber attackers t he Committee emphasize that the cyber security of Government 
websites and other critical digital infrastructure needs to be strengthened. The 
Committee were also informed that some Government branches/wings/sections are still 
using out-dated Windows in the ir official computer and laptops making them vulnerable 
for cyber threats. Though MeitY has come up with regular guidelines regarding ensuring 
cyber security of Government cyber infrastructure, the Committee would emphasize on 
the adherence to these guidel ines and recommend the Ministry to update entire 
government infrastructure regarding handling of cyber threats. The Committee would like 
to be apprised of the actions taken in this regard. 
Reply of the Government 

 
26 
  
(a) MeitY issued letter directing all centr al Ministries/Departments and State/UT 
Governments to carry out regular periodical audit of IT infrastructure, websites and 
applications yearly or whenever there is a change in any component of IT infrastructure, 
websites or applications whichever is earlier.    
  
(b) To enhance the cyber security preparedness, MeitY issued letter to all 
Ministries/Departments along with the directions to take necessary measures such as 
MAC binding of every PC connected with Network, upgradation operating systems & 
devices with the latest version/patches, removal of obsolete systems / equipment from 
the network, stopping use of pirated OS & applications, etc. 
(c) MeitY issued communication to all central Ministries/Departments and State/UT 
Governments for compliance of the G uidelines on Information Security Practices for 
Government Entities developed by CERT-In, MeitY. 
(d) MeitY has issued communication to Ministries/Departments along with “Guidelines on 
mandatory features of Cyber Security Architecture” to protect their digi tal assets from 
cyber threats. 
(e) CERT -In issued “Guidelines on Information Security Practices” for Government 
Entities for Safe &  Trusted Internet in June 2023. Measures to be taken by CISOs of 
Government departments, suggested by NIC are included in the guidelines.  
 
(f) Steps taken by NIC : 
 
i. For the purpose of effective coordination for implementation of information and 
cybersecurity plans, policies, guidelines and related processes and procedure, six 
Deputy CISOs (DCISOs) across eight critical Ministries/Apex bodies/Departments 
have been deployed by NIC. 
ii. To further augment the capacity of the organizations to handle cyber threats, team 
of Cybersecurity professionals from industry will be deployed at respective 
Ministries/Apex bodies/Departments to assist DCISOs. 
iii. Awareness mailer and advisories are being circulated as when required to 
increase the awareness about Cybersecurity. 
iv. NIC is in the process of setting of a state of the art GovSOC to get complete 
visibility into the cyber threats directed towards Government cyber space and to 
effectively and proactively mitigate such threats. The GovSOC will work 
24X7X365. 
 
(Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology  
O.M. No. 18 (8)/ 2021-DEDPD dated 07.01.2025) 
 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 12) 
Promotion of local players in fintech universe 
 The Committee note that fintech companies, apps and platforms such as 
PhonePe and Google Pay owned by foreign entities dominate Indian fintech sector. The 

 
27 
  
market share in terms of volume of key players of UPI Google pay and Phonepe was 
36.39 per cent and 4 6.91 per cent respectively in October -November 2023. However, 
market share by volume of Indigenous BHIM UPI was only 0.22 per cent in the same 
period. On the other hand, while dwelling on the issue of different modes used by 
scamsters to dupe people and pa rk illegal money, the Committee have been informed 
that fintech companies are being used for money laundering also. During the course of 
evidence, the representatives of I4C gave example of Pyypl app which was being used 
by Chinese investment scamsters mak ing it difficult for Indian Law Enforcement 
Agencies to track the trail of the money collected through scams. The Committee 
highlight that as the magnitude of digital payments increase in India, use of fintech apps 
is slated to increase for digital financi al transactions. In this context, the Committee 
recommend that there should be focus on promotion of local Indian players in fintech 
universe. Indigenously developed BHIM UPI is a good example of it, however it’s share 
in the UPI market is very low. The Co mmittee opine that regulation of Indian fintech apps 
would be more feasible for the regulatory bodies such as RBI and NPCI in comparison to 
foreign entities which have multiple jurisdictions. As India, focusing on ‘Make in India’ in 
other sectors, the Comm ittee are of the opinion that local entities are to be promoted in 
fintech sector. The Committee may be apprised of the action taken in this regard. 
Reply of the Government 
The following updated status report is submitted : 
a. NPCI BHIM Services Ltd. (NBSL) has been setup as a subsidiary and is 
functioning with dedicated focus, leadership and capital infusion since October 
01, 2024. 
b. NBSL has conducted extensive user testing of the app basis which the user 
interface and user experience are being revamped. 
c. The technology stack is also being rebuilt to ensure availability of capacity to 
handle scale. Technology to support 5000 transactions per second (TPS) by 
January 2025 and 10000 TPS by September 2025 is being planned. 
d. BHIM is attempting to increase its collabo ration with banks, which will increase 
the market share of bank apps. 
e. BHIM is attempting to work with specific PSU corridors to increase its market 
share by building new cases. 
f. Through all the above-mentioned efforts, NBSL targets to reach a market share of 
>5% for BHIM by FY 2028. 
 
(Source : DFS) 
(Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology O.M. No. 
    18 (8)/ 2021-DEDPD dated 07.01.2025) 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 13) 
Lack of Punitive measures to combat cyber frauds 

 
28 
  
 While examining the issue of cyber crimes occurring in the Country, the 
Committee have been informed that 10,30,709 Cyber Crime complaints have been 
reported on National Cybercrime Reporting Portal in the year 2023 (upto 15.11.23) which 
is much higher than  the 6,94,440 complaints received in the year 2022.  The Committee 
note that cybercrimes are increasing in the country at an exponential rate. However, as 
per the data furnished by Ministry of Home Affairs the conviction rate in the cases of 
cyber crimes is very low. As per Crime in India (2017 -2021) report published by National 
Crime Records Bureau, as against the 54979 cyber cases registered for trial in the year 
2021, in only 491 cases the accused have been convicted making it only 0.89 per cent of 
the cases registered. Similarly, in the year 2020, 1110 conviction cases were disposed 
off after trial out of 40656 total cybercrime cases registered for trial making it only 2.73 
per cent of the cases which is not encouraging. The Committee therefore are compel led 
to conclude that punitive measures have not been very effective in tackling cyber crimes. 
Expressing concern towards the low conviction rates in the cases of cyber crimes the 
Committee call upon the Ministry to make all efforts to ensure accused in the  cases of 
cybercrimes are brought to justice. The Committee opine that there is an imperative need 
for a statutory and legislative overhaul in the domain of cybercrimes and emphasize that 
punitive measures under the law should act as deterrent for the crim inals. The 
Committee would like to be apprised of the actions taken in this regard. 
 
Reply of the Government 
The inputs by Cyber Laws division, MeitY in this regard are as follows:- 
 
It may be noted that as per entry 36A in the Second Schedule in the subje cts distributed 
to the Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA) in the Government of India (Allocation of Business) 
Rules, 1961 ("(AoBR)"), as amended  namely- the Government of India (Allocation of 
Business) (Three Hundred and Seventy Seventh Amendment) Rules, 2024  vide S.O. 
4254(E) dated 27th September, 2024, the "Matters relating to Cyber Crime" are allocated 
to MHA (a copy of the same is attached herewith and also available 
at https://cabsec.gov.in/writereaddata/allocationbusinessrule/amendment/english/1_Uplo
ad_3934.pdf). Therefore, MHA is the appropriate ministry to deal with matters related to 
Cyber Crime. Further, the newly  enacted Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 (“BNS”) 
(enforced from 1 st July, 2024) is also adminsitered by MHA.  Section 111 of the BNS 
punishes the commission of any continuing unlawful activity including economic offence, 
cyber-crimes, by any person or a group  of persons, either as a member of an organised 
crime syndicate or on behalf of such syndicate. The punishment is minimum of 5 years 
(non-bailable) which may extend to imprisonment for life and fine not less than 5 lakh 
rupees and fine not less than 10 lak h rupees in case death of any is caused.  Several 
other sections under the BNS may also be attracted in case of a financial cyber -crime 
such as sections 316 (Criminal breach of trust), 318 (Cheating), 319 (cheating by 
personation), 336 (Forgery), 178 (Count erfeiting coin, Government stamps, currency -
notes or bank -notes). Most of these sections provide for non -bailable 
offences. Simultaneously, few sections under the Information technology Act, 2000 ("IT 
Act") which indirectly deal with such cyber financial c rimes may also be invoked such as- 
sections 66 (Computer related offence), 66C (Punishment for identity theft), 66D 

 
29 
  
(Punishment for cheating by personation by using computer resource), 66F (Punishment 
for cyber terrorism). All these cyber crimes are now administered by MHA in accordance 
with the above-mentioned amendments to the AoBR. 
 
MHA action in this regard is provided below : 
 
1. A Fast track Court Mechanism may be established to resolve the matter of the 
Cyber crime , effectively & expeditiously in country. 
2. The new acts i.e, Bhartiya Nyaya Saanhita (BNS), Bhartiya Nagrik Suraksha 
Sanhita ( BNSS) and the Bhartiya Shiksha Adhiniyam (BSA) have been 
implemented with effect from 1st July, 2024. 
3. These acts have covered the provisions of electronic evidence : the scope of 
secondary evidence has been broadened and some changes have been made in 
the provisions related to electronic evidence in BSA. Such provisions in new acts 
are helping in the investigation, and prosecution of cyber crime cases smoothly for 
LEAs. It has also provided relief in investigations and trails of cyber criminals 
operating across the States/UTS from one place. Few of provisions are mentioned 
under: 
 The BCA allows oral evidence to be given electronically. This would permit 
witnesses, acc used persons and victims to testify through electronic 
means. 
 Joint Trials: a joint Trail refers to the Trial of more than one person for the 
same offence. The IEA states that in a joint trial if a confusion made by one 
of the accused which also affects th e other accused is proven, it will be 
treated as a confession against both. The BSA adds an explanation to this 
provision. It states that a trial of multiple persons, where an accused has 
absconded or not responded to an arrest warrant will be treated as a  join 
trial. This would lead to speedy trials. 
 The punishment provisions in the Bhartiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 has also 
been enhanced and redundant provisions has been revamped or removed. 
 The new provision under BNS 2023 take significant steps to combat 
cybercrime recognizing its increasing role in organized Crime. Section 
111(1) defines cyber crime as part of organized criminal activities, covering 
offences such as Large scale identity theft, Cyber fraud, hacking, online 
extortion ransomware attacks and oth er digital crimes orchestrated by 
syndicates.  
 These offenses often conducted through sophisticated networks threaten 
National Security , disrupt critical Infrastructure and cause economic harm. 
The law targets not just individuals committing these cyber c rimes but also 
syndicate involved in coordinated cyber attacks involved in coordinated 
cyber-attacks or activities using technology to facilitate unlawful actions. 
 Section 111(2) enforces stringent punishment for cybercrimes especially if 
they result in loss of life or severe financial harm. Perpetrators may face the 
death penalty or life imprisonment along with mandatory fine of Rs 10 
Lakhs. The law also criminalizes aiding in the commission of cybercrimes 

 
30 
  
harbouring Cybercriminals or dealing in proceeds w ith cybercrimes. These 
offences are classified as cognizable and non -bailable, triable by Sessions 
court, ensuring swift legal action against cybercrime syndicates. 
 BNSS had introduced provisions of Zero -FIR, E -FIR, and preliminary 
enquiry before the regis tration of FIR in certain cases which are practical 
provisions required to deal in cybercrime complaints and help in returning 
money to victims. 
 The Bhartiya Nagrik Suraksha (Second) Sanhita 2023 (BNSS -0II) 
mandates forensic investigation for offences puni shable with 7 yrs of 
imprisonment or more. 
 All trials inquires and proceedings may be held in electronic mode. 
Production of electronic communication devices likely to contain digital 
evidence will be allowed for investigation, inquiry or trial. 
 If a procl aimed offender has absconded to evade trial and there is no 
immediate prospect of arresting him the trial can be conducted and 
judgement pronounced in his absence. 
 Along with specimen signatures or handwriting, finger impressions and 
voice samples may be c ollected for investigation or proceedings. Samples 
may be taken from a person who has not been arrested. 
 The new Digital Person Data Protection Act 2023 mandates strict security 
measures and accountability for organizations handling personal data, 
reducing vulnerabilities that cyber criminals exploit for activities like identity 
theft, fraud and data breaches. 
 Strict penalties & Breach Notification: The Act imposes heavy penalties for 
Data Breaches and requires timely notification to authorities ensuring 
quicker responses to cybercrimes and deterring negligence in data 
protection. 
 
(Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology O.M. No. 
    18 (8)/ 2021-DEDPD dated 07.01.2025) 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 15) 
Use of fintech apps/platforms to sensitize users  about safe and secure 
transactions 
 The Committee note that cyber frauds emanating from digital payments are a 
serious issue as it not only results in financial loss to vulnerable but also result in loss of 
trust in the whole ecosystem of digital payments forcing the people to revert back to cash 
transactions. Owing to quantum of this issue, there is an urgent need to tackle it to 
provide safe and secure digital payment ecosystem. The Committee have been informed 
that as precursor to cyber frauds, users fa ll prey to Greed (e.g. Investment scam), Fear 
(e.g. disconnection of electricity/KYC) and Ignorance. The Committee while deliberating 
on the issue emphasized that to address any issue, preventive action is one of the major 
aspect that can really make a difference. Prevention is the first line of defence and one of 
the major preventive actions in tackling cyber frauds can be creation of awareness 

 
31 
  
among the users. The Committee have been apprised by the Ministry about the 
initiatives that are being taken by M EITY, MHA and other stakeholders to sensitize 
people about safe digital transactions on social media and other platforms like mygov. 
The Committee, however emphasize on the generation of awareness regarding the 
fintech apps and platforms such as Paytm, Phonepe and Googlepay itself. Use of fintech 
apps and platforms for financial transactions have increased multifold due to accessibility 
and convenience provided by them. Moreover, these apps/platforms or companies 
operating them run commercial ads to attract  attention of citizens towards convenience 
of using them for financial transactions. These apps also contain details of bank 
accounts and other personal information of individual users linked to them. The 
Committee consider that interfaces of these apps ca n be very significant for generation 
of awareness regarding not only about safe transactions methods but also about bogus 
methods being used by fraudsters to dupe people. The Committee, in view of the 
foregoing recommend the Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology to come up 
with guidelines for Banks/fintech companies/apps/platforms to focus mainly on 
generating awareness in the form of creative, pop ups etc. among general public at the 
interface of apps promoted by them. Further, the Committee a re of the considered view 
that generation of awareness in local/regional languages to users in rural and remote 
areas of the country can curb the cases of social engineering to certain extent. The 
action taken of the Ministry in this regard may be submitted at the earliest.  
Reply of the Government 
 
i.    Apart from the previous shared status, it may be noted that RBI vide its circular  
DPSS.CO.OD.No.1934/06.08.005/2019-20 dated June 22, 2020  on ‘Increasing 
Instances of Payment Frauds – Enhancing Public Awareness Campaigns Through 
Multiple Channels’ has advised payment system operators and participants 
(banks and non -banks) to undertake targeted multi -lingual campaigns by way of 
SMSs, advertisements in print and visual media, etc., to educate their users on 
safe and secure use of digital payments. The Bank further engages  with these 
stakeholders to encourage them to utilize their mobile apps, social media profiles 
and other channels to disseminate awareness related material 
ii. Besides, the Reserve Bank has launched a mission “Har Payment Digital” as part 
of observance  of Digital Payment Awareness Week (DPAW) every year in the 
month of March. This is part of RBI’s endeavour to make every person in India a 
user of digital payments. During the DPAW, Regional Offices of the RBI 
conducted awareness and outreach programmes which also formed part of ‘Jan 
Bhagidari’ events under the Indian G20 presidency. Similar initiatives were 
undertaken by the bank and non-bank payment system operators. 
iii. The Reserve Bank had also initiated a ‘75 Digital Villages’ programme in 
observance of 75 years of Independence. Under this programme, Payment 
System Operato rs (PSOs) had adopted 75 villages across the country and 
converted them into digital payment enabled villages. 
iv. The theme for this year is “Digital Payment, Surakshit Payment”.  The awareness 
programmes aimed at creating awareness around safety and security of digital 

 
32 
  
payments. The goal was to reach out and empower every individual with the 
knowledge and tools necessary to navigate this digital payments landscape with 
confidence and ease. 
 
 
   (Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology  
O.M. No. 18 (8)/ 2021-DEDPD dated 07.01.2025) 
 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 16) 
Institutionalised measures across jurisdictions 
 The Committee during the course of evidence were apprised by the 
representatives of I4C that the cyber frauds are happening both from within and outside 
the country. The international origin frauds are largely done by Chinese actors operating 
from Dubai, Cambodia, Vietnam and Hongkong. These are investment scams which run 
largely through telegram app. Moreover, task based scams, illegal loan apps, illegal 
gaming apps, ransomware and matrimony scams were largely from Nigeria. The 
Committee are concerned abou t the cybercrimes committed from the other International 
jurisdictions in India as it is difficult for the agencies to locate the accused due to 
interspersed jurisdictions. The Committee, therefore recommend that the Ministry may 
focus on proper coordination with Law Enforcement Agencies of the countries from which 
these scamsters operate. Further, the best practices of other countries such as the 
Financial Fraud Kill Chain (FFKC) and FBI’s Internet Crime Complaint Center (IC3) 
both followed in United State s of America may be explored for implementation in 
India as well. The Committee have also been informed that Singapore has 
established an Anti Scam Centre  where representatives of all the stakeholders sit 
together to act on the financial frauds complaints. The Committee suggest for replication 
of such nodal point/agency in India and emphasis on prompt action on the scamsters. 
The Committee would like to be apprised of the actions taken in this regard. 
 
Reply of the Government 
The following Action Taken Report is submitted: 
 
i. I4C is making efforts to enhance cooperation with agencies across the globe 
working in the    area of cybercrime. 
ii. Cyber Fraud Mitigation  Centre (CFMC) is established at I4C, MHA. CFMC will 
serve as an example of ‘Cooperative Federalism” in law enforcement. In October, 
2024 Director (CFMC) visited Anti Scam Centre, Singapore to learn the best 
practices. 
iii. Cyber Fraud Mitigation Centre (CFMC) is established at I4C, MHA. CFMC will 
serve as an example of ‘Cooperative Federalism” in law enforcement. In October, 
2024 Director (CFMC) visited Anti Scam Centre, Singapore to learn the best 
practices. 

 
33 
  
iv. Financial Fraud kill chain is being implemented thro ugh API integration of NCRP 
with Bank’s Core Banking System to identify the money trail and Lien mark the 
disputed amount. This will minimise human intervention and improve the success 
ration of NCRP-CFCFRMS platform. 
 (Source : MHA) 
(Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology  
O.M. No. 18 (8)/ 2021-DEDPD dated 07.01.2025) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
34 
  
CHAPTER III 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS   WHICH  THE  COMMITTEE  DO  NOT  DESIRE  TO 
PURSUE  IN  VIEW  OF  THE  REPLIES  OF  THE  GOVERNMENT 
 
-Nil- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
35 
  
CHAPTER IV 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IIN  RESPECT OF  WHICH  REPLIES  OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE  NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE  COMMITTEE  
AND REQUIRE REITERATION 
 
 
-Nil- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
36 
  
CHAPTER V 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF  WHICH REPLIES  OF THE  
GOVERNMENT ARE INTERIM IN NATURE 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 5) 
Virtual accounts used for cyber frauds  
 
  While briefing the Committee about the various modes of cyber frauds, the 
representatives of MHA submitted that a virtual account was one such issue which the 
fraudsters were using for committing frauds. Elaborating on the modus operandi, they 
submitted t hat one single current account or an escrow account could be mapped to 
multiple virtual accounts. The law enforcement agencies would have no knowledge about 
the happenings through the virtual accounts. They further submitted that the banks had 
to closely m onitor what was happening in the virtual accounts and what kind of 
transactions were taking place in the virtual accounts as this was one of the common 
things that was seen in the investment scam and also in the loan application scam.  
When the Committee s ought to know further details on this, the representatives of MHA 
informed that a person who had to receive or pay money to multiple people would create 
multiple virtual accounts in the account through which he operates. Then using the 
Fintech company from the virtual account at one go, instructions would be issued to debit 
or credit money into all these virtual accounts. The transactions would go through but its 
visibility would not be there. Further, on looking at the transactions, it would be attributed 
to one account i.e. the original account. It was further submitted that these virtual 
accounts were creating problems as there was little KYC for virtual accounts. To a 
pointed query of the Committee, with regard to the necessity of virtual accounts when 
they were being used for cyber frauds, the representatives of Meity submitted that these 
accounts which were provided by leading Indian banks were used to create payment 
aggregator like infrastructure for financial transactions. They further added that thes e 
virtual accounts provided convenience in making fund payments and reconciliation.  
However, the Ministry had noticed that these virtual accounts were used to mask the 
funds trail while making payments and at present were not monitored and could evade 
AML/CTF mechanism. MeitY also submitted that the virtual cards provided by 
International Fintech companies serving as virtual accounts were used to egress money 
out of India using VISA and Master Card network. Given the submissions of the various 
Ministries, the Committee note that there is a very serious lacuna in the banking system 
which is being exploited by scamsters for committing online financial frauds. Taking the 
serious view of the situation, the Committee call upon the concerned Ministries to look 
into these issues at the earliest and evolve a mechanism wherein such misuse can be 
checked. The Committee would like to be apprised of the action taken in this regard. 
 
 
 
 

 
37 
  
Reply of the Government 
Various steps taken by I4C, MHA are given below : 
i. I4C is continuously identifying potential current account that are being misused to 
accept deposits in various organized crime through its initiative Citizen Financial 
Cyber Fraud Management System (CFCFRMS). 
ii. 14C has raised the issue of use of virtual accounts fo r transnational money 
laundering activities by creating illegal Payment gateway/aggregator mechanism 
for committing frauds with the Reserve Bank of India and the Department of 
Financial Services (DFS) in a senior level meeting convened on 14th 
October,2024 and again on 6th Dec,2024. 
(Source : MHA) 
Steps taken by RBI in this regard are as follows: 
i. On April 16, 2024, the Reserve Bank had placed the draft directions on regulation 
of Payment Aggregator – Point of Sale, for the comments of public/stakeholders. 
The feedback received has been examined and final guidelines will be issued 
shortly. 
ii. Prior to this draft direction, the Payment Aggregators operating in online 
(guidelines issued in March 2020) and cross -border (guidelines issued in October 
2023) have alrea dy been brought under the regulatory ambit. With the issuance 
of final guideline, the PAs operating in offline space also will be under RBI’s 
regulation. 
(Source : RBI) 
 
(Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology  
O.M. No. 18 (8)/ 2021-DEDPD dated 07.01.2025) 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 9) 
Rate of recovery and Grievance Redressal Mechanism 
 
  The Committee during the course of examination noted that online financial 
frauds are rising at an alarming rate and in comparison to that recovery made and the 
amount returned to the victim is very low. As per the data furnished by I4C, Rs. 547.14 
Crore amount was lost in cyber frauds in the year 2021 as reported by citizens, however, 
no amount could be returned to victims in the year 2021. Similarly, Rs. 2294.79 Crore 
was lost in cyber frauds in the year 2022 by victims but only .57 Crore was returned to 
the victims in 2022. The Committee have also been informed that the system has been 
successful in blocking/lien marking about 10.4 per cent of the transactions reported over 

 
38 
  
the last 3 years i.e. 2020, 2021 and 2022. Further, the Committee during the cours e of 
evidence raised the issue of complexity of procedure to file complaints and procedure 
involved in retrieving the money lost in the cases of cyber frauds. The Committee found 
that there is a high turnaround time to close the complaint to the satisfacti on of the 
complainant. The Committee note with concern that the recovery percentage in the 
cases of cyber frauds is abysmally low. The Committee would like to impress upon the 
Ministry to take concerted efforts in ensuring that the defrauded money is recovered. The 
Committee have been informed that the fraudulent money hold in the digital ecosystem is 
being refunded through court order, as per the provision of law and there are certain 
issues related to CFCFRMS platform that are being contested in the court  of law. In this 
context, not delving on the legal aspects involved, the Committee urge the Ministry to 
streamline the process of the return of the amounts on lien/frozen to the victims and 
apprise them of the actions taken in this regard.   
Reply of the Government 
I4C is making efforts to automate the response of Banks/Wallets/Financial intermediaries 
through APIs on CFCFRMS to minimize the response time and more fraudulent 
transactions are put on ‘hold/Lien marked’ withing the digital ecosystem.  I4C has 
integrated NPCI through APIs to get immediate response for UPI transactions and 
working with various banks to do so. 
 
To streamline the process of the return of amount marked as Lien, I4C has prepared a 
draft SoP for freezing / unfreezing of bank mute accounts, lien marking of banking 
transaction, refund of money saved on CFCFRMS to the victims, disposal of crime 
proceeds and establishment of effective Grievance Redressal Mechanism. The draft SoP 
was also sent to RBI, DFS, CEIB, FIU, IBA, Banks and LEAs  for taking inputs / 
suggestions. The same will be issued to all concerned stakeholders after approval of 
Competent Authority. 
(Source : MHA) 
(Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology  
O.M. No. 18 (8)/ 2021-DEDPD dated 07.01.2025) 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 14) 
Requirement of specialised cyber staff 
 The Committee during the course of examination highlighted the need for 
specialised and trained cyber staff in monitoring and in law enforcement agencies. To 
assess the current scenario of cyber staff in the country, the Committee enquired about 
the sanctioned strength and current vacancies in the two specialised agencies dealing 
with the issues of cyber security and cyber security in financial sector i.e. CERT -In and 
CSIRT-Fin respectively. In their reply, the Ministry have submitted that CERT -In has a 
sanctioned strength of 142 posts of which 26 posts are currently vacant. Further, CSIRT -
Fin is currently managed by 6 officers of CERT -In and regulators i.e. RBI, SEBI and 
IRDA. Further, proposal for 25 technical posts for CSIRT -Fin has been included in the 
overall manpower proposal of CERT -In which is under submission to Department of 

 
39 
  
Expenditure. The Committee emphasize that cyber security has diverse domains and to 
cater to these domains adequate staff specialised and trained in tackling cybercrimes is 
need of the hour. Therefore, the Committee recommend the Ministry to assess the staff 
requirements of these two nodal agencies viz.  CERT-In & CSIRT-Fin and fill the current 
vacancies at the earliest. The Committee also emphasize that posts in these agencies 
should not be manned by human resource which have general skills but by human 
resource with technical expertise as nature of work is purely technical in nature. The 
Committee have also been informed by the MeitY that as per NASSCOM strategic 
review (2023), demand of 2,21,000 cyber security professionals was identified which is in 
diverse domains of cyber security . The Committee stress that the Ministry should focus 
on the training of staff of Central monitoring agencies and State Law Enforcement 
Agencies to equip them with the necessary skills and talent required to be cyber security 
professionals in order to cater to the rising demand in the cyber security domain. The 
Committee would like to be apprised of the actions taken in this regard. 
Reply of the Government 
Various steps taken in this regard is as provided below : 
 
(a) The proposal for technical posts for CSIRT -Fin has been included in the overall 
manpower proposal of CERT -In and submitted to Department of Expenditure. The 
proposal is being processed by Department of Expenditure.  
(b) MeitY has funded a project title d “Development of Cyber Forensic Training cum 
Investigation Labs in North -Eastern States and Cloud based centralized Cyber 
Forensics Lab Infrastructures ” being implemented by NIELIT Kohima and CDAC 
Kolkata in active collaboration with NIELIT centres’ in Gu wahati, Shillong, Sikkim, and 
Itanagar to deliver training programs for State Law Enforcement Agencies to equip them 
with critical cybersecurity skills to meet the increasing demands in this field. As of 
September 30, 2024, a total of 98 training sessions have been conducted, attended by 
2,485 participants. 
(c) MeitY is implementing ‘ Information Security Education and Awareness (ISEA) 
Project’ for generating human resources in the area of Information Security and creating 
general awareness on various aspect s of cyber hygiene/cyber security among the 
masses. Details of various activities carried-out under the said project are as under: 
 Under the Government officials training component, 28,444 Government officials 
were trained in various short-term programmes in the area of information security 
through direct/e-learning/Virtual Instructor Led Training (VILT) mode, which inter -
alia includes 13,302 Government personnel of Central Ministries/Departments 
trained in one-day Generic Program (12,646) and five days ext ensive Foundation 
Program (656) on Cyber Security.  
 As a part of Awareness activities, 1,867 awareness workshops on Information 
Security have been organized through direct/virtual mode across the country for 
school & colleges students, teachers, faculty, G overnment personnel, LEAs, 
general users, parents, women, CSCs, etc. covering 4,43,364 participants. In 
addition, 1,26,173 school teachers have been trained as master trainers in 43 

 
40 
  
training programs. Besides this, around 7.10 crore estimated beneﬁciaries have 
been covered so far through indirect mode. 
 
 
(Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology  
O.M. No. 18 (8)/ 2021-DEDPD dated 07.01.2025) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
     NEW DELHI; DR. NISHIKANT DUBEY, 
           7th   March, 2025  Chairperson, 
 16 Phalguna, 1946 (Saka) Standing Committee on  
Communications and Information Technology 

 
41 
  
ANNEXURE I 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON COMMUNICATIONS AND  
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(2024-25) 
MINUTES OF THE FIFTEENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
----------- 
 The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 05 March, 2025 from 1100 hours to          
1346 hours in Main Committee Room, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
DR. NISHIKANT DUBEY- Chairperson 
 MEMBERS 
  
Lok Sabha 
 
 
2. Shri Anil Baluni 
3. Dr. Rabindra Narayan Behera 
4. Shri Appalanaidu Kalisetti 
5. Shri Arun Kumar Sagar 
6. Shri Vishnu Datt Sharma 
 
 
Rajya Sabha 
  
7. Shri Saket Gokhale 
8. Shri V. Vijayendra Prasad  
9. Shri S. Niranjan Reddy 
10. Shri Kartikeya Sharma 
11. Shri Lahar Singh Siroya 
12. Shri K.T.S. Tulsi 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Y.M. Kandpal   - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. A. Jyothirmayi                       - Director 
3. Shri Amrish Kumar             - Deputy Secretary 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the Sitting of the 
Committee convened to consider and adopt Two draft Action Taken Repor ts i.e. Fifty-fourth 
and Fifty -sixth Reports  (17th Lok Sabha) relating to the Ministry of Electronics and 
Information Technology and Ministry of Information and Broadcasting respectively under the 
jurisdiction of Committee and to have briefing on the subje ct ‘Impact of Emergence of 

 
42 
  
Artificial Intelligence and related issues’ relating to the Ministry of Electronics and 
Information Technology. 
3. The Committee, then, took up the following two draft Reports for consideration and 
adoption:- 
 
(i) XXXX….XXXX….. XXXX….XXXX….. XXXX….XXXX….. XXXX….XXXX 
(ii) Draft Report on Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Fifty - fourth 
Report (17 th Lok Sabha) on “Digital Payment and Online Security Measures for 
Data Pr otection” relating to the Ministry of Electronics and Information 
Technology. 
(iii) XXXX….XXXX….. XXXX….XXXX….. XXXX….XXXX….. XXXX….XXXX 
(iv) XXXX….XXXX….. XXXX….XXXX….. XXXX….XXXX….. XXXX….XXXX  
(v) XXXX….XXXX….. XXXX….XXXX….. XXXX….XXXX….. XXXX….XXXX 
4. The Committee adopted the Reports without modifications. 
 
5. The Committee authorized the Chairperson to finalize the draft Action Taken Reports 
and present the same to the House during the current Session of Parliament. 
 
6. XXXX….XXXX….. XXXX….XXXX….. XXXX….XXXX….. XXXX….XXXX 
 
The Committee, then, adjourned. 
 
**** 
 
 
 
 
 
 
________________________________________________________________________ 
XXXX….XXXX     Matter not related to the Report. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
43 
  
ANNEXURE II  
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THEIR 
FORTY-FIFTH REPORT 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
[Vide Paragraph No. 5 of Introduction]  
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government:–  
Recommendation Sl..: 1, 2, 3,4,6,7,8,10,11,12,13,15 and 16   
 
13 
 Percentage of total: 81.25 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the replies of the Government:– 
Recommendation Sl. No.: NIL 
 
00 
 Percentage of total: 0% 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and require 
reiteration:–  
Recommendation Sl. Nos.: NIL 
 
  00 
 Percentage of total: 0% 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the  replies of the 
Government are of interim in nature:– 
Recommendation Sl. Nos.: 5,9 AND 14 
 
03 
 Percentage of total: 18.75 
 