 
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
COMMUNICATIONS AND 
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(2025-26) 
 
 
 
EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
MINISTRY OF ELECTRONICS AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
 
 
‘IMPACT OF EMERGENCE OF ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE AND RELATED 
ISSUES’ 
 
TWENTY-SEVENTH  REPORT 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
March, 2026/ Chaitra, 1948 (Saka) 
 
 
 
27 


 
 
 
TWENTY-SEVENTH  REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
COMMUNICATIONS AND  
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(2025-26) 
 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
MINISTRY OF ELECTRONICS AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
 
 
‘IMPACT OF EMERGENCE OF ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE AND RELATED 
ISSUES’ 
 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on.   30.03.2026 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on  30.03.2026 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
March, 2026/ Chaitra, 1948 (Saka) 
 


 
 
CCIT No.439 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
©2025 By Lok Sabha Secretariat 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok 
Sabha (Seventeenth Edition) and Printed by Lok Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi-110001. 

 
 
 
 
CONTENTS 
  Pg. No. 
 COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (ii) 
 INTRODUCTION (iii) 
 REPORT  
 PART-I  
I.  Introductory   
II.  Impact of Emergence of Artificial Intelligence in  the 
Ministries/Departments/Organisations/Agencies of the Government 
 
 A. Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology (MeitY)  
 B. Ministry of New and Renewable Energy (MNRE)  
 C. Ministry of Finance  
 Department of Financial Services  
 Department of Revenue  
 Directorate of Enforcement (ED)  
 Central Board of Direct Taxes (CBDT)  
 Central Board of Indirect Taxes and Customs (CBIC)  
 D. Ministry of Home Affairs  
 E. Ministry of Defence and Defence Research and Development 
Organisation (DRDO) 
 
 F. Ministry of Power  
 G. Department of Legal Affairs (Ministry of Law and Justice)  
 H. Department of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (Ministry of Agriculture 
and Farmers Welfare) 
 
 I. Ministry of Tourism  
III.  India as a Responsible AI Leader  
IV.  Challenges impacting the application, Adoption and Regulation of AI in India  
    IV. IndiaAI Mission : Catalyzing and Democratizing AI Innovation in India  
    V. Other Related Issues  
 PART-II  
 OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS  
 ANNEXURE-I  
 APPENDICES  
1. Minutes of the Thirteenth sitting of the Committee (2024-25) held on 09.01.2025.  
2. Minutes of the Sixteenth Sitting of the Committee (2024 -25) held on     
05.03.2025. 
 
3. Minutes of the Twentieth Sitting of the Committee (2024 -25) held on     
26.06.2025. 
 
4. Minutes of the Fourth Sitting of the Committee (2025-26) held on     05.01.2026.  
5. Minutes of the Fifth Sitting of the Committee (2025-26) held on 27.01.2026.  
6. Minutes of the Eleventh Sitting of the Committee (2025-26) held on  27.03.2026.  

 
Composition of the Standing  Committee on Communications and  
Information Technology (2024-25) 
 
Dr. Nishikant Dubey - Chairperson 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri C.N. Annadurai 
3. Shri Anil Baluni 
4. Dr. Rabindra Narayan Behera 
5. Shri Anup Sanjay Dhotre 
6. Shri Gurmeet Singh Meet Hayer 
7. Shri Sanjay Haribhau Jadhav 
8. Shri S. Supongmeren Jamir 
9. Shri Appalanaidu Kalisetti 
10. Smt. Poonamben Hematbhai Maadam 
11. Ms. Mahua Moitra 
12. Shri G. Kumar Naik 
13. Shri Shafi Parambil 
14. Dr. M.K. Vishnu Prasad 
15. Ms. Kangna Ranaut 
16. Shri Radheshyam Rathiya 
17. Shri Ramasahayam Raghuram Reddy 
18. Shri Arun Kumar Sagar 
19. Shri Devesh Shakya 
20. Shri Vishnu Datt Sharma 
21. Shri Rajesh Verma 
 
Rajya Sabha 
22. Shri Saket Gokhale* 
23. Smt. Priyanka Chaturvedi 
24. Shri Ilaiyaraaja 
25. Shri Amar Pal Maurya 
26. Dr. Sasmit Patra 
27. Shri V. Vijayendra Prasad 
28. Shri S. Niranjan Reddy 
29. Shri Kartikeya Sharma 
30. Shri Lahar Singh Siroya  
31. Shri K.T.S. Tulsi 
 
_____________________________________________________________________ 
Committee constituted w.e.f. 26 th September, 2024 vide Para No.833 of Bullet in Part-II 
dated   26th September, 2024. 
* Shri Saket Gokhale has been nominated vide Para No. 853 of Bulletin Part –II dated 
03rd October, 2024. 

 
Composition of the Standing  Committee on Communications and  
Information Technology (2025-26) 
 
Dr. Nishikant Dubey - Chairperson 
Lok Sabha  
2. Shri C.N. Annadurai 
3. Shri Anil Baluni 
4. Dr. Rabindra Narayan Behera 
5. Shri Anup Sanjay Dhotre 
6. Shri Gurmeet Singh Meet Hayer 
7. Shri Sanjay Haribhau Jadhav 
8. Shri S. Supongmeren Jamir 
9. Shri Appalanaidu Kalisetti 
10. Smt. Poonamben Hematbhai Maadam 
11. Shri G. Kumar Naik 
12. Shri Shafi Parambil 
13. Dr. M.K. Vishnu Prasad 
14. Ms. Kangna Ranaut 
15. Shri Radheshyam Rathiya 
16. Shri Ramasahayam Raghuram Reddy 
17. Shri Arun Kumar Sagar 
18. Shri Devesh Shakya 
19. Shri Vishnu Datt Sharma 
20. Shri Rajesh Verma 
21. Vacant 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
22. Smt. Priyanka Chaturvedi 
23. Shri Saket Gokhale 
24. Shri Sujeet Kumar 
25. Shri Amar Pal Maurya 
26. Dr. Sasmit Patra 
27. Shri Kanad Purkayastha 
28. Shri S. Niranjan Reddy 
29. Shri Kartikeya Sharma 
30. Shri Lahar Singh Siroya  
31. Shri K.T.S. Tulsi 
 
SECRETARIAT 
1.  Shri Harish Chandra Bist  — Joint Secretary 
2.  Smt. A. Jyothirmayi   — Director 
3.  Shri Salil Saroj                          — Under Secretary  
 
_____________________________________________________________________ 
Committee constituted w.e.f. 26th September, 2025 vide Para No.3282 of Bulletin Part-II 
dated  01st October, 2025. 
 
 

 
INTRODUCTION 
  I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Communications and Information 
Technology (2025 -26), having been authorized by the Committee to present the Twenty 
Seventh Report on the subject ‘Impact of emergence of Artificial Technology and related issues’ 
relating to the Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology.  
2.  The Standing Committee on Communications and Information Technology (2025 -26) 
selected this subject for detailed examination and Report to the Parliament. The representatives 
of the Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology deposed before the Committee on 9 th 
January, 2025.  The representatives of the Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology, 
Ministry of New and Renewable Energy, Department of Financial Services and De partment of 
Revenue deposed before the Committee on the subject on 5 th March, 2025. On 26th June, 2025 
the representatives of the Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology, Ministry of Home 
Affairs, Ministry of Defence and Defence Research and Dev elopment Organisation and Ministry 
of Power deposed before the Committee on the subject.  The representatives of the Ministry of 
Electronics and Inform ation Technology, Department of Telecommunications alongwith 
representatives from Ministry of Tourism, Mi nistry of Culture, Department of Legal Affairs, 
Department of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare and Department of Sports deposed before the 
Committee on the subject on 5 th January, 2026. On 27 th January, 2026 the representatives of 
the Ministry of Electronic s and Information Technology, with representatives from Ministry of 
Civil Aviation, Airport Authority of India, Directorate General of Civil Aviation, Bureau of Civil 
Aviation Security, Ministry of Corporate Affairs, Serious Fraud Investigation Office, Dep artment 
of Revenue, Directorate of Enforcement, Central Board of Direct Taxes, Central Board of 
Indirect Taxes and Customs, Department of Personnel and Training and Central Bureau of 
Investigation deposed before the Committee on the subject. 
3.  The Committee at their Sitting held on 27 th March, 2026 considered and adopted the 
Report.  
4. The Committee wish to express their thanks to the representatives of all the Ministries for 
furnishing written information/ views and/ or appearing before the Commit tee, which was of 
immense help in the examination of the Subject and Report.  
5.  The Committee also place on record their appreciation for the invaluable assistance 
rendered by the officials of Lok Sabha Secretariat attached to the Committee.   
6.  For fa cility of reference and convenience the Observations/Recommendations of the 
Committee have been printed in bold in Part-II of the Report. 
 
New Delhi; DR. NISHIKANT DUBEY, 
  27 March, 2026   Chairperson, 
   6 Chaitra, 1948 (Saka) Standing Committee on 
Communications and Information Technology. 

1 
 
 
 
 
REPORT 
Part-I 
(Narration Analysis) 
 
CHAPTER-I 
 
                                                      Introductory 
 
The emergence of Artificial Intelligence (AI) offers a powerful means to overcome 
traditional developmental constraints and drive socio -economic progress at an 
unprecedented scale. AI has proven to be instrumental in supporting inclusive 
development, enhancing public service delivery, refining policy -making, and increa sed 
citizen engagement.AI stands as a cornerstone in India’s efforts to achieve its ambitious 
economic and societal goals, with an estimated contribution of upto $  500 b illion to 
India’s GDP by 2025 . Recognizing the transformative potential offered by AI, the 
Government of India has undertaken concrete steps to encourage the domestic 
adoption of AI in a responsible manner and build public trust in the use of this 
technology, placing the idea of 'AI for All' at its very core. The productivity gains offered 
by leveraging AI as well as its potential to empower citizen participation in governance 
has made it ubiquitous in India's approach to governance and public service delivery. 
 
2. Recognizing the importance of promoting the growth of the domestic AI 
innovation ecosystem, India intends to adopt a balanced approach to the 
governance of AI. Striking the delicate balance between ensuring adequate 
safeguards for protecting citizen interests and fostering innovation is paramount to 
harnessing the full potential of AI while safeguarding against unintended 
consequences. 
 
3. The Government of India is pioneering the approach of harnessing the power 
of AI for social good, applying AI in education, healthcare, agriculture, languages, 
and other critical sectors: 
 UMANG (Unified Mobile Application for New -Age Governance): UMANG 
serves as a unified platform, offering all Indian citizens a singular point of 
access to pan India e -government services, spanning from central to local 
government bodies. The platform provides access to 18 36 vital government 
services encompassing a wide spectrum of areas such as education, COVID -
19 vaccinations, public transport, employment guidance, passport 
applications, utilities, cybercrime reporting, and more. 
 DigiYatra: The DigiYatra initiative, spear headed by the Ministry of Civil 
Aviation, marks a revolutionary step towards leveraging artificial intelligence 
(AI) to enhance the air travel experience for Indian citizens. The DigiYatra 
initiative, implemented through the DigiYatra App, revolutionizes t he air travel 
experience with a seamless registration process. The streamlined process is 

2 
 
expected to enhance airport throughput, providing a more efficient and secure 
travel experience for passengers while minimizing queuing times and 
maximizing the utilization of resources. 
 Digital India Bhashini: Digital India Bhashini (National Language Translation 
Mission) is an initiative launched by the Ministry of Electronics and 
Information Technology that aims to build speech -to-speech machine 
translation systems for various Indian languages and dialects and evolve a 
Unified Language Interface (ULI). The mission will work towards creating a 
'voice-based internet' that is accessible in vernacular Indian languages and 
building multilingualism as well by developing th e next generation of 
'conversational' government apps and websites. 
 NAYAN AI (Urban Governance): NAYAN AI has collaborated with various 
government departments in India, such as Delhi Police, the Ministry of Road 
Transport and Highways, and the Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium 
Enterprises to provide near real -time monitoring of traffic and infrastructure of 
the city. The AI model for infrastructure and traffic monitoring employs 
advanced image recognition and sensor data analysis to detect and report 
issues such as potholes, damaged manhole covers, non -functional traffic 
lights and streetlights. 
 ATMAN AI: DRDO's Centre for Artificial Intelligence and Robotics (CAIR) 
developed ATMAN AI, an AI -based-COVID detection application software 
using chest X -rays (CX Rs) which can classify the images into normal, 
COVID-19 and pneumonia classes using a limited number of sample images. 
This secure, web -based solution was developed to optimise chest X -rays for 
rapid detection of COVID-19 triggered lung abnormalities. 
 AI-Based Attendance Monitoring (Shiksha Setu): The Government of Assam 
has developed a mobile application called 'Shiksha Setu' for recording the 
digital attendance of both students and teachers. Through this system proxy 
attendance has been eliminated, an d teachers who used to either not come 
to school or arrive late now attend punctually. The system has also identified 
and removed 4 lakh ghost students. This has resulted in significant cost 
savings for the government in PM Poshan, school uniforms, and tex tbook 
supplies. 
   
4. Artificial Intelligence is a kinetic enabler to leapfrog traditional development 
barriers and catalyse large-scale socio-economic transformation in the country. AI is 
expected to add 47 Lakh new tech jobs by 2027 in India. AI is expected to add USD 
$ 967 B illion to the Indian economy by 2035 accounting for 10% of the country’s 
USD 5 trillion GDP target. AI became a national priority with the NITI Aayog’s 
National Strategy for AI (2018), promoting AI -driven innovation in healthcare, 
agriculture, education, and governance.Since then India has taken major, formative 
steps towards facilitating the creation of a world -leading ecosystem for Trustworthy 
AI, particularly with the launch of the IndiaAI Mission in March 2024.  

3 
 
 
The success of the government’s initiatives and approach is evident from India's 
rising position in global AI rankings and indexes.  
 
 India is ranked at 4th position in the Global AI leaders  after US, China & 
UK as per the report of the Stanford AI Index 2 024 published by Stanford 
Institute for Human -Centreed AI which is measures a country’s AI 
ecosystem on key indicators including research papers, private 
investment, patents, and more. Our Country has been ranked 1st for AI 
Skill Penetration and 1st in Number of GitHub AI Projects as per the 
Stanford AI Index report 2024. 
 
 Furthermore, i n the Tortoise Global Artificial Intelligence Index 2024, 
India has entered the top ten for the first time, improving its ranking 
from 14th in 2023 to 10th globally.  This remarkable advancement is 
attributed to India's strong and diverse AI workforce, supported by 
favourable demographics and academic excellence. 
 
 Rising Digitisation and Data Potential 
 
 
o India is the largest connected  nation with more than 900 million internet 
users – second largest online market in the world; 
o Implementation of Digital Programmemes is at the Population Scale; eg. 
Aadhaar is the largest biometric ID system in the world 
 
 Large Technical Talent Pool 
 
o India ranks 1st  in AI skill penetration – Stanford AI Index 2023 and 2024 
o India hosts second largest talent pool of highly -skilled AI, machine 
learning and big data talent 
 
 Growing Start-up & Innovation Ecosystem 
 
o India ranks 5th  in the Number of Newly F unded AI Companies by 
Geographic Area – Stanford AI Index 2023 
o India’s AI leadership collectively raised $760 million for generative AI start -
ups in the first half of 2024 (Statista). 
 
 Emerging Digital Infrastructure 
 
India’s notable achievements in the re cently released Network Readiness 
Index 2024 include: 
 
o 1st Rank:  AI Scientific Publications, AI Talent Concentration and ICT 

4 
 
Services Exports 
o 2nd Rank:  FTTH (Fiber to the Home) / Building Internet Subscriptions, 
Mobile Broadband Internet Traffic within the Country, International Internet 
Bandwidth 
 
The government's extensive initiatives such as IndiaAI Mission, Digital India, 
BharatNet, and Startup India , along with its forward -looking Bharat 6G Vision, play 
an instrumental role in positioning India as a global leader in the digital realm.  
 
5. When the Committee asked the Ministry about the roadmap of investments in AI, 
itwas submitted by the Ministry that: 
 “The IndiaAI Mission was approved by Union Cabinet led by Hon’ble Prime 
Minister Shri Narendra Modi ji on 7th March 2024 with a total outlay of Rs. 
10,371.92 Cr for a period of 5 years. The mission is driven by a vision to position 
India as a global leader in artificial intelligence by focussing on seven key pillars: 
i. IndiaAI Comput e: The IndiaAI compute pillar envisions building a high -end 
scalable AI computing ecosystem comprising AI compute infrastructure of 10,000 
or more Graphics Processing Units (GPUs).  
ii. IndiaAI Innovation Centre (IAIC):  The AI Innovation centre aims to develop and 
deploy indigenous Large Multimodal Models (LMMs) trained on India -specific 
data. 
iii. IndiaAI Datasets Platform:  The IndiaAI Datasets Platform (IDP) seeks to 
enhance access, qual ity, and utilization of public sector datasets to make them 
AI-ready. 
iv. IndiaAI Application Development Initiative:  The IndiaAI Application 
Development Initiative aims to develop, scale, and promote the adoption of 
impactful AI solutions to effectively tackle significant problem statements. 
v. IndiaAI FutureSkills:  IndiaAI FutureSkills Pillar envisions augmenting the 
number of graduates, post-graduate and PhDs in AI domain. Further, it envisions 
setting up Data and AI Labs in Tier 2 and Tier 3 cities across Indi a, to impart 
foundational-level courses in Data and AI. 
vi. IndiaAI Startup Financing: For providing support to AI startups at all stages.  
vii. Safe & Trusted AI : This pillar enables the implementation of Responsible AI 
projects including the development of indigenous tools and frameworks, self -
assessment checklists for innovators, and other guidelines and governance 
frameworks”. 
The budget allocated for five years across the seven pillars is as follows: 
Components Total Expenditure (₹ Cr) 
IndiaAI Compute Capacity  4563.36  
IndiaAI Innovation Centre (IAIC)  1971.37  

5 
 
IndiaAI Datasets Platform  199.55  
IndiaAI Application Development 
Initiative   689.05  
IndiaAI FutureSkills  882.94  
IndiaAI Startup Financing  1942.5  
Safe & Trusted AI  20.46  
IndiaAI Overheads and Contingency 
@1%  102.69  
Total  10,371.92  
 
6. When the Committee asked the Ministry about the sectors that are going to be 
impacted hugely by the advent of AI and subsequently its utilization in day -to-day works, 
the Ministry provided the following: 
 
  “Government has published the National Strategy for Artificial Intelligence (NSAI) in 
June 2018 and proposes to develop an ecosystem for the research and adoption of 
Artificial Intelligence. The NSAI emphasizes the potential of AI to solve social 
challenges faced by its citizens in areas such agriculture, health, education, Smart 
Cities and Infrastructure and Smart Mobility and Transportation etc. 
 To build AI use cases for large scale socio -economic transformation in such 
operational areas, IndiaAI has launched the first Innovation Challenge  in August 
2024 to address problem statements in 5 critical sectors , namely, Agriculture, 
Healthcare, Governance, Assistive technologies for learning disabilities, and Climate 
Change and disaster management for 13 problem statements.  
 IndiaAI CyberGuard AI Hackathon:  An AI Hackathon launched in partnership with 
the Indian Cybercrime Coordination Centre (I4C) to create AI -driven solutions for 
cybersecurity has  been launched on 16th October 2024. This initiat ive which has 
received 263 responses, seeks to leverage advanced AI technologies like Natural 
Language Processing (NLP) and predictive analytics to guide citizens in filing 
cybercrime reports on the National Cyber Crime Reporting Portal (NCRP)”. 
 
7. The Committee when asked the Ministry to elaborate upon the role which Al can 
play in contributing towards lndia's economic growth, development and technological 
innovations in important sectors like finance, industry, healthcare, agriculture, and 
education, the following submission was made: 
 “India is consistently leveraging AI to drive economic growth, development, and 
technological innovation across critical sectors such as finance, industry, 

6 
 
healthcare, agriculture, and education through active government support, public-
private collaborations, and significant investments in research and development 
for cutting edge technologies.  
AI is expected to add USD 967 billion to the Indian economy by 2035 and USD 
450–500 billion to India’s GDP by 2025 —accounting fo r 10% of the country’s 
USD 5 trillion GDP target. 
Finance: 
 AI is playing a crucial role in enhancing financial inclusion and streamlining 
banking services in India. AI -powered tools enable personalised financial 
products, fraud detection, and risk assessme nt, making banking more accessible 
and secure for millions of citizens. The adoption of AI in fintech is revolutionising 
digital payments and lending, with platforms like UPI and AI-driven credit scoring 
systems empowering small businesses and individuals with easier access to 
credit and seamless transactions. Additionally, regulatory compliance and fraud 
prevention are being strengthened through AI, as banks and financial institutions 
deploy AI models to monitor transactions in real -time. InsurTech companies use 
technologies such as AI/ML, Internet of Things (IoT), etc. to develop and deliver 
customer-centric and efficient products at an affordable premium by minimizing 
the operation cost. These companies automate underwriting by processing 
customers’ records, reports, etc. to evaluate their risk and develop products for 
them within no time, ensuring faster approval of applications. Insurance 
Regulatory and Development Authority (IRDAI) has played an active role in 
supporting innovation in the Insuran ce Sector with the introduction of Regulatory 
Sandbox in the year 2019. Pension Fund Regulatory and Development Authority 
(PFRDA) has envisioned a project comprising of automation of its internal 
processes, Regulatory and Supervisory framework and Data Ana lytics. PFRDA-
TRACE (Tracking Reporting Analytics & Compliance e -Platform) is expected to 
facilitate efficient data processing, reduction in manual processes, document 
handling, analysis, reporting, retrieval, management, and reorganization through 
collaboration & automated workflows.  
 In December, 2024 RBI announced a C ommittee focu ssed on AI in 
finance is called the "Framework for Responsible and Ethical Enablement of 
Artificial Intelligence (FREE -AI)" C ommittee, which is tasked with developing a 
framework for the ethical adoption of AI in the financial sector.  
Industry: 
 India is integrating AI into manufacturing and supply chain management to 
boost productivity and efficiency. AI -driven predictive maintenance, quality 
control, and automation are reducing costs and improving output in industries 
such as automotive, textile s, and electronics. The government is promoting AI-
based start -ups and innovation hubs under initiatives like  the National AI 
Strategy and Digital India . The India AI mission’s Startup Financing P illar 

7 
 
supports AI startups and innovation by creating funding  mechanisms and 
fostering AI research in universities and industry. 
Healthcare: 
 AI is significantly improving healthcare accessibility and affordability in 
India. AI -powered diagnostic tools, telemedicine platforms, and predictive 
analytics are bridging the gap between urban and rural healthcare services. AI 
supports diagnostics, pati ent management, and operational efficiency in 
healthcare facilities. This can particularly address critical healthcare gaps in 
underserved areas. 
 The government is supporting AI research for disease detection and 
treatment, with projects like AI-based canc er screening and tuberculosis 
detection saving lives and reducing the burden on healthcare infrastructure.  
 India's Ayushman Bharat Digital Mission (ABDM) is catalysing AI to 
revolutionise the healthcare sector by creating a robust digital health ecosystem . 
The mission aims to develop AI -powered tools such as federated learning 
platforms and open benchmarking systems to enhance disease diagnosis and 
treatment planning by integrating AI with digital health infrastructure. 
 Moreover, AI has been incredibly use ful whilst being deployed for 
pandemic preparedness and management, as seen during the COVID-19 crisis, 
where AI models were used to predict outbreaks and optimize vaccine 
distribution, enhancing India’s healthcare response capabilities. 
Agriculture: 
 AI is  transforming India’s agriculture sector by empowering farmers with 
data-driven solutions. AI -based technologies like crop monitoring, weather 
forecasting, and soil health analysis are increasing yields and reducing risks for 
farmers. AI powered precision farming tools, pest and disease detection tools, 
supply chain management tools have potential to enhance agricultural 
productivity and sustainability. 
 The government is promoting AI -driven agri -tech startups to provide 
farmers with real -time insights on ma rket prices, pest control, and irrigation 
management. Furthermore, AI is enabling precision farming and sustainable 
practices, ensuring food security and reducing the environmental impact of 
agriculture, which is crucial for a country with a large agrarian economy. 
Education: 
 AI is transforming education and skill development in India by providing 
personalised learning experiences and addressing gaps in access to quality 
education. AI -powered platforms enable adaptive learning, catering to diverse 
learning needs and improving educational outcomes. Additionally, AI is being 
used to promote multilingual education and vocational training, empowering 

8 
 
students and workers with skills relevant to the 21st -century economy and 
strengthening India’s human capital. 
 Key government initiatives include the establishment of a Centre of 
Excellence in AI for Education, backed by a ₹500 crore allocation, which aims to 
enhance skill development and personalize learning experiences. The National 
Education Policy 2020 emphasizes  integrating technology to modernize 
education, and AI is being introduced as a subject in s chool curricula across 
various States. Additionally, the All India Council for Technical Education (AICTE) 
has declared 2025 as the "Year of Artificial Intelligence ," focussing on integrating 
AI into technical education to equip students with future-ready skills.  
IndiaAI Innovation Challenge 
 Under IndiaAI Application Development Initiative, the first set of 14 
indicative problem statements has been launched on 13th August 2024 calling for 
development, deployment and adoption of AI applications in 5 critical sectors, 
namely, Climate Change and disaster management, Healthcare, Agriculture, 
Governance, and Assistive technologies for learning disabilities. 
 The Innovation Challenge is open to Indian i nnovators, startups, non-profit 
organisations, students, academic/R&D organizations, and companies. Winners 
will receive up to INR 1 Crore as award  and the opportunity to deploy their 
solutions at a national scale.  
 A total o f 900 applications were received.  30 teams have qualified for 
stage 2. Each selected team has been awarded up-to INR 25 Lakhs to build/fine-
tune their solution. Top 3 to qualify for final round and the winners will receive up 
to INR 1 Crore as award  and th e opportunity to deploy their solutions at a 
national scale”. 
8. When asked whether the Ministry  consulted the organizations (public and 
private), which have already started using AI in its ‘Core Business Affairs’ and whether 
any study has been conducted on its impact, the Ministry stated as under: 
 “The Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology (MeitY) in India has actively 
engaged with both public and private organizations that have integrated Artificial 
Intelligence (AI) into their core business operations. MeitY has conducted studies and 
consultations to assess AI's impact across various sectors. 
 The Government has constituted 7 expert groups to deliberate and prepare a design 
document on IndiaAI. The first edition of IndiaAI expert group report detailed out the 
operational aspects of establishing Centres of Excellence (CoEs) on AI, and the 
institutional framework on governing data collection, management, processing and 
storage by the National Data Management Office (NDMO). The report also 
recommends on how India can leverage its demographic dividend and play to its 
strengths as an IT superpower to further the penetration of IndiaAI skills in the 

9 
 
country, strengthening the IndiaAI compute infrastructure in India to support IndiaAI 
innovation through public-private partnerships (PPPs). 
 Under the Safe and Trusted AI pillar, a stakeholder consultation including 
researchers, start -ups, and thinktanks  was also held to evaluate the merits of 
establishing an IndiaAI Safety Institute  to rigorously assess AI  models, evaluate 
risks, and ensure effective safeguards. 
 A multi-stakeholder advisory committee was constituted by MeitY under the 
chairmanship of the Principal Scientific Advisor (PSA) to provide guidance and 
recommendations on India’s approach to govern ance of AI. The report has now 
been published for public consultation  to guide the development of a 
trustworthy and accountable AI ecosystem in India.  
 In January 2025, MeitY, in collaboration with UNESCO and other partners, organized 
a two -day consultation  on AI Readiness Assessment Methodology (RAM) . The 
consultation aims to draft an India -specific AI policy report that identifies strengths 
and opportunities for growth within India's thriving AI ecosystem. This consultation 
involved various stakeholders, i ncluding representatives from public and private 
organizations utilizing AI“. 
 
9. The Committee noted the fact that Public governance and public services is an 
area which needs a major improvement in service delivery,  efficiency and innovation. 
Hence, the Committee asked the Ministry to elaborate upon the role which Al can play in 
enhancing Public governance and public services delivery in the country. The Ministry 
replied: 
 “Public governance and service delivery in India require significant improvements 
in efficiency, transparency, and innovation. Artificial Intelligence (AI) has the 
potential to revolutionize these areas by optimizing decision -making, streamlining 
processes, and enhancing citizen engagement. The IndiaAI Mission has recently 
come up with t he AI Competency Framework for Public Sector Leadership  which 
serves as a structured approach to integrate AI into governance effectively. 
AI is driving digital transformation in governance by enabling data -driven 
policymaking, automated public service del ivery, and efficient resource 
management. Key areas of impact include: 
 AI-powered predictive analytics assists policymakers in resource allocation, 
public infrastructure planning, and disaster management. 
 AI-driven real -time monitoring systems enhance tran sparency and reduce 
corruption in public administration. 
 AI Chatbots & Virtual Assistants: Automating grievance redressal, reducing 
bureaucratic delays, and providing 24/7 citizen support (e.g., MyGov AI chatbot). 
 Automated Document Processing: AI simplifi es verification for government 
schemes (e.g., Aadhaar authentication, tax filing, and subsidy disbursement). 

10 
 
 AI-driven cybersecurity measures help protect sensitive government data and 
citizen privacy. 
 AI-powered telemedicine platforms provide healthcare access in remote areas. 
 AI-based fraud detection ensures fair allocation of welfare benefits under 
schemes like PM Kisan and Ayushman Bharat. 
 AI-driven case law analysis speeds up judicial processes. 
 Automated document retrieval helps courts and legal depa rtments manage case 
records efficiently. 
India AI mission under its IndiaAI Application Development Initiative has been 
looking at developing population scale solutions to address these needs. Under 
the First round of the Innovation Challenge, 30 solutions  were shortlisted under 
Climate, Healthcare, Governance, Agriculture and Learning Disabilities. 
The Government of India is committed to responsible AI adoption, ensuring 
transparency, fairness, and accountability through: 
● IndiaAI Safe & Trusted AI Pillar: Developing governance tools to audit AI 
algorithms and mitigate bias. 
● Digital Personal Data Protection Act (DPDPA), 2023: Strengthening privacy laws 
to protect citizens from AI-driven risks. 
● Inter-Ministerial AI Coordination Committee (IMACC): Overseeing A I deployment 
across sectors for public benefit”. 
 
10. When the Committee wanted to know about the steps taken/envisaged to be 
taken by the Ministry for the domestic adoption of AI, the Ministry replied: 
 “To promote the adoption of AI and to develop a robust, safe and trusted AI 
innovation ecosystem in the country, the Government has undertaken several 
initiatives as follows: 
i). Government has published the National Strategy for Artificial Intelligence in June 
2018 and proposes to develop an ecosystem for the research and adoption of 
Artificial Intelligence i.e. #AI for ALL. 
ii). MeitY has undertaken implementation of IndiaAI Mission which is a 
comprehensive Programmeme for leveraging transformative technologies to 
foster inclusion, innovation and adoption for socia l impact as well as to make 
India a global leader in the Al space and ensure responsible and transformational 
use of Al for All. It aims to catalyze the AI innovation ecosystem in the country 
and help ensure the global competitiveness of India’s AI startup s, researchers 
and industry. The strategy is to bridge the gaps in the existing AI ecosystem viz -
a-viz Compute infrastructure, Data, AI financing, Research and Innovation, 
targeted Skilling, developing foundational AI models, sector -specific AI projects 

11 
 
and institutional capacity for Data to maximize the potential of AI to advance 
India's progress. 
iii). MeitY has established Centres of Excellence in various emerging technologies 
including Artificial Intelligence to explore opportunities in these specialized fiel ds. 
These centres provide start -ups with premium plug -and-play co-working spaces 
and access to the ecosystem. 
iv). MeitY has launched the "National AI Portal" (https://indiaai.gov.in/) which serves 
as a comprehensive repository of Artificial Intelligence (AI) i nitiatives in the 
country. The portal acts as a single point of reference for individuals, researchers, 
and industry professionals seeking information about AI initiatives in India, 
including academic research, startups, policy initiatives, and other relat ed 
information. 
v). GPAI is an international and multi -stakeholder initiative to guide the responsible 
development and use of AI, grounded in human rights, inclusion, diversity, 
innovation, and economic growth. India is a founding member of GPAI, having 
joined the multi -stakeholder initiative on June 15, 2020. Since then, India has 
signicantly contributed to the GPAI goals and objectives and is working on 
various domestic initiatives for the responsible development, deployment, and 
adoption of AI. As one of the largest Global South economies leading the AI race, 
India nominated itself for the position of incoming council chair of GPAI. India 
received more than two -thirds of preference votes and was therefore elected as 
the Incoming Council Chair in November 2022 . India served as the Incoming 
Chair in 2023, then subsequently Lead Chair in 2024. 
vi). MeitY has initiated ‘FutureSkills PRIME ’ a Programmeme for Re -skilling/Up-
skilling of IT Manpower for Employability in 10 new/emerging technologies. These 
include AI, Block chain, Robotics, Big Data & Analytics, IoT, Virtual Reality, 
Cybersecurity, Cloud Computing, 3D Printing and Web 3.0. 
vii). Government has initiated ‘ Visvesvaraya PhD Scheme ’ with the objective to 
enhance the number of PhDs in Electronics System Design & Manufac turing 
(ESDM) and IT/IT Enabled Services (IT/ITES) sectors including AI and Emerging 
Technologies. 
viii). YuvAi initiative for Skilling and Capacity Building : MeitY has collaborated 
with the All -India Council for Technical Education (AICTE) and META, to launch 
the “YuvAi initiative for Skilling and Capacity Building”. This Programmeme aims 
to bridge the AI talent gap in the country by empowering students and young 
developers aged 18 -30 to leverage open -source large language models (LLMs) 
to address real -world challenges. It aims to build capacity in generative AI skills, 
utilizing open-source LLMs while fostering AI innovation across key sectors. This 
goal is to train numerous developers, and entrepreneurs, contributing significantly 
to India’s AI ecosystem across critical sectors such as healthcare, education, 
agriculture, smart cities, and financial inclusion. 

12 
 
ix). MeitY along with CDAC has also initiated a project on AIRAWAT (AI Research, 
Analytics and Knowledge Dissemination Platform) for providing a common 
compute platform for AI research and knowledge assimilation. This AI Computing 
infrastructure will be used by all Technology innovation hubs, Research Labs, 
Scientific Communities, Industry, and Start -Ups institutions with National 
Knowledge Network. AIRAWAT is dev eloped with 200 petaflops Mix Precision AI 
Machine which will be scalable to a peak compute of One AI Exaflop.  
x). MeitY, through IndiaAI, conducted multiple workshops on the use of AI in public 
service delivery. The workshop brought together representatives from central and 
state governments with the objective of helping Ministries and Departments 
assess their data capabilities, explore ways to leverage data for AI applications, 
and identify key problem statements that can be addressed through AI -driven 
solutions“. 
 
11. While replying to the framework of the approach of the Government of India in 
quantifying datasets used in AI, the Ministry submitted in the written reply that: 
 “Quantification of datasets used in AI refers to methods for measuring and 
assessing AI datasets based on their size, quality, diversity, bias, 
representativeness, and relevance. The availability of  high-quality, structured, 
and interoperable datasets  is ne cessary for developing  robust AI solutions. 
Quantifying AI datasets helps ensure transparency, fairness and efficiency in 
development of AI solutions, enabling regulatory compliance and performance 
optimization.  
Recognising data as the foundation of AI so lutions, Government of India, under 
the IndiaAI Mission is set to launch the IndiaAI Datasets Platform —a unified 
platform focussed  on providing Indian startups and researchers with 
streamlined access to high -quality, non -personal and anonymized datasets 
for AI research and innovation. This platform shall enable:  
 Diverse Access : Aggregate datasets  from Ministries, Departments, and 
Public Sector entities; 
 AI-Readiness: AI readiness assessment; Standardized data formats; 
improved metadata quality, and interoperability; 
 Data Discoverability : Secure, structured data repository  to support AI 
research, start-ups, and public-sector AI applications; 
 Sector-Specific Data Curation/Relevance : Curated datasets  across key 
sectors such as  healthcare, agriculture, g overnance, disaster management, 
infrastructure etc”. 
 
 

13 
 
 
12. Replying regarding plan to implement the idea of 'AI for All' while taking into 
account the fact that workforce disruption that AI will bring could render large numbers 
from potential assets to liabil ities if right structures are not put in place , the Ministry 
stated that: 
 “The Government of India emphasizes the concept of 'AI for All,' aligning with the 
Prime Minister's vision to foster and promote the use of cutting-edge technologies 
across the country. Addressing the AI Action Summit at the Grand Palais in Paris, 
the Prime  Minister said, "Loss of jobs is AI's most feared disruption, but 
history has shown that work does not disappear due to technology, only its 
nature changes. We need to invest in skilling and re -skilling our people for 
an AI-driven future." 
Aligning with th e vision of PM Modi, G overnment of India aims to ensure that AI 
benefits all sectors of society, driving innovation and growth. The Government is 
committed to harnessing the power of Artificial Intelligence (AI) for the good of our 
people in sectors like h ealthcare, agriculture, education, Governance, DPI and 
others. Some of the initiatives by the Government of India to meet the growing 
demand for professionals in emerging fields like data science and Artificial 
Intelligence (AI) are as under: 
 MeitY has ini tiated ‘FutureSkills PRIME’  a Programmeme for Re -skilling/Up-
skilling of IT Manpower for Employability in new/emerging technologies namely 
Artificial Intelligence, Robotic Process Automation, Augmented/Virtual Reality, 
Internet of Things, Big Data Analytic s, Additive Manufacturing/ 3D Printing, Cloud 
Computing, Social & Mobile, Cyber Security, and Blockchain. Under the Future  
Skills Prime Programmeme, there are 157 courses specifically focus sed on the 
cutting-edge fields of Artificial Intelligence (AI). In which, so far 1.68 Lakh+ 
individuals have been trained in various AI -related courses. Also, 2994 
Government Officials have been trained in AI under the said Programmeme. 
 IndiaAI FutureSkills  Pillar of the IndiaAI Mission envisions augmenting the 
number of graduate and post -graduate in AI domain by awarding IndiaAI 
fellowship to B.Tech and M.Tech students of all the All-India Council for Technical 
Education (AICTE) recognized engineering insti tutions. Further, top NIRF ranked 
research institutes were approached to intake new PhD scholars under IndiaAI 
PhD fellowship.  
 Additionally, Under the IndiaAI FutureSkills, IndiaAI Data Labs  are being setup 
as infrastructure in Tier 2 and Tier 3 cities ac ross India, to impart foundational -
level courses in Data and AI such as Annotation, Data Cleaning, Data Analytics, 
etc. IndiaAI has established one model IndiaAI Data Lab on National Institute of 
Electronics & Information Technology ’s (NIELIT’s) premises a t Karkardooma 
Institutional Area, Delhi which will act as a reference point for the infrastructure to 
be set up as a part of the initiative. Additionally, IndiaAI in collaboration with 

14 
 
NIELIT is establishing 27 IndiaAI data labs in Tier 2 and Tier 3 cities  across the 
country.  
 National e -Governance Division (NeGD), MeitY in collaboration with industry 
partners (Intel & Meta), has launched ‘YUVAi: Youth for Unnati and Vikas with 
AI’- A National Programmeme for School Students with an objective of enabling 
school students from classes 8 th to 12 th with AI tech and social skills in an 
inclusive manner. A total of 1200+ students were oriented on the basics of AI and 
the top 200 students were shortlisted. Further, in next phase of the 
Programmeme MeitY along with All-India Council for Technical Education 
(AICTE) targets to empower 100,000 students and young developers aged 18 -30 
across critical sectors such as healthcare, education, agriculture, smart cities, 
and financial inclusion. Additionally, this initiative w ill also include the 
establishment of a Gen AI Resource Hub with courses, case studies, and open 
datasets; an LLM for Young Developers Course designed by Meta; and Master 
Training Activation Workshops to introduce participants to foundational AI 
concepts. 
 IndiaAI, IBD under the  Digital India Corporation, has signed a Memorandum of 
Understanding (MoU) with  Microsoft in January 2025 to drive t he adoption and 
development of Artificial I ntelligence (AI) in India. This strategic partnership is 
aligned with the c ore objectives of India AI Mission. This collaboration aims to 
train 5,00,000 individuals, including students, educators, developers, government 
officials, and women entrepreneurs, by 2026. Microsoft under this collaboration 
will also  establish "AI Catalys ts- Centre of Excellence”, to promote rural  AI 
innovation in Tier  2 and Tier 3 cities  and equip 1 ,00,000 AI innovators and 
developers through hackathons, community building. Additionally, Microsoft will 
also set up  AI Productivity Labs  in 20 National Skill Training Institutes 
(NSTIs)/NIELIT centres across 10 States to train 20,000 educators and empower 
100,000 students with foundational AI courses in 200 Industrial Training Institutes 
(ITIs). 
 MeitY has launched Visvesvaraya PhD Scheme in 2014, with the objective of 
enhancing the number of PhDs in the country to compete globally in the 
knowledge intensive sectors of Electronics System Design and Manufacturing 
(ESDM) and IT/IT Enabled Services (IT/ITES). Under the scheme, financial 
support is provided to Full -time & Part -time PhD candidates and Young Faculty 
who are undertaking research and technology development. The Scheme also 
provides infrastructure support to institutions. Under the Visvesvaraya PhD 
Scheme: Phase -I (2014 -2023), a total of 1423 PhD candidates have been 
supported. With the objective of covering more scholars, Phase - II of 
Visvesvaraya PhD Scheme (2021 -2030) has been initiated for a duration of 9 
years to support 1000 Full -time PhD candidates, 150 Part -time PhD candidates, 
50 Young Faculty Research Fellowships and 225 Post-Doctoral Fellowships.  
 Government has launched Responsible AI for Youth 2022 . The Programmeme 
was designed to reach out to students from Government schools on pan India 

15 
 
basis and provide them with an opportun ity to become part of the skilled 
workforce in an inclusive manner. The Programmeme impacted 52000+ students 
across 35 States and UTs, empowering youth with necessary AI skill sets, who 
had limited or no access to the latest technologies and resources, and  2,536 
teachers from 2,252 schools were oriented on the basic knowledge of AI“. 
 
13. The Committee, when asked to brief  on the progress made so far under projects 
like machine unlearning, synthetic data generation for bias mitigation, AI bias mitigation 
in hea lthcare systems and AI algorithm audition tools, the Ministry furnished the 
following reply: 
 “A call for Expression of Interest (EOI) for building tools and frameworks on 
Responsible AI, with a focus on 10 themes was launched and over 2000 
responses were received for the first Expression of Interest (EoI) from which eight 
Responsible AI Projects has been selected. 
The themes and the details of the winners under each theme can be found in the 
table below: 
THEME PROJECT TITLE ORGANISATION(S) 
Machine 
Unlearning 
Machine Unlearning in 
Generative Foundation 
Models 
IIT, Jodhpur 
Synthetic Data 
Generation 
Design and Development of 
Method for Generating 
Synthetic Data for Mitigating 
Bias in Datasets and 
Framework for Mitigating 
Bias in ML Pipeline for 
Responsible AI 
IIT, Roorkee 
AI Bias Mitigation Development of 
Responsible Artificial 
Intelligence for Bias 
Mitigation in Healthcare 
Systems 
NIT, Raipur 
Algorithm 
Auditing Tools 
ParakhAI - An open-source 
framework and toolkit for 
Participatory Algorithmic 
Auditing 
Civic Data Labs 
As part of the “Synthetic Data Generation” theme, the project “Design and 
Development of Method for Generating Synthetic Data for Mitigating Bias in 
Datasets and Framework for Mitigating Bias in ML Pipeline for Responsible AI” 

16 
 
led by IIT Roorkee has developed an initial pre -processing method to balance 
training datasets based on class labels and sensitive attributes.” 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

17 
 
CHAPTER- II 
 
Impact of Emergence of Artificial Intelligence in the 
Ministries/Departments/Organisations/Agencies of the Government 
 
A. Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology (MeitY) 
 
14. As the proliferation of AI in citizen -centric public services accelerates, the 
imperative for establishing robust ethical guardrails becomes increasingly evident to 
safeguard against potential misuse and ensure responsible deployment. To ensure that 
adequate guardrails are in place to protect citizens, India is adopting a multi -stakeholder 
approach to design and adopt policie s, and legal mechanisms for the development, 
deployment, and use of AI that is safe and accessible for all. India, as the largest Global 
South economy leading the AI race, stands in a unique position to lead efforts towards 
global cooperation on AI, ensuring that the global discourse around AI is more balanced, 
and inclusive, and takes into account the needs and priorities of the Global South. 
 
15.       India – AI Impact Summit 2026 
India hosted the India - AI Impact Summit from 16 to 20  February 2026 at Bhara t 
Mandapam, New Delhi, focussing on impact of AI on People, Planet, and Progress  
and it was the fourth in a series of global AI summits. The Summit was guided by the 
three aforementioned Sutras and the seven Chakras – Human Capital; Inclusion for 
Social Empowerment; Safe & Trusted AI; Resilience, Innovation & Efficiency;  Science, 
Democratizing AI Resources; and Economic Growth & Social Good. 
The India – AI Impact Summit 2026 featured a series of flagship initiatives, including 
the AI Pitch Fest (UDAAN); Global Innovation Challenges for Youth, Women, and Other 
Participants; Research Symposium; and the AI Expo. 
16. As AI capabilities and diffusion accelerate, participating organizations rec ognize 
the importance of collaborating with a wide range of stakeholders, including 
governments and civil society to a) promote greater understanding of AI usage and its 
impacts to advance evidence based policymaking, and readiness for technological 
change; and b) broaden access to AI’s transformative benefits across languages, 
cultures, and use cases, including through improving context -relevant multilingual 
evaluation techniques. To the extent practicable and appropriate, participating 
organizations will report progress on the New Delhi Frontier AI Impact commitments 
outlined below through established transparency mechanisms, such as the Hiroshima AI 
Process Reporting Framework. 
 
17. Commitment 1: Advance Analysis on Real -World AI Usage : Participating 
organizations recognize that building rich measures of where and how AI is diffusing 
across the global economy helps to (a) shed light on the future of work and human -AI 
collaboration; (b) support the development of evidence -based policymaking in areas 

18 
 
such as workforce development and education; (c) enable meaningful comparison over 
time: and (d) help advance adoption and opportunity. Outcome 1: Participating 
organizations will work to enhance analysis regarding global AI adoption for economic 
purposes. Consistent with user privacy commitments, organizations will: Publish - by the 
next AI Summit - statistical insights derived from anonymised, aggregated and 
taxonomized usage data, either directly or (where relevant) through contributions to 
international efforts. 
 
18. Commitment 2: Strengthen Multilingual and Use -Case Evaluations Participating 
organizations recognize that cross -lingual support is helpful for democratizing AI and 
aspire to improve AI performance and high -quality experiences for users across the 
globe. Fu rthermore, they recognize the value of partnerships with governments and 
local ecosystems that have or may develop datasets and expertise that support the 
evaluation of AI systems for local cultural contexts and use cases. Outcome 2: 
Participating organizations will work to advance the evaluation of AI systems for global 
contexts. They will: 1) Evaluate multilingual capabilities on a subset of languages and 
cultural contexts while preserving flexibility on the choice of tools, benchmarks, as well 
as AI syst ems prioritised for this work. 2) Collaborate with local ecosystems for the 
development and application of evaluations for under -represented languages and 
cultural contexts. 
 
 
19. When asked about the key AI Programmemes/initiatives launched and being 
implemented by Central Government and various State Governments in India in the field 
of Electronics & IT Sector, Home Affairs and Internal Security, Defence sector and 
Power sector and to provide details and the current progress status, the Ministry of 
Electronics and Information Technology submitted: 
 “India has launched a comprehensive set of AI Programmemes and initiatives at 
both the central and state levels, aiming to position the country as a global leader in 
artificial intelligence while ensuring inclusive growth and societal transformation.  
 Government of India had published the National Strategy for Artificial 
Intelligence in June 2018 which proposed to develop an ecosystem for the 
research and adoption of Artificial Intelligence. In similar efforts, MeitY  had 
created 7 expert groups on AI who published IndiaAI 2023 Expert Working 
Groups Report- First Edition AI in Oct 2023 focussing on a precise and cohesive 
strategy to bridge the gaps in existing AI ecosystem viz -a-viz Compute 
infrastructure, Data, AI financing, Research and Innovation, targetted Skilling and 
institutional capacity for Data to maximize the potential of AI for advancing India’s 
progress. 
 The Union Cabinet had approved the IndiaAI Mission on March 7, 2024. IndiaAI 
Mission aims to propel innovation and build domestic capacities to ensure the 
tech sovereignty of India. IndiaAI Mission comprises of 7 pillars namely - IndiaAI 

19 
 
Compute Capacity, IndiaAI Innovation Centre (IAIC), IndiaAI Dataset P latform, 
IndiaAI Application Development Initiative (IADI), IndiaAIFutureSkills, IndiaAI 
Startup Financing, Safe & Trusted AI.  
 The IndiaAI Mission stands out as the national flagship initiative. Launched with a 
budget of ₹10,371.92 crore, this mission foc usses on building a robust AI 
ecosystem. It covers critical areas such as compute infrastructure, datasets, 
innovation, skilling, startup support, and the promotion of ethical AI. In its first 
year, IndiaAI Mission had already: 
a. Established national compute power exceeding 34,000 GPUs. 
b. Initiated 4 foundation models from SARVAM AI, Soket AI, Gnani ai and 
Gan AI.  
c. Selected 30 AI solutions in the domain of Healthcare, Agriculture, 
Governance, Assistive Learning Technologies and Climate & Disaster 
Management and 
d. Building 8 solutions for Safe and Trusted AI.  
e. Launched AI Safety Institute 
f. Launched AIKo sh the unified datasets platform with more than 1000 
datasets and 200 models already available on the platform 
g. 200+ Fellowships granted to UG, PG and PhD scholars 
h. Establishing 27 Data and AI Labs in Tier 2 and Tier 3 cities, expanding 
opportunities for AI education and innovation beyond major urban centres 
 Under the IndiaAI Mission the Centre for Generative AI, Srijan ( सृजन), was 
established at IIT , Jodhpur in collaboration with Meta. This centre focus ses on 
advancing open-source AI in India, supporting the development of indigenous AI 
applications and research capabilities. Complementing this is the YuvAI Initiative 
for Skilling and Capacity Buildin g, launched in partnership with the All India 
Council for Technical Education (AICTE). YuvAI aims to empower students and 
young professionals with skills in AI research, development, and responsible 
deployment, ensuring a steady pipeline of AI talent for the country. 
 The National e -Governance Division (NeGD ) has launched the ‘Artificial 
Intelligence in Governance’  Training Programme at IIT, Delhi. This initiative 
aims to equip government officials with the knowledge and skills to responsibly 
harness AI in p ublic administration, covering policy frameworks, ethical 
considerations, and practical applications in service delivery 
 BharatGen - an open -source, multilingual, India -centric foundation model. 
Funded by the Department of Science and Technology, BharatGen  aims to 
reduce reliance on foreign AI models and foster public -private partnerships. It 

20 
 
was launched in September 2024, with completion targeted for 2026, and is 
supported by the IndiaAI Compute Facility and major cloud providers. 
 The Digital India Bhashi ni initiative  is focussed on language technology, 
providing AI -driven solutions for all 22 scheduled Indian languages. It enables 
voice-based access to digital services and content creation, with over 350 AI -
based language models and more than 17 language services already 
operational, in collaboration with over 70 research institutes. 
 AI Centres of Excellence:  The Department of Higher Education, Ministry of 
Education, has established three Centres of Excellence (CoEs) in Artificial 
Intelligence with a focus  on advancing research and innovation in Healthcare, 
Agriculture, and Sustainable Cities. These CoEs are part of the government’s 
vision to “ Make AI in India and Make AI work for India,”  and represent a 
strategic step to strengthen India’s global position in AI -driven research and 
innovation. Furthermore, in the education sector, a new Centre of Excellence in 
AI for Education has been announced with a ₹500 crore allocation in the Union 
Budget 2025 –26. This centre aims to drive personalized learning and skil l 
development, fostering collaboration between academia and industry to develop 
AI-driven educational solutions. 
 AIRAWAT PARAM Sidhi:  MeitY has initiated a pilot project on AIRAWAT (AI 
Research, Analytics, and Knowledge Dissemination Platform)  for providing a 
common compute platform for AI research and knowledge assimilation. 
AIRAWAT along with Param Siddhi AI constitutes 410 petaflops Mix Precision AI 
Machine and has secured 75th position in Top500 Global Supercomputing List. 
Through AIRAWAT the Government  of India wants to provide accessibility to 
compute infrastructure to the AI startup ecosystem in the country. Empowering 
startups, MSMEs, industries, and research/academic institute  will enable the 
creation of indigenous AI -based solutions tailored to sol ve India’s real -life 
challenges with cutting-edge computational resources. 
 Under the Visvesvaraya PhD Scheme of MeitY : Phase-I (2014-2023), a total of 
1423 PhD candidates have been supported. With the objective of covering more 
scholars, Phase- II of Visvesvaraya PhD Scheme (2021 -2030) has been initiated 
for duration of 9 years to support 1000 Full -time PhD candidates, 1 50 Part-time 
PhD candidates, 50 Young Faculty Research Fellowships and 225 Post -Doctoral 
Fellowships.  
 The FutureSkills Prime platform, a joint endeavour by the Government of India 
and the Industry, is a significant step towards democratizing access to AI skills.  
Offering courses in 10 emerging areas such as Cloud Computing and Artificial 
Intelligence, the platform provides mid-career professionals with an opportunity to 
upskill/re-skill. 
 The Central Board for Secondary Education (CBSE), in partnership wit h Intel, 
offers the free “AI for All”  online course. Designed for learners with little or no 

21 
 
prior knowledge of AI, it has reached over 3 million pe ople available in 11 
languages. The course aligns with the National Education Policy’s aim to prepare 
everyone for an AI-driven economy. 
 The India Semiconductor Mission , with a budget of ₹76,000 crore, underpins 
the hardware needs of the AI ecosystem, with six major projects approved and 
five under construction as of May 2025. 
 At the state level, several governm ents have launched their own targeted AI 
missions and policies.  
a. Tamil Nadu has initiated the Tamil Nadu Artificial Intelligence Mission 
(TNAIM), a five-year plan to make the state a national AI hub, focussing on 
social good, e-governance, and economic development.  
b. Andhra Pradesh is collaborating with Google to develop Amaravati as an 
AI city, with a focus on agriculture, healthcare, skill development, and 
sustainability.  
c. Karnataka has introduced the Shiksha Co-pilot, a generative AI -powered 
assistant for teachers, and a policy to attract 500 Global Capability 
Centres, aiming to create 3,50,000 jobs by 2029.  
d. Telangana has launched its own Telangana AI Mission a conscious 
strategy backed with the right investm ents to develope Hyderabad as a 
global AI Innovation hub. It has partnered with Meta to enhance e -
governance using generative AI and is planning an AI -centric World Trade 
Centre in Hyderabad.  
e. Odisha recently approved its AI Policy -2025, establishing a mis sion with a 
two-tier governance structure to drive AI adoption across health, 
agriculture, education, disaster management, and governance, with an 
emphasis on ethical AI and data governance.  
f. Maharashtra has launched the MahaAgri -AI 2025–29 policy to suppo rt AI-
driven agriculture and related technologies, and has signed an MoU with 
Google to promote AI in agriculture, healthcare, and education, including 
the creation of a Centre of Excellence in AI, IoT, robotics, and Industry 
4.0.” 
 
20. When the Committee sought to know about existence of any Inter-Ministerial Co-
ordination Committee for AI planning and implementation created, the Ministry replied 
as under: 
 
 “Recognizing AI’s transformative potential across various sectors, a multistake 
holder committee to synergize AI initiatives ac ross Government of India has been  

22 
 
constituted under the chairmanship of the Principal Scientific Adviser ( PSA) on 2nd 
June 2025. The Committee’s terms of reference include: 
i) To map and review the existing AI initiatives undertaken  by various Ministries, 
Departments and institutions: 
ii) To identify areas of potential convergence, synergy, and collaboration: 
iii) To recommend mechanisms for coordination, standardization, andknowledge -
sharing among different Government AI initiatives; and 
iv) To avoid duplication of efforts and ensure optimal use of resources.” 
 
21. When the Ministry was asked about collaborations, if any, with other countries 
and International organizations by Government of India in the field of AI development, 
funding and R&D, the following was submitted: 
 
 “India AI Mission is being implemented by the Government of India with the 
objective of addressing key issues that can help India take the global leadership in 
building applications using AI. To achieve these ambitious goals, the Government of 
India has act ively pursued collaborations with various countries and international 
organizations. Some of the key partnerships include MoUs with Intel, Microsoft, Meta, 
Japan International Cooperation Agency (JICA), Gates Foundation, IBM, Data.org, Intel, 
OpenAI, Wadhwani AI etc. These partnerships will enable development of indigenous AI 
applications, advance skill development in AI, boost research capabilities, build Indic 
datasets, support Indian AI Startups etc. with the aim of contributing to India’s AI 
mission to ensure tech sovereignty and the vision of building AI solutions that are tailor 
made for India. 
Further, t he IndiaAI Mission, in collaboration with Station F (Paris, France) and HEC 
Paris, announced an ambitious acceleration Programme for Indian AI startup s. This 
Programme aims to support 10 Indian AI startups, as a cohort, in scaling globally by 
leveraging the European market’s vast opportunities. Through this partnership, selected 
startups have  undergone a 4 -month immersive onsite acceleration Programme at 
Station F, the world’s largest startup campus. The Programme, designed by HEC Paris, 
Europe’s leading business school, provided startups with unparalleled access to 
resources, mentorship and networking opportunities.” 
 
22. While responding to the query about  impact on the economy of India d ue to fast 
changing landscape and ever changing technologies owing to emergence of A I in all 
walks of life, the Ministry stated that: 
                      
 “Artificial Intelligence (AI) is fast moving from hype to a reality in our day -to-day 
life. Insights from the RBI Director General and reports from EYand Accenture s uggests 

23 
 
that by early-2030s AI could add upto $359 bn -$438 bn to India's GDP  equivalent to 5-
7% of baseline GDP,  t o India’s economic output. The adoption of AI in production 
processes by Indian firms has risen from 8 per cent in 2023 to 25 per cent in 2024. To 
meet the potential India needs to accelerate adoption of AI while managing risks to jobs, 
enduring skill development, and focus on inclusion of all. 
Additionally, ICRIER econometric work finds a unit rise in AI intensity lifts the Total 
Factor Productivity (Measure of how efficiently inputs like labour and capital are used to 
produce output) to 0.3% in India’s to p firms, implying $67 -70 bn immediate value.There 
are several factors that play an important contribution in India’s advantage in AI. 
Also, the Government of India has approved the IndiaAI Mission in March of 2024. 
₹10,300 crore have been allocated over a period of five years. The IndiaAI Mission aims 
to create a robust ecosystem that accelerates AI innovation through strategic initiatives 
and collaborations spanning both public and private domains. The mission aims to 
democratize access to computing resources, enhance data quality, nurture home  grown 
AI expertise, foster industry partnerships, support startup ventures, promote socially 
impactful AI projects, and emphasizing ethical practices, the mission seeks to foster 
responsible and inclusive growth within India’s AI landscape.  
The availability and adoption of World -class digital public infrastructure such as 
Aadhaar, UPI and ONDC lowers data -sharing friction and transaction costs and  provide 
an ideal testbed for AI deployment. 
A youthful, tech -savvy wor kforce—median age 29 —supplies 1.4 million IT graduates 
annually, the largest AI-talent base outside the US and China. 
Additionally, a significant impact is estimated in the below industry sectors - 
1. Financial services: With a rise in digital payments, it is  estimated that AI ‐led credit 
scoring and fraud analytics will add to NPA risk. 
2. Manufacturing: Gen-AI-driven design plus predictive maintenance could raise factory 
efficiency by10-15% and add $200 bn Gross Value by 2030. 
3. Agriculture: AI weather analytics and drone-based phenotyping can lift yields 8 -10%, 
narrowing the 30% food-supply chain loss. 
4. Healthcare: Start-up diagnostics/tele-ICU platforms forecast $6 -7 bn cost savings by 
2030 while expanding rural reach. 
 In terms of the labour market, EY’s report s tates that 42% of tasks will be augmented 
with AI and 24% will be fully automated. Around 38 million jobs are expected to be 
transformed by 2030 due to AI. 
Bain projects 2.3 million new AI positions by 2027. However, the present talent supply 
(~1.2 million) falls short, leaving 1.1 million-plus gap. 
Prominent fast growing job roles include AI/ML & Gen -AI Specialist, Big-Data Engineer, 
Prompt Engineer & LLMOps and AI Security Management Specialist.” 

24 
 
 
23. In response to the query made by the Committee that in some of the media 
reports concerns have been raised about data authenticity and biasness in giving 
answers by many foreign AI models like GROK, Chat GPT and DEEPSEEK, foreign AI 
companies have access t o local data to train their AI Models and whether there is a 
need to restrict or limit the foreign AI models in Indian market, the Ministry submitted:  
 
 “Foreign AI companies do have access to Indian data for training their AI models. 
However, traditionall y these models were often trained on datasets primarily sourced 
from English-speaking countries or global internet corpora tion, which did not adequately 
represent India’s linguistic, cultural, and demographic diversity. The reasons for the 
same may be attr ibuted to the easy accessibility of large volumes of digitized data in 
English, which is essential for developing these models, and the fact that a large 
number of consumers of these models are expected to be digital natives or tech savvy, 
who would have a t least an intermediate knowledge of the English language. However, 
the need for adapting AI solutions and models for the Indian context has been 
highlighted in recent years and efforts are being made regarding the same. 
With respect to leveraging data of Indian users for training models for the Indian context, 
the government favors a pro-innovation approach with appropriate safeguards to ensure 
that data owners are protected. This balanced approach is owing to the fact that the 
government recognized that a ccess to diverse AI platforms is crucial for fostering 
research and technological competitiveness. At the same time, it is important to ensure 
that foreign AI companies do not have unchecked access to local data.  Instead of 
restrictive measures that could  limit India ’s AI research capabilities; this approach  
balances innovation with robust data protection  through technical safeguards and 
regulatory oversight. 
Regulatory Framework for Data Protection 
The Digital Personal Data Protection Act (DPDP) 2023  provides fundamental 
protections for Indian citizens using AI platforms including foreign models like ChatGPT, 
GROK, and DeepSeek. The Act requires explicit user consent  for data processing, 
mandates transparent privacy policies, and establishes data subject rights including 
access and deletion. Restrictions on cross -border data transfers  apply only to 
countries restricted by the Central Government. Entities storing data on foreign 
territories need to ensure that adequate protecti on for data processed outside India is in 
place. These provisions apply to all AI platforms  operating in India  regardless of 
origin. Additionally, CERT-In’s Technical Guidelines on AI Bill of Materials (AIBOM)  
mandates comprehensive documentation for AI systems  including model 
architecture, training data sources, known vulnerabilities, and security requirements, 
enabling systematic evaluation against established security criteria.  
Indigenous AI Development Strategy 
The IndiaAI Mission ’s ₹10,300 crore investment  demonstrates the government ’s 
commitment to building indigenous AI models which would be leveraged and consumed 

25 
 
as an alternative to existing solutions available from foreign entities. This dual approach  
accessing foreign AI while building domestic capabi lities represents pragmatic 
recognition of current technological realities . India’s strategy focusses on reducing 
foreign platform dependency through accelerated indigenous development. 
 With intent to develop indigenous AI models, The IndiaAI Mission had published a Call 
for Proposals on 30 th January 2025. 506 proposals were received in response to the 
Call for Proposals. Out of these, IndiaAI has selected a portfolio of capable teams to 
build a diverse and specialized sovereign AI ecosystem.These initiati ves are collectively 
working to address India’s unique linguistic diversity, cultural context, and sector-specific 
needs, aligning with the vision of a self -reliant and inclusive AI -powered nation as 
envisaged by the IndiaAI Mission.  A brief overview of t he teams building these is 
provided below:  
• Sarvam AI (Sarvam -Large): This proposal aims to train a family of multi -modal 
foundation models from scratch, with the primary goal of delivering Sarvam -
Large, a 70 -120 billion parameter LLM. The project is a dee p collaboration with 
leading researchers from IIT , Madras and focusses on achieving state -of-the-art 
accuracy in all 22 scheduled Indian languages. The initiative will also build 
population-scale applications, including a citizen -helpline voice agent ( “2047”) 
and a government project monitoring system (“AI4Pragati”). 
• Soket AI (Project EKA):  This project will create a next -generation 120 billion 
parameter Sparse Mixture of Experts (MoE) foundation model. Project EKA is 
designed for inclusivity, computational efficiency, and defense readiness, 
supporting major South Asian script families to se rve over 2 billion people. By 
adopting an “open source ” and “build in public ” philosophy, the project aims to 
foster a collaborative ecosystem. 
• Gan.ai (Superhuman TTS): This initiative focusses on a foundational Text -to-
Speech (TTS) model rather than a traditional LLM. Building on their commercially 
successful Myna v1 model that supports all 22 official Indian languages, Gan.ai 
proposes to develop a 70B -parameter “Superhuman TTS ” model. Leveraging 
LLM-style reasoning, the model aims to achieve natural, expr essive and 
emotionally aware speech synthesis across 22 Indian and 18 foreign languages, 
surpassing current global benchmarks.  
• Gnani.ai (Foundational Voice AI): This project is centreed on building an end -
to-end, agentic Speech -to-Speech foundational mode l, eliminating the 
dependency on intermediate text transcription. The architecture fuses a 14B 
parameter LLM with a 616M parameter audio encoder, optimized for real -time, 
low-bandwidth conversations in over 12 major Indian languages. Gnani.ai will 
leverage its existing proprietary dataset of millions of hours of Indian language 
speech data. The total project cost is ₹180 Crore, for which Gnani.ai seeks a ₹50 
Crore GPU grant and ₹60 Crore in funding from the Mission. 
 

26 
 
Key Commercial and Large-Scale Ventures 
Several private sector entities are also developing large -scale, multilingual models 
aimed at both consumer and enterprise markets. 
• Ola Krutrim:  Positioned as “India’s own AI, ” Krutrim is developing a full stack 
from indigenous silicon to a family of front ier AI models. Their flagship  
 Krutrim-3 is envisioned as a family of models, including a 700B parameter 
Mixture-of-Experts (MoE) model and smaller dense models (30B, 70B), designed 
to be multimodal and highly efficient for Indic use cases. Ola Krutrim aim s to 
make its sovereign AI 70% cheaper for Indic use cases compared to global 
competitors.  
• Tech Mahindra (Project Indus): Having already developed Project Indus, a 1.2 
billion parameter model focussed on Hindi and 37 of its dialects, Tech Mahindra 
proposes to build upon this experience. Their forward -looking strategy involves 
creating new foundation models (~3 Billion parameters) for languages not yet 
covered by existing open-source efforts. A key part of their vision is to develop an 
Indic Agentic AI fram ework and a Model Orchestration System to manage a 
“Model Garden ” of diverse Indian FMs, enabling India to leapfrog directly to 
applied, real-world AI solutions. 
• AI4Bharat (IIT Madras): A pioneering research lab at IIT Madras, AI4Bharat has 
been instrumental in building open -source datasets and models for Indic 
languages. Their work serves as a foundational pillar for many other indigenous 
AI efforts. They are focussed on creating public digital goods and fostering a 
collaborative ecosystem for Indian language technologies.” 
 
24. The Committee also wanted to know about centralized AI law in India if any and if 
there is any authority or a person who conducts periodic audits of the AI models to 
check for their accuracy. To this, the Ministry answered: 
 “Government of India’s Approach to AI regulation 
 India recognizes the transformative potential of AI to drive large -scale socio -
economic change, and thus, its approach to AI governance is balanced, pro-
innovation, and contextually grounded. India’s goal is to ensure that AI fosters 
inclusive growth, strengthens public services, and enhances economic 
opportunities, while also addressing risks in a pragmatic and forward -looking 
manner. 
 Various risks a ssociated with AI, such as bias, privacy concerns, misinformation 
and disinformation, are adequately covered under existing legal frameworks 
such as the Information Technology Act, 2000, the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 
2023, the Copyrigh t Act, 1957  etc.  Comp lementing these safeguards, India is 
also actively developing indigenous tools, frameworks, and guidelines for AI 
governance grounded in Indian datasets and local socio-cultural realities. 

27 
 
 India has long pioneered techno-legal approaches to digital governa nce. The 
Data Empowerment and Protection Architecture (DEPA) is one such globally 
recognised model. 
 The Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology (MeitY) has invited 
Expressions of Interest (EoIs) for the development of techno -legal tools and 
frameworks for responsible AI. The first round of selected projects, covering 
areas such as privacy preservation, explainability, and bias mitigation, is already 
underway, while a second round is currently under evaluation. 
 India has also launched its IndiaAI Safety Institute to advance science-based 
and indigenous  research on AI governance, pioneering innovative approaches 
to AI safety that are relevant to the developing world. The Institute follows a Hub-
and-Spoke model, and a Call for Partnerships has been i ssued to onboard 
relevant stakeholders across academia, industry, and civil society. The proposals 
received are also currently under evaluation.  
 In parallel, a multi -stakeholder Advisory Group, chaired by the Principal 
Scientific Advisor  of India and comp rising representatives from relevant 
Ministries, was constituted to develop an ‘AI for India -Specific Regulatory 
Framework.’ Under its guidance, a Sub-Committee on ‘AI Governance and 
Guidelines Development’ was established. The Sub -Committee's draft report  
was released for public consultation, with the process concluded on February 27, 
2025.  
 The Government of India remains firmly committed to ensuring that AI 
technologies are deployed in a manner that upholds constitutional values and 
adheres to the principles of fairness, transparency, and proportionality . 
Through a combination of legal safeguards, institutional mechanisms, and 
research-led interventions, India is taking a balanced and forward -looking 
approach to the ethical use of AI. 
Audits for AI Models  
 Under the Safe & Trusted AI Pillar  of the IndiaAI Mission, several projects have 
been approved to develop techno -legal tools for AI governance.  In parallel, 
various sectoral regulators and public authorities have begun issuing t heir own 
AI-related guidelines and consultation papers. For instance, the Comptroller and 
Auditor General of India ( CAG) released an Artificial Intelligence Strategy 
Framework in April 2025 which, inter alia, provides a framework for auditing AI 
systems deployed in the public sector. Similarly, the Securities and Exchange 
Board of India (SEBI) released a consultation paper in June 2025 on guidelines 
for the responsible use of AI/ML in Indian securities markets, emphasising the 
need for governance, oversight , and auditability of AI models used in financial 
services.” 
 

28 
 
25. The Committee wanted the Ministry to explain about AI -Vani, to which the 
following was furnished: 
 
 
o “AI VANI “Virtual Assistance by NIC” is a Chatbot framework developed by 
NIC and copyrighted and hosted as a service on Meghraj National Cloud of 
NIC. AI VANI helps you to build layered, modular, pluggable chatbots that can 
be integrated as a chatbot widget within an existing web application. The 
VANI framework consists of various modules that can  perform API integration 
with back -end systems, queue management, agent monitoring, and live 
handovers to human agents and can be added to the chatbot as required. 
Using this framework, multiple chats, and voice can be deployed to interact 
with the back -end engine by maintaining individual sessions, thus ensuring 
the privacy of each conversation. 
o VANI chatbot services are facilitated by NLU (Natural Language 
Understanding) & generation of response (Natural Language Processing) 
which allows Intent based answ ers to most queries to citizens asking about 
any scheme or projects of the Central or State Governments . At the backend 
it is facilitated by Generative AI based models, so most of the user requests 
can be serviced from CPU based VMs instead of expensive GPUs. 
o As the naming and purpose of intents and action parameters of individual bots 
can differ from case to case, the business layers  of the bots can be 
customized to suit the purposes of the user organization or Department’s 
requirements. The chatbots and v oice bots take the necessary precautions to 
ensure the confidentiality and privacy of the user data by handling the data 
flow exclusively through the user application and restricting the data flow 
between the user and other third -party AI engines. NIC serv ices many 
chatbots through its internal conversational AI engine. 
o Multilingual Support is facilitated even if the w ebsite is not available in Indian  
Languages - AI VANI chatbot supports 22 official Indian languages in text, 
and 10 Indian languages voice su pport streaming – Bengali, English, Hindi, 
Gujarati, Kannad, Marathi, Malayalam, Odiya, Tamil & Telugu. As an add -on 
service for this, users are provided with AI Panini and AI Matra services. 
Using AI Matra Transliteration services, the end user of the cha tbot can type 
using the standard QWERTY keyboard for any non -English language, 
eliminating the need to learn or map new language keyboards. AI Panini 
facilitates the translation of the text entered by the user to English, Query the 
AI engine and give response back in the text language to be displayed. These 
services are facilitated through Meghraj cloud of NIC.” 
26. When the Committee asked the Ministry about its concurrence with the new 
analysis by the International Monetary Fund (IMF) that AI is going to affe ct nearly 40 per 
cent of all jobs and whether the Ministry is proposing to introduce Artificial Intelligence 
(AI) in the working of various Departments across the Country and If yes, the details 

29 
 
thereof along with the Departments in which the Government ha s already introduced it 
and if not, the reasons thereof, the following was replied: 
 
 “The Government of India emphasizes the concept of 'AI for All,' aligning with the 
Hon’ble Prime Minister's vision to democratise use of technology. This initiative aims to 
ensure that AI benefits all sectors of society, driving innovation and growth. 
India is regarded as the skills capital in technology and Artificial Intelligence. The most 
reliable ranking in AI is placing India among the top countries with AI Skills, AI  
capabilities, and policies to use AI. Stanford University has ranked India among the top 
three countries along with the US and China in the Global and National AI vibrancy 
ranking based on 42 indicators. Leads the world in AI talent acquisition, with an a nnual 
hiring rate of about 33%, ranks among the top countries globally in AI skill penetration 
and has seen AI talent concentration grow more than threefold since 2016. 
Government is committed to harnessing the power of Artificial Intelligence (AI) for the  
good of our people in sectors like healthcare, agriculture and education. At the same 
time, the Government is cognizant of the risks posed by AI. 
Artificial Intelligence is increasingly being used in Governance and public services by 
various Central and S tate Government Departments and Organizations, such as those 
in Agriculture, Healthcare, Education, Railways, Governance & Administration, Earth 
Science, Energy & Power, Rural Development & Panchayati Raj, Transportation and 
Law & Justice. It helps automat e repetitive tasks, improve transparency, and enhance 
communication between citizens and the Government. AI is being applied through 
image and video analytics for decision -making, speech synthesis and recognition for 
voice-based services, natural language processing for translation and document 
summarization, and generative AI -based bots for efficient and interactive citizen 
services. These advancements aim to make governance more efficient, transparent, 
and citizen-friendly. At the same time, the Governmen t is cognizant of the risks posed 
by AI.  
The advent of Artificial Intelligence is not leading to any job losses instead it is being 
used as a tool for augmenting capability. AI may result in automating some routine jobs 
but will also result in job creation in various streams like data science, data curation, etc. 
India has a distinct advantage globally when it comes to having a workforce trained in 
Artificial Intelligence. This will require reskilling and upskilling, for which the Government 
has taken various initiatives: 
i). IndiaAI Mission: Union Cabinet led by Hon’ble Prime Minister has approved the 
IndiaAI Mission on 7 th March 2024, a strategic initiative to establish a robust and 
inclusive AI ecosystem that aligns with the country’s development goals. This  
mission is driven by a vision to position India as a global leader in artificial 
intelligence by focussing on seven foundational pillars. 

30 
 
One of the key pillars of IndiaAI Mission is IndiaAI Future Skills  which envisions 
augmenting the number of graduate and post -graduates in the AI domain by 
awarding IndiaAI fellowships to UG, PG and PhD students for undertaking project 
work and research in the field of AI and related subjects. 
IndiaAI has established IndiaAI Data Lab in National Institute of Electronics & 
Information Technology ’s (NIELIT’s) 28 centre ’s, ICET Nagaland, Mokokchung, 
Mhow, and CDAC Mohali. 
FutureSkills PRIME : MeitY in collaboration with IT/ITeS Sector Skills Council -
NASSCOM has initiated a Programmeme titled FutureSkills PRIME ( Programmeme for 
Re-skilling/Up-skilling of IT Manpower for Employability). FutureSkills PRIME is an 
‘aggregator of aggregators’ platform comprising various online skills providers to provide 
digital skills training on a national scale in online mode. The Programmeme is aimed at 
re-skilling/ up -skilling of IT professionals in 10 new/emerging technologies namely 
Artificial Intelligence, Big Data Analytics, Robotic Process Automation, Additive 
Manufacturing/ 3D Printing, Cloud Computing, Social & Mobile, Cyber Security , 
Augmented/Virtual Reality, Internet of Things and Blockchain. Besides the online mode, 
40 centres of CDAC and NIELIT are also implementing the Blended Learning mode, 
Training of Trainers, and Government Official training Programmemes.” 
 
27. In response to whether it was a fact that India stood at 80th spot at the Artificial 
Intelligence (AI) preparedness Index across 174 countries based on several indicators 
across four dimensions viz. digital infrastructure, human capital, technological innovation 
and legal framework, the Ministry stated that: 
 
 “The 2024 IMF study, ranked India 72nd, more recent 2025 -2026 analysis 
highlights India as a top -3 contender due to rapid advancement, the same Standford AI 
Index also states that in India the relative penetration o f AI skills was 2.5 times greater 
than the global average across the same set of occupations. 
In the Tortoise Global Artificial Intelligence Index 2024, India has entered the top ten for 
the first time, improving its ranking from 14 th in 2023 to 10 th globally in 2024. The 
Tortoise Global AI Index is based on 122 indicators collected from 24 different public 
and private data sources and 83 government sources. These indicators are divided 
across seven sub -pillars: Talent, Operating Environment, Infrastr ucture, Research, 
Development, Government Strategy, and Commercial Ecosystem. 
28. Regarding future course of action, the Ministry has submitted as: 
 
“AI technologies have a tremendous potential to transform societies and 
individuals. To develop a robust, safe and trusted AI innovation ecosystem in the 
country, Government has taken following necessary steps in policies and infrastructure: 

31 
 
The Government of India has approved the IndiaAI Mission on 7 th March 2024, a 
strategic initiative to establish a robust and inclusive AI ecosystem that aligns with the 
country’s development goals. This mission is driven by a vision to position India as a 
global leader in artificial intelligence by focussing on seven foundational pillars. The 
mission is poised to catalyse the AI  ecosystem through its seven key pillars. The 
following pillars to maximize the potential of AI for advancing India’s progress: 
 IndiaAI Compute: The IndiaAI compute pillar envisions building a high -end 
scalable AI computing ecosystem comprising AI compute infrastructure of 10,000 
or more Graphics Processing Units (GPUs). 
 IndiaAI Innovation Centre (IAIC) (IndiaAI Foundation Models ): The AI 
Innovation Centre aims to develop and deploy indigenous Large Multimodal 
Models (LMMs) trained on India-specific data. 
 IndiaAI Datasets Platform  (AIKosh): Launched on March 6, 2025, the platform 
has made strides in democratizing data access for AI development by onboarding 
10,000+ datasets and 277 AI models from more than 55 entities across 20 
sectors. 
 IndiaAI Application Development Initiative: The IndiaAI Application 
Development Initiative aims to develop, scale, and promote the adoption of 
impactful AI solutions to effectively tackle significant problem statements. 
 IndiaAIFutureSkills: IndiaAIFutureSkills Pillar envisions augmenting the number 
of graduate and post -graduate in AI domain. Further, it envisions setting up Data 
and AI Labs in Tier 2 and Tier 3 cities across India, to impart foundational -level 
courses in Data and AI. 
 IndiaAI Startup Financing: A spectrum of st artup development stages starting 
from product development to commercialization are to be supported. 
 Safe & Trusted AI: This pillar enables the setup of AI Safety Institute and 
implementation of Responsible AI projects including the development of 
indigenous tools and frameworks, self -assessment checklists for innovators, and 
other guidelines and governance frameworks. 
MeitY has established Centres of Excellence in various emerging technologies including 
Artificial Intelligence to explore opportunities in t hese specialized fields. These centres 
provide start -ups with premium plug -and-play co -working spaces and access to the 
ecosystem.” 
 
29. To a pointed query as to whether it was true that s ensitive data of our Country 
could reach foreign servers with the use of Chat-GPT and other Artificial Intelligence (AI) 
tools and whether the Government was working towards developing indigenous AI tools 

32 
 
so that sensitive data remains safe within the Country, the Ministry, in their writte n reply, 
submitted as under:          
 “The Union Cabinet, led by the Hon’ble Prime Minister, approved the IndiaAI 
Mission on 7th March 2024, as a strategic initiative to establish a robust and inclusive AI 
ecosystem aligned with India's development goals.  The mission aims to position India 
as a global leader in artificial intelligence by fostering innovation, enhancing domestic 
capabilities, and ensuring the country’s tech sovereignty. The mission focusses on 
seven foundational pillars including the IndiaA I Foundation Models pillar. This pillar 
underscores the importance of building India’s own Large Multimodal Models (LMMs) 
trained on Indian datasets and languages, to ensure sovereign capability and global 
competitiveness in generative AI. Twelv e startups have been selected  till date to 
develop India’s foundation models including  Sarvam AI, Soket AI, Gnani AI , and Gan 
AI, Avatar AI, IIT Bombay Consortium (BharatGen), GenLoop, Zentieq, 
Intellihealth, Shodh AI, Fractal Analytics Ltd . and Tech Mahindra Maker’ s Lab. 
These models are being developed and deployed on data centres hosted within India. 
Additionally, the IndiaAI Compute pillar under the mission is focussing on creating a 
high-end, scalable AI computing ecosystem to deliver Compute -as-a-Service for In dia’s 
rapidly growing AI startups and research community. 38,231 GPUs through 14 
empanelled vendors, over 3 rounds of empanelment, are being made accessible at 
subsidized rates, facilitating increased accessibility and affordability for tech developers 
through datacentres hosted in India.  
Under the mission, a RFP has also been published on 31st October 2025 for setting up 
a sovereign compute at Shastri Park, NIC Data  centre with a compute power of 1.1 Exa 
Flops. The RFP is presently in evaluation stage. A government-controlled GPU cluster is 
also being developed which will house 3,000 next -generation GPUs, which will cater 
primarily to sovereign and strategic requirements.” 
 
30. On being asked whether AI innovations were  still stuck at a nascent stage with 
huge resource constraints and were lagging way behind the frontrunners in scale, 
innovation and research, the Ministry submitted: 
 “India has demonstrated significant and globally recognized strengths in the AI 
domain. The nation's ecosystem is vibrant and growing rapidly, a fact substantiated by 
multiple independent and credible sources: 
 Our rankings speak of  our readiness: As per Stanford University's Global AI 
Vibrancy Rankings 2025,India ranks 3rd in AI competitiveness after US and 
China, a rise from the  fourth position in the Stanford Global AI Vibrancy 2024 
Index. It highlights how India's fast -growing tech ecosystem and strong talent 
base are helping the country play a key role in the global AI race. 
 According to the Stanford AI Index Report 2025, Indi a leads  the world in AI 
talent acquisition with an annual hiring rate of 33% and ranks second globally in 
AI skill penetration, just behind the United States.  

33 
 
 As per a report by NASSCOM, India's AI market is projected to reach USD 17 
billion by 2027,  growing at an annualized rate of 25% -35% between 2024 and 
2027.  
 India’s GenAI startup ecosystem has seen roughly a 3.7x surge and close to 
USD 1 billion  in cumulative GenAI funding, making it one of the fastest -growing 
GenAI hubs globally, even if still smaller than US/China in absolute capital. 
 India ranked tenth in the Tortoise Global AI Index 2024 , with a particularly 
strong and diverse AI workforce, driven by demographics and academic 
excellence. 
 The 2025 Technology and Innovation Report, issued by UN Trad e and 
Development (UNCTAD), states that India ranked 36th in 2024 on the 
‘Readiness for Frontier Technologies’ index, improving its position from 48th in 
2022. 
 India continues to lead South and Central Asia  from past 2 years, in the 
region’s AI readiness, and ranks well globally, 21 st with a score of 67.88, in The 
Government AI Readiness Index 2025.” 
 
31. To a specific query by the Committee as to whether the Government had  
instituted any accountability and audit mechanisms for Artificial Intelligence (AI) syst ems 
that process or collect users’ personal data, the Ministry replied as: 
 “The Digital Personal Data Protection Act, 2023 (“DPDP Act”) is a technology -
agnostic data protection law that governs the processing of digital personal data, 
including where such  processing is carried out through Artificial Intelligence (AI) or 
automated systems. The Act does not create AI -specific audit or certification regimes; 
however, it establishes a comprehensive accountability framework that applies equally 
to AI systems when they process personal data. 
The Act places clear obligations on Data Fiduciaries that determine the purposes and 
means of processing personal data. The core obligations on them include: 
i. Issuing notices and obtaining consent prior to data processing; 
ii. Securing verifiable parental or guardian ’s consent for children or persons with 
disabilities; 
iii. Implementing technical and organizational safeguards to prevent breaches; 
iv. Notifying the Data Protection Board and affected individuals in the event o f a breach; 
and 
v. Setting up mechanism for providing rights to individuals in digital manner. 

34 
 
Data Fiduciaries remain accountable for the data processing activities done by their 
Data Processors, and liable for paying any financial penalty as imposed by the 
adjudicatory body, i.e., Data Protection Board. Also, additional obligations for the 
organizations classified as Significant Data Fiduciaries, include conducting periodic Data 
Protection Impact Assessments, appointing Data Auditors and Data Protection Officers.  
To operationalize the Act, the Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology 
(MeitY) notified the Act, and the Digital Personal Data Protection Rules, 2025 (“Rules”) 
on 13 November, 2025. The Act and Rules mandate that personal data be processed 
only for lawful purposes with free, informed, specific and unambiguous consent, 
preceded or accompanied with the notice of data collection and its intended purposes. It 
requires Data Fiduciaries to implement strong security safeguards, erase personal data 
upon withdrawal of consent unless retention is legally required and comply within an 18 -
month transition period. 
Moreover, adopting a Digital -by-Design approach in the functioning of the Data 
Protection Board offers significant advantages to both Data Fiduciaries and the 
individuals. This approach not only streamlines compliance processes by en abling 
digital submission of documents, faster reporting of data breaches, and automated 
tracking of case progress. This approach also enhances transparency and 
accountability through robust audit trails and data logs and fosters greater trust, 
improves responsiveness, and builds a modern, future-ready governance model for data 
protection. 
While the DPDP Act, 2023 does not prescribe AI -specific accountability or audit 
mechanisms, however, entities deploying AI that processes personal data are therefore 
subject to the same statutory compliance, audit, and enforcement regime as any other 
data processing technology. 
Pending full operationalisation of the Digital Personal Data Protection Act, 2023 and 
stabilisation of compliance across ecosystem entities and leg acy systems, continued 
adherence to the Information Technology (Reasonable Security Practices and 
Procedures and Sensitive Personal Data or Information) Rules, 2011 (“SPDI Rules”), 
issued under section 43A of the Information Technology Act, 2000 (“IT Act”) , provides 
an established interim framework for accountability in systems, including Artificial 
Intelligence (AI) systems, that process personal data. In particular, the SPDI Rules 
mandate implementation of documented information security Programmemes, 
reasonable security practices commensurate with the nature of data processed, privacy 
policies governing collection and use of information, and periodic independent audits of 
security controls. These requirements collectively support traceability, governance 
oversight, and auditability of AI -driven data processing activities, thereby ensuring 
continuity of accountability safeguards.” 
 
 

35 
 
32. When the Committee wanted to know if the Ministry concurred with the view that 
a lack of “clean, quality, usable data” was per ceived as the single largest challenge to 
implementing AI at scale, the following was submitted: 
                    
 “The Ministry recognizes that implementing AI at scale faces three fundamental 
barriers: compute, grassroots -level skills, and datasets. In the Indian context, data 
accessibility and availability are perceived as the single most significant challenges, 
followed closely by concerns regarding the cleanliness and quality of existing datasets. 
33. On plans to tackle the above challenge, the Ministry submitted the following: 
 
“The Strategic Solution: Addressing Barriers through the IndiaAI Mission 
To build a scalable and inclusive AI ecosystem, the Department is executing a 
structured, multi-pronged approach. 
 Unlocking Data Accessibility: 
o The Ministry is unlocking high -value datasets through AIKosh to solve the 
problem of data silos. 
o This initiative makes over 10,000 datasets accessible to the public. 
o To ensure high usability, these datasets utilize standardized metadata. 
o The platform emplo ys API-based ingestion mechanisms , which 
significantly lower the entry barriers for startups, researchers, and industry 
players to innovate. 
 Ensuring Data Quality and Usability: 
o Beyond mere accessibility, the Department places a strong emphasis on 
"gold-standard" data generation to ensure the data is clean and 
actionable. 
o Healthcare Initiatives:  The Department has launched the INDEED 
Programme in collaboration with the Indian Council of Medical Research 
(ICMR) to create high-quality, validated medical datasets. 
o Linguistic Empowerment:  Large-scale annotation partnerships have 
been formed with Bhashini to ensure diverse linguistic data is prepared 
for AI training. 
o Resource Support:  AIKosh provides specific tools and resources 
dedicated to effective data management, ensuring that data pipelines 
remain robust and efficient. 
 

36 
 
 Building a Trusted Foundation: 
o The ultimate goal of these combined initiatives is to construct a robust 
and trusted data foundation. 
MeitY had developed meta data and data standard (MDDS) for various sectors.” 
34. Regarding the adoption level of our indigenous AI models so far as ‘Sarvam’ or 
‘Bhashini’ was concerned, the Ministry apprised of the Committee as under: 
 “The National Language Technology Mission (Digital India Bhasini) of Ministry of 
Electronics and IT aimed at addressing language barriers in the digital medium through 
the development of speech and text processing technologies for 22 scheduled Indian 
languages. The platform has expanded to support 36+ languages, offers 23+ language 
services, and hosts 350+ indigenous AI models, enabling multilingual content delivery 
across a wide range of government portals and applications. BHASHINI has recorded 
1.2 million+ mobile app downloads, facilitated 5 billion+ inferences, and suppo rts 100+ 
use cases with 450+ active customers. The platform has participation from 45+ Central 
Ministries, 24+ States, 300+ startups, 15+ industries, 90+ linguistic experts, and 85+ 
academic and research institutions.” 
35. The Committee sought clarifications regarding how Deep-fakes were defined and 
what were the mechanisms to regulate these so as to minimize damages that occur 
especially to women. In reply, the Ministry submitted: 
  “MeitY, in exercise of the powers conferred under the Information Technology 
Act, 2000 issued the Information Technology (Intermediary Guidelines and Digital 
Media Ethics Code) Rules, 2021 (IT Rules, 2021) on 25 th February 2021 in 
supersession of the erstwhile Information Technology (Intermediary Guidelines) 
Rules, 2011, which were subsequently amended on 28 th October 2022, 6th April 
2023 and 22nd October 2025.   
 The IT Act, read with the rules made thereunder, is a technology -neutral 
legislation that does not distinguish between computer resources in general and 
those that use Artif icial Intelligence or any other emerging technologies. 
Accordingly, the provisions of the IT Act apply uniformly to all computer 
resources, including those leveraging AI or similar technologies. 
 The IT Act and the IT Rules, 2021, together, have put in plac e a stringent 
framework to prevent the hosting or transmission of unlawful and harmful content 
in the digital space and impose clear obligations on intermediaries, including 
social media intermediaries, to ensure accountability. These provisions require 
intermediaries to publish user -facing rules/terms, privacy policy and user 
agreement, implements grievance redressal mechanisms, and take expeditious 
action on unlawful content as per the provisions of law. 

37 
 
 In this context, the IT Rules, 2021 mandate interme diaries to observe due 
diligence and not to host or transmit unlawful information, whether generated by 
them or by users, including information that is obscene, pornographic, invasive of 
another’s privacy, insulting or harassing on the basis of gender, rac ially or 
ethnically objectionable, or promoting hate or violence, or impersonates another 
person, or is harmful to child, or deceives or misleads the addressee about the 
origin of the message or knowingly and intentionally communicates any 
misinformation or information which is patently false and untrue or misleading in 
nature, or violates any law for the time being in force.  
 The IT Rules, 2021 further require intermediaries to periodically inform their 
users, at least once every year, that in case of non -compliance with the rules and 
regulations, privacy policy or user agreement for access or usage of the 
computer resource of such intermediary, it has the right to terminate access or 
usage rights immediately or remove non -compliant information or both, as the 
case may be. 
 The IT Rules, 2021 have a clear objective of enhancing online safety of users, 
particularly women & children by empowering them to exercise their rights 
towards safety, trust and modesty by enabling them to report grievances against 
various online harms and offences which are violative of any extant law and seek 
time-bound redressal from the intermediaries including social media 
intermediaries concerned whose computer resources are misused for hosting, 
publishing or sharing, uploading, etc.  or making viral any unlawful information or 
content including any act which is defamatory and obscene in nature. 
36. Further, taking cognisance of the fact that Images posted on internet continue to 
circulate through Airdrop, WhatsApp, and other platforms and  by the time the image is 
deleted from one social media platform, it has already spread across the Country and 
the world causing immense harm. Hence, the Committee wanted to know how MeitY 
proposed to check this. In reply, it was submitted bythe Ministry: 
 
 “In order to address such violations, intermediaries are required to take action on 
content infringing user rights upon receipt of a complaint by an affected user 
through the grievance redressal mechanism of the intermediary. 
 The IT Rules, 2021 further pr escribe specific timelines for the redressal of user 
grievances. In the event of non -resolution of a grievance by the intermediary 
within the stipulated timeframe, a user may file an appeal before the Grievance 
Appellate Committee (GAC). The Government has  also established Grievance 
Appellate Committees (GACs) under the IT Rules, 2021 to allow users and 
victims to appeal online on www.gac.gov.in against decisions taken by the 
Grievance Officers of intermediaries in case they are dissatisfied with the 
decision of the Grievance Officer. 

38 
 
 Therefore, the IT Rules, 2021 have a clear objective of enhancing online safety of 
users and enable users, including parents and guardians, to report grievances 
against various online harms and offences which are violative of a ny extant law 
and seek time -bound redressal from the intermediaries including social media 
intermediaries. 
 In case of failure of the intermediaries to observe the legal obligations as 
provided in the IT Rules, 2021, they lose their exemption from third par ty 
information provided under section 79 of the IT Act and shall be liable for 
consequential action or prosecution as provided under any extant law. 
 Recognising the increasing availability of generative AI tools and the resulting 
proliferation of synthetic ally generated information (SGI) (commonly known as 
deepfakes), as well as the potential misuse of such technologies to create or 
generate SGI of obscene, vulgar, sexually explicit nature, including CSEAM, 
which may cause user harm, spread misinformation, manipulate elections, or 
enable impersonation of individuals, MeitY has prepared draft amendments to the 
IT Rules, 2021. The draft aims to strengthen due diligence obligations for 
intermediaries, particularly social media intermediaries (SMIs) and signific ant 
social media intermediaries (SSMIs), as well as for platforms that enable the 
creation or modification of synthetically generated content. The strengthened due 
diligence framework envisages that intermediaries offering computer resources 
enabling the c reation or dissemination of such content shall deploy reasonable 
and appropriate technical measures, including automated tools, and adopt 
safeguards such as prominent labelling/disclosure of synthetically generated 
information and embedding of metadata/pro venance mechanisms, to the extent 
technically feasible, to ensure accountability and user safety. The Ministry has 
invited feedback on the draft amendments to the IT Rules, 2021. 
 The proposed SGI regulatory framework is envisaged to carefully provide 
exceptions so that routine good -faith editing/enhancement, accessibility 
improvements, and educational/training content are not treated as SGI, provided 
it does not materially distort or misrepresent the content or create false records. 
This ensures safeguards against misuse while supporting innovation and 
creativity. 
 The IT Act also provides penal provisions for various cyber offences including 
identity theft (section 66C), cheating by personation (section 66D), privacy 
violation/NCII (section 66E), and publica tion/transmission of obscene/sexually 
explicit/CSEAM content (section 67/67A/67B). Additionally, IT Rules, 2021 [Rule 
3(2)(b)] mandate intermediaries to remove certain categories of harmful content 
including impersonation/nudity/NCII expeditiously within p rescribed timelines [24 
hours] and provide grievance redressal. 
 Further, in October 2025, MeitYhas issued a Standard Operating Procedure 
(SoP) to Curtail Dissemination of NCII Content under Rule 3(2)(b) of IT Rules, 

39 
 
2021, inter alia, providing a clear vict im-centric protocol for reporting and 
takedown of NCII content, including: 
(i) multiple reporting channels such as One Stop Centres (OSCs), 
intermediary grievance mechanism/report buttons, National Cyber Crime 
Reporting Portal (NCRP) and LEAs; 
(ii) mandato ry removal/disablement of flagged NCII content by 
intermediaries within 24 hours of complaint; 
(iii) requirement for SSMIs to deploy crawler/hash -matching type 
measures to identify and take down re-uploaded/resurfaced NCII content; 
(iv) coordination  with I4C through NCRP/Sahyog Portal for 
creation/maintenance of secure NCII hash bank to prevent resurfacing; 
(v) de -indexing by search engines and coordinated action by 
CDNs/DNRs/ISPs to render access inaccessible within timelines.” 
The said SoP to curta il dissemination of NCII Content may be accessed at the 
following link: 
37.       Elaborating the key provisions under IT Rules, 2021, the Ministry submitted the 
following: 
Provision Details 
Restricted information 
under Rule 3(1)(b) 
Restricts hosting, storing, transmitting, displaying or 
publishing information/content that, among other things: 
 belongs to another person and to which the user does 
not have any right; 
 is obscene, pornographic, invasive of another’s privacy, 
insulting or harassing on the basis ofgender, racially or 
ethnically objectionable, or promoting hate or violence; 
 is harmful to child; 
 infringes any patent, trademark, copyright or other 
proprietary rights; 
 deceives or misleads the addressee about the origin of 
the message or knowingl y and intentionally 
communicates any misinformation or information which 
is patently false and untrue or misleading in nature; 

40 
 
Provision Details 
 impersonates others; 
 threatens national security or public order; 
 violates any applicable law. 
User Awareness 
Obligations 
Intermediaries must clearly inform users through terms of 
service and user agreements about the consequences of 
sharing unlawful content, including content removal, 
account suspension, or termination. 
Accountability in 
Content Removal  
Intermediaries must act expeditiously to remove unlawful 
content upon court orders, reasoned intimations from 
appropriate government, or user grievances, within 
prescribed timelines. 
Grievance Redressal  Intermediaries to appoint Grievance Officers 
 Mandates to resolve complaints through removal of 
unlawful content within 15 days or 72 hours, as the case 
may be, as prescribed under the rules. 
 Content violating privacy, impersonating individuals, or 
showing nudity must be removed within 24 hours 
against any such complaint. 
Grievance Appellate 
Committees (GACs) 
Mechanism 
Users can appeal online if their complaints are not 
addressed by the intermediaries’ Grievance Officers. GACs 
ensure accountability and transparency of content 
moderation decisions. 
Assistance by 
Intermediaries to 
Government Agencies 
Intermediaries must provide information under their control 
or assistance to authorised Government agencies for 
identity verification, or for the prevention, detection, 
investigation, or prosecution of offences, including cyber 
security incidents. 
Additional Obligations 
of significant social 
media intermediaries 
(SSMIs) (i.e., social 
media intermediaries 
having 50 lakhs or 
 SSMIs offering messaging services must help law 
enforcement trace originators of serious or sensitive 
content. 
 SSMIs to use automated tools to detect and limit spread 
of unlawful content. 

41 
 
Provision Details 
above registered user 
base in India) 
 SSMIs to publish compliance reports, appoint local 
officers (Chief Compliance Officers, Nodal Contact 
Persons, Resident Grievance Officers), and s hare 
physical address based in India for compliances and 
law enforcement coordination. 
 SSMIs are required to ensure that information hosted or 
transmitted on their computer resource is clearly 
identifiable as being advertised, marketed, sponsored, 
owned, o r exclusively controlled, where such 
information is promoted for direct financial benefit or 
where the intermediary owns copyright, exclusive 
licensing, or contractual control over the publication or 
transmission of such information. 
 SSMIs to offer volunta ry user verification, internal 
appeals, and fair hearing before taking suo-moto action. 
 
38. According to the Ministry, a n Advisory Group, chaired by the Principal Scientific 
Advisor, was constituted to undertake the development of an ‘AI for India -Specific 
Regulatory Framework'. Under the guidance of the Advisory Group, a Subcommittee on 
‘AI Governance and Guidelines Development’ was to provide actionable 
recommendations for AI governance  in India. The Subcommittee's report on AI 
Governance, now published for public consultation, aims to guide the development of a 
trustworthy and accountable AI ecosystem in India. When t he Committee wanted the 
Ministry to elaborate on the finer details of the Report, the following was submitted: 
 
o  “The India AI Governance Guidelines, released on 5 November 2025, establish a 
comprehensive national framework to ensure the safe, responsible, and inclusive 
development of AI across sectors. The guidelines propos e a robust governance 
framework to foster cutting-edge innovation, and safely develop and deploy AI for all 
while mitigating risks to individuals and society.The framework comprises four key 
components: 
 Seven guiding principles (Sutras) for ethical and responsible AI. 
 Key recommendations across six pillars of AI governance. 
 An action plan mapped to short, medium, and long-term timelines. 

42 
 
 Practical guidelines  for industry, developers, and regulators to ensure 
transparent and accountable AI deployment. 
o At the core of the framework lie seven guiding principles (Sutras): Trust, People 
First, Innovation over Restraint, Fairness & Equity, and Accountability , 
Understandable by Design and Safety, Resilience & Sustainability.  
 They are designed to be technology ag nostic and applicable across all 
sectors. These principles emphasize human -centric development, ethical 
use, and the prevention of harms such as deepfakes, bias, misinformation, 
and discrimination. 
o The guidelines organize recommendations across six governa nce pillars : 
Infrastructure expansion, capacity building, policy and regulation, risk 
mitigation, accountability, and institutional oversight.  
o These are envisioned as a foundational reference for policymakers, researchers, and 
industry to foster greater national and international cooperation for safe, responsible, 
and inclusive AI adoption.” 
39. Since capitalizing on the transfo rmative potential of AI required  a whole -of-
ecosystem approach to drive innovation and democratize access to AI infrastructure and 
resources, the Committee wanted to know how the Ministry proposed  to achieve this. In 
reply, the Ministry submitted: 
o  ” Guided by the vision of  “Making AI in  India and Making AI Work for India” , the 
Cabinet approved the  India AI Mission  in March 2024, with a budget outlay of 
₹10,372 crore over five years. The mission marks a defining step towards making 
India a global leader in Artificial Intelligence. 
o The IndiaAI mission will establish a comprehensive ecosystem catalyzing AI 
innovation through strategic Programmes and partnerships across the public and 
private sectors. By democratizing computing access, improving data quality, 
developing indigenous AI c apabilities, attracting top AI talent, enabling industry 
collaboration, providing startup risk capital, ensuring socially impactful AI projects 
and bolstering ethical AI, it will drive responsible, inclusive growth of India's AI 
ecosystem. 
o The IndiaAI Mission is being implemented through seven key pillars: 
 IndiaAI Compute:  
o For democratizing access to AI infrastructure, IndiaAI launched a request for 
empanelment of agencies for offering AI services on cloud on August 16th, 2024.  

43 
 
o Under this pillar, 14 empaneled AI Cloud Service providers will enable access to 
more than 38,231 GPUs  across Intel, AMD, NVIDIA, and AWS architectures. The 
GPUs are being made available at competitive L1 rates of Rs. 65, including 40% 
subsidy, through the IndiaAI Compute porta l. An additional 24,000 GPUs are 
expected to be empaneled in the ongoing 4th round of empanelment 
 IndiaAI Application Development Initiative:  
o The pillar aims to support the development, scaling, and promotion of impactful AI 
solutions that address real-world challenges. 
o 30 solutions are being developed across 14 themes in 5 pivotal sectors climate 
change, disaster management, healthcare, agriculture, governance, and assistive 
technologies for learning disabilities. 5 applications for national rollout have been 
selected across 5 pivotal sectors 
o IndiaAI has also partnered with ministries such as  AYUSH, MSME and National 
Financial Reporting Authority (NFRA) to identify high-impact AI use cases 
o Sector-specific hackathons have been organized with the Indian Cybercrime 
Coordination Centre, the Geological Survey of India and National Cancer Grid 
(NCG) to further encourage focussed AI solution development.  
o Four more hackathons are being organized by IndiaAI. They are IndiaAI Financial 
Reporting Compliance Challenge , IndiaAI Intelligent Document Processing 
Challenge, IndiaAI Face Authentication Challenge,  and IndiaAI Innovation 
Challenge for Transforming Governance in partnership with Govt. of Andhra 
Pradesh. 
 AIKosha - IndiaAI Datasets Platform:  
o AIKosh develops large datasets for training AI models. It provides secure access 
to high -quality, non -personal datasets and AI models, along with an integrated 
development environment. 
o The platform has over 10016+ datasets and 277 AI Models onboarded from 66+ 
organizations across 20 sectors .The platform also features access to 35 use 
cases and 25 toolkits. 
 29,757 dataset downloads 
 5,569 models downloaded 
 19,560 registered users 

44 
 
o AIKosh integrates data from government and non -government sources such as 
Government, Academia, Startups, Corporates  
 IndiaAI FutureSkills: 
o The IndiaAI FutureSkills Pillar aims to expand AI Skilling Programmes and create 
pathways for entry -level with Fello wship Programmes to support 500 PhD 
fellows, 8,000 undergraduate students, and 5,000 postgraduate students  
across a variety of disciplines. Furthermore, 570 Data and AI Labs  will be 
established across Tier 2 and Tier 3 cities in India, of which 27 labs  in 
collaboration with the National Institute of Electronics & Information Technology 
(NIELIT) are already launched 
o To prepare the workforce for the future, MeitY launched Future  Skills PRIME, a 
national Programmeme focussed on reskilling and upskilling IT pro fessionals in 
10 new and emerging technologies, including AI.  As of Feb 2026, the portal 
has more than 28.8 lakhs registered users, 17.65 lakhs student enrollments, 
and over 7 lakhs badge holders. 
o Meity also launched the ‘YuvAI for All’  course in Nov 2025, to make AI literacy 
accessible to everyone. The course aims to equip 1 -crore people with basic AI 
skills. As of Feb 2026, the course has over 377,902 enrollments. 
o YUVAi (Youth for Unnati and Vikas with AI): National e-Governance Division 
(NeGD), MeitY in collaboration with industry partners (Intel & Meta), has 
launched ‘YUVAi: Youth for Unnati and Vikas with AI’ - A National 
Programmeme for School Students with an objective of enabling school students 
from classes 8th to 12th with AI tech and social skills in an inclusive manner. 
 IndiaAI Startup Financing: 
o This pillar addresses the critical need for risk capital across the entire lifecycle of 
AI startups—from prototyping to commercialization.  
o The IndiaAI Startups Global Initiative, launc hed in collaboration with Station F 
(Paris) and HEC Paris, aims to support 10 cutting -edge Indian AI startups in 
expanding into the European market. It aims to establish 58 state/UT -level 
Centres of Excellence in AI alongside industry, academia, and resear ch partners, 
aiming to further strengthen local AI ecosystems. 
 
 

45 
 
 IndiaAI Foundation Models: 
o The pillar aims to catalyze AI development by supporting 15 to 20 startups in 
developing LLMs and SLMs. These startups would receive full compute usage 
and additional funding covering up to 25% of compute expenditure.  
o In the first and second phase, twelve startups were selected: Sarvam AI, Soket AI, 
Gnani AI, Gan AI, Avaatar AI, IIT Bombay consortium – BharatGen, Zenteiq, Gen 
Loop, Intellihealth, Shodh AI, Fractal Analytics, Tech Mahindra Maker’s Lab. 
 Safe & Trusted AI: 
o Eight projects  focussing on diverse themes have been selected through an EOI 
process and are currently under development, the second round of EOI was 
launched covering critical themes such as Watermarking & Labelling, Ethical AI 
Frameworks, AI Risk Assessment & Management, Stress Testing Too ls, and 
Deepfake Detection Tools , promoting a comprehensive approach to AI 
governance, in which Five projects have been selected of the 400+ 
applications received.  
o AI Safety Institute launched with over 90 applications received for partnering 
institutes.” 
40. The IndiaAI IDP (IndiaAI Intelligent Document Processing) challenge, in 
partnership with public institutions, will utilize AI/ML technologies to streamline public 
services processes by enabling intelligent document processing for a high -volume of 
text-heavy documents across varying levels of quality and formats. The Committee, in 
this regard, asked about the progress made by MeitY so far and the following was 
received in response: 
 “The IndiaAI IDP Challenge, under the IndiaAI Mission of MeitY, is a key step 
towards deploying AI -driven intelligent document processing to enhance access to 
public service delivery.  
Through this initiative, IndiaAI is catalysing solutions that can handle large volumes of 
multi-format, low -quality and multi -lingual docu ments using advanced OCR and NLP, 
and convert them into structured, machine -readable outputs for governance workflows. 
This is directly aligned with the IndiaAI objectives of strengthening data -driven decision-
making and improving the efficiency, accuracy and transparency of citizen -facing 
services. 
The evaluation committee comprising senior representatives from IndiaAI, Ministry of 
Finance, Union Public Service Commission, National e -Governance Division, Software 
Technology Parks of India and Ministry of E lectronics and Information Technology, 

46 
 
completed the Stage 1 evaluation basis of the reports shared by the teams as part of 
their application process and shortlisted top 10 teams for Stage 2 evaluation process. 
The shortlisted teams, post the execution of the NDAs received encrypted access to 
representative public-sector document datasets to test their solution performance. The 
shortlisted teams were given 17 days to process the datasets and submit the outputs in 
the standardised template by 10 February 2026 
To conclude Stage 2, the teams will present and demonstrate their solutions’ capabilities 
to the Evaluation Committee, showcasing use cases such as automated extraction, 
classification and validation of fields from text -heavy records, forms and registers  for 
potential pilot deployment with partner public institutions.” 
41. When asked  whether crimes committed with the assistance of Artificial 
Intelligence are treated as Cyber crime and If so, what steps have been taken by the 
Ministry to address these emerging  challenges and the following was submitted in 
response:  
            
• “The Indian cyberspace is primarily regulated through the Information 
Technology Act, 2000 (“IT Act”) and the rules thereunder. As the principal legislation 
regulating digital platforms and online activities, the IT Act provides the legal foundation 
for ensuring accountability of intermediaries and safeguarding users from a range of 
cyber offences. There a re 18 sections under the IT Act which cover various forms of 
cyber offences, out of which 6 offences are non-bailable and 12 offences are bailable.  
• The IT Act provides for punishment against various offences considered as 
cybercrimes such as identity thef t, cheating by personation, violation of privacy, 
publishing/transmitting material that is obscene/ containing sexually explicit act, etc., 
depicting children in sexually explicit act/transmitting/ browsing child sexual abuse 
material, cyber terrorism etc.  The IT Act penalises various cyber offences relating to 
computer resources, including— 
 tampering with computer source documents (section 65),  
 dishonestly or fraudulently accessing a computer resource without the permission 
of its owner commonly referred to as hacking (section 66),  
 identity theft (section 66C),  
 cheating by impersonation (section 66D),  
 violation of bodily privacy (section 66E),  
 cyber terrorism (section 66F),  
 publishing or transmitting of obscene material in electronic form (section 67) , and 
publishing or transmission of material containing sexually explicit act or CSAM in 
electronic form (section 67A and 67B) 

47 
 
 non-compliance with the direction for interception or monitoring or decryption of 
any information on certain grounds like public order, national security, etc. 
(section 69),  
 non-compliance with the direction for blocking access of information by public on 
certain grounds like public order, national security, etc. (section 69A),  
 non-compliance with the direction for providing techn ical assistance and 
extending all facilities to enable monitoring and collecting traffic data or 
information (section 69B),  
 making or attempt to unauthorised access to protected system (CII) (section 70), 
 non-compliance with CERT-In’s direction or call for information (section 70B), etc. 
• Each such cybercrime is punishable with imprisonment for a period that may 
extend to one year to life imprisonment, and as per section 77B of the IT Act, an offence 
punishable with imprisonment of three years and above sha ll be cognizable and the 
offence punishable up to imprisonment of three years shall be bailable. Further, a police 
officer not below the rank of Inspector is empowered to investigate any offence under the 
IT Act under section 78.  
• It may also be noted that  the IT Act, read with the rules made thereunder, is a 
technology-neutral legislation  that does not distinguish between computer resources 
in general and those that use Artificial Intelligence (“AI”) or any other emerging 
technologies. Accordingly, the pro visions of the IT Act apply uniformly to all computer 
resources, including those leveraging AI or similar technologies. Further, the IT Act does 
not distinguish between any information that is generated using AI tools or any other 
technology and those whic h are generated by users themselves for the purpose of 
defining offences.  
• Accordingly, offences such as computer -related offences (Section 66 read with 
Section 43), identity theft (Section 66C), cheating by personation (Section 66D), violation 
of privacy (Section 66E), and publication or transmission of obscene, sexually explicit or 
child sexual exploitative and abuse material (Sections 67, 67A and 67B) apply equally 
where AI tools are used in the commission of the offence. 
42. The Committee asked how the Ministry, in context of Artificial Intelligence, 
addresses the regulatory vacuum, wherein statutory recognition may not yet exist, but 
AI-related issues enter jurisprudence and are subjected to legislative and judicial 
scrutiny. In reply of both the queries, the Ministry furnished the reply as under: 
 
• “The Information Technology (Intermediary Guidelines and Digital Media Ethics 
Code) Rules, 2021 (“ IT Rules, 2021 ”) lay down the statutory due diligence framework 
governing intermediaries and significant social media intermediaries. In view of the rapid 
advancement, accessibility and increasing misuse of generative artificial intelligence 
technologies, particularly in t he creation and dissemination of highly realistic synthetic 
audio, visual and audio -visual content and deepfakes, the Ministry of Electronics and 
Information Technology (MeitY), in exercise of the powers given under the Information 

48 
 
Technology Act, 2000 (“I T Act”), notified 1the Information Technology (Intermediary 
Guidelines and Digital Media Ethics Code) Amendment Rules, 2026 relating to 
synthetically generated information (SGI) , vide Gazette notification number G.S.R. 
120(E), dated 10th February, 2026, which came into force on 20th February, 2026. 
• The Information Technology (Intermediary Guidelines and Digital Media Ethics 
Code) Amendment Rules, 2026 amends the IT Rules, 2021 to further strengthen the due 
diligence framework for intermediaries, particularl y in relation to synthetically 
generated information (SGI) and associated online harms.  
 The amendments introduce definitions relating to audio, visual or audio -
visual information and SGI; strengthen user awareness and compliance 
timelines; introduce a ded icated SGI due diligence framework under 
Rule 3(3); and impose additional obligations on Significant Social Media 
Intermediaries (SSMIs), including user declaration, technical verification 
and prominent labelling of SGI. The amendments, inter alia, cover t he 
following broad areas: 
 insertion of definitions relating to “audio, visual or audio-visual 
information” and “synthetically generated information 
(SGI)”, along with specific exclusions of certain categories 
information from the definition of SGI; 
 clarification that, for purposes of these Rules, references to 
“information” in the context of unlawful acts shall include SGI; 
 clarification that removal/disablement of information including 
SGI in compliance with the Rules (including through reasonable 
technical measures / automated tools) shall not amount to 
violation of section 79(2)(a) or 79(2)(b) conditions; 
 strengthening of user awareness obligations , including 
periodic user information at least once every three months, and 
additional warnings for intermediaries facilitating SGI creation; 
 strengthening of timelines for compliance , including reduced 
timelines for removal of unlawful information upon actual 
knowledge and for grievance redressal (including special 
categories such as nudity/impersonation etc.); 
 introduction of a dedicated SGI due diligence framework under 
Rule 3(3), including: 
o measures to prevent unlawful/prohibited SGI; and 
o labelling/metadata/identifier obligations for permissible 
SGI; 
                                                           
 
 

49 
 
 additional due diligence obligations for Significant Social Media 
Intermediaries (SSMIs) , including user declaration and 
technical verification before publishing SGI, and prominent 
labelling of SGI. 
 
• A brief summary of the key provisions of the Information Technology (Intermediary 
Guidelines and Digital Media Ethics Code) Amendment Rules, 2026 is given below: 
Brief Summary of the Information Technology (Intermediary Guidelines and Digital 
Media Ethics Code) Amendment Rules, 2026: 
A. Definition of Synthetically Generated Information (SGI) 
SGI is defined as artificially or algorithmically created, generated, modified or altered 
audio, visual or audio-visual information appearing real. [Rule 2(1)(wa)] 
Exclusions: The definition excludes: 
 Routine or good -faith editing, formatting, enhancement, colour correction , 
transcription; 
 Draft, illustrative or conceptual content; 
 Accessibility improvements such as translation or clarity enhancement. 
B. Dedicated SGI Due Diligence Framework 
Intermediaries facilitating creation or generation of SGI must: 
 Deploy reasonable technical measures to prevent unlawful SGI; [Rule 3(3)(a)(i)] 
 Ensure visible labelling and metadata embedding; [Rule 3(3)(a)(ii)] 
 Inform users of legal consequences of unlawful SGI.[Rule 3(3)(b)] 
C. Strengthened User Accountability 
Users must be informed that unlawful SGI may attract penalties under laws including 
[Rule 3(1)(c), 3(1)(ca), 3(1)(cb)]:  
 Information Technology Act, 2000 
 Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 
 Protection of Children from Sexual Offences Act, 2012 
 Representation of the People Act, 1951 
 Indecent Representation of Women (Prohibition) Act, 1986 
 Sexual Harassment of Women at Workplace Act, 2013 
 Immoral Traffic (Prevention) Act, 1956 

50 
 
Contravention may lead to: 
 Immediate removal; 
 Suspension/termination of account without vitiating evidence; 
 Identification and lawful disclosure to victims; 
 Mandatory reporting to authorities where required. 
D. Additional Obligations for Significant Social Media Intermediaries (SSMIs) [Rule 
4(1A) 4(4)] 
 Mandatory user declaration before publishing SGI; 
 Technical verification mechanisms; 
 Prominent labelling; 
 Strengthened compliance architecture for large platforms. 
E. Safe Harbour Clarification 
Clarifies that removal or disablement of information, including SGI, in compliance with 
the Rules does not affect protection u nder Section 79(2) of the Information Technology 
Act, 2000. [Rule 2(1B)] 
F. Time-Bound Enforcement Reform 
1. Reduction of Removal/disablement Timeline 
Removal/disablement timeline reduced from 36 hours to 3 hours  upon 
valid reasoned intimation from the Appropriate Government. [Rule 3(1)(d)] 
2. Reduction of Grievance Redressal Timelines 
 General grievances: reduced from 72 hours to 36 hours; [First Proviso 
to Rule 3(2)(a)(i)] 
 Special category harms (nudity, imperson ation, sexually explicit 
content etc.): reduced from 24 hours to 2 hours. [Rule 3(2)(b)]” 
43. Asked about AI readiness in the Country, particularly with regard to software and 
hardware infrastructure’, the role of India AI mission in this regard and  steps taken to 
develop State-Level data centres as full-fledged data centres, in addition to data centres 
located in Delhi, the reply by the Ministry was: 
 
o  “Under the IndiaAI mission, MeitY has implemented various initiatives with 
regards to software and hardwa re infrastructure that will act as an enabler of 
socio-economic development. MeitY has democratized  access to AI 

51 
 
infrastructure, making the AI infrastructure: compute, datasets and foundational 
modelsaccessible, affordable and available to a wide set of users.  
 IADI: The IndiaAI Application Development Initiative (IADI) is engineered to 
promote the creation and implementation of at least 25 significant AI solutions 
capable of driving large -scale socio-economic transformation. Launched in 2024, 
the first Inn ovation Challenge focussed on pivotal sectors such as climate 
change, disaster management, healthcare, agriculture, governance, and assistive 
technologies for learning disabilities.  
 Thirty applications have reached the prototyping stage, with a second 
iteration of the challenge planned in conjunction with the Ministry of 
Education. Additionally, sector -specific hackathons/ Innovation Challenges 
have been organized with the Indian Cybercrime Coordination Centre, the 
Geological Survey of India and National C ancer Grid (NCG) to further 
encourage focussed AI solution development. Five applications for national 
rollout have been selected across 5 pivotal sectors 
 Foundation Models : The IndiaAI Foundation Models pillar aims to catalyze AI 
development by supporting 15 to 20 startups in developing LLMs and SLMs. 
These startups would receive full compute usage and additional funding covering 
up to 25% of compute expenditure. The financial support is structured as a mix of 
grants (40% of compute costs) and 60% equity to be realized at future valuation 
rounds. From 506 proposals received, four proposals from Sarvam AI, Soket AI, 
Gnani AI, and Gan AI have been selected in the first phase to dev elop India’s 
foundation models. In phase 2, additional 8 proposals selected for building 
Foundation Models – Avatar AI, IIT Bombay Consortium (BharatGen), GenLoop, 
Zentieq, Intellihealth, Shodh AI, Fractal Analytics Ltd. and Tech Mahindra 
Maker’s Lab. 
 Access to Compute:  The national GPU pool being expanded by the IndiaAI 
Mission is accessible through a government -supported cloud infrastructure. The 
IndiaAI Compute Portal operates over 38,231 GPUs. This is available at 
subsidised rates of under Rs. 65/hour, compared to the global rates of more than 
Rs. 200/ hour.  
 To empanelment the latest GPUs and empanelment a greater number of 
AI Services, the 4 th round of empanelment has been made live on 6 th 
November 2025. In India AI Impact Summit 2026, Union Minister f or 
Electronics and Information Technology Ashwini Vaishnaw announced that 
India will expand its compute capacity beyond the existing 38,000 
Graphics Processing Units (GPUs), with an additional 20,000 GPUs to be 
added in the coming weeks.  

52 
 
 At present, more than 270 users have already registered, and subsidy 
valued at approximately ₹1085 crores has been allocated. A significant 
development includes the construction of a government-controlled GPU 
cluster set to house 3,000 next -generation GPUs , which will cate r 
primarily to sovereign and strategic requirements for state 
governments. The first RFP for setting up a sovereign compute at Shastri 
Park, NIC Datacentre has been published on 31st October 2025. 
 AIKOSH: In 2025, IndiaAIKosh was launched under the IndiaAI  Mission. It aims 
to serve as a national repository of AI datasets, models and tools. The platform 
organises datasets in 20 sectors, covering a wide range of domains critical to 
India’s development. As of Feb 2026, it has onboarded 10016+ datasets and 277 
AI models from 66+ entities across 20 sectors. The platform provides permission -
based access, allowing contributors to retain control over data usage while 
facilitating AI development.A notable feature of this platform is its permission -
based access, allowing data contributors to maintain control over download , 
thereby balancing data sharing with privacy concerns.” 
44. Elaborating the ways to develop a framework to ensure equity in the use of 
datasets by both public and the private sectors and apply them uniformly across sectors 
such as healthcare and a cross different Departments. T he Ministry submitted the 
following: 
 
 “The Ministry is developing a comprehensive framework to ensure equity in 
dataset usage through a combination of Digital Public Infrastruc ture (DPI), inclusive 
access policies, and sector -specific governance. This strategy ensures that high -quality 
data is not a siloed asset but a shared resource for national innovation. 
Initiatives and Scope 
The primary initiative driving this direction is the IndiaAI Datasets Platform  -AIKosh, 
which aim to democratize access to the building blocks of AI. 
 Inclusive Open Access:  The framework provides free, open access to a 
national repository containing 10,000+ datasets and 250+ AI models. 
 Data Sourcing: The repository hosts non-personal data sourced from both the 
public and private sectors. 
 Sovereign Model Development:  Private entities are encouraged to leverage 
these public datasets, combining them with external data to develop indigenous 
and sovereign AI models like BharatGen. 
 Balanced Participation: The scope includes Public-Private Partnerships (PPPs) 
designed to co -create and share data, ensuring that smaller startups and 
researchers have the same access as large industry players. 

53 
 
Equity via Governance and Sectoral Guidelines 
To ensure that access translates into fair and ethical outcomes, the Ministry has 
established overarching AI Governance guidelines. 
 Cross-Sectoral Applicability:  These guidelines serve as a foundational 
blueprint that can be uniformly applied across various departments to standardize 
data-sharing protocols and ethics. 
 Healthcare Integration (SAHI):  The Ministry of Health and Family Welfare has 
launched the Strategy for Artificial Intelligence in Healthcare for India (SAHI), 
which focusses on: 
o Data Strategy and Utilization:  Strategic use of the Ayushman Bharat 
Digital Mission (ABHA)  ecosystem to ensure data -driven healthcare 
delivery. 
o Ethical Standards:  Mandating co nsent-based data use, transparency, 
and accountability to prevent algorithmic bias. 
Strategic Impact 
By integrating non-personal data accessibility  with stringent governance , the 
Ministry ensures that the AI ecosystem remains resilient, trusted, and inclus ive. This 
framework allows India to move from theoretical principles to actionable, real -world AI 
impact, as demonstrated during the IndiaAI Impact Summit 2026  where these 
sovereign models and datasets were showcased to a global audience.” 
 
45. When t he Commit tee wanted to know about the consultation papers that were 
available for review prior to deliberation on the AI Summit, the following submission was 
made: 
 
 “The AI Impact Summit 2026 discussions were organised through seven 
thematic working groups each focussed on a key dimension of the AI ecosystem. 
These working groups produced outcome documents outlining voluntary 
frameworks, cooperation mechanisms, and practical initiatives.  
In addition, the summit adopted a Summit Declaration and the New Delhi Fron tier AI 
Impact Commitments, capturing the shared principles and areas of cooperation. 
For the reference of the Committee, the key documents emerging from the Summit are 
enclosed in this submission. 
1. AI Impact Summit Declaration 
The declaration outlines t he collective understanding reached by participating countries 
and organisations on advancing AI for public good. It summarises the core principles 

54 
 
guiding cooperation across areas such as access to AI resources, trustworthy AI 
systems, AI for science, inc lusive adoption, human capital development and economic 
growth. 
2. Charter for the Democratic Diffusion of AI (Democratizing AI Resources 
Working Group) 
This charter proposes a voluntary framework to improve global access to foundational 
AI resources such as compute, datasets, models and talent. It emphasises equitable 
participation in AI development, support for multilingual datasets, and collaborative 
infrastructure initiatives to reduce barriers to entry. 
3. Framework for the Trusted AI Commons (Safe & Trusted AI Working Group) 
This framework proposes the creation of a shared repository of technical AI safety 
resources, including tools, benchmarks and standards.  
4. Guidance Note on AI Governance (Safe & Trusted AI Working Group) 
The guidance note outline s practical approaches for governments to design AI 
governance systems.  
5. Network of AI for Science Institutions (Science Working Group) 
This initiative proposes a collaborative international network to support the use of AI in 
scientific research. It focusses on enabling cross-border collaboration, sharing tools and 
datasets, and strengthening participation of institutions across regions. 
6. Alliance for Advancing Inclusion through AI (Inclusion for Social Empowerment 
Working Group) 
The alliance aims to promote AI solutions that improve access to services, opportunities 
and information for underserved communities. It includes a platform to document use 
cases, share implementation practices and support scaling of inclusive AI initiatives. 
7. Voluntary Guiding Principles for Skilling and Reskilling in the Age of AI (Human 
Capital Working Group) 
These principles focus on strengthening workforce preparedness for the AI era through 
AI literacy, reskilling initiatives and inclusive access to learning opportunities, particularly 
for vulnerable and underserved groups.  
8. New Delhi Frontier AI Impact Commitments 
This document outlines voluntary commitments by participating organisations to improve 
transparency on real -world AI usage and strengthen multilingual evaluation of AI 
systems to support broader and more inclusive adoption.” 

55 
 
 
B. Ministry of New and Renewable Energy 
 
46. Artificial Intelligence based applications and learning models are gradually being 
suitably used to identify the risky areas, risk patterns, probability and impact of the risk 
envisaged. Some of the major use cases for power sector include use of Al for de tection 
and analysis of Information Security risk at real -time basis as well as for post -facto 
forensic.GRID-INDIA has established a Next Generation Security Operation Centre 
(SOC) for monitoring the network activities of its 6 control centres (viz. NLDC &  5 
RLDCs) and is operating the same since October 2022. Artificial Intelligence (AI) -based 
behavioral analysis models are used in the established SOC modules viz. User Entity 
Behavior Analysis (UEBA) and Network Behaviour Anomaly Detection (NBAD) which 
identify deviation from general behavioural patterns/ profiles of the User/ Network 
component thereby generating alerts to the concerned security team for further 
investigations. Al-driven challenges in cyberspace are increasing and utilities are being 
targeted for the massive impact of such activities. Cyber Security Al -driven challenges 
include Advanced Persistent Threats (APT) and reconnaissance activity by embedded 
Malware that can adapt, evolve, and evade detection. Such threats can be mitigated 
through D eep packet inspections, hardened security design and enforcement of strict 
security policies. GRID -INDIA being ISO27001:2022 certified has implemented suitable 
controls to protect its Critical Information Infrastructure (CII) installations at NLDC & 
RLDCs from Al -based threats. Also, robust incidence response and recovery 
mechanisms with periodic audits and drills help in necessary control and emergency 
preparedness. 
 
47. When asked if the Minis try of New & renewable Energy was  working together 
with the Indian Meteorological Department to get early insights on where there might be 
a chance of  solar power going down or wind frequency going down, which could affect 
the power grid, the Ministry replied: 
 
“India has set ambitious target of  renewable energy, aiming for 500 GW capacity 
by 2030. lntegrating solar and wind power into the grid requires precise power 
forecasting for effective grid management, energy planning, and maintaining a stable 
and reliable power supply. The main weather parameters utilized for RE ge neration 
forecast are (a) Precipitation (b) Atmospheric Pressure (c) Relative humidity (d) Solar 
irradiation (e) Temperature (f) Wind speed & direction. The following steps have been 
undertaken in the area of  weather forecasting to ensure grid stability: ( i) Central 
Electricity Authority (CEA) has constituted a core group comprising members from the 
Indian Meteorological Department (IMD), National Centre for Medium Range Weather 
Forecasting (NCMRWF), GRID -INDIA, National Institute of Wind Energy (NIWE), 
National Institute of Solar Energy (NISE), Solar Energy Corporation of lndia Ltd (SECI) 
and experts from the wind and solar sector to develop a methodology to improve data 
collection and forecasting for enhanced renewable energy (RE) prediction. (ii) Joint 
meetings have been organised by Ministry of Power & Ministry of Earth Sciences 

56 
 
(MoES) have been held with stakeholders to improve localized weather forecasts. (iii) 
IMD has agreed to share key inputs including Precipitation, Atmospheric Pressure, 
Relative humidity, Solar iradiation, Temperature, Wind speed & direction. (iv) Forecasts 
will be based on a l2xl2 km GFS model grid, with l0 -day forecasts at 00 and l2 UTC, 3 -
day forecasts at 06 and l8 UTC, and hourly resolution up to 36 hours, followed by 3-hour 
intervals. IMD is also working to enable sub -hourly (1s-minute) forecasting capabilities. 
(v) IMDNCMRWF will provide weather forecasts for RE rich states at one -hour intervals 
with enhanced grid resolution of4x4 km or better". (vi) They will  provide weather 
forecasts at LS-minute interval to Grid -lndia using MoES model data, with a grid size of  
4x4 km and a refresh rate of twice -daily. By June 2025, the refresh rate will be 
increased to hourly, subject to availability of  actual data from Automated Weather 
Stations (AWS) installed at RE plants. (vii) Additionally, IMDNCMRWF will provide 
satellite-based products for nowcasting cloud, fog and storm movements, enabling solar 
radiation fluctuation predictions up to three hours in advance, starting February - March 
2025. (viii) IMD is currently sharing specialized solar and wind energy forecasts to help 
optimize power supply strategies during extreme weather conditions. The forecast 
resolution has been improved from 25x25 km to l 2x 12 km and the forecast frequency 
has been increased from once daily to four times a day. (ix) weather forecasting 
services are being provided to power sector through a dedicated portal, offering weather 
forecasts, nowcast warnings, all India Weather for ecasts & meteograms, satellite & 
RADAR datq and severe weather alerts.” 
 
48. During deposition before the Committee, the Secretary of MeitY submitted: 
 
“करेंट्ली डेटा सेन्टसस  का  लगभग  1020 मेगावाट लगा  हुआ है। दो वर्स में वह डबल  हो जाएगा। यह 
लगभग  दो हजार  से  ऊपर  चला  जाएगा। हो सकता  है कक   चार -पााँच वर्ों में चार -पााँच गीगावाट पावर  
की  जरूरत  पड़ेगी। अभी इसकी  प्लान िंग कर ी  है। More than that, distribution network has 
to be planned because they need to be close to a 400-kilowatt sub-station. इसललए  
उसकी  प्लान िंग भी चल  रही  है। We have had two or three rounds of discussions with all 
stakeholders”. 
 
49. He further submitted: 
 
“इसे  बढ़ा रहे  हैं क्योंकक इसमें दो ररक्वायरमेंट्स हैं। एक  पावर  की  ररक्वायरमेंट है और  दूसरी  
क ेलक्टलवटी की  ररक्वायरमेंट है। जहााँ पर  अिंडर-सी  केबल  आता है, यह उसके  पास  रहता  है। लेकक  
इिंट सल किंट्री का  डेटा है, तो उसमें दो तरह  के  और  डेटा सेन्टसस  आएिंगे। जैसे   ोएडा वगैरह  में डेटा सेन्टसस  
लग  रहे  हैं। यहााँ डोमेलटटक  ररक्वायरमेंट मीट कर े  के  ललए  भी डेटा सेन्टर की  जरूरत  होती है और  एज़ 
डेटा सेन्टसस  भी लग  रहे  हैं, क्योंकक टपेलियली  एआई और  लोकली  कम्पप्यूट करने  के लिए  इसकी  जरूरत  
पड़ती  है”। 
 
 

57 
 
 
C. Ministry of Finance 
 
Department of Financial Services /Department of Revenue/Directorate of 
Enforcement (ED)/Central Board of Direct Taxes (CBDT)/Central Board of 
Indirect Taxes and Customs (CBIC) 
 
50.  In the Financial sector, the challenges like growing third -party dependencies and 
market concentration; increased correlation due to widespread use of similar AI models 
leading to financial stability risks; lack of interpretability of AI models and data quality 
concerns; Data privacy, cybersecurity concerns, and use of AI for spreading 
disinformation; the use of AI in cybersecurity can significantly strengthen our defenses 
against cyber threats however cyber attackers can also leverage AI to enhance their 
methods, making them more effective and difficult to counter, are being encountered. 
 
51. With respect to role played by AI in improving and boosting cyber security 
measures in India and checking cyber-crimes along with improving law enforcement and 
prevention of crime in India, it was further submitted that: 
 
 “(1) Cyber security threats and cyber -crime is a major area of concern in 
India: Cyber-crime and online financial frauds are crimes committed using the 
internet to deceive or defraud individuals or organizations for financial gain: 
 
(i) Automated Transactions; 
(ii) Account Takeovers;  
(iii) Deep fake and Identity Fraud; 
(iv) Cryptocurrency Manipulation; 
(v) AI-Generated Shell Companies.  
 
(2) Role of AI in improving law enforcem ent, preventing cyber -crime and 
combating online financial frauds; 
 
(i) Real-time fraud detection and prevention: AI can detect or prevent 
fraud through Real -time Transaction Monitoring. The AI -powered systems can 
analyse huge amounts of transaction data in real time, lagging suspicious 
activities or anomalies e.g. AI systems can detect unusual deviation in patterns / 
behaviour such as large, uncharacteristic withdrawals or transactions in unusual 
locations). AI can also use behavioural biometrics (such as typing speed, mouse 
movements, and navigation patterns) to monitor user behaviour and identify 
inconsistencies. 
 
(ii) Identity verification and authentication: AI can use facial recognition 
and voice biometrics for secure, frictionless authentication. This ensures that only 
authorized users can access their financial accounts, redu cing the risk of identity 
theft.  
 

58 
 
(iii) Predictive Analytics for Fraud Prevention: By examining historical data, 
AI models can predict which transactions are most likely to be fraudulent and 
alert authorities or banks to take preventive action. Predictive model s can also 
identify risky patterns or high -risk individuals, helping financial institutions take 
proactive steps to mitigate fraud. 
 
(iv) Anomaly Detection with Machine Learning: Machine learning 
algorithms can be trained to detect unusual patterns in user behaviour or financial 
transactions. These algorithms continuously learn from new data, allowing them 
to identify and respond to emerging fraud tactics e.g. if a user typically makes 
small, domestic transactions but suddenly attempts an international transfer of a 
large sum, the AI system would flag this as an anomaly and prompt additional 
verification. 
 
(v) Fraudulent Account Detection: AI can help detect synthetic identity 
fraud, where criminals create fake identities using a combination of real and 
fabricated in formation. Machine learning models can cross -check various data 
points across multiple platforms to uncover discrepancies and identify such 
fraudulent accounts. 
 
(vi) Analysis of huge data:  AI can analyse huge amount of data/information 
which are collected duri ng investigation such as bank statements, financial 
reports, email dumps etc. in real time basis. 
 
(vii) Detection of hidden assets: In criminal cases especially cyber and 
crypto fraud cases, criminals not only commit illegal activities but also hide their 
illicit assets/funds in a hidden wallet. In this respect, a well -trained AI with 
analysis capabilities can help in tracing such hidden assets and the same can be 
recovered”. 
 
52. Regarding the role of AI in combating online financial frauds in India , it was 
submitted that: 
 
 “CBDT 
AI can play an effective role in combating online financial frauds in the context of 
ITD by protecting its IT -systems from cyber threats and attacks and responding to 
such threats in real -time. Machine learning algorithms can predict cyberattacks by 
recognizing unusual network behavior, while natural language processing helps 
decode phishing attempts or malicious code. AI -driven automation can patch 
security gaps, manage access controls, and reduce human error. 
 
 

59 
 
CBIC 
AI can be effectively used in the following ways to combat online financial frauds in 
India 
 AI can be used in Data Analytics of large data in a short time and the 
analytics report generated by AI can be used in combating online financial fraud 
including tax related fraud. 
 The AI Modules can be used to identify the pattern in the related data using 
users’ profile, transactional history and the compliance data, and pattern can be 
used to identify alert and risky financial fraud.  
 Artificial Intelligence/Machine Learni ng models trained on transaction 
patterns can detect anomalies and flag suspicious activities like phishing attempts 
in real-time. 
 AI-powered AML (Anti -Money Laundering) Tools can be used to  monitor 
large volumes of transactions and create alerts. 
 AI-driven Cybersecurity Tools can be used to  detect malware, ransomware, 
and fraud vectors in digital payment ecosystems. 
 AI Chatbots & Virtual Agents can be used to create awareness among 
customers on financial frauds.  
 AI can be utilized to detect and pr event trade -based money laundering by 
analysing patterns and anomalies in customs data. 
FIU-IND 
AI can play a vital role in understanding the legal requirement and business 
dynamics and thus may help in optimising the effective targeted RFIs, enhancing 
the precision of suspicious transaction detection. Al can help identify emerging 
risks and trends in financial crime, enabling proactive measures to be taken. Al 
can be used to monitor transactions for suspicious patterns, such as structured 
transactions, shell company usage, or unusual transaction amounts. Al can assist 
in verifying client identities and assessing their risk profiles during the onboarding 
process especially in VKYC etc. 
2. By leveraging machine learning and data analytics, AI can dynamically 
adjust thresholds settings with data -driven adjustments based on real -time fraud 
trends, transactional behaviors, and risk profiles, reducing manual intervention 
and ensuring greater accuracy in alert generation. Al -powered systems can 
monitor transactions  in real -time, enabling faster detection and response to 
suspicious activities. Al can support the development and maintenance of 
dynamic financial crime risk assessments, allowing for continuous monitoring of 
changes in risk profiles. Unlike static thresh old based RFIs, AI enables 

60 
 
personalized risk assessment e.g. High -risk customers are subject to lower 
transaction thresholds whereas Low -risk individuals face fewer unnecessary 
alerts, reducing compliance burden.   
3. AI can adapt to the changing scenarios  quickly and thereby enhance RFI 
effectiveness, improving AML/CFT compliance by increasing detection accuracy, 
reducing false positives, and adapting in real -time to evolving financial crimes 
with AI -powered intelligence, Reporting Entities can strengthen AML/CFT 
systems and enhances financial fraud detection.  The new age financial crimes 
such as phishing, identity theft, Investment scam etc. may be quickly detected by 
the enhanced use of AI/ML. Al's ability to process large amounts of data quickly 
and accurately enables faster and more efficient AML/CFT processes. 
4. The AI tools/technology such as Machine Learning (ML) Algorithms, 
Behavioral Biometrics, Natural Language Processing (NLP), Predictive Analytics, 
Fraud Management Platforms, AI -Driven Chatbots , Network Graph Analytics, 
Deep Learning, Simulation Modelling helps in the detection of anomalies in 
transaction patterns (e.g., unusual spending, logins), analyze user behavior 
(typing speed, mouse movements) to detect takeovers, identify phishing attemp ts 
in emails, SMS, and social media, forecast potential fraud using historical data 
and trends, real -time, cross -channel fraud detection and AML using neural 
networks, transaction monitoring to detect money laundering and mule networks, 
analyze card transa ctions to reduce fraud and false declines, simulate fraud 
scenarios to test and refine detection systems etc. Al algorithms can analyse 
large volumes of transaction data to identify anomalies and patterns that might 
indicate money laundering or terrorist financing activities, which can be difficult for 
humans to detect. Hence, developments in AI research in the field of AML and 
financial frauds, could lead to prevention and reduction in the instances of 
financial crimes in India.  
Directorate of Enforcement (ED) 
(1) Cyber security threats and cyber -crime is a major area of concern in India: 
Cyber-crime and online financial frauds are crimes committed using the internet 
to deceive or defraud individuals or organizations for financial gain. Methods used 
by criminal for money-laundering which may arise as a challenge for India as well 
with the help of AI are briefly categorised as under: 
 
(i) Automated Transactions : The use of AI by criminals to automate  
transactions is a growing concern in cybersecurity and financial sectors.  
Criminals can leverage AI to improve the efficiency, scale, and sophistication of 
their illicit activities, including fraud, money laundering, and cybercrime.  For 
example, the criminals use AI to automate the process of testing stolen credit card 
details by trying multiple combinations of credit card numbers, expiration dates, 
and CVVs on various online stores. AI -powered bots can execute thousands of 

61 
 
small transactions across different jurisdictions, making it harder for traditional 
anti-money laundering (AML) systems to detect anomalies. 
 
(ii) Account Takeovers: AI can help criminals automate the process of taking 
over bank or e -commerce accounts. AI bots can be Programmemed to attempt 
login using stolen credentials (often obtained through ph ishing or data breaches) 
and use various methods to bypass multi - factor authentication (MFA) systems, 
such as AI -powered phone number spoofing, or even impersonating legitimate 
users. 
(iii) Deep fake and Identity Fraud : Deep fakes involve the use of AI to creat e 
hyper-realistic but fabricated images, videos, or audio recordings, making it 
challenging, even to experts, to distinguish them from authentic content. This 
technology poses significant threats to financial institutions and individuals alike. 
AI-generated fake identities and deep fake videos can be used to bypass Know 
Your Customer (KYC) verification systems. 
 
(iv) Cryptocurrency Manipulation : AI algorithms can execute sophisticated 
trades across crypto exchanges to obscure illicit funds through complex 
transactions. The AI -generated profiles help launder illicit funds by enabling the 
conversion of cryptocurrencies into fiat currencies without revealing the 
perpetrators' true identities. 
 
(v) AI-Generated Shell Companies : AI ca n automate the creation of fake 
businesses as AI can swiftly produce realistic documents such as invoices and 
contracts, facilitating the creation of fake business activities. AI enables the 
analysis and execution of complex transaction patterns, such as layering funds 
through multiple shell c ompanies. This process involves moving money through 
various accounts to obscure its origin, complicating detection efforts. 
 
(2 )Role of AI in improving law enforcem ent, preventing cyber -crime and 
combating online financial frauds: AI-powered tools can analyse emails, 
messages, or websites for signs of phishing attacks or scams. It can detect subtle 
differences in language that indicate fraud, such as urgent messages, requests 
for personal details, or suspicious links. AI can also automat ically flag fraudulent 
communication attempts, protecting users from falling victim to common social 
engineering scams. AI can help in combating online financial frauds by following 
ways: 
 
(i) Real-time fraud detection and prevention: AI can detect or prevent 
fraud through Real -time Transaction Monitoring. The AI -powered systems  can 
analyse huge amounts of transaction data in real time , lagging  suspicious 
activities or anomalies e.g. AI systems can detect unusual deviation in patterns / 
behaviour such as large,  uncharacteristic withdrawals or transactions in unusual 
locations). AI an also use behavioural biometrics (such as typing speed, mouse 

62 
 
movements, and navigation patterns) to monitor user behaviour and identify 
inconsistencies. 
 
(ii) Identity verification and authentication: AI can use facial recognition 
and voice biometrics for secure, frictionless authentication. This ensures that only 
authorized users can access their financial accounts, reducing the risk of identity 
theft.  
 
(iii) Predictive Analytics for Fraud Prevention: By examining historical data, 
AI models can predict which transactions are most likely to be fraudulent and 
alert authorities or banks to take preventive action. Predictive models can also 
identify risky patterns or hig h-risk individuals, helping financial institutions take 
proactive steps to mitigate fraud. 
 
(iv) Anomaly Detection with Machine Learning: Machine learning 
algorithms can be trained to detect unusual patterns in user behaviour or financial 
transactions. These al gorithms continuously learn from new data, allowing them 
to identify and respond to emerging fraud tactics e.g. if a user typically makes 
small, domestic transactions but suddenly attempts an international transfer of a 
large sum, the AI system would flag this as an anomaly and prompt additional 
verification. 
 
(v) Fraudulent Account Detection: AI can help detect synthetic identity 
fraud, where criminals create fake identities using a combination of real and 
fabricated information. Machine learning models can cr oss-check various data 
points across multiple platforms to uncover discrepancies and identify such 
fraudulent accounts. 
 
(vi) Analysis of huge data:  AI can analyse huge amount of data/information 
which are collected during investigation such as bank statements,  financial 
reports, email dumps etc. in real time basis. 
 
(vii) Detection of hidden assets: In criminal cases especially cyber and 
crypto fraud cases, criminals not only commit illegal activities but also hide their 
illicit assets/funds in a hidden wallet. In this respect, a well -trained AI with 
analysis capabilities can help in tracing such hidden assets and the same can be 
recovered”. 
 
53. When the Committee asked about the role of Al in streamlining public services 
like Aadhaar and GST and collection of direct a nd indirect taxes in India and widening 
the tax base, it was submitted that: 
 
 

63 
 
 
 “Direct Taxes 
AI can play a significant role in enhancing the collection of direct taxes and 
widening the tax base, through the following measures:  
 Personalized Taxpayer Assistance: AI chatbots can assist taxpayers with 
address their queries and guide taxpayers to resolve mismatches to ensure filing of 
Income tax Returns (ITRs) and other Statements in a streamlined manner. This 
would reduce compliance burden and potential grievances. AI can also proactively 
notify taxpayers about mismatches between reported incomes and information in 
the Annual Information Statement (AIS), promoting voluntary compliance. 
 Automated Scrutiny & Risk Profiling : AI can analyze ITR and non -ITR 
forms to identify high -risk taxpayers, improving scrutiny selection, benchmarking 
sectors and ensuring identification of instances of under -reporting or use of 
excessive deduction within taxpayer categories. The capability to fine tune case 
selection model b ased on previous orders/decisions can also be enhanced using 
AI. Predictive analytics for fraud detection, real -time monitoring, and AI assisted tax 
receipt matching and information can also help identify tax evasion and ensure 
compliance. 
 
 Outlier Analysi s: AI can be used for outlier analysis, which helps in 
establishing taxpayer profiles and spotting deviations in behavior, such as abrupt 
drops in declared income or drastic increases in assets, etc. 
 
 Campaign efficacy : AI can also help in graded communica tions for fine -
tuning of campaign models based on learnings of earlier campaigns. 
 
 Predictive Tax Compliance Measures : AI can identify sectors with low tax 
compliance and suggest targeted policy interventions at a sectoral level. It can also 
be used for pr edicting income, Advance Tax payable, etc. on the basis of analysis 
of historical data and trends. 
Indirect Taxes 
AI plays the following role in streamlining public services like Aadhaar and GST, 
and collection of direct and indirect taxes in India and widening the tax base: 
 The public services can be made more friendly and accessible by using A.I. 
in user interface to make instruction vernacular based and in conversant language. 
 Data for multiple uses including income tax, banking and other financial 
transaction can be analysed through A.I to identify areas requiring government 
intervention or enforcement action to improve compliance. 
 A.I. can be used as an active assistant in return filling and providing help to 
taxpayers.      

64 
 
 To identify suspicious patterns in GST Registration Applications, returns 
filing, flagging potential tax evasion AI could be used. 
 AI models can predict potential non -compliant taxpayers based on historical 
data, transaction patterns and financial behaviour. 
 AI chatbots can guid e taxpayers through GST registration, returns filing and 
payments. 
 AI can be used to improve user experience and to further 
enhance the ease of doing business. At present, there is Chatbot 'Vaani" which has 
AI features. Using these tool users  can very easi ly search regarding 
any of the keywords such as Registration, Import, and Export etc on the ICEGATE 
portal. The tool is trained to reply with all relevant items such as User Manual, 
Advisory etc related  the keyword. As with any AI tool, it becomes more int elligent 
with continued usage. Therefore, promoting this tool further among users will lead 
to a better interactive experience for the Importers/Exporters and other users. 
 AI algorithms can analyse GST data to detect fraudulent transactions, fake 
invoices, and cases of tax evasion. Advanced analytics can identify circular trading, 
input tax credit fraud, and suspicious patterns in large -scale transactions. AI -
powered dashboards can monitor GST compliance in real time, assigning risk 
scores to businesses for  proactive inspections. AI -powered systems can auto -
assess tax returns, verify claims, and flag inconsistencies. This reduces human 
intervention and processing time. 
 Leverage AI tools to help traders accurately identify  the correct Customs 
Tariff Heading (CTH) number for their goods. 
 This will reduce classification errors, streamline customs procedures, and 
promote compliance with trade regulations. 
 Stopping Fraud & Duplication: AI can detect fake Aadhaar IDs, bogus GST cl
aims, and shell companies involved in tax fraud. 
 Simplifying Tax Filing: AI -powered assistants can help businesses and 
individuals file GST and income tax easily, reducing errors and delays. 
 Expanding the Tax Base: AI can analyze transactions to identify potential 
taxpayers who aren’t currently in the tax net. 
 Faster Compliance & Support: AI chatbots can provide instant help for tax-
related queries, making compliance smoother. 
 AI can make the GST and customs related matters like classification and 
valuation of goods more transparent and bring uniformity”. 
54. Further, the Ministry apprised the Committee about the status of co -ordination 
between FIU and GSTN for Data analytics , roles of combined synergy and coordination 

65 
 
likely to be  played in Ministry of Finance and the likely benefits for the st ake holders as 
under: 
 “GSTN 
 
For the purpose of analytics, GSTN inter alia utilises various third -party data 
sources. This information is utilized to design use cases for the benefit of GST tax 
officers, with the objectives of aiding ongoing tax investigations, strengthening 
financial fraud detection and refining system-based risk assessment process. 
For receiving information from FIU, GSTN has been notified by the Department of 
Revenue as a ‘recipient’ entity. The legal framework for FIU to provi de 
information to GSTN is thus in place, using which, GSTN can seek data from FIU 
based on its requirements for data analytics.  
FIU-IND 
Goods and Services Tax Network (GSTN) has been notified as the 26th agency 
under Section 66 of the Prevention of Money Laundering Act (PMLA) for 
information sharing with Financial Intelligence Unit (FIU-India), aiming to enhance 
intelligence sharing and to combat financial crimes. 
Memorandum of Understanding has also been signed by FIU with GSTN for 
mutual sharing of data and intelligence between the two Organizations. In 
addition during data analysis, additional details wherever required, are sought 
and shared expeditiously between the two organizations”. 
 
55. Regarding the mechanism developed by Income Tax Department for solv ing the 
issues related to data dependency on private vendors and system crashing/demolition 
once the vendors are no longer associated with the Department , it was apprised as 
under: 
 “To ensure a smooth vendor transition, the Income Tax Department (ITD) has 
implemented safeguards to mitigate data dependency on private vendors with 
system stability. Infrastructure pertaining to the project is procured by the 
Managed Service Provider (MS P) but the application and infrastructure is owned 
by the ITD. The MSP is responsible for design, development, implementation, 
operation and maintenance of the projects with defined contractual obligations. 
The ITD also has a technical cadre (Electronic Da ta Processing (EDP) cadre) for 
an in -house understanding of the technology involved. Additionally, the ITD 
ensures proper exit management and knowledge transfer during transitions to 
maintain continuity and efficiency. Exit Management is one of the crucial  phases 
in the project involving the transfer of the project from one service provider to 
another. During this phase, a smooth transition of the project documentation and 
artefacts, configuration items, databases and regulated assets is ensured 

66 
 
between the existing and the new MSP while ensuring continuity and quality of 
critical services”. 
56. When asked about the databases that are currently being used by FIU and 
Revenue Department, the following was submitted: 
 
 “CBDT 
The various projects in the ITD are using databases of DB2, Oracle and Postgres 
technologies. The choice of database depends on the functional requirements, 
technical bid proposals submitted by the MSP and past experience.  
 
Databases capture data from various sources from within and outside the  ITD. 
The risk detection exercise happens through different scenarios on the broad 
database. Therefore, there does not seem to be a risk of bias coming on the 
database level in the ITD. 
CBIC 
The Following Databases are used in the DG Systems. 
Oracle, MySQL, Db2, Enterprise Postgres Advanced Server 
Hbase 
IIAS Appliance (Db2) 
Hive (Warehouse), mariadb 
Neo4j Graph DB 
 
Data is transactional and not based on past cases or certain patterns. So, there is 
no bias in output. Analytical output in DG Systems is based on business rules 
approved by the Department. For AI related model output, proper training data is 
prepared on the basis of business rules and patterns observed in transactional data 
so as to mitigate any chances of biasness in analysis. 
FIU-IND 
FIU-India has its own database which contains various reports including 
Suspicious Transaction Reports. Further, FIU also uses information from various 
other extemal databases like CBDT, MCA, NPCI, GSTN, NSDL, CDSL to enrich 
the information reported by the Reporting Entities. 

67 
 
Every report that is reported to FIU -India undergoes a process of Entity 
Resolution to extract entity and their related attributes from reports and apply 
Entity Resolution Rules on each entity. The entity enrichment is then done using 
external databases followed by identification of possible relationships between 
entities based on the attributes extracted from the reports. FINnet 2.0 deploys Al / 
ML tools and algorithms to enable accurate resolution. 
The Al & ML model is also used for L EA prediction. The Al/ ML model has been 
trained on the historical data and it also uses pattern recognition and 
classification models to identify patterns to make informed decisions and 
predictions”. 
 
57. When asked to elaborate on the impact of use of AI in various Programmemes 
run by the Department and future course of action for integration of AI in the functioning 
of the Department, the following was submitted: 
 
“Financial Intelligence Unit-India (FIU-IND): 
 
FINnet 2.0, the state -of-the-art IT system of FIU -India, uses Al/ML to generate accurate 
linkages and create enriched profiles of reported entities for improving quality, support 
deeper analysis, visualize the network & uncover hidden relationships.  
 
Goods and Services Tax Network (GSTN): 
AI/ML is being used in system -based risk assessment, flags fraudulent Input Tax Credit 
(ITC) claims, and identifies tax evasion networks, ensuring robust revenue protection. In 
future, GSTN seeks to utilize Generative AI for grievance redressal of tickets raised by 
taxpayers, helping draft notices under human supervision, and helping tax officers in 
use of various analytical tools and in training. 
Central Board of Direct Taxes (CBDT): 
At present, the use of Artificial Intelligence in the Income Tax Department (ITD) is limited 
to basic Natural Language Processing (NLP) for processing unstructured data and 
selective Machine Learning (ML) for refining case selection models. In future, the 
Income Tax Department envisages wider AI integration including use of AI powered 
chatbots, predictive analytics, anomaly detection, trend identification, classification, 
fraud detection and pattern recognition, etc.  
 
Central Board of Indirect Taxes and Customs (CBIC): 
For future integration of AI in functioning of Department, CBIC is Implementing a new AI 
powered Customs Integrated System for end -to-end digitization of all Customs 
processes to promote faster dwell time and ease of doing business.  
The National Customs Target Centre (NCTC) is using AI in Image Analytics for analysis 
of X -ray images generated by scanning of containerized cargo. This AI model helps 

68 
 
provide a prediction of the cargo that may potentially be inside the container. The future 
course of action is  to integrate this model with ICEGATE using APIs, so that the model 
can ingest images from all scanners located across the country, and the predictions can 
be provided directly to the officer who is located on the field. 
AI/ML is being used in system -based risk assessment, flags fraudulent Input Tax Credit 
(ITC) claims, and identifies tax evasion networks, ensuring robust revenue protection. In 
future, CBIC seeks to utilize Generative AI for grievance redressal of tickets raised by 
taxpayers, drafting notic es under human supervision, and helping tax officers in use of 
various analytical tools and in training.” 
58. When asked whether the Department would be able to save exchequer with the 
assistance of AI in its functioning; the Ministry submitted that: 
 “Goods and Services Tax Network (GSTN): 
AI/ML AI systems have the potential to assist in proactively detecting fake invoices and 
fraudulent refund claims, significantly reducing revenue leakages and securing funds for 
the exchequer before they are lost. Further, AI may help in increasing productivity of 
officers thereby contributing savings to exchequer. 
Central Board of Direct Taxes (CBDT): 
Al is envisaged to improve risk identification, campaigns and case lifecycle, leading to 
better resource utilisation and str engthened voluntary compliance, thereby supporting 
improved revenue outcomes.  
As the economy grows and the numbers of taxpayers increase, there will be a need to 
cater to a larger user base both in terms of services as well as verifications. AI 
assistance will help in more effective utilization of existing manpower as well as physical 
infrastructure, and lessen the need for a corresponding increase in spending for creation 
of such capacities, thus saving on exchequer. 
Central Board of Indirect Taxes and Customs (CBIC) 
The use of AI in Image Analytics will help enhance the department’s performance by 
assisting officers in the analysis of scanned images, thereby helping them avoid human 
errors and cognitive load, and increasing accuracy of image analysis. Thi s will help in 
acting against revenue & non -revenue risks, thereby augmenting Customs duty and 
saving the exchequer. 
CBIC aims to evolve from rule -based processing to predictive, intelligence-led targeting. 
This will lead to better utilisation of current r esources for pin pointed, high value 
investigations thereby leading to higher revenue realisation.  
AI systems has the potential to assist in proactively detecting fake invoices and 
fraudulent refund claims, significantly reducing revenue leakages and secu ring funds for 
the exchequer before they are lost. Further, AI may help in increasing productivity of 
officers thereby contributing savings to exchequer.” 
 
59. The Committee wanted to know if it was a humungous task to disseminate the 
use of AI in the Revenue offices widely spread across the Country and also due to want 

69 
 
of technically trained experts, to which the Department replied: 
 “Goods and Services Tax Network (GSTN): 
GSTN is achieving dissemination of output of AI/ML use through a centralized analytics 
portal where complex AI/ML processing occurs at the backend, while field officers utilize 
simplified, intuitive risk dashboards. Continuous capacity -building Programmes are 
actively deployed to bridge any technical skill gaps. 
Central Board of Direct Taxes (CBDT): 
Capacity building and targeted training Programmemes can be undertaken through 
iGOT Karmayogi courses and specialised Programmemes at National Academy of 
Direct Taxes (NADT) and its regional training centres for the field formations as and 
when required. This will support wider awareness and understanding of AI and AI 
enabled services.  
The departmental manpower works extensively on its digital systems, and is th erefore 
well-versed in their usage. There are established mechanisms to train the personnel for 
any changes in the departmental digital procedures. The challenge of the task in AI 
adoption for the Department lies primarily in devising systems such that the  AI-related 
changes integrate seamlessly in the existing processes, without negatively affecting the 
working of either the taxpayers or the Department personnel. 
Central Board of Indirect Taxes and Customs (CBIC) 
The targeting initiatives of CBIC are centr ally run through dedicated CBIC data centre. 
The processed output in form of actionable intelligence i s then made available to CBIC 
field offices for assistance in investigations. At present enough technically trained 
experts are available centrally in various functional verticals for carrying out the targeting 
and citizen centric initiatives of CBIC. 
CBIC is achieving dissemination of output of AI/ML use through a centralized analytics 
portal where complex AI/ML processing occurs at the backend, while fiel d officers utilize 
simplified, intuitive risk dashboards. Continuous capacity -building Programmes are 
actively deployed to bridge any technical skill gaps.” 
60. Elaborating on the impact of use of AI in various Programmemes run by the 
Directorate of Enforcemen t and the future course of action for integration of AI in the 
functioning of the Directorate, the submission of the Department was as under: 
 
 “As of now, ED is not using any AI tools for money laundering investigations. 
Decisions on large scale use of AI  are policy matters to be taken by the Central 
Government and other competent authorities, not by ED alone. ED has noticed that 
criminals are using AI to improve their laundering methods, so it stays alert and, with 
FIU, MCA etc., closely watches new AI ba sed frauds and processes data to find shell 
companies, suspicious transactions and red flags. In future, AI can help ED dispose of 
cases faster by quickly analysing large volumes of data and highlighting high risk cases 
for priority action.” 
 
 

70 
 
61. Since the Di rectorate of Enforcement was a multi -disciplinary organization 
mandated with investigation of offence of money laundering and violations of foreign 
exchange laws and  enforcement under various Acts, the Committee  wished to know 
about  the scope of use of AI in this field and the reply was: 
 
 “In this area, AI has a lot of potential, but ED has not yet developed or used any 
AI based models, and it mainly focusses on investigation while bodies like FIU and RBI 
handle the regulatory side. AI tools can be a game changer by spotting patterns and red 
flag indicators more accurately, which can help agencies investigate shell companies, 
black money and benami transactions more effectively.” 
 
62. During the course of examination, the Committee found that till date, amongst the 
Prosecution Cases filed by ED, presently at various stages of trial, delays in the 
adjudication of these cases were due to inherent complexity of invest igations as well as 
the procedural linkages with the trial of the predicate offence. Hence, the Committee 
wished to know if AI could assist the ED so as to fast track the cases pending at various 
stages. The reply was provided as under: 
 
 “In theory, AI can help ED dispose of cases faster by quickly analysing large 
volumes of data and highlighting high risk cases for priority action. It can link and 
analyse corporate records, tax and property data, banking transactions and land records 
to d etect hidden income, undeclared assets and benami ownership. At present, ED 
does not use such AI tools, and any future use to speed up cases would require 
following evidentiary rules, human supervision and legal decisions.” 
 
63. When asked to elaborate on the impact of use of AI in various Programmemes 
run by CBDT and CBIC  and also regarding integration of AI in the functioning of CBDT 
and CBIC, the following submission was made: 
 
“Central Board of Direct Taxes (CBDT): 
AI-based predictive modelling and anomaly detection can help identify potentially 
ineligible/suspicious deduction/exemption claims through pattern recognition and risk 
profiling, supporting targeted compliance measures.  
 
Artificial Intelligence (AI) offer s significant potential to address the challenge of 
understatement of income by enabling a shift from traditional post -facto enforcement to 
preventive, technology -driven compliance. The Income -tax Department has already 
moved in this direction through NUDG E (Non -intrusive Usage of Data to Guide and 
Enable) campaigns, which are data -centric initiatives that leverage analytics, 
behavioural insights and digital communication to improve voluntary compliance and tax 
collection efficiency. 
 
The implementation of NUDGE initiatives is guided by the SAK.SHAM framework, a 
seven-stage strategy comprising  
 

71 
 
I) Sankalan (systematic compilation of data from diverse sources),  
2) Anusandhan (research and risk analysis),  
3) Kriyanvyan (actionable interventions),  
4) Sampark (targeted communication),  
5) Hastak (handholding and facilitation) 
6) Adhikaar (ensuring transparency and taxpayer trust), and 
7) Mulyankan (continuous monitoring and evaluation).  
 
Under these campaigns, AI -driven risk engines analyse large datasets to  identify 
instances of possible under -reporting, such as non -disclosure of foreign assets or 
income, incorrect claims of deductions under sections like 800, 80GGC or 80E, and 
excess exemptions. Sometimes, AI is also used to make information machine 
compatible to be used in further analysis. Targeted communications are then sent to 
selected taxpayers encouraging them to review and update their Income-tax Returns. 
 
Going forward, AI can further strengthen compliance by better risk profiling and AI -
enabled chatbots and virtual assistants can provide step-by-step guidance filing, helping 
taxpayers correctly report income and deductions.  
Additionally, predictive analytics can identify emerging patterns of non -compliance, 
anomaly detection in high -risk sectors, a nd adaptive risk scoring, enabling timely 
nudges and awareness measures. However, these predictive analytics should be 
guided by prescriptive approach to facilitate taxpayers. These predictive cum 
prescriptive interventions can be in the form of personaliz ed compliance reminders or 
guidance frameworks. Together, these measures can create a transparent, facilitative 
and nonintrusive compliance ecosystem that reduces understatement of income while 
making it easier for taxpayers to meet their obligations accurately. 
Income Tax Department is planning the next phase of the Integrated e -Filing and CPC 
(IEC) project i.e. IEC 3.0, for which the new Managed Service Provider is expected to be 
on-boarded in the year 2027.  
This upcoming project will use advanced techno logies like Artificial Intelligence (AI) and 
Machine Learning to make the system smarter and more efficient. Through AI -Assisted 
seamless filing, taxpayer's support and grievance redressal mechanism, Management 
Information System and robust Governance mech anism, IEC 3.0 aims to create a more 
secure, transparent, and future -ready tax administration system for both taxpayers and 
the Department.  
Central Board of Indirect Taxes and Customs (CBIC): 
Central Board of Customs and Indirect Taxes (CBIC) aims to mini mize official 
intervention and minimize dwell time of cargo by focussing efforts on potentially non -
compliant consignments while facilitating lawful trade. The Risk Management System 
(RMS), central to this design, screens cargo using extensive risk rules. Consignments 
flagged as risky undergo examination and assessment, while non -risky ones are 
processed automatically with minimal human intervention leading to faster turnaround 
time.  With increasing AI integration, RMS is evolving from rule -based processin g to 
predictive, intelligence-led targeting, aligned with the National Trade Facilitation Action 
Plan (NTFAP) 2020-23 to facilitate 90% of all imports and exports. This will significantly 
enhance ease of doing business for importers and exporters. 

72 
 
CBIC has  developed ADVAIT (Advanced Analytics in Indirect Taxes) tool that uses 
machine learning, a subset of AI, to cover use cases related to preventive and predictive 
work. This includes Predictive Analytics of new GST Registrations and new Customs 
Licenses, Pa ttern and Behavior Modelling of Suppliers and Buyers networks, 
Demographic Clustering and Connections lookups across GST, Customs, Central 
Excise and Income Tax databases.  
CBIC aims to broad base delivery of citizen centric services and remove impediments  of 
language / legal efficiency in assessing services. In this regard CBIC has developed AI 
enabled Chatbots: Atithi Mitra (For International Passengers) and Vaani (For 
importers/exporters) The chatbots provide quick responses to user queries related to 
international passengers and imports/exports, reducing the need for direct helpdesk 
interaction. It includes a quick menu for trade categories, machine learning logic for 
query interpretation and FAQ-based responses. 
CBIC is setting-up the Advanced Targeting  System for Passengers (ATS -P) to facilitate 
legitimate travel for passengers while managing the threat posed by risky passengers 
that may require additional scrutiny prior to entering or exiting all international airports in 
India. ATS-P will leverage tec hnological advancements in data processing and big data 
to develop analytical models which will facilitate seamless, non -intrusive and faster 
handling of passengers at the airports. The new system will leverage AI / ML models 
such as Anomaly Detection, Clu stering, Graph based Network Analysis, and Pattern 
Mining to analyze passenger data and facilitate risk assessment. Facial Recognition 
System (FRS) will also be leveraged for matching potential suspects or select high risk 
passengers only. ATS -P will be su pported by a centralized Integrated Command and 
Control Centre (ICCC) set up in Delhi NCR - National Customs Targeting Centre 
(Passenger) - NCTC Pax. The system will capture data from different sources and 
provide necessary inputs to NCTC Pax under DGARM o n potential risks, smuggling of 
contraband, drugs etc., while also enabling passenger facilitation through reduced 
manual intervention & screening of passengers. The risk analysis will encompass 
incoming/outgoing as well as transit passengers. 
CBIC/GSTN im plements Automated Registration Risk Assessment based on the 
recommendations of the GST Council and in accordance with relevant provisions of 
Rule 8(4A) and 9(1) of the CGST Rules, 2017. GSTN assigns a real time risk score to 
the registration application b ased on data analysis and risk parameters. Thereafter, 
based on such assessment, the registration application is channeled through 
appropriate levels of authentication and scrutiny before approval or rejection by the 
proper officer. High risk applications are mandatorily directed to carry out Biometric 
based Aadhar authentication and Document Verification at a designated facilitation 
centre.  In addition, they are also marked for field visit verification. 
Further, for faster container movement, CBIC, has de signed & developed the Container 
Image Analytics Centre (CIAC). The CIAC is a central system, which obtains images 
scanned by scanners in near -real-time, processes these images through a image 
analytics AI model, and gives a prediction about the potential nature of the goods back 
to the officer. This system detects concealed compartments, unusual density signatures, 
and other anomalies that may indicate concealment. The Automated image analysis 
reduces the reliance on manual interpretation and enables faste r yet more reliable 
screening, thereby strengthening enforcement while supporting timely clearance. 

73 
 
Furthermore, CBIC is Implementing a new AI powered Customs Integrated System for 
end-to-end digitization of all Customs processes to promote faster dwell ti me and ease 
of doing business. 
AI adoption in CBIC is increasing across the domains of Risk Assessment and 
Predictive Analytics and is being harnessed for increasing efficiency and ease of doing 
business.”  
64. While examining the subject, the Committee found that CBDT  had started an 
initiative to encourage taxpayers to voluntarily review deduction/exemption claims 
identified as potentially ineligible. When the Committee asked the Department to 
showcase the scope of using AI to mitigate these challenges to over come the problem 
of understatement of income ,  the reply of the Department was same as furnished 
above: 
 
65. Seeing the rapid changes in administration of direct taxes, during the last 
decades; the Committee sought to know  how CBDT propose d to meet the new 
challenges and overcome them with the help and adoption of AI in their functioning. The 
submission made by the CBDT is as under: 
 
 “Some of the challenges which are emerging due to development of economy as 
well as advancement in information technology:  
a. Growth in data sources  
b. Development of complex tax evasion techniques  
c. Globalisation and mobility of capital  
d. Increasing compliance burden due to complex economic ecosystem involving multiple 
stakeholders.  
e. Growth in number of taxpayers 
AI can assist in meeting these challenges through 
a. AI based Advanced data analytics using data from different sources to identify non -
compliance and revenue leakage. Integration can be done on the basis of common 
identifier across databases; however, in cases where common identifier is missing, AI 
can assist in building up of algorithm to find the most suitable match.  
b. AI can assist in identification of non -genuine transaction using advanced statistical 
models or machine learning based whi ch is generally not possible through rule based 
algorithms based on domain expertise.  
c. AI can assist in doing ease of compliance like intelligent validation checks during 
filing, AI chatbots for taxpayer assistance, Personalised compliance reminders and  
Faster processing and refunds and similar initiatives.  
d. Cross border coordination - Technological initiative can also assist in cross border 
coordination through exchange of information or automatic reporting standards.  
e. Serving large taxpayers - AI driven initiatives like SAKSHAM NUDGE can assist in 
facilitating taxpayers through communications and assistance services for doing the 
targeted compliance. These initiatives will be based on Trust -based administration with 
data-driven verification. 

74 
 
ITD e nvisages wider AI use in predictive analytics, anomaly detection, trend 
identification, classification, fraud detection, pattern recognition, chatbot support and 
analysis of unstructured data. AI has the potential to function as a decision -support tool 
within the legal framework and will assist the ITD towards better taxpayer services as 
well as promoting voluntary compliance.” 
 
66. When specifically asked about  how AI could  help CBIC in ‘Ease of Doing 
Business’, the Committee was informed: 
 
 “CBIC aims to broa d base delivery of citizen centric services and remove 
impediments of language / legal efficiency in assessing services. In this regard CBIC 
has developed AI enabled Chatbots: Atithi Mitra (For International Passengers) and 
Vaani (For importers/exporters) The chatbots provide quick responses to user queries 
related to international passengers and imports/exports, reducing the need for direct 
helpdesk interaction. It includes a quick menu for trade categories, machine learning 
logic for query interpretation and FAQ-based responses. 
AI may facilitate faster processing of registrations, returns and refunds through 
automated validation and risk -based assessment. It may reduce unnecessary scrutiny 
for compliant taxpayers; improve transparency and lower compliance  burden, thereby 
supporting Ease of Doing Business. AI/ ML can help in targeting of risk and minimizing 
manual departmental interventions for honest taxpayers. In last 6 months, for ease of 
doing business, risk -based sanction of provisional refund for zero-rated and inverted 
duty refund applications has been introduced. Risk based grant of registration  is also in 
place, which provides for simpler process flow for low -risk applicants. AI/ML can help in 
furthering providing risk based simplified process for promoting ease of doing business. 
CBIC aims to minimize official intervention and minimize dwell time of cargo by 
focussing efforts on potentially non -compliant consignments while facilitating lawful 
trade. The Risk Management System (RMS), central to this design, screens cargo using 
extensive risk rules. Consignments flagged as risky undergo examination and 
assessment, while non -risky ones are processed automatically with minimal human 
intervention leading to faster turnaround time.  With increasing AI integration, RMS is 
evolving from rule-based processing to predictive, intelligence-led targeting, aligned with 
the National Trade Facilitation Action Plan (NTFAP) 2020 -23 to facilitate 90% of all 
imports and exports. This will significantly enhance ease o f doing business for importers 
and exporters.” 
 
67. When asked if AI was playing any role in identifying the fraudsters and criminals 
functioning near the open borders of the Country, the Department replied as: 
 
 “Central Board of Direct Taxes (CBDT): 
The IT Department has significantly improved its use of technology and data analytics to 
identify potential tax evaders and high-risk taxpayers. With technological advancements, 
the collection of financial data in respect of the taxpayers has  commendably improved. 
The analysis of data to find tax evasion clubbed with market intelligence has improved 
the selection of tax evaders for intrusive investigations.  

75 
 
These actions are initiated only after thorough discrete surveillance/investigations, use 
of technol ogy and data analytics and gathering credible information regarding tax 
evasion and undisclosed income & assets of an assessee from various channels.  
It may be noted that ITD receives information regarding tax evasion through various 
channels, viz. inform ation sharing platforms between various Government Agencies/ 
organisations like Central Economic Intelligence Bureau (CEIB) and Regional Economic 
Intelligence Committee (REIC), Tax evasion petitions (TEPs), information received 
through informers, information filed with ITD in form of Specified Financial Transactions 
(SFTs ), Suspicious Transaction Reports (STRs) received regularly through FIU -IND, 
etc.  
By analysing transactional patterns and cross -referencing multiple data sources, AI can 
support the ident ification of potential fraudsters and suspicious financial activities.AI -
enabled analytics can analyse large datasets and utilise enhanced capabilities such as 
fund flow analysis to identify suspicious patterns, hidden relationships, circular 
transactions and layered fund transfers. 
Central Board of Indirect Taxes and Customs (CBIC): 
The NCTC’s AI image analytics model works primarily on images obtained from X -ray 
scanning of containerized cargo. It applies computer vision and deep learning 
techniques to de tect anomalies or hidden compartments, identify prohibited or 
suspicious items and flag unusual density patterns or shapes.” 
68. On being asked about steps been envisaged to help the taxpayers (Direct and 
Indirect) to fill their returns without falling prey to  online frauds and lose huge amount of 
money, the submission of the Department was: 
 
 “Central Board of Direct Taxes (CBDT): 
Income Tax Department is planning the next phase of the Integrated e -Filing and CPC 
(IEC) project i.e. IEC 3.0, for which the new Managed Service Provider is expected to be 
on-boarded in the year 2027. IEC 3.0 intends to use Al/ ML to incorporate Risk Based 
Multi Factored Authentication for more secured access to e-filing portal. 
Central Board of Indirect Taxes and Customs (CBIC): 
GST returns are filed in GSTN portal which is secure and seamlessly handles millions of 
return every month without any such issues.” 
 
69. In response to a query as to  why AI was primarily a reactive mechanism when 
there could  be more predictive or preventive AI model to check revenue leakage, the 
Department submitted: 
 
 
 

76 
 
 “Central Board of Direct Taxes (CBDT): 
In future, the ITD envisages wider AI integration including predictive analytics, anomaly 
detection, trend identification, classification, fraud detection and pattern recognition 
etc.to plug revenue leakages.  
Predictive analytics can significantly strengt hen income -tax administration by enabling 
authorities to anticipate non -compliance and revenue leakages before they occur. By 
analyzing historical filings, third-party financial data, transaction patterns, and behavioral 
indicators, predictive models can identify high-risk taxpayers, sectors, or activities, allow 
targeted scrutiny while leave compliant taxpayers undisturbed. It also supports pre -filing 
alerts, faster refunds for low-risk cases, and more accurate revenue forecasting. Overall, 
predictive analytics shifts tax administration from reactive enforcement to proactive, non-
intrusive compliance management, improving both revenue protection and taxpayer 
trust. However, mechanisms have to be drawn to balance the predictive analytics with 
due diligence to avoid false positives so that honest taxpayers are not aggrieved. 
Central Board of Indirect Taxes and Customs (CBIC): 
CBIC has developed ADVAIT (Advanced Analytics in Indirect Taxes) tool that uses 
machine learning, a subset of AI, to cover use cases related to preventive and predictive 
work. This includes Predictive Analytics of new GST Registrations and new Customs 
Licenses, Pattern and Behavior Modelling of Suppliers and Buyers networks, 
Demographic Clustering and Connections lookups across GST, Custom s, Central 
Excise and Income Tax databases. AI adoption in CBIC is increasing across the 
domains of Risk Assessment and Predictive Analytics and is being harnessed for 
increasing efficiency and ease of doing business.” 
 
70. Regarding steps being taken to use AI in terms of simplifying tax compliance at 
the Tax Returns filing level by individuals and corporate companies, the following 
submission was made by the Department: 
 “Central Board of Direct Taxes (CBDT) 
AI enabled chatbots and multilingual graded communications as part of campaigns will 
help in improved taxpayer compliances. 
Central Board of Indirect Taxes and Customs (CBIC) 
CBIC/GSTN is planning to use AI in disseminating information to taxpayers and to 
nudge them towards more compliant behaviour.” 
D. Ministry of Home Affairs 
 
71. Artificial Intelligence (AI) is emerging as a critical enabler in strengthening the 
internal security architecture of India, particularly in enhancing the operational 
capabilities of the Ministry of Home Affairs, police forces, paramilitary units, and other 
law enforcement agencies. AI facilitates real -time surveillance, predictive policing, 
behavioural analysis, and crime pattern recognition, enabling faster and more informed 
decision-making. Indian Cyber Crime Coordination Cent re ( I4C) has taken following 
steps to use AI in assisting detection and investigation of cybercrimes: 

77 
 
i. A Data Analysis Lab has been set-up at I4C. It is actively engaged in utilizing AI and 
ML tools to analyse complaints reported on the portal. It collabora tes with various 
organizations and institutions to facilitate knowledge sharing in the field of AI and 
ML.  
ii. To modernize cybercrime reporting and investigation, the Indian Cyber Crime 
Coordination Centre (I4C), in collaboration with IndiaAI and MeitY, organized the 
CyberGuard AI Hackathon to develop an AI solution for automatic classification of 
cybercrime complaints on the National Cybercrime Reporting Portal (NCRP). The 
winning model, currently under implementation and fine -tuning, analyses complaint 
descriptions and uploaded evidence to assist law enforcement in prioritizing and 
investigating cases more effectively. This initiative aims to improve the efficiency 
and responsiveness of Law Enforcement Agencies (LEAs). 
iii. I4C is also planning to implement a n AI-assisted complaint registration system for 
the 1930 cybercrime helpline, which will reduce the time required for lodging 
complaints and improve user experience through guided interaction.  
iv. Additionally, I4C, in collaboration with IIT Bombay, is explor ing the use of AI to 
assign suspect scores to mule accounts by analysing  behavioural and transactional 
patterns to help identify confirmed mule accounts. I4C is also engaging with the 
Reserve Bank Innovation Hub (RBIH) to develop a model that provides real -time 
suspect scoring for financial transactions, enabling banks to flag and potentially stop 
fraudulent transactions proactively, thus offering a robust layer of defence against 
financial cybercrimes. 
v. PMT (Proactive Monitoring Tool): An AI -based tool deve loped by CDAC Mumbai is 
currently being used to screen and verify Child Sexual Exploitative and Abuse 
Material (CSEAM) content in cyber tiplines received via the National Centre for 
Missing & Exploited Children (NCMEC) before they are forwarded to Law 
Enforcement Agencies (LEAs). The AI model is under fine-tuning, and it is proposed 
to be extended to crawl the open web for proactive identification of CSEAM content.  
vi. I4C uses AI-based tools to monitor dark web, scam websites, and fraud networks for 
tracking cybercrime discussions, phishing campaigns, and suspicious financial 
transactions. 
vii. In cybercrime commando course curriculum, AI&ML topics have also been covered. 
AI can also be used in Automatic Number Plate Recognition (ANPR), AI -powered Facial 
Recognition Technology (FRT) with CCTV surveillance for identifying wanted  criminals 
as well as for efficient traffic management. 
AI is also helping security agencies in enhancing their capabilities for intelligence 
gathering and counter -terrorism efforts by rapidly analyzing vast datasets, detecting 
anomalies, predicting patterns, cross linkages etc., thereby improving decision -making, 
speed and accuracy in such areas of operations. 
There is an increasing impact of AI in the domain of Police. For CCTNS2.0 Application 
under development, NCRB has envisaged many usages of AI as under: 
Features Brief Description 
AI based Acts & 
Section Prediction 
Automatically predicts Acts & Section from FIR content 
using Custom trained AI-LLM model (Capable of evaluating 
existing act/section applied on FIR) 
Multilingual 
Intelligent QnA on 
Capable of answering multi -lingual and  cross-lingual 
queries on ingested FIR and  case diary data this will help 

78 
 
FIR and Case Diary 
Data 
the user to get  precise and actionable insight in a time  
efficient manner. 
AI-NLP driven 
Spelling & Grammar 
Checker 
Automatically corrects grammatical (sentence construction) 
mistakes and spelling of given texts. 
Auto-classification of 
Major/Minor Head & 
Modus Operandi 
Based on pre -defined major/minor h ead,the upgraded 
model is LLM based & capable of depicting Modus 
Operandi of crime based on available FIR data 
AI Chatbot for 
Citizen 
Capable of guiding on complaint related and other tasks. 
Citizen will be able to leverage the QnA facility to get 
precise information about law and order. 
Entity Resolution and 
Criminal Profiling 
Based on FIR data present across various  police stations 
within and across states, system can "resolve" different 
cases to a common suspect and complete an overall 
criminal profile  of a person. This can also be integrated 
with Dossier. 
Crime Hotspot 
Detection 
Geo-spatial mapping with feature such as crime heat -map, 
intensity, patrol route optimiser and alerts (i.e., Multiple 
address, Festival/Event Risk etc.) Predictive Policing 
Predictive Policing Place-Based: Facilitates in predicting where crimes might 
happen and provide  beat planning. Using Risk Terrain 
Modeling (RTM) , combining crime history, social or 
cultural events and other local factors (e.g., drug hotspots) 
Person-Based: Criminal Suspect Profiling, NER and 
identifying repeat offenders (history -sheeters) using AI 
techniques, ingesting offender lists & predicting risk 
scores for entities 
Part-I: ASUMP scheme 
i. Although ‘Police’ and ‘Public Order’ are State subjects as per t he Seventh 
Schedule of the Constitution, the efforts of the States for equipping and 
modernizing their police forces has been supplemented under the scheme of 
“Assistance to States & UTs for Modernization of Police”. 
ii. Under the scheme, central assistance is  provided to all the State/UT 
Governments for procurement of weapons; equipment for Information 
Technology, Communication, Training, etc. 
iii. Each year, State/UT Governments formulate Action Plans as per their 
requirements and strategic priorities. These Actio n Plans are considered by the 
High-Powered Committee (HPC) in the Ministry. Subsequently, funds are 
released to the States/UTs in accordance with the release guidelines issued by 
the Department of Expenditure from time to time. 
iv. In the F.Y 2025 -26, State Go vernment of Kerala and Andhra Pradesh have 
projected their requirement of funds for undertaking Artificial Intelligence related 
projects/equipment in their Action plan 2025-26. 
As regards application of AI by CAPFs, the role and impact AI can play in param ilitary 
forces can be encapsulated in numerous terms/advantages depending upon the 
operational preparedness and requirements. AI in paramilitary forces can bring 
transforming changes in intelligence gathering from various sources, resource 
identification, and optimal mobilization. Future possibilities can be predicted on present 

79 
 
and past recurrences and data i.e. intrusion routes, terrain analysis, operational 
planning of border patrols. It can help in better inventory management and optimal 
distribution based on deficiencies, due benefits etc. 
2. AI based solutions have been envisaged to enhance operation/administrative 
efficiency in field of manpower deployment, robotics, autonomous system, crowd 
analytics, smart surveillance systems, facial & object recog nition, security operation 
centre, phishing and malware detection, simulation training etc. 
3. AI Powered CCTV surveillance system, drone integration systems, command and 
control centre, utilization of defense forces on porous borders gender analytics, veh icle 
analytics, vehicles forensic research, automatic number plate recognition technology, 
suspicious vehicle detection, seizure item wise analytics, crowd control are few benefits 
generated/provided by AI based solutions to increase operational efficiency  in 
paramilitary forces. 
Paramilitary forces viz. AR, BSF, CISF, CRPF, and NSG have suggested application of 
AI in their respective domain as under: 
AR: Artificial Intelligence (AI) can play an increasingly transformative role in managing 
paramilitary forces, and internal security in India. Certain roles that AI can play are as 
enumerated below: 
i. Border Surveillance: AI -powered drones and computer vision s ystems can 
monitor border areas for intrusion detection and terrain analysis. 
ii. Threat Detection: AI can assist in identifying suspicious behavior or objects in 
high-risk zones using real-time video analytics. 
iii. Operational Planning: Machine learning models ca n optimize troop deployment 
and logistics based on terrain, threat level, and historical data. 
iv. Cyber Security: Cyber security agencies can use AI to detect phishing, 
ransomware, and digital threats, AI also can help in deepfake detection and fraud 
prevention. 
v. Counter-Terrorism: AI can analyze social media, communication patterns, and 
financial transactions to identify potential threats and radicalization. 
vi. Surveillance & Intelligence: AI can enhance data fusion from multiple sources like 
CCTV, drones, teleco m, to build actionable intelligence for internal security 
operations. 
 
BSF:  
(a) AI-Powered Surveillance Systems: 
 Identifying and detecting potential threats and unauthorized crossings in real -
time through: 
 AI-driven cameras 
 Object detection 
 Behavior analysis 
 Robots or drones for intercepting threats like smugglers or intruders, 
minimizing risk to human lives. 
 Robotic mules offer a modern, AI -powered alternative to enhance operational 
efficiency and reduce human dependency. 

80 
 
 
(b) Predictive Data Analytics: 
 Legacy Ops incident database can be processed and used to train AI models 
for; 
 Identifying patterns 
 Predicting potential hotspots for illegal crossings, smuggling, or infiltration 
 Improve Domination Plan 
 
(c) AI driven Enhanced Decision-making with Data Analytics: 
 Automated Reports and Insights: AI to generate actionable insights from raw 
data. 
 Scenario Simulation and Risk Assessment: AI simulations can model different 
scenarios (e.g., high influx of refugees, armed infiltration, border war -gaming) 
to prepare contingency plans. 
CISF:  
Centralized AI Surveillance & Monitoring:  Centralized AI -enabled Monitoring of CCTV 
feeds from various airports at Airport Sector Hqrs, Control Room at Mahipalpur for real -
time data and informed decision making, leading to improved secur ity and operational 
efficiency. 
Facial Recognition and Predictive Threat Alerts:  Automated Identification and 
generation of alerts for suspected persons and unattended baggage Supports anomaly 
detection in crowd behavior and provides predictive threat alerts. 
AI-Powered Baggage Screening:  AI -enabled baggage scanners. These scanners use 
advanced AI algorithms to detect potential threats in baggage, enhancing the efficiency 
and accuracy of security checks. 
AI-Driven Cyber Defense:  Proactive use of AI for d etecting phishing, malware, 
disinformation campaigns and state -sponsored cyber threats, ensuring a secure digital 
environment. 
CRPF: 
1. Crowd Forecasting Models : Improves deployment planning for CAPFs during 
national elections or high-risk public events, preventing violence or stampedes. 
2. Facial Recognition at Sensitive Locations: Helps identify wanted criminals, known 
insurgents, or imposters entering restricted areas, aiding CAPFs operations. 
3. Real-time Threat Monitoring : Enables pre-emptive response by CAPFs to 
communal flare-ups or insurgent propaganda. 
4. Geospatial AI : Critical for CAP Fs to monitor border activities, in jungle warfare 
and counter-insurgency. 
5. Multilingual NLP (Natural Language Processing) : Improves the decoding of local 
communications, insurgent manifestos, or intercepted messages, especially in 
linguistically diverse areas. 
6. Fake New Monitoring: Supports information dominance and protects the integrity 
of paramilitary operations in politically sensitive areas. 

81 
 
7. AI for Fake News &  Deepfake Detection: Essential for CAPFs in conflict zones, 
during VIP security and critical infrastructure protection. 
NSG:  
a. Use of AI can enhance command and control by providing real -time situational 
awareness, predictive analysis, and faster decision -making through rapid data 
processing from multiple sources. It can ensure secure communication, integrate 
autonomous systems and reduces human error thereby improving operational 
efficiency and mission effectiveness of the force. 
b. AI models can analyze vast datasets to identify patterns, and trends in terrorist 
activities, thus enabling predictive analysis of potential threats and radicalization. 
c. AI-powered surveillance can help monitor public spaces and critical infrastructure 
for suspicious activities, identifying anomalies that may indicate a planned attack. 
d. AI can facilitate the integration of vast  amounts of data from diverse sources, 
enabling a more comprehensive understanding of complex terrorist networks that 
would be impossible with traditional methods. 
 
Following steps/initiatives have already been taken: 
At present CRPF is using AI in identifying narratives/sentiment analysis on Open Source 
(Social Media Platforms). 
An AI driven Intelligence fusion centre is in final stage of deployment. It will ingest huge 
amount of structured and unstructured data and provide analysis, creation of dec ision 
support system which can help in smart explorative interpretations, and solutions for 
operational requirements of CRPF. 
NSG is developing National IED data management software (NIDMS) for collection, 
analysis, visualization and dissemination of IED/B omb-related data towards a collective 
endeavour to enhance national security. This software will incorporate AI tools for 
enhanced language processing with image and object detection. 
NSG has planned to develop other organizational specific software in col laboration with 
BISAG-N which will include AI tools for human resources management/inventory 
management and other specific application required by NSG. 
"Draft Guidelines for establishing Al/ ML Labs at the Nodal Centres in States/UTs” have 
been prepared by  BPR&D incorporating vital segments like infrastructure setup, 
Hardware/ Software requirements, Data acquisition and management, etc. Also, the 
tools pertaining to Data Security, Data Quality, data analytics, and indicative terms of 
reference for skilled manpower were included. ln addition to above, Arcan be used in 
policing in following areas: 
i. Predictive mapping of crime to identify the hotspot. 
ii. Resource optimization for efficient staffing, shifts and patrol routes 
iii. Automated report writing for administrative efficiency. 
iv. Managing emergencies call centre to Al. 
v. Al in digital forensic, CCTV and drones to identify suspects, tracking missing 
people etc. 
vi. At in tracking and detecting financial frauds, money laundering by identifying 
suspicious monetary patterns.” 

82 
 
 
72. On being  asked as to how AI could support the Ministry of Home Affairs in 
strategic planning, intelligence gathering &  analysis and law enforcement coordination, 
the Ministry responded as under: 
 “Artificial Intelligence (AI) can help by providing data-backed insights for planning, 
decision-making and automatically analysing information from various sources to 
identify potential threats through predictive tools, which can enhance decision making 
and policy formation. It can enhance the cap abilities of analysing the existing data and 
co-relating it with the emerging patterns of activity to forecast and prepare for impending 
national security scenarios. 
AI can play a transformative role in enhancing the Ministry of Home Affairs’ capacity for 
strategic planning, intelligence management, and coordination among law enforcement 
agencies. In the area of strategic planning, AI can support data -driven decision-making 
by identifying long -term threat patterns, risk zones, and resource optimization mode ls 
through advanced analytics. It enables the Ministry to simulate various internal security 
scenarios, forecast emerging risks, and prioritize interventions more effectively. 
In intelligence gathering and analysis, AI can automate the processing of vast a nd 
diverse data sources including communication records, open -source intelligence, 
financial transactions, and surveillance feeds. This allows for quicker identification of 
threats, detection of anomalies, and linkage analysis across different data points.  
Natural Language processing tools can be used for multilingual monitoring, including 
regional dialects, aiding in decoding sensitive content from open and dark web sources. 
For law enforcement coordination, AI enables centralized crime data integration, r eal-
time alert generation, and operational dashboards that support faster communication 
and case handling across states and agencies. The Indian Cyber Crime Coordination 
Centre (I4C) is already leveraging such capabilities, including AI -based classification of 
cybercrime complaints on the NCRP platform and development of models to detect 
mule accounts and prevent financial frauds in near real-time.”  
 
73. Elaborating upon the impact of Artificial Intelligence (AI) in cybercrime, the 
following submission was made by the Ministry: 
 
 “The growing capabilities of Artificial Intelligence (AI) have significantly impacted 
the cybercrime ecosystem, both in the complexity of attacks and the speed at which 
they can be executed. Cybercriminals are increasingly exploiting AI for generating 
deepfake videos, voice clones, and synthetic media to impersonate individuals for fraud, 
misinformation, and identity theft. AI tools are being used to craft phishing emails, create 
fake banking applications, and deploy adaptive malware with minimal human effor t. 
Criminals are also leveraging AI for large -scale data scraping, personalized targeting, 
and behavioural manipulation. Of particular concern is the use of AI to generate Child 

83 
 
Sexual Exploitative and Abuse Material (CSEAM) and deepfake imagery for sextor tion 
and blackmail, making detection and prevention more difficult through traditional 
methods.” 
 
74. The Ministry was specifically asked  whether the existing laws were able to cope 
up with the challenges generated by AI and i f not, what additional laws had  been 
enacted or being envisaged to counter the risks posed by AI on the safety, security and 
privacy of citizens due to increased digital and social media interface. The Committee 
also wanted to know that if the Ministry felt  that the laws currently in us e were 
competent enough to meet the challenges created by AI like misuse of videos, then how 
the Ministry  dealt with such menace. To these, th e Ministry provided a consolidated 
reply as under: 
  “The existing legal and regulatory framework is gradually evo lving to address the 
emerging challenges posed by Artificial Intelligence (AI), especially in areas impacting 
safety, security, and privacy due to the growing interface of AI with digital and social 
media. Following salient points may be noted in this regard: 
1. Strengthening through Existing and New Legal Frameworks: India’s legal ecosystem 
has responded proactively to the evolving threat landscape associated with AI 
misuse. Key legislations and frameworks include: 
i. Information Technology Act, 2000:  The IT Act continues to provide the 
foundational digital legal framework. Under Sections 66, 66B, 66C, 66D, 66E, 
66F and 67, 67A, 67B and 72 etc., offences such as unauthorised access, 
identity theft, cheating by personation, data tampering, and online ob scenity, 
increasingly perpetrated using AI tools, are punishable. The Act is actively used 
to address AI -related harms like deepfake pornography, AI -generated phishing, 
and synthetic media fraud. 
ii. New Criminal Laws (2023): 
a) Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023: 
The newly enacted Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita (BNS), 2023, includes provisions 
dealing with technology -enabled crimes such as organised crime including 
cybercrime (Section -111), petty organised crime (Section 112), cyberstalking 
(Section 78), online harassment ( Section 75), and publishing sexually explicit 
content (Section 294), spreading misinformation (Section 353) etc. These are 
relevant to AI -generated harms such as non -consensual AI -generated 
intimate imagery or deepfake pornography, personating, AI -generated 
impersonation for fraud or character assassination, automated cyberstalking, 
phishing, and scam campaigns, synthetic disinformation through deepfakes or 
chatbots spreading false narratives etc. 
b) Bharatiya Sakshya Adhiniyam, 2023 (New Evidence Act):  This l aw gives 
recognition to electronic evidence, digital signatures, and metadata, which is 
crucial when investigating crimes involving AI -based systems or algorithmic 
decisions. It strengthens the admissibility of AI -generated content when used 
as evidence, provided authenticity is established. 
c) Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023:  The new criminal procedure code 
emphasizes technologically enabled investigation. This includes video 

84 
 
recording of statements, digital arrest warrants, and electronic data retri eval 
— important tools for dealing with AI-facilitated crimes. 
iii. Digital Personal Data Protection (DPDP) Act, 2023:  The Digital Personal Data 
Protection Act, 2023 marks a foundational shift in India’s data governance 
framework by establishing data privacy as a statutory right and by holding entities 
accountable for how they collect, process, store, and share personal data. The 
Act ensures individual autonomy and control over personal data by enforcing a 
consent-based model of data processing, requiring that p ersonal data be 
collected and used only for lawful, specific, and clearly defined purposes, and 
with the explicit knowledge and permission of the data principal (the individual). 
The DPDP Act is particularly significant in the context of Artificial 
Intelligence (AI) systems, which frequently rely on large datasets — often 
including personal and sensitive data — for training, profiling, decision -
making, and personalization. The Act prohibits unauthorized or excessive 
data collection, and ensures that AI systems and the entities deploying them 
must adhere to the principles of data minimization, purpose limitation, and 
fairness. This has direct implications for preventing unlawful AI profiling, 
algorithmic discrimination, and AI -based surveillance by bot h private 
platforms and state actors. 
Moreover, the Act introduces obligations on Data Fiduciaries, 
including developers and operators of AI systems, to implement reasonable 
safeguards, such as data security measures, grievance redressal 
mechanisms, and tr ansparency in automated decision -making. It also 
empowers individuals to seek redress if they believe their personal data has 
been misused, which includes misuse by automated tools that may impact a 
person’s rights, reputation, or opportunities. 
 
Another key value addition in the DPDP framework is the provision for 
significant penalties for non -compliance, including fines up to ₹250 crore for 
failing to prevent data breaches or using data for unauthorized purposes — 
which is crucial in deterring reckless or  opaque deployment of AI 
technologies. 
 
iv. Digital India Act (DIA):  DIA is currently under formulation to replace the IT Act 
and introduce new central legal framework to deal with emerging issues of AI. 
 
MeitY oversees the policy related to AI and it has iss ued certain guidelines related to AI. 
Specific laws for AI are yet to be enacted in India. However, existing laws such as 
Information Technology Act, 2000 provides important legal oversight to meet the 
challenges created by AI like misuse of videos. 
When the Ministry was asked to elaborate on the need for strong legal frameworks for 
AI, building of AI -powered national Cyber Security platforms and need for development 
and enforcement of national standards and SOPs for AI usage in India and the 
submission was as under: 
 “Robust legal frameworks are needed to address AI's ethical and societal 
implications as well as national cyber security platforms are essential for safeguarding 

85 
 
AI systems from cyber threats. Further, national standards and SOPs are crucial fo r 
ensuring safe, reliable, and responsible AI development and deployment across India. 
MeitY has constituted an Advisory Group on AI for India Specific Regulatory AI 
Framework under the chairmanship of Principal Scientific Advisor to GoI. The ToR of the 
committee inter -alia includes advice to GoI on AI regulation and draft policies and 
regulations that balance innovation and regulations and to draft contextualized ethical 
guidelines adoptable in India.” 
75. Elaborating upon measures to be taken to ensure responsible and ethical AI use 
in internal security while maintaining human oversight, privacy and accountability, the 
Ministry furnished the following: 
 
 “There is  a need to have inter -ministerial consultations to examine key issues 
related to AI governan ce in India, conduct a gap analysis of existing frameworks, and 
propose recommendations in the form of Mandatory guidelines for a comprehensive 
approach to ensure the trustworthiness and accountability of building and using AI 
systems in India. Necessary r egulatory frameworks also need to be enacted for safe 
and ethical usage of AI in India.” 
76. When sought to know what role AI could  play in real-time surveillance and facial 
recognition systems for enhancing security in India and for crowd monitoring and riot 
control in high -risk zones or during public events, the following was submitted by the 
Ministry: 
 
 “AI can play a crucial role in enhancing security in India by automating real -time 
surveillance and facial recognition systems, allowing for more efficient m onitoring of 
high-risk zones or public events. Advanced facial recognition systems powered by AI 
can help in quick identification of individuals with relatively high degree of accuracy, 
helping to prevent crimes like theft and assault, while also analysing  crowd behaviour to 
detect potential hot spots for violence or unrest. This may enable authorities to respond 
swiftly to emerging situations, reducing the risk of incidents and improving overall 
situational awareness.” 
 
77. The Ministry, while elaborating upon  the potential of AI usage in enhancing 
border security and controlling cross -border smuggling and infiltration and effectiveness 
of AI -based surveillance drones/ robotics in assisting in hazardous /risky internal 
security operations, submitted: 
 
“AI has v ast potential in enhancing border security and countering cross -border 
threats such as smuggling and infiltration across India’s diverse frontiers. It enables 
intelligent surveillance by integrating and analyzing real-time data from multiple sources, 
including cameras, sensors, drones, and UAVs. AI models can recognize suspicious 
patterns, detect human and object movement, and support predictive risk assessments 
by combining historical trends with live feeds. 
 
In challenging terrains —whether riverine, dense forests, high -altitude areas, or open 
and porous stretches —AI-powered drones, robotics, and smart surveillance systems 

86 
 
provide persistent monitoring and early warnings, improving operational readiness while 
reducing risk to personnel. These solutions can be deployed to detect threats in remote, 
hazardous, or difficult -to-access locations where human patrolling is difficult or 
dangerous. 
 
AI-enabled tools such as facial recognition systems, reverse facial recog nition, attribute-
based searches, and automatic number plate recognition can help identify suspicious 
individuals and vehicles. Network -centric surveillance grids capable of integrating feeds 
from diverse equipment enhance the speed and accuracy of threat detection. AI can 
also be applied to make border check posts smarter, improve permit verification 
systems, and monitor the real-time progress of field operations. 
 
By reducing human error and response time, AI acts as a true force multiplier in border 
management—enhancing the safety, efficiency, and effectiveness of security personnel 
in high-risk environments.” 
 
78. The Ministry of Home Affairs was aksed to explain the steps taken to use AI for 
intelligence gathering and counter terrorism. The Ministry in response submitted as: 
 
 “AI is helping security agencies in enhancing their capabilities for intelligence 
gathering and counter -terrorism efforts by rapidly analysing vast datasets, detecting 
anomalies, predicting patterns, cross linkages etc., thereby improv ing decision-making, 
speed and accuracy. 
AI is being used for intelligence gathering and counter intelligence. Key application 
includes face recognition, social media parsing and network analysis, Natural Language 
Processing for analysis of structured and unstructured data, pattern analysis and hidden 
connection etc. Additionally, AI is used for entity resolution enabling accurate 
identification and correlation of individuals across multiple data sources.” 
79. When explaining about the possibility of Digital Fe ncing with the aid of AI where 
our borders are porous, the Ministry informed the Committee as: 
 “AI-based digital fencing offers significant potential for managing porous borders 
by enabling continuous, automated monitoring and rapid threat detection. Integrated 
with sensors, communication systems, and real -time alert mechanisms, such solutions 
can provide early warnings of unauthorized cross -border movement and trigger instant 
alerts to security forces. Predictive analytics further strengthen proactive  deployment 
and resource optimization in vulnerable stretches. 
The effectiveness of AI -enabled digital fencing depends on terrain and infrastructure 
readiness. While open and accessible areas allow for straightforward deployment, 
dense forests, hilly terra in, and high -altitude zones require specialized equipment, 
robust and redundant communication networks, and reliable power supply. Where 
physical barriers are impractical due to political, environmental, or socio -economic 
considerations, virtual monitoring systems can serve as effective alternatives. 
By combining AI, sensors, and predictive analytics within a network -centric architecture, 
digital fencing can become a powerful tool for secure and efficient border 

87 
 
management—maximizing coverage, minimizing hu man risk, and enhancing overall 
operational readiness.” 
80. In view of lots of illegal activities on dark web, the Committee wished to know 
about the steps been taken/being taken to curb these and also whether the Ministry was 
contemplating any AI research sys tem for controlling such activities on the dark web. 
The Ministry in its reply stated that: 
 “The dark web poses complex challenges for law enforcement due to its 
encrypted and anonymous environment, which facilitates a wide range of illicit activities 
such as the sale of narcotics, firearms, stolen data, CSEAM, counterfeit documents, and 
financial fraud using cryptocurrencies. Unlike the surface web, the dark web lacks 
standard indexing, making it difficult to monitor, trace actors, or extract timely 
intelligence using traditional methods. It also serves as a marketplace for cybercrime-as-
a-service, including ransomware toolkits, phishing kits, and access credentials of 
compromised systems. 
To address these threats, the Ministry of Home Affairs, through the  Indian Cyber Crime 
Coordination Centre (I4C), has constituted a specialised team under the National 
Cybercrime Threat Analytics Unit (NCTAU) to monitor dark web activities. NCTAU is 
actively scanning the dark web for data breaches involving Indian citizen s, 
organizations, and critical infrastructure. Reports generated are regularly shared with 
relevant stakeholders for investigation and mitigation. The unit is in the process of 
enhancing its capacity by enrolling more skilled manpower and expanding the sco pe of 
monitoring. In parallel, the Ministry is also exploring the use of advanced AI -based tools 
to automate the identification of hidden threats, illicit marketplaces, and suspicious 
communications on the dark web.” 
 
81. Examining further, t he Committee wishe d to ascertain whet her AI was being  
misused for creating caste and class rift in the society and hence used for creating 
social disharmony and problems of law and order. In this regard, it was submitted that: 
 
 “AI tools can be weaponized to inflame social  rifts and fake narratives through 
deepfakes and misinformation campaigns leading to law & order issues. Section 69A of 
the IT Act, 2000 empowers the Designated Officer to issue orders to intermediaries for 
blocking of data or communication links on specif ied grounds of: (i) interest of 
sovereignty and integrity of India, (ii) defence of India, (iii) security of the State, (iv) 
friendly relations with foreign States or (v) public order or (vi) for preventing incitement to 
the commission of any cognizable of fense relating to above. The due process being 
followed is defined in the Information Technology (Procedure and safeguards for 
blocking for access of information by public) Rules, 2009. 
MeitY issues blocking orders under Section 69A of the IT Act upon rece ipt of a written 
request from Nodal Officers designated for Ministries/Departments at the Centre and 
Departments at the State level as well as from notified agencies of the Central 
Government under section 69A of the IT Act for blocking of illegal information on specific 
grounds as laid down in section 69A (1) of the IT Act. 

88 
 
Section79(3)(b) of IT Act read with Rule 3(1)(d) of  IT Rules, 2021, mandates the 
platforms to ensure expeditious action, well within the timeframes stipulated (as early as 
possible but  not later than 36 hours) under the IT Rules, 2021, to remove or disable 
access to information/content (such as VPN URLs)that violates the provisions of the IT 
Rules, 2021, upon receipt of court orders or notice from the Appropriate Government or 
its authorised agency or upon receipt of complaint made by the impersonated individual 
or person authorised by him in this behalf. 
The Ministry of Home Affairs (“MHA”) vide G.S.R. 193(E) dated 13th March, 2024 has 
designated the Indian Cyber Crime Coordination Cent re (I4C), to be the agency of the 
MHA to perform the functions under section 79(3)(b) of the IT Act and to notify the 
instances of information, data or communication link residing in or connected to a 
computer resource controlled by the intermediary being used to commit the unlawful 
act.” 
 
82. On being questioned whether the Ministry thinks that AI can mislead any 
personal data or any subject matter for information, the comments made by the Ministry: 
 
 “Artificial Intelligence (AI), when misused or inadequately  regulated, can mislead 
individuals by generating false, deceptive, or manipulated content. AI systems trained 
on biased, incomplete, or malicious datasets may produce misleading outputs that 
distort facts or misrepresent individuals and events. One of the  major concerns is the 
use of AI -generated deepfake videos, which are increasingly being misused by 
fraudsters in investment scams. These videos often impersonate eminent personalities 
to create a false sense of trust and credibility, misleading victims in to making financial 
commitments based on fabricated endorsements. 
To address these risks, the Ministry, through the Indian Cyber Crime Coordination 
Centre (I4C), is taking proactive steps to detect and counter such misuse including the 
monitoring and taked own of malicious AI -generated content, development of early 
detection tools, and engagement with social media platforms to strengthen their content 
moderation mechanisms. 
83. When guage by the Committee if AI can affect a person’s ability of learning given 
the unlimited dimensions to the limited knowledge, the following was submitted: 
 
 “AI can affect a person’s ability to learn —both positively and negatively —
especially in the context of “unlimited dimensions” (AI capabilities) and “limited 
knowledge” (human capacity and cognitive constraints). 
Positive Effects: Enhancing Human Learning 
i. Personalization & Adaptivity: AI can tailor content to a learner’s level, pace, and 
style—something traditional education often fails to do. This adaptive learning boosts 
engagement and retention. 
ii. Access to Vast Knowledge:  AI can expose learners to ideas and perspectives far 
beyond what a single teacher or textbook can offer, essentially removing barriers to 
entry in nearly any subject. 

89 
 
iii. Instant Feedback & Support:  Language models, tutoring systems, and educational 
platforms can give real -time corrections, explanations, and encouragement —
reducing frustration and improving confidence. 
iv. Simulation of Complex Systems:  AI can model abstract concepts (like quantum 
mechanics, econom ic models, or psychological theories) through simulations, 
making the “unlimited dimensions” of complex domains more digestible. 
Negative Effects: Undermining Human Learning 
i. Cognitive Laziness & Dependency: If learners over-rely on AI for answers, they may  
not develop deep reasoning or critical thinking skills. It’s the “calculator effect” 
applied to thinking. 
ii. Surface-Level Understanding:  AI often provides high -level summaries or simplified 
explanations. Learners may think they understand something deeply when they’ve 
only skimmed the surface. 
iii. Overwhelm from Information Overload:  The sheer volume of AI -generated content 
can drown learners in options, making it hard to focus, reflect, or retain. Human 
cognition thrives under constraints, not unlimited input. 
iv. Loss of Epistemic Curiosity:  When answers come too easily, the struggle of 
learning—which is essential for forming lasting knowledge st ructures—may be 
bypassed. This can dull intrinsic motivation. 
In conclusion, we can state that AI can represent unbounded knowledge dimensions, 
but humans still learn best when information is 
i. scaffolded (built layer by layer), 
ii. emotionally engaging, 
iii. socially contextualized, 
iv. and effortfully processed. 
The danger is in confusing access to knowledge with understanding. AI can flood 
learners with the former, but deep learning requires careful curation and intentional 
practice. AI is a tool, not a substitute for human learning. If used intentionally —to 
challenge, support, and engage —it can unlock deeper, broader learning than ever 
before. But if used passively —to replace thinking or shortcut effort —it can stunt true 
intellectual growth.” 
84. Wanting to know how mule accounts multiply and populate so fast that it escaped 
the ambit of laws , the Committee asked  the Ministry if it had  been able to identify 
whether there were insiders within the system  who were  facilitating this massive 
population of mule accounts. Further, the Committee wanted to know what was being 
done in terms of punitive measures  and if MHA had  any AI tools or methods that were 
being used for detecting mule SIM card accounts alon gwith any system where the 
Ministry was able to detect the owners of the SIM cards. The submission made by MHA 
was as under: 
 
 “Fraudsters exploit the existing infrastructure briefed below in various ways: 
i. Banking (Mule Accounts, Virtual Accounts, Payment Aggregator, Payment Gateway, 
Misuse of CBDC, Cryptocurrency etc.) 
ii. Telecom (Mule SIM, Rogue POS Agents, Simbox, SMS Headers, Call Spoofing etc.) 

90 
 
iii. IT Infrastructure (Google, Meta, Instagram, Telegram, Facebook, etc.) 
iv. Human Resources (Agent, Sub-Agent, Scam Centre, etc.) 
The response of I4C to the above method adopted by cyber fraudster is as below:  
i. The National Cybercrime Reporting Portal (NCRP) was launched in August 2019 by 
the Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA) to set up a mechanism to facilitate reporting of all 
types of cybercrime including Cyber -Enabled Financial crimes. The port al has two 
components; the first is for citizens to report cybercrime -related complaints online 
without needing to visit a police station, and the second component is for police 
agencies, banks and financial intermediaries, and other stakeholders to monito r and 
act upon those complaints expeditiously. The second component has a module 
called the Citizen Financial Cybercrime Reporting and Management System 
(CFCFRMS) under CFMC, as a part of the National Cybercrime Reporting Portal 
(NCRP) integrates LEAs, maj or Banks and Financial Intermediaries on a single 
platform. As of June 2025, Financial Institutions comprising of 431 Banks, 34 
Wallets/Payment Aggregators (PA)/ Payment Gateways (PG), 27 Merchants, 2 
Insurance Companies, 7 Crypto Exchanges/ VAPs, 2 Stock trading and 4 major 
Telecom Service Providers have been onboarded on NCRP -CFCFRMS Portal.  The 
financial crimes reported over the NCRP after verification by concerned LEA’s via 
CFCFRMS module are being sent to the Banks/Financial Intermediaries in order to  
warrant action by banks/FIs to save the fraudulent transaction within the financial 
digital ecosystem.I4C provides banks with visibility into mule bank accounts through 
the NCRP Portal, enabling them to take necessary actions. 
ii. A State -of-the-Art Cyber Fra ud Mitigation Centre (CFMC) has been established at 
I4C where representatives of major banks, Financial Intermediaries, Payment 
Aggregators, Telecom Service Providers, IT Intermediaries and representatives of 
States/UTs Law Enforcement Agency working toget her for immediate action and 
seamless cooperation to tackle cybercrime. CFMC is committed to developing robust 
mechanisms to combat cyber financial fraud in near real -time. By bringing together 
financial institutions, CFMC aims to detect, prevent and mitig ate the cyber financial 
frauds by preventing the dissemination of fraudulent funds across various financial 
sectors. As of June 2025, Representatives from top 45 Banks/Financial Institutions 
(FI), all major TSPs (Airtel, Jio, Vodafone Idea, BSNL), and 12 L EAs form different 
states are co -located in CFMC. These representatives coordinate closely using 
extensive dashboards to combat cyber criminals and to halt crime proceeds within 
the digital ecosystem. 
iii. Furthermore, to ensure inter -bank visibility all partic ular entities including DFS, RBI, 
Banks, Financial Institution are being provided with the visibility of their respective 
layer wise mule accounts reported on NCRP - CFCFRMS platform, additionally a 
Suspect Registry mechanism has been implemented, which ena bles Banks and 
Financial institution to flag mule accounts and related identifiers across the 
participating entities, thus assisting the Bank/FIs in mitigation of cyber financial 
frauds. Suspect Registry will share the relevant information with the partici pating 
entities, for taking necessary action (i) to verify the credentials of new customers 
before onboarding, ii) monitor the ongoing transactions in real time, (iii) check 
historical accounts and transactions to identify suspect mule accounts. 
iv. Additionally, a draft MOU is under process between RBI Innovation Hub and I4C to 
enhance the efficiency of mule hunter application. Mule hunter is an in -house AI/ML-
based solution which is better suited than a rule -based system to identify suspected 

91 
 
mule accounts. Advanced ML algorithms can analyse transaction and account detail 
related datasets to predict mule accounts with higher accuracy and greater speed 
than typical rule-based systems. This machine learning based approach has enabled 
the detection of more mule a ccounts within a bank’s system. Additionally, RBIH’s 
Mulehunter.ai model provides AI/ML -based solutions for identifying and mitigating 
risks related to mule accounts, significantly enhancing fraud detection capabilities 
across the banking system. The integ ration of same with I4C’s NCRP -
CFCFRMS/Suspect Registry will assist in faster and more accurate mitigation 
measures against cyber financial Fraud.   
v. It is also intimated that all Banks/FIs including their regulators (DFS/ RBI/ 
NABARAD) are being regularly sensitized regarding the possibility of collusion and 
are advised to take necessary precautionary action against the same.  
vi. As regards detection of m ule sim cards, the same falls under the domain of 
Department of Telecommunications (DoT).” 
vii.  
85. When specifically asked if the Ministry ha d a dashboard that showed  the CALL 
numbers for awareness about ‘1930’ (a cloud telephony system using AI to help the 
callers) so that if someone required to use, then it was accessible and timely responded 
across all villages and districts, MHA submitted the following: 
 “I4C is planning to implement an AI-assisted complaint registration system for the 
1930 cybercrime helpline, which will reduce the time required for lodging complaints and 
improve user experience through guided interaction. It will be compatible with most of 
the regional/native languages. 
Further, I4C, MHA runs a Social Media Handle "Cyberdost" which ef fectively promotes 
the cybercrime helpline number 1930 and the reporting portal www.cybercrime.gov.in. 
The posts are in English and Hindi and also in regional languages from time to time. An 
app is in the process of development. Action starts immediately w ith registering of the 
complaint, as it is immediately forwarded to the LEAs and Banks etc.” 
86. On being asked how the Ministry of Home Mi nistry Affairs dealt with the issue of 
privacy while scraping through the internet and through social media, the Committe e 
was apprised as: 
 ““Scraping” under consideration generally refers to using computer Programmes, 
tools or software (called web scrapers) to automatically browse public web pages or 
social media posts; extract specific information (e.g., names, phone numbers, keywords, 
hashtags, trends, images); store or analyse that information for law enforcement or 
intelligence purposes. 
Type of data that can be scraped by the authorised security agencies only from publicly 
available sources using open -source Intelligen ce (OSINT) technique may include the 
following: 
Type of data Examples 
Social media posts Public tweets, Facebook posts, YouTube videos 
Deepfake or morphed 
media 
Altered or impersonated images or videos of any person 
including public figures 
Fake news or Viral instigating content spreading communal hatred or 

92 
 
misinformation  affecting sovereignty, security of the State or public 
order  
Hashtags and trends Scraping YouTube channels and Telegram groups for 
Radical Content/ Posts using etc. that promote extremist 
ideologies or that share propaganda videos or bomb -
making tutorials. 
Scam websites or links Online gambling, fake job scams, fake investment 
scams, etc. 
Public posts or ads on sites like OLX, QuikrJobs, or 
even LinkedIn are scraped to flag job scams. 
Scraping of URLs, Domain names, Keywords like “govt 
job 2025”, “army vacancy”, etc. to flag fake job alerts 
using names/logos of ministries or govt. organisations. 
Links and data from Google search, Telegram channels, 
or websites hosting be tting content like IPL gambling 
apps are gathered. 
Scraping Matrimonial 
and Dating Platforms 
(for honeytraps or 
frauds) 
Public profiles on matrimonial/dating sites may be 
scraped in cybercrime investigations where people are 
blackmailed or trapped into sharing sensitive data. 
Scraping Dark Web 
Marketplaces 
Extraction of Cryptocurrency wallet addresses 
Publicly available information on the internet and social media platforms is used for 
intelligence gathering. No private or personal Information is gathered from Social 
Media.Hence, privacy is never violated.” 
87. In terms of Surakshini (a centre run by the Ministry of Home Affairs, which keeps 
an eye on the crimes related to children and women and helps in removing vulgar 
contents), the Ministry has a ‘hash’ value that is being shared.  When t he Committee 
wanted to know what  had been the response time of the social media intermediaries in 
actually responding to it and taking them down, the following was submitted: 
 
 “Currently, the Online Cybercrime against Women and Children (OCWC) team 
under I4C identifies complaints related to Child Sexual Exploitation and Abuse Material 
(CSEAM) and Non -Consensual Intimate Imagery (NCII) received through the National 
Cybercrime Reporting Portal (NCRP). OCWC team share URLs  and links reported in 
the complaints with Social Media Intermediaries (SMIs) via the SAHYOG platform for 
content takedown. These requests are followed up to ensure compliance and timely 
removal. 
Under the proposed SURAKSHINI initiative, a dedicated Mitiga tion Centre will be 
established to strengthen this process. Once operational, SURAKSHINI will facilitate the 
creation of a comprehensive hashbank for CSEAM and NCII content. This will allow 
SMIs to proactively detect and prevent the upload of such harmful content using 
automated hash -matching, thereby shifting from a reactive takedown approach to a 
preventive content moderation model. Additionally, the SURAKSHINI dashboard will 
provide end -to-end visibility into complaint status, takedown timelines, and FIR  

93 
 
registration, helping improve coordination and accountability across platforms and law 
enforcement agencies.” 
88. Regarding illegal online gaming and gambling, the Committee  were given to 
understand that was quite rampant and sometimes it took  a long time bef ore they were 
actually pulled down because they were on VPNs and outside our domain. So the 
Committee wanted to know how the Ministry was planning to actually take them down 
when they are not part of our network and were being operated through private VPNs . 
The reply furnished was as under: 
 
 “The Information Technology Act, 2000(IT Act) along with the Information 
Technology (Intermediary Guidelines and Digital Media Ethics Code) Rules, 2021 (“IT 
Rules, 2021”), provides a legal framework to regulate unlawfu l online content. 
Intermediaries including telecom service providers, network service providers, and 
internet service providers are obligated to exercise due diligence and take necessary 
action for the removal or disabling of such content upon receipt of l awful directions from 
the Appropriate Government or its authorised agency. 
 Legal provisions that may be applicable in relation to any Virtual Private Network 
(VPN) service providers: 
– VPN services can be termed as Intermediary under IT Act, 2000  
– Regulated under Section 70B (CERT -in Directions) and Section 79 (Intermediary 
liability) 
– Under 69A of IT Act, 2000, VPN services can be blocked through ISPs/App 
stores for national security, public order, etc. 
– Under Section 79(3)(b) of IT Act, 2000 & IT (Intermediary) Rules, 2021 
o Under Rule 3(1)(d), ISPs/App stores can be ordered to remove VPN URLs 
– VPN details must be shared upon legal request [Rule 3(1)(j)] 
– Logs and user info retained for 180 days [Rule 3(1)(h)] 
– Applies also to ISPs and intermediaries 
 Section 69A of the IT Act, 2000 empowers the Designated Officer to issue orders to 
intermediaries for blocking of data or communication links on specified grounds of: (i) 
interest of sovereignty and integrity of India, (ii) defence of India, (iii) security of the 
State, (iv) friendly relations with foreign States or (v) public order or (vi) for 
preventing incitement to the commission of any cognizable offense relating to above. 
The due process being followed is defined in the Information Technology (Procedure 
and safeguards for blocking for access of information by public) Rules, 2009. 
 MeitY issues blocking orders under Section 69A of the IT Act upon receipt of a 
written request from Nodal Officers designated for Ministries/Departments at the 
Centre and Departments at the  State level as well as from notified agencies of the 
Central Government under section 69A of the IT Act for blocking of illegal information 
on specific grounds as laid down in section 69A (1) of the IT Act. 
 Section79(3)(b) of IT Act read with Rule 3(1)(d)  of  IT Rules, 2021, mandates the 
platforms to ensure expeditious action, well within the timeframes stipulated (as early 
as possible but not later than 36 hours) under the IT Rules, 2021, to remove or 
disable access to information/content (such as VPN URL s)that violates the 
provisions of the IT Rules, 2021, upon receipt of court orders or notice from the 
Appropriate Government or its authorised agency or upon receipt of complaint made 
by the impersonated individual or person authorised by him in this behalf. 

94 
 
 Rule 3(1)(j) of the IT Rules, 2021 mandates the intermediaries to provide information 
regarding VPN under its control or possession, or assistance to the Government 
agency which is lawfully authorised for investigative or protective or cyber security 
activities, for the purposes of verification of identity, or for the prevention, detection, 
investigation, or prosecution, of offences under any law for the time being in force, or 
for cyber security incidents, well within the timeframes stipulated (as soon as 
possible but not later than 72 hours). 
 Under Rule 3(1)(h) of the IT Rules, 2021, intermediary is required to retain user's 
registration information for 180 days after cancellation or withdrawal of his 
registration.  
 CERT-In directions dated 28.04.2022 mentions that VPN service providers, shall be 
required to register the following accurate information which must be maintained by 
them for a period of 5 years or longer duration as mandated by the law after any 
cancellation or withdrawal of the registration as the case may be:  
a. Validated names of subscribers/customers hiring the services 
b. Period of hire including dates 
c. IPs allotted to/being used by the members 
d. Email, IP & time stamp used at the time of registration/on-boarding 
e. Purpose for hiring services 
f. Validated address and contact numbers 
All entities to enable ICT system slogs, retain it for 180 days, keep logs in India and 
share with CERT -In when required .CERT-In directions dated 28.04.2022 is accessible 
via the following link: 
https://www.cert-in.org.in/PDF/CERT-In_Directions_70B_28.04.2022.pdf 
 The Ministry of Home Affairs (“MHA”) vide G.S.R. 193(E) dated 13th March, 2024 has 
designated the Indian Cyber Crime Coordination Centre (I4C), to be the agency of 
the MHA to perform the functions under section 79(3)(b) of the IT Act and to notify 
the instances of information, data or communication link residing in or connected to a 
computer resource controlled by the intermediary being used to commit the unlawful 
act.  
 I4C is also the central agency implementing the SAHYOG Portal, developed to route 
notices issued under section 79(3)(b) of the IT Act r/w Rule 3(1)(d) of the IT Rules, 
2021. 
 The portal i s developed in collaboration with Ministry of Home Affairs, Ministry of 
Electronics and Information Technology and Department of Telecommunications. 
The portal facilitates lawful, automated routing of takedown notices related to 
cybercrimes/cyberspace between authorised agencies of the respective Appropriate 
Government, designated nodal officers, and intermediaries. 
 I4C can monitor and track compliance by intermediaries with such takedown notices 
routed through the portal, ensuring transparency and accountability in the process. 
 The word ‘SAHYOG’, meaning cooperation, reflects the portal’s objective of enabling 
seamless coordination for swift removal of unlawful content. 
 As per established norms, authorised agencies in the respective Appropriate 
Government issuing such notices for content removal may invoke the relevant laws 
that are being violated due to the continued presence of unlawful content on 
intermediary platforms even after notices are issued. 

95 
 
 In addition to the regulatory framework under the IT Ac t, the suppliers of online 
money gaming are also being regulated under the Integrated Good and Services Tax 
Act, 2017 (“IGST Act”) and are required to obtain a single registration under the 
Simplified Registration Scheme referred to in the IGST Act. 
 The Directorate General of GST Intelligence Headquarters (“DGGI”) is empowered 
as appropriate government/agency under the IT Act and the IGST Act to direct 
intermediaries to disable access to unregistered online money gaming platforms 
including offshore online m oney gaming platforms violating the IGST Act. The 
Gazette Notification issued by the Department of Revenue, Ministry of Finance, vide 
S.O. 95(E) dated 6th January, 2025 is available at the following link: 
https://egazette.gov.in/WriteReadData/2025/259972.pdf 
DGGI is also investigating offshore entities involved in the supply of online money 
gaming/betting/gambling. As per the PIB Press Release by the Ministry of Finance, 
dated 22nd March, 2 025, 357 websites/URLs of illegal/non -compliant offshore online 
money gaming entities have been blocked by the DGGI, in coordination with MeitY, 
under the IT Act. 
The Indian Cyber Crime Coordination Centre (I4C), in exercise of the powers conferred 
under c lause (b) of sub -section (3) of Section 79 of the Information Technology Act, 
2000, has issued statutory notices to the concerned Information Technology (IT) 
intermediaries, for removal/disabling of access to 1345 URLs/websites/accounts 
disseminating content pertaining to online gambling and betting, which has been found 
to be unlawful. 
Pursuant to the said notices under Section 79(3)(b) of the IT Act, the concerned Internet 
Service Providers (ISPs) and IT intermediaries —including search engines, social med ia 
platforms, e -commerce entities, and instant messaging applications —have acted in 
compliance by removing the specified content. This ensures that such unlawful material 
remains inaccessible to users, including attempts made through Virtual Private 
Networks (VPNs).” 
89. Given that Law and order is a State subject,  the Committee wanted  to know to 
what extent databases from States were being integrated by the Ministry of Home 
Affairs and whether the Ministry had been able to access UIDAI and other databases for 
facial recognition at State levels. To this, MHA replied as under: 
 
 “The Criminal Procedure (Identification) Act, 2022 authorise taking 
measurements of convicts and other persons for the purposes of ident ification and 
investigation in criminal matters.”measurements" includes finger-impressions, palm-print 
impressions, footprint impressions, photographs, iris and retina scan, physical, biological 
samples and th 1eir analysis, behavioural attributes including  signatures, handwriting or 
any other examination referred to in section 53 or section 53A of the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1973. 
In order to facilitate the above, CrPI System is being rolled out which will capture 
photographs, Iris and DNA as per the pr ovisions of the Act. The captured photographs 
will be processed and will be ingested in a facial recognition system for matching 
purpose also. 

96 
 
A proposal has been initiated to integrate AI on SAMANVAYA platform in which data of 
arrested cybercriminals has been uploaded by States/UTs for interstate linkages. There 
is no access to UIDAI or other database for facial recognition at I4C.” 
90. When asked if there was any AI mechanism or tool that was being used by the 
Ministry for detecting forged government documents, the  Ministry replied: 
 “All the forensic departments functioning under the Ministry of Home Affairs, are 
duly competent and sufficiently equipped to conduct examinations in respect of all 
categories of document forgery. These institutions are equipped with state -of-the-art 
forensic technologies, such as the Video Spectral Comparator, Projectina, advanced 
digital stereomicroscopes, Traso Scan, ProScope, and other specialized instruments,  
and are duly supported by trained and qualified personnel possessing the requisite 
expertise. 
Artificial Intelligence–based tools are presently being deployed in forensic investigations 
pertaining to digital and cybercrime by the forensic institutions fun ctioning under the 
administrative control of the Ministry of Home Affairs. Use of Artificial Intelligence in 
document forgery examination has not yet been operationalized, as the technology 
remains at a nascent stage and requires further validation for efficacy.” 
91. When the Committee sought to know if the Bureau of Immigration was using AI to 
detect unwanted people entering the Country or people who might be wanted for crimes 
in other countries but were not yet on an Interpol list, and if the Ministry was indulging in  
collaboration with international agencies beyond Interpol  for data sharing,  the Ministry 
submitted: 
 “The Bol is currently not using AI for immigration process. However, the future 
implementation plan for the Mission Mode Project i.e. Immigration, Visa Foreigners 
Registration and Tracking (IVFRT) (Version 3.0), commencing on 01.04.2026, envisions 
a comprehensive transformation of India's immigration, visa, and traveller management 
ecosystem by leveraging emerging technologies such as Ar tificial Intelligence (AI) and 
Machine Learning (ML) for intelligent traveler profiling, and exploring Blockchain to 
enhance the authenticity and security of digital records. As far as international 
collaboration for data sharing is concerned, currently th ere is no collaboration with any 
country. However, the UAE has proposed an MOU in this regard which is under 
consideration.” 
92. While trying to understand the parameters and the procedures which have been 
built to identify deep fake;  the Committee wanted to k now if the Ministry was proposing 
any plan of action to enlarge its gambit  and also whether the Ministry was taking any 
measures for the usage of AI tools and its best-case practices.  The reply of the Ministry 
was: 
 “The proliferation of deepfake content,  particularly videos and audio manipulated 
using artificial intelligence, presents a serious concern in the domain of cyber -enabled 
crimes. Such content is increasingly being used for investment scams, impersonation, 
misinformation, and public deception, o ften involving fabricated endorsements by 
eminent personalities. These sophisticated fakes erode public trust and can lead to 
large-scale financial and reputational harm. 

97 
 
The Indian Cyber Crime Coordination Centre (I4C) is actively working to detect and 
address the misuse of deepfake technologies. The National Cybercrime Threat 
Analytics Unit (NCTAU) under I4C regularly identifies deepfake content being circulated 
on various platforms. These cases are shared with Social Media Intermediaries (SMIs) 
for timel y takedown. In this regard, I4C has also conducted meetings with SMIs and 
conveyed the need to train their AI -based content moderation systems to proactively 
detect and flag deepfake content. 
Further, acting under clause (b) of sub -section (3) of section 7 9 of the Information 
Technology Act, 2000, I4C has issued notices to the concerned intermediaries for 
removal or disabling of access to 175 URLs that hosted unlawful deepfake or other AI -
generated content.” 
93. On being asked if the Ministry was going to have a relook at the entire SOP of the 
financial transaction itself and ensure that there is AI assistance available to the 
institutions, so that financial frauds could be prevented at the very place of its origin , the 
Ministry while replying elaborated as under: 
 
 “Basically, matter pertains to the Ministry of Finance; however, the same can be 
achieved in the following manner:  
a. Strong authentication on login/initiation:  It is suggested to ensure that when a user 
initiates a new login sessions or transactions, robust authentication is in place 
requiring password and mandatory “auto read” OTP for accessing payment 
functionality. It is also suggested that while using internet banking, the system should 
be able to detect the presence of third -party application such as TeamViewer of 
AnyDesk. In case, the system detects any such application, internet banking login 
should not be authenticated/permitted. 
b. Device Binding: At transaction origin, banking application must verify that the device 
is binded and has been in regular use. The banking application should ensure that 
transactions should be sent only from a bound device (one that the user has 
previously registered). If an attemp t comes from an unauthorized device, transaction 
attempted can be treated as high risk and disallowed/deferred until the device is 
verified and bound. 
c. Transaction Limits:  At the origin of a transaction, banks should apply standard 
customer rules for new us ers. For example, new customers (e.g. >30 days since 
onboarding), lower default limits on transaction amount or volume must be kept. If an 
account had multiple failed login or PIN reset attempts, bank may restrict high -value 
outward transfers for a cooling off period unless the user authenticates. 
d. Behavioural prompts:  At the point of initiating specific transaction types known for 
fraud (like transfers to a new payee or sending money in response to a scam prone 
context available through TAU reports of I4C) a confirmation prompt may be 
introduced like “This is a new pay ee proceed with caution.” The user must explicitly 
confirm to continue. This measure can prevent fraud by prompting the user to 
reconsider the transaction. 
e. Embedded fraud check in the origination flow:  Banking applications especiallyThird -
Party Application Providers (TPAPs) can incorporate checks during the input phase 
before final submission using DoTs Financial Fraud Risk Indicator (FRI) database. 
As soon as the user enters the beneficiary account or UPI ID, the system can do a 

98 
 
lookup against blacklists a nd the transaction can be denied or user may be warned 
as “Beneficiary is flagged of fraud-transaction not allowed”. 
f. Transaction pattern: If the amount entered is high, relative to the normal transaction 
patterns of the user, he/she maybe prompted for reco nfirmation or the transaction 
may be deferred. 
g. Activity Control: If the transaction is of a type the customer has never done before, it 
should be treated for higher scrutiny by default. For example, a first ever 
international transfer or withdrawal in fore ign ATM, or first use of the mobile app to 
send money could automatically trigger a step -up check at origin. The first such 
transactions should be mandated requiring a call -back verification or a branch visit 
(depending on severity). After confirming it wa s legitimate, subsequent smart 
transactions can be treated as normal. 
h. Split transaction control: Sometimes fraudsters try to break a large amount into many 
small ones to avoid detection rules. A control at origin can detect if a user is 
executing multiple transfers to the same beneficiary in the same session that sums 
to a large total. 
Based on the inputs of I4C, RBI has issued a comprehensive advisory to all banks on 
use of money mule accounts for cyber enable frauds vide their advisory reference no. 
CO. DOS. RSD. No. 56058/11-01-00612024-2025 dated 19.11.2024. 
The advisory covers strict adherence to the directions on introduction of new 
technologies, as contained in Paragraph 62 of the Master Direction - Know Your 
Customer (KYC) Directions, 2016. Banks/FIs shall identify and assess the ML / TF risks 
prior to the launch of new products, services etc., including in case of those products / 
services offered in collaboration with Fintechs / Third-party Service Providers. 
It also emphasizes that banks should ens ure deployment and adoption of robust 
software for real -time transaction monitoring and use of Al / ML tools in detecting 
suspicious and fraudulent transaction patterns as well as use of network analytics in 
identifying mule networks. Setting up of a dedic ated centralised unit at the bank -level 
may also be considered for a harmonised and time bound response in countering cyber-
enabled frauds.” 
 
94. On being asked if MHA had considered the feasibility of posting cyber experts 
directly in the police stations to handle cybercrimes, the Ministry replied  as under: 
 “I4C has requested States/UTs/CAPFs & CPOs  to utilise trained cyber 
commandos in cyber related fields at Cyber Police stations. 
Training to selected cyber commandos is being imparted in a phased manner. It is 
proposed to train 5000 cyber commandos for such purpose during the next 5 years. 
First ba tch of cyber commandos is already undergoing training at different training 
institute of repute.” 
 
 
 

99 
 
 
E. Ministry of Defence and Defence Researchh and Development 
Organisation(DRDO) 
 
95.     Initiatives taken 
DPSUs and CAIR, DRDO have taken up various AI projects under the 
domains/technology areas such as Command, Control, Communications, Computer and 
Intelligence, Surveillance and Reconnaissance Systems (C4ISR) Systems; 
Autonomous/ Unmanned/ Robotic Systems; I ntelligent Monitoring Systems; 
Manufacturing and Maintenance; Operational Data Analytics; Perimeter Security 
systems; Speech / Voice analysis using NLP; Generative AI (LLM based Virtual 
Assistants) solutions. etc.  
Further, significant R&D efforts are also  being made by DPSUs/ Organizations/ 
Academia’s/ Startups across following new domains/ projects: AI Platform Automation; 
Cyber Security; Human Behavioral analysis; Lethal Autonomous weapon systems; 
Logistics & Supply Chain management; AI enabled Simulators, etc. 
Some of the DRDO initiatives include  
(i) Developing the framework, toolkit and methodology for ensuring Trustworthiness of 
AI Systems. 
(ii) Developed portable AI system for Mandarin to Hindi/English speech translation on 
the edge - enabling automated Manda rin data translation in network denied 
environment.  
i. lack of digitized data causing non -reliable, less generalized and poor 
performance in deployed environment. 
ii. computing infrastructure and high implementation costs in establishing 
advanced data centres or retrofitting legacy platforms.  
 Legacy System Integration : Older platforms (tanks, aircraft, artillery ) weren't 
built for AI integration, making upgrades complex and expensive.  
b) Ethical, Legal & Normative Concerns 
 Opacity: Lack of transparency in decision making 
 Ethical concerns in autonomous systems 
 Over-reliance: Reduced human judgment & accountability 
 
Challenges posed by AI in the Defence Sector 
 
a) Data, Infrastructure & Integration 
 Fragmented and Classified Data : Military data lacks standardization, is often 
compartmentalized or classified, limiting  large-scale AI training (e.g., in object 
detection or battlefield simulation).  
 Infrastructure Shortfalls: India’s defence sector faces   

100 
 
c) Adversarial attacks throughout AI pipeline (Evasion, Poisoning & Information 
Extractions) 
 DRDO–Tri service Collaboration : DRDO has established the DRDO Young 
Scientist Laboratory -Artificial Intelligence (DYSL -AI), which is actively engaging 
with Tri services and other agencies to initiate cross collaboration and cater to 
current defence AI requirements.  
 Centre of excellence has been established at various IITs to promote cross-
disciplinary collaboration.  
c) Building Technological Independence 
 Indigenous AI Systems: Projects like Human Machine Teaming and other AI 
based projects is being taken up to build capacity for next -gen autonomous 
warfare solutions. 
d) Evaluation Framework (ETAI Framework) for Trustworthy AI systems in Defence 
has already been developed & released in Oct 2024 
e) Maintain Human oversight in critical operations 
f) Ensure logging and monitoring post deployment 
 
96. When the Committee wanted to know how AI was helping the Ministry of Defence 
in meeting its requirements of State -of-the-Art Technology for producin g indigenous 
Defence Equipment and what policy changes and investments were essentially required 
to strengthen India's AI preparedness in the Defence sector, the Ministry elaborated: 
 
i.  “There is a definite gap in the availability of learnable datasets that can be used 
to build reliable and effective AI based solutions. Th e datasets when not available 
need to be created in volume, variety and dynamicity for building effective models. 
An end -to-end pipeline that can bring domain experts, data scientists, data 
Plans to counter challenges 
These challenges can be addressed through various means such as Data Management, 
engaging Private Sector, Cost-effective solutions, stringent security measures etc. 
a) Institutional Mechanisms & Funding 
 iDEX, TDF, and DIO : These bodies provide funding, institutional backing, and a 
collaborative platform for AI innovation through startups, academia, and private 
firms.  
 Short term & Long-termplans: By committing to short term & long-term projects 
and modernization centreed on AI and next -gen systems, labs like DYSL -AI are 
ensuring technological readiness.  
b) Ensuring AI integration and infrastructure sharing to enhance R&D & cross 
collaboration 

101 
 
engineers and AI experts needs to be institutionalized and establi shed. This will 
require necessary amendments to the GFR based on complete appreciation of the 
ROI.  
ii. India has strategic dependence on imported Accelerators (GPU) which are critical 
for AI. This strategic dependence has to be broken through Gol initiative. 
iii. LLMs for Strategic applications is the need of nation. The LLMs needed for Strategic 
Applications are different for Government to Government and Government to 
Citizen Applications. This requires investment and sharing of Data sets in 
possession of various Gol departments.  
iv. AI is crucial for India's "Aatmanirbhar Bharat" in defence sector, accelerating 
indigenous equipment production through faster R&D, advanced simulation, and AI -
powered quality control. It also enables predictive maintenance, enhancing the  
operational readiness of indigenously produced assets. 
Adopt Frameworks (ETAI Framework or other) for trustworthy AI system 
development ensuring Reliability & Robustness, Safety & Security, Transparency 
and Fairness.” 
 
97. Since India's pursuit of Al -driven defence modernization faces several structural 
and strategic  challenges that hinder as its progress toward self -reliance and a  major 
impediment was the Country's continued dependence on foreign nations for advanced 
military technologies which delayed the development of an indigenous AI-based defence 
ecosystem, t he Committee sought the views  of the Ministry in this regard  and the 
following was submitted: 
There is a definite gap in the availability of learnable datasets that can be used to build 
reliable and effective Al based solutions. The datasets when not available need to be 
created in the volume, variety and dynamicity necessary for building effective  models. 
An end -to-end pipeline that can bring domain experts, data scientists, data engineers 
and Al experts needs to be institutionalized and established. This will require necessary 
amendments to the GFR based on a complete appreciation of the ROI. Indi a has 
strategic dependence on imported Accelerators (GPU) which is critical for Al. This 
The Policy changes and investments essential to strengthen AI preparedness include 
plans built on DAIC/DAIPA, iDEX and DAP review. 
1. Create a classified Defence Data & Compute backbone (DDCB). 
2. Establish Test & Evaluation standards and national ranges for AI/autonomy. 
3. Strengthen safety, ethics, and accountability for AI in combat. 
4. Adopt Open technical standards + sovereign model repositories. 
5. Secure supply chains for AI hardware & critical components. 
 “With Battle space becoming multi domain, nonlinear and full spectrum the 
development of Systems is becoming complex. Modeling such high complex systems 
requires AI . Hence AI is critical to achieve self - reliance. The structural and strategic 
aspects as discussed below need to be addressed. 

102 
 
strategic dependence has to be broken through Gol initiative. LLM for Strategic 
applications is  the need of nation. The LLMs needed for Strategic Applications are 
different for Government to Government and Government to Citizen Applications. This 
requires investment and sharing of Data sets in possession of various Gol departments.” 
 
98. When asked to explain how AI was being integrated into India's national defence 
strategy and military modernization plans and what were the current AI applications 
used in surveillance, intelligence gathering and warfare for Indian Armed Forces, the 
Ministry furnished the following details: 
 “Indian Defence forces are formulating RMA 3.0 with the view to incorporate deep 
technologies like AI, Quantum cyber and space domains in to full spectrum warfare. 
Current AI application used in surveillance includes  face detection and recognition 
system, speech and text translation system. 
Development of AI/ML based tools for improving functionalities is currently under 
development. 
a) AI/ML for Post Mission Data Analysis. 
b) AI/ML for performance improvement. 
AI Centres are being developed by each lab.” 
 
99. Asked to elaborate whether AI could  enhance the capabilities of autonomous 
weapon systems and unmanned vehicles (drones etc.) and on the Al -driven 
advancement in drones, missile guidance, targeting systems, and electronic warfare in 
India, the Ministry of Defence submitted that: 
AI-based electronic warfare (EW) enables faster, more accurate, and 
autonomous control of the electromagnetic spectrum.” 
100. In response to  a query as to whether the Ministry of Defence explored use of AI 
for border security and real-time threat detection along India's border , the following was 
submitted: 
 
 “Yes, the Ministry of Defence (MoD), Government of India has actively explored 
and initiated multiple projects involving AI for border security and real -time threat 
detection. Specifically, R&DE(E) of DRDO has successfully completed project on multi -
layered intelligent perimeter surveillance and response.  Some of the involved 
technologies are 
 
 AI-Enabled Smart Fencing (CIBMS) 
 AI for Real-Time Video & Image Analytics 
 “AI can enhance the capabilities of autonomous weapon systems and unmanned 
vehicles by  
 Precision target detection 
 Dynamic route planning  

103 
 
 AI-Powered Drone Surveillance 
 Project “iSentinel” 
 AI-Driven Multi-Sensor Fusion and Early Warning Systems 
 AI-Based Surveillance Systems for Border Security 
 AI-Driven Robotics and Autonomous Systems” 
 
101. On the role AI could play in cyber warfare, protecting critical De fence 
infrastructure in India from cyber threats and enhancing operational efficiency in Indian 
Defence operations, the Ministry elucidated as: 
 
In defence cyber warfare also, AI is crucial for advanced threat detection and automated 
incident response, enabling rapid mitigation of cyber threats. For critical defence 
infrastructure, Al provides real time monitoring and anomaly detection to safeguard vital 
networks and systems.” 
 
102. To a pointed query as to  how the Defence Rese arch and Development 
Organisation (DRDO) was leveraging AI for indigenous defence innovation, the Ministry 
elaborated: 
 “Two specialized labs CAIR, DYSL -AI and AI cell in every lab of DRDO are 
leveraging the AI for indigenous defence innovation. 
 
(i) Face Recognition system under Disguise (FRSD) :  Solution is capable of 
automated face detection and recognition of persons under disguise and helps in 
spotting intruders at sensitive locations using AI-enabled alerts. 
(ii) AI-powered Speech Translation : The system translates Mandarin to Hindi/English 
speech enabling cross lingual communication, sensitive data analysis. 
(iii) NPOL, DRDO is leveraging Artificial Intelligence (AI) to drive indigenous defence 
innovation by integrating AI into underwater surveillance, sonar sys tems, and 
autonomous platforms. NPOL is researching and developing AI -powered solutions 
for passive acoustic target classification, adaptive sonar signal processing, and 
autonomous navigation in AUVs, enhancing operational effectiveness in complex 
underwater environments.  
(iv) DMRL/DRDO used the Integrated Computational Materials Engineering concept in 
a project for the development of powder metallurgy turbine disc wherein AI was 
used for certain modules. With increasing contribution of AI for similar endeavors , 
some of the limitations of the ICME approach can be overcome. This will pave way 
for faster development of better materials at reduced cost. A multi -institutional 
 “The role of AI is very significant in all the aspects of cyber warfare across 
monitoring, defence and deterrence. The data points available, effectively collected and 
processed can provide 360 -degree view of the cyber security posture. AI can help in 
assessing the vulnerabilities, planning defence. evolving traps and also creating new 
observation points. It can significantly reduce the cognitive overload and enable decision 
making. 

104 
 
project is under initiation through DIA -CoE IITK with regards to Accelerated 
Development of  Next Generation High Strength High Performance Steel. This 
project will make use of AI/ML for the design of chemistry of new steel. Further, an 
AR&DB sponsored project was conducted by IISc for property prediction of Ni -base 
superalloys and Ti alloys using advanced ML algorithms.  
(v) Under the project DIR -10 at DMRL/DRDO, an AI based approach involving a 
combination of Machine Learning and Genetic algorithm techniques was 
implemented to accelerate design and development of promising high temperature 
multi-component alloys. This has paved the way for developing new light -weight 
materials having high strength at high temperature surpassing the current 
commercial alloys for defence applications. This approach enabled the alloy design 
in significantly less number of experiments and repeatability trials. Apart from the 
alloy development application, an ongoing R&D work is being done for analysis of 
micro-structural images using AI tools with the aim to automate identification and 
quantification of micro -structural f eatures and defects and relate it with material 
properties for accelerated material development.  
(vi) RCI a premier lab has established a dedicated technology group for developing 
AI/ML based applications to improve product features and process efficiency. 
Furthermore, RCI has also field-tested AI/ML for use in missile applications;  
(vii) Petaflop’s facility has been created for training of massive models with large 
datasets; 
(viii) A project is being undertaken for the development of indigenous AI / ML model 
for precision nutrition intervention aimed at metabolic health of soldiers deployed in 
different environmental conditions such as high altitude, dessert, humid and coastal 
areas. 
(ix)  DGRE is using AI and ML based techniques to generate the avalanche forecast for 
Indian Hi malaya regions. AI/ML based algorithms are used in the analysis of 
chemical and biological detector response on exposure to chemical and biological 
agents.   
(x) DIPR has developed crowd behaviour analysis software which use psychological 
questions to identify  the behaviour of crowd. DIPR is working in the use of trust in 
AI. 
(xi) AI/ML model are being used for training the human effort augmentation device 
being develop by DEBEL. 
(xii) Also, to provide innovative solutions to India’s defence in the field of defence 
armament & ammunitions systems. ARDE is employing AI in the development of 
following systems: 
a) Development of electronic discrimination module for classification of 
system. 

105 
 
b) Drone Based Telemetry Receiving System 
c) Auto target detection, tracking, identification and locking system  
(xiii) Advanced Robotics: In this project, it proposed to develop AI driven technologies 
to function as assistance to soldier. Also the establishment has been working on a 
project involving AI for border security and real-time threat detection. 
(xiv) Structural Health Monitoring (SHM): AI/ML based solutions are being explored 
for defect detection. 
(xv) Compact Power Source: AI/ML are being used to add intelligent features helpful 
for optimized operation of power supply system for defence application 
However, a limitation with the AI based approach is that the robustness of the model 
predictions depends on the training database size and quality. But still, the AI tools can 
be used to guide the experimentation to converge quickly to the promising alloys h aving 
desired properties. Also, database size is expected to increase with time.  
The advancements in deep learning based object detection algorithms are leveraged to 
develop Automatic Target Recognition capabilities which will enable the autonomous 
systems especially AUVs, Torpedoes and Underwater Mines for efficient detection and 
classification of targets of interest.” 
103. When the Committee wanted to know the potential benefits and risks of deploying 
AI in lethal autonomous weapon systems, defence technologi es and warfare, the 
Ministry submitted the following: 
AI ML based techniques are not amenable for verified decision making and hence are 
likely to result in unintended outcome s as well. However, a semi -automatic control with 
an AIML supported recommendation could be very impactful.” 
 
 
 “Deployment of AI based and deductive reasoning can be very useful in decision 
making. 
Development and deployment of autonomous weapon systems provide several military 
advantages.  Autonomous weapons systems act as a force multiplier enabling 
expanded battlefield, allowing combat to reach into areas previously inaccessible. It can 
reduce casualties by excluding human war fighters from dangerous missions. 
AI based deductive reasoning can be very useful in decision making.  Further, AI can 
enhance the capabilities of lethal autonomous weapon systems and unmanned vehicles 
by  
 Precision target detection 
 Dynamic route planning  
 
One major challenge is the lack of consensus on how to define the autonomy of weapon 
systems. A standard definition that accounts for levels of autonomy could help guide an 
incremental approach to proposing limits. 

106 
 
104. The Committee  specifically asked how it was ensured that AI models were 
trained with the vast experience of the Defence officers who have worked in the field, 
the submission was as under: 
 
 “Defence AI Project Agency (DAIPA) constituted under Ministry of Defence (MoD) 
is working with an objective of accelerating AI adoption in the defence and facilitate 
Synergies between Service Head Quarters and Defence PSUs to identify Use cases 
and take up development Projects; issues related to Data sharing, data analysis, 
infrastructure requirements, etc. 
While training AI models, experienced scientists are involved. They ensure that the 
outcomes are useful by tweaking the training parameters. 
Also, based on vast experience of Defence officers in their respective fields as per 
application specific requirements, custom data sets can be generated & labelled to 
make it unbiased & realistic data sets for training AI models. 
In addition, joint collaboration group of DRDO & Indian Armed Forces will incorporate 
vast experience of defence officers in training of AI models.” 
105. Commenting upon if robots were being used in the border areas or any other 
places or i f it was st ill in the experiment stage; the role of Military I nternet of Things 
(IoT); how harmful dark satellites were and regarding data sharing with other friendly 
countries, the following was submitted: 
 “Some of the robotic systems developed are as follows: 
 
 Remotely Operated Vehicle -Daksh: Identification and handling of improvised 
explosive device (IED) 
 Unexploded Ordnance Handling Robot-UXOR: Handling and diffusion of UXO 
 Confined Space Remotely Operated Vehicle-CSROV 
 Surveillance Remotely Operated Vehicle-SROV 
 
Apart from these, development of technologies for legged robots such as biped and 
quadruped is being carried out.  
DRDO has a project, STAR on robot development (humanoid and quadruped) taken by 
R&D Engrs. RCI is doing a sub-project for STAR.” 
 
106. When aske d if there was any way that an AI system could be used for MRO 
(Maintenance, Repair and Operations) and if AI could be used in MRO operations for 
better understanding and fixing flaws so that it does not take that longer time for these 
helicopters to come back on board, the Committee was informed: 
 “Yes. Al systems can bring efficiency in the MRO operations by using the AI 
based predictive maintenance and spares planning(AI in SCM &  Logistics), crew 
decision support, sensor fusion for ISR (Intelligence, Surveillance and 
Reconnaissance), and autonomy on air/sea/land platforms.  
However, Al systems require learnable information along with expertise -based 
correction to make the MRO predictive preventive and effective.” 

107 
 
F. Ministry of Power 
 
107. Artificial Intelligence (AI) has emerged as a critical enabler in transforming the 
energy sector by optimising processes, improving operational efficiency, and supporting 
energy transition goals. AI appl ications can be instrumental in managing grids, 
forecasting energy demand with greater accuracy, and facilitating the integration of 
renewable energy sources into the grid. AI holds significant potential to address 
complex challenges in the energy sector, such as minimising energy waste, reducing 
operational costs, and enhancing the adoption of clean and renewable energy 
technologies. By leveraging AI -driven solutions, the sector can contribute substantially 
to achieving national and global sustainability g oals and ensuring a secure and resilient 
energy future. NTPC has implemented an AI/ML -based forecasting system for solar 
power generation that uses advanced algorithms to deliver accurate day -ahead and 
intraday generation forecasts. The system integrates r eal-time weather data from IoT -
based monitoring stations, satellite inputs, and historical irradiance patterns to support 
data-driven scheduling and grid management. Earlier, forecasting relied on third -party 
services and manual weather assessments, which were prone to human error. The 
automated system now generates forecasts and schedules systematically, leading to 
significant reduction in deviation charges under the DSM mechanism and improved 
renewable integration and grid compliance. Grid Controller of I ndia Limited is 
considering improving upon its current statistical forecasting mechanism to an AI/ML -
based short-term (day-ahead and intraday) demand forecasting model to enhance grid 
reliability. The system intends to integrate weather parameters, histori cal demand 
trends, and event factors such as holidays and weekends to achieve a targeted Mean 
Absolute Percentage Error (MAPE) of 3–5% for day-ahead forecasts. 
 
 
108. The high percentage of power loss during transmission and distribution is an area 
of concern in India. In the regard, the Committee asked the Ministry to explain if use of 
AI could help in reduction of transmission and distribution (T&D) losses and how AI 
enabed automation could improve operational efficiency in Indian power utilities and 
distribution companies. The Committee also wanted to know  if AI could be helpful in 
energy theft detection and prevention in electricity distribution system . The submissions 
by the Ministry of Power are as under: 
 
  “AI can be highly effective in preventing power theft, fraud, and leakage in India’s 
power sector by utilising advanced analytics, machine learning, and smart meter data to 
detect and address non -technical losses with greater speed and accuracy. The 
Revamped Distribution Sector Scheme (RDSS), launched in 2021, supports the 
development of Information and Communication Technology (ICT) systems across the 
sector. As of 30th September, 2025, approximately 4.38 crore consumer smart meters, 
9.86 lakh distribution transformer meters, and 1.39 lakh feeder -level smart meters have 
been installed under RDSS and other initiatives. The extensive data generated from 
these smart meters enables the deployment of AI models for theft detection, including 

108 
 
meter tampering and b ypassing, consumption behaviour analysis, load disaggregation, 
demand-side management, and the reduction of AT&C losses. AI systems can analyse 
vast volumes of consumption and meter data to identify irregularities such as direct 
theft, tariff misuse, and a bnormal usage patterns. Machine lear ning models can be 
trained to f lag these anomalies at the consumer or premises level, enabling targeted 
inspections and swift corrective actions. Under the Powerthon initiative of RDSS, 
technology solution providers are being deployed at scale in states including Bihar, 
Madhya Pradesh, Gujarat, Maharashtra, and Uttar Pradesh, with formal agreements 
between DISCOMs and solution providers to implement AI -based solutions for theft 
detection, load segregation, consumption pat tern analysis, and power factor 
improvements to reduce AT&C losses. On the transmission side, Powergrid has 
implemented an AI -based defect identification system that uses computer vision and 
deep learning to automatically detect defects such as broken cond uctors, damaged 
insulators, and bird nests in transmission lines from drone and mobile -captured images. 
Earlier, inspection photographs were analyzed manually, which was time -consuming 
and prone to human error. The AI model, deployed in April 2024, now aut omates this 
process with an accuracy range of 50 –80% across defect types and continues to 
improve through ongoing training. The system enables faster and more accurate defect 
detection, improving inspection efficiency, enhancing safety, and allowing mainte nance 
teams to prioritize repairs effectively. 
 
109. On being questioned about the role AI can play in energy planning, power 
assessment, smart grid development and real -time monitoring of energy flow in India 
and how AI could contribute to improving energy access and electrification in rural and 
remote regions of India, the response was as under by the Ministry of Power: 
 
 “India has achieved universal electrification, connecting all villages and willing 
households, marking a major milestone in its energy journey. However, challenges 
related to supply quality and reliability persist, particularly in remote areas. Artificial 
Intelligence (AI) offers transformative potential to bridge these gaps and drive efficiency 
across the en tire energy value chain as India advances toward a low carbon and 
digitalized power system. In smart grid development, AI serves as the operational 
intelligence that enables resilient and adaptive grid management. It powers self -healing 
grids by detecting faults such as short circuits or line breaks in real time and 
autonomously rerouting power to prevent cascading outages. Through dynamic load 
management, AI optimizes demand response, time -of-day pricing, and smart appliance 
coordination, thereby reducing grid stress and flattening peak loads. In managing 
distributed energy resources (DERs) including rooftop solar, microgrids, battery storage, 
and electric vehicles, AI enables real -time synchronization of local generation and 
consumption. In rural regions, AI can strengthen and integrate microgrids with the main 
grid, enhancing reliability and flexibility. AI is also reshaping energy planning and power 
assessment. By analyzing weather patterns, demographics, economic activity, and 
consumption trends, AI -driven models improve demand -supply forecasting, support 
generation mix optimization, and identify seasonal demand variations. In renewable 

109 
 
potential assessment, AI processes satellite imagery to pinpoint high -potential zones for 
solar and wind projects, aiding in the optimal siting of renewable assets. Furthermore, in 
generation portfolio optimization, AI assists utilities and regulators in balancing baseload 
and peaking capacity, integrating storage solutions, and maintaining grid stability.” 
 
110. When asked as t o what impact AI could  have on reducing carbon emissions and 
in enhancing sustainability in India’s power sector, the Ministry in its response stated as 
under: 
 “AI can play a pivotal role in reducing carbon emissions and advancing 
sustainability in India’ s power sector by enabling cleaner generation, greater efficiency, 
and smarter grid operations. In power generation, AI enhances renewable energy 
forecasting and integration by using weather data, satellite imagery, and historical 
performance to accurately predict solar and wind output. This enables grid operators to 
schedule renewable generation more reliably, minimize curtailment, and reduce reliance 
on fossil-fuel based power. AI -driven optimization of dispatch decisions further ensures 
that renewables and hydro sources are prioritized in real time, maximizing the utilization 
of low -carbon energy before fossil plants are ramped up. AI also contributes to 
improving energy efficiency across the system. In industries such as steel, cement, and 
aluminum, AI-powered predictive maintenance and process optimization reduce energy 
waste and emissions. In urban and building energy management, AI regulates HVAC 
systems, lighting, and appliance operations through adaptive controls, driving significant 
demand-side savings in both commercial and residential sectors. Finally, through smart 
grids and demand flexibility, AI enables dynamic pricing and automated demand 
response mechanisms that shift consumption away from high emission periods. By 
flattening peak demand curve s and reducing dependence on peaking coal plants, AI 
strengthens grid stability while advancing India’s energy transition goals.” 
 
111. The Committee called upon the  views of Ministry on the major data security and 
privacy concerns associated with AI -based energy/power management systems in India 
and what role AI could play in protecting critical power infrastructure in India from cyber 
threats/attacks. The response submitted was as under: 
 
 “AI is increasingly being deployed across India’s power sector for diverse 
applications such as grid management; demand forecasting, early warning systems in 
hydroelectric plants, predictive maintenance in thermal and renewable installations, and 
analytics within Advanced Metering Infrastructure (AMI). While AI adoption brings 
significant efficiency and reliability gains, it also introduces key data -related challenges. 
Data security concerns arise primarily from the use of cloud -based platforms for AI 
model training, data storage, and analytics. Cloud systems, especially those hosted 
outside India may pose risks to data sovereignty and jurisdictional control. Additionally, 
inadequate cybersecurity measures in certain cloud environments can increase 
vulnerability to cyberattacks. In the power sector, these concerns are mitigated through 
the use of Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology (MeitY) -empanelled cloud 
services, which ensure compliance with national security and data protection standards. 

110 
 
Draft Central Electricity Authority (Cybersecurity in Power Sector) regulations propose to 
mandate that power sector related sensitive information and sensitive data, including 
data and information hosted on cloud, must be stored in an encrypted, secured an d 
protected environment and must reside within India only. Data privacy concerns emerge 
in AI-driven AMI and smart grid applications that handle large volumes of consumer and 
operational data. Without adequate anonymization or masking, AI algorithms could 
inadvertently reveal sensitive personal information such as usage habits or occupancy 
patterns. To address this, Computer Security Incident Response Team – Power 
(CSIRT-Power), in its standard operating procedure for ensuring cybersecurity for power 
sector utilities, has incorporated privacy -preserving mechanisms such as data masking, 
encryption, and aggregation to protect user data confidentiality. On the other hand, AI 
significantly strengthens cybersecurity in the sector. AI/ML based solutions enhance 
real-time threat detection, analysis, and response capabilities within Security Operations 
Centres (SOCs) through their integration in Security Information and Event Management 
(SIEM) systems. These systems process vast datasets to identify anomalies, suspicious 
activity, and zero-day attacks. Similarly, AI-powered User and Entity Behaviour Analytics 
(UEBA) tools monitor user and system behaviour to detect insider threats or 
compromised accounts early. AI also improves Cyber Threat Intelligence (CTI) by  
correlating indicators of compromise across multiple sources, identifying attack patterns, 
attributing threat actors, and using predictive models to anticipate emerging risks. 
Furthermore, AI -based systems can analyze behavioural patterns to detect zero d ay 
vulnerabilities before exploitation, significantly strengthening the resilience of India’s 
power sector against evolving cyber threats.” 
 
112. The Ministry explained about the future prospects and investment opportunities 
for AI-driven innovation in India’s power and energy sector as: 
 “The future prospects and investment opportunities for AI -driven innovation in 
India’s power and energy sector are immense. Ministry of Power has 
conceptualized the India Energy Stack as a Digital Public Infrastructure (DPI) to  
ensure standardization, interoperability, and data -driven innovation across the 
sector. A dedicated Task Force has been established to oversee its development 
and implementation, positioning India as a global leader in digital energy 
systems. a) AI for Re newable Energy Optimization: To achieve India’s target of 
500 GW of non -fossil capacity by 2030, AI can play a pivotal role in improving 
forecasting accuracy for solar and wind generation, minimizing curtailment, and 
enabling predictive maintenance of phot ovoltaic and wind assets. Machine 
learning models leveraging satellite and meteorological data can assist in optimal 
siting of renewable projects, enhancing generation efficiency and investment 
returns. b) AI-Enabled Grids: With India’s transmission and distribution losses still 
exceeding 16%, AI offers transformative solutions such as grid automation, self 
healing systems, real -time load balancing, congestion management, theft 
detection, and outage prediction. Integration of AI with IoT can create smart 
substations capable of dynamic response to grid conditions. RDSS (Revamped 

111 
 
Distribution Sector Scheme) includes major components dedicated to 
digitalization and AI -based grid modernization. c) AI for EV Grid Integration & 
Smart Charging: As India seeks to at tain a 30% share of electric vehicles, in the 
total vehicles sold, by 2030, AI can enable smart charging station management, 
EV fleet load forecasting, grid impact analysis, and vehicle -to-grid (V2G) 
coordination. DISCOMs and leading EV companies are incre asingly investing in 
AI-driven charging infrastructure start -ups, creating a growing ecosystem of 
energy-tech innovation. d) AI for Smart Homes, Buildings & Energy Services: 
Rapid urbanization and rising energy demand in residential and commercial 
sectors present opportunities for AI -based solutions in demand prediction, 
adaptive HVAC and lighting control, and appliance-level energy optimization. The 
PropTech and ESCO (Energy Service Company) markets are fostering AI -
enabled building energy management platf orms that enhance energy efficiency 
and sustainability. e) AI for Rural Electrification & Microgrids: Over 30 million 
people still face unreliable power access in India’s rural areas. AI can optimize 
microgrid design, load sizing, and asset monitoring for off-grid systems, while 
predictive maintenance improves reliability. f) AI in Energy Trading & Carbon 
Markets: With the rollout of India’s Carbon Credit Trading Scheme (CCTS), AI 
has a key role in real -time carbon accounting, offset validation, and predict ive 
analytics for Renewable Energy Certificates (RECs) and green tariffs. AI-powered 
trading bots can enhance price discovery and liquidity in carbon and energy 
markets, enabling efficient participation by utilities and corporates. Energy fintech 
and carbo n-market start -ups are expected to lead innovation in AI -enabled 
compliance and trading platforms.” 
113. The Committee wanted to ascertain whether it was a fact that a lot of contractors 
were using Chinese smart meters which were very vulnerable as a point of s ource in 
terms of cyber -intrusion or cyber -attacks and how the Ministry was ensuring that those 
components were not used. The Ministry in response furnished the following reply: 
 
 “To strengthen the cybersecurity and integrity of India’s power supply syste m, the 
Ministry of Power has introduced a set of directives on 2nd July, 2020 (and, subsequent 
amendment on 6th August, 2025) aimed at preventing potential cyber threats arising 
from imported equipment and components. These measures are designed to ensure 
that all critical hardware used in the power sector is secure, reliable, and compliant with 
national standards. Under these directions, any equipment, components, or parts 
imported for use in the country’s power system must undergo mandatory testing within  
India. The objective is to identify and eliminate any embedded malware, trojans, or other 
cyber vulnerabilities that could compromise the power network. All such testing will be 
conducted exclusively in laboratories certified and designated by the Ministr y of Power 
to ensure authenticity and consistency in the evaluation process. Further, imports from 
“prior reference” countries, those identified as sensitive from a national security 
perspective or from entities owned or controlled by such countries, will require prior 
approval from the Government of India. In exceptional cases where such imports are 

112 
 
permitted, the Ministry of Power will approve specific testing protocols to be followed in 
the designated laboratories. Central Electricity Authority is in the process of finalizing the 
Central Electricity Authority (Cyber Security in Power Sector) Regulations. These 
regulations will ensure that the control and operation of power system elements 
including solar inverters, as well as the exchange of related infor mation, including real -
time data, remain within national boundaries. Additionally, Ministry of Power has 
mandated that IT equipment and services, as may be identified in due course, to be 
used in the power sector shall be cleared through the Trusted Teleco m Portal operated 
by National Security Council Secretariat (NSCS) prior to their supply, with effect from 1st 
January 2026.” 
 
114. To a pointed query that  if an individual solar plant on someone’s terrace was 
used for a cyber attack and to access the grid, what security mechanisms were in place 
to ensure that these individual plants are protected from any sort of cyber attacks , the 
Ministry replied as under: 
 “Central Electricity Authority is in the process o f finalizing the Central Electricity 
Authority (Cyber Security in Power Sector) Regulations. These regulations will ensure 
that the control and operation of power system elements including solar inverters, as 
well as the exchange of related information, in cluding real -time data, remain within 
national boundaries. Additionally, Ministry of Power has mandated that IT equipment 
and services, as may be identified in due course, to be used in the power sector shall be 
cleared through the Trusted Telecom Portal o perated by National Security Council 
Secretariat (NSCS) prior to their supply, with effect from 1st January 2026.” 
 
115. On being  asked if the Ministry of Power was funding or working on any 
indigenous production study to ensure that low cost power storage technologies or 
batteries could be produced in the C ountry to help storage of surplus power , the  
response was as under: 
 
 “Advanced Chemistry Cells (ACCs) are the n ew generation advance energy 
storage technologies that can store electric energy either as electrochemical or as 
chemical energy and convert it back to electric energy as and when required. Through 
this Scheme, the Central Government intends to optimally i ncentivize potential investors 
to set - up Giga -scale ACC manufacturing facilities with emphasis on maximum value 
addition and quality output and achieving pre committed capacity level within a pre -
defined time-period. Ministry of Heavy Industries’s National Programmeme on Advanced 
Chemistry Cell (ACC) Battery storage was approved by the Union Cabinet on 
12.05.2021 with budgetary outlay of Rupee 18,100 crores. This scheme will strengthen 
the ecosystem for Electric Mobility and Battery Storage in the country.  The scheme 
envisages enhancing India’s manufacturing capabilities of Advanced Chemistry Cell 
(ACC) by setting up of Giga scale ACC and battery manufacturing facilities in India with 
emphasis on maximum domestic value addition. This scheme will promote Make in India 
initiative. The scheme envisages setting up of a cumulative ACC manufacturing capacity 
of fifty (50) GWh for ACCs and an additional cumulative capacity of (5) GWh for Niche 

113 
 
ACC Technologies. The manufacturing facility as proposed by the beneficiary firm would 
have to be commissioned within a period of 2 years. The subsidy will be disbursed 
thereafter over a period of 5 years. The beneficiary has to ensure achieving a domestic 
value addition of at -least 25% and incur the mandatory investment (₹ 22 5 crore /GWh) 
within 2 Years (at the Mother Unit Level) and raise it to 60% domestic value addition 
within 5 Years, either at Mother Unit, in -case of an Integrated Unit, or at the Project 
Level, in-case of “Hub & Spoke” structure.” 
 
116. While explaining the future plans for the AI driven smart grid, the Ministry 
elaborated: 
 “In the domain of smart grids, Artificial Intelligence (AI) plays a vital role in 
optimizing energy consumption patterns, predicting real -time demand, and managing 
energy supply efficient ly, thereby ensuring the reliable and effective use of available 
energy resources. Advanced AI algorithms can process large volumes of data, including 
weather forecasts, satellite imagery, and historical generation trends to provide accurate 
short-term and  long-term forecasts for solar and other renewable energy generation. 
These forecasting capabilities enable grid operators to plan effectively, integrate 
variable renewable sources, and reduce reliance on fossil -fuel-based backup power. AI 
also enhances predictive maintenance and fault detection across power generation and 
distribution networks. By identifying potential failures before they occur, AI -based 
systems help minimize downtime, improve asset reliability, and reduce maintenance 
costs. Overall, the integration of AI into the energy ecosystem serves as a cornerstone 
for achieving clean, affordable, and reliable energy. It promotes economic growth, drives 
technological innovation, and strengthens efforts to combat climate change. By enabling 
more effic ient operations and unlocking new solutions, AI not only enhances 
sustainability but also contributes to job creation and long-term global development.” 
 
117. On being asked to furnish a brief note on the  specific guidelines issued to the 
various utilities of t he Ministry of Power to adopt cyber security measures, the Ministry 
submitted: 
 “Yes. Central Electricity Authority (CEA) Guidelines for Cyber Security in the 
Power Sector, 2021 provide a comprehensive framework for the adoption and 
implementation of cybersecurity measures across the generation, transmission, 
distribution, and load des patch segments of the power sector. These guidelines lay 
down mechanisms for establishing robust cyber defenses, incident response systems, 
and audit protocols for critical infrastructure. They inter alia mandate the creation of 
Information Security Divisi ons (ISDs) within utilities, appointment of Chief Information 
Security Officers (CISOs), periodic cybersecurity audits. The guidelines also emphasize 
the importance of supply chain security, network segmentation, secure remote access, 
and real -time monitor ing of critical systems through Security Operations Centres 
(SOCs). Further, the Draft CEA (Cybersecurity in Power Sector) Regulations, issued 
subsequently, aim to make these cybersecurity measures enforceable. The draft 
regulations propose to mandate util ities and system operators to comply with baseline 
and advanced cybersecurity requirements as per the criticality of assets to the power 
system. They outline obligations for reporting cyber incidents to the CERT -In, 

114 
 
conducting periodic vulnerability assess ments and penetration testing (VAPT), and 
ensuring secure configuration management and patch updates.” 
 
118. When asked for measures being taken by the Ministry Power to protect the 
critical infrastructure of power grids and energy infrastructure from cyber att ack 
vulnerabilities, the Committee was informed by the Ministry as: 
 
 “Ministry of Power established the Computer Security Incident Response Team 
(CSIRT) – Power at Central Electricity Authority (CEA) on 5th April, 2023 as an 
extended arm of CERT -In to assist utilities in handling cyber incidents and ensuring 
enhanced cyberse curity preparedness in the power sector. The first phase of the 
project, focussed on incident analysis and forensic capabilities, was inaugurated on 23rd 
September, 2024. MoP has also established 6 (six) sub -sectoral CERTs namely 
Thermal, Hydro, Transmission, Grid Operation, Renewable Energy and Distribution with 
each Sectoral CERT mandated to prepare their sub -sector specific model Cyber Crisis 
Management Plan (C -CMP) for countering cyber attacks. Central Electricity Authority 
(CEA) Guidelines for Cyber Se curity in the Power Sector, 2021 provide a 
comprehensive framework for the adoption and implementation of cybersecurity 
measures across the generation, transmission, distribution, and load despatch 
segments of the power sector. These guidelines lay down me chanisms for establishing 
robust cyber defense, incident response systems, and audit protocols for critical 
infrastructure. They inter alia mandate the creation of Information Security Divisions 
(ISDs) within utilities, appointment of Chief Information Sec urity Officers (CISOs), 
periodic cybersecurity audits. The guidelines also emphasize the importance of supply 
chain security, network segmentation, secure remote access, and real -time monitoring 
of critical systems through Security Operations Centres (SOCs ). Further, the Draft CEA 
(Cybersecurity in Power Sector) Regulations, issued subsequently, aim to make these 
cybersecurity measures enforceable. The draft regulations propose to mandate utilities 
and system operators to comply with baseline and advanced cybersecurity requirements 
as per the criticality of assets to the power system. They outline obligations for reporting 
cyber incidents to the CERT -In, conducting periodic vulnerability assessments and 
penetration testing (VAPT), and ensuring secure configu ration management and patch 
updates.” 
 
Department of Legal Affairs (Ministry of Law and Justice) 
 
119. Artificial Intelligence (AI) refers to the simulation of human intelligence in 
machines that are designed to think and work like humans. AI has the ability to  learn 
from experience, and perform tasks that typically require human intelligence. AI is 
rapidly transforming economies, governance systems, and social relations. Although its 
implementation promises efficiency, creativity, and better service delivery, t here are 
some issues associated with its impact on employment, privacy, accountability, bias, 
and national security. AI is now widely used in a variety of industries, including public 
administration, healthcare, finance, education, and law enforcement, bec ause of recent 

115 
 
developments in machine learning, data analytics, and processing power. 
 
 Role of Department of Legal Affairs:  
 In accordance with the provisions of Allocation of Business Rules, the 
Department of Legal Affairs is primarily concerned with tendering of advice to 
Ministries on legal matters including interpretation of the Constitution and the 
laws and conduct of cases  in the Supreme Court and the High Courts on behalf 
of the Central Government and on behalf of the Governments of States 
participating in the Central Agency Scheme.  
 
 DIRECTIVES FOR CONDUCT OF LITIGATION:  
The conduct of Union of India (UoI) litigation is one of the responsibilities of the 
Department of Legal Affairs.  Government engages in a wide range of activities that 
profoundly impact individuals, society, public and private institutions as well as its 
own functioning. Litigation often emerges as a con sequence of the intricacies of the 
legal and governance processes. The process of litigation is complex and its outcome 
is uncertain. This is further aggravated by overburdened courts, where cases having 
merit or otherwise often clog the judicial system, t hereby causing delays in justice 
dispensation and hindering timely and effective decision-making. 
Efficient management of its litigation by the Government of India is crucial to 
promoting good governance and ensuring public welfare and timely dispensation of 
justice. Therefore,it is essential to develop a well -coordinated and integrated 
approach to managing litigation before the courts, tribunals and other quasi -judicial 
fora involving the Union of India to comprehensively move towards reinforcing the 
goal of good governance. 
In line with the recommendations of the Committee of Secretaries  the 
Department of Legal Affairs, Ministry of Law and Justice, vide OM dated 4 th April, 
2025, had framed the 'Directive for the Efficient and Effective Management of 
Litigation by Government of India', which is an integrated approach in reinforcing the 
goal of good governance and ensuring public welfare and timely dispensation of 
justice. The Directive shall apply to all Central Government Ministries/Departments, 
their attached and subordinate offices, autonomous bodies and for arbitration matters 
to CPSEs as well. State Governments may also consider adopting the Directive. 
This directive is designed to establish a system to ensure effective, efficient, 
integrated and coordinated management of litigation involving the Ministries/ 
Departments of the Central Government and its attached and subordinate offices and 
autonomous bodies, before courts and tribunals  and other quasi-judicial fora to 
promote good governance in pur suit of the goal of Viksit Bharat @ 2047 . It may be 
seen as the “Standard Operating Procedure” for litigation management. 
 

116 
 
The directive seeks to achieve the following objectives:  
 Streamline the administrative processes involved in the conduct of litigation;  
 Reduce litigation of recurrent nature;  
 Reduce anomalies/inconsistencies in statutory or non -statutory notifications 
and administrative orders;  
 Reduce unnecessary appeals against orders of the Court;  
  Put in place a sound Knowledge Management System (KMS). 
 
120. The following paragraphs highlights the role envisaged by the Department for use 
of AI in discharge of its role and responsibilities: 
ROLE OF ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE IN REDUCING GOVERNMENT LITIGATION 
PENDENCY 
 AI-ENABLED TIMELY REVIEW OF JUDGMENTS ENABLES QUICK 
COMPLIANCE OF COURT DIRECTIONS 
In certain cases, judgments and directions issued by courts are not examined in a 
timely or structured manner by the concerned authorities of the Ministries. This may lead 
to delays in compliance and, in some instances, give rise to avoidable follow -up 
proceedings, including contempt matters.AI -based tools may be utilised to analyse 
judgments upon pronouncement, extract operative directions, and present them in a 
structured and actionable manner. Such tools can  assist in clearly identifying the nature 
of compliance required, the concerned office or authority, and the stipulated timelines. 
AI can also monitor the timelines . Timely and consistent compliance with court 
directions, reduction in avoidable contempt pr oceedings, improved accountability of 
concerned offices, and enhanced credibility of government responses before courts. 
 AI ENABLED INTERVENTION IMPROVES AWARENESS AND 
CONSISTENCY ACROSS MINISTRIES, DEPARTMENTS, AND FIELD UNITS 
Ministries and Departments o perate through multiple attached and subordinate 
offices across different locations. Judicial decisions rendered in one matter may not be 
readily available to other units dealing with similar issues, leading to inconsistencies in 
approach and duplication o f effort.AI systems can assist in categorizing and mapping 
similar cases across ministries, departments, and field units. Relevant judicial 
pronouncements can be disseminated to concerned units handling comparable matters, 
thereby promoting consistency in legal positions, institutional learning, and coordinated 
litigation management. Taking a uniform consistent stand by the Government and its 
entities avoids contradictory pleadings, improves institutional learning, and more 
efficient handling of similar categories of cases. 
 

117 
 
 USE OF AI TOOLS IMPROVES THE QUALITY AND STANDARDS OF 
DRAFTING OF PLEADINGS  
Pleadings, affidavits, and appeals filed on behalf of the Government may vary in 
structure, language, and completeness.References to applicable statutory provis ions or 
judicial precedents may not always be uniform.AI -assisted drafting tools may be 
employed to support preparation of standardised initial drafts based on authoritative 
legal sources, including statutes, and departmental records. This may help in  ena bling 
to improve the quality and consistency in government filings and avoids drafting related 
errors or objections and enhanced effectiveness of legal representation. 
 REDUCTION OF PROCEDURAL DEFECTS AND ADMINISTRATIVE DELAYS 
Courts frequently return filin gs due to procedural defects such as non -compliance 
with formatting requirements, incorrect pagination, or missing annexures. Rectification of 
such defects entails additional time and administrative effort.AI -based validation 
mechanisms can be used to cond uct pre -filing checks for compliance with prescribed 
procedural and formatting requirements. Automated verification of pagination, annexure 
references, and filing norms can reduce defects and facilitate smoother processing of 
cases. 
 STRENGTHENING PROACTIVE  CASE MANAGEMENT THROUGH ALERTS 
AND MONITORING 
Effective litigation management requires timely tracking of hearing dates, filing 
deadlines, and compliance obligations. In the absence of structured monitoring systems, 
critical timelines may be overlooked.AI-driven alert and monitoring systems can 
generate timely reminders for hearings, filings, and compliance actions. Such systems 
support proactive planning and coordinated action by concerned officers and counsel. 
 SUPPORTING CONSISTENT LEGAL INT ERPRETATION IN HIGH -VOLUME 
LITIGATION 
In subject areas involving a large number of cases, divergent interpretations of legal 
provisions may be adopted across matters, resulting in inconsistent stands and 
prolonged litigation. By analysing large datasets of  judicial decisions, AI tools can 
identify prevailing interpretations and areas of judicial inconsistency. These insights can 
assist departments in rethinking and streamlining the operation of laws etc so that 
inconsistencies may be removed. This may help in limiting the future arising of 
litigation.Greater consistency in legal interpretation, reduction in conflicting positions 
across cases, and avoidance of repetitive litigation on settled issues, may be achieved 
by the use of AI. 

118 
 
 IDENTIFICATION OF LOW -PROBABILITY LITIGATION AND AVOIDABLE 
APPEALS 
In certain categories of cases, judicial outcomes exhibit consistent patterns. Pursuing 
litigation or filing appeals in such matters may not yield commensurate benefits and may 
add to overall pendency.AI -based analysis of historical case outcomes can provide 
indicative assessments regarding the likelihood of success. Such inputs may support 
informed decision-making and whether to continue or avoid such litigation. 
 ESTIMATION OF LITIGATION COSTS  
Decisions regard ing continuation of litigation are not always supported by a 
systematic assessment of associated costs, including legal expenses and administrative 
resources.AI tools can analyse historical litigation data to estimate potential costs and 
resource implicati ons. This can assist departments in weighing expected benefits 
against costs and in considering alternative dispute resolution mechanisms, where 
appropriate. This will lead to more cost -effective litigation decisions, better financial 
planning, informed se lection of dispute resolution mechanisms, and reduction in 
disproportionate litigation expenditure. 
 DEVELOPMENT OF INDICATIVE TIMELINES FOR CASE RESOLUTION 
Absence of indicative timelines for resolution of cases poses challenges for planning, 
budgeting, and resource allocation, particularly in long -pending matters.AI models may 
be used to study the progression and duration of similar cases and generate indicative 
timelines for resolution. Such information can support realistic planning and early 
intervention strategies.Improved planning and resource allocation, early identification of 
long-pending matters, realistic expectation-setting and timely adoption of resolution 
strategies. 
 PERFORMANCE ASSESSMENT AND CAPACITY BUILDING 
Objective and systematic assessme nt of litigation performance across departments, 
officers, and engaged counsel is necessary for continuous improvement but is often 
difficult to undertake.AI-enabled analytics can assist in compiling performance indicators 
such as adherence to timelines, quality of filings, and overall case outcomes. 
Evidence-based performance evaluation, identification of capacity gaps, targeted 
training and skill development, will lead to overall improvement in the quality of 
government litigation management. 
Artificial Intelligence is not merely a technological tool but an aid to augment good 
Governance if used diligently. It has impact on various sectors including law, economy, 
rights, security, and public trust etc. The Department is presently attempting to harness 

119 
 
the use of AI for better management and conduct of litigation concerning Union of India, 
across various Courts and Tribunals. 
 
121. When asked to  explain the challenges posed by AI in the Legal field , the 
Department submitted as: 
 
  “Job Displacement and Social Inequality 
Automation driven by AI threatens routine and low -skilled jobs, leading to workforce 
displacement. Without adequate reskilling mechanisms, this may widen socio -economic 
inequalities. 
 Privacy and Surveillance Concerns 
The extensive use of data fo r AI systems increases the risk of intrusive surveillance, 
violation of privacy, and misuse of personal information, undermining individual 
autonomy. 
 Lack of Transparency and Accountability 
Many AI systems operate as “black boxes,” making it difficult to u nderstand, challenge, 
or audit their decisions. This raises serious concerns regarding due process and legal 
accountability. 
 Over-Reliance on Technology 
Excessive dependence on AI can weaken human judgment and critical thinking. Errors 
or system failures m ay have large -scale consequences if human oversight is 
inadequate. 
 Ethical and Security Risks 
AI technologies can be misused for autonomous weapons, misinformation, and 
deepfakes, posing ethical dilemmas and threats to democratic institutions and national 
security.” 
G. Department of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare (Ministry of Agriculture and 
Farmers Welfare) 
 
122. Indian agriculture is transitioning from a predominantly  input-driven and 
experience-based system to a technology-led, intelligence-driven ecosystem, with 
Artificial Intelligence (AI) emerging as a central enabler. This transformation is driven by 
increasing climate variability, rising costs of cultivation, fragmented landholdings, and 
the need for precision, transparency, and timeliness in service delivery. 
 
The emergence of AI coincides with the rapid expansion of  digital public 
infrastructure (DPI)  in India —Aadhaar, UPI, mobile connectivity, satellite data, and 
cloud platforms —making large -scale, farmer -facing AI solutions both feasible and 

120 
 
scalable. Recognising this opportunity, the Government of India has embedded AI 
adoption in agriculture within the broader national vision of Viksit Bharat @2047. 
The Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers’ Welfare (MoA&FW) has operationalised 
and proposed a comprehensiv e portfolio of AI initiatives, spanning  farmer advisories, 
pest surveillance, crop identification, insurance, scheme delivery, and 
governance analytics , anchored within the  Digital Agriculture Mission 
(DAM) and AgriStack architecture. 
123. In their submission about o ngoing AI Initiatives and t heir Impact , MOA & 
FW has stated the following: 
 
i. Kisan e-Mitra (AI-enabled Farmer Scheme Assistant) 
Nature of Initiative: 
A text- and voice-enabled AI chatbot providing real-time information on major 
agricultural schemes such as PM-KISAN, PMFBY, and Kisan Credit Card. 
Key AI Features: 
 Natural Language Processing (NLP) 
 Multilingual voice and text interfaces (11 regional languages) 
 Automated query resolution and benefit status tracking 
Current Impact: 
 Handles over 8,000 farmer queries daily 
 Has addressed over 93 lakh farmer interactions 
 Reduces dependence on physical offices and intermediaries 
 Improves transparency and trust in scheme delivery 
Governance Significance: 
Kisan e-Mitra represents a shift from document-heavy, office-centric service delivery 
to AI-mediated, citizen-first governance. 
ii.  National Pest Surveillance System (NPSS – Operational) 
 
Nature of Initiative: 
An AI and Machine Learning-based platform for pest identification, 
surveillance, and advisory dissemination. 
Current Capabilities: 
 Image-based pest identification across 61 crops and 400+ pests 
 AI-supported diagnosis using farmer-uploaded images 
 Used by 10,000+ extension workers for field surveillance 

121 
 
Impact: 
 Enables early detection and timely mitigation, reducing crop losses 
 Moves pest management from reactive to preventive 
 Strengthens Integrated Pest Management (IPM) adoption 
Institutional Impact: 
NPSS enables data-driven outbreak management, supporting procurement planning, 
extension prioritisation, and climate resilience strategies. 
iii. AI-based Crop Identification under Digital Crop Survey  
Nature of Initiative: 
AI-enabled computer vision system integrated with the Digital Crop Survey 
(DCS). 
AI Functionality: 
 Automated identification of crops and varieties from geo-tagged images 
 Filters poor-quality or non-crop images 
 Enables straight-through processing, escalating only mismatch cases 
Current Status: 
 Trained on nearly 19 crore crop images (paddy and wheat) 
 Being expanded to 16 major crops 
Impact: 
 Significant reduction in supervisory workload 
 Improved accuracy of crop statistics 
 Strengthened foundations for  PMFBY, MSP planning, and subsidy 
targeting 
iv. AI-driven Monsoon and Weather Advisory – piloted with IMD data of over 
100 years 
 
Nature of Initiative: 
AI-based weather forecasting models integrated with m-Kisan SMS platform. 
Current Impact: 
 AI-based monsoon advisories sent to 3.8 crore farmers across 13 states (2025) 
 Forecast horizon up to four weeks in advance 
 

122 
 
Significance: 
 Enables informed sowing and irrigation decisions 
 Strengthens climate resilience at farm level 
v. AI-enabled Crop Damage Assessment & Insurance Disbursal (Proposed) 
 
Nature of Initiative: 
Use of AI, satellite imagery, and computer vision to automate crop loss 
assessment. 
Expected Impact: 
 Faster and more objective insurance claim settlement 
 Reduced disputes and manual verification 
 Improved farmer confidence in crop insurance systems 
Governance Benefit: 
Enhances fiscal accountability and reduces leakages in large-scale insurance 
Programmemes. 
vi. Domain-Specific Agri Large Language Models (Agri-LLMs) –proposed 
 
 Trained on Indian agricultural data 
 Support advisory, scheme interpretation, and policymaking 
 Reduce dependence on generic global AI models 
vii.  Bharat VISTAAR  - proposed 
 
Nature of Initiative: 
An advanced, integrated AI platform under development, envisaged as a single-
window digital interface for farmers. 
Expanded AI Capabilities: 
 End-to-end scheme lifecycle support (information, application, benefit status, 
grievance filing) 
 AI-driven crop advisory, weather forecasting, and market price 
information 
 Conversational AI with chatbot and IVR integration 
Expected Impact: 
 Unified access point for agricultural services 

123 
 
 Inclusion of digitally less-literate farmers through IVR and voice support 
 Reduced fragmentation across portals and schemes 
Strategic Importance: 
Bharat VISTAAR is designed as the front-end citizen layer of India’s agricultural 
DPI, integrating multiple AI services into a single farmer experience. 
 
124.  Submitting key benefits of AI Adoption in Agriculture and way forward MoA & FW  
stated: 
“The deployment of AI-based systems offers multiple benefits: 
 Improved farmer decision-making through timely, localized advisories 
 Reduction in crop losses via early detection of pests and diseases 
 Enhanced efficiency in governance , including subsidy targeting, insurance 
disbursal, and monitoring 
 Cost optimisation and productivity gains through precise input use 
 Strengthened climate resilience by enabling anticipatory planning 
 Data-driven po licymaking supported by real -time, high -quality agricultural 
intelligence 
The emergence of AI in agriculture represents a paradigm shift from input -driven 
practices to  intelligence-driven, anticipatory governance . Going forward, priority 
actions include: 
 Strengthening AI governance frameworks aligned with data protection principles 
 Expanding indigenous AI model development and benchmarking 
 Deepening integration across agriculture, animal husbandry, and fisheries 
 Enhancing state capacity for AI adoption and customization 
 Ensuring farmer-centric design with strong feedback and grievance mechanisms 
With appropriate safeguards and coordinated implementation, AI can become a 
cornerstone of India’s agricultural transformation, contributing significantly to farmer 
welfare, food security, and the national vision of Viksit Bharat @2047.” 
125. When asked to explain about Kisan E -Mitra and in how many languages of India 
it can be accessed, the following submission was made: 
 
“'Kisan e-Mitra' is a voice -based AI-powered chatbot developed to assist farmers 
with responses to their queries on the PM Kisan Samman Nidhi scheme. This solution 
supports 11 regional languages and is evolving to assist with other government 
Programmes suc h as PMFBY and Kisan Credit Card. At present, on an average, it 
handles over 8,000 farmer queries daily and so far, more than 95 lakh queries have 

124 
 
been answered.” 
 
126. The Committee wanted to know whether the Department ha d undertaken  any 
study before implemen ting AI in agricultural sectors and share the important points so 
highlighted in study reports. The submission in this regard was as under: 
 
“Government has constituted a Steering Committee to monitor and review the 
design, implementation, harmonization an d institutionalization of AI -based initiatives to 
derive improved service delivery for small -holder farmers across India. Further, the 
Government is also conducting workshops to take this forward for implementation of AI 
in agriculture with various stakeho lders viz. ICAR, MeitY, Ministry of Education, IIT 
Ropar, Private Sector agri-tech companies/ start-ups, etc.” 
 
127. Highlighting the constraints due to which many farmers and agricultu ral workers 
hesitate to use AI, the following was submitted: 
 
“The use of Artificial Intelligence is becoming popular day by day. However, some 
of the reasons for low adoption of Artificial Intelligence (AI) by farmers may be 
summarized as under:  
 High Initial Investment and Costs: AI -powered tools, such as drones, 
robotic harvesters, and smart sensors, require high capital, which is 
prohibitive for adoption by the small and marginal farmers and the dat a 
processing from such devices. 
 Lack of High Speed Internet Connectivity: Many rural areas lack high -
speed, reliable i nternet connectivity (broadband) and stable power, which 
are essential for cloud-based AI tools. 
 Technical Skill Gap: A significant gap exists in the ability to operate, 
maintain, and understand, complex AI systems. 
 Lack of Trust and Explain -ability: AI mo dels can sometimes produce 
unexpected or "black box" recommendations. Farmers often default to 
their traditional experience over AI advice when they do not understand 
how the AI reached a conclusion. 
 Language and Context Barriers: Many AI tools are not available in local 
languages/ dialects, or they are trained on data from different agri -
ecological zones (e.g., western countries), making them ineffective for 
local crops and soil types.  
 
Farmer Concerns  
 
 Unclear Return on Investment (ROI): Farmers are hesitant to spend 
money on technology without guaranteed, quick, or visibl e increase in 
yield or savings. 
 Data Privacy and Ownership: Concerns exist about who owns the data 

125 
 
collected from their farms and whether it will be used against them. 
 Job Displacement: Fear that automation and robot ics will replace manual 
labour. 
 System Failure and Accountability: If an AI system fails or gives bad 
advice (e.g., wrong fertilizer dosage), it is unclear who is liable  for the 
resulting crop loss.  
 
128. Elaborating the m easures taken by the Department to mitigate c oncerns 
regarding the usage of AI, the following was stated:  
 
The Department of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare (DA& FW) in India, 
along with other bodies, is implementing several measures to foster AI 
adoption:  
 
a. Financial Assistance and Subsidies:  
 
 Sub-Mission on Agricultural Mechanization (SMAM): The integration of 
Artificial Intelligence (AI) and Drone Technology in  Indian agriculture is 
being heavily promoted by the Government of India. The government 
provides up to 50% subsidy (up to ₹5 lakhs) for purchasing drones by 
individual small/marginal farmers and, crucially, to Women Self Help 
Groups (SHGs) under the 'Namo Drone Didi' scheme. 
 Custom Hiring Centres (CHCs): Financial aid to establish CHCs to rent out 
drones and other smart machinery to farmers who cannot afford 
ownership.  
 
b. Developing Localized & User-Friendly AI Tools:  
 
 'Kisan e-Mitra' Chatbot: A voice-based AI chatbot that supports 11 regional 
languages, helping farmers with queries about schemes (PM Kisan, Fasal 
Bima). 
 National Pest Surveillance System: A tool allowing extension workers to 
take images of pests/diseases, using AI to provide immediate identification 
and solutions. 
 'Bharat-VISTAAR': A multilingual AI tool that will integrate AgriStack 
(digital records) with ICAR data to provide customized agricultural 
advisory.  
 
c. Capacity Building and Training:  
 
 ICAR & KVK s: Indian Council of Agricultural Research (ICAR) and Krishi 
Vigyan Kendras (KVKs) are conducting field demonstrations on drone 
technology to build trust through practical experience. 
 Training SHGs: Under Namo Drone Didi, women SHGs are being trained 

126 
 
to handle, operate, and repair drones.  
 
d. Creating Data Governance Frameworks:  
 
 Efforts are being made to establish clear data ownership rights and ensure 
transparency in how farmer-shared data is used.” 
 
129. Since climate change has become a real concern in the recent past, the 
Committee wanted to know if there was any separate model where by farmers could 
predict the impact of climate change beyond the existing model which they already 
have. To this, the Department replied: 
 
 “An AI-based pilot was conducted on agriculturally relevant local monsoon onset 
forecasts across parts of 13 States in India for Kharif 2025. The probabilistic forecasts 
predicted only the local onset of the monsoon, which is essential for deciding on the 
date of sowing crops. An open -source (freely available) AI -model was used for 
developing Artificial Intelligence Forecasting System (AIFS) based on historical rainfall 
data of 125 years from the India Meteorological Department (IMD). The pilot was 
conducted in collaboration with Indian Meteo rological Department (IMD) and 
Development Innovation Lab-India on pro-bono basis.” 
H. Ministry of Tourism 
130. During evidence the Secretary deposed as under: 
 
“‘2025’ is a landmark year in terms of Artificial Intelligence because for the first 
time in human history, we have six Large Language Models, six LLMs, knowing more 
than all the eight billion people on this planet. Today, six machines know more than all 
eight billion people on the planet. Till now, the generation of new knowledge, the 
generation of ideas, and the propagation of ideas were done from humans to humans 
through print and through various other means. Perhaps for the first time, we are 
reaching an era where this role would be taken over by machines and AI themselves. It 
may not be exclusively in the domain of human beings. Last year, another milestone 
was crossed. The average computer costing US 1,000 dollar had the same computing 
power as the hum an brain, 10 to the power 16 flops per second. By 2048, which is well 
within our lifetimes, the same average computer will have the power of all the human 
brains on the planet. One computer will have the power of all the human brains on this 
planet. Artificial Intelligence, as a term, was first introduced in 1968 at a conference in 
Dartmouth in U.S. However, it has come to main stage only now. The reasons for that 
are the following. First and foremost, the computing cost, the cost of computing power is 
dramatically falling. It has come down by 99 per cent in the last five years alone. The 
cost of data is falling dramatically, and the explosion of data from everything we do, 
smartphones to the Internet browsers to computers, is feeding that computing power 
with data to learn and infer what human beings are thinking and predicting what they 
could do next. Third, the capital going into Artificial Intelligence is massive. As recently 

127 
 
as 2021, all the companies in the world put together, put 160 billion US dollar into AI. 
That is, 2021, and not too far away. Last year, just four companies put 160 billion US 
dollar into AI. This year, that number is 300 billion US dollar. We are looking at a future 
which is both extremely inspiring, also extremely scary. If computin g power and the 
pace of AI development moves at the pace it is moving today, and there is no reason to 
believe that it would not, there will soon come a time where there will be a cure for every 
disease in the world and a teacher for every child in the world. That is not far away. That 
will happen in the next 10 years. Already, many children, including in rural areas, are 
using YouTube for classes, for supplementing their education, and, on top of that, now 
you have AI -driven courses. We are building on the  AI blocks of Gen AI to power the 
Incredible India website so that when a foreign tourist looks at coming to India, he is 
able to automatically, using AI, plan his itineraries. We are bringing together supply and 
demand through the ONDC platform for digita lizing both sides so that we will know that 
the same tourist, at a click of a button, will know the number of hotel rooms. He will be 
able to book through the same app. He will be able to rate the hotel rooms. He will be 
able to book tickets for various attractions, both Government and private attractions. But 
none of this is there today. This is all going to start now, and hopefully, in a year's time, 
we should be able to show you significant progress. I wanted to set the context by telling 
you the backdro p against which this work is starting, and indeed, we have a long 
journey to go on. We are just at the first marker of it. I would like to end by saying just 
one thing, which is that today the LLMs have made the cost of expertise free. I gave you 
the context for a reason, which is that once the cost of expertise becomes free, anyone 
sitting in this room or outside can tap into that expertise and build applications on top of 
it, which is what we are trying to do for tourism’. 
 
131. The Committee asked what AI chat-bots were available in the tourism sector for 
promoting tourism and whether AI in tourism sector was breaking language barriers. To 
this the Ministry replied: 
 
 “The Ministry of Tourism has integrated a hybrid Chat-bot interfaces in the 
Incredible India Digital Platform (IIDP) with limited AI capabilities to guide tourist.   
Yes. AI in tourism sector is breaking language barriers.   
The Ministry is leveraging Anuvadini in the Incredible India Digital Platform (IIDP)   which 
is an AI -based translation to ol developed by the All India Council for Technical 
Education (AICTE) under the Ministry of Education, Government of India.” 
 
132. According to Forbes, AI was going to become a huge industry and investments 
were projected to reach gigantic proportions in coming  years. The impact of AI on the 
global economy was expected to be profound, contributing significantly to its growth and 
transformation. So, the Committee wanted to know the opinion of the Ministry on this 
report and what steps had been initiated or though t of to tap the positives in this regard. 

128 
 
The Ministry submitted: 
 
 “AI is likely to be transformative force for the global and Indian economy. The 
tourism sector, being information-intensive, stands to benefit immensely from AI. 
To tap into this potential , the Ministry has launched the Incredible India Digital Platform 
(IIDP) as the unified digital infrastructure where AI can be plugged for growth of tourism 
eco system.” 
 
133. The Committee wanted to know how the Ministry foresaw the concerns about the 
impact o f AI on employment, as AI could improve efficiency and create new job 
opportunities; it could also lead to job displacement in certain sectors. The reply 
submitted was as under: 
 “The Ministry views AI as an enabler that augments human capabilities rather than 
replacing them entirely. 
 Displacement Concerns:  Tourism being a manpower driven sector, the impact 
of AI on employment is likely to be minimal. AI would increase the 
efficiency in   Routine tasks like basic data entry, ticketing, and standard query 
handling, etc. 
 New Opportunities:  AI creates high -value jobs such as data analysts, digital 
content curators, AI -maintenance technicians for smart hotels, and augmented 
reality (AR) developers for virtual heritage tours.” 
134. The Committee was apprised about t he implementation of National Digital 
Tourism Mission (NDTM), 2022 and the use of AI to make it more efficient as: 
 “The Incredible India Digital platform is the  backbone of NDTM with building 
blocks through API integration.   
The possibilities of AI   on  creating itinerary  based on user preferences, access of 
seamless services across the country, real time analytics on tourist footfalls would aid in 
policy planning & infrastructure development etc.” 
135. When asked if history could be altered using AI in respe ct of tourist spots, its 
legacy and cultural values, the Ministry of Tourism replied: 
  
 “Yes.  Historical misinformation in respect of tourist spots, its legacy and cultural 
values can be corrected through AI.  
The Ministry is aware of the risk of "Deepfa kes" or AI hallucinations creating false 
narratives about historical sites. To prevent this, the Ministry is launched the revamped 
version of Incredible India Digital Platform (IIDP).” 
 
 

129 
 
136. When asked by the Committee regarding how many jobs in the sector would be 
lost, if tourism guides would become redundant and other related issues, the Ministry 
submitted: 
 “Ministry is yet to assess as to how many jobs in the sector would be lost, if any. 
Meanwhile, the Ministry does not foresee a net loss of jobs but a  transformation of jobs. 
While AI bots may handle basic information, the demand for human "storytellers" and 
"experience curators" is rising. Thus, tourism guides will not become redundant. Ministry 
will coordinate with Meity& Ministry of Skill Development  and Entrepreneurship 
regarding AI Future Skill Programmeme and leverage the power of AI for skilling or re -
skilling in tourism sector.” 
  

130 
 
CHAPTER- III 
 
India as an AI Leader 
 
137. According to MeitY, in the past decade, India has formulated a distinctive 
approach to digital transformation through the 'Digital India' flagship Programmeme. 
Prioritizing inclusivity and accessibility, nationwide -scaled utilities focussing on digital 
identity, digital payme nts etc. have seamlessly integrated into India's digital framework. 
Given its current positioning, India is strategically poised to employ AI to transform 
public service delivery for efficiency in governance, innovation, and improved citizen 
engagement.A r ecent industry report, focussing on Generative AI (GenAI), paints a 
promising outlook by suggesting that GenAI holds the potential to contribute a 
substantial sum, up to 1.5 trillion dollars, to India's GDP by 2030. Reinforcing India's 
pivotal role in this  transformative field, the Stanford AI Index 2023 also ranks the nation 
as the foremost country in AI skill penetration. The burgeoning AI landscape in India is 
further exemplified by a robust start -up ecosystem, ranking 5th in the Number of Newly 
Funded A I Companies by Geographic Area and attracting significant investments 
exceeding $475 million in GenAI startups in the past two years. These rankings are a 
clear indication of the necessity of incisive interventions to bolster India to the loftiest 
ranks as a destination for AI development.   
 
138. When asked whether MeitY had taken cognizance of the Stanford Index rating 
wherein India ha d been rated very high in AI developments and  if the Ministry had  
conducted a study of their own in this regard,  the response was: 
 “MeitY closely monitors global AI indices, including the Stanford AI Index Report, 
which has acknowledged India's significant progress in artificial intelligence. The 
Ministry, through its various initiatives and agencies, continuously assesses AI 
development in the Country using both external benchmarks and independent 
national evaluations. 
Assessment and Comparison 
1. Recognition in Stanford AI Index 
 India has been rated highly in AI research output, talent pool, and 
government-led AI initiatives. 
 The country  has demonstrated robust growth in AI -driven startups, 
research publications, and AI-skilled workforce development. 
2. Independent Study by MeitY 
 MeitY has conducted its own assessment through organizations such as 
the National Association of Software and Ser vice Companies (NASSCOM), 
Centre for Artificial Intelligence and Robotics (CAIR), and industry -academic 
collaborations. 

131 
 
 The “AI for India 2030 Blueprint”, a collaborative initiative involving the 
MeitY, the Office of the Principal Scientific Adviser to the  Government of India, 
NASSCOM, and the World Economic Forum's Centre for the Fourth Industrial 
Revolution, India (C4IR India), focussed on similar evaluations of the AI 
landscape in India.  
 NASSCOM has also conducted similar evaluations on its own accord. 
Some of the reports that address the same are “Advancing India's AI Skills: 
Interventions and Programmemes needed”, “State of Data Science and AI Skills 
in India”, and “India’s Generative AI Startup Landscape 2024”.  
 Several Private Sector agencies have ca rried out the survey of the AI 
landscape in India, notably “BCG 2025 AI Radar Report” by Boston Consulting 
Group (BCG), “India’s State of AI Research” by Change Engine, and “Freshworks 
AI Workplace Report 2025’ by Freshworks. 
 The findings largely corrobora te Stanford’s assessment, affirming India’s 
strengths in AI research, workforce, and innovation. 
 Some differences in methodology exist, particularly concerning datasets, 
performance indicators, and the weightage given to different AI parameters. 
 
139. When asked to furnish the measures taken to bridge the identified gaps, the 
Ministry submitted that: 
“The Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology (MeitY) has taken 
significant steps to address the gaps, such as:  
1. AI Research, Analytics and Knowledge Dissemination Platform 
(AIRAWAT): MeitY along with CDAC has implemented the project on AIRAWAT 
(AI Research, Analytics and Knowledge Dissemination Platform) for providing a 
common compute platform for AI research and knowledge assimilation. This AI 
computing infrastructure is being used by all technology innovation hubs, 
research labs, scientific communities, industry and start -ups, and institutions with 
National Knowledge Network.  
 
i.  National Supercomputing Mission (NSM): The Government of India 
had launched the National Supercomputing Mission (NSM) in 2015 which 
is aimed to build indigenous capacity for high -end supercomputing 
systems and reduce dependency on foreign technologies.  
ii. IndiaAI Mission: Union Cabinet led by Hon’ble Prime Minister has 
approved the IndiaAI Mission on 7 th March 2024, a strategic initiative to 
establish a robust and inclusive AI ecosystem that aligns with the country’s 
development goals. This mission is driven by a vision to position India as a 
global leader in artificial intelligen ce by focussing on seven foundational 
pillars.  
One of the key pillars under the IndiaAI mission is the IndiaAI Compute 
pillar. The IndiaAI compute pillar envisions building a high -end scalable AI 

132 
 
computing ecosystem comprising AI compute infrastructure of  10,000 or 
more Graphics Processing Units (GPUs).  
Towards this, IndiaAI Independent Business Division (IBD) published a 
Request for Empanelment (RFE) on August 16, 2024, to empanel AI 
services on cloud including GPUs. 19 bidders had submitted proposals to  
empanel their AI cloud services, out of which 10 bidders were qualified for 
financial bid opening.  
Out of 18,693 GPUs offered, 14,461 GPUs are already installed on the 
bidder’s infrastructure and are available for immediate use. Additionally, 
there is fu rther GPU capacity available with the bidders who were not 
technically qualified.  
To keep pace with the changes in technologies, IndiaAI enabled a 
continuous empanelment process inviting fresh proposals from the 
empaneled agencies for onboarding new GPUs and discovering any 
revised rates.  
IndiaAI FutureSkills:  
 IndiaAI FutureSkills Pillar envisions to augment the number of graduates, 
postgraduates and PhDs in AI domain. Further, it envisions setting up Data and 
AI Labs in Tier 2 and Tier 3 cities across India, to impart foundational -level 
courses in Data and AI.  
IndiaAI Startup Financing:  
 IndiaAI Startup Financing pillar is to provide support to AI startups at all 
stages. Multiple rounds of stakeholder consultations have been held to deliberate 
on the scheme for supporting AI Startups at Pre-Seed, Seed and Growth stage.  
IndiaAI Innovation Centre:  
 IndiaAI Innovation centre aims to develop and dep loy indigenous Large 
Multimodal Models (LMMs) trained on India-specific data  
 Multiple rounds of stakeholder consultations have been held to deliberate 
on the IndiaAI‟s strategy for building indigenous Large Multi -model Models 
(LMMs).  
IndiaAI Datasets Platform:  
 The IndiaAI Datasets Platform (IDP) seeks to enhance access, quality, 
and utilization of public sector datasets to make them AI-ready.  
 A comprehensive plan has been created for developing platform and a 
feature list has been finalized after evalua ting other prominent dataset platforms 
such as Hugging Face, Dubai Pulse etc.  
IndiaAI Applications Development Initiative:  

133 
 
 IndiaAI Application Development Initiative aims to develop, scale, and 
promote the adoption of impactful AI solutions to effectively tackle significant 
problem statements.  
 IndiaAI Innovation challenge was launched on 13th August 2024 for the 
themes of healthcare, agriculture, improved governance, climate change &  
disaster management and assistive technologies for learning disabilities. The 
Innovation Challenge was open to Indian innovators, startups, non -profits, 
students, academic/R&D organizations, and companies.  
Safe & Trusted AI:  
 This pillar enables the implementation of Responsible AI projects including 
the development of indigenous tools and frameworks, self -assessment checklists 
for innovators, and other guidelines and governance frameworks.  
 Eight Responsible AI Projects have been selected to address the need for 
robust guardrails to ensure the responsible development, deployment, and 
adoption of AI technologies. The projects cover a range of critical themes, 
including Machine Unlearning, Synthetic Data Generation, AI Bias Mitigation, 
Ethical AI Frameworks, Privacy-Enhancing Tools, Explainable AI, AI Governance 
Testing, and Algorithm Auditing Tools”. 
140. When the Committee asked whether it was a fact that the Research Community 
in AI is confined to a handful of academic institutes, and relies on individual bril liance 
rather than institutional competence, the Ministry furnished the following in its written 
reply alongwith the measures taken to bridge the gap. 
 “The Government is actively collaborating with academicians, researchers, start -
ups, industries and inte r-ministerial departments and organizations to build 
institutional AI competency in the Country. Under the IndiaAI mission, different 
stakeholders are consulted from time -to-time to strengthen the development of 
Indian AI ecosystem. For example,  
 Under the Safe & Trusted AI pillar, applications from academic institutions, R&D 
organizations, Government Organization/ body, Start -ups, and Private sector 
companies are invited for development of indigenous technical tools, guidelines, 
frameworks, and st andards for a balanced, technology -enabled, and India -
specific approach to AI governance. 
 Under this pillar, a stakeholder consultation including researchers, start -ups, 
and thinktanks  was also held to evaluate the merits of establishing an IndiaAI 
Safety Institute to rigorously assess AI models, evaluate risks, and ensure 
effective safeguards. 
 Under the IndiaAI Datasets Platform pillar, the government has been actively 
engaging with Line Ministries, departments, and public and private institutions, for 
enabling access to quality non -personal and anonymized datasets, AI models 
and toolkits for research and innovation. 

134 
 
 Under the IndiaAI Application Development Initiative, applications received in the 
Innovation challenges, hackathon are referred to evaluation  committees including 
participation from public institutions, academia and sector -specific industry and 
startups. 
 Under the IndiaAI Futureskills Initiative, Data and AI Lab has been setup in  
partnership with Intel in Karkardomma Delhi and is considered the  model lab for 
setup of other such labs. Establishment of 27 AI and Data labs across India in 
collaboration with NIELIT has been initiated and another 3 labs in Nagaland, 
Madhya Pradesh and Mohali in collaboration with Intel are being established.  
 Consultation with AI Researchers and Industry under IndiaAI Innovation 
Centre pillar was held on 26.11.2024 under the Chairmanship of Sh. S. Krishnan, 
Secretary, MeitY. The primary objective was to determine India's strategy for 
developing foundational models and  broader AI research. The conversation 
revealed a mix of consensus and strategic differences, unified by a shared 
commitment to contributing to India's technological future and self-reliance 
 The Government has partnered with the industry partners such as IBM, Meta, 
and Microsoft etc. towards building an AI innovation ecosystem in India”. 
 
141. During examiniation, the Committee found that a doption of AI in India had  
remained rather limited, less tha n a quarter of firms in India were  using AI in any form 
for the ir business processes and startup ecosystem in AI was virtually non -existent. 
Among the several impediments towards large scale adoption of AI in India, the primary 
ones include d difficulty in access to data (more specifically, structured and intelligent 
data), high cost and low availability of computing infrastructure, lack of collaborative 
approach to solving for AI combined with low awareness. When the Ministry was asked 
to elaborate on it, the following was submitted: 
“Adoption of AI and equitable acces s to its benefits depends upon democratised 
access to resources critical for AI innovation and development.  
To enable this, the Government of India has launched the IndiaAI Mission, a 
comprehensive national -level Programme with an outlay of over INR 10,00 0 
crore (~ $1.2 Bn) to democratize and catalyse the AI innovation ecosystem  in 
the country. The IndiaAI Mission will be implemented through seven key pillars: 
1. IndiaAI Compute Capacity : Under this pillar, IndiaAI aims to create 
compute capacity of more than 10000 Graphic Processing Units (GPUs). 
 
2. IndiaAI Datasets Platform: Under this pillar, IndiaAI is developing IndiaAI 
Datasets Platform as a one -stop solution for seamless access to resources 
critical for AI innovation, including quality non -personal datasets, models and 
toolkits. This pillar also focusses on encouraging d evelopment and 
implementation of Metadata and Data Standards for promoting semantic 
interoperability across sectors.  

135 
 
3. IndiaAI Startup Financing: Under this pillar, IndiaAI aims to support and 
accelerate 1,050 deep -tech AI startups  and provide them with str eamlined 
access to funding. 
4. Safe & Trusted AI:  Under this pillar, IndiaAI aims to enable development 
of indigenous technical tools, guidelines, frameworks, and standards for a 
balanced, technology-enabled, and India-specific approach to AI governance. 
IndiaAI Safety Institute : The Government of India has recently announced the 
establishment of AI Safety Institution  to enable researchers, developers and 
other stakeholders to develop tools, frameworks and processes for AI safety. 
5. IndiaAI Application Development Initiative : Under this pillar, IndiaAI 
aims to collaborate with start -ups, industries, academicians, and researchers to 
develop/scale/promote the adoption of impactful 25 AI solutions  with 
potential for catalyzing large-scale socio-economic transformation. 
IndiaAI had conducted multiple workshops on the use of AI in public service 
delivery. The workshop brought together representatives from central and state 
governments with the objective of helping Ministries and Departments assess 
their data c apabilities, explore ways to leverage data for AI applications, and 
identify key problem statements that can be addressed through AI -driven 
solutions. 
IndiaAI CyberGuard AI Hackathon: An AI Hackathon launched in partnership 
with the Indian Cybercrime Coord ination Centre (I4C) to create AI -driven 
solutions for cybersecurity has been launched on 16th October 2024. This 
initiative which has received 263 responses, seeks to leverage advanced AI 
technologies like Natural Language Processing (NLP) and predictive analytics to 
guide citizens in filing cybercrime reports on the National Cyber Crime Reporting 
Portal (NCRP)”.  
142. India stands at 80 th spot at the Artificial Intelligence (AI) Preparedness Index 
across 174 countries based on several indicators across four di mensions viz. digital 
infrastructure, human capital, technological innovation and legal framework. The 
Committee wanted to know  the plan of action to move up in the index while improving 
these entire four segments.  To this,the Ministry stated: 
 “While India is ranked1st for AI Skill Penetration  and 1st in Number of GitHub 
AI Projects as per the Stanford AI Index report 2024, IMF’s Artificial Intelligence 
Preparedness Index has ranked India 72 out of 174 countries. To move up the 
index across the four di mensions stated above, the Government is taking the 
following steps: 
A. Digital Infrastructure : The Government of India is committed to building 
digital ecosystems  for public good that are built on the principles of open 
technology. Several initiatives have been taken in this regard: 
1. Open APIs - The Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology has 
published ‘Policy on Open Application Programmeming Interfaces’  for the 

136 
 
Government of India. Under the open API policy, the government has mandated 
use of open APIs for its various flagship Programmes. Further, MeitY has also 
developed API Setu as an API platform to enable swift, transparent, safe and 
reliable information sharing  across applications and to promote innovation by 
linking systems and data. The portal has  published over 900 APIs  provided by 
many Central and State Government departments on the platform.  
2. National Open Digital Ecosystems (NODE) - The Ministry of Electronics & 
Information technology, in collaboration with strategic i ndustry partners and civil 
society, launched the strategy  for national open digital ecosystems. The report 
lays down the strategy for building open and secures  digital delivery platforms 
anchored by transparent governance mechanisms which enable a 
community of partners to unlock innovative solutions, to transform societal 
outcomes. This report acts as a lighthouse for sectoral ministries, state 
governments & other countries to establish their own open digital platforms for 
public good. Following a collaborative approach, the government is in the 
process of launching an updated version of the paper, incorporating the 
comments from public consultations & learnings from implementation of 
sectoral platforms 
3. Open Digital Platforms for Public Good: India has made rapid strides in 
developing open digital public infrastructure in sectors with maximum 
potential for social impact  such as health, education, public infrastructure, 
financial inclusion, etc. Starting with ID through Aadhaar and payments 
through the Unified Payment Interface to Ayushmann Bharat Digital Mission  
(ABDM), all digital infrastructures built as part of these flagship Programmes is 
designed on the principles of open technology, federated architecture and 
transparent governance. It is estimated that these open digital platforms could 
collectively create new economic value of USD 500+ billion  (INR 35+ lakh 
crore) or ~5.5% of India’s projected GDP in 2030, and also generate USD 200+ 
billion (INR 15+ lakh crore) in savings 
4. DigiLocker is a flagship initia tive of MeitY under the Digital India Programmeme 
that aims at ‘Digital Empowerment’ of citizen by providing access to authentic 
digital documents to citizen’s digital document wallet. The platform has over 86 
million registered users and has issued 4.54 b illion documents from 1436 
issuers  
5. To make governance easily accessible to people , the government of India has 
launched UMANG (Unified Mobile Application for New Age Governance) that 
enables access to over 1300 government services from over 265 
departments to the citizens through their mobile phones, thus expanding the 
digital outreach of the citizens. The platform has over 3.74 crore registered 
users, an average monthly transaction volume of 195 crore. 
 

137 
 
B. Human Capital: 
a. Creating a Global Hub of Talent in Emerging Technologies through 
FutureSkills Prime - The government of India, through MeitY, is creating a 
revolutionary skilling ecosystem focussed on enhancing India’s digital talent. 
Under this initiative a robust online  platform has been created to encourage 
remote and self -paced learning in the field of emerging technologies. This 
Programme aims to offer subsidised access to certified courses to the interested 
participants in any of the 10 identified emerging technologies  
b. IndiaAI FutureSkills: Under this pillar, IndiaAI aims to mitigate barriers to entry 
into AI Programmes as well as set-up Data & AI Labs in Tier 2 and Tier 3 cities 
across India to impart foundational level courses. 
C. Technological Innovation 
 
a. IndiaAI Application Development Initiative : Under this pillar, IndiaAI aims to 
collaborate with start -ups, industries, academicians, and researchers to 
develop/scale/promote the adoption of impactful 25 AI solutions  with 
potential for catalyzing large-scale socio-economic transformation. 
b. IndiaAI Datasets Platform:  Under this pillar, IndiaAI is developing IndiaAI 
Datasets Platform as a one -stop solution for seamless access to resources 
critical for AI innovation, including quality non -personal datasets, models and 
toolkits, to AI researchers, innovators, start -ups and industry to promote 
technological innovation. 
 
D. Legal Framework: 
 Government of India has taken concrete steps for encouraging adoption of AI 
in a responsible manner  in India and building public trust in the use of this 
technology, placing the idea of ‘AI for All’ at its very core. Several initiatives 
have been undertaken in this respect. 
 
143. While elaborating on the Legal Framework for AI, the Ministry has submitted that: 
 
o India is one of the few countries across the global that has an established policy 
position working to strengthen responsible AI within government systems 
o MeitY’s report  on cyber security, safety, legal and ethical issues provides a 
well-rounded analysis on the issues relating to social impact of AI 
o In 2021, NITI Aayog released a two part approach on Ethical AI.  The first part 
of the strategy titled “Towards Responsible AI for All” , establishes broad 
ethics principles for design, development and deployment of AI  in India – 
drawing on similar global initiatives but grounded in the Indian legal and 
regulatory context. The second part of the strategy  explores means of 
operationalization of ethical AI principles  across the public sector, private 
sector and academia 

138 
 
o This includes 7 principles for responsible design, development, and 
deployment of AI  in India. These principles for RAI  include safety and 
reliability, inclusivity and non -discrimination, equality, privacy and security, 
transparency, accountability, and protection and reinforcement of positive human 
values.  
o These principles are also envisioned to be captured under the Safe & Trusted AI 
component under the recently launched IndiaAI Mission. This pillar shall include 
the implementation of ‘Responsible AI’ projects including the development of 25 
indigenous tools and frameworks for Governance of AI  that are trained on 
Indian datasets and contextualized to our unique needs and challenges. 
o Report on AI Governance Guidelines  Development: A multi -stakeholder 
advisory committee was constituted by MeitY under the chairmanship of the 
PSA to provide guidance and recommendations on India’s approach to 
governance of AI. The report has now been published for public 
consultation  to guide the development of a trustworthy and accountable AI 
ecosystem in India.  
o AI Readiness Assessment  – In January 2025, MeitY, in collaboration with 
UNESCO and other partners, organized a two -day consultation on AI Readiness 
Assessment Methodology (RAM). The consultation aims to draft an India -specific 
AI policy report that identifies strengths and opportunities for growth within India's 
thriving AI ecosystem. This consultation involved various stakeholders, including 
representatives from public and private organizations utilizing AI.  
o Bureau of Indian Standards Artificial Intelligence Sectional Committee,  LITD 
30 - New Indian Standard Identical to ISO/IEC TR 24368:2022 - This document 
provides a high -level overview of International Standards that addre ss issues 
arising from AI ethical and societal concerns in the context of principles, 
processes and methods already adopted in this domain. 
o Standard for Fairness Assessment and Rating of Artificial Intelligence 
Systems; Telecommunication Engineering Centre , Department of 
Telecommunications - The standard provides a Voluntary Fairness Assessment 
of AI/ML systems and covers the applicable AI/ML systems with combined 
fairness rating metric for AI/ML systems to certify fairness in assessment 
systems. It approaches certification via a three-step process involving bias risk 
assessment, threshold determination for metrics, and bias testing.  
o Recommendations on Leveraging Artificial Intelligence and Big Data in 
Telecommunications Sector; Telecom Regulatory Authority  of India (TRAI)  – 
This paper has outlined the probable risks from AI that need examination and 
potential measures to address and mitigate those risks while securing the 
benefits. It also expands on the enablers for AI adoption. The paper proposed the 
setting up of Artificial Int elligence and Data Authority of India under TRAI to 
oversee all issues related to data digitization, data sharing, and data monetization 
and Study the possible impact of upcoming technologies on data ethics and come 
out with relevant rules/guidelines on the subject.  

139 
 
o The Digital Personal Data Protection Act (DPDPA) to protect citizens' privacy, 
safety, and trust with respect to their personal data and enhance the 
accountability for entities collecting and processing personal data.  
o India will establish an I ndiaAI Safety Institute as a hub for indigenous 
foundational research & development on AI safety , developing India’s social, 
legal, & technical infrastructure for AI Governance.  
o The institute will formulate partnerships with international institutions, in cluding 
other AI Safety Institutes, to co -design and adopt international best practices on 
Safe and Trusted AI and work towards harmonized global safety standards to 
address cross-border risks of AI technologies”. 
 
144. When the Ministry was asked whether separate allocation of funds had  been 
made to cater to the needs of AI sector,  the submission was made as under: 
 “In March 2024, the Government of India approved the IndiaAI Mission with an 
outlay of 10,371.92 Crores with the aim to build a precise and cohesive strategy 
for bridging the gaps in the existing AI ecosystem.  The IndiaAI mission will 
establish a comprehensive ecosystem catalyzing AI innovation through strategic 
Programmes and pa rtnerships across the public and private sectors. By 
democratizing computing access, improving data quality, developing indigenous 
AI capabilities, attracting top AI talent, enabling industry collaboration, providing 
startup risk capital, ensuring socially  impactful AI projects and bolstering ethical 
AI, it will drive responsible, inclusive growth of India's AI ecosystem”. 
 
145. Noting that the Government of India had  set up an ambitious target of becoming 
$ 5 trillion econom, the Committee sought to know the role of AI towards contribution to 
India’s goal of becoming a $5 trillion economy. To this, the Ministry replied: 
 “Artificial Intelligence (AI) is expected to have a positive impact on the Indian 
Economy. AI expenditure in India is expected to reach $11.78 billion by 2025 and 
add $1 trillion to India’s economy by 2035, as per a Research and Markets report. 
Artificial Intelligence (AI) alone is expected to raise India’s annual growth rate by 
1.3 percentage points by 2035—in a scenario of intelligent machines and humans 
working together to solve the country’s most difficult problems. 
Generative AI could add $359 -438 billion to India’s GDP by 2030 alone and 
potentially contribute $1.2 to $1.5 trillion to India's GDP within the next 7 years. 
AI adoption could tra nsform 38 million jobs by 2030, boosting the Indian 
economy's productivity by 2.61% through gains in the organized sector. There is 
potential for an additional 2.82% increase with the adoption of Gen AI by the 
unorganized sector. 
Government of India is tak ing several concrete steps to encourage the adoption 
of AI, placing the idea of ‘AI for All’  at its very core. Going forward, India’s AI 
Strategy is to focus on democratizing resources essential for AI Innovation, 

140 
 
improving AI Compute infrastructure in the  country, encouraging the AI research, 
developing AI foundational Models, & nourishing the AI Talent in the Country. 
Government is actively seeking the support of Industry & academics in improving 
the state of AI in the Country. 
In March 2024, the Governme nt of India approved the IndiaAI Mission with the 
aim to build a precise and cohesive strategy for bridging the gaps in the existing 
AI ecosystem.  The IndiaAI mission will establish a comprehensive ecosystem 
catalyzing AI innovation through strategic Programmes and partnerships across 
the public and private sectors. By democratizing computing access, improving 
data quality, developing indigenous AI capabilities, attracting top AI talent, 
enabling industry collaboration, providing startup risk capital, ensuring socially 
impactful AI projects and bolstering ethical AI, it will drive responsible, inclusive 
growth of India's AI ecosystem”. 
 

141 
 
 
CHAPTER- IV 
 
Challenges impacting the Application, Adoption and Regulation of AI in India 
 
146. According to the Ministry, potential of AI is enormous but its widespread adoption 
faces several challenges. These challenges range from talent constraints to lack of 
access to critical infrastructure. Addressing these hurdles is crucial if AI is to be fully 
integrated into India’s ecosystem. These include: 
 
o Lack of access to quality AI-ready datasets 
o Limited access to AI compute 
o High Initial Costs and Investment Barriers 
o Lack of Skilled Workforce and Technical Expertise 
o Limited Cultural and Contextual Nuance of LLMs  
 
 
147. The Ministry also explained the issues of Biases in Data used for AI. Biases in AI 
solutions typically stem from the data that trains the technology. If the data used to train 
these models are biased or reflect societal inequalities, the resulting AI model  will also 
be biased. There is a need for diverse, quality datasets in Indians languages that 
capture India’s local contexts for training indigenous AI models. Indian AI ecosystem 
also needs a unified datasets platform to promote data discoverability and p rovide one-
stop access point to datasets. The Government need to augment availability of datasets 
curated for AI innovation (dynamic, granular, containing multiple variables - 
appropriately anonymized) and solve the problem of lack of Data Specialists with in 
Government Agencies. Limited access to advanced computing resources coupled with 
the high cost of high -performance infrastructure, restricts broader participation and 
innovation in AI initiatives. The global race towards AI superiority is predicated on 
dedicated National AI Compute power as most countries move towards procuring 
advanced AI computing systems and  India presently only has AIRAWAT Param Siddhi 
AI (developed by CDAC) as a dedicated AI compute infrastructure of 656 GPUs being 
used by Startups, Bhashini, and researchers. 
 
 
148. The Central Government after extensive public consultations with relevant 
stakeholders has notified the Information Technology (Intermediary Guidelines and 
Digital Media Ethics Code) Rules, 2021 (“IT Rules, 2021”) on 25.02.202 1 which was 
subsequently amended 28.10.2022 and 6.4.2023. The IT Rules, 2021 cast specific legal 
obligations on intermediaries, including social media intermediaries and platforms, to 
ensure their accountability towards safe and trusted internet including their expeditious 
action towards removal of the prohibited misinformation, patently false information and 
Deepfakes. In case of failure of the intermediaries to observe the legal obligations as 
provided in the IT Rules, 2021, they lose their safe harbour p rotection under section 79 

142 
 
of the Information Technology Act, 2000 (“IT Act”) and shall be liable for consequential 
action or prosecution as provided under any extant law. The Digital Personal Data 
Protection Act, 2023 has been enacted on 11th August, 2023 which casts obligations on 
Data Fiduciaries to safeguard digital personal data, holding them accountable, while 
also ensuring the rights and duties of Data Principals. 
 
149. When asked to highlight the major constraints and challenges India faces in Al 
adoption and implementation,  the following submission was made by the Ministry: 
 “India faces several significant constraints and challenges in the adoption and 
implementation of artificial intelligence (AI). These obstacles can be categorized 
as follows: 
1. Infrastructure Accessibility:  There exists a notable disparity in the 
accessibility of advanced AI infrastructure, particularly between urban and rural 
regions. Accessibility not only pertains to physical resources but also extends to 
user interfaces, whic h must be user -friendly and designed for individuals with 
varying levels of technical expertise. 
2. Cost Barriers:  The high costs associated with advanced computing 
resources hinder broader participation in AI initiatives, particularly among startups 
and smal l businesses that may lack the financial resources for substantial 
investment in AI technology. 
3. Shortage of Skilled Workforce : A significant challenge is the scarcity of 
individuals who possess the requisite skills and expertise in AI technologies and 
data science. This shortage undermines the effective optimization and 
deployment of AI solutions. 
4. Data Privacy and Security:  The assurance of robust data privacy and 
security measures is imperative for establishing trust among users and for 
compliance with exi sting regulations. Navigating the complexities of data 
governance remains a significant challenge.  
5. Scalability and Future Readiness:  As AI technologies evolve and the 
volume of data increases, there is a pressing need to develop scalable AI 
infrastructures that are adaptable to future demands. This includes addressing 
the requirements for both computational power and data management practices. 
6. Institutional Frameworks:  The establishment of a comprehensive 
institutional framework for data governance, as pro posed through initiatives such 
as the National Data Governance Policy (NDGP) and the National Data 
Management Office (NDMO), is still in its formative stages. These frameworks 
are essential for ensuring orderly data collection, management, and access, 
which are critical for maximizing the potential of AI. 

143 
 
7. Safe and Ethical use of AI:  There is a need for responsible AI 
frameworks for wider adoption of AI in the Indian context and ensuring solutions 
developed are relevant linguistically and culturally to India and its citizens”. 
 
150. Elaborating further on  the comprehensive outlook of the Ministries/Departments 
to deal with various kinds of challenges which will arise with the advent of AI in the 
entire human sphere, the Ministry submitted: 
 
• “India aims to champion a pro -innovation approach to AI governance by 
ensuring adequate safeguards for protecting citizen interests against 
unintended consequences and fostering innovation to harness the full 
potential of AI development.  
• Government of India’s approach to Artificial Intelligence governance is 
through the prism of "user harm or derived user harm” through any 
technology, to ensure the protection of AI users. 
• Safe & Trusted AI under the IndiaAI Mission: 
a) The IndiaAI Safety Institute has b een launched under the Safe and 
Trusted Pillar of the IndiaAI Mission to address AI risks & Safety Challenges. The 
Institute, incubated by IndiaAI Mission, will be set up on a hub and spoke model 
with various research and academic institutions and private sector partners 
joining the hub and taking up projects under the Safe and Trusted Pillar of IndiaAI 
Mission. 
b) Under the Safe and Trusted pillar, the IndiaAI Mission has selected eight 
Responsible AI Projects against the first Expression of Interest (EoI)  under the 
following themes: 
• AI Bias Mitigation 
• Machine Unlearning 
• Synthetic Data Generation 
• Ethical AI Frameworks 
• Privacy-Enhancing Tools 
• Explainable AI 
• AI Governance Testing 
• Algorithm Auditing Tools 

144 
 
c) The 2nd round of EOI, which is curre ntly ongoing and has received 420 
applications, includes themes such as: 
• Watermarking and Labelling 
• Ethical AI Frameworks 
• AI Risk Assessment & Management 
• Stress Testing Tools 
• Deepfake Detection Tools 
d) A multi -stakeholder Advisory Group, chaired by  the Principal Scientific 
Advisor of India and comprising representatives from relevant ministries, 
has been constituted to develop an ‘AI for India -Specific Regulatory 
Framework.’ Under the Advisory Group’s guidance, a Subcommittee on ‘AI 
Governance and G uidelines Development’ was formed to provide 
actionable recommendations for AI governance in India. The 
Subcommittee's report on AI Governance was released for public 
consultation to facilitate the creation of a robust, inclusive, and adaptive 
framework fo r technological advancements. The consultation process 
closed on February 27, 2025”. 
151. Overviewing the major challenges in the application and adoption of AI in the 
Country, the Committee observed that Artificial intelligence (Al) is rapidly transforming 
various sectors in India, including healthcare, finance, education and security among 
others and  the Country has a strong focus on research and developm ent in Al. I n 
furtherance of it, the Committee asked the Ministry about the initiatives taken to bring 
about efficiency in public administration and public services through application of 
Artificial Intelligence, to which the following was submitted: 
 “Artificial Intelligence (AI) is playing a transformative role in India's digital 
landscape, contributing significantly to key sectors such as healthcare, finance, 
education, and governance. AI is projected to add USD 967 billion to India’s 
economy by 2035 and contribute USD 450 –500 billion to India’s GDP by 2025, 
aligning with the country’s vision of a USD 5 trillion economy. Recognizing the 
strategic importance of AI, the Government of India has undertaken targeted 
initiatives to drive AI adoption in public administration and public services. 
The National Strategy for AI (2018), laid the groundwork for AI -driven innovation 
across priority sectors, including agriculture, healthcare, education, smart cities, 
and mobility. 
In similar efforts, MeitY had created 7 expert groups on AI who published IndiaAI 
2023 Expert Working Groups Report - First Edition AI  in Oct 2 023 focussing 
on a precise and cohesive strategy to bridge the gaps in existing AI ecosystem 

145 
 
viz-a-viz Compute infrastructure, Data, AI financing, Research and Innovation, 
targeted Skilling and institutional capacity for Data to maximize the potential of AI 
for advancing India’s progress.  
In March 2024, the Government of India approved the IndiaAI Mission with the 
aim to build a precise and cohesive strategy for bridging the gaps in the existing 
AI ecosystem.  The IndiaAI mission will establish a comprehe nsive ecosystem 
catalysing AI innovation through strategic Programmes and partnerships across 
the public and private sectors. By democratizing computing access, improving 
data quality, developing indigenous AI capabilities, attracting top AI talent, 
enabling industry collaboration, providing startup risk capital, ensuring socially 
impactful AI projects and bolstering ethical AI, it will drive responsible, inclusive 
growth of India's AI ecosystem.  IndiaAI Mission comprises of 7 pillars namely - 
IndiaAI Comput e Capacity, IndiaAI Innovation Centre (IAIC), IndiaAI Dataset 
Platform, IndiaAI Application Development Initiative (IADI), IndiaAI FutureSkills, 
IndiaAI Startup Financing, Safe & Trusted AI. 
IndiaAI Application Development Initiative (IADI) : The IndiaAI Application 
Development Initiative will develop, scale, and promote the adoption of impactful 
AI solutions to effectively tackle significant problem statements. 
Under, IADI pillar, IndiaAI has launched the IndiaAI innovation challenge which 
seeks to promote impactful AI solutions in critical sectors. Participants will be 
provided a platform to harness the potential of AI across critical priority areas 
namely Healthcare, Governance, Agriculture, Assistive Technologies for Learning 
Disabilities and Climate Change & Disaster Management. 
National AI Portal: The government launched a National AI portal named 
“Indiaai.in”. It is the single central knowledge hub on artificial intelligence and 
allied fields for aspiring entrepreneurs, students, professi onals, academics, and 
everyone else. 
Bhashini: The government has launched Bhashini to provide language 
technology solutions as digital public goods. Bhashini will involve the 
development of a national digital public platform for language to provide univer sal 
access to content, i.e., boost the delivery of digital content in all Indian languages. 
AI-as-a-Service (AIAAS) on Meghraj:  The Meghraj Cloud Service has been 
facilitating AIAAS since January 2021 and offers a variety of AI services to meet 
the user re quirements. This includes services such as AI SATYAPIKAANAN for 
face-based verification, AI -VANI for conversational tools in the form of chatbots 
and voicebots, AI -PANINI for text translation, SHRUTI for automatic speech 
recognition, and AI-SARANSH for summarising text. 
Digidhan Mitra Chatbot: The Government launched an AI-based Digidhan Mitra 
Chatbot for enabling text and voice -based conversation with the user. It provides 
bank-wise transaction details and the growth patterns of various modes of 
transactions, such as BHIM, IMPS, and cards, in tabular and graphical form. The 

146 
 
chatbot has been designed and developed by the National Informatics Centre 
(NIC). 
AI Nirbhit: An AI -based solution developed by NIC for masking of Personally 
Identifiable Information such as PAN, Aadhaar & Fingerprints in pdf documents to 
enable fraud prevention. Department of Land Resources has implemented this 
solution pan India for public copies of sale deeds”. 
152. When the Committee asked the Ministry about International collaborations an d 
partnerships that have been undertaken to develop Artificial Intelligence within the legal 
framework, the Ministry in its written submission has furnished the following details: 
 
● “India encourages the adoption of AI in a responsible manner, placing the idea of 
‘AI for All ’ at its very core. India champion a pro innovation approach to AI 
governance by ensuring adequate safeguards for protecting citizen interests 
against unintended consequences and fostering innovation to harness the full 
potential of AI development. 
● Government of India’s approach to Artificial Intelligence development and 
regulation is through the prism of "user harm or derived user harm” through any 
technology, to ensure the protection of AI users. 
● The Global Partnership on Artificial Intelligence (GPAI) is an initiative dedicated to 
artificial intelligence (AI) that aims to bring together countries that share the 
values reflected in Principles for responsible stewardship of trustworthy AI and 
National policies and international co -operation for trustworthy AI of the OECD 
Council Recommendation on Artificial Intelligence . India is a founding member of 
GPAI and was the Lead Chair for the partnership  in 2024. Under India’s 
Chairmanship, the New Delhi Declaration (2023)  committed the GPAI members 
to advance safe, secure, and trustworthy AI.  
● India was a part of the G20 Troika under Brazil’s 2024 Presidentship. The G20 
Rio de Janeiro Leaders' Declaration 2024 , focusses on leveraging ‘ AI for 
Good and For All’ , in line with the G20 New Delhi Leade rs' Declaration, which 
pushed for a pro-innovation regulatory/governance  approach that maximizes 
the benefits and takes into account the risks associated with the use of AI; and 
promotes responsible AI for achieving SDGs.  
● The Brazil’s G20 Digital Economic  Ministerial Declaration,  on ‘ Artificial 
Intelligence For Inclusive Sustainable Development And Inequality 
Reduction’, calls for inclusive international cooperation to overcome AI induced 
digital divides, notably on capacity building, joint research and vo luntary 
technology transfer and knowledge sharing, on mutually agreed terms, in order to 
expand participation of all countries, in particular developing countries, in digital 
transformation. 
● The recently launched Global Digital Compact  under the UN Pact fo r the 
Future calls for full and equal representation of all countries, especially 

147 
 
developing countries, to advance equitable and inclusive approaches to harness 
AI benefits for achieving Sustainable Development Goals 
● India, along with EU and 27 other count ries, is a signatory to the Bletchley 
Declaration signed at the AI Safety Summit, 2023  in UK, calling for global 
collaboration to ensure AI is developed and used safely, ethically, and for the 
benefit of all. India also participated in the AI Seoul Summit 2024 held in May, 
2024 
● India also supported the US introduced UNGA resolution on Artificial 
Intelligence which was passed in the UN General Assembly in 2024. This 
resolution calls for standardized regulatory and governance approaches for 
ensuring safe, secure and trustworthy development of AI systems. 
 India and France recently co-chaired the AI Action Summit in Paris  on the 10th 
- 11th February, 2025. The summit built upon previous international AI Summits 
and events, including the Bletchley Park and Seoul Summits.  
 India has been actively engaging in all discussions pertaining to the AI Action 
Summit. This includes:  
o Co-Chairing AI Governance Working Group along with France and Canada.  
o Active involvement in deliberations of other working groups, shaping th e 
deliverables.  
o Key member of the steering group for the Action Summit . So far, four 
meetings of Steering Group have been convened by France.  
o Negotiations on the Leaders’ Statement.  
o Potential Participation in Proposed informal GPAI Ministerial Meeting on the side-
lines of the Summit“. 
 
153. The Ministry further submitted: 
 “India is actively working to address and mitigate any constraints and challenges 
in AI deployment, innovation, and adoption as mentioned below: 
• The IndiaAI Mission provides funding and grants to support AI development 
through its various pillars and initiatives to make AI adoption more accessible, 
especially for small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs). 
• AI development requires highly trained professionals. Through the IndiaAI Future 
Skills initiative, AI education is being expanded across undergraduate, 
postgraduate, and Ph.D. Programmes. IndiaAI Fellowships are awarded to 
students pursuing relevant undergraduate and postgraduate Programmes at 
Private or Centrally Funded Technical Instit utes (CFTIs) recognized by AICTE, 
NBA, NAAC, or UGC. So far, 150 undergraduate students, 48 postgraduate 
students, and 3 PhD scholars have been selected for the fellowship. Additionally, 
IndiaAI has set up Data Labs at NIELIT’s Delhi Centre and ICIT, Nagal and, with 
plans to establish 27 more labs in collaboration with NIELIT across Tier 2 and 
Tier 3 cities.  

148 
 
• AI is data -intensive and requires scalable computing power. The IndiaAI 
Compute pillar is developing a national AI compute ecosystem, including 18,000+ 
GPUs, built through public -private partnerships to support startups and 
researchers. 
• AI innovation depends on high -quality, large -scale datasets. IndiaAI Dataset 
Platform aims to enable Indian startups and researchers to access a unified 
repository of hig h-quality, anonymised datasets, reducing barriers to AI 
innovation. 
• Strengthening regulations like the Digital Personal Data Protection Act (DPDPA) 
and rules, and initiatives under the Safe & Trusted AI pillar, which invite 
proposals on AI governance, play  a crucial role in ensuring safe and trusted AI 
deployment in India. 
• With AI playing an increasing role in decision -making, ensuring ethical AI 
deployment is critical. The IndiaAI Safety Institute has been launched under the 
Safe and Trusted Pillar of the IndiaAI Mission to address AI risks & Safety 
Challenges. The Institute, incubated by IndiaAI Mission, will be set up on a hub 
and spoke model with various research and academic institutions and private 
sector partners joining the hub and taking up projects under the Safe and Trusted 
Pillar of IndiaAI Mission.   
• A multi-stakeholder Advisory Group, chaired by the Principal Scientific Advisor of 
India and comprising representatives from ministries, industry & academia has 
been constituted to develop an ‘AI for  India-Specific Regulatory Framework.’ 
Under the Advisory Group’s guidance, a Subcommittee on ‘AI Governance and 
Guidelines Development’ was formed to provide actionable recommendations for 
AI governance in India. The Subcommittee's report on AI Governance  was 
released for public consultation to facilitate the creation of a robust, inclusive, and 
adaptive framework for technological advancements. The consultation process 
closed on February 27, 2025. 
• IndiaAI Innovation Centre (IAIC) has launched a Call for P roposals inviting 
proposals from startups, researchers, and entrepreneurs to collaborate on 
building state -of-the-art foundational AI models trained on Indian datasets. The 
initiative aims to establish indigenous AI models that align with global standards 
while addressing unique challenges and opportunities within the Indian context”. 
 
154. When asked whether IT Rules, 2023 addresses the issues raised by AI and if not, 
what action was being taken to address it, the Ministry replied as: 
a.  “The Information Technology Act ("IT Act") is a technology neutral law and 
does not distinguish between computer resources and computer resources that 
use AI, hence the provisions of IT Act apply to all computer  resources. Further, 
the Information Technology (Intermediary Guidelines and Digital Media Ethics 
Code) Rules, 2021 (“ IT Rules, 2021 ”) which were notified on 25.02.2021 under 
the IT Act and subsequently amended on 28.10.2022 and 6.4.2023 do not 

149 
 
distinguish between any information that is generated using AI tools or any other 
technology and those which are authentic or genuine. The IT Rules, 2021 cast 
specific due diligence obligations on intermediaries, including social media 
intermediaries to make reasonable efforts by themselves and to cause the users 
of their computer resource to not host, store, transmit, display or publish, etc. any 
such information that is categorised as unlawful under the IT Rules, 2021 and 
violative of any law for the time  being in force . Intermediaries are required to 
ensure their accountability that includes their expeditious action towards removal 
of the unlawful information within the timelines prescribed under Rules. For this 
purpose, unlawful information include any s uch information that is obscene, 
pornographic, paedophilic, invasive of another’s privacy, including bodily privacy, 
insulting or harassing on the basis of gender, racially or ethnically objectionable, 
or that deceives or misleads the addressee about the o rigin of the message or 
knowingly and intentionally communicates any misinformation or information 
which is patently false and untrue or misleading in nature, or that is harmful to 
child or impersonates another person, or that threatens the unity, integrit y, 
defence, security or sovereignty of India, public order, or that contains software 
virus or any other computer code, file or Programme designed to interrupt, 
destroy or limit the functionality of any computer resource, or that violates any law 
for the t ime being in force. Therefore, where any information falls within the 
categories mentioned in Rule 3(1)  (b) of the IT Rules, 2021, any user may make 
a request to the Grievance Officer of the concerned intermediary on whose 
platform such unlawful informatio n is made available to the public. Upon receipt 
of such a request, the intermediary is required to act expeditiously and in any 
case within the timelines prescribed under Rule 3(2) of the IT Rules, 2021. Rule 
3(2)(b) of the IT Rules, 2021 requires an inter mediary to remove content which 
exposes private area of / shows an individual in full or partial nudity or shows or 
depicts such individual in any sexual act or conduct, or impersonated/ artificially 
morphed an individual, within 24 hours against complaint . The Government has 
also established Grievance Appellate Committees under Rules 3A of the IT 
Rules, 2021 to allow users and victims to appeal online 
on www.gac.gov.in against decisions taken by the Grievance Officers of 
intermediaries in case they are dissatisfied with the decision of the Grievance 
Officer in case of legal violations including deepfakes or fails to r edress the 
grievances from users or victims or an individual or any person on his behalf 
within the timelines prescribed under the IT Rules, 2021. 
b. Rule 3(1)(d) of the IT Rules, 2021 requires an intermediary to ensure 
expeditious action, well within the timeframes stipulated under the IT Rules, 2021 
(as early as possible but not later than 36 hours), to remove or disable access to 
information that violates the aforesaid provisions of the IT Rules, 2021 or any 
extant law, upon receipt of court order or notice from the Appropriate Government 
or its authorised agency or upon receipt of complaint made by any user or a 
victim (including the impersonated individual or person authorised by him in this 

150 
 
behalf). It is to mention that the Ministry of Home Affairs (“MHA ”) vide G.S.R. 
193(E) dated 13 th March, 2024 has designated the Indian Cyber Crime 
Coordination Centre (I4C) to be the agency of the MHA to perform the functions 
under section 79(3)  (b) of the IT Act and to notify the instances of information, 
data or comm unication link residing in or connected to a computer resource 
controlled by the intermediary being used to commit the unlawful act. Additionally, 
any appropriate Government (in Centre as well as in State) itself or through its 
authorised agency can issue the takedown orders to intermediary in case any 
information violates any law for the time being in force. 
c. Rule 3(1)(j) of the IT Rules, 2021 requires an intermediary to provide 
information under its control or possession, or assistance well within the 
timeframes stipulated under the IT Rules, 2021 (as soon as possible but not later 
than 72 hours) to the Government agency which is lawfully authorised for 
investigative or protective or cyber security activities, for the purposes of 
verification of identity, o r for the prevention, detection, investigation, or 
prosecution, of offences under any law for the time being in force, or for cyber 
security incidents. 
d. Rule 3(1) (l) of the IT Rules, 2021 requires an intermediary to report cyber 
security incidents and shar e related information with the CERT -In in accordance 
with the policies and procedures as mentioned in the Information Technology 
(The Indian Computer Emergency Response Team and Manner of Performing 
Functions and Duties) Rules, 2013. 
e. As an additional due d iligence measure under Rule 4(2) of the IT Rules, 
2021, a significant social media intermediary (“SSMI”) (i.e. a social media 
intermediary having 50 lakhs or above number of registered users in India), 
among other additional due diligences, is also require d to cooperate with Law 
Enforcement Agencies (LEA) for prevention, detection, investigation, prosecution 
or punishment by enabling identification of the first originator of information 
related to the sovereignty and integrity of India, the security of the State, friendly 
relations with foreign States, or public order, or of incitement to an offence 
relating to the above or in relation with rape, sexually explicit material or child 
sexual abuse material (CSAM). 
f. Rule 4(4) of the IT Rules 2021 prescribes that SSMIs shall deploy 
technology-based measures to proactively identify information that depicts any 
act depicting rape, child sexual abuse or conduct or any information which is 
exactly identical to information that has previously been removed or access under 
Rule 3(1) (d) of the IT Rules, 2021. The significant social media intermediaries 
shall display a notice to any user attempting to access such information stating 
that such information has been identified by the intermediary under the categories 
mentioned. 
g. Rule 7 of the IT Rules, 2021 provides that in case of failure of the 
intermediaries to observe the legal obligations as provided in the IT Rules, 2021, 

151 
 
they lose their safe harbour protection un der section 79 of the IT Act and shall be 
liable for consequential action or prosecution as provided under any extant law. 
h. To address the menace of deepfakes and synthetic content generated by 
AI technologies, MeitY has issued advisories to all intermediar ies on 26th 
December 2023 and subsequently on 15th March 2024 advising on countering 
malicious ‘synthetic media’ and ‘deepfakes’. Intermediaries have been warned 
that non -compliance will lead to losing exemption from liability provided under 
section 79(1) of the IT Act. 
i. Further, the provisions of Section 43A of the IT Act read with the 
Information Technology (Reasonable Security Practices and Procedures and 
Sensitive Personal Data or Information) Rules, 2011 (“ SPDI Rules ”) are also 
applicable for protection  of sensitive personal data and violation by anybody 
corporate (which would include AI companies) would be punishable under 
provisions of the IT Act. The Adjudicating Officer under Section 46 of the IT Act is 
empowered to adjudicate a contravention of Sect ion 43A and any other provision 
of the IT Act. 
j. Further, as per section 81 of the IT Act, the provisions of the IT Act do not 
prevent any person from exercising their rights under the Copyright Act, 1957 or 
the Patents Act, 1970. The provisions of the IT Ac t or the rules thereunder do not 
restrict the exercise of intellectual property rights by any person in any manner”. 
 
155. Submitting further with respect to rules/regulations to safeguard the personal life 
and privacy which may be interfered by the misuse of AI, the Ministry stated: 
Apart from this, the Information Technology (Intermediary Guidelines and Digital 
Media Ethics Code) Rules, 2021, among other due diligence obligations, 
prescribes that the intermediary shall  
– take all reasonable measures to secure its computer resource and information 
contained therein following the reasonable security practices and procedures 
as prescribed in the SPDI Rules, and  
– report cyber security incidents and share related information wi th the Indian 
Computer Emergency Response Team in accordance with the policies and 
procedures as mentioned in the Information Technology (The Indian 
Computer Emergency Response Team and Manner of Performing Functions 
and Duties) Rules, 2013. 
The Digital Personal Data Protection Act, 2023 (‘DPDP Act’) has been drafted as 
a technology agnostic legislation as the digital technology is undergoing evolution 
at a very fast pace with huge social and economic impact, thus law governing it 
should have sufficient fle xibility to address changing situations and emerging 
requirements.  

152 
 
The Act provides that all Data Fiduciaries, including those processing personal 
data for AI technologies, must adhere to its provisions to ensure the protection of 
data principals while processing personal data in a manner that is lawful, fair and 
transparent. It mandates that all Data Fiduciaries processing personal data must 
obtain consent from Data Principals before collecting their data. They are also 
required to implement reasonable se curity safeguards to prevent personal data 
breaches, erase personal data once it is no longer needed for the specified 
purpose, and establish a grievance redressal system, including appointing an 
officer to address queries from Data Principals. 
Additionally, the Act imposes certain additional obligations in respect of Data 
Fiduciaries notified as Significant Data Fiduciaries, such as appointing a data 
auditor and conducting periodic Data Protection Impact Assessment to ensure 
higher degree of data protectio n. Data fiduciaries contravening the provisions of 
the DPDP Act may face financial penalties, up to ₹250 crore.  
While the DPDP sets out the rights and duties of Data Principals and the 
obligations of Data Fiduciaries, it attempts to retain sufficient flex ibility to address 
such requirements. 
The Act empowers the Central Government to exempt the application under the 
provisions of the legislation, for the personal data processing necessary for 
research purposes, if the personal data is not to be used to tak e any decision 
specific to a Data Principal and such processing is carried on in accordance with 
specified standards. This addresses any concern regarding data availability for AI 
research. Further, the DPDP Act is not applicable to data made publicly avai lable 
by Data Principals or pursuant to any obligation by law to disclose such data, 
making available sizeable volumes of data for AI research”. 
 
156. Owing to the challenges of cyber security due to use of AI , the Committee asked 
the Ministry about the effective steps being taken for tackling cyber fraud and checking 
breach of cyber security with the use of AI and the Ministry replied: 
 “The use of AI in cyber -attacks is becoming more prevalent and cybercriminals 
are using it to launch more sophisticated and effective attacks, such as Advanced 
Persistent Threats (APTs), which involve the use of artificial intelligence to avoid 
detection and target specific data.  
Government has taken following measures to enhance the cyber security posture 
and prevent cyber attacks and cyber frauds:  
(i) The Indian Computer Emergency Response Team (CERT-In) issues alerts 
and advisories regarding latest cyber threats/vulnerabilities inc luding malicious 
attacks using Artificial Intelligence (AI) and countermeasures to protect 
computers, networks and data on an ongoing basis. In this context, an advisory 
on safety measures to be taken to minimize the adversarial threats arising from 

153 
 
Artificial Intelligence (AI) based applications was published in May 2023. Further, 
advisory on best practices against vulnerabilities while using Generative AI 
solutions was published in March 2025. 
 
(ii) CERT-In issued guidelines on information security practices for 
government entities in June 2023 covering domains such as data security, 
network security, identity and access management, application security, third -
party outsourcing, hardening procedures, security monitoring, incident 
management and security auditing. 
(iii) CERT-In issued Guidelines for Secure Application Design, Development, 
and Implementation & Operations in September 2023. CERT -In has also 
released the Software Bill of Materials (SBOM) guidelines for entities, particularly 
those in the public sector, government, essential services, organizations involved 
in software export and software services industry in October 2024. SBOM helps 
organizations know exactly what components are in their software or assets, 
making it easier to identify and fix vulnerabilities. 
(iv) CERT-In is one of the International partners to co -sign the joint high -level 
risk analysis report on Artificial Intelligence (AI) entitled “Building trust in AI 
through a cyber -risk-based approach,” published by the National Cybe rsecurity 
Agency for France (ANSSI) in February 2025. The report advocates for a risk -
based approach to support trusted AI systems and secure AI value chains and 
calls for discussions on AI -related cyber risks and how to mitigate them to foster 
trusted AI development 
(v) The Certified Security Professional in Artificial Intelligence (CSPAI) 
Programme launched by CERT-In and SISA in September 2024. The certification 
is approved by the ANSI National Accreditation Board (ANAB) by meeting the 
ISO/IEC 17024 standard. The Programme aims to address the growing need for 
Secure and Responsible AI integration into business applications and processes. 
The CSPAI Programme equips cybersecurity professionals with the skills to 
secure AI systems, proactively address AI-related threats, and ensure trustworthy 
AI deployment in business environments. 
(vi) CERT-In published a whitepaper in August 2023, highlighting the 
increasing attacks on Application Programmeming Interface (API) and how AI can 
be useful in mitigating these attacks. 
(vii) CERT-In published “Cyber Security Guidelines for Smart City 
Infrastructure” in February 2025 including measures for secure usage of Artificial 
Intelligence (AI) and Machine Learning (ML) for smart city infrastructure and 
applications. 
(viii) MeitY conducts Programmemes to generate information security 
awareness. Books, videos and online materials about information security are 

154 
 
developed for general users, children and parents, and are disseminated through 
portals such as www.infosecawareness.in and www.csk.gov.in.  
(ix) The Indian Cyber Crime Coordination Centre (I4C) under the Ministry of 
Home Affairs is designated as the nodal point in the fight against cybercrime. A 
toll-free number 1930 is operational for citizens to get assistance in lodging online 
complaints in their own language. To spread awareness on cybercrime, the 
Ministry has taken several steps, which include dissemination of messages on 
cybercrime through the Twitter handle @cyberDost and radio campaigns. 
(x) National Cyber Crime Reporting Portal (www.cybercrime.gov.in) including 
Financial Cyber Fraud Reporting and Management System has been made 
operational by the Indian Cyber Crime Coordination Centre (I4C) and being 
administered by the Ministry  of Home Affairs to enable public to report incidents 
pertaining to all types of cybercrimes, financial frauds and to stop siphoning -off of 
funds by the fraudsters. Cyber Crime Helpline number is 1930”. 
 
157. Asked to submit the  measures adopted to make AI ethi cal and privacy norms 
embedded, the Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology submitted: 
 “The government follows a balanced approach to AI governance, striking a 
delicate balance between innovation and regulation. Towards this, the Ministry is 
undertaking following measures to make AI ethical and privacy norms embedded: 
 Safe & Trusted AI Pillar, IndiaAI Mission : This pillar enables the 
implementation of Responsible AI projects including the development of 
indigenous tools and frameworks, self -assessment checklists for innovators, and 
other guidelines and governance frameworks. 
o Under this pillar, eight projects have been selected under the first EOI 
round across eight critical themes to promote Responsible AI development and 
use across sectors. These include AI Bias Mitigation , Machine Unlearning, 
Synthetic Data Generation, Ethical AI Frameworks, Privacy-Enhancing Tools , 
Explainable AI, AI Governance Testing, and Algorithm Auditing Tools. 
o Further IndiaAI has launched the 2nd round of Expression of Interest 
(EoI) across key themes, including Watermarking and Labelling, Ethical AI 
Frameworks, AI Risk Assessment & Management, Stress Testing Tools, and 
Deepfake Detection Tools.  
o As part of the Safe & Trusted AI pillar, an AI Safety Institute  is being 
established as a hub for indigenous foundational R&D on AI safety, developing 
India’s social, legal, and technical infrastructure for AI Governance. The AI Safety 
Institute will also formulate international partnerships with reputable global 
institutions to co -design and adopt international best practices and standards for 
safe and responsible use of AI. 
 MeitY has also constituted committees to study various AI polic y 
considerations, including intellectual property rights (IPR) issues. The report of 

155 
 
Committee - D on Cyber Security, Safety, Legal and Ethical Issues  is 
available on the MeitY website. 
 Further, a multi-stakeholder advisory committee  was constituted by 
MeitY under the chairmanship of the PSA  to provide guidance and 
recommendations on India’s approach to governance of AI. Under the guidance 
of this Advisory Group, a sub -committee on ‘AI Governance and Guidelines 
Development’ (“ Sub-Committee”) was set up on N ovember 9, 2023, to provide 
workable recommendations for AI governance in India. 
 On January 06, 2025, the Sub -Committee released its recommendations 
in the form of the AI Governance Guidelines Report (“ Report”), for public 
consultation to guide the development of a trustworthy and accountable AI 
ecosystem in India”.  
 
158. Having noted the reply of the Ministry regarding making AI  ethical and privacy 
norms embedded, the Committee further wanted to know about Al regulations/ Rules 
existing/ framed in lndia  and the challenges for its compliance, given the uncertainty 
surrounding the AI use and development. The Committee also asked for major ethical 
and privacy concerns regarding Al adoption and implementation in the Country. To this, 
the Ministry furnished the following reply: 
 
 “The Digital Personal Data Protection Act, 2023 (‘DPDP Act’) has been drafted as 
a technology agnostic legislation as the digital technology is undergoing evolution 
at a very fast pace with huge social and economic impact, thus law go verning it 
should have sufficient flexibility to address changing situations and emerging 
requirements. Therefore, while the DPDP sets out the rights and duties of Data 
Principals and the obligations of Data Fiduciaries, it attempts to retain sufficient 
flexibility to address such requirements. 
The Act empowers the Central Government to exempt the application under the 
provisions of the legislation, for the personal data processing necessary for 
research purposes, if the personal data is not to be used to take any decision 
specific to a Data Prin cipal and such processing is carried on in accordance with 
specified standards. This addresses any concern regarding data availability for AI 
research.  
Further, the DPDP Act is not applicable to data made publicly available by Data 
Principals or pursuant to any obligation by law to disclose such data, making 
available sizeable volumes of data for AI research.  
In addition, The Information Technology Act ("IT Act") is a technology neutral law 
and does not distinguish between computer resources and computer resources 
that use AI. Hence, the provisions of IT Act apply to all computer  resources. The 
provisions of section 43A of the IT Act read with the Information Technology 
(Reasonable Security Practices and Procedures and Sensitive Personal Data or 
Information) Rules, 2011 (“SPDI Rules”) are applicable for protection of sensitive 

156 
 
personal data or information and violation by anybody corporate (which would 
include AI companies) would be liable to penalty under provisions of the IT Act. 
The Adjudicating Officer under section 46 of the IT Act is empowered to 
adjudicate a contravention of section 43A and any other provision of the IT Act. 
The current Indian laws, like the Copyright Act, 1957, also very closely preserve 
the right of protection of copyrighted data an d discourage its use without 
permission. Further, as per section 81 of the IT Act , the provisions of the IT Act 
do not prevent any person from exercising their rights under the Copyright Act, 
1957 or the Patents Act, 1970 . The provisions of the IT Act or t he rules support 
the exercise of intellectual property rights by any person in any manner, 
irrespective of whether the infringement of such IPR is done by a physical person 
or by using AI based applications. 
SEBI regulations on use of AI/ML: As per recentl y notified amendments, 
persons regulated by the Securities and Exchange Board of India (SEBI) 
who use AI and ML tools and techniques will be responsible for the privacy 
of investor data and the output of such AI/ML usage. According to the new 
amendments, p ersons regulated by the Board, recognised stock 
exchanges, recognised clearing corporations, or depositories which use 
AI/ML tools and techniques, either designed by them or procured from 
third-party technology service providers, irrespective of the scale and 
scenario of adoption of such tools for conducting their business and 
servicing their investors/clients/constituents, shall be solely responsible: 
 for the privacy, security and integrity of investors and stakeholders’ data 
including data maintained by them in a fiduciary capacity throughout the 
processes involved; 
 for the output arising from the usage of such tools and techniques they rely 
upon or deal with; and 
 for compliance with applicable laws in force 
In December 2024, the Reserve Bank of India (RB I) announced the setting up of 
a committee to develop a Framework for Responsible and Ethical 
Enablement of Artificial Intelligence (FREE -AI) in the Financial Sector . The 
terms of reference of this committee are to identify potential risks associated with 
AI, if any and recommend an evaluation, mitigation and monitoring framework 
and consequent compliance requirements for financial institutions, including 
banks, NBFCs, FinTech, PSOs, etc. The Committee shall also recommend a 
framework including governance a spects for responsible, ethical adoption of AI 
models/applications in the Indian financial sector. 
In recognition of the need for an India -specific approach to AI governance, 
a multistakeholder Advisory Group under the chairmanship of the Principal 
Scientific Advisor (PSA) of India has been constituted to undertake 
development of an ‘AI for India -Specific Regulatory Framework’. Under the 

157 
 
guidance of the Advisory Group, a Subcommittee on ‘AI Governance and 
Guidelines Development’ was constituted to provide a ctionable 
recommendations for AI governance in India. The Subcommittee’s Report 
on AI Governance Guidelines Development (Subcommittee Report), 
released in January 2025 for public consultation, emphasised the need for a 
coordinated, whole-of-government approach to ensure effective compliance 
and enforcement as India’s AI landscape continues to evolve. 
Some compliance challenges to AI related regulations  with potential impact 
on AI ethics and privacy are: 
 Rapid Technological Advancements:  The swift evolution of AI technologies 
outpaces the development of corresponding regulations, resulting in outdated or 
insufficient guidelines. 
 Data Privacy and Security:  AI systems often require vast amounts of data, 
raising concerns about data breaches and unauthorized use. 
 Algorithmic Bias:  AI models trained on biased datasets can perpetuate 
discrimination, leading to ethical and legal challenges in ensuring fairness and 
equity. 
To overcome this, the Safe & Trusted AI pillar of the mission  will enable the 
implementation of Responsible AI through the development of indigenous tools 
and frameworks, self -assessment checklists for innovators, and other guidelines 
and governance frameworks.  
To further this agenda of the government, Eight Safe & Trusted AI Projects  
have been selected to address the need for robust guardrails to ensure the 
responsible development, deployment, and adoption of AI technologies. The 
projects cover a range of critical themes, including Machine Unlearning, 
Synthetic Data Generation, AI Bias Mitigation, E thical AI Frameworks, 
Privacy-Enhancing Tools, Explainable AI, AI Governance Testing, and 
Algorithm Auditing Tools. 
IndiaAI has also launched the 2nd round of Expression of Interest (EoI) for 
Safe &  Trusted AI Projects, inviting organizations to submit proposals on key 
themes, including Watermarking and Labelling, Ethical AI Frameworks, AI 
Risk Assessment & Management, Stress Testing Tools, and Deepfake 
Detection Tools. With AI safety being the funda mental prerequisite for AI 
innovation, these efforts will form the backbone of the IndiaAI mission”.  
159. While dwelling further on the topic of ethical AI, the Committee wanted the 
Ministry to give details  of National Strategy or National Plan/Policy in lndia , if any, for a 
responsible and ethical Al development that prioritizes ethical Al practices, 
transparency, accountability, fairness and using Al in an inclusive and equitable manner. 
The Ministry replied: 
 “Government of India has taken concrete steps for  encouraging adoption of AI 
in a responsible manner  in India and building public trust in the use of this 

158 
 
technology, placing the idea of ‘AI for All’ at its very core. Several initiatives 
have been undertaken in this respect: 
 India is one of the few countries across the global that has an established 
policy position working to strengthen responsible AI within government systems 
 MeitY’s report of Committee - D on Cyber Security, Safety, Legal and 
Ethical Issues provides a well -rounded analysis on the issues relating to social 
impact of AI 
 In 2021, NITI Aayog released a two part approach on Ethical AI.  The 
first part of the strategy titled “Towards Responsible AI for All” , establishes 
broad ethics principles for design, developmen t and deployment of AI  in 
India – drawing on similar global initiatives but grounded in the Indian legal and 
regulatory context. The second part of the strategy  explores means of 
operationalization of ethical AI principles  across the public sector, private  
sector and academia 
 This includes 7 principles for responsible design, development, and 
deployment of AI  in India. These principles for RAI  include safety and 
reliability, inclusivity and non -discrimination, equality, privacy and security, 
transparency, accountability, and protection and reinforcement of positive human 
values.  
 These principles are also envisioned to be captured under the Safe & 
Trusted AI component under the recently launched IndiaAI Mission. This pillar 
shall include the implementation o f ‘ Responsible AI ’ projects including the 
development of 25 indigenous tools and frameworks for Governance of AI  
that are trained on Indian datasets and contextualized to our unique needs and 
challenges. 
 Report on AI Governance Guidelines  Development: A multi -
stakeholder advisory committee was constituted by MeitY under the 
chairmanship of the PSA to provide guidance and recommendations on India’s 
approach to governance of AI. The public consultation s on the report have 
recently closed.  
 AI Readiness As sessment –MeitY, in collaboration with UNESCO and 
other partners, organizing consultations on AI Readiness Assessment 
Methodology (RAM). The consultation aims to draft an India -specific AI policy 
report that identifies strengths and opportunities for growt h within India's thriving 
AI ecosystem. This consultation involved various stakeholders, including 
representatives from public and private organizations utilizing AI.  
 Bureau of Indian Standards Artificial Intelligence Sectional 
Committee, LITD 30 - New Indian Standard Identical to ISO/IEC TR 24368:2022 
- This document provides a high -level overview of International Standards that 
address issues arising from AI ethical and societal concerns in the context of 
principles, processes and methods already adopted in this domain. 

159 
 
 Standard for Fairness Assessment and Rating of Artificial 
Intelligence Systems ; Telecommunication Engineering Centre, Department of 
Telecommunications - The standard provides a Voluntary Fairness Assessment 
of AI/ML systems and covers th e applicable AI/ML systems with combined 
fairness rating metric for AI/ML systems to certify fairness in assessment 
systems. It approaches certification via a three-step process involving bias risk 
assessment, threshold determination for metrics, and bias testing.  
 Recommendations on Leveraging Artificial Intelligence and Big Data 
in Telecommunications Sector; Telecom Regulatory Authority of India (TRAI) – 
This paper has outlined the probable risks from AI that need examination and 
potential measures to add ress and mitigate those risks while securing the 
benefits. It also expands on the enablers for AI adoption. The paper proposed the 
setting up of Artificial Intelligence and Data Authority of India under TRAI to 
oversee all issues related to data digitization, data sharing, and data monetization 
and Study the possible impact of upcoming technologies on data ethics and come 
out with relevant rules/guidelines on the subject.  
 The Digital Personal Data Protection Act (DPDPA) to protect citizens' 
privacy, safety , and trust with respect to their personal data and enhance the 
accountability for entities collecting and processing personal data.  
 India will establish an IndiaAI Safety Institute as a hub for indigenous 
foundational research & development on AI safety , developing India’s social, 
legal, & technical infrastructure for AI Governance.  
 The institute will formulate partnerships with international institutions, 
including other AI Safety Institutes, to co -design and adopt international best 
practices on Safe and Trusted AI and work towards harmonized global safety 
standards to address cross-border risks of AI technologies”. 
 
160. When the Committee sought the views of the Ministry regarding rapid AI adoption 
posing different kinds of challenges including potential job displacement and job 
eradication, the Ministry submitted that: 
 “The Indian AI talent demand is projected to grow from 600,000–650,000 to more 
than 1,250,000 during 2022 –27. However, the AI market is expected to grow at 
25–35 percent, potentially signa lling a demand -supply gap in the talent pool and 
a need for up skilling existing talent. Over the past year, 43 percent of the Indian 
workforce across sectors has used AI in their organisations. About 60 percent of 
workers and 71 percent of GenZs recognise  that acquiring AI skills can enhance 
their career prospects. 
The Government of India emphasizes the concept of 'AI for All,' aligning with the 
Prime Minister's vision to foster and promote the use of cutting-edge technologies 
across the country.  
For skilling and re-skilling of its people, MeitY has initiated ‘FutureSkills PRIME’ a 
Programmeme for Re -skilling/Up-skilling of IT Manpower for Employability in 10 

160 
 
new/emerging technologies including Artificial Intelligence. One of the key pillars 
of Ind iaAI Mission is IndiaAI Future Skills which envisions augmenting the 
number of graduate and post -graduate in AI domain by awarding IndiaAI 
fellowship to B.Tech and M.Tech students of all the All India Council for Technical 
Education (AICTE) recognized engi neering institutions. Further, top 50 National 
Institutional Ranking Framework (NIRF) ranked research institutes are being 
supported with IndiaAI PhD fellowship for undertaking research in the field of AI 
and related subjects”. 
161. While deposing before the Committee, the Secretary of the Ministry submitted: 
 
“The potential of AI in India fundamentally is that it is estimated that there could 
be about 47 lakh new jobs which can be created by 2027 through Artificial 
Intelligence and automation. Primarily, these are the jobs which can get created 
in the space in India itself and in a manner where India actually provides the 
human resources”. 
 
162. He further submitted: 
 
“The potential which has been assessed by various industry bodies and 
consultancies is about 47 lakh new tech jobs.  Just to give a perspective, today 
the IT sector employs about 54 lakh people in the Country overall.  So, almost on 
par with that, there is potential in AI to create jobs”. 
 
163. The Committee wanted to dwell further on the issue of job displacement due to AI 
and so asked the Ministry to elucidate on the scope of creation of employment with the 
introduction of AI especially in rural India in conte xt of literacy and technological know -
how and the submission by the Ministry was as under: 
 
 “As per the report, “Advancing India’s AI skills” published by NASSCOM, the 
Indian AI talent supply is expected to grow from 600,000 to greater than 
1,250,000 over  2022-27 at a 15 percent CAGR. The AI market is expected to 
grow at a rate of 25 percent CAGR, potentially signalling a demand -supply gap in 
the talent pool. Thus, there is a need for upskilling existing talent in India to meet 
this demand.  
On the same li nes, The Economic Survey 2024 –25 emphasises that while AI 
offers India a unique opportunity to augment employment numbers by focussing 
on skilling. 
In rural areas, the advent of AI across different sectors is expected to creat e 
employment in the below areas. 
 
 

161 
 
Healthcare Access: 
 Telemedicine assistants: Facilitating remote consultations with doctors through 
AI-powered translation and data collection.  
 Community health workers with AI tools: Utilizing AI -powered diagnostic support 
for basic health issues.  
 Medical data analysts: Interpreting health data to identify trends and potential 
outbreaks.  
Education and Skill Development: 
 Educational Content creators for local languages: Developing educational content 
in regional languages using AI tools. 
 
Agriculture Tech: 
 Precision farming data analysts: Analysing data from sensors to optimize 
irrigation and fertilizer usage.  
 Crop disease detection specialists: Using AI -powered image analysis to identify 
plant diseases early.  
 Farm management consultants: Advising farmers on optimal planting and 
harvesting times based on AI predictions”. 
 
164. Taking into consideration the  wide concerns among the private and public sector 
employees about job losses due to Artificial intelligence especially in IT/ITES and other 
technical jobs, the Committee asked the Ministry to elaborate upon threats Al poses for 
employment in India, and in what ways the employed workforce can adopt to this shift. 
The Committee further wanted to know whether the Ministry foresaw  any brighter 
prospects wit h respect to Al -driven automation driving and creating new and wider 
employment and job opportunities by skill upgradation and technological adaptation in 
India. To these,  Ministry submitted: 
 
The Government of India is focussed to meet the growing demand for 
professionals in emerging fields like data science and Artificial Intelligence (AI), 
some of the initiatives by the Government of India integrate Al and cyber security 
training into existing skill development Programmes are as under: 
 One of the key initiatives under the IndiaAI Mission is the IndiaAI 
FutureSkills, which seeks to break down barriers to AI education by focussing on 
higher education and coordinating with existing skilling efforts.  
 Under the IndiaAI FutureSkills, IndiaAI Data Labs are also being setup as 
infrastructure in Tier 2 and Tier 3 cities across India, to impart foundational -level 
courses in Data and AI such as Data Annotation and Data Curation. All the 36 

162 
 
States and Union Territories (UTs) have been requ ested to submit their 
nominated list of Industrial Training Institutes (ITIs)/Polytechnics located in Tier 2 
and Tier 3 cities for setting up of IndiaAI Data Labs. Additionally, IndiaAI in 
collaboration with NIELIT is establishing 27 IndiaAI data labs in T ier 2 and Tier 3 
cities across the country.  
 MeitY has initiated ‘FutureSkills PRIME’  a Programmeme for Re -
skilling/Up-skilling of IT Manpower for Employability in new/emerging 
technologies namely Artificial Intelligence, Robotic Process Automation, 
Augmented/Virtual Reality, Internet of Things, Big Data Analytics, Additive 
Manufacturing/ 3D Printing, Cloud Computing, Social & Mobile, Cyber Security, 
and Blockchain.  
 National e -Governance Division (NeGD), MeitY in collaboration with 
industry partners (Intel  & Meta), has launched ‘YUVAi: Youth for Unnati and 
Vikas with AI’ - A National Programmeme for School Students with an objective 
of enabling school students from classes 8 th to 12th with AI tech and social skills 
in an inclusive manner.  
 IndiaAI, IBD under  the Digital India Corporation, has signed a 
Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) with  Microsoft in January 2025 to drive 
the adoption and development of artificial intelligence (AI) in India. This strategic 
partnership is aligned with the core objectives of India AI Mission. This 
collaboration aims to train 500,000 individuals, including students, educators, 
developers, government officials, and women entrepreneurs, by 2026. Microsoft 
under this collaboration will also establish "AI Catalysts- Centre of Excellence”, to 
promote rural  AI innovation in Tier  2 and Tier 3 cities  and equip 100,000 AI 
innovators and developers through hackathons, community building. Additionally, 
Microsoft will also set up  AI Productivity Labs  in 20 National Skill Training 
Institutes (NSTIs)/NIELIT centres across 10 states to train 20,000 educators and 
empower 100,000 students with foundational AI courses in 200 Industrial 
Training Institutes (ITIs). 
 MeitY has launched Visvesvaraya PhD Scheme in 2014 , with the 
objective of enhancing the number of PhDs in the Country to compete globally in 
the knowledge intensive sectors of Electronics System Design and Manufacturing 
(ESDM) and IT/IT Enabled Services (IT/ITES). Under the scheme, financial 
support is provided to Full -time & Part -time PhD candidates and Young Faculty 
who are undertaking research and technology development. The Scheme also 
provides infrastructure support to institutions. 
 Mission Karmayogi  – The focus of the Mission is on enhancing the 
government-citizen interaction, with officials becoming enablers for citizens and 
business, with development of behavioural -functional-domain competencies 
leading to ease of living and ease of doing business.  At the core of Mission 
Karmayogi is the iGOT Karmayogi platform which guides civil service officials in 

163 
 
their capacity-building journey, emphasizing AI and digital fluency. This initiative 
equips officials with the skills to leverage AI and digital tools,  fostering efficient 
governance and data-driven decision-making.  
165. Regarding the challenges posed by AI, the Committee wanted the Ministry to 
elaborate on the steps being taken to ensure Cyber -attacks are kept under check and 
simultaneously ensure security of Banks due to growing use of AI to destabilize financial 
system. The Ministry replied: 
 
 “The following actions have been taken by Computer Emergency Response 
Team (CERT-In), Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology (MeitY), to 
ensure cyber-attacks are kept under check and simultaneously ensure security of 
Banks due to growing use of AI to destabilize financial system: 
i. Conduct of International drill on 'Navigating the Rise of AI -enbled Cyber 
Attacks': 
International cooperation is crucial in defending against AI -based 
cyberattacks.  By collaborating, countries can share threat intelligence, best 
practices, and resources, which help them to identify emerging cyber threats and 
attack patterns more quickly.  This collective information sharing helps build a 
more comprehensive understanding of global cyber risks, enabling nations to 
respond more effectively. Additionally, sharing best practices ensures that each 
country can adopt the most effective defense str ategies, reducing vulnerabilities 
and improving overall cybersecurity posture. In pursuance of the same, CERT -In 
organised ASEAN CERT Incident Drill (ACID) 2024 and virtual Table Top 
Exercise (TTX) on 15th & 16th October. The Theme of the drill is 'Navigat ing the 
Rise of AI-enabled Cyber Attacks'. 
ii. Launch of AI security certification for the professionals 
A well-trained workforce is critical in detecting, mitigating, and responding to AI -
enabled cyberattacks, because the sophistication of these threats requires skilled 
professionals who can understand and respond effectively. As AI technologies 
evolve, cybersecurity teams must be equipped with the latest knowledge on how 
AI can be used by threat actors to conduct cyber-attacks. 
In this connection, the Indian Computer Emergency Response Team (CERT -In), 
Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology (MeitY ), Government of India 
and SISA, a global leader in forensics driven Cyber Security has jointly launched 
the Certified Security Professional for Artificial Intelligence (CSPAI) Programme 
which is the world’s first ANAB -accredited AI security certification.   The CSPAI 
Programme equips security professionals with the skills needed to effectively 
integrate AI into business applications while adhering to sustainable practices. 
 

164 
 
iii. Conduct of PoC for an AI-driven security system 
CERT-In provides leadership for  the Computer Security Incident Response 
Team-Finance Sector (CSIRT -Fin) operations under its umbrella for responding 
to and containing and mitigating cyber security incidents reported from the 
financial sector. 
While AI has made cyberattacks more sophisticated, enabling attackers to exploit 
vulnerabilities faster and more efficiently, it also plays a crucial role in defending 
against these threats. AI -driven security systems can detect and respond to 
cyberattacks in real time by analyzing vast amounts of d ata, identifying 
anomalies, and predicting potential threats before they escalate. Machine 
learning algorithms continuously improve their detection accuracy, enabling better 
protection against malware, phishing, and zero -day attacks. Considering the 
same, CSIRT-Fin, CERT -In did a PoC of an AI based Behavioral biometrics 
authentication solution developed by a cybersecurity technology provider which 
can strengthen and complement the existing security system of an organization, 
and provided its input and feedback for further development. 
        Further, CSIRT -Fin, CERT-In and Mastercard had jointly published a 
whitepaper on API Security: Threats, Best Practices, Challenges, and Way 
forward using AI in September 2023. The whitepaper highlights the drawbacks of 
the conventional security methods in securing the APIs, and how AI based 
system which learns to distinguish anomalous behavior from general behavior 
using the data could be quite helpful. 
iv. Advisory on security implications to minimize threats from AI 
applications 
On 9th May 2023, CERT -In published an advisory on the security implications of 
AI language -based applications. It has been mentioned in the advisory that AI 
language-based models such as ChatGPT, Bing AI, Bard AI, etc. are widely 
getting recognition and being discussed for their useful impact. But it can be used 
by threat actors to target individuals and organizations. 
The advisory recommended several measures to mitigate adversarial threats 
associated with AI applications. 
v. Use of AI to create  highly realistic and convincing fake videos, images, 
and audio 
Deepfake technology, which involves the use of AI to create highly realistic and 
convincing fake videos, images, and audio, is becoming increasingly 
sophisticated. This technology poses signif icant risks, including the potential for 
disinformation, fraud, and social engineering attacks. 

165 
 
On 27 November 2024, the Indian Computer Emergency Response Team 
(CERT-In) issued an advisory on Deepfake Threats and Countermeasures, 
highlighting the escalati ng risks posed by the increasing sophistication of 
deepfake technology. This advisory serves as a critical resource for individuals, 
organizations, and businesses to identify, assess, and mitigate the threats 
associated with Deepfake technology”. 
166. On being  asked whether any Inter -Ministerial advisory bodies had  been 
established to continuously monitor and guide developments in AI, while ensuring 
regulation keeps pace with technology, the Ministry has replied that: 
 
 
“Recognizing AI’s transformative potential and impact across various sectors, a 
multi-stakeholder advisory committee was constituted by MeitY under the 
chairmanship of the PSA to provide guidance and recommendations on India’s 
approach to governance of AI, to ensure regulation keep  pace with technology. 
Under the guidance of this Advisory Group, a sub -committee on ‘AI Governance 
and Guidelines Development’ (“Sub -Committee”) was set up on November 9, 
2023, to provide workable recommendations for AI governance in India”. 
167. Elaborating further, the Ministry replied: 
 
 “Following the recommendations of the Sub -committee, an Inter-Ministerial AI 
Coordination Committee (IMACC) was constituted in April, 2024, to provide a common 
roadmap and to coordinate efforts to implement a whole -of-government approach for 
implementation and use of AI in the country. The committee terms of reference include: 
i) “Evaluate current legislative fram eworks related to AI and recommend 
amendments or new regulations to minimize potential harm resulting from AI 
use 
ii) Providing legal clarity and certainty around development and use of AI by 
issuing joint guidance 
iii) Advising to establish common terminologies an d risk inventories across 
relevant sectors to facilitate consistent understanding and management of AI 
related risks 
iv) Providing mechanisms for demonstrable self -regulation among AI 
stakeholders to uphold responsible AI principles and promote ethical use of AI 
technologies 
v) To take coordinated steps to respond to identified gaps with the benefit of 
multi-regulatory support. 
vi) Advising on creating a policy environment which enables the use of AI for 
beneficial use-cases. 
vii) Promote the development and deployment of responsible AI applications in 
their domains/sectors”. 

166 
 
 
168. The Committee were given to understand that for a safe and ethical use of Al, the 
Government proposed to establish an Al Safety lnstitute (AlSl) using a collaborative hub-
and-spoke model to enable nationwide participation in developing Al safety frameworks 
and tools. And in view of this development, the Committee wanted to know about the 
proposed functionality and status of AlSl, to which the Ministry submitted that: 
 “The recent Advances in AI have not only catapulted its capabilities but also 
given rise to new risks and safety concerns  that can pot entially undo the 
merits of leveraging this technology for good.   
This includes risks of AI systems propagating existing biases, being vulnerable 
to misuse and unintended consequences, and spreading misinformation, 
among others.  
Further, effective governance of AI systems is inhibited by the current lack of 
understanding of their capabilities  and emergent risks . There are also no 
accepted conformity standards, evaluation systems, or risk management 
frameworks.  
Thus, India will establish an IndiaAI Safety Institute as a hub for indigenous 
foundational research & development on AI safety , developing India’s social, 
legal, & technical infrastructure for AI Governance.  
The institute will formulate partnerships with  international institutions, including 
other AI Safety Institutes, to co -design and adopt international best practices on 
Safe and Trusted AI and work towards harmonized global safety standards to 
address cross-border risks of AI technologies”. 
 
169. When asked  if Open AI’s large language models (LLMs) were trained on 
copyrighted material without authorization , the following submissions have been made 
by the Ministry: 
 
“Firms such as Open AI which are building proprietary closed source AI 
models such as GPT 3.5 and GPT4 (which are used to run ChatGPT) 
generally do not disclose the data that was leveraged to train the models. 
However, there is some visibility into the training data for these models owing 
to on-going litigations filed against OpenAI by various entities. 
For instance, The New York Times had filed a copyright infringement lawsuit 
against Microsoft and OpenAI on Dec 27th 2023. Along with other allegations, 
the New York Times claimed that Microsoft and OpenAI are infringing 
copyright by training their l arge language models (LLMs) on material 
copyrighted by the newspaper which includes articles published by the 
newspaper in their online edition. 

167 
 
In their response Open AI argued that training this constitutes "fair use," a 
legal doctrine under U.S. copyrig ht law, as the training process involves 
analyzing publicly available data to create output from scratch, based on the 
concepts learnt, rather than directly reproducing copyrighted works. As of 
today, courts worldwide are yet to definitively rule on whethe r AI training on 
copyrighted materials without permission is permissible 
In India, the lawsuit ANI v. OpenAI was filed in Jan 2025. In the lawsuit, ANI 
alleges unauthorized reproduction and use of copyrighted materials for training 
purposes by Open AI. 
Under India's Copyright Act of 1957, copyright protects original works such as 
literary and artistic creations, granting authors exclusive rights to reproduce 
and adapt their works. The Act does not explicitly address AI training. 
However, under Section 52 it  allows exceptions like "fair dealing" for purposes 
such as research, criticism/ review or for reporting of current affairs.  It remains 
to be determined by the Indian judiciary whether the training of AI models with 
copyrighted material would be acceptable under the fair dealing clause“. 
 
170. The Secretary of the Ministry deposed before the Committee on the issue of 
LLM as under: 
 
“जह ां तक एआई लिशन  पर  अपडेट  है, these were some of the applications of 
different Ministries. Last time, we discussed about them. इसिें इांडडजजनस 
फ उ ां डेशन िॉडल्स की ब त हुई थी। जब  हि  पपछिी  ब र  किेटी  की सिक्ष आए थे, तब हि  
कॉि  फॉर  प्रपोजल्स इश्यू करने  की ब त कर  रहे  थे। हिने  कॉि  फॉर  प्रपोजल्स इश्यू कर  
दिय   है। उसिें 67 एप्िीक े शांस लििे  हैं। बहुत बदिय  ररसप ांस लिि  है। इसिें 20 ि जज  
िल्टी िॉडल्स हैं और  47 सिॉि  िैंग्वेज िॉडल्स हैं। अभी इसक  एनॉलिलसस  चि  रह  है। 
हि रे  यह ां एक किेटी  है, जह ां पर  इांडडयन ओररजन  के प्रोफ े ससज वगैरह  अिेररकन  
पवश्वपवद्य िय य  अन्य जगहों पर  हैं, उसिें उन सबको  और  भ रतीय  एक्सपर्टजस भी हैं, 
उसक  एनॉलिलसस  चि  रह  है। जल्िी ही इसक  अवॉडज शुरू  हो ज एग ”। 
 
171. When asked to explain the efforts being made by the Ministry towards working 
more on voice -driven AI rather than text -driven AI and the progress of India in Large 
Language Model (LLM) highlighting the initiatives and achievements of BHASHINI 
division of MeItY in Speech to Speech and Speech to Text d omain in various Indian 
languages, the Ministry submitted: 
 “A. As part of India's National Language Translation Mission (NLTM), the 
Ministry has launched the Bhashini initiative. The Bhashini initiative leverages 
linguistic datasets, enables vernacular content creation, and providing translation 

168 
 
tools for 22 schedu led Indian languages. Furthermore, it enhances national 
competitiveness by enabling local innovation in AI while reducing reliance on 
foreign technologies. 
Bhashini plays a crucial role in key use cases across the Country, enabling 
speech-to-text and speech-to-speech functionalities. The platform supports these 
technologies to power various applications. A notable example is the PM Kisan 
chatbot, where farmers can ask queries about the PM Kisan Samman Nidhi 
scheme and receive responses in their native langu age using Bhashini’s TTS, 
NMT, and ASR technologies. Another example is NPCI’s voice -based payments, 
which allow users to transfer money in their preferred language.   
Bhashini services, offered through the NHLT platform, have processed over 
*177.85 millio n* inferences to date. These services, accessible via multiple 
applications and APIs, extensively support speech -to-text and speech -to-speech 
functionalities.  
A Call for Proposals was published by IndiaAI inviting proposals from startups, 
researchers, and  entrepreneurs to collaborate on building state -of-the-art 
foundational AI models trained on Indian datasets, including Large Language 
Models (LLM). This initiative aims to establish indigenous AI models that align 
with global standards while addressing un ique challenges and opportunities 
within the Indian context.   
In the first month, IndiaAI Mission has received a total of 67 proposals till 
February 15 aimed at building India's foundation models, with contributions from 
both established startups and new teams of researchers & academia. 22 are 
focussed on Large Language Models (LLMs) & Large Multimodal Models 
(LMMs). Along with funding support, a wide range of GPUs have been requested 
by teams submitting these proposals. The proposals are currently being 
evaluated. In the second month, IndiaAI Mission has received a total of 120 
proposals till March 15”. 
 
172. Regarding action initiated to coordinate with various Ministries, Departments 
and stakeholders to quantify the situation arising due to use of AI and infringement of 
copyright, the following was submitted: 
 
 “India recognizes the intersection of emerging technology and intellectual 
property laws. Intellectual property rights (IPR) violations that may occur through 
use of AI, particularly generative AI, are a subject of concern. 
The current Indian laws, like the Copyright Act, 1957 , very closely preserve the 
right of protection of copyrighted data and discourage its use without permission. 

169 
 
Further, as per section 81 of the IT Act , the provisions of the IT  Act do not 
prevent any person from exercising their rights under the Copyright Act, 1957 or 
the Patents Act, 1970 . The provisions of the IT Act or the rules support the 
exercise of intellectual property rights by any person in any manner, irrespective 
of whether the infringement of such IPR is done by a physical person or by using 
AI based applications. 
MeitY has also constituted committees to study various AI policy considerations, 
including intellectual property rights (IPR) issues. The report of Committee - D 
on Cyber Security, Safety, Legal and Ethical Issues  is available on the MeitY 
website. 
Further, a multi-stakeholder advisory committee  was constituted by MeitY 
under the chairmanship of the PSA  to provide guidance and recommendations 
on India’s approach to governance of AI. Under the guidance of this Advisory 
Group, a sub-committee on ‘AI Governance and Guidelines Development’ (“ Sub-
Committee”) was set up on November 9, 2023, to provide workable  
recommendations for AI governance in India. 
On January 06, 2025, the Sub -Committee released its recommendations in the 
form of the AI Governance Guidelines Report (“Report”), for public consultation to 
guide the development of a trustworthy and accountable AI ecosystem in India. 
In addition, as part of the Safe & Trusted AI pillar, Ministry has recently 
announced the setting up of AI Safety Institute  as a hub for indigenous 
foundational research and development on AI safety issues. The IndiaAI Safety 
Institute will work with all relevant stakeholders, including academia, start -ups, 
industry, and government ministries/departments, towards ensuring responsible 
use of AI, and address issues such as copyright”. 
173. Elaborating on  AI systems that process personal da ta in ways that 
contravene the Digital data Protection Act, 2023 (DPDP Act) , the Ministry has 
submitted that: 
 
“The data protection legislation, the Digital Personal Data Protection Act, 
2023 (DPDP Act), has been enacted but is not yet in force. It aims at  
safeguarding the processing of personal data of individuals and provides a 
comprehensive framework to regulate the collection and use of personal 
data. 
 
The DPDP Act encapsulates the key principles of purpose limitation and data 
minimisation. It mandates that the data collected must be limited to the 
specified purpose and requires that the consent must be obtained from the 
individuals on or before processing their personal data. In this regard, AI 
systems that collect personal data should only collect for specific, clearly 

170 
 
defined and lawful purposes, and consent must be obtained in an informed 
and transparent manner. Moreover, AI systems are required to implement 
appropriate technical and organizational measures and to undertake 
reasonable security safegua rds to prevent personal data breach, in 
accordance with the provisions of the DPDP Act. 
 
The DPDP Act provides individuals with the right to access, correct and 
erasure of their personal data, and these rights must be facilitated by the AI 
systems. AI systems must erase personal data, once the specified purpose is 
served and should not retain the personal data, unless necessary for 
compliance with any other law. 
 
Additionally, the DPDP Act imposes certain additional obligations in respect 
of Data Fiduciarie s notified as Significant Data Fiduciaries, such as 
appointing a data auditor and conducting periodic Data Protection Impact 
Assessment to ensure higher degree of data protection. Data fiduciaries 
contravening the provisions of the DPDP Act may face financ ial penalties, up 
to ₹250 crore”. 
 
174. Regarding the challenges in Personal Data Protection after the introduction of AI 
along with the action plan of the Ministry to deal with it , t he Ministry submitted as 
follows: 
 “The Digital Personal Data Protection Act, 2023 (‘DPDP Act’) has been drafted as 
a technology agnostic legislation as the digital technology is undergoing evolution 
at a very fast pace with huge social and economic impact, thus law governing it 
should have sufficient flexibility to address changing  situations and emerging 
requirements. Therefore, while the DPDP sets out the rights and duties of Data 
Principals and the obligations of Data Fiduciaries, it attempts to retain sufficient 
flexibility to address such requirements. 
 
The Act empowers the Cen tral Government to exempt the application under the 
provisions of the legislation, for the personal data processing necessary for 
research purposes, if the personal data is not to be used to take any decision 
specific to a Data Principal and such processin g is carried on in accordance with 
specified standards. This addresses any concern regarding data availability for AI 
research. Further, the DPDP Act is not applicable to data made publicly available 
by Data Principals or pursuant to any obligation by law to disclose such data, 
making available sizeable volumes of data for AI research.  
 
In addition, The Information Technology Act ("IT Act") is a technology neutral law 
and does not distinguish between computer resources and computer resources 
that use AI, hence the provisions of IT Act apply to all computer  resources. The 
provisions of section 43A of t he IT Act read with the Information Technology 
(Reasonable Security Practices and Procedures and Sensitive Personal Data or 

171 
 
Information) Rules, 2011 (“SPDI Rules”) are applicable for protection of sensitive 
personal data or information and violation by any body corporate (which would 
include AI companies) would be liable to penalty under provisions of the IT Act. 
The Adjudicating Officer under section 46 of the IT Act is empowered to 
adjudicate a contravention of section 43A and any other provision of the IT Act. 
Further, the Ministry has also been taking active steps under the IndiaAI Mission 
to safeguard citizen interests while promoting innovation: 
 IndiaAI Datasets Platform  initiative focusses on enhancing access to 
non-personal and anonymized datasets for AI innovation and research. The 
platform is set to offer anonymization tools and encryption support to counter any 
risk of personal data breach. 
 the ‘Safe & Trusted’ AI pillar under the IndiaAI Mission has selected eight 
projects under the first EOI round  across eight critical themes to promote 
Responsible AI development and use across sectors. These include AI Bias 
Mitigation, Machine Unlearning, Synthetic Data Generation, Ethical AI 
Frameworks, Privacy-Enhancing Tools, Explainable AI, AI Governance Testing, 
and Algorithm Auditing Tools. 
 Further IndiaAI has launched the 2nd round of Expression of Interest 
(EoI) across key themes, including Watermarking and Labelling, Ethical AI 
Frameworks, AI Risk Assessment & Management, Stress Testing Tools, and 
Deepfake Detection Tools.  
 As part of the Safe & Trusted AI pillar, an AI Safety Institute  is being 
established as a hub for indigenous foundational R&D on AI safety, developing 
India’s social, legal, and technical infrastructure for AI Governance. The AI Safety 
Institute will also formulate international partnerships with reputable global 
institutions to co -design and adopt international best practices and standards for 
safe and responsible use of AI”. 
 
175. When the Committee sought to know whether the Ministry had taken into 
consideration environmental impacts, in terms of energy consumption and generation of 
e-waste, due to vast amount of computational power required to develop AI system , the 
Ministry made the following submission: 
 
“India recognises the need for building AI sustainably for All. Towards this,  
• India has recently joined the Coalition for Sustainable AI launched at the 
Paris AI Action Summit. Initiated by the French government in 
collaboration with the UN Environmental  Programme (UNEP) and the 
International Telecommunications Union (ITU), is a global community of 
stakeholders willing to contribute to initiatives for aligning AI development 
with global sustainability goals and fostering responsible AI that supports 
the ecological transition.  
• Promoting use of AI and related technologies for sustainability, the recently 
launched IndiaAI Innovation Challenge, under the IndiaAI Application 

172 
 
Development Initiative, calls applications for developing indigenous 
solutions for C limate Change and Disaster Management as one of the 
critical thematic areas. 
 A total of 900 applications were received. As of today, 18 AI applications in 
the themes Agriculture, Assistive Technology for Learning Disabilities and 
Climate Change and Disaste r Management have qualified for the first 
round of funding. Winners of the Innovation Challenge to receive funding of 
INR 1 Crore”. 
 
176. Regarding measures taken by the Ministry to align India’s response to meet its 
commitment towards 2030 Sustainable Developm ent Goals (SDGs) – socio, economic 
and environmental, while keeping attuned to the expanding economy and emergence of 
AI, the Ministry submitted as under: 
 
 “Recognizing the potential of Artificial Intelligence to create deep and 
sustainable social impact, the Indian government has made great strides in 
promoting the use of AI particularly in key sectors for social good (Such as 
education, infrastructure, urban & rural development, healthcare, etc.).  
1. National Strategy for AI  - India’s National Strategy for AI was 
released in 2018 by NITI Aayog , which was closely followed by a group of 
committees tackling specific technical and policy challenges around the 
implementation of the country’s AI Programme. The NSAI emphasizes the 
potential of AI to solve social challenges  faced by its citizens in areas 
such agriculture, health, education, Smart Cities and Infrastructure and Smart 
Mobility and Transportation. 
2. Promoting Responsible AI for Youth : MeitY, in collaboration with 
industry partners, has launched ‘Responsible AI for Youth’ – a national 
Programme for government schools  that aims to create an AI ready 
workforce for the future. The aim of this Programme is to provide an equal 
opportunity to all Indian youths - in urban, rural and remote corners of India - 
to become human-centric designers who can create real AI solutions to solve 
economic and social impact issues of India. This Programme is currently 
aimed at students from class 8 -12 across all government schools in district 
headquarters 
3. National Digital Education Architecture (NDEAR)  is created with a 
vision of building a unifying national digital infrastructure to  energise and 
catalyse the education ecosystem. It is a federated, unbundled, interoperable, 
inclusive, accessible which aims to create and deliver diverse, relevant, 
contextual, innovative solutions that benefit students, teachers, parents, 
communities and administrators resulting in timely implem entation of policy 
goals as envisaged in the New Education Policy 2020. The NDEAR 
architecture is built on the Open Digital Ecosystem  approach of platform, 
governance and community principles that includes the interoperability of 
data, privacy by design. 

173 
 
4. National Mission on Education through Information and 
Communication Technology (NMEICT)  has been envisaged to leverage the 
potential of ICT in teaching and learning process in Higher Education 
Institutions. It seeks to bridge the digital divide  in the s kills to use 
computing devices for the purpose of teaching and learning among urban and 
rural teachers/learners. It focusses on appropriate pedagogy for e -
learning, providing facility of performing experiments through virtual 
laboratories, on-line testing and certification, on-line availability of teachers to 
guide and mentor learners, utilization of available Education Satellite 
(EduSAT) and Direct to Home platforms, training and empowerment of 
teachers to effectively use the new method of teaching -learning. By providing 
high-quality e-content free of cost helps in leveraging the cardinal principles 
of education policy viz. access, equity and quality education. 
5. National Urban Digital Mission  is an initiative of the Ministry of 
Housing and Urban Developme nt that aims to build strong and resilient 
smart cities  in line with SDG 11 . The Programme aims to build shared 
digital infrastructure to strengthen the capacity of India’s urban 
ecosystemwhile working across the three pillars of people, process and 
platform and institutionalizing a citizen-centric and ecosystem driven 
approach towards urban governance . To further make cities sustainable 
and resilient, the Climate Smart Cities Assessment Fr amework (CSCAF)  
was rolled out in 100 Smart Cities  as part of this initiative to help cities look 
at urban planning and governance from a climate change lens . In order to 
leverage data  to help build solutions to complex urban challenges , the 
Indian Urban D ata Exchange (IUDX)  has been institutionalized.  IUDX is 
completely open source , based on an underlying framework of open 
standard APIs, data models, and the security, privacy and accounting 
mechanisms facilitating its easy adoption across the digital ecosystem.  
6. National Language Translation Mission  is an initiative launched by 
the Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology that aims to build 
speech to speech machine translation systems  for various Indian 
languages and dialects  and evolve a Unified Language Interface. (ULI)  
The mission will work towards creating a ‘voice -based internet’ that is 
accessible in vernacular Indian languages and building multilingualism  
as well by developing the next generation ‘conversational’ government apps 
and websites. This approach of providing free and open -source platforms 
allows the private sector  to improve services and products in the 
domain of language  technologies and enable the citizen to access digital 
services in their vernacular language to further incr ease digital inclusion and 
accessibility as recommended in the SDG 10 as well. 
7. In May 2019, MeitY launched the Technology Incubation and 
Development of Entrepreneurs  (TIDE 2.0) scheme. Along with the Centre 
of Excellence in Artificial Intelligence  (CoE in AI) established by the 

174 
 
National Informatics Centre  (NIC), it acts as a gateway for innovation 
solutions to reach market rapidly. 
8. To expand the number of PhDs in the Electronics and IT sectors and 
catalyze R&D and IP creation in these critical areas, MeitY launched the 
Visvesvaraya PhD Scheme , which will ultimately support 3,000 PhD 
candidates. Their research will include Artificial Intelligence, Big Data, 
Machine Learning, Natural Language Processing, Image Processing, and 
Pattern Recognition. 
 
9. IndiaAI Application Development Initiative:  Under this pillar, IndiaAI 
aims to collaborate with start -ups, industries, academicians, and researchers 
to develop/scale/promote the adoption of impactful 25 AI solutions  with 
potential for catalyzing large-scale socio-economic transformation. 
Current Status : IndiaAI Innovation Challenge: Under IADI, the first 
Innovation Challenge was launched on 13th August 2024 calling for 
development, deployment and adoption of AI applications in 5 critical 
sectors, namely Climat e Change and disaster management, Healthcare, 
Agriculture, Governance and Assistive technologies for learning 
disabilities 
IndiaAI CyberGuard AI Hackathon:  An AI Hackathon launched in 
partnership with the Indian Cybercrime Coordination Centre (I4C) to create 
AI-driven solutions for cybersecurity has been launched on 16th October 
2024. This initiative which has received 263 responses, seeks to leverage 
advanced AI technologies like Natural Language Processing (NLP) and 
predictive analytics to guide citizens in filing cybercrime reports on the 
National Cyber Crime Reporting Portal (NCRP).“ 
 
177. Further, on being asked whether MeitY ha d initiated any plan of action for 
democratization of access to quality datasets and resources through a Unified AI 
resource platform, the Ministry provided the following in their written submission: 
 
 “The Government of India has been  actively working towards democratisation 
of AI resources for all, guided by the vision of ‘Making AI in India and Making AI 
Work for India.’  The IndiaAI Mission, approved by the  Union Cabinet with a 
₹10,371.92 crore outlay, is a strategic step in this direction. 
Under this mission, the IndiaAI Dataset Platform pillar is set to be launched as 
a unified AI resource platform to  enhance access to all resources critical for AI 
such as datasets, models and tools . This platform shall integrate quality non-
personal and anonymized datasets  from existing reposito ries, onboard new 
public and private contributors, and provide AI -focussed functionalities. The 
platform will also serve as a hub for AI models, toolkits, curated datasets, and 
successful AI-driven public sector applications use cases.  

175 
 
By combining these resources in one place, the platform will catalyse AI 
innovation in the country, making it easier for AI developers to access and utilize 
the necessary assets to drive progress in this field.” 
178. Going by media reports which stated that  in a country like lndi a, with low digital 
literacy and a fragile media system, people were more likely to accept misleading and 
fake Al outputs as truth, leading to harmful and  unethical consequences, the Committee 
wanted to know how the Ministry planned to tackle such a technological menace. In 
response, the Ministry stated that: 
 “India is actively addressing the challenge of misleading AI outputs through a 
multi-faceted approach, focussing on regulation, education, and technological 
innovation. 
Regulatory Frameworks: 
The government has introduced and strengthened various regulatory measures 
to combat AI -driven misinformation. In March 2024, MeitY issued revised 
advisory requiring platforms to label AI -generated content, ensuring users can 
differentiate it from authenti c sources. Additionally, intermediaries must comply 
with existing IT Rules to prevent the spread of unlawful AI -generated content, 
while platforms are mandated to develop mechanisms to detect and mitigate 
deep fakes. 
Under the IT Act (2000), Section 66D pe nalises the transmission of offensive 
messages, which includes the dissemination of fake news. Similarly, Section 505 
of the Indian Penal Code has been increasingly used to take legal action against 
the circulation of false and misleading news. Furthermore , the Bharatiya Nyaya 
Sanhita Bill, 2023, proposes strict punishment for spreading fake news that 
threatens national sovereignty or security. 
Digital Literacy Initiatives: 
Recognising the critical role of digital literacy in combating misinformation, the 
government has invested in large -scale initiatives. The Union Budget 2025 has 
allocated ₹500 crore to boost digital learning and AI -powered education. 
Additionally, the Pradhan Mantri Gramin Digital Saksharta Abhiyan (PMGDISHA) 
aims to make six crore rural households digitally literate by training at least one 
individual per household. 
Past initiatives like the National Digital Literacy Mission (NDLM) and Digital 
Saksharta Abhiyan (DISHA), implemented from 2014 to 2016, trained over 52.50 
lakh candidates acr oss the country. To enhance STEM education, the 
government is also setting up 50,000 Atal Tinkering Labs in government schools, 
promoting coding and problem-solving skills among students. 
Under the IndiaAI FutureSkills Initiative, the government is taking a whole -of-
country approach to AI skilling. This includes establishing specialised Data & AI 
Labs in Tier 2 and Tier 3 cities, providing fellowships for students from AICTE -

176 
 
recognised institutions, and developing industry -aligned curriculum and training 
Programmemes to strengthen India’s AI ecosystem. 
Technological Solutions: 
The government is investing in AI -driven solutions to counter AI -generated 
misinformation. The Ministry of Information & Broadcasting, in collaboration with 
the India Cellular & Electr onics Association (ICEA), is promoting AI -based fact -
checking solutions. A notable initiative is the TruthTell Hackathon at WAVES 
2025, which encourages the development of AI -driven real-time fact verification 
tools. 
Under the Safe & Trusted AI initiative,  the government is actively promoting 
responsible AI by developing indigenous AI governance frameworks and self -
assessment checklists for AI innovators. Under this pillar, the IndiaAI Mission has 
selected eight projects under the first EOI round  across eight critical themes to 
promote Responsible AI development and use across sectors. These include AI 
Bias Mitigation , Machine Unlearning, Synthetic Data Generation, Ethical AI 
Frameworks, Privacy-Enhancing Tools, Explainable AI, AI Governance Testing, 
and Algorithm Auditing Tools. 
Further IndiaAI has launched the 2nd round of Expression of Interest (EoI ) 
across key themes, including Watermarking and Labelling, Ethical AI 
Frameworks, AI Risk Assessment & Management, Stress Testing Tools, and 
Deep fake Detection Tools.  
The Government of India has also announced the establishment of AI Safety 
Institute to enable researchers, developers and other stakeholders to develop 
tools, frameworks and processes to encourage the adoption of AI in a responsible 
manner with the principles of safety, security, transparency, and privacy 
embedded in the design of AI technology.. 
Additionally, to ensure holistic oversight, MeitY has established a multi -
stakeholder advisory committee, chaired by the Principal Scientific Adviser (PSA), 
to guide India's AI governance strategy. In January 2025, this committee released 
the AI Governance Guidelines Report for public consultation, shaping a 
trustworthy and accountable AI ecosystem. Public inputs received are under 
observation now.” 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

177 
 
 
 
CHAPTER- V 
 
IndiaAI Mission : Catalysing and Democratizing AI Innovation in India 
 
179. Recognizing the critical role that AI will play in shaping the future of the 
renewable energy sector and beyond, the Government of India launched the IndiaAI 
Mission, a comprehensive national-level Programme with an outlay of over INR 10,000 
crore to democratize and catalyse the AI innovation ecosystem  in the country. The 
IndiaAI Mission will be implemented through seven key pillars :i) IndiaAI Compute 
Capacity; ii) IndiaAI Innovation Centre; iii) IndiaAI Datasets Platform; iv) IndiaAI 
Application Development Initiative; v) IndiaAI FutureSkills; vi) IndiaAI Startup Financing; 
and viii) Safe & Trusted AI. 
 
180. Enumerating the salient features of IndiaAI Mission along with the targets and the 
measures envisaged by the Ministry, the following was submitted: 
 “The Government has approved the IndiaAI Mission on 7 th March 2024 with the 
aim to bolster India's global leadership in AI, foster technological self -reliance, 
ensure ethical and responsible AI deployment, and democratize the benefits of AI 
across all strata of society.   
The IndiaAI Mission is being implemented by ‘IndiaAI’ – an Independent Business 
Division (IBD) of Digital India Corporation. The Mission encompasses seven key 
pillars of the AI ecosystem, including:  
1. IndiaAI Compute Capacity : The IndiaAI compute pillar envisions building 
a high -end scalable AI computing ecosystem comprising AI compute 
infrastructure of 10,000 or more Graphics Processing Units (GPUs).   
2. IndiaAI Innovation Centre (IAIC):  The AI Innovation Centre aims to 
develop and deploy indigeno us Large Multimodal Models (LMMs) trained on 
India-specific data.  
3. IndiaAI Datasets Platform : The IndiaAI Datasets Platform (IDP) seeks to 
enhance access, quality, and utilization of public sector datasets to make them 
AI-ready.  
4. IndiaAI Application Develo pment Initiative : The IndiaAI Application 
Development Initiative aims to develop, scale, and promote the adoption of 
impactful AI solutions to effectively tackle significant problem statements.  
5. IndiaAI FutureSkills: IndiaAI FutureSkills Pillar envisions t o augment the 
number of graduates, post-graduate and PhDs in AI domain. Further, it envisions 
setting up Data and AI Labs in Tier 2 and Tier 3 cities across India, to impart 
foundational-level courses in Data and AI.  

178 
 
6. IndiaAI Startup Financing: The IndiaAI Startup Financing Pillar envisions 
for providing support to AI startups at all stages.   
7. Safe & Trusted AI:  This pillar enables the implementation of Responsible 
AI projects including the development of indigenous tools and frameworks, self -
assessment checklists for innovators, and other guidelines and governance 
frameworks. 
The IndiaAI Mission is envisaged to achieve the following expected outcomes: 
1. Establishment of the IndiaAI compute capacity of 10,000 or more GPUs 
and the AI Marketplace. 
2. Developing foundational models with capacity of 100 billion+ parameters 
trained on datasets covering major Indian language s for priority sectors like 
healthcare, agriculture, governance, etc. 
3. Establishing AI Curation Units (ACU) in 50 -line ministries/ departments 
and establishing the IndiaAI Datasets Platform. 
4. Undertaking 25 applied AI projects to address public sector proble m 
statements. 
5. Supporting 2,000 B.Tech, 2,500 M.Tech and 500 PhD, Post Doc students 
in AI and setting up 200 IndiaAI Labs. 
6. Financing 1,050 AI and deep tech startups at various stages of the Startup 
lifecycle. 
7. Developing in India Safe and Trusted AI tools, checklists, etc”. 
 
181. Explaining each component of IndiaAi Mission the Ministry provided the following: 
 “The Union Cabinet has approved the IndiaAI Mission on March 7, 2024. IndiaAI 
Mission aims to propel innovation and build domestic capacities to ensure the 
tech sovereignty of India. IndiaAI Mission comprises of 7 pillars namely - IndiaAI 
Compute Capacity, IndiaAI Innovation Centre (IAIC), IndiaAI Dataset P latform, 
IndiaAI Application Development Initiative (IADI), IndiaAI FutureSkills, IndiaAI 
Startup Financing, Safe & Trusted AI.  
 Under the IndiaAI Compute capacity  pillar,access to over 10,000 AI 
GPUs will be provided to end users, comprising startups, researchers, academia, 
MSMEs, government bodies, and public sector agencies. Further, an AI 
marketplace will be designed to offer AI as a service and pre -trained models to AI 
innovators. 
Under this initiative, an invitation for application for empanelment of AI services 
on cloud was published on August 16th,2024. The bid submission closed on 28th 
of November 2024 and bids were opened on 2nd December 2024. 19 bidders 
had submitted a proposal offering AI services including GPUs and AI platforms 

179 
 
for developing AI solutions. Post technical evaluation, 10 bidders have been 
empaneled at discovered L1 rates have been for all the AI cloud services. 
The IndiaAI Compute Portal has been develop ed to provide access to these 
empaneled AI services on the cloud to the end users. This portal ensures 
accessibility of computational resources essential for AI research and 
development, benefiting students, startups, researchers, and government 
departments. Onboarded users can leverage a wide range of AI services for 
development, including AI compute instances (GPUs), network services, storage 
services and AI platform services. The portal provides access to high -end. A 
variety of storage services, includin g block, file, and object storage, are also 
available. 
In addition to the discounted rates, up to 40% of the costs would be further 
subsidized for eligible end-users. An end-user policy for empaneled AI services is 
published by IndiaAI which would define t he eligibility criteria for different 
category of users for accessing the empaneled services. This initiative reflects 
the government's commitment to making modern technology accessible to all, 
empowering individuals at the grassroots level economically and technologically. 
 The IndiaAI Innovation Centre aims to enable the development and 
deployment of indigenous Large Multimodal Models (LMMs) and domain -specific 
foundational models in critical sectors. India presently has a thriving ecosystem of 
innovators working on creating India -first foundational models that are 
contextualized to our social, cultural, and linguistic diversity. This includes Digital 
India Bhashini, Sarvam AI, Project Indus, BharatGPT, among others. 
A Call for Proposals has been published by IndiaAI on 30th Jan 2025, inviting 
proposals from startups, researchers, and entrepreneurs to collaborate on 
building state-of-the-art foundational AI models trained on Indian datasets. This 
initiative aims to establish indigenous AI models that align w ith global standards 
while addressing unique challenges and opportunities within the Indian context. In 
the first month,  IndiaAI Mission has received a total of 67 proposals till February 
15 aimed at building India's foundation models, with contributions f rom both 
established startups and new teams of researchers & academia.  22 are focussed 
on Large Language Models (LLMs) & Large Multimodal Models (LMMs), while the 
remaining 45 are centreed on domain -specific models (SLMs). The majority of 
SLMs target key sectors such as healthcare, education, and financial 
services. Along with funding support,  a wide range of GPUs have been 
requested by teams submitting these proposals. 
 IndiaAI Datasets Platform : The AIKosh The IndiaAI Datasets Platform 
has been launched o n 6th March 2025 to improve access, quality, and use of 
public sector datasets to make it AI ready. IDP aims to streamline access to high -
quality, non-personal datasets for AI innovation, this unified platform will serve as 
a one-stop solution for Indian startups and researchers. 

180 
 
The platform consists of 300+ Datasets from 10+ entities, 80+ Models to support 
AI solutions from 4 entities, 5+ Use cases showcasing potential applications that 
can be developed using the datasets and models available on the platf orm, 10+ 
Toolkits that users can integrate into their projects. It also has resources to help 
users understand platform features.  
 IndiaAI Application Development Initiative (IADI) : The IndiaAI 
Application Development Initiative will develop, scale, and pr omote the adoption 
of impactful AI solutions to effectively tackle significant problem statements. 
Under, IADI pillar, IndiaAI has launched the IndiaAI innovation challenge which 
seeks to promote impactful AI solutions in critical sectors. Participants wil l be 
provided a platform to harness the potential of AI across critical priority areas 
namely Healthcare, Governance, Agriculture, Assistive Technologies for Learning 
Disabilities and Climate Change & Disaster Management. 
The challenge has received over 90 0 applications, showcasing diverse 
innovations such as multi-modal farmer advisory services in Indian languages, AI-
enhanced X -ray solutions for early disease detection, and transformative 
approaches to grievance redressal and legal support. After rigorous  evaluation, 
by the thematic committees, comprising of representatives from 
Ministries/Departments, sectoral and domain experts, 30 AI solutions have been 
shortlisted across themes for refinement, development, and scaling. 
 IndiaAI FutureSkills:  IndiaAI Fut ureSkills will mitigate barriers to entry 
into AI Programmes by focussing on all levels of higher education in AI. Further, 
Data and AI Labs will be set up in Tier 2 and Tier 3 cities across India, to impart 
foundational-level courses in Data and AI. Under the FutureSkills pillar MeitY has: 
IndiaAI Fellowships are being offered to students pursuing relevant 
undergraduate and postgraduate Programmes at Private / Centrally Funded 
Technical Institutes (CFTI) under the Government of India or must be recognized 
either by the All -India Council for Technical Education (AICTE) / National Board 
of Accreditation (NBA) / National Assessment and Accreditation Council (NAAC) 
of the University Grants Commission (UGC) or as per the extant norms. IndiaAI 
Fellowships are des igned for students who have undertaken projects associated 
with AI/ML or other allied domains, thereby bridging the gap between theoretical 
knowledge and practical application and ensuring a workforce proficient in 
essential AI skills . IndiaAI has been rec eiving applications from UG & PG 
students all over the country who have undertaken project in Artificial intelligence 
AI and are being reviewed. Till date, 150 UG students and 48 PG students have 
been selected for the IndiaAI Fellowship and the first tranc he of the fellowship 
amount has been released to these students. 
Under the IndiaAI FutureSkills, IndiaAI Data Labs are also being setup as 
infrastructure in Tier 2 and Tier 3 cities across India, to impart foundational -level 
courses in Data and AI such as Data Annotation and Data Curation. All the 36 

181 
 
States and Union Territories (UTs) have been requested to submit their 
nominated list of Industrial Training Institutes (ITIs)/Polytechnics located in Tier 2 
and Tier 3 cities for setting up of IndiaAI Data Lab s. Additionally, IndiaAI in 
collaboration with NIELIT is establishing 27 IndiaAI data labs in Tier 2 and Tier 3 
cities across the country details of which are placed at Annexure I. 
 IndiaAI Startup Financing pillar envisions providing support to AI startups 
at all stages. The IndiaAI Mission in collaboration with Station F (Paris, France) 
and HEC Paris, had announced an ambitious acceleration Programme for Indian 
AI startups. This Programme will support 10 Indian AI startups in scaling globally 
by leveraging the European market’s vast opportunities. Through this partnership, 
selected startups will undergo a 4 -month immersive onsite acceleration 
Programme at Station F, the world’s largest sta rtup campus. The Programme, 
designed by HEC Paris, Europe’s leading business school, will provide startups 
with unparalleled access to resources, mentorship, and networking opportunities. 
A call for applications for Indian Startups working in the domain of  AI has been 
launched. 
 Safe & Trusted AI:  This pillar will enable the implementation of 
Responsible AI projects including the development of indigenous tools and 
frameworks, self-assessment checklists for innovators, and other guidelines and 
governance frameworks. 
A call for Expression of Interest (EOI) for building tools and frameworks on 
Responsible AI, with a focus on 10 themes was launched and over 2000 
responses were received for the first Expression of Interest (EoI) from which eight 
Responsible AI Pr ojects have been selected. The projects cover a range of 
critical themes, including Machine Unlearning, Synthetic Data Generation, AI Bias 
Mitigation, Ethical AI Frameworks, Privacy -Enhancing Tools, Explainable AI, AI 
Governance Testing, and Algorithm Auditing Tools. IndiaAI has launched the 2nd 
EoI for Safe & Trusted AI Projects, inviting organizations to submit proposals on 
key themes, including Watermarking and Labelling, Ethical AI Frameworks, AI 
Risk Assessment & Management, Stress Testing Tools, and D eepfake Detection 
Tools”. 
 
182. Details of funds allocation, engagement of technical and expert staff required, 
consultation with other Ministries stakeholders and Beneficiaries, challenges and 
constraints likely to be faced during implementation of IndiaAl Mis sion as furnished by 
the Ministry are: 
 “The implementation of ‘IndiaAI Mission’ with a total outlay of Rs. 10,371.92 Cr is 
for a period of 5 years. The allocation of budgetary outlay among the key pillars is 
below: 
 

182 
 
Components Total Expenditure (₹ Cr) 
IndiaAI Compute Capacity 4563.36 
IndiaAI Innovation Centre (IAIC) 1971.37 
IndiaAI Datasets Platform 199.55 
IndiaAI Application Development 
Initiative  689.05 
IndiaAI FutureSkills 882.94 
IndiaAI Startup Financing 1942.5 
Safe & Trusted AI 20.46 
IndiaAI Overheads and 
Contingency @1% 102.69 
Total 10,371.92 
 
 Recognizing AI’s transformative potential across various sectors, A multi-
stakeholder advisory committee  was constituted by MeitY under the 
chairmanship of the PSA  to provide guidance and recommendations on 
India’s approach to governance of AI. Under the guidance of this Advisory 
Group, a sub -committee on ‘AI Governance and Guidelines Development’ 
(“Sub-Committee”) was set up on November 9, 2023, to provide workable  
recommendations for AI governance in India. The subcommittee report has now 
been published for public consultation to guide the development of a trustworthy 
and accountable AI ecosystem in India. 
 AI Readiness Assessment  – MeitY is also initiating a countr y-wide AI 
Readiness Assessment in partnership with UNESCO to assess the current 
states and gaps in India’s AI ecosystem and two rounds of consultations  
have been completed. 
 In line with the global AI Safety Institute trends, and to keep pace with the rapid  
advancements in AI, the Government of India conducted a stakeholder 
consultation to evaluate the merits of establishing an IndiaAI Safety Institute. 
Following which, Prime Minister Modi ji announced the launch of IndiaAI Safety 
Institute at the Paris Action Summit in February. The Institute will be set up on a 
hub and spoke model with various research and academic institutions, private 
sector partners joining the hub. 

183 
 
 Ministry of Electronics and IT in partnership with J-PAL hosted a workshop in 
April, 2024 to enable Ministries and Departments to understand their data 
capacity and how to leverage data for AI. This also included identification and 
curation of problem statements relevant to the ministry/department that may be 
solved leveraging AI solutions.  
 MeitY under the India AI Mission Start -up Financing pillar organised a 
roundtable discussion - ‘AI Innovate: Empowering Tomorrow's Start -ups’ in 
August 2024 under the Chairmanship of Shri Jitin Prasada, Minister of State, 
Ministry of Electronics and Informa tion Technology and Ministry of Commerce 
and Industry, Government of India. The roundtable aimed to bring together 
diverse perspectives from the start -up ecosystem, including venture capitalists, 
incubators, accelerators, public institutions, state governm ent institutions and AI 
Start-ups.   
 AI Kosh Workshop : IndiaAI hosted an inter -ministerial workshop in February, 
2025 preceding the official launch of AI Kosh, the IndiaAI Datasets Platform. 
This workshop included participation from central government offi cials who were 
apprised of AI Kosh features and the need for data sharing for AI research and 
innovation”. 
183. Outlining the  mechanism for ensuring effectiveness of the Mission and its 
financial outlays, the Ministry submitted: 
 
“The IndiaAI Mission will be implemented through the ‘IndiaAI’ Independent 
Business Division (‘IBD’) under the Digital India Corporation (DIC) and have the 
following governance framework: 
1. Mission Governing Board (MGB):  The MGB will be the topmost 
executive body for the IndiaAI Mission. It would be an empowered body to make 
key decisions for the success of the Mission and be responsible for its periodic 
review and guidance. Responsible to review, periodically (at least o nce a year), 
the technical and financial activities of the Mission and suggest measures, as 
deemed fit, to meet the aims and objectives of the Mission. 
2. Project Review and Steering Committee (PRSG):  The mandate of the 
PRSG is to develop and fine -tune the fi nal delivery contents, mechanisms, and 
performance measurement criteria of each component/activity to be undertaken 
by the Mission. It will review the financial progress on a half -yearly basis and 
recommend the release of funds. It will also assign the res ponsibilities of delivery 
to IndiaAI IBD or any other partnering agencies in the Mission ecosystem. 
3. Project Implementation Monitoring Committee (PIMC):  The PIMC 
monitors the implementation and the progress of every component of the mission 
and meets as per the requirement”.  
 

184 
 
184. Regarding the policies undertaken by the Ministry with the stakeholders to ensure 
that there was more private sector investment in the hardware, the building block aspect 
of AI building, the Ministry submitted: 
 “One of the key pillars  under the IndiaAI mission is the IndiaAI Compute pillar. 
The IndiaAI compute pillar envisions building a high -end scalable AI computing 
ecosystem comprising AI compute infrastructure of 10,000 or more Graphics 
Processing Units (GPUs). 
Towards this, IndiaAI published a Request for Empanelment (RFE) on August 16, 
2024, to empanel AI services on cloud including GPUs. 19 bidders had submitted 
proposals to empanel their AI cloud services, out of which 10 bidders were 
qualified for financial bid opening. 
Against the target of 10,000 GPUs outlined in the IndiaAI compute pillar, 
technically qualified bidders have submitted 18,693 GPUs for empanelment. Out 
of 18,693 GPUs offered, 14,461 GPUs are already installed on the bidder’s 
infrastructure and are availabl e for immediate use. Additionally, there is further 
GPU capacity available with the bidders who were not technically qualified. 
The prices quoted by the bidders are highly competitive and average discount 
from market prices for all GPUs is 42 %. Average di scount from market prices for 
higher precision GPUs is 47%. Average rate per GPU is ₹115.85/hour and 
Average rate per Higher precision GPU is ₹150/hour. 
To keep pace with the changes in technologies, IndiaAI enabled a continuous 
empanelment process invitin g fresh proposals from the empaneled agencies for 
onboarding new GPUs and discovering any revised rates”. 
185. The Ministry further submitted: 
 “The Government of India emphasizes the concept of ‘AI for All’, aligning with the 
Hon’ble Prime Minister's vision to  democratize use of technology. This initiative 
aims to ensure that AI benefits all sectors of society, driving innovation and 
growth. 
India has taken major, formative steps towards facilitating the creation of a world -
leading ecosystem for Trustworthy Art ificial Intelligence (AI). India is a major hub 
of skilled workforce in AI, with a vibrant Startup ecosystem that has mushroomed 
from the established research networks that have been building AI applications 
that can be leveraged for enhanced public service delivery.   
The success of the government’s initiatives and approach is evident from India's 
rising position in global AI rankings and indexes.   

185 
 
Several steps have been taken to attract private sector investment and 
collaborate with leading private play ers in AI for AI funding and AI infrastructure 
development, including initiatives such as: 
 For democratizing access to AI infrastructure, critical for innovation and ensuring 
the global competitiveness, IndiaAI, under the IndiaAI Compute Pillar, had 
published a Request for Empanelment (RFE), inviting applications for the 
empanelment of AI services on the cloud and offer the services to academia, 
MSMEs, startups, research community, governments, public sector agencies and 
other entities approved by IndiaAI.  
Against the target of 10,000 GPUs outlined in the IndiaAI compute pillar, 
empaneled bidders have offered 14,517 GPUs at L1 rates. The average L1 
rate discovered for the GPUs is Rs. 115 per GPU hour. Additionally, the 
Government would support eligible end users to the extent of 40% of the AI 
compute cost. 
To ensure equitable access to computational resources, the IndiaAI 
Compute Portal has been launched which will offer AI compute, network, 
storage, platform and cloud services at the discounted rates to sta rtups, 
MSMEs, academia, researchers, students, startups and government 
agencies, including Central Ministries and State Departments. The portal 
would also provide access to AI Platform and other services on the service 
provider’s portal for development of AI models and solutions at discounted 
rates.  
With an objective to keep pace with the changes in technologies and market 
prices, IndiaAI has enabled a continuous empanelment process by inviting 
proposals from agencies who wants to get empanelled every quar ter. Willing 
agencies shall submit financial proposals which can be same or lower than 
the existing L1 rates. IndiaAI has published the RFE for continuous 
empanelment on 21st February, 2025. The last date of submission of 
proposals is 30th April 2025. Pre -bid meeting has been organized, and 
adequate publicity is being done to ensure transparency in the empanelment 
process. 
 Under IndiaAI Application Development Initiatives, IndiaAI Innovation Challenge 
was launched to seek and advance the development, deploy ment, and adoption 
of AI applications in critical sectors. The challenge was open to Indian innovators, 
startups, non -profits, students, academic/R&D organizations, and companies. 
Over 900 applications have been received across the five focus areas - 
Healthcare, Improved Governance, Agriculture, Assistive Technology for 
Learning Disabilities and Climate Change and Disaster Management. Winners 
will receive up to INR 1 Crore as award and the opportunity to deploy their 
solutions at a national scale.  Out these , the 30 shortlisted AI solutions under the 
identified sectors across three stages of maturity: Idea, Prototype, and Existing 

186 
 
Solutions. Moreover, the second set of problem statements are being developed 
in collaboration with various Ministries/Departments . Meetings with various 
ministries, state governments and public institutions such as the Dept. of 
Commerce, Ministry of Education, Telangana Govt., UIDAI and ISRO are 
ongoing and in the process of problem statement identification. 
 The IndiaAI Startup Financing Pillar envisions for providing support to AI startups 
at all stages. The IndiaAI Mission in collaboration with Station F (Paris, France) 
and HEC Paris, had announced an ambitious acceleration Programme for Indian 
AI startups. This Programme will support 10 Indian AI startups in scaling globally 
by leveraging the European market’s vast opportunities. 
 Under the Safe and Trusted Pillar of the IndiaAI Mission, Eight Responsible AI 
Projects have been selected to address the need for robust guardrails to en sure 
the responsible development, deployment, and adoption of AI technologies. The 
projects cover a range of critical themes, including Machine Unlearning, Synthetic 
Data Generation, AI Bias Mitigation, Ethical AI Frameworks, Privacy -Enhancing 
Tools, Expla inable AI, AI Governance Testing, and Algorithm Auditing Tools. 
Moreover, IndiaAI also launched the 2nd EoI for Safe & Trusted AI Projects, 
inviting organizations to submit proposals on key themes, including Watermarking 
and Labelling, Ethical AI Framework s, AI Risk Assessment & Management, 
Stress Testing Tools, and Deepfake Detection Tools. 
 IndiaAI, IBD under the Digital India Corporation, has signed a Memorandum of 
Understanding (MoU) with Microsoft in January 2025 to drive the adoption and 
development of  artificial intelligence (AI) in India. This strategic partnership is 
aligned with the core objectives of India AI Mission. This collaboration aims to 
train 500,000 individuals, including students, educators, developers, government 
officials, and women ent repreneurs, by 2026. Microsoft under this collaboration 
will also establish "AI Catalysts - Centre of Excellence”, to promote rural AI 
innovation in Tier 2 and Tier 3 cities and equip 100,000 AI innovators and 
developers through hackathons, community buildi ng. Additionally, Microsoft will 
also set up AI Productivity Labs in 20 National Skill Training Institutes 
(NSTIs)/NIELIT centres across 10 states to train 20,000 educators and empower 
100,000 students with foundational AI courses in 200 Industrial Trainin g Institutes 
(ITIs). 
 National e -Governance Division (NeGD), MeitY in collaboration with industry 
partners (Intel & Meta), has launched ‘YUVAi: Youth for Unnati and Vikas with 
AI’- A National Programmeme for School Students with an objective of enabling 
school students from classes 8th to 12th with AI tech and social skills in an 
inclusive manner. A total of 1200+ students were oriented on the basics of AI and 
the top 200 students were shortlisted. Further, in next phase of the 
Programmeme MeitY along with A ll-India Council for Technical Education 
(AICTE) targets to empower 100,000 students and young developers aged 18 -30 
across critical sectors such as healthcare, education, agriculture, smart cities, 

187 
 
and financial inclusion. Additionally, this initiative wi ll also include the 
establishment of a Gen AI Resource Hub with courses, case studies, and open 
datasets; an LLM for Young Developers Course designed by Meta; and Master 
Training Activation Workshops to introduce participants to foundational AI 
concepts”. 
 
186. To a suggestion that Ministries/departments have a Technology Office/Cell under 
their purview to deal with AI and a separate provision and budget for the usage of AI 
and its applications, the Ministry submitted that: 
 “In March 2024, the Union Cabinet of India approved the IndiaAI Mission, 
marking a significant milestone in the country's technological and economic 
development. This ambitious initiative is designed as a sector and state agnostic 
national mission, emphasizing the transformative potential of artificial intelligence 
(AI) across various domains. The IndiaAI Mission aims to harness the power of AI 
to drive innovation, improve governance, and enhance the quality of life for all 
citizens, positioning India as a global leader in the AI landscape. 
The IndiaAI mission will establish a comprehensive ecosystem catalyzing AI 
innovation through strategic Programmes and partnerships across the public and 
private sectors. By democratizing computing access, improving data q uality, 
developing indigenous AI capabilities, attracting top AI talent, enabling industry 
collaboration, providing startup risk capital, ensuring socially impactful AI projects 
and bolstering ethical AI, it will drive responsible, inclusive growth of Indi a's AI 
ecosystem. 
MeitY has already placed Chief AI and Data Officers in three ministries: the 
Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare, the Ministry of Education, and the 
Ministry of Women and Child Development, for a period of two years. This 
initiative aims to provide professional AI leadership and support to these 
ministries and departments, presenting an integrated view of citizen service 
delivery and driving inter -ministerial coordination and synergy in matters related 
to advanced AI and digital technologies. 
Additionally, dedicated AI Curation Units (DMU) will be set up within government  
ministries/departments and a maximum of one data scientist and two data 
analysts will be provided as data fellows to augment data capacity within 50 
Ministries/Departments. This will help build capacity within line ministries and 
departments to identify and leverage data for research and innovation. 
The IndiaAI Application Development Initiative (IADI)  aims to develop, scale 
and promote the adoption of impactful 25 AI solutions with the potential for 
catalyzing large -scale socio -economic transformation. This initiative aims to 

188 
 
address these issues by creating a sector -agnostic framework to support the 
scaling and adoption of AI solutions across different regions and populations. 
IADI focusses to source problem statements from various governmental sources 
to identify and scale AI solutions, ultimately promoting widespread adoption and 
achieving large-scale social impact. 
Further, iGOT -AI model has been launched under the Mission Karmayogi, an 
advanced AI -powered personalized content recommendation system developed 
to enhance the learning experience for government officials on the iGOT 
platform. This model leverages user profile data, consumption data for different 
level, Competency mapping, capacity building plans) data and AI -driven 
technology to recommend interactive learning courses based on identified skill 
gaps and professional needs. Currently 1,800+ capacity building courses are 
available on the iGOT Karmayogi platform that have been developed in 
collaboration with over 150 ecosystem partners from the public, private, and 
philanthropic sectors. 
Additionally, MeitY has designed an AI Competency Framewo rk to establish 
standardized AI competencies, guiding educational institutions and industries in 
developing necessary skills for the AI workforce. This report highlights the need 
for a competency framework to equip public sector officials in India with the  
knowledge and skills necessary to effectively engage with AI technologies”. 
187. When asked whether Government of India was considering collaborating with any 
private universities, on the lines of IITs, which may have NAC approval credit ratings for 
development of different facets of AI in India, the Committee was apprised as: 
 “The Government of India has collaborated with IITs and NAC -accredited 
institutions through various initiatives under the IndiaAI Mission. Key initiatives 
include: 
• IndiaAI FutureSkills Programmeme: 
a) Under the IndiaAI Future Skills initiative, AI education is being expanded 
across undergraduate, postgraduate, and Ph.D. Programmes. IndiaAI 
Fellowships are awarded to students pursuing relevant undergraduate and 
postgraduate Programmes at Private or Centrally Funded Technical Institutes 
(CFTIs) recognized by AICTE, NBA, NAAC, or UGC. So far, 150 undergraduate 
students, 48 postgraduate students, and 3 PhD scholars have been selected for 
the fellowship.  
b) Additionally, IndiaAI has set up Data Labs at NIELIT’s Delhi centre and 
ICIT, Nagaland, with plans to establish 27 more labs in collaboration with NIELIT 
across Tier 2 and Tier 3 cities. 

189 
 
• IndiaAI Safety Institute:  
a) The IndiaAI Safety Institute has been launched under the Safe and 
Trusted Pillar of the IndiaAI Mission to address AI risks & Safety Challenges. The 
Institute, incubated by IndiaAI Mission, will be set up on a hub and spoke model 
with various research and academic institutions and private sector partners 
joining the hub and taking up projects under the Safe and Trusted Pillar of IndiaAI 
Mission.  
b) To support this objective, the ‘Safe & Trusted AI’ pillar under the IndiaAI 
Mission has selected eight projects in its first round of Expressions of Interest 
(EoI) across critical areas as mentioned below: 
THEME PROJECT TITLE ORGANISATION(S) 
Machine 
Unlearning 
Machine Unlearning in 
Generative Foundation 
Models 
IIT Jodhpur 
Synthetic 
Data 
Generation 
Design and 
Development of Method 
for Generating Synthetic 
Data for Mitigating Bias 
in Datasets and 
Framework for 
Mitigating Bias in ML 
Pipeline for Responsible 
AI 
IIT Roorkee 
AI Bias 
Mitigation 
Development of 
Responsible Artificial 
Intelligence for Bias 
Mitigation in Healthcare 
Systems 
NIT Raipur 
Explainable 
AI 
Framework 
Enabling Explainable 
and Privacy Preserving 
AI for Security 
DIAT Pune, Mindgraph Technology 
Pvt. Ltd. 
Privacy 
Enhancing 
Tools 
Robust Privacy-
Preserving Machine 
Learning Models 
IIT Delhi, IIT Dharwad, IIIT Delhi, 
TEC 
Explainable 
AI 
Nishpaksh: Tools for 
Assessing Fairness of 
IIIT Delhi, TEC 

190 
 
AI Model 
AI 
Governance 
Testing 
Track-LLM, 
Transparency, Risk 
Assessment, Context & 
Knowledge for LLMs 
Amrita Vishwa Vidyapeetham, TEC 
Algorithm 
Auditing 
Tools 
ParakhAI - An open-
source framework and 
toolkit for Participatory 
Algorithmic Auditing 
Civic Data Labs 
c) The 2nd round of EOI, which is currently ongoing and has received 420 
applications (including from IITs and other academic institutions), includes 
themes such as: 
 Watermarking and Labelling 
 Ethical AI Frameworks 
 AI Risk Assessment & Management 
 Stress Testing Tools 
 Deepfake Detection Tools 
• IndiaAI Innovation Challenge:  
a) The Innovation Challenge under the IndiaAI Application Development 
Initiative is open to Indian innovators, st artups, non -profits, students, 
academic/R&D organizations, and companies. The first challenge was launched 
in August 2024 with 14 problem statements focussed on AI applications in critical 
sectors. A total of 900 applications were received, with 30 teams q ualifying for 
stage 2. The top 3 among the 30 teams will qualify for the final round, and the 
winners will receive up to INR 1 Crore as an award and the opportunity to deploy 
their solutions at a national scale. 
b) IndiaAI CyberGuard AI Hackathon: An AI Ha ckathon launched in 
partnership with the Indian Cybercrime Coordination Centre (I4C) to create AI -
driven solutions for cybersecurity has been launched on 16th October 2024. A 
total of 263 responses were received. Top 20 qualifying teams recently 
participated in a 3 days physical hackathon. Final selection is underway. 
• Foundation Models:  
a) IndiaAI Innovation Centre (IAIC) has launched a Call for Proposals inviting 
proposals from startups, researchers, and entrepreneurs to collaborate on 
building state -of-the-art foundational AI models trained on Indian datasets. The 

191 
 
initiative aims to establ ish indigenous AI models that align with global standards 
while addressing unique challenges and opportunities within the Indian context.  
b) IndiaAI Mission has received a total of 67 proposals till 15th February 2025 
aimed at building India's foundation models, with contributions from both 
established startups and new teams of researchers & academia. 22 are focussed 
on Large Language Models (LLMs) & Large Multimodal Models (LMMs), while 
the remaining 45 are centreed on domain -specific models (SLMs). The m ajority 
of SLMs target key sectors such as healthcare, education, and financial 
services”. 
188. About the level of investment in Al development and supporting IT & electronics 
hardware/lT-TeS infrastructure required in lndia for competing at Global level and 
whether the Ministry saw any major challenges lndia could face, especially in rural 
areas, the Ministry submitted: 
 “India's global competition in AI is not just an economic opportunity but a strategic 
imperative. With the increasing concentration of AI systems (like, foundation 
models) and infrastructure (like, compute resources) in a few countries, it 
becomes important for India to position itself strongly in the global supply chain, 
rather being passive consumers of AI developed elsewhere. With a vast 
technological talent pool, a thriving entrepreneurial ecosystem, and unique 
societal challenges, India has both the capability and responsibility to develop AI 
solutions that cater to domestic needs while fostering inclusive models for global 
adoption. Moreover, addressing India's complex and multi -dimensional economic 
and social challenges can create scalable solutions that benefit other emerging 
and developing economies. 
To establish itself as a global leader in the digital economy, India is making 
significant investments in AI development, IT & electronics hardware, and IT -
enabled services (IT-ITeS) infrastructure.  
Recognising the transformative potential of AI and advanced digital technologies, 
India is implementing a multi -pronged strategy that include s financial 
investments, policy support, and public-private partnerships. 
 Strengthening IT-ITeS Infrastructure in Rural and Urban Areas: 
 Data Centre Expansion:  India is witnessing rapid expansion in data 
centre infrastructure, with investments from global  tech giants and Indian firms to 
meet the growing demand for AI and cloud computing. India's data centre 
expansion is driven by government policies and growing demand for AI and cloud 
computing. The Draft Data Centre Policy, 2020, aims to simplify clearanc es and 
encourage foreign investments. Additionally, the Budget 2025 includes initiatives 
to enhance connectivity, strengthen data security, and provide incentives for 
green technology and AI-driven data centres. 

192 
 
 5G and Digital Connectivity:  The rollout of 5G services and BharatNet 
expansion is enhancing connectivity, ensuring high-speed internet access even in 
rural areas to support AI -driven applications. The Government is expanding 
BharatNet Phase -III and launching initiatives like PM -WANI for public Wi -Fi 
hotspots to bridge the rural -urban digital gap. As of July 2024, PM -WANI has 
deployed over 2,07,642 public Wi -Fi hotspots across India. The scheme also 
allows local entrepreneurs to set up Public Data Offices (PDOs) without licenses, 
providing affordable internet access. 
 Digital Public Infrastructure (DPI):  India’s leadership in DPI (e.g. UPI, 
Aadhaar, ONDC, and India Stack) is creating a strong digital foundation for AI -
powered governance and economic activities. 
 Skilling and Workforce Development:  Programmemes such as 
FutureSkills Prime and Skill India Digital Hub are upskilling rural youth in AI, cloud 
computing, and emerging technologies: 
o FutureSkills PRIME:  MeitY in collaboration with IT/ITeS Sector Skills 
Council-NASSCOM has initiated a Programmeme titled FutureSkills PRIME 
(Programmeme for Re -skilling/Up-skilling of IT Manpower for Employability). 
FutureSkills PRIME is an ‘aggregator of aggregators’ platform comprising various 
online skills providers to provide digital skills training on a national scale in online 
mode. The Programmeme is aimed at re-skilling/ up-skilling of IT professionals in 
10 new/emerging technologies namely Artificial Intelligence, Big Data Analytics, 
Robotic Process Automation, Additive Manufacturing/ 3D Printing, Cloud 
Computing, Social & Mobile, Cyber Security, Augmented/Virtual Reality, Internet 
of Things and Blockchain. Besides the online mode, 40 centres of CDAC and 
NIELIT are also implementing the Blended Learning mode, Training of Trainers, 
and Government Official training Programmemes.  
Under the Programmeme, a total of 19.81 lakh+ candidates have signed -up on 
the portal, and 8.55 lakh candidates have enrolled in various courses, out of 
which 3.80 lakh candidates have completed their course(s). Further, the 
Resource Centres (Lead/ Co -Lead Centres), have so far trained 11,492 
Government Officials and 2,367 Trainers. 
o Pradhan Mantri Kaushal Vikas Yojana (PMKVY): Ministry of Skill 
Development and Entrepreneurship (MSDE) is implementing its flagship scheme 
Pradhan Mantri K aushal Vikas Yojana (PMKVY) since 2015 to impart skill 
development training through Short -Term Training (STT) and up -skilling and re -
skilling through Recognition of Prior Learning (RPL). PMKVY 4.0 has been 
designed as a Demand -Driven scheme to skill the ca ndidates as per regional 
demand of skilled workforce in the industry and market. Further, the scheme also 
focusses on new age and emerging courses such as Drone, Artificial Intelligence 
(AI), etc. The details of candidates trained in the job role related t o Artificial 
Intelligence (AI) are placed at Annexure II. 

193 
 
o Skill India Digital Hub (SIDH): Ministry of Skill Development and 
Entrepreneurship (MSDE) has launched Skill India Digital Hub (SIDH) platform, a 
comprehensive and accessible platform for skill enha ncement, offering industry -
relevant skill courses, job opportunities, and entrepreneurship support to youth of 
the country from rural and urban areas. SIDH leverages advanced AI and 
machine learning techniques to enhance the assessment of candidate skills and 
recommend relevant courses such as Skill Competency Extractor Engine, 
Recommendation Engine etc. This AI/ML -driven approach ensures the platform 
provides tailored skill assessments and personalized learning pathways, 
supporting both candidates in enhancing their competencies and organizations in 
identifying top talent. 
SIDH offers an extensive array of AI and ML courses, ranging from foundational 
Programmes like 'Fundamentals of Azure AI Speech' and 'Machine Learning', to 
specialized offerings such as ' Google Cloud Generative AI' and 'AI Strategy to 
Create Business Value in Healthcare', to cater to varying levels of expertise and 
application, enabling participants to stay at the forefront of AI and ML 
technology”. 
189. Outlining the roadmap of the Ministry in handling the algorithmic bias, which is 
creating a technological gap in the society and giving an edge to a particular section of 
people who have access to technological developments , t he Mi nistry furnished the 
following: 
 “The Ministry is addressing algorithmic bias by investing in indigenous AI 
governance tools, frameworks, and guidelinesthat are contextualised to Indian 
socio-economic realities and reflect its unique challenges and opportunities . To 
support this objective,  the ‘ Safe & Trusted’  AI pillar under the IndiaAI Mission 
has selected eight projects under the first EOI round across eight critical themes 
to promote Responsible AI development and use across sectors. These include 
AI Bias Mitigation , Machine Unlearning,  Synthetic Data Generation, Ethical AI 
Frameworks, Privacy-Enhancing Tools, Explainable AI, AI Governance Testing, 
and Algorithm Auditing Tools. 
Further IndiaAI has launched the 2nd round of Expression of Interest (EoI) across 
key themes, including Waterma rking and Labelling, Ethical AI Frameworks, AI 
Risk Assessment & Management, Stress Testing Tools, and Deep fake Detection 
Tools.  
The Government of India has also announced the establishment of AI Safety 
Institute to enable researchers, developers and other stakeholders to develop 

194 
 
tools, frameworks and processes to encourage the adoption of AI in a responsible 
manner with the princip les of safety, security, transparency, and privacy 
embedded in the design of AI technology”. 
190. When asked to explain the steps taken by the Ministry to take India AI Mission to 
Tier 2 and Tier 3 cities and the developments thereafter, the following submissions were 
made: 
 “The Government of India has approved the IndiaAI Mission on 7 th March 2024. 
The Mission aims to bolster India's global leadership in AI, foster technological 
self-reliance, ensure ethical and responsible AI deployment, and democratize the 
benefits of AI across all strata of society. The IndiaAI FutureSkills pillar of the 
IndiaAI Missionaims to mitigate barriers to entry into AI Programmes by focussing 
on all levels of higher education in AI  and will coordinate with existing efforts in 
the area of skilling. IndiaAI Fellowship is being offered toB.Tech and M.Tech 
students of all the All -India Council for Technical Education (AICTE) recognized 
engineering institutions from across the country. Further, top NIRF ranked 
research institutes are being approached to intake new PhD scholars under 
IndiaAI PhD fellowship.  
Additionally, Under the IndiaAI FutureSkills, IndiaAI Data Labs  are being setup 
as infrastructure in Tier 2 and Tier 3 cities across India, to impart foundational -
level courses in Data and AI such as Annotation, Data Cleaning, Data Analytics, 
etc.      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

195 
 
 
CHAPTER-VI 
 
Other Related Issues 
 
191. According to media reports, International Business Machines Corporation (IBM),  
opines “AI hallucination is a phenomenon wherein a large language model (LLM) – often 
a generative AI Chabot or computer vision tool – perceives patterns or objects that are 
non-existent or imperceptible to human observers, creating outputs that are nonse nsical 
or altogether inaccurate. When the Ministry was asked to comment on it in the context of 
Indian Education System and AI, the submission made was as under: 
 “Presently, we have not seen large widespread adoption of Gen AI by the Indian 
Education system, formally. However there have been instances of GenAI being 
used by students for assistance in completing assignments or by teachers for 
creating course content.  In such cases, AI hallucinations pose the following 
challenges -  
 Misinformation in Learning : AI hallucinations can lead to the creation of 
inaccurate educational content, potentially misinforming students. 
 Bias and Inequality : Hallucinations stemming from biased training data may 
enforce stereotypes in students or not consider marginalized perspectives. 
 Overreliance on AI – Students and teachers may become overly reliant on AI 
tools, potentially neglecting critical thinking and fact-checking”.  
 
192. When asked to elaborate on the concept of ‘Harmonization of Machine Readable 
Files’ in AI in context of Human Intelligence, the Ministry submitted: 
 
 “Harmonization of Machine -Readable Files in AI in the Context of Human 
Intelligence’ includes process of standar dizing and aligning AI datasets to check 
for compatibility, interoperability, and potential for meaningful insights generation 
that may align with human decision-making and reasoning. Key aspects include, 
 Standardization: Structuring data into uniform formats such that AI 
systems can process and analyze it efficiently 
 Interoperability: To enable AI models to integrate data from diverse 
sources (e.g., different government agencies, research institutions, and 
industries) while maintaining consistency 
 Human-AI Alignment : Providing for AI -generated insights that are 
interpretable, relevant, and useful for human decision-makers 
 Bias Mitigation : Harmonizing data such that inconsistencies and biases 
are reduced 

196 
 
 Regulatory Compliance : Aligning data formats with AI governance 
frameworks to enable transparency, accountability, and responsible AI 
deployment. 
These aspects can enable AI to function more effectively alongside human 
intelligence, such that those AI systems may support informed decision-making in 
a way that enhances human intelligence”. 
193. Regarding the usage of AI in improving the Electoral Process of the Country, the 
Ministry stated: 
 
 “India is actively exploring and implementing AI to enhance its electoral 
processes. Political parties in India have adop ted AI technologies to enhance 
their efforts in recent electoral campaigns. In the 2024 general elections, AI was 
utilized for: 
 Personalized Voter Outreach : AI tools helped in tailoring messages to 
different voter segments, improving engagement and communication through AI-
powered robocalls, personalised whatsapp videos from party leaders etc. 
 Real-Time Speech Translation:  Use of AI -powered translation tool 
Bhashini facilitated real-time translation of political speeches, enabling leaders to 
reach a broader audience across diverse linguistic groups. 
To monitor the use of AI in electoral processes, and address potential risks and 
challenges associated with deep fakes  and misinformation,  the Election 
Commission of India (ECI) has taken significant steps  to maintain public trust and 
electoral integrity, 
 AI Ethics in Campaigning:  In January 2025, the ECI issued an advisory 
mandating that all AI -generated content used in election campaigns be clearly 
labelled. This move aims to promote transparency and prev ent misinformation 
during elections.  
 AI-Powered Vote Counting:  The ECI has explored AI -driven solutions to 
improve the efficiency and accuracy of vote counting. For instance, during the 
Bihar Panchayat elections in 2021, the commission partnered with an A I firm to 
automate vote counting, enhancing the speed and reliability of the process”.  
 
194. Asked to comment if AI was a necessary evil,  the Ministry stated: 
 
 “AI, like any transformative technology, is a  powerful enabler  that can 
deliver tremendous socio-economic benefits  if deployed responsibly. It is not 
inherently evil, but rather a  tool whose impact depends on how it is designed, 
governed, and used. 

197 
 
AI plays a  critical role in solving complex challenges  that may be inefficient 
through conventional means. 
 In healthcare, AI -driven diagnostics and predictive models are improving early 
detection of diseases and enabling personalized treatment. 
 In agriculture, AI supports precision farming, reducing input costs and improving 
yields. 
 In governance, AI e nhances public service delivery through predictive analytics, 
improving responsiveness and efficiency. 
AI is also essential for India’s global competitiveness. As economies increasingly 
adopt AI across sectors, countries that do not invest in AI risk falli ng behind in 
productivity, innovation, and economic growth. 
For a country like India,  AI’s potential to democratize access  to services —
especially in  healthcare, education, and financial inclusion —makes it 
indispensable for bridging socio-economic divides. 
Despite the benefits, certain concerns related to AI are observed, particularly 
around bias, misinformation, data privacy, etc. 
 Large-scale AI deployment, if not governed properly, can exacerbate inequalities, 
reinforce biases, and create systemic risks. 
 The emergence of  deep fakes , algorithmic bias, and opaque decision -making 
systems has highlighted the riskier side of unregulated AI adoption. 
India’s Approach: Mitigating the Risks While Harnessing the Benefits 
Recognizing these dual aspects, the  IndiaAI Mission has embedded responsible 
AI governance at its core, particularly under the Safe & Trusted AI pillar. 
 Through this pillar, MeitY is actively fostering the development of  bias mitigation 
tools, explainability frameworks, privacy -enhancing technologies , and risk 
management frameworks  to ensure that AI solutions are transparent, 
accountable, and aligned with India’s constitutional values. 
The Digital Personal Data Protection Act (DPDP), 2023  has been enacted, along 
with the recently published DPDP Rules.  These provide a comprehensive 
framework for protecting personal data while fostering innovation by enabling the 
secure and responsible use of data in AI development.  
The IndiaAI Safety Institute is being set up to address AI risks & Safety 
Challenges. The Institute will be set up on a hub and spoke model with  various 
research and academic institutions, private sector partners joining the hub”. 
 
195. Asked to update the status of setting up of Data -Embassies to develop India as 
an AI centre and whether the Ministry of Commerce and Industry ha s been consulted in 
this regard, the Ministry submitted as: 

198 
 
 “A data embassy is a concept that involves storing copies of a nation's critical 
data or sensitive information in secure locations outside its borders. Data 
Embassies are cloud-based virtual data storage systems that act as a backup for 
crucial digital assets and critical infrastructure of a nation. They are typically 
hosted in a foreign jurisdiction but fully adhere to the sovereignty and laws of the 
host nat ion, retaining the same level of protection and immunity afforded to 
physical embassies. They act as offsite, cloud -based storage facilities that house 
a nation's critical digital assets and important public data. 
Discussions have been initiated with relev ant ministries including Ministry of 
Commerce and Industry for seeking inputs related to security, international 
collaboration etc”. 
196. About how different Ministries/Departments dealt with the challenges arisen by AI 
in regard to our cultural heritage and human values aspects , the following submission 
was made: 
 “The IndiaAI Mission was launched by MeitY on March 7th, 2024, with the 
mission aims to position India as a global leader in Artificial Intelligence (AI) by 
focussing on bolstering technological self -reliance, upholding the ethical and 
trusted deployment of AI, and democratising AI benefits across diverse socio -
economic and cultural groups. Under this mission: 
• The IndiaAI Safety  Institute has been launched under the Safe and 
Trusted Pillar of the IndiaAI Mission to address AI risks & Safety 
Challenges. The Institute, incubated by IndiaAI Mission, will be set up on a 
hub and spoke model with various research and academic instituti ons and 
private sector partners joining the hub and taking up projects under the 
Safe and Trusted Pillar of IndiaAI Mission. Under the Safe and Trusted 
pillar, the IndiaAI Mission has selected eight Responsible AI Projects 
against the first Expression of Interest (EoI).  
• IndiaAI launched the 2nd round of Expression of Interest (EoI) on 
December 14, 20204, inviting Indian Academic Institutes/ Organizations, 
Autonomous bodies, R&D Institutes/ Organizations, Startups and 
Companies. Themes covered under the 2nd EoI include: 
2) Watermarking & Labelling: Develop tools to authenticate AI -generated 
content, ensuring it’s traceable, secure, and free of harmful materials. 
3) Ethical AI Frameworks: Establish AI frameworks that align with global 
standards, ensuring AI respects human values and promotes fairness. 
4) AI Risk Assessment & Management: Create risk management tools 
and frameworks to enhance the safe deployment of AI in public 
services. 

199 
 
5) Stress Testing Tools: Create stress -testing tools to evaluate how AI 
models perform under extreme scenarios, detect vulnerabilities, and 
build trust in AI for critical applications. 
6) Deepfake Detection Tools: Create Deepfake Detection Tools to enable 
real-time identification and mitigation of deepfakes, preventing 
misinformation and harm f or a secure and trustworthy digital 
ecosystem”. 
 
197. Regarding developing edge data centres, the Ministry stated: 
 “As of now there is no proposal under consideration for setting up of edge data 
centre. Further, the decision for setting up of Data Centre at a particular location 
is decided by Data Centre developers depending upon their business viability and 
client requirements to ensure optimal operational efficiency and service delivery”. 
198. Considering that there was a great scope for technological development and AI 
innovation with  the help of quantum computing, the Committee sought to know the 
progress made and the readiness of the Ministries/Departments in this regard.   To this, 
the reply was: 
 “Government is implementing the National Quantum Mission approved by the 
Union Cabinet at an outlay of Rs. 6003.65 Crore for a period of eight years. 
Under the Mission, four Thematic Hubs (T -Hubs), each focussing on a specific 
domain of quantum technologies have been established.  
A Thematic Hub on Quantum Computing has been set up at IISc Bengaluru, 
focussing on advancing quantum computing research and applications. The key 
mandates of this Thematic Hub include: 
a. Technology Development 
b. Human Resource Development 
c. Entrepreneurship Development and Industry Collaboration 
d. International Collaborations  
Key progress highlights: 
i. The Quantum Computing T -Hub is driving the development of indigenous 
quantum hardware and software platforms, including AI -driven models to explore 
quantum-enhanced AI applications in sectors such as healthcare, finance, and 
national security. 
ii. Under Human Resource Development, the T -Hub is actively conducting 
training Programmes to build expertise in quantum computing. 

200 
 
iii. Collaboration with industry and international institutions is being fostered 
to enable knowledge exchange and workforce development 
The Department of Science and Technology (DST), through NQM, is actively 
engaging with stakeholders, including the Ministry of Electronics and IT (MeitY), 
Department of Telecommunications (DoT), and Defence Research and 
Development Organisation (DRDO), Department of Space (DoS) and Department 
of Atomic Energy (DAE), to assess and enhance readiness for quantum adoption. 
The NQM is committed to accelerating India's capabilities in quantum computing 
and ensuring that Ministries/Departments are well -equipped to harness its 
potential for technological innovation”. 
 
      ********* 
  

201 
 
PART-II 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS 
Introductory 
1. Artificial Intelligence (AI) is the science and engineering of making 
intelligent machines -- especially intelligent computer Programmemes -- to 
complement and supplement human intelligence and to expand the bounds of 
human potential. Al is dependent on the availability and quality of data  from 
which it is trained. It works by combining algorithms with large volumes of data, 
allowing it to automatically learn from patterns and attributes within that data. 
Creating large volumes of high -quality data is nec essary for optimal AI 
performance.  With a transformative impact across industries and sectors, AI 
can spark global innovation, enhance data -driven decision -making and boost 
progress towards Sustainable Development Goals. Amid rapid innovation and 
advancements in AI, there is growing recognition that while it provides 
opportunities for extraordinary growth and inclusive sustainable development, 
using AI responsibly may mitigate potential disruption and risks attached with it. 
Discussions of the risks are es pecially pertinent in relation to the role of AI in 
the spread of misinformation and its use in law enforcement or in the delivery of 
public services. 
  As AI training advances , its influence on economic and security spheres 
has led to it becoming a focal point in contemporary international relations. 
States with the financial and technical resources and capacity are prioritizing AI 
systems as a strategic objective. Meanwhile, technology companies wield 
significant influence and control over data, algorithm s and computational 
resources. Harnessing the benefits of AI systems while minimizing the risks and 
potential harms associated with it requires a collaborative effort among 
stakeholders as part of shared global responsibility. The rapid emergence of 
generative AI applications has further accelerated the push towards exploring 
adaptable governance models and mechanisms that evolve with technological 
progress. The detailed examination of the subject ‘Impact of emergence of 
Artificial Intelligence and related issues’ have found various aspects which have 
been brought out in the ensuing paragraphs. 
2. Given the horizontal, transversal and cross -sectoral nature of AI, it has the 
potential to affect almost all aspects of humanity. In order to mitigate the 
associated risks, they must be examined thro ugh multiple lenses to address  
issues, ranging from economic s to market -related issues, the social fabric, 
digital rights and inclusivity, in a comprehensive manner. As part of discussions 
on AI governance, the Committee ob serve that it is necessary to factor in the 
following dimensions: (a) the AI value chain and the socioeconomic and 
geopolitical impacts thereof, as some countries vie for technological dominance 

202 
 
while others risk being confined to serving as sources of dat a, cheap labour or 
raw materials; (b) the AI life cycle, taking into consideration the technical 
dimensions of AI development and deployment; (c) the broader macro risks and 
challenges associated with AI; (d) the diverse levels and avenues of impact of AI 
on different sectors and aspects of society, for example, precision agriculture 
intended to generate higher agricultural yields and lethal autonomous weapons 
systems introducing new threats to peace and security; and (e) governance, 
which must go hand in hand with the sustainable development opportunities. 
Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology (MeitY) 
3. Going by the vastness, to assess the impact of AI in each aspect of human 
life need ample data of research and development taking place in the arena of AI. 
The various impacts that have been observed are brought out by the Ministry of 
Electronics and Information Technology.  According to the Ministry, the National 
Strategy for Artificial Intelligence (NSAI) was published in June 2018 in order to 
develop an ecosystem for the research and adoption of Artificial Intelligence. 
The NSAI emphasized the potential of AI to solve social challenges faced by its 
citizens in areas such as agriculture, health, education, Smart Cities and 
Infrastructure and Smar t Mobility and Transportation etc. Subsequently, IndiaAI 
Mission was approved by Union Cabinet on 7th March 2024 with a total outlay of 
Rs. 10,371.92 Cr for a period of 5 years. The mission is driven by a vision to 
position India as a global leader in Artificial Intelligence by focussing on seven 
key pillars: 
i. IndiaAI Compute: The IndiaAI compute pillar envisions building a high -end 
scalable AI computing ecosystem comprising AI compute infrastructure of 
10,000 or more Graphics Processing Units (GPUs).  
ii. IndiaAI Innovation Centre (IAIC): The AI Innovation centre aims to develop 
and deploy indigenous Large Multimodal Models (LMMs) trained on India -
specific data. 
iii. IndiaAI Datasets Platform: The IndiaAI Datasets Platform (IDP) seeks to 
enhance access, quality, and utilization of public sector datasets to make 
them AI-ready. 
iv. IndiaAI Application Development Initiative: The IndiaAI Application 
Development Initiative aims to develop, scale, and promote the adoption of 
impactful AI solutions to effectively tackle significant problem statements. 
v. IndiaAI Future Skills: IndiaAI Future Skills pillar envisions augmenting the 
number of graduates, post -graduates and PhDs in AI domain. Further, it 
envisions setting up Data and AI Labs in Tier 2 and Tier 3 cities across 
India, to impart foundational-level courses in Data and AI. 
vi. IndiaAI Startup Financing: For providing support to AI startups at all 
stages.  

203 
 
vii. Safe & Trusted AI: This pillar enables the implementation of Responsible AI 
projects including the development of indigenous t ools and frameworks, 
self-assessment checklists for innovators, and other guidelines and 
governance frameworks. 
Further, to build AI use cases for large scale socio-economic transformation in 
such operational areas, IndiaAI launched the first Innovation Challenge in August 
2024 to address problem statements in five critical sectors, namely, Agriculture, 
Healthcare, Governance, Assistiv e technologies for learning disabilities, and 
Climate Change and disaster management for 13 problem statements. It was 
followed by at least five major AI related challenges. The Ministry of Electronics 
and Information Technology has submitted that India is consistently leveraging AI 
to drive economic growth, development, and technological innovation across 
critical sectors such as finance, industry, healthcare, agriculture, and education 
through active government support, public -private collaborations, and significant 
investments in research and development for cutting edge technologies.  AI is 
expected to add USD 967 billion to the Indian economy by 2035 and USD 450 –500 
billion to India’s GDP by 2025 —accounting for 10% of the country’s USD 5 trillion 
GDP tar get. The Committee opine that a  well-conceived AI governance system 
with appropriate incentives and guard rails that are commensurate for different AI 
systems and applications can advance ethical and human rights -based 
governance while maximizing the posit ive impact of the technology on society 
and mitigating the risks thereof. The Committee desire that the Ministry may 
ensure that effective AI governance be delivered through an ecosystem of critical 
functions, not limited to technology dev elopment and consensus-building. It may 
encourage research and analysis as well as start-ups, stakeholder engagement 
and coordination, standard - and norm -setting, capacity -building, stringent  
monitoring, transparency and accountability. 
4. In order t o promote the adoption of AI and to develop a robust, safe and 
trusted AI innovation ecosystem in the Country, MeitY has undertaken several 
initiatives. IndiaAI Mission is a comprehensive Programmeme for leveraging 
transformative technologies to foster inc lusion, innovation and adoption for 
social impact as well as to make India a global leader in the Al space and ensure 
responsible and transformational use of Al for All. It aims to catalyze the AI 
innovation ecosystem in the Country and help ensure the glo bal 
competitiveness of India’s AI startups, researchers and industry. The strategy is 
to bridge the gaps in the existing AI ecosystem viz -a-viz Compute infrastructure, 
Data, AI financing, Research and Innovation, target ted Skilling, developing 
foundational AI models, sector-specific AI projects and institutional capacity for 
Data to maximize the potential of AI to advance India's progress. IndiaAI Mission 
had already: a)  Established national compute power exceeding 34,000 GPUs ; b) 
Initiated 4 foundation mod els from SARVAM AI , Soket AI, Gnani AI and Gan AI;  
c) Selected 30 AI solutions in the domain of Healthcare, Agriculture, 

204 
 
Governance, Assistive Learning Technologies and Climate & Disaster 
Management; d) Building 8 so lutions for Safe and Trusted AI;  e) Launched AI 
Safety Institute ; f) Launched AIKosh the unified datasets platform with more 
than 1000 datasets and 200 models already available on the platform ; g) 200+ 
Fellowships granted to UG, PG and PhD scholars ; and h) Establishing 27 Data 
and AI Labs in Tier 2 and Tier 3 cities, expanding opportunities for AI education 
and innovation beyond major urban centres. Taking note of these achievements 
the Committee hope that given the vastness of the Country both in terms of size 
and population, lot more wi ll be done in order to keep pace with the 
advancements that are taking place around the world.  
 
5. The IndiaAI Mission focusses on seven foundational pillars including the 
IndiaAI Foundation Models pillar. This pillar underscores the importance of 
building India’s own Large Multimodal Models (LMMs) trained on Indian datasets 
and languages, to ensure sovereign capability and global competitiveness in 
generative AI. Twelve startups have been selected to develop India’s foundation 
models including  Sarvam AI, So ket AI, Gnani AI, and Gan AI, Avatar AI, IIT 
Bombay Consortium (BharatGen), GenLoop, Zentieq, Intellihealth, Shodh AI, 
Fractal Analytics Ltd. and Tech Mahindra ’s ‘Project Indus’  and ‘Model Garden’ . 
These models are being developed and deployed on data cent res hosted within 
India. Additionally, the IndiaAI Compute pillar under its mission is focussing on 
creating a high -end, scalable AI computing ecosystem to deliver Compute -as-a-
Service for India’s rapidly growing AI startups and research community. 38,231 
GPUs through 14 empanelled vendors, over 3 rounds of empanelment, are being 
made accessible at subsidized rates, facilitating increased accessibility and 
affordability for tech developers through data centres hosted in India. Under the 
mission, a RFP has a lso been published on 31st October 2025 for setting up a 
sovereign compute at Shastri Park, NIC Data centre with a compute power of 1.1 
Exa Flops. The RFP presently is on an evaluation stage. A government -
controlled GPU cluster is also being developed whic h will house 3,000 next -
generation GPUs, cater primarily to sovereign and strategic requirements. 
Taking note of the above submissions the Committee wish to be apprised of the 
progress made in this regard  so as to speed up development of next -generation 
GPUs. 
 
6. During the course of examination of the Subject, the Committee found that 
implementing AI at scale faces three fundamental barriers: compute, grassroots -
level skills, and datasets. In the Indian context, data accessibility and availability 
are perceiv ed as the most  significant challenge. In order to address these 
issues, the Department is executing a structured, multi -pronged approach. For 
Unlocking Data Accessibility, the Ministry is unlocking high -value datasets 
through AIKosh to solve the problem of data silos. T his initiative makes over 

205 
 
10,000 datasets accessible to the public. In order to ensure high usability, these 
datasets utilize standardized metadata. The platform employs API -based 
ingestion mechanisms, which significantly lowers the entry barriers for star tups, 
researchers, and industry players to innovate. For ensuring Data Quality and 
Usability, the Ministry submitted that they have a strong emphasis on "gold -
standard" data generation to ensure the data is clean and actionable. In respect 
of Healthcare In itiatives, the Ministry has launched the INDEED Programme in 
collaboration with the Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR) to create high -
quality, validated medical datasets. Further, large -scale annotation partnerships 
have been formed with Bhashini to  ensure that diverse linguistic data is 
prepared for AI training. Resource Support is being given by AIKosh which 
provides specific tools and resources dedicated to effective data management, 
ensuring that data pipelines remain robust and efficient. In ord er to build a 
robust and trusted data foundation, MeitY has developed Meta Data and Data 
Standard (MDDS) for  various sectors. Going by the above  submissions, the 
Committee feel that the Ministry may overcome the fundamental barriers such as 
compute, grassr oot level skills and datasets, i n order to build a scalable and 
inclusive AI ecosystem, MDDS for different sectors and the Committee hope that 
the intended objectives are achieved.  
 
7. While examining the issue of Deepfake, the Committee sought clarifications 
regarding how Deep -fakes were defined and what were the mechanisms to 
regulate these so as to minimize social defamation and mental trauma that occur 
especially to women. The Committee are informed that MeitY, in exercise of the 
powers conferred under th e Information Technology Act, 2000 issued the 
Information Technology (Intermediary Guidelines and Digital Media Ethics Code) 
Rules, 2021 (IT Rules, 2021) on 25th February 2021 in supersession of the 
erstwhile Information Technology (Intermediary Guidelines ) Rules, 2011, which 
were subsequently amended on 28th October 2022, 6th April 2023 and 22nd 
October 2025 and are further evolving. The IT Act, read with the rules made 
thereunder, is a technology-neutral legislation that does not distinguish between 
computer resources in general and those that use Artificial Intelligence or any 
other emerging technologies. Accordingly, the provisions of the IT Act apply 
uniformly to all computer resources, including those leveraging AI or similar 
technologies. The IT Act a nd the IT Rules, 2021, together, have put in place a 
stringent framework to prevent the hosting or transmission of unlawful and 
harmful content in the digital space and impose clear obligations on 
intermediaries, including social media intermediaries, to e nsure accountability. 
Its provisions require intermediaries to publish user -facing rules/terms, privacy 
policy and user agreement, implements grievance redressal mechanisms, and 
take expeditious action on unlawful content as per the provisions of law. In this 
context, the IT Rules, 2021 mandate intermediaries to observe due diligence and 

206 
 
not to host or transmit unlawful information, whether generated by them or by 
users, including information that is obscene, pornographic, invasive of 
another’s privacy, insulting or harassing on th e basis of gender, racially or 
ethnically objectionable, or promoting hate or violence, or impersonates another 
person, or is harmful to child, or deceives or misleads the addressee about the 
origin of the message or knowingly and intentionally communicate s any 
misinformation or information which is patently false and untrue or misleading 
in nature, or violates any law for the time being in force. The IT Rules, 2021 
further require intermediaries to periodically inform their users, at least once 
every year,  that in case of non -compliance with the rules and regulations, 
privacy policy or user agreement for access or usage of the computer resource 
of such intermediary, it has the right to terminate access or usage rights 
immediately or remove non -compliant information or both, as the case may be. 
The IT Rules, 2021 have a clear objective of enhancing online safety of users, 
particularly women and  children by empowering them to exercise their rights 
towards safety, trust and modesty by enabling them to report grievances against 
various online harms and offences which are violative of any extant law and 
seek time -bound redressal from the intermediaries including social media 
intermediaries concerned whose computer resources are misused for hosting, 
publishing or sharing, uploading etc. or making viral any unlawful information or 
content including any act which is defamatory and obscene in nature. 
Recognising the increasing availability of generative AI tools and the resulting 
proliferation of synthetically generate d information (SGI) (commonly known as 
deepfakes), as well as the potential misuse of such technologies to create or 
generate SGI of obscene, vulgar, sexually explicit nature, including CSEAM, 
which may cause user harm, spread misinformation, manipulate el ections, or 
enable impersonation of individuals, MeitY has prepared draft amendments to 
the IT Rules, 2021. The draft aims to strengthen due diligence obligations for 
intermediaries, particularly social media intermediaries (SMIs) and significant 
social me dia intermediaries (SSMIs), as well as for platforms that enable the 
creation or modification of synthetically generated content. The strengthened 
due diligence framework envisages that intermediaries offering computer 
resources enabling the creation or di ssemination of such content shall deploy 
reasonable and appropriate technical measures, including automated tools, and 
adopt safeguards such as prominent labelling/disclosure of synthetically 
generated information and embedding of metadata/provenance mecha nisms, to 
the extent technically feasible, to ensure accountability and user safety. The 
Ministry has invited feedback on the draft amendments to the IT Rules, 2021. 
Further, as per the Ministry, the proposed SGI regulatory framework is 
envisaged to carefu lly provide exceptions so that routine good -faith 
editing/enhancement, accessibility improvements, and educational/training 
content are not treated as SGI, provided it does not materially distort or 
misrepresent the content or create false records. This en sures safeguards 

207 
 
against misuse while supporting innovation and creativity. The Committee urge 
the Ministry to expedite the implementation of these draft Rules and apprise the 
Committee of the same. 
 
8. According to the Ministry, an Advisory Group, chaired by  the Principal 
Scientific Advisor, was constituted to undertake the development of an ‘AI for 
India-Specific Regulatory Framework'. Under the guidance of the Advisory 
Group, a Sub  Committee on ‘AI Governance and Guidelines Development’ was 
constituted to provide actionable recommendations for AI governance in India. 
The Subcommittee's report on AI Governance, is published for public 
consultation, which aims to guide the development of a trust  worthy and 
accountable AI ecosystem in India. The Committee are i nformed that the India AI 
Governance Guidelines, released on 5 November 2025,was to establish a 
comprehensive national framework to ensure the safe, responsible, and 
inclusive development of AI across sectors. The guideline was to propose a 
robust governan ce framework to foster cutting -edge innovation, and safely 
develop and deploy AI for all while mitigating risks to individuals and society. 
The framework comprises four key components namely ,  i) Seven guiding 
principles (Sutras)  for ethical and responsibl e AI;  ii) Key recommendations 
across six pillars of AI governance; iii) An action plan mapped to short, medium, 
and long -term timelines ; and iv)  Practical guidelines for industry, developers, 
and regulators to ensure transparent and accountable AI deployme nt. At the 
core of the framework lie seven guiding principles (Sutras) which were Trust, 
People First, Innovation over Restraint, Fairness & Equity, Accountability, 
Understandable by Design and Safety, Resilience & Sustainability. They are 
designed to be t echnology agnostic and applicable across all sectors. These 
principles emphasize human -centric development, ethical use, and the 
prevention of harms such as deepfakes, bias, misinformation, and 
discrimination. The guidelines organize recommendations across  six 
governance pillars: Infrastructure expansion, capacity building, policy and 
regulation, risk mitigation, accountability, and institutional oversight. These are 
envisioned as a foundational reference for policymakers, researchers, and 
industry to foste r greater national and international cooperation for safe, 
responsible, and inclusive AI adoption. The Committee would like to be apprised 
of the finality of the report submitted by the Sub Committee to ensure 
transparency and accountable AI for India specific Regulatory Framework.  
 
 
 

208 
 
9. The Committee are informed that the IndiaAI IDP Challenge, under the 
IndiaAI Mission of MeitY, is a key step towards deploying AI -driven intelligent 
document processing to enhance access to public service delivery. Through this 
initiative, IndiaAI is catalysing solutions that can handle large volumes of multi -
format, low-quality and multi -lingual documents using advanced OCR and NLP, 
and convert them into structured, machine -readable outputs for governance 
work flows. This i s directly aligned with the IndiaAI objectives of strengthening 
data-driven decision -making and improving the efficiency, accuracy and 
transparency of citizen -facing services. According to MEITY, an evaluation  
Committee comprising senior representatives fr om IndiaAI, Ministry of Finance, 
Union Public Service Commission, National e -Governance Division, Software 
Technology Parks of India and Ministry of Electronics and Information 
Technology, completed the Stage 1 evaluation of the reports shared by the 
teams as part of their application process and shortlisted top 10 teams for Stage 
2 evaluation process. The shortlisted teams, post the execution of the Non-
Disclosure Agreements ( NDAs) received encrypted access to representative 
public-sector document datasets  to test their solution performance. The 
shortlisted teams were given 17 days to process the datasets and submit the 
outputs in the standardised template by 10 February 2026. To conclude Stage 2, 
the teams will present and demonstrate their solutions’ capa bilities to the 
Evaluation Committee, showcasing use cases such as automated extraction, 
classification and validation of fields from text -heavy records, forms and 
registers for potential pilot deployment with partner public institutions. In this 
regard the Committee would like to be apprised of the outcome of the evaluation 
process. 
 
10. As regards AI readiness in the Country, particularly with regard to software 
and hardware infrastructure’, the role of India AI mission in this regard and steps 
taken to devel op State -Level data centres as full -fledged data centres, in 
addition to data centres located in Delhi, the Committee are informed that under 
the IndiaAI mission, MeitY has implemented various initiatives with regards to 
software and hardware infrastructur e that will act as an enabler of socio -
economic development. MeitY has democratized access to AI infrastructure, 
making the AI infrastructure: compute, datasets and foundational models 
accessible, affordable and available to a wide set of users. The IndiaA I 
Application Development Initiative (IADI) is engineered to promote the creation 
and implementation of at least 25 significant AI solutions capable of driving 
large-scale socio -economic transformation. Launched in 2024, the first 
Innovation Challenge focussed on pivotal sectors such as climate change, 
disaster management, healthcare, agriculture, governance, and assistive 
technologies for learning disabilities. While narrating,  it was stated that thirty 
applications have reached the prototyping stage, with  a second iteration of the 

209 
 
challenge planned in conjunction with the Ministry of Education. Additionally, 
sector-specific hackathons/ Innovation Challenges have been organized with the 
Indian Cybercrime Coordination Centre, the Geological Survey of India a nd 
National Cancer Grid (NCG) to further encourage focussed AI solution 
development. Five applications for national rollout have been selected across 5 
pivotal sectors. The IndiaAI Foundation Models pillar aims to catalyze AI 
development by supporting 15 t o 20 startups in developing LLMs and SLMs. 
These startups would receive full compute usage and additional funding 
covering up to 25% of compute expenditure. The financial support is structured 
as a mix of grants (40% of compute costs) and 60% equity to be realized at 
future valuation rounds. From 506 proposals received, four proposals from 
Sarvam AI, Soket AI, Gnani AI, and Gan AI have been selected in the first phase 
to develop India’s foundation models. In phase 2, additional 8 proposals 
selected for buil ding Foundation Models – Avatar AI, IIT Bombay Consortium 
(BharatGen), GenLoop, Zentieq, Intellihealth, Shodh AI, Fractal Analytics Ltd. 
and Tech Mahindra Maker’s Lab. On access to Compute it was submitted that 
the national GPU pool being expanded by the I ndiaAI Mission is accessible 
through a government -supported cloud infrastructure. The IndiaAI Compute 
Portal operates over 38,231 GPUs. This is available at subsidised rates of under 
Rs. 65/hour, compared to the global rates of more than Rs. 200/ hour. To 
empanel the latest GPUs and for empanelment of a greater number of AI 
Services, the 4 th round of empanelment has been made live on 6 th November 
2025. The Committee are informed that during the India AI Impact Summit 2026, 
it was announced that India will e xpand its compute capacity beyond the 
existing 38,000 Graphics Processing Units (GPUs), with an additional 20,000 
GPUs to be added in the coming weeks. At present, more than 270 users have 
already registered, and subsidy valued at approximately ₹1085 crore  has been 
allocated. A significant development includes the construction of a government -
controlled GPU cluster set to house 3,000 next -generation GPUs, which will 
cater primarily to sovereign and strategic requirements for State Governments. 
AIKOSH: In 20 25, IndiaAIKosh was launched under the IndiaAI Mission. It aims 
to serve as a national repository of AI datasets, models and tools. The platform 
organises datasets in 20 sectors, covering a wide range of domains critical to 
India’s development. As of Feb 2 026, it has onboarded 10016+ datasets and 277 
AI models from 66+ entities across 20 sectors. The platform provides 
permission-based access, allowing contributors to retain control over data 
usage while facilitating AI development. A notable feature of this  platform is its 
permission-based access, allowing data contributors to maintain control over 
download, thereby balancing data sharing with privacy concerns. Taking into 
consideration these developments, the Committee may be apprised of the latest 
updates on progress in achieving the intended objectives of the IndiaAI Mission.  
 

210 
 
11. Elaborating on the ways to develop a framework to ensure equity in the use 
of datasets by both public and the private sectors and apply them uniformly 
across sectors such as healthcare and across different Departments the Ministry 
submitted that it is developing a comprehensive framework to ensure equity in 
dataset usage through a combination of Digital Public Infrastructure (DPI), 
inclusive access policies, and sector-specific governance. This strategy ensures 
that high -quality data is not a siloed asset but a shared resource for national 
innovation. Outlining the Initiatives and Scope it stated that the primary initiative 
driving this direction is the IndiaAI Datasets Platform -AIKosh, which aims to 
democratize access to the building blocks of AI. For inclusive Open Access the 
framework provides free, open access to a national repository containing 
10,000+ datasets and 250+ AI models. For data sourcing, the repository hosts 
non-personal data sourced from both the public and private sectors. In order to 
have Sovereign Model , private entities are encouraged to leverage these public 
datasets, combining them with external data to develop indigenous and 
sovereign AI models like BharatGen. To have balanced participation the scope 
includes Public -Private Partnerships (PPPs) designe d to co -create and share 
data, ensuring that smaller startups and researchers have the same access as 
large industry players. Further, to ensure that access translates into fair and 
ethical outcomes, the Ministry has established overarching AI Governance 
guidelines. 
 Cross-Sectoral Applicability: These guidelines serve as a foundational 
blueprint that can be uniformly applied across various departments to 
standardize data-sharing protocols and ethics. 
 Healthcare Integration (SAHI): The Ministry of Health and  Family Welfare 
has launched the Strategy for Artificial Intelligence in Healthcare for India 
(SAHI), which focusses on: 
o Data Strategy and Utilization: Strategic use of the Ayushman Bharat 
Digital Mission (ABHA) ecosystem to ensure data -driven healthcare 
delivery. 
o Ethical Standards: Mandating consent-based data use, transparency, 
and accountability to prevent algorithmic bias. 
On strategic impact, it was stated that by integrating non -personal data 
accessibility with stringent governance, the Ministry ensur es that the AI 
ecosystem remains resilient, trusted, and inclusive. This framework allows India 
to move from theoretical principles to actionable, real -world AI impact, as 
demonstrated during the IndiaAI Impact Summit 2026 where these sovereign 
models and datasets were showcased to a global audience. With these 
submissions the Committee find that the AI Framework that is being developed by 
the Ministry has appreciable intended outcomes. The Committee would like the 

211 
 
Ministry to expedite the development of th e comprehensive framework and 
apprise them of the recent developments. 
12. On the ‘AI Impact Summit 2026’ the Committee are informed that 
discussions were organised through seven thematic working groups each 
focussed on a key dime nsion of the AI ecosystem. The  working groups 
produced outcome documents outlining voluntary frameworks, cooperation 
mechanisms, and practical initiatives. In addition, the summit adopted a Summit 
Declaration and the New Delhi Frontier AI Impact Commitments, capturing the 
shared principles and areas of cooperation. The outcome of the Summit was: 
a. AI Impact Summit Declaration: The declaration outlines the collective 
understanding reached by participating countries and organisations on 
advancing AI for public good. It summarises the core principles guiding 
cooperation across areas such as access to AI resources, trustworthy AI 
systems, AI for science, inclusive adoption, human capital development 
and economic growth. 
b. Charter for the Democratic Diffusion of AI (Democratizing AI Reso urces 
Working Group): This charter proposes a voluntary framework to improve 
global access to foundational AI resources such as compute, datasets, 
models and talent. It emphasises equitable participation in AI development, 
support for multilingual datasets, and collaborative infrastructure initiatives 
to reduce barriers to entry. 
c. Framework for the Trusted AI Commons (Safe & Trusted AI Working 
Group): This framework proposes the creation of a shared repository of 
technical AI safety resources, including tools, benchmarks and standards.  
d. Guidance Note on AI Governance (Safe & Trusted AI Working Group): 
The guidance note outlines practical approaches for governments to 
design AI governance systems.  
e. Network of AI for Science Institutions (Science Worki ng Group): This 
initiative proposes a collaborative international network to support the use 
of AI in scientific research. It focusses on enabling cross -border 
collaboration, sharing tools and datasets, and strengthening participation 
of institutions across regions. 
f. Alliance for Advancing Inclusion through AI (Inclusion for Social 
Empowerment Working Group):The alliance aims to promote AI solutions 
that improve access to services, opportunities and information for 
underserved communities. It includes a p latform to document use cases, 
share implementation practices and support scaling of inclusive AI 
initiatives. 

212 
 
g. Voluntary Guiding Principles for Skilling and Reskilling in the Age of AI 
(Human Capital Working Group):These principles focus on strengthenin g 
workforce preparedness for the AI era through AI literacy, reskilling 
initiatives and inclusive access to learning opportunities, particularly for 
vulnerable and underserved groups.  
h. New Delhi Frontier AI Impact Commitments: This document outlines 
voluntary commitments by participating organisations to improve 
transparency on real-world AI usage and strengthen multilingual evaluation 
of AI systems to support broader and more inclusive adoption. 
 The Committee hope that the outcome of the IndiaAI Summit will be 
implemented both in letter and spirit. 
 
13. Elaborating further on the comprehensive outlook of the 
Ministries/Departments to deal with various kinds of challenges which will arise 
with the advent of AI in the entire human sphere, MEITY submitted that  India 
aims to champion a pro -innovation approach to AI governance by ensuring 
adequate safeguards for protecting citizen interests against unintended 
consequences and fostering innovation to harness the full potential of AI 
development. Government of Indi a’s approach to Artificial Intelligence 
governance is through the prism of "user harm or derived user harm” through 
any technology, to ensure the protection of AI users. Under the Safe & Trusted 
AI pillar under the IndiaAI Mission, an IndiaAI Safety Instit ute has been launched 
to address AI risks & Safety Challenges. The Institute, incubated by IndiaAI 
Mission, will be set up on a hub and spoke model with various research and 
academic institutions and private sector partners joining the hub and taking up 
projects under the Safe and Trusted Pillar of IndiaAI Mission. The Committee 
would like to be apprised of the det ails of work done by MeitY on the pro -
innovative approach to AI Governance to safeguard the interests of our Citizens. 
 
Ministry of New and Renewable Energy 
 
14. The Committee are informed by the Ministry of New and Renewable Energy 
that Artificial Intelligence based applications and learning models are gradually 
being suitably used to identify the risky areas, risk patterns, probability and 
impact of the risk envisaged. Some of the major use cases for power sector 
include use of Al for detection and analysis of Information Security risk on real -
time basis as well as for post -facto forensic.  GRID-INDIA has established a Next 
Generation Security Op eration Centre (SOC) for monitoring the network 
activities of its 6 control centres (viz. NLDC & 5 RLDCs) and is operating the 
same since October 2022. Artificial Intelligence (AI) -based behavioural analysis 

213 
 
models are used in the established SOC modules v iz. User Entity Behaviour 
Analysis (UEBA) and Network Behaviour Anomaly Detection (NBAD) which 
identify deviation from general behavioural patterns/ profiles of the User/ 
Network component thereby generating alerts to the concerned security team 
for furthe r investigations. The Committee are also informed that GRID -INDIA 
being ISO27001:2022 certified has implemented suitable controls to protect its 
Critical Information Infrastructure (CII) installations at NLDC & RLDCs from Al -
based threats. When asked if th e Ministry of New & renewable Energy was 
working together with the Indian Meteorological Department to get early insights 
on where there might be a chance of solar power going down or wind frequency 
going down, which could affect the power grid, the Commit tee are informed that 
India has set an ambitious target of renewable energy, aiming for 500 GW 
capacity by 2030. lntegrating solar and wind power into the grid requires precise 
power forecasting for effective grid management, energy planning, and 
maintaining a stable and reliable power supply. With Al -driven challenges in 
cyberspace increasing and utilities being target ted for the massive impact of 
such activities, the Committee note that Cyber Security Al -driven challenges 
include Advanced Persistent Threa ts (APT) and reconnaissance activity by 
embedded Malware that can adapt, evolve, and evade detection. As submitted by 
the Ministry of New and Renewable Energy such threats can be mitigated 
through Deep packet inspections, hardened security design and enfor cement of 
strict security policies. Also, robust incidence response and recovery 
mechanisms with periodic audits and drills help in necessary control and 
emergency preparedness. The Committee hope that the target set for renewable 
energy by the Ministry of  New and Renewable Enertgy is achieved while 
mitigating the AI driven challenges. 
 
Ministry of Finance 
 
15. While examing about AI application in  Financial sector, the Committee are 
informed by the Ministry of Finance that some of the challenges that are being 
encountered are growing third -party dependencies and market concentration; 
increased correlation due to widespread use of similar AI models leading to 
financial stability risks; lack of interpretability of AI models and data quality 
concerns; Data privacy, cyber security concerns, and use of AI for spreading 
disinformation. The use of AI in cybersecurity can significantly strengthen our 
defenses against cyber threats however cyber attackers can also leverage AI to 
enhance their methods, making them more potent and difficult to counter. With 
respect to the role played by AI in improving and boosting cyber security 
measures in India and checking cyber-crimes, it was submitted that(1) Cyber 
security threats and cyber -crime is a major area of concern: Cyber -crime and 
online financial frauds are crimes committed using the internet to deceive or 
defraud individuals or organizations for financial gain.  The Committee note that 

214 
 
crimes for money -laundering with the help of AI may arise as challenge in the 
field of Automated Transactions; Account Takeovers; Deep fake and Identity 
Fraud; Crypto currency Manipulation; and AI-Generated Shell Companies. 
Regarding the role of AI in improving law enforcement, preventing cyber -
crime and combating online financial frauds, the Committee are informed by the 
Ministry of Finance that AI -powered tools can analyse emails, messages, or 
websites for signs of phishing  attacks or scams. It can detect subtle differences in 
language that indicate fraud, such as urgent messages, requests for personal 
details, or suspicious links. AI can also automatically flag fraudulent 
communication attempts, protecting users from fallin g victim to common social 
engineering scams. AI can help in combating online financial frauds by: i) Real -time 
fraud detection and prevention;  ii) Identity verification and authentication;  iii) 
Predictive Analytics for Fraud Prevention;  iv) Anomaly Detection with Machine 
Learning; v) Fraudulent Account Detection ; vi) Analysis of huge data ; and vii) 
Detection of hidden assets. While furnishing details about the role of Al in 
streamlining public services like Aadhaar and GST and collection of direct and 
indirect taxes in India and widening the tax base, it was stated  by the 
representatives of Ministry of Finance  that AI can play a significant role in 
enhancing the collection of direct taxes and widening the tax base, through the 
Personalized Taxpayer Assistance: AI chatbots can assist taxpayers by addressing 
their queries and guide taxpayers to resolve mismatc hes to ensure filing of Income 
Tax Returns (ITRs) and other Statements in a streamlined manner ; Automated 
Scrutiny & Risk Profiling: AI can analyze ITR and non-ITR forms to identify high-risk 
taxpayers, improving scrutiny selection, benchmarking sectors and ensuring 
identification of instances of under -reporting or use of excessive deduction within 
taxpayer categories. The capability to fine tune case sel ection model based on 
previous orders/decisions can also be enhanced using AI. Predictive analytics for 
fraud detection, real -time monitoring, and AI assisted tax receipt matching and 
information can also help identify tax evasion and ensure compliance; Ou tlier 
Analysis: AI can be used for outlier analysis, which helps in establishing taxpayer 
profiles and spotting deviations in behaviour, such as abrupt drops in declared 
income or drastic increases in assets, etc.; Campaign efficacy: AI can also help in 
graded communications for fine -tuning of campaign models based on learnings of 
earlier campaigns; Predictive Tax Compliance Measures: AI can identify sectors 
with low tax compliance and suggest target ted policy interventions at a sectoral 
level. It can also be used for predicting income, Advance Tax payable, etc. on the 
basis of analysis of historical data and trends. 
While explaining about  the role played by AI in streamlining public services like 
Aadhaar and GST, and collection of direct and indirect taxes in India and widening 
the tax base the Ministry stated that the public services can be made more user-
friendly and accessible by using A.I. in user interface to make instruction vernacular 
based and in conversant language. Data for multiple uses including income tax, 

215 
 
banking and other financial transaction can be analysed through A.I to identify 
areas requiring government intervention or enforcement action to improve 
compliance. AI  can be used as an active assistant in return filling and providing 
help to taxpayers.  To identify suspicious patterns in GST Registration Applications, 
returns filing, flagging potential tax evasion AI could be used. AI models can predict 
potential non -compliant taxpayers based on historical data, transaction patterns 
and financial behaviour.  AI chatbots can guide taxpayers through GST registration, 
returns filing and payments.  AI can be used to improve user experience and to 
further enhance  the ease of doing business. At present , Chatbot  'Vaani’ has AI 
features. By using these tools, users can very easily search for any of the keywords 
such as Registration, Import, and Export etc on  the ICEGATE portal.  The tool is 
trained to reply with all relevant items such as User Manual, Advisory etc 
related the keyword. As with any AI tool, it becomes more intelligent with continued 
usage. Therefore, promoting this tool further among users will lead to a better 
interactive experience for  the Importers/Exporters and other users.  AI algorithms 
can analyse GST data to detect fraudulent transacti ons, fake invoices, and 
cases of tax evasion. Advanced analytics can identify circular trading, input tax 
credit fraud, and suspicious patterns in large -scale transactions. AI -powered 
dashboards can monitor GST compliance in real time, assigning risk score s to 
businesses for proactive inspections. AI -powered systems can auto -assess tax 
returns, verify claims, and flag inconsistencies. This reduces human intervention 
and processing time. Leverage AI tools to help traders accurately 
identify the correct Customs Tariff Heading (CTH) number for their goods. This will 
reduce classification errors, streamline customs procedures, and promote 
compliance with trade regulations.  
Stopping Fraud & Duplication: AI can detect fake Aadhaar IDs, bogusGST claims, 
and shell companies involved in tax fraud.  Simplifying Tax Filing: AI -powered 
assistants can help businesses and individuals file GST and income tax easily, 
reducing errors and delays.  Expanding the Tax Base: AI can analyze transactions 
to identify potential taxpa yers who aren’t currently in the tax 
net.Faster Compliance & Support: AI chatbots can provide instant help for tax-
related queries, making compliance smoother.  AI can make the GST and customs 
related matters like classification and valuation of goods more transparent and 
bring uniformity. Taking note of the wide spread use of AI in the Tax Sector, the 
Committee hope that these tools continue to evolve as user friendly tools  and help 
to preventing financial as wella s tax frauds by shell companies. 
16. Continuing with briefing about  the impact of use of AI in various 
Programmemes and future course of action for integration of AI, the Department 
of Revenue stated that in Financial Intelligence Unit -India (FIU-IND) FINnet 2.0, 
the state -of-the-art IT system of FIU -India, uses Al/ML to generate accurate 
linkages and create enriched profiles of reported entities for improving quality, 
support deeper a nalysis, visualize the network and  uncover hidden 

216 
 
relationships. In Goods and Services Tax Network (GSTN) AI/ML is bein g used in 
system-based risk assessment, flags fraudulent Input Tax Credit (ITC) claims, 
and identifies tax evasion networks, ensuring robust revenue protection. In 
future, GSTN seeks to utilize Generative AI for grievance redressal of tickets 
raised by taxpayers, helping draft notices under human supervision, and helping 
tax officers to use of various analytical tools and in training. In Central Board of 
Direct Taxes (CBDT) at present, the use of Artificial Intelligence in the Income 
Tax Department (ITD) is  limited to basic Natural Language Processing (NLP) for 
processing unstructured data and selective Machine Learning (ML) for refining 
case selection models. In future, the Income Tax Department envisages wider AI 
integration including use of AI powered cha tbots, predictive analytics, anomaly 
detection, trend identification, classification, fraud detection and pattern 
recognition, etc. It was submitted that Income Tax Department is planning the 
next phase of the Integrated e -Filing and CPC (IEC) project i.e. IEC 3.0, for which 
the new Managed Service Provider is expected to be on -boarded in the year 
2027. IEC 3.0 intends to use Al/ ML to incorporate Risk Based Multi Factored 
Authentication for more secured access to e -filing portal. For future integration 
of AI in functioning of Department, CBIC is implementing a new AI powered 
Customs Integrated System for end-to-end digitization of all Customs processes 
to promote faster dwell time and ease of doing business. The National Customs 
Target Centre (NCTC) is using AI in Image Analytics for analysis of X -ray images 
generated by scanning of containerized cargo. This AI model helps provide a 
prediction of the cargo that may potentially be inside the container. The future 
course of action is to integrate this model wi th ICEGATE using APIs, so that the 
model can ingest images from all scanners located across the Country, and the 
predictions can be provided directly to the officer who is located on the field.  
AI/ML is being used in system-based risk assessment, flags fraudulent Input Tax 
Credit (ITC) claims, and identifies tax evasion networks, ensuring robust 
revenue protection. CBIC seeks to utilize Generative AI for grievance redressal 
of tickets raised by taxpayers, drafting notices under human supervision, and 
helping tax officers in use of various analytical tools and in training. From these 
submissions it is seen that AI is widely used in various arms of the  Revenue 
Department. The Committee hope that the Department will ensure that the 
taxpayers continue to get has sle-free filing of IT -Returns and seamless access 
to e-filing portal with the integration of Integrated e -filing and CPC (IEC) Project 
that is IEC 3.0. 
Ministry of Home Affairs 
17. The Ministry of Home Affairs in it submission stated that Artificial 
Intelligence (AI) is emerging as a critical enabler in strengthening the internal 
security architecture of India, particularly in enhancing the operational 
capabilities of the Ministry of Home Affairs, police forces, paramilitary units, and 
other law enforcement agencies. AI facilitates real -time surveillance, predictive 

217 
 
policing, behavioural analysis, and crime pattern recognition, enabling faster 
and more informed decision -making. Indian  Cyber Crime Coordination Centre 
(I4C) has taken following steps to use AI in assisting detection and investigation 
of cybercrimes: 
i. A Data Analysis Lab has been set -up at I4C. It is actively engaged in 
utilizing AI and ML tools to analyse complaints report ed on the portal. It 
collaborates with various organizations and institutions to facilitate 
knowledge sharing in the field of AI and ML.  
ii. To modernize cybercrime reporting and investigation, the Indian Cyber 
Crime Coordination Centre (I4C), in collaboratio n with IndiaAI and MeitY, 
organized the CyberGuard AI Hackathon to develop an AI solution for 
automatic classification of cybercrime complaints on the National 
Cybercrime Reporting Portal (NCRP). The winning model, currently under 
implementation and fine -tuning, analyses complaint descriptions and 
uploaded evidence to assist law enforcement in prioritizing and 
investigating cases more effectively. This initiative aims to improve the 
efficiency and responsiveness of Law Enforcement Agencies (LEAs). 
iii. I4C is al so planning to implement an AI -assisted complaint registration 
system for the 1930 cybercrime helpline, which will reduce the time 
required for lodging complaints and improve user experience through 
guided interaction.  
iv. Additionally, I4C, in collaboration with IIT Bombay, is exploring the use of 
AI to assign suspect scores to mule accounts by analysing behavioural 
and transactional patterns to help identify confirmed mule accounts. I4C 
is also engaging with the Reserve Bank Innovation Hub (RBIH) to 
develop a model that provides real -time suspect scoring for financial 
transactions, enabling banks to flag and potentially stop fraudulent 
transactions proactively, thus offering a robust layer of defence against 
financial cybercrimes. 
v. PMT (Proactive Monitoring To ol): An AI -based tool developed by CDAC 
Mumbai is currently being used to screen and verify Child Sexual 
Exploitative and Abuse Material (CSEAM) content in cyber tipline 
received via the National Centre for Missing & Exploited Children 
(NCMEC) before they are forwarded to Law Enforcement Agencies 
(LEAs). The AI model is under fine -tuning, and it is proposed to be 
extended to crawl the open web for proactive identification of CSEAM 
content.  
vi. I4C uses AI -based tools to monitor dark web, scam websites, and fra ud 
networks for tracking cybercrime discussions, phishing campaigns, and 
suspicious financial transactions. 
vii. In cybercrime commando course curriculum, AI&ML topics have also 
been covered. 

218 
 
viii. AI can also be used in Automatic Number Plate Recognition (ANPR), AI -
powered Facial Recognition Technology (FRT) with CCTV surveillance 
for identifying wanted  criminals as  well as for efficient traffic 
management. AI is also helping security agencies in enhancing their 
capabilities for intelligence gathering and counter -terrorism efforts by 
rapidly analyzing vast datasets, detecting anomalies, predicting patterns, 
cross linkages etc., thereby improving decision -making, speed and 
accuracy in such areas of operations.  
 The Committee find that MHA has taken various measures to  use AI based 
tools in assisting detection and investigation of Cybercrimes  such as darkweb, 
scam websites and fraud networks . Further, it has been  observed that the 
Ministry is fine -tuning their portals i.e., National Cybercrime Reporting Portal 
(NCRP) to improve the efficiency and responsiveness of Law Enforcement 
Agencies (LEAs) and Proactive Monitoring Tool (PMT). The Committee , while 
appreciating the formidable AI enabled steps taken by the m, hope that the  
Ministry will continue to strengthen the agile use of AI in reinforcing the internal 
security architecture of India. 
18. Elaborating upon the impact of Artificial Intelligence (AI) in cybercrime, the 
Ministry of Home Affairs stated that the growing capabilities of Artificial 
Intelligence (AI) have significantly impacted the cybercrime ecosystem, both in 
the complexity of attacks and the speed at which they can be executed. 
Cybercriminals are increasingly exploiting AI for generating deep fake videos,  
voice clones and synthetic media to impersonate individuals for fraud, 
misinformation and identity theft. AI tools are being used to craft phishing 
emails, create fake banking applications, and deploy adaptive malware with 
minimal human effort. Criminals are also leveraging AI for large -scale data 
scrapping, personalized target ting, and behavioural manipulation. Of particular 
concern is the use of AI to generate Child Sexual Exploitative and Abuse 
Material (CSEAM) and deepfake imagery for sextortion and bl ackmail, making 
detection and prevention more difficult through traditional methods. On being 
asked whether the existing laws were able to cope up with the challenges 
generated by AI and if not, what additional laws had been enacted or being 
envisaged to counter the risks posed by AI on the safety, security and privacy of 
citizens due to increased digital and social media interface, the Ministry replied 
that the existing legal and regulatory framework is gradually evolving to address 
the emerging challenges  posed by Artificial Intelligence (AI), especially in areas 
impacting safety, security, and privacy due to the growing interface of AI with 
digital and social media. About the preventive steps taken it was submitted that 
Strengthening of Law was through Ex isting and New Legal Frameworks. India’s 
legal ecosystem has responded proactively to the evolving threat landscape 
associated with AI misuse. Key legislations and frameworks include: 

219 
 
i. Information Technology Act, 2000: The IT Act continues to provide the  
foundational digital legal framework. Under Sections 66, 66B, 66C, 66D, 66E, 
66F and 67, 67A, 67B and 72 etc., offences such as unauthorised access, 
identity theft, cheating by impersonating, data tampering, and online 
obscenity, increasingly perpetrated using AI tools, are punishable. The Act is 
actively used to address AI -related harms like deepfake pornography, AI -
generated phishing, and synthetic media fraud. 
ii. New Criminal Laws (2023): 
a) Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023: 
b) Bharatiya Sakshya Adhiniyam , 2023 (New Evidence Act): This 
law gives recognition to electronic evidence, digital signatures, and 
metadata, which is crucial when investigating crimes involving AI -
based systems or algorithmic decisions. It strengthens the 
admissibility of AI-generated content when used as evidence, provided 
authenticity is established. 
c) Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023: The new criminal 
procedure code emphasizes technologically enabled investigation. 
This includes video recording of statements, digital arrest  warrants, 
and electronic data retrieval — important tools for dealing with AI -
facilitated crimes. 
iii. Digital Personal Data Protection (DPDP) Act, 2023: The Digital Personal 
Data Protection Act, 2023 marks a foundational shift in India’s data 
governance framework by establishing data privacy as a statutory right and 
by holding entities accountable for how they collect, process, store, and 
share personal data. The Act ensures individual autonomy and control over 
personal data by enforcing a consent -based m odel of data processing, 
requiring that personal data be collected and used only for lawful, specific, 
and clearly defined purposes, and with the explicit knowledge and permission 
of the data principal (the individual). 
The DPDP Act is particularly significant in the context of Artificial Intelligence 
(AI) systems, which frequently rely on large datasets — often including 
personal and sensitive data — for training, profiling, decision -making, and 
personalization. The Act prohibits unauthorized or excessive data collection, 
and ensures that AI systems and the entities deploying them must adhere to 
the principles of data minimization, purpose limitation, and fairness. This has 
direct implications for preventing unlawful AI profiling, algorithmic 
discrimination, and AI-based surveillance by both private platforms and state 
actors. 

220 
 
Moreover, the Act introduces obligations on Data Fiduciaries, including developers 
and operators of AI systems, to implement reasonable safeguards, such as data 
security measures, grie vance redressal mechanisms, and transparency in 
automated decision -making. It also empowers individuals to seek redress if they 
believe their personal data has been misused, which includes misuse by automated 
tools that may impact a person’s rights, reputa tion, or opportunities. Another key 
value addition in the DPDP framework is the provision for significant penalties for 
non-compliance, including fines up to ₹250 crore for failing to prevent data 
breaches or using data for unauthorized purposes — which is crucial in deterring 
reckless or opaque deployment of AI technologies. 
iv. Digital India Act (DIA): DIA is currently under formulation to replace the 
IT Act and introduce new central legal framework to deal with emerging 
issues of AI. 
 From the above submissions the Committee find that Digital India Act (DIA) is 
currently under formulation to replace the IT Act and introduce new central legal 
framework to deal with emerging issues of AI. The Committee hope that the Digital 
India Act will soon be passed in Parliament. 
19. While examining the negative impacts of AI, the Committee wanted to know 
about mule accounts and how it escaped the ambit of laws. The Committee 
sought to understand what was being done in terms of punitive measures and if 
MHA had any AI tools or methods that were being used for detecting mule SIM 
card accounts along with any system where the Ministry was able to detect the 
owners of the SIM cards. MHA submitted that fraudsters exploit the existing 
infrastructure in various ways: Banking (Mule A ccounts, Virtual Accounts, 
Payment Aggregator, Payment Gateway, Misuse of CBDC, Crypto currency etc.),  
Telecom (Mule SIM, Rogue POS Agents, Simbox, SMS Headers, Call Spoofing 
etc.),IT Infrastructure (Google, Meta, Instagram, Telegram, Facebook, etc.) and 
Human Resources (Agent, Sub-Agent, Scam Centre, etc.).The response of I4C to 
the above method adopted by cyber fraudster is as below:  
i. The National Cybercrime Reporting Portal (NCRP) was launched in 
August 2019 by the Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA) to set up a mechanism to 
facilitate reporting of all types of cybercrime including Cyber -Enabled 
Financial crimes. The portal has two componen ts; the first is for citizens to 
report cybercrime-related complaints online without needing to visit a police 
station, and the second component is for police agencies, banks and 
financial intermediaries, and other stakeholders to monitor and act upon 
those complaints expeditiously. The second component has a module called 
the Citizen Financial Cybercrime Reporting and Management System 
(CFCFRMS) under CFMC, as a part of the National Cybercrime Reporting 
Portal (NCRP) integrates Law Enforcement Agencies ( LEAs), major Banks 

221 
 
and Financial Intermediaries on a single platform. As of June 2025, Financial 
Institutions comprising of 431 Banks, 34 Wallets/Payment Aggregators (PA)/ 
Payment Gateways (PG), 27 Merchants, 2 Insurance Companies, 7 Crypto 
Exchanges/ VAPs, 2 Stock trading and 4 major Telecom Service Providers 
have been on boarded on NCRP -CFCFRMS Portal.  The financial crimes 
reported over the NCRP after verification by concerned LEA’s via CFCFRMS 
module are being sent to the Banks/Financial Intermediaries in  order to 
warrant action by banks/FIs to save the fraudulent transaction within the 
financial digital ecosystem.  I4C provides banks with visibility into mule bank 
accounts through the NCRP Portal, enabling them to take necessary actions. 
ii. A State -of-the-Art Cyber Fraud Mitigation Centre (CFMC) has been 
established at I4C where representatives of major banks, Financial 
Intermediaries, Payment Aggregators, Telecom Service Providers, IT 
Intermediaries and representatives of States/UTs Law Enforcement Agency  
are working together for immediate action and seamless cooperation to tackle 
cybercrime. CFMC is committed to developing robust mechanisms to combat 
cyber financial fraud in near real -time. By bringing together financial 
institutions, CFMC aims to detect,  prevent and mitigate the cyber financial 
frauds by preventing the dissemination of fraudulent funds across various 
financial sectors. As of June 2025, Representatives from top 45 
Banks/Financial Institutions (FI), all major TSPs (Airtel, Jio, Vodafone Ide a, 
BSNL), and 12 LEAs from different States are co -located in CFMC. These 
representatives coordinate closely using extensive dashboards to combat 
cyber criminals and to halt crime proceeds within the digital ecosystem. 
iii. Furthermore, to ensure inter -bank visibility all particular entities 
including DFS, RBI, Banks, Financial Institution are being provided with the 
visibility of their respective layer -wise mule accounts reported on NCRP - 
CFCFRMS platform, additionally a Suspect Registry mechanism has been  
implemented, which enables Banks and Financial institution s to flag mule 
accounts and related identifiers across the participating entities, thus 
assisting the Bank s/FIs in mitigation of cyber financial frauds. Suspect 
Registry will share the relevant information with the participating entities, for 
taking necessary action (i) to verify the credentials of new customers before 
onboarding, ii) monitor the ongoing transactions in real time, (iii) check 
historical accounts and transactions to identify suspect mule accounts. 
iv. Additionally, a draft MOU is under process between RBI Innovation Hub 
and I4C to enhance the efficiency of mule hunter application. Mule hunter is 
an in -house AI/ML -based solution which is better suited than a rule -based 
system to identify suspected mule a ccounts. Advanced ML algorithms can 
analyse transaction and account detail related datasets to predict mule 
accounts with higher accuracy and greater speed than typical rule -based 

222 
 
systems. This machine learning based approach has enabled the detection of 
more mule accounts within a bank’s system. Additionally, RBIH’s 
Mulehunter.ai model provides AI/ML -based solutions for identifying and 
mitigating risks related to mule accounts, significantly enhancing fraud 
detection capabilities across the banking system.  The integration of same 
with I4C’s NCRP -CFCFRMS/Suspect Registry will assist in faster and more 
accurate mitigation measures against cyber financial Fraud.  The Committee 
note that the MHA, in order to further strengthen the system, is in the process 
of h aving an MOU between RBI Innovation Hub and I4C to enhance the 
efficiency of mule hunter application. The Committee while taking note of the 
AI/ML-based solutions to fight against financial fraudsters, call upon the 
Ministry to apprise them of the latest developments in the field. 
20. MHA also submitted that I4C is planning to implement an AI -assisted 
complaint registration system for the 1930 cybercrime helpline, which will 
reduce the time required for lodging complaints and improve user experience 
through guided interaction. It will be compatible with most of the regional/native 
languages. Further, I4C, MHA runs a Social Media Handle "Cyberdost" which 
effectively promotes the cybercrime helpline number 1930 and the reporting 
portal www.cybercrime.gov.in. The p osts are in English and Hindi and also in 
regional languages from time to time. An app is in the process of development. 
Action starts immediately with registering of the complaint, as it is immediately 
forwarded to the LEAs and Banks etc. Taking cognisanc e of these initiatives by 
MHA, the Committee would like to be apprised of the development of the App for 
immediate reporting/quick action against cyber crime. 
 
21.  Among the other initiatives of MHA, the Committee are informed that in 
terms of ‘Surakshini’ (a  centre run by the Ministry of Home Affairs, which keeps 
an eye on the crimes related to children and women and helps in removing 
vulgar contents), the Ministry has a ‘hash’ value that is being shared. When the 
Committee wanted to know what had been the re sponse time of the social media 
intermediaries in actually responding to it and taking them down, it was 
submitted that currently, the Online Cybercrime against Women and Children 
(OCWC) team under I4C identifies complaints related to Child Sexual 
Exploitation and Abuse Material (CSEAM) and Non -Consensual Intimate Imagery 
(NCII) received through the National Cybercrime Reporting Portal (NCRP). OCWC 
team share URLs and links reported in the complaints with Social Media 
Intermediaries (SMIs) via the SAHYOG pl atform for content takedown. These 
requests are followed up to ensure compliance and timely removal. 
Under the proposed SURAKSHINI initiative, a dedicated Mitigation Centre 
will be established to strengthen this process. Once operational, SURAKSHINI 
will f acilitate the creation of a comprehensive hashbank for CSEAM and NCII 

223 
 
content. This will allow SMIs to proactively detect and prevent the upload of 
such harmful content using automated hash -matching, thereby shifting from a 
reactive takedown approach to a preventive content moderation model. 
Additionally, the SURAKSHINI dashboard will provide end -to-end visibility into 
complaint status, takedown timelines, and FIR registration, helping improve 
coordination and accountability across platforms and law enforce ment 
agencies. The Committee hope that SURAKSHINI initiative would soon become 
operational. 
 
22. Regarding the extent of databases from States being integrated by the 
Ministry of Home Affairs and whether the Ministry had been able to access UIDAI 
and other databases for facial recognition at State levels, the Committee were 
informed that the Criminal Procedure (Identification) Act, 2022 authorise taking 
measurements of convicts and other persons for the purposes of identification 
and investigation in criminal matters. ‘Measurements’ includes finger -
impressions, palm -print impressions, footprint impress ions, photographs, iris 
and retina scan, physical, biological samples and their analysis, behavioural 
attributes including signatures, handwriting or any other examination referred to 
in section 53 or section 53A of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973. In  order to 
facilitate the above, CrPI System is being rolled out which will capture 
photographs, Iris and DNA as per the provisions of the Act. The captured 
photographs will be processed and will be ingested in a facial recognition 
system for matching purpo se also. A proposal has been initiated to integrate AI 
on SAMANVAYA platform in which data of arrested cybercriminals could be 
uploaded by States/UTs for interstate linkages. There is no access to UIDAI or 
other database for facial recognition at I4C. Taki ng into consideration the 
importance of the issue the Committee hope that the Ministry will soon complete 
the process of integration  of data bases of States regarding arrested cyber 
criminals with SAMANVAYA platform. 
 
23.  As regards the AI mechanism or tool t hat was being used by the Ministry 
for detecting forged government documents, the Committee are informed that all 
the forensic departments functioning under the Ministry of Home Affairs, are 
duly competent and sufficiently equipped to conduct examinations in respect of 
all categories of document forgery. These institutions are equipped with state -
of-the-art forensic technologies, such as the Video Spectral Comparator, 
Projectina, advanced digital stereomicroscopes, Traso Scan, ProScope, and 
other specialized instruments, and are duly supported by trained and qualified 
personnel possessing the requisite expertise. Artificial Intelligence –based tools 
are presently being deployed in forensic investigations pertaining to digital and 
cybercrime by the forensic in stitutions functioning under the administrative 
control of the Ministry of Home Affairs. Use of Artificial Intelligence in document 

224 
 
forgery examination has not yet been operationalized, as the technology 
remains at a nascent stage and requires further vali dation for efficacy. The 
Committee while appreciating the efforts of the Ministry, hope that the Ministry 
will continue exploring the  use of advanced AI based tools to help stop digital 
and cybercrimes.  
 
24. During the course of examination when the Committee  sought to know if 
the Bureau of Immigration (BoI) was using AI to detect unwanted people 
entering the Country or people who might be wanted for crimes in other 
countries but were not yet on an Interpol list, and if the Ministry was indulging in 
collaboration with international agencies beyond Interpol for data sharing, the 
Ministry submitted that the Bol is currently not using AI for immigration process. 
However, the future implementation plan for the Mission Mode Project i.e. 
Immigration, Visa Foreigners Registration and Tracking (IVFRT) (Version 3.0), 
commencing on 01.04.2026, envisions a comprehensive transformation of 
India's immigration, visa, and traveller management ecosystem by leveraging 
emerging technologies such as Artificial Intelligence (AI) an d Machine Learning 
(ML) for intelligent traveller profiling, and exploring Blockchain to enhance the 
authenticity and security of digital records. The Committee learnt that as far as 
international collaboration for data sharing is concerned, currently ther e is no 
collaboration with any country. Taking note  of the above  submissions, the 
Committee would like to urge that AI should be used to prevent illegal 
immigration and strengthen Digital Security records by the Government. 
Ministry of Defence 
 
25. While examining the submissions made by Ministry of Defence, the 
Committee wanted to know the potential benefits and risks of deploying AI in 
lethal autonomous weapon systems, defence technologies and warfare. The 
Ministry submitted that deployment of AI b ased and deductive reasoning can be 
very useful in decision making. Further, it was added that development and 
deployment of autonomous weapon systems provide several military 
advantages.  Autonomous weapons systems act as a force multiplier enabling 
expanded battlefield, allowing combat to reach into areas previously 
inaccessible. It can reduce casualties by excluding human war fighters from 
dangerous missions.  Further, AI can enhance the capabilities of lethal 
autonomous weapon systems and unmanned vehic les by precision target 
detection and dynamic route planning. One major challenge as submitted by the 
Ministry is the lack of consensus on how to define the autonomy of weapon 
systems. A standard definition that accounts for levels of autonomy could help 
guide an incremental approach to proposing limits. AI ML based techniques are 

225 
 
not amenable for verified decision making and hence are likely to result in 
unintended outcomes as well. The Committee would like to call upon the 
Ministry to apprise them of the way-out to the challenges that are posed in this 
field. 
 
Ministry of Power 
 
26. Ministry of Power in its submissions stated that Artificial Intelligence (AI) 
has emerged as a critical enabler in transforming the energy sector by 
optimising processes, improving  operational efficiency, and supporting energy 
transition goals. AI applications can be instrumental in managing grids, 
forecasting energy demand with greater accuracy and facilitating the integration 
of renewable energy sources into the grid. AI holds sig nificant potential to 
address complex challenges in the energy sector, such as minimising energy 
waste, reducing operational costs and enhancing the adoption of clean and 
renewable energy technologies. By leveraging AI -driven solutions, the sector 
can contribute substantially to achieving national and global sustainability goals 
and ensuring a secure and resilient energy future. NTPC has implemented an 
AI/ML-based forecasting system for solar power generation that uses advanced 
algorithms to deliver accurate day-ahead and intra-day generation forecasts. The 
system integrates real -time weather data from IoT -based monitoring stations, 
satellite inputs, and historical irradiance patterns to support data -driven 
scheduling and grid management. Earlier, forecastin g relied on third -party 
services and manual weather assessments, which were prone to human error. 
The automated system now generates forecasts and schedules systematically, 
leading to significant reduction in deviation charges under the DSM mechanism 
and i mproved renewable integration and grid compliance. Grid Controller of 
India Limited is considering improving upon its current statistical forecasting 
mechanism to an AI/ML -based short -term (day -ahead and intraday) demand 
forecasting model to enhance grid r eliability. The system intends to integrate 
weather parameters, historical demand trends, and event factors such as 
holidays and weekends to achieve a target ted Mean Absolute Percentage Error 
(MAPE) of 3 –5% for day -ahead forecasts. While examining these su bmissions,  
the Committee wanted to know what security mechanisms were in place to 
ensure that individual solar plants are protected from cyber attacks and the 
cyber attackers do not access the grid, the Ministry submitted that Central 
Electricity Authorit y is in the process of finalizing the Central Electricity 
Authority (Cyber Security in Power Sector) Regulations. These regulations will 
ensure that the control and operation of power system elements including solar 
inverters, as well as the exchange of re lated information, including real -time 
data, remain within national boundaries. Additionally, Ministry of Power has 
mandated that IT equipment and services, as may be identified in due course, to 
be used in the power sector shall be cleared through the Tru sted Telecom Portal 

226 
 
operated by National Security Council Secretariat (NSCS) prior to their supply, 
with effect from 1st January 2026. The Committee hope that the Central 
Electricity Regulatory Authority (Cyber Security in Power Sector) Regulations 
come into existence at the earliest. 
Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare 
 
27. According to the Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare t he 
emergence of AI in agriculture represents a paradigm shift from input -driven 
practices to  intelligence-driven, anticipatory governance. Submitting key 
benefits of AI Adoption in Agriculture MoA & FW  stated that the deployment of 
AI-based systems offers  multiple benefits such as Improved farmer decision -
making through timely, localized advisories; Reduction in crop losses  via early 
detection of pests and diseases ;Enhanced efficiency in governance, including 
subsidy targeting, insurance disbursal, and mo nitoring; Cost optimisation and 
productivity gains through precise input use ;Strengthened climate resilience  by 
enabling anticipatory planning and Data -driven policymaking supported by real -
time, high -quality agricultural intelligence. Highlighting the co nstraints due to 
which many farmers and agricultural workers hesitate to use AI, the Ministry 
submitted that the use of Artificial Intelligence is becoming popular day by day. 
However, some of the reasons for low adoption of Artificial Intelligence (AI) by  
farmers are: 
 High Initial Investment and Costs: AI -powered tools, such as drones, 
robotic harvesters, and smart sensors, require high capital, which is 
prohibitive for adoption by the small and marginal farmers and the 
data processing from such devices. 
 Lack of High Speed Internet Connectivity: Many rural areas lack high-
speed, reliable internet connectivity (broadband) and stable power, 
which are essential for cloud-based AI tools. 
 Technical Skill Gap: A significant gap exists in the ability to operate, 
maintain, and understand, complex AI systems. 
 Lack of Trust and Explain -ability: AI models can sometimes produce 
unexpected or "black box" recommendations. Farmers often default 
to their traditional experience over AI advice when they do not 
understand how the AI reached a conclusion. 
 Language and Context Barriers: Many AI tools are not available in 
local languages/ dialects, or they are trained on data from different 
agri-ecological zones (e.g., western countries), making them 
ineffective for local crops and soil types.  
Farmer Concerns were: 
 Unclear Return on Investment (ROI): Farmers are hesitant to spend 
money on technology without guaranteed, quick, or visible increase 

227 
 
in yield or savings. 
 Data Privacy and Ownership: Concerns exist about who owns the 
data collected from their farms and whether it will be used against 
them. 
 Job Displacement: Fear that automation and robotics will replace 
manual labour. 
 System Failure and Accountability: If an AI system fails or gives bad 
advice (e.g., wrong fertilizer dosage), it is unclear who is liable for the 
resulting crop loss.  
 
The Committee are given to understand that Government has constituted a 
Steering Committee to monitor and review the design, implementation, 
harmonization and institutionalization of AI -based initiatives to derive improved 
service delivery for small -holder farmers across India. Further, the Government 
is also conducting workshops to take this forward for implementation of AI in 
agriculture with various stakeholders viz. ICAR, MeitY, Ministry o f Education, IIT 
Ropar, Private Sector  agri-tech companies/ start -ups etc. The Committee would 
like to be apprised of the dedicated steps taken by the Ministry in the usage of AI 
in overcoming the challenges faced in the agriculture sector.  
 
Ministry of Tourism 
 
28. The Committee are apprised of by the Ministry of Tourism that a hybrid 
Chat-bot interface have been integrated in the Incredible India Digital Platform 
(IIDP) with limited AI capabilities to guide tourists. The Ministry is leveraging 
Anuvadini in the Incredible India Digital Platform ( IIDP) which is an AI -based 
translation tool developed by the All India Council for Technical Education 
(AICTE) under the Ministry of Education, Government of India. The Committee 
also note that the possibilities of AI on creating itinerary based on user 
preferences, access of seamless services across the country, real time analytics 
on tourist footfalls, would aid in policy planning & infrastructure development 
etc. The Committee hope that the user preference data is taken care of as per 
user consent. The C ommittee while appreciating the integration of hybrid Chat -
bot interfaces in IIDP, also note the role of AI in breaking language barriers for 
domestic and international tourists.  The Committee are also informed that the 
Ministry has recently launched the revamped version of Incredible India Digital 
Platform (IIDP) to prevent the risk of "Deepfakes" or AI hallucinations creating 
false narratives. The Committee also note that the Ministry will coordinate with 
MeitY and Ministry of Skill Development and Entre preneurship to strengthen 
regarding AI Future Skill Programmeme and leverage the power of AI for skilling 
or re -skilling in tourism sector. The Committee may , therefore, be apprised of 
the details of such AI based skill training provided to tourist guides,  storytellers 
and curators etc. The Committee do note that AI can support efforts to promote  

228 
 
 
sustainable tourism practices and offer potential to enhance the efficiency, 
responsiveness, and accountability of tourism policy making. 
Conclusion  
29. The Committ ee understand that IndiaAI Future Skills Pillar is a core 
initiative under the IndiaAI Mission which envisions augmenting India’s AI talent 
ecosystem by developing AI expertise by launching national fellowship 
programs at undergraduate, post -graduate and P hD level. Further, it is setting 
up 570 AI and Data Labs in Tier 2 and Tier 3 cities across India including NIELIT 
Centres and in Government ITIs/Polytechnic Institutes to provide hands -on 
exposure to tools, datasets and problem -solving environments for in novation, 
experimentation, and collaborative learning. It is also working with expert 
partners for NCVET-recognised certification in foundational programs to prepare 
learners for entry -level AI careers across different domains like Agriculture, 
Healthcare, Manufacturing and Education.  
 The Committee would like to urge upon the Ministry that specialised 
studies/courses in AI should be encouraged through introduction of 
scholarships from lower standards of schools,  besides popularizing AI in  
colleges, and fellowships and academic research (PhDs) in AI in all Universities 
and setting up of Data Centres and AI Labs throughout the Country.   
 The Committee also opine that AI should be used ethically and responsibly. 
The Committee are given to understand that several countries in the world have 
already enacted stringent and binding laws to prevent the misuse of Artificial 
Intelligence (AI). Alth ough the Government is taking measures to stop the 
misuse of AI to ensure that it is not used for financial frauds or intimidation or 
for deepfake audio -videos etc. and innocent people especially women and 
children are given protection, the Committee urge upon the Government to 
explore the possibility of a comprehensive legislation to prevent the misuse of 
AI and also explore if age restrictions for certain platforms could be an option to 
save people from the misuse of AI.  
 The Committee are of the view th at efficient use of AI will help resolve the 
problems of humanity and ameliorate the lives of common people through 
integration of Artificial Intelligence into health care, education, agriculture, 
energy, industry and infrastructure creation. AI can have c ascading benefits on 
industrial production, speeding up execution of projects, improving quality of 
lives and fast dissemination of knowledge.   

229 
 
 With its vast potential of IT human resource as well as tremendous pool of 
medical and engineering talents emb edded into Artificial Intelligence, India can 
enhance the quality of lives of its teeming millions and attain desirable 
economic growth in the world. AI integration can create climate resilient 
infrastructure, tackle disaster management, undertake water ma nagement at 
dams, minimize energy loss and energy management at power grids.  Therefore, 
if AI is used positively, it can help overcome challenges and sufferings faced by 
the humanity.   
****************** 
  
 
 
 
New Delhi; DR. NISHIKANT DUBEY, 
   27 March, 2026   Chairperson, 
  6 Chaitra, 1948 (Saka) Standing Committee on 
Communications and Information Technology. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

230 
 
Annexure-I  
 
S.No. NIELIT Centre State/UT 
1 Gorakhpur Uttar Pradesh 
2 Lucknow Uttar Pradesh 
3 Shimla Himachal Pradesh 
4 Aurangabad Maharashtra 
5 Patna Bihar 
6 Buxar Bihar 
7 Muzaffarpur Bihar 
8 Kurukshetra Haryana 
9 Ropar Punjab 
10 Haridwar Uttarakhand 
11 Bikaner Rajasthan 
12 Tezpur Assam 
13 Bhubaneswar Odisha 
14 Calicut Kerala 
15 Guwahati Assam 
16 Itanagar Arunachal Pradesh 
17 Srinagar J&K 
18 Jammu J&K 
19 Ranchi Jharkhand 
20 Imphal Manipur 
21 Gangtok Sikkim 
22 Agartala Tripura 
23 Aizawl Mizoram 
24 Shillong Meghalaya 
25 Kohima Nagaland 
26 Leh Ladakh 
27 Silchar Assam 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

231 
 
 
Appendix-I 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON COMMUNICATIONS AND 
 INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (2024-25) 
 
MINUTES OF THE NINTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
----------- 
 
 The Committee sat on Thursday, the 9 th January, 2025 from 1100 hours to 1307 
hours in Committee Room No. '2', Parliament  House Annexe Extension Building, New 
Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Dr. Nishikant Dubey - Chairperson 
 
 MEMBERS 
  
     Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri C. N. Annadurai 
3. Shri Anup Sanjay Dhotre 
4. Smt. Poonamben Hematbhai Maadam 
5. Shri G. Kumar Naik 
6. Shri Shafi Parambil  
7. Dr. M.K. Vishnu Prasad  
8. Shri Ramasahayam Raghuram Reddy 
9. Shri Arun Kumar Sagar 
10. Shri Devesh Shakya 
11. Shri Rajesh Verma 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
12. Shri Saket Gokhale 
13. Smt. Priyanka Chaturvedi 
14. Dr. Sasmit Patra 
15. Shri V. Vijayendra Prasad 
16. Shri Kartikeya Sharma 
17. Shri K. T. S. Tulsi  
Secretariat 
 
1. Shri Y. M. Kandpal   - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. A. Jyothirmayi   - Director 
3. Shri Rajesh Mohan   -     Deputy Secretary 

232 
 
 
 
LIST OF WITNESSES 
 
 
MINISTRY OF ELECTRONICS AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
 
Sl. No. Name Designation 
1. Shri S. Krishnan Secretary 
2. Shri Abhishek Singh Additional Secretary 
3. Shri Sudheer Kumar Marwaha Scientist ‘G’ and Group Coordinator 
4. Shri Abhishek Aggarwal Scientist ‘D’ 
 
Experts/Stakeholders on Artificial Intelligence 
Sl. No. Name Designation 
1. Shri Amitabh Nag CEO, Bhashini 
2. Shri Ashish Aggarwal 
 
Vice President and Head, 
Policy Outreach and 
Government Relations, 
NASSCOM 
3. Shri Sudipto Banerjee Senior Manager, Policy 
Outreach and Government 
Relations, NASSCOM 
4. Shri Saurabh Singh 
 
Digital and AI Policy leader, 
AWS 
5. Shri Vikram Sridharan Director for Infrastructure 
Policy, Asia Pacific Japan, 
AWS 
 
(After the witnesses were called in) 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the representatives of the Ministry of 
Electronics and Information and Technology (MeitY) , National Association of Software 

233 
 
and Service Companies (NASSCOM), Amazon Web Services (AWS), Bhashini and 
other officials accompanying them to the Sitting of the Committee convened to examin e 
the subject ‘Impact of Emergence of Artificial Intelligence and related issues' relating to 
the Ministry of  Electronics and Information Technology.  
Briefing about the inception, concept and functionality of Artificial Intelligence 
(AI), the Chairperson highlighted the initiatives taken by the Government of India 
towards growth of domestic AI innovation including the declaration made by All India 
Council of Technical Education (AICTE) i.e. 2025 as the year of Artificial 
Intelligence. He further detailed about the usage of AI in India in different fields and 
highlighted that India’s key initiatives leveraging AI were UMANG, DigiYatra, Digital 
India Bhashini, NAYAN AI, ATMAN AI etc. and gave example of Govt. of Assam in 
developing AI-based Attendance Monitoring app. Drawing attention to the challenges in 
this sector, the Chairperson highlighted some of them i.e., lack of access to quality AI -
ready datasets, limited access to AI compute, high initial costs and investment barriers, 
lack of skilled workforce and technical expertise, limited cultural and contextual 
nuances of Large Multimodal Models (LMMs), spread of disinformation, manipulation of 
elections, automation of warfare, creation of bio -weapons, introduction of irreversible 
changes to the human genome, sophisticated cyber -attacks, AI powered deep -fakes, 
phishing, dat a manipulation, malware attacks, exposing critical infrastructure and 
personal data to unprecedented security threats etc. He also sought clarifications on 
some of the pertinent questions which would arise with the implementation of AI i.e., 
potential of AI to benefit everyone equally, the risks and rewards of AI and whether AI 
promoted autonomy or diminished it. He, further, elaborated some of the recent 
achievements made by AI across the globe which interalia included eradicating 
inherited diseases, exten ding the human lifespan, and even reversing ageing, drug 
discovery, optimizing global logistics and model climate solutions with unprecedented 
accuracy. While concluding his opening remarks, the Chairperson emphasized that 
collective efforts were required to address the challenges so as to encourage and 
regulate the use Artificial Intelligence for the overall progress and development of 
humanity, especially in our country.   
 
3. Subsequently, the representatives of Ministry of Electronics and Information 
Technology (MeitY), made a power point presentation which gave an overview of the 
Impact of Emergence of AI which inter-alia included (i) India’s Vision for AI; (ii)Potential 
of AI for India (iii) Challenges emerging from AI (e.g Challenges in Deployment &  
Adoption of AI, Biases in Current Foundational Models, Challenges in the India Data 
Ecosystem, Challenges in the India AI Compute Ecosystem); (iv) IndiaAI Mission - its 
Overview and Goals; (v) Other Key AI initiatives (e.g. YuvaAI - Youth for Unnati and 
Vikas with AI, Future Skills Prime); and (vi) Future Roadmap of building a robust AI 
Ecosystem. 
 
4. The Members then sought clarifications on various issues which, inter-alia, 
included (i) Framework or the approach of the Government in quantifying datasets;     (ii) 

234 
 
Democratization of access to quality datasets and resources through a Unified AI 
resource platform; (iii) Scope of creation of employment with the introduction of AI in 
rural In dia; (iv) Job displacement due to the introduction of AI; (v) Handling of 
algorithmic bias; (vi) Personal data Protection after the introduction of AI; (vii) Problems 
of copyright; (viii) Comprehensive legislation to address the issue of  data localization  
only for certain data principles; (ix) Harmonization of machine readable files; (x) Use of 
AI in improving the electoral process; (xi) Courses offered by MeitY to literate the core 
State Government employees; (xii) Internal assessment of the Stanford Inde x rating 
India very High in AI developments; (xiii) Scope of Amendments in IT Rules, 2023 to 
address the issues raised by AI; (xiv) Data related to Centre of Excellence in Bihar; (xv) 
Establishment of Inter -Ministerial Coordination Committee to overview th e 
implementation of AI; (xvi) Cyber -attack and security of Banks; and (xvii) Roadmap of 
investments in AI by MeitY. 
 
5. The representatives of the  Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology 
(MeitY), NASSCOM, AWS and Bhashini responded to most of the queries raised by the 
Members. The Chairperson, then, directed that written replies to points on which 
information were not readily available may be furnished to the Committee within ten 
days. 
 
6. Thereafter, the Chairperson thanked the representatives of (MeitY), NASSCOM, 
AWS and Bhashini for deposing before the Committee.  
 
The witnesses then withdrew. 
A copy of verbatim record of the proceedings was kept on record. 
The Committee, then, adjourned. 
 
******* 
  

235 
 
Appendix-II 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON COMMUNICATIONS AND 
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY(2024-25) 
 
MINUTES OF THE FIFTEENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
----------- 
 
 The Committee sat on Friday, the 5 th March, 2025 from 1115 hours to 1346 hours in 
Main Committee Room, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Dr. Nishikant Dubey- Chairperson 
 
 MEMBERS 
  
 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri Anil Baluni 
3. Dr. Rabindra Narayan Behera 
4. Shri Appalanaidu Kalisetti 
5. Shri Arun Kumar Sagar 
6. Shri Vishnu Datt Sharma 
 
RajyaSabha 
 
7. Shri Saket Gokhale 
8. Shri V. Vijayendra Prasad 
9. Shri S. Niranjan Reddy 
10. Shri Kartikeya Sharma 
11. Shri Lahar Singh Siroya 
12. Shri K. T. S. Tulsi 
Secretariat 
 
 
1. Shri Y. M. Kandpal   - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. A. Jyothirmayi   - Director 
3. Shri Amrish Kumar   -     Deputy Secretary 
 
 
 

236 
 
LIST OF WITNESSES 
 
 
MINISTRY OF ELECTRONICS AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (MeitY) 
 
Sl. No. Name Designation 
1.  Shri S. Krishnan Secretary  
2.  Shri Abhishek Singh Additional Secretary 
3.  Smt. Kavita Bhatia Scientist ‘G’ and Group Coordinator 
4.  Shri Abhishek Aggarwal Scientist ‘D’ 
5.  Shri Sushil Kumar Jangid Scientist ‘B’ 
 
MINISTRY OF NEW & RENEWABLE ENERGY 
 
Sl. No. Name Designation 
1.  Ms. Nidhi Khare Secretary 
2.  Dr. Arun Kumar Tripathi Scientist G 
3.  Dr. PankajSaxena Scientist G 
4.  ShriSujit Pillai Scientist F 
5.  Shri Adarsh Saiwal Senior Director, NIC 
 
 
DEPARTMENT OF FINANCIAL SERVICES 
 
Sl. No. Name Designation 
1.  Shri M. Nagaraju Secretary 
2.  Shri M.P. Tangirala Additional Secretary 
 

237 
 
 
DEPARTMENT OF REVENUE 
 
Sl. No. Name Designation 
1.  Shri Ajay Seth Secretary  
2.  Shri Vivek Aggarwal Additional Secretary 
3.  Shri Naval Kishore Ram Joint Secretary 
4.  Shri Nikhil Verma ADG (Systems), CBDT 
5.  Shri Hemant Gupta ADG (Systems), CBDT 
6.  Shri Rewat Raja Bahl ADG (Systems), CBIC 
7.  Shri Manish Kumar Hairat Additional Director, FIU-IND 
 
 
(After the witnesses were called in) 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the representatives of the Ministry of 
Electronics and Information and Technology (MeitY), Ministry of New and 
Renewable Energy, Department of Financial Services (Ministry of Finance) and 
Department of Revenue (Minis try of Finance) to the Sitting of the Committee 
convened to have the Presentation/Evidence on the Subject ‘Impact of 
emergence of Artificial Intelligence and related issues’.  
 
 The Chairperson, in his opening remarks, pointed out that the aim of the 
deliberations was to have a broad perspective of the preparedness of various 
Departments of the Government of India in Artificial Intelligence for creating an 
ecosystem for its growth. The Chairperson elaborated that progress of AI can be 
a boon or bane and India’s approach in this field has been to promote innovation, 
ensure inclusivity and drive equitable access -based on open and ethical AI. He 
further emphasized that the notion that advanced AI requires massive, 
centralized resource is crumbling. In its place , an alternative path where 
openness, collaboration and democratization have become the driving forces of 
AI innovation, freeing the monopoly of few entities. Pointing out at the 
advancements made by India in this sector under India AI Mission, the 
Chairperson made an observation that the future of AI should be focussed on 

238 
 
advanced reasoning capabilities while taking into account the sophisticated 
cyber-attacks, leveraging AI power defects, phishing, data manipulation and 
malware.  
 
3. Then, the representatives of Department of Revenue (Ministry of Finance) , made 
a power point presentation which gave an overview of use of AI tools in the 
Department inter-alia including (i) Tax Compliance and Enforcement; (ii) Data 
Analysis and Risk Management; (iii) Automation of processes; (iv) Chatbots and 
Virtual Assistants; (v) Customs and Border Security; (vi) Predictive Modeling for 
Tax Policy; (vii) Data Integration and Interoperability; (viii) Prediction of Tax 
Collection; (ix) Document Search of Taxpayer details for ent ry linkage and 
analysis; (x) Implementation of ADVAIT (Advance Analytics in Indirect Taxation) 
(xi) Development of BIFA (Business Intelligence and Fraud Analytics) Tool to 
highlight and report fraudulent or suspected to be fraudulent Taxpayer behavior; 
(xii) Use of Indian Customs Electronic Data Interchange Gateway (ICEGATE): 
Chatbot (Vaani) for providing quick response to the users for receiving Financial 
Condition Report (FCR) queries related to imports/exports without connecting to 
ICEGATE helpdesk; (xii i) Development of FIU -FIN Core for connectivity of 
Database, analysis of Data, Dissemination of Data etc.  
 
The Department while highlighting the impact of AI in their day -to-day functioning 
also pointed out the risks of using AI tools that included use of  bias and 
discriminated data, lack of transparency and accountability, privacy concerns, 
security vulnerabilities and over-reliance on technology and vendor dependence.  
 
4. The representatives of Department of Financial Services (Ministry of Finance) in 
their power point presentation highlighted the Impact of AI in Financial Services 
like personalized customer experience, enhancing operational efficiency, 
improved risk management and incremental revenue generation and in the 
Insurance and pension sectors. Fla gging concerns about the challenges posed 
by AI in the areas of growing third -party dependencies and market concentration; 
increasing correlation due to widespread use of similar AI models leading to 
financial stability risks; lack of interpretability of A I models and data quality 
concerns; Data privacy, cyber security and spread of disinformation,  the 
Department informed the Committee that RBI has set up a committee to develop 
a Framework for Responsible and Ethical Enablement of Artificial Intelligence 
(FREE-AI) in the Financial Sector, to guide on addressing potential systemic risks 
from the adoption of Artificial Intelligence in Financial Sector. 
 
5. The representatives of Ministry of New and Renewable Energy in their power 
point presentation highlighted t he initiatives taken by the Ministry in the sectors 
like Rooftop solar assessment project, GIS -Based Solar Potential Mapping by 
National Institute of Solar Energy (NISE) and capacity building. The Department 

239 
 
further highlighted the applications of AI in fo recasting & Resource Assessment, 
scheduling of power supply to Grid. While discussing about the impact of AI 
implementation in Renewable Energy (RE), the Department detailed about AI -
driven demand forecasting and grid optimization leading to reduced energy  
wastage; ML-based forecasting and resource assessment ensuring better energy 
planning; Predictive maintenance lowering operational costs by preventing 
failures in Renewable Energy plants;  Aids in PV module recycling and circular 
economy initiatives, reducing environmental impact; and Micro grid management 
and self -healing grids enhancing reliability and stability. The presentation also 
mentioned about the potential areas of use of AI which included the Renewable 
Energy (RE) Predictions, Energy Storage Opt imization, Micro-grid Optimization & 
Energy management, Site Selection for RE Projects, Integration of chatbots in all 
scheme portals of the Ministry and AI -powered virtual models to simulate real -
time plant performance. In the end, the Ministry enlisted c yber security risks and 
skill gaps as major challenges and concerns. 
 
6. Thereafter, the representatives of Ministry of Electronics & Information 
Technology (MeitY) made a power point presentation which inter-alia covered 
topics on AI Matters in India, harnessing the potential of AI; Use of cases, 
challenges in deployment and adoption of AI technology, India AI Mission, Future 
skills Prime and way forward for better and robust AI ecosystem. Giving further 
details, Secretary MeitY apprised the Committee a bout (i) Receiving of 67 
applications for the creation of Indigenous Foundation Model of AI; (ii) 
Completion of Dataset Platform; (iii) Bids received for model Hyper Scale AI 
Compute; (iv) Shortlisting of 30 applications for AI Application Development 
Initiative; (v) Awarding of 8 projects in Safe and Trusted AI; (vi) Launch of one 
project of Machine Unlearning with IIT, Jodhpur; (vii) Launch of a project for 
Synthetic data generation with IIT, Roorkee; (viii) Lunch of AI Bias Mitigation 
Strategy with NIT, Raipur; (ix) Launch of explainable AI Framework Project with 
Defense Institute of Advanced Technology, Pune and another private company 
called Minecraft Technology Private Limited; (x) Launch of Privacy Enhancement 
Strategy with IIT Delhi, IIT Dharwad and Telecommunications Engineering Centre 
(TEC) (Department of Telecommunications); (xi) Launch of AI Ethical Certification 
Framework with IIT Delhi and TEC; (xii) Establishment of AI algorithm auditing 
tool, a civic data lab, called PARAKH AI, which is an ope n-source framework to 
audit AI algorithm; (xiii) Launch of AI Governance Testing Framework with Amrita 
Vishwa Vidyapeetham in Kerala and Technology Engineering Centre; (xiv) Work 
on Big data Analytics with NASSCOM, NIELIT, AICTE etc.; (xv) Work with line 
Ministries and with States to expand AI utilizations across Ministries and States; 
(xvi) Work on post-quantum cryptography and quantum communications; etc. 
 
7. Thereafter, Members sought clarifications on various issues which, inter-alia, 
included (i) AISI’s f ive safety projects such as real -time deep fake detection, AI -

240 
 
generated content water -marking, ethical AI frameworks and red teaming AI 
models; (ii) progress made so far under projects like machine unlearning, 
synthetic data generation for bias mitigation,  AI bias mitigation in healthcare 
systems and AI algorithm audition tools; (iii) major constraints as well as 
challenges faced in AI adoption;  (iv) status of co -ordination between FIU and 
GSTN for Data analytics; (v) mechanism by Income Tax Department for  solving 
the issues related to private vendors and system demolition ;(vi) steps to frame 
rules to safeguard the personal life which may be interfered by the use of AI; (vii) 
status of setting up of Data -Embassies to develop India as an AI centre; (viii) 
efforts being made by the Ministry towards voice -driven AI; (ix) differentiation 
between false information and right information signaled in midst of noise by FIU; 
and (x) Evaluation of free from bias AI Models used by private Fintech 
companies; (xi) inviti ng private sector investment in hardware; (xii) impact of AI 
on human & cultural aspects and on the jobs ; (xiii) need for a separate 
provisioning and budget regarding AI usage and promoting training for all 
employees; (xiv) attracting private sector inves tment and collaboration in AI 
funding and collaboration with private universities for AI development; (xv) issues 
related to cyber fraud; (xvi) clean power requirement for AI development; and 
(xix) quantum computing and its readiness, etc. 
 
8. The representatives of all the Ministries responded to most of the queries raised 
by the Members. The Chairperson, then, directed that written replies to points on 
which information were not readily available may be furnished to the Committee 
within ten days. 
 
9. Thereafter, the Chairperson thanked the representatives of all the Ministries for 
deposing before the Committee.  
 
The witnesses then withdrew. 
A copy of verbatim record of the proceedings was kept on record. 
The Committee, then, adjourned. 
****** 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

241 
 
 Appendix-III 
  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON COMMUNICATIONS AND 
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (2024-25) 
 
MINUTES OF THE TWENTIETH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
----------- 
 
 The Committee sat on Thursday, the 26 th June, 2025 from 1100 hours to 1410 
hours in Main Committee Room, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Dr. Nishikant Dubey- Chairperson 
 
 MEMBERS 
  
 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri Anil Baluni 
3. Dr. Rabindra Narayan Behera 
4. Shri Anup Sanjay Dhotre 
5. Shri S. Supongmeren Jamir 
6. Shri G. Kumar Naik 
7. Shri Radheshyam Rathiya 
8. Shri Ramasahayam Raghuram Reddy 
9. Shri Arun Kumar Sagar 
10. Shri Devesh Shakya 
11. Shri Vishnu Datt Sharma 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
12. Shri Saket Gokhale 
13. Shri Amar Pal Maurya 
14. Dr. Sasmit Patra 
15. Shri Kartikeya Sharma 
16. Shri Lahar Singh Siroya 
 
Secretariat 
 
 
1. Shri Y. M. Kandpal   - Additional Secretary 
2. Shri Amrish Kumar   -     Deputy Secretary 
 

242 
 
 
 Welcoming members to the sitting of the Committee, the Chairperson drew 
their attention to the Agenda for the sitting which included cons ideration and adoption of 
the 4 Draft Action Taken Reports (ATRs) on DFG (2024 -25) and evidence of the 
representatives of Ministry of Electronics and Information and Technology (MeitY), 
Ministry of Home Affairs, Ministry of Defence and Ministry of Power on  the Subject 
‘Impact of emergence of Artificial Intelligence and related issues’.  
 
 The Committee then considered and adopted the following Draft Action Taken 
Reports:- 
 
(i) Draft Report on Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of  the Committee contained in their Second 
Report (18 th Lok Sabha) on “Demands for Grants (2024 -25)” relating to the 
Ministry of Communications (Department of Posts). 
(ii) Draft Report on Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the C ommittee contained in their Third 
Report (18 th Lok Sabha) on “Demands for Grants (2024 -25)” relating to the 
Ministry of Information and Broadcasting. 
(iii) Draft Report on Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contai ned in their Fourth 
Report (18 th Lok Sabha) on “Demands for Grants (2024 -25)” relating to the 
Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology. 
(iv) Draft Report on Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Fifth Report 
(18th Lok Sabha) on “Demands for Grants (2024 -25)” relating to the Ministry of 
Communications (Department of Telecommunications). 
 
7. The Committee also authorized Chairperson to finalize the reports and 
present/lay them in Lok Sabha/Rajya Sabha during the Monsoon Session of Parliament.  
 
8. Thereafter, the Subject ‘Impact of emergence of Artificial Intelligence and related 
issues’ was taken up for discussion. The following witnesses from Ministries were 
present during the sitting: 
 
 
 
 
 
 

243 
 
LIST OF WITNESSES 
 
MINISTRY OF ELECTRONICS AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (MeitY) 
 
Sl. No. Name Designation 
1.  Shri S. Krishnan Secretary  
2.  Smt. Kavita Bhatia Group Coordinator and Scientist ‘G’ 
3.  Shri Abhishek Aggarwal Scientist ‘D’ 
 
MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAIRS 
 
Sl. No. Name Designation 
1.  Shri Govind Mohan Secretary 
2.  Shri Rajesh Kumar Chief Executive Officer, Indian Cyber 
Crime Coordination Centre 
3.  Shri Rakesh Kumar Pandey Joint Secretary, Cyber and 
Information Security Division 
 
 
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE 
 
Sl. No. Name Designation 
1.  Shri Rajesh Kumar Singh Secretary 
2.  Dr. Samir V Kamat Secretary DDR&D and Chairman, 
DRDO 
3.  Ms. Dipti Mohil Chawla Additional Secretary, Department of 
Defence 
 
MINISTRY OF POWER 
Sl. No. Name Designation 
1.  Shri Pankaj Agarwal Secretary  
2.  Shri Ghanshyam Prasad Chairperson, CEA  

244 
 
3.  Shri R.P. Pradhan Chief Information Security Officer 
(CISO) 
4.  Shri Manish Mishra  Director (IT) 
 
(After the witnesses were called in) 
 
2. Welcoming the representatives from the Ministry of Electronics and Information 
and Technology (MeitY), Ministry of Home Affairs, Ministry of Defence and 
Ministry of Power, t he Chairperson, in his opening remarks, pointed out that 
Artificial Intelligence (AI) has emerged as one of the key technologies 
revolutionizing vario us walks of life of the world after Industrial Revolution. He 
informed that AI is not just automating the back end; it is also reinventing the 
future of leadership, decision -making and strategic growth in the financial world. 
Its rapid advancements are rev olutionizing sectors like finance, healthcare, and 
education, making processes more efficient and accessible. He added that AI 
complements human skills, addresses labour shortages and enables economies 
to shift from scarcity to abundance. Adding further on  this issue, he said that 
India’s fintech market is flourishing and projected to become $400 Billion in next 
three years. The AI influence is being felt across every aspect of daily life from 
digital payments to innovations such as quantum communication which paves the 
way for real-time application in quantum cyber security. He highlighted the crucial 
role of IndiaAI Mission launched with a budget of Rs. 10,372.9 2 Crores for AI 
development in India. 
 
3. Then, the representatives of Ministry of Home Affairs ma de a power point 
presentation which gave an overview of use of AI tools in the Department and its 
misuse by cyber criminals. Highlighting a few potential areas of misuse where AI -
driven threats are more sophisticated and harder to detect, the representativ es of 
Ministry informed that (i) AI is creating fake videos and voice clones to 
impersonate individuals which are used in scams, frauds, and misinformation 
campaigns and deceiving people into transferring money or sharing sensitive 
information;(ii) Use of AI Bot to create deep nude and sexually explicit content 
and its auto -sharing in groups; (iii) AI making it easier for even less tech -savvy 
individuals to develop and deploy sophisticated phishing websites, fake banking 
apps or malicious software; (iv) AI -based system developed by I4C for 
automatically classifying crime descriptions from victim complaints on the NCRP 
Portal to help LEAs respond faster and efficiently; (v) Analyzing and categorizing 
victim reports from 1930 calls, improving response time for  cybercrime 
complaints. To deal with the issue, the representatives of Ministry emphasized on 
the need to build AI powered national cyber security platforms to monitor and 
protect critical infrastructure from cyber–attacks;  to develop and enforce national  
standards for AI ensuring algorithms are free from bias; and to mandate social 

245 
 
media intermediaries to implement AI -driven content moderation to prevent deep 
fakes, scams, malicious content, monitor suspicious activities and collaborate 
with law enforcement agencies to identify cyber-criminals. 
 
4. The representatives of Ministry of Defence in their power point presentation 
highlighted the impact of AI in Defence Sector like Intelligence, Surveillance and 
Reconnaissance; Command and Control Systems; Cyber Sec urity; Forensic 
analysis; Logistic Support and Maintenance; Autonomous Weapon Systems; 
Autonomous Robotics Technologies; Protection of Critical Cyber infrastructure, 
etc. They further highlighted initiatives taken by Ministry of Defence in AI 
including AI adoption in Indian Army, Air Force and Navy as well as in Defence 
PSUs and DRDO including Important Global Defence projects undertaken; and 
Challenges towards AI adoption in Defence. 
 
5. The representatives of Ministry of Power in their presentation highlight ed the 
impact, challenges & opportunities created by AI in power sector i.e. meeting 
growing power demand of data centres, providing low-carbon pathways, ensuring 
optimization of cost of supply, Demand forecasting, Grid optimization, RE 
generation forecasting and integration, Predictive maintenance and Energy theft 
detection etc. The Ministry also detailed about initiatives taken by Power PSUs 
like Project Monitoring for measurement of progress, Solar Panel Inspection and 
Ash Dyke Monitoring for preventive maintenance, Automatic preparation of defect 
reports from data captured during transmission line inspection using Artificial 
Intelligence etc. The Ministry also highlighted that under Draft National Electricity 
Policy, 2025, Electric Power Survey would inc lude demand of the Data Centres 
as well. 
 
6. Thereafter, Members sought clarifications on various issues which, inter-alia, 
included (i) Steps taken till date for use of AI for intelligence gathering and 
counter terrorism; (ii) Digital fencing of borders; (iii) proliferation of obscene 
videos created with the aid of AI; (iv) Financial frauds and cyber crimes 
committed with the use of AI by criminals; (v) Need for amending IPC to bring AI 
generated crimes under its purview;   (vi)Issues of privacy while dealing with the 
cyber crimes; (vii) mechanism or tool created by the Ministry of Home Affairs for 
detecting forged documents; (viii) Awareness campaign for popularizing 1930 
Call no. developed by I4C for registering cyber crimes; and; (ix) Identification of 
border areas where GPS jamming taken place often; etc. 
 
7. The representatives of the Ministries responded to most of the queri es raised by 
the Members. The Chairperson, then, directed that written replies to points on 
which information were not readily available may be furnished to the Committee 
within ten days. 
 

246 
 
8. Thereafter, the Chairperson thanked the representatives of all the Ministries for 
deposing before the Committee.  
 
The witnesses then withdrew. 
A copy of verbatim record of the proceedings was kept on record. 
The Committee, then, adjourned. 
****** 
  

247 
 
 Appendix-IV 
  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON COMMUNICATIONS AND 
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (2025-26) 
 
MINUTES OF THE FOURTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
----------- 
 
 The Committee sat on Monday, the 5th January, 2026 from 1509 hours to 1817 hours 
in Committee Room ‘B’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Dr. Nishikant Dubey- Chairperson 
 
 MEMBERS 
  
 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri Anil Baluni 
3. Dr. Rabindra Narayan Behera 
4. Shri Radheshyam Rathiya 
5. Shri Arun Kumar Sagar 
6. Shri Vishnu Datt Sharma 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
7. Shri Saket Gokhale 
8. Smt. Priyanka Chaturvedi 
9. Shri Sujeet Kumar 
10. Shri Amar Pal Maurya 
11. Dr. Sasmit Patra 
12. Shri Kanad Purkayastha 
13. Shri S. Niranjan Reddy 
14. Shri Kartikeya Sharma 
15. Shri Lahar Singh Siroya 
16. Shri K.T.S. Tulsi 
 
Secretariat 
 
 
1. Shri Harish Chandra Bist  - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. A. Jyothirmayi                            -          Director 
3. Shri Rajesh Mohan   -     Deputy Secretary 
 
 

248 
 
LIST OF WITNESSES 
 
MINISTRY OF ELECTRONICS AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (MeitY) 
 
Sl. No. Name Designation 
1.  Shri Abhishek Singh Additional Secretary 
2.  Smt. Kavita Bhatia  Scientist ‘G’& Group Coordinator 
 
DEPARTMENT OF TELECOMUNICATIONS 
 
Sl. No. Name Designation 
1.  Shri Amit Agrawal Secretary 
2.  Shri Deb Kumar Chakrabarti Member (S) 
3.  Shri Gulzar Natarajan Additional Secretary 
 
MINISTRY OF TOURISM 
 
Sl. No. Name Designation 
1.  Dr. Srivatsa Krishna  Secretary 
2.  Sh. Harikishore S Joint Secretary  
 
MINISTRY OF CULTURE 
Sl. No. Name Designation 
1.  Shri Vivek Aggarwal Secretary 
2.  Shri Gurmeet Singh Chawla Joint Secretary  
3.  Shri Samar Nanda Joint Secretary  
 
 
DEPARTMENT OF LEGAL AFFAIRS 
 
Sl. No. Name Designation 
1.  Dr. Rajiv Mani Secretary 

249 
 
2.  Dr. R.J.R. Kashibhatla Joint Secretary 
 
 
DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE AND FARMERS WELFARE 
 
Sl. No. Name Designation 
1.  Shri Devesh Chaturvedi Secretary 
2.  Shri Pramod Kumar Meherda Additional Secretary 
 
DEPARTMENT OF SPORTS 
 
Sl. No. Name Designation 
1.  Shri Hari Ranjan Rao Secretary 
2.  Dr. Shobhit Jain Joint Secretary 
 
(After the witnesses were called in) 
 
2. Welcoming Hon’ble Members and the representatives from the Ministry of 
Electronics and Information and Technology (MeitY), Department of 
Telecommunications (DoT), Ministry of Tourism, Ministry of Culture, Department of 
Legal Affairs, Department of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare and Department of 
Sports, the Chairperson, in his opening remarks, stated that Artificial intellige nce has 
become the new frontier of global competition, with China and the United States 
striving for dominance. Much like the space race, nations were investing heavily in 
advanced semiconductors and microchips to gain an edge.   As per Stanford 
University reports, since 2016, the number of countries enacting AI laws had grown 
nine fold, reaching over 21 percent of 75 nations by 2023. The European Parliament 
pioneered in AI legislation, emphasizing safety, transparency, fairness, and 
environmental responsib ility, while banning harmful applications such as voice 
activated toys that endangered children. 
3. He further mentioned that the AI revolution promised simultaneous industrial, 
informational, and cultural transformations —accelerating drug discovery, energy 
innovation, education, communication, and even artistic creation. The United States 
had introduced AI legislation across all states, guided by its Action Plan focussed on 

250 
 
innovation, infrastructure, and diplomacy. Global summits in the UK, Seoul, and Paris 
had highlighted AI’s rapid progress, with India set to host the next in February, 2026. 
 
4. Emphasizing upon the critical issues related to AI, he also added that India’s 
challenge was in building energy capacity, semiconductor production, and supportive 
ecosystems for startups and research institutions. Expanding AI literacy, fostering 
open source collaboration, and ensuring secure data infrastructure were vital. Though 
AI offered immense opportunities in Defence, industry, and science, risks such as 
deep fakes and adversarial attacks warranted strong governance. Responsible policies 
would determine whether AI drove inclusive growth or deepened inequality. 
5. Then, the representative of Ministry of Tourism made his submission which gave 
an overview of use of AI t ools in the Ministry i.e., (i) Development  of  AI blocks of Gen 
AI to power the Incredible India website; and (ii) Use of Open Network for Digital 
Commerce (ONDC) for digitization of supply and demand needs of tourists. 
 
6. The representatives of Department of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare in their 
power point presentation highlighted the use of AI for making Grievance Redressal 
issues related to PM -KISAN and PMFBY more efficient; development of AgriStack - 
India's digital infrastructure for agriculture; an d development of Agri-LLM under IndiaAI 
Mission for unified solutions to the problems raised by Farmers throughout the 
Country.   
 
7. The representatives of DoT in their presentation highlighted the usage of AI for 
optimal development of Network efficiency; b etter customers’ support system 
management by the Telecom Service providers; and support to industries, start -ups 
and academia working in this sector. He also stated about challenges faced for 
adoption of AI in their sector like problems in adoption of old  legacy networks; 
availability and quality of data for developing AI Tools and Models; ways to deal with AI 
assisted high tech frauds; and  continuous updating of AI tools and Models in midst of 
financial and trained manpower issues. 
 
8. Thereafter, the repre sentatives of Department of Legal Affairs submitted the use 
of AI in its functioning i.e., development of AI tool to ascertain the performance of 
advocates, success rate of cases fought by them; and dissemination of knowledge of 
legal aspects to a common people. 

251 
 
 
9. Then, the representatives of the Ministry of Culture presented their views. In their 
presentation, they enlightened the Committee about Gyan Bharatam, Gyan Setu, 
Digitization of manuscripts, development of AI tools for museums galleries and 
National Archives, and development of JATAN App to create digital data of objects 
among others. 
10. The representatives of Department of Sports via their presentation informed that 
it was using AI for Scouting Talent Identification, repository of historical data via 
National Sports Repository System (NSRS), unified annual calendar of training and 
competition with the collaboration of Sports Authority of India (SAI) and Sports 
Authorities of States and Union Territories. 
11. After that, the MeitY apprised the Committee tha t it contributed 23 per cent of the 
AI Applications in GitHub Ai Repository, development of approximately 38,000 GPUs 
under IndiaAI Mission, need for creation of Sovereign LLMs and others etc. 
12. Thereafter, Members sought clarifications on various issues whi ch, inter-alia, 
included (i) Steps taken to counter fake and biased reviews in the field of tourism; (ii) 
Use of AI for environmental monitoring at tourist sites; (iii) Selective implementation of 
KISAN SAMMAN NIDHI by the Department of Agriculture; (iv) G uardrails to ignore 
prompts to delusion the choice makers; (v) Representation of Genetic Diversification 
on AI tools; (vi) Issues of compensating the talents which have been misread by AI 
tools in the field of Sports; (vii) Free accessibility of Gyan Bhara tam AI Tools to the 
common man; (viii) Framework for AI regulation; and (ix) Guidelines for SUPACE. 
13. The representatives of the Ministries/Departments responded to most of the 
queries raised by the Members. The Chairperson, then, directed that written repli es to 
points on which information were not readily available may be furnished to the 
Committee within ten days. 
14. Thereafter, the Chairperson thanked the representatives of all the Ministries for 
deposing before the Committee.  
 
 
The witnesses then withdrew. 
A copy of verbatim record of the proceedings was kept on record. 
The Committee, then, adjourned. 
****** 

252 
 
 Appendix-V 
  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON COMMUNICATIONS AND 
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (2025-26) 
 
MINUTES OF THE FIFTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
----------- 
 
 The Committee sat on Monday, the 27th January, 2026 from 1430 hours to 1745 
hours in Main Committee Room, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Dr. Nishikant Dubey- Chairperson 
 
 MEMBERS 
  
 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri Anil Baluni 
3. Dr. Rabindra Narayan Behera 
4. Shri Anup Sanjay Dhotre 
5. Shri S. Supongmeren Jamir 
6. Shri G. Kumar Naik 
7. Dr. M. K. Vishnu Prasad 
8. Shri Arun Kumar Sagar 
9. Shri Devesh Shakya 
10. Shri Rajesh Verma 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
11. Smt. Priyanka Chaturvedi 
12. Shri Sujeet Kumar 
13. Shri Amar Pal Maurya 
14. Dr. Sasmit Patra 
15. Shri Kartikeya Sharma 
16. Shri Lahar Singh Siroya 
 
Secretariat 
 
 
1. Shri Harish Chandra Bist  - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. A. Jyothirmayi                       -          Director 
3. Shri Rajesh Mohan   -     Deputy Secretary 
 

253 
 
LIST OF WITNESSES 
 
MINISTRY OF ELECTRONICS AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (MeitY) 
Sl. No. Name Designation 
1.  SHRI S. KRISHNAN SECRETARY 
2.  SMT. KAVITA BHATIA SCIENTIST G AND GROUP 
COORDINATOR 
 
MINISTRY OF CIVIL AVIATION 
Sl. No. Name Designation 
1.  SHRI PIYUSH SRIVASTAVA SENIOR ECONOMIC 
ADVISOR 
2.  SHRI SHOBHIT GUPTA JOINT SECRETARY 
 
AIRPORT AUTHORITY OF INDIA (AAI) 
Sl. No. Name Designation 
1.  SHRI M. SURESH MEMBER (AIR NAVIGATION 
SERVICES) 
2.  SHRI ANURAG SHARMA EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR 
 
DIRECTORATE GENERAL OF CIVIL AVIATION (DGCA) 
Sl. No. Name Designation 
1.  SHRI FAIZ AHMED KIDWAI DIRECTOR GENERAL, DGCA 
2.  SHRI HARISH KUMAR VASHISTH JOINT DIRECTOR GENERAL 
 
BUREAU OF CIVIL AVIATION SECURITY (BCAS) 
Sl. No. Name Designation 
1. SHRI RAJESH NIRWAN DIRECTOR GENERAL 
2. MS. PRATIBHA AMBEDKAR JOINT DIRECTOR GENERAL 

254 
 
 
SERIOUS FRAUD INVESTIGATION OFFICE (SFIO) 
Sl. No. Name Designation 
1.  SH. SAMIR ASHWIN VAKIL DIRECTOR 
 
CENTRAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION (CBI) 
Sl. No. Name Designation 
1.  SHRI PRAVEEN SOOD DIRECTOR 
2.  SHRI AYV KRISHNA  ADDITIONAL DIRECTOR 
 
DEPARTMENT OF REVENUE 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Name Designation 
1.  SHRI DIWAKAR NATH MISRA  ADDITIONAL SECRETARY 
(REVENUE) 
2.  SHRI MANISH KUMAR SINHA CEO, GOODS AND 
SERVICES TAX NETWORK 
(GSTN) 
 
 
DIRECTORATE OF ENFORCEMENT (ED) 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Name Designation 
1.  SHRI RAHUL NAVIN  DIRECTOR 
 
CENTRAL BOARD OF DIRECT TAXES (CBDT) 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Name Designation 
1.  SHRI RAVI AGRAWAL  CHAIRMAN, CBDT 
2.  SHRI SHASHI BHUSHAN SHUKLA PRINCIPAL COMMISSIONER 

255 
 
 
CENTRAL BOARD OF INDIRECT TAXES AND CUSTOMS (CBIC) 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Name Designation 
1.  SHRI VIVEK CHATURVEDI  CHAIRMAN 
2.  SHRI REWAT RAJA BAHL ADDITIONAL DIRECTOR 
GENERAL 
 
 
DEPARTMENT OF PERSONNEL AND TRAINING (DoPT) 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Name Designation 
1.  SMT. RACHNA SHAH SECRETARY 
2.  SHRI SUSHIL KUMAR PATEL  JOINT SECRETARY 
 
MINISTRY OF CORPORATE AFFAIRS (MCA) 
 
Sl. No. Name Designation 
1.  MS. DEEPTI GAUR MUKERJEE  SECRETARY 
2.  SH. BALAMURUGAN D. JOINT SECRETARY 
 
 (After the witnesses were called in) 
 
2. Welcoming Hon’ble Members and the representatives from the Ministry of 
Electronics and Information and Technology (MeitY), Department of Revenue, Central 
Bureau of Investigation (CBI), Central Board of Direct Taxes (CBDT), Central Board of 
Indirect Taxes and Customs (CBIC), Department of Personnel and Training (DoPT), 
Ministry of Corporate Affairs (MCA), Enforcement Directorat e (ED),                       
Ministry of Civil Aviation, Directorate General of Civil Aviation (DGCA), Serious Fraud 
Investigation Office (SFIO), t he Chairperson, in his opening remarks, stated that 
Countries investing in AI gain both strategic and econom ic advantages. To address 
high computing costs, India has provisioned over 38,000 GPUs under the IndiaAI 
Mission, enabling start -ups—ranked third globally —to build indigenous AI models on 
domestic servers, safeguarding national data. Researchers are advanc ing work in 
semiconductors, data centres, green hydrogen, deep tech, machine learning, quantum 
computing, agri-tech, aerospace, drones, and rocket technology. 
 

256 
 
3. He further mentioned that the true economic value of AI lies in enterprise 
deployment rather than ever-larger models. Nearly 95% of use cases can be addressed 
by smaller models with parameters ranging from 50 million to 20 billion. India has 
already deployed such models across sectors to boost efficiency. Globally, AI is seen as 
the fifth industrial revolution, and India’s strategy emphasizes cost -effective solutions 
with high returns. The IndiaAI Mission has created shared national facilities under a 
public-private partnership, offering computing resources at one -third of global costs. He 
also added that, cybercrime threats such as digital arrest scams have surged and raised 
concerns over AI -generated synthetic content, misinformation, and sexualized image 
manipulation.  
 
4. Then, the representative of DoPT made her submission which gave an overview 
of use of AI tools in the Department i.e., (i) Use of AI is being integrated with personnel 
management and capacity building; and (ii) Use of AI for having translated content or 
having texts available along with the courses run by the Department. 
 
5. The represen tatives of Ministry of Corporate Affairs in their power point 
presentation highlighted the use of AI for registration of Companies and solving related 
grievances; development of early warning signals for enforcement action and 
compliance; development of AI -powered Smart Bot and Help Desk;  and handling of 
security incidents and events through AI-enabled sorting.  
 
6. The representatives of CBI stated that the personnel of the Bureau are trained to 
use AI to prevent cyber crime by breaking the chain established between the SIM card 
providers, Banks and the fraudsters. It was further stated by CBI that Mule Accounts 
were tracked with the aid of AI. CBI informed the Committee that it was using AI Facial 
Recognition Tool to detect the suspicious activity and persons. 
 
7. Thereafter, the representatives of CBDT and CBIC submitted the use of AI in its 
functioning i.e., use of AI tool to make Filing of Income Tax Returns easy and user 
friendly; use of AI embedded Non -intrusive usage of Data to Guide and Enable 
Taxpayers (N UDGE) for compliance; setting up of AI enabled Data Investigation and 
Analysis Labs (DIAL) for collating & analyzing Data and finding meaningful patterns to 
prevent frauds; launch of Insight 2.0 and IEC 3.0 projects for predictive analysis; use of 
AI aided applications ‘VAANI’ and ‘ATHITI’ for compliance and Ease of Doing Business; 
use of AI for Business Intelligence Platform – ADVAIT to analyze Data of payments, 
transactions, Customs & GST Returns. 
 
8. Then, the representatives of the Enforcement Directorate presented their views 
on AI and stated that AI was used in the Directorate for faster investigation of cases, 
pattern recognition of crimes, network and link analysis to uncover hidden connections 
and proxy ownership. 
 

257 
 
9. The representatives of Ministry of Ci vil Aviation apprised the Committee that it 
was using AI for increasing capabilities of regulators, strengthening safety and security 
oversight and improve transparency. The Ministry also stated that AI was being used for 
baggage screening and locating the  trespassers inside the premises of airports through 
Perimeter Detection System. DGCA submitted that various projects were at testing and 
launching stage to enhance security of air passengers and to comply with the guidelines 
of International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO). 
 
10. MeitY apprised the Committee about its initiative for co -coordinating with various 
Ministries/Departments/Entities on AI via ‘KARMYOGI BHARAT’ Mission.  
 
11. Thereafter, Members sought clarifications on various issues which,  inter-alia, 
included (i) Use of AI for pre -scanning and scanning of applicants before recruitment by 
DoPT; (ii) AI literacy and proficiency for future career progression of Government 
Officers; (iii) Consideration of crimes committed with the help of AI as Cyber Crim e; (iv) 
Detection and blocking of imposters on social media sites with the help of AI;  (v) Need 
for elimination of fake companies by MCA with aid of AI; (vi) Equity of AI Data sharing 
with public and private sectors; and (vii) AI needs to be developed as a more predictive 
and preventive tool rather than a reactive mechanism etc. 
 
12. The representatives of the Ministries/Departments responded to many of the 
queries raised by the Members. The Chairperson, then, directed that written replies to 
points on which i nformation were not readily available may be furnished to the 
Committee within ten days. 
 
13. Thereafter, the Chairperson thanked the representatives of all the 
Ministries/Organizations for deposing before the Committee.  
 
 
The witnesses then withdrew. 
A copy of verbatim record of the proceedings was kept on record. 
The Committee, then, adjourned. 
****** 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

258 
 
Appendix-VI 
  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON COMMUNICATIONS AND  
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (2025-26) 
 
MINUTES OF THE ELEVENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
----------- 
 The Committee sat on Friday, the 27th March, 2026 from 1000 hours to 1030 hours 
in Committee Room No. ‘C’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
DR. NISHIKANT DUBEY- Chairperson 
 MEMBERS 
  
Lok Sabha 
 
 
2. Shri Anil Baluni 
3. Shri S. Supongmeren Jamir 
4. Shri G. Kumar Naik 
5. Shri Radheshyam Rathiya 
6. Shri Devesh Shakya 
7. Shri Rajesh Verma 
 
 
Rajya Sabha 
8. Shri Amar Pal Maurya 
9. Shri S. Niranjan Reddy 
10. Shri Lahar Singh Siroya  
 
Secretariat 
 
 
1. Shri Harish Chandra Bist  - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. A. Jyothirmayi                      -          Director 
3. Shri Rajesh Mohan   -     Deputy Secretary 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the Sitting of the 
Committee convened to consider and adopt draft Report  on the Subject ‘Impact of 
Emergence of Artificial Intelligence and related issues’  relating to the Ministry of Electronics 
and Information Technology under the jurisdiction of the Committee. 
 

259 
 
 
3. The Committee, then, took up the draft Report  on the Subject ‘Impact of Emergence 
of Artificial Intelligence and related issues’ for consideration and adoption. 
 
4. The Committee adopted the Report with slight  modifications and also authorized the 
Chairperson to finalize the draft Report and present the  same to the House during the 
current Session of Parliament. 
 
 
 
The Committee, then, adjourned. 
 
**** 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 