 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON COMMUNICATIONS  
AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY  
(2024-25) 
 
 
EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
MINISTRY OF INFORMATION AND BROADCASTING 
 
 
 
 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the 
Committee contained in their Fifty-Sixth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on 
‘Regulation of Cable Television in India'] 
 
 
SIXTH REPORT 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     March, 2025/ Phalguna, 1946 (Saka) 
6 
 


 
 
SIXTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
COMMUNICATIONS AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(2024-25) 
 
 
EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
MINISTRY OF INFORMATION AND BROADCASTING 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the 
Committee contained in their Fifty-Sixth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on 
‘Regulation of Cable Television in India'] 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on           11.03.2025 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on              11.03.2025 
 
                    LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
                   NEW DELHI 
 
 
                 March 2025/ Phalguna, 1946 (Saka) 


 
 
CCIT No. 407 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
©2025 By Lok Sabha Secretariat 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok 
Sabha (Seventeenth Edition) and Printed by Lok Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi-110001 

 
 
 
CONTENTS 
 PAGE  
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE..................................................................................................  
INTRODUCTION....................................................................................................................................  
CHAPTER I Report……………………………………………………………………….....................  
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government……………………………………………………………………...............  
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in 
view of the replies of the Government………………………………..........................  
CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee and require reiteration ………….........  
CHAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the Government 
are of interim in nature….........................................................................................  
 ANNEXURES  
I. Minutes of the 15th Sitting of the Committee held on 05.03.2025............................  
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in their Fifty -Sixth Report (Seventeenth Lok 
Sabha).  
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
Composition of the Standing Committee on Communications and 
Information Technology (2024-25)** 
 
Dr. Nishikant Dubey - Chairperson 
Lok Sabha 
  
2. Shri C.N. Annadurai 
3. Shri Anil Baluni 
4. Dr. Rabindra Narayan Behera 
5. Shri Anup Sanjay Dhotre 
6. Shri Gurmeet Singh Meet Hayer 
7. Shri Sanjay Haribhau Jadhav 
8. Shri S. Supongmeren Jamir 
9. Shri Appalanaidu Kalisetti 
10. Smt. Poonamben Hematbhai Maadam 
11. Ms. Mahua Moitra 
12. Shri G. Kumar Naik 
13. Shri Shafi Parambil 
14. Dr. M.K. Vishnu Prasad 
15. Ms. Kangna Ranaut 
16. Shri Radheshyam Rathiya 
17. Shri Ramasahayam Raghuram Reddy 
18. Shri Arun Kumar Sagar 
19. Shri Devesh Shakya 
20. Shri Vishnu Datt Sharma 
21. Shri Rajesh Verma 
Rajya Sabha 
22. Shri Saket Gokhale* 
23. Smt. Priyanka Chaturvedi 
24. Shri Ilaiyaraaja 
25. Shri Amar Pal Maurya 
26. Dr. Sasmit Patra 
27. Shri V. Vijayendra Prasad 
28. Shri S. Niranjan Reddy 
29. Shri Kartikeya Sharma 
30. Shri Lahar Singh Siroya  
31. Shri K.T.S. Tulsi 
SECRETARIAT 
1.  Shri Y.M. Kandpal  — Joint Secretary 
2.  Smt. A. Jyothirmayi  — Director 
3.  Smt. Rinky Singh                — Executive Officer  
 
**Committee constituted w.e.f. 26 th September, 2024 vide Para No.833 of Bulletin Part -II dated 
26th September, 2024. 
* Shri Saket Gokhale  has been nominated vide Para No. 853 of Bulletin Part –II dated 03 rd 
October, 2024. 

 
 
INTRODUCTION 
I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Communications and Information Technology 
(2024-25), having been authorized by the Committee, present this Sixth Report on Action Taken 
by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their 
Fifty-Sixth Report (Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on  the subject  ‗Regulation of Cable Television in 
India‘ relating to the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting. 
2.  The Fifty-Sixth Report was presented to Lok Sabha and also laid on the Table of  
Rajya Sabha on 8th February, 2024.  The Ministry of Information and Broadcasting furnished their 
Action Taken Notes on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the Fifty-Sixth Report 
on 17th January, 2025. 
3.  The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their Sitting held on           
5th March, 2025. 
4.  For facil ity of reference and convenience, Observations/Recommendations of the 
Committee have been printed in bold in Chapter-I of the Report.  
5.  An analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Fifty-Sixth Report of the Committee is given at Annexure-II. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     NEW DELHI; DR. NISHIKANT DUBEY, 
   07  March, 2025  Chairperson, 
16  Phalguna, 1946 (Saka) Standing Committee on  
Communications and Information Technology 

1 
 
CHAPTER I 
REPORT 
This Report of the St anding Committee on Communications and Information 
Technology deals with the action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Fifty-sixth Report 
(Seventeenth Lok Sabha) on  the subject ‗Regulation of Ca ble Television in India ‘ 
relating to the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting. 
 
2. The Fifty-sixth Report was presented to Lok Sabha/laid in Rajya Sabha on                          
8th February, 202 4.  It contained 11 Observations/Recommendations. Replies  of the 
Government in respect of all the Observations/Recommendations have been received 
from the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting and are categorized as under:- 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by 
the Government 
 
Rec. Sl. Nos.:– 1, 8, 9 & 11 
 
  Total-04 
Chapter-II 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the replies of the Government 
 
 
Rec. Sl. No.:– NIL 
 
  Total — NIL  
Chapter-III 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in res pect of which replies of 
the Government have not been accepted by the Committee and 
require reiteration 
 
Rec. Sl. No.:– NIL 
 
  Total – 00  
Chapter-IV 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of 
the Government are of interim in nature  
 
Rec. Sl. No.:– 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7 & 10 
 
  Total – 07 
Chapter-V 
 
3. The Committee trust that utmost importance would be given to 
implementation of the Observations/Recommendations accepted by the 
Government. The Committee further desire that Action Taken Notes on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in Chapter -I of this Report and final 
action taken replies to the Observations/Recommendations contained in                         
Chapter-V of this Report should be furnished at the earliest. 

2 
 
4. The Committe e will now deal with action taken by the Government on some of 
their recommendations.   
Regulation of Cable Television in India 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 2) 
5. The Committee, in their Fifty-sixth Report, had recommended as under:- 
―The Committee note that for r egulating the Cable TV industry there are 
not only multiple Acts, Rules, Guidelines, etc. but there are also multiple 
regulatory bodies like MIB, TRAI, DoT, etc. For example, MIB serves as 
the registering authority for MSOs whereas the Head -Post office of the 
area serves as registering authority for Local Cable Operators. Besides, 
as submitted by MIB there is an urgent need for creating a level playing 
field for all broadcasting services as well as for addressing the need of 
satellite-based technologies whi ch are being regulated through the old 
legislation. In view of the foregoing, the Committee are of the opinion that 
the Cable TV industry needs to be regulated through a comprehensive Act 
and therefore recommend the Ministry to ensure that the proposed 
‗Broadcasting Services (Regulation) Bill, 2023‘ sees the light of the day at 
the earliest since it will go a long way in resolving the concerns of this 
industry. Nevertheless, the Committee impress upon the Ministry to 
ensure that adequate consultations are d one with all the concerned 
stakeholders. The Committee recommend that all the aspects concerning 
the cable industry may be taken into consideration while bringing in the 
comprehensive Bill. The Committee would further like to engage in 
constructive discussions regarding the proposed draft legislation at a more 
mature stage of its formulation.  The Committee also desire to be apprised 
of the timeline by which the Ministry would table the ‗Broadcasting 
Services (Regulation) Bill, 2023‘ for the consideration o f the Parliament. 
The Committee desire to be apprised of the progress made in this regard‖. 
 
6. In their Action Taken Reply, t he Ministry of information and Broadcasting 
submitted as under:– 
―The draft Broadcasting Services (Regulation) Bill, 2023 was placed in 
public domain on 10.11.2023, seeking views/comments/suggestions of the 
general public and stakeholders till 09.12.2023 which was later extended 
upto 15.01.2024. Number of comments were received and series of 
consultations were done subsequently. Based o n the wide range of view 
expressed during consultations with stakeholders, additional time was 
provided for comments till 15.10.2024. A fresh draft will be published after 
detailed consultations.  
 
Concerning the timeline for presenting the draft bill befo re the Honorable 
Parliament, it is stated that post completion of consultations with 
stakeholders, this Ministry shall prepare a draft Cabinet Note on the bill, 
which will be circulated for Inter-Ministerial consultation. Following this, the 
draft bill wil l be submitted for the Cabinet's consideration. This process is 
expected to take some time. The Committee will be duly informed about 
the progress of this process‖. 
 

3 
 
7. The Standing Committee on Communications and Information Technology 
[17th Lok Sabha ( 2024-25)], in their Fifty-sixth Report had observed that for 
regulating Cable T elevision Industry, there are multiple Acts, Rules, Guidelines, 
etc. besides multiple regulatory bodies like  Ministry of Information and 
Broadcasting (MIB), Telecom Regulatory Autho rity of India (TRAI) , Department of 
Telecommunication (DoT), etc. The Committee had also learnt that there was an 
urgent need for creating a level playing field for all Broadcasting services and for 
addressing the need for satellite-based technologies whic h were being regulated 
through the old legislation.  In view of these, the Committee had opined that the 
Cable TV Industry needs to be regulated through a comprehensive Act and had 
desired to be apprised of the timeline by which the ‘Broadcasting services 
(Regulation) Bill, 2023’ would be tabled in the Parliament.  To this, the Ministry in 
their Action Taken Reply,  informed that the draft ‘Broadcasting Services 
(Regulation) Bill, 2023’ was placed in public domain on 10.11.2023 to seek 
views/comments/suggestions from general public and stakeholders till 09.12.2023 
which was later extended upto 15.01.2024.  The Ministry also informed that a 
number of comments were received and series of consultations were done and 
based on the wide range of view s expressed during consultations additional time 
was provided for comments till 15.10.2024.  Thus, a fresh draft would be published 
after the completion of detailed consultations with stakeholders . Further, the 
Ministry would prepare a draft Cabinet Note on the Bill, whi ch would be circulated 
for Inter- Ministerial consultation. Following this, the draft Bill would be submitted 
for the Cabinet’s consideration and this process would take some time.  
In the light of the significance/need for a comprehensive Act and the  fact 
that it is more than 3 months since the additional time was given for receiving 
comments/suggestions from general public and stakeholders  (till 15.10.2024 ), the 
Committee desire to be apprised of the progress made with respect to  the 
‘Broadcasting Services (Regulation) Bill, 2023/2024 ’. The Committee call upon the 
Ministry to set a deadline for completing the entire process and introduce the 
‘Broadcasting Services (Regulation) Bill’ in the Parliament at the earliest. 
 
Constraints/challenges faced with respect to Cable TV regulation in India 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 3) 
8. The Committee, in their Original Report, had made the following 
Observation/Recommendation:– 

4 
 
―The Committee further note the measures/initiatives taken to address the 
issues concerning various players of the Cable TV industry . TRAI has 
issued the consultation paper on ‗Issues related to New Regulatory 
Framework for Broadcasting and Cable services‘ on 7th May 2022 
seeking stakeholders‘ comments. On the basis of this consultation, on 
22nd November  2022, TRAI notified the Telecommunication 
(Broadcasting and Cable) Services (Eighth) (Addressable Systems) Tariff 
(Third Amendment) Order, 2022 and the Telecommunication 
(Broadcasting and Cable) Services (Addressable Systems) 
Interconnection Regulations ( Third Amendment) Order, 2022. Further, to 
address various issues, TRAI issued a consultation paper titled ‗Review of 
Regulatory Framework for Broadcasting and Cable services‘ on 23rd 
August 2023 seeking stakeholders‘ comments. The Committee have been 
informed that the comments/ counter -comments are being analyzed by 
TRAI. In this regard, the Committee desire to be apprised of the updated 
status regarding the ‗Review of Regulatory Framework for Broadcasting 
and Cable services‘ issued on 23rd August 2023 seek ing stakeholders‘ 
comments along with the outcome on the following measures taken by 
MIB to ensure the growth of Cable TV sector which includes (i) 
streamlining of procedures for Multi -System Operator (MSO) registration 
renewal, extending the period to ten  years; (ii) Last Mile Access to 
Broadband service providers; (iii) Regulatory Framework for Platform 
Services issued on 30.11.2022; (iv) Guidelines issued on infrastructure 
sharing on 29.12.2021, that is permitting Multi -System Operators (MSOs) 
to share i nfrastructure, including headends and networks, under specific 
conditions;  (v) streamlining the registration procedure for LCOs, etc.  
 
The Committee further recommend MIB to collaborate with the Ministry of 
Electronics and Information Technology (Meity) to develop a 
comprehensive digital solution for addressing under  reporting among 
Cable TV subscribers and the absence of an oversight mechanism. This 
solution should include an advanced digital platform with robust data 
analytics tools to detect and mitiga te under reporting, real -time reporting 
features, standardized data protocols  and regular audits for ongoing 
effectiveness. The user -friendly interface will facilitate seamless reporting 
and monitoring, ensuring transparency and accountability within the C able 
TV sector. 
 
The Committee would further urge the Ministry to : (i) identify and address 
the issues acting as roadblocks of monitoring mechanism for ensuring 
compliance to the relevant regulations/guidelines; (ii) have a central 
database for monitoring cable operators; and (ii) take initiatives for making 
Ministry of I&B as the registering authority for LCOs. The Committee 
would like to be apprised of the action taken on these issues‖. 
 
 
9. The Ministry of Information and Broadcasting, in their Action Taken  Reply, stated 
that the updated status regarding the ‗Review of Regulatory Framework for Broadcasting 
and Cable services‘ issued by TRAI on 23.08.2023 for stakeholder‘s comments shall be 
provided by TRAI. As regards other points, the Ministry provided following inputs:-  
―(i)Streamlining of procedure for MSO registration renewal, extending the 
period to 10 years: In this regard, it is stated that this Ministry amended 

5 
 
the Cable Television Network Rules, 1994 on September 18, 2023, to 
include provisions related to the renewal of MSO registration. According to 
the amendments, MSO registration will be renewed for a period of 10 
years. The additional requirements for the renewal process have been 
duly notified in the amended Rules. To ensure a streamlined renewa l 
procedure, MSOs are instructed to apply for the renewal of their 
registrations online through the Broadcast Seva Portal.  
 
(ii) Last Mile Access to Broadband Service Providers:  (a)It is stated that 
the CTN Rules, 1994 were am ended on 18.09.2023 and Rule  5C was 
added which reads as follows: 
‘Cable operators may strive to provide last mile access to broadband 
service providers providing internet service or access service, in a fair, 
transparent and Non -discriminatory manner for proliferation of broadband 
services’. 
 
(b) In addition to the above, a DO letter dated February 19, 2024, from the 
Secretary (I&B) was sent to the Department of Telecommunications 
requesting the exemption of cable operators registered under the Cable 
Television Networks (CTN) Act, 199 5, from the requirements of obtaining 
a Virtual Network Operator (VNO) license. This exemption was sought to 
facilitate the proliferation of broadband services, especially in rural areas.  
 
(c) Subsequently, a meeting was organized by this Ministry on 27.0 6.2024 
with the representatives from DoT and LCOs/MSOs. During the meeting, it 
was informed by DoT that TRAI‘s recommendations on rationalization of 
requirements of VNO license are under consideration in the Department. 
A reminder dated 17.10.2024 was sent  to DoT seeking action taken in the 
matter. In response, DoT vide its DO letter dated 19.11.2024 stated that 
‗DoT is in the process of framing of Rules under the ambit of 
Telecommunications Act 2023 pertaining to development, expansion and 
operation of telecommunication services and telecommunication networks; 
assignment of spectrum; and for matters connected therewith or incidental 
thereto.  Further, the Department is in the process of evaluating the TRAI 
recommendations dated 18th September 2024 regarding the framework for 
service authorizations under Section 3(1)(a) of the Act. However, TRAI’s 
recommendations concerning authorizations under Section 3(1)(b) of the 
Act are yet to be received. A final decision on the matter will only be taken 
once the matter  has been examined in a holistic manner considering all 
aspects including its potential impact on the stak eholders and sector as a 
whole’. 
(iii) Regulatory framework for Platform Services (PS) issued on 
30.11.2022: This Ministry had issued guidelines for r egistration of PS 
channels offered by MSOs on 30.11.2022. The MSOs providing PS 
channels have been instructed to apply for registration of these services 
online. 
(iv) Guidelines issued on infrastructure sharing on 29.12.2021 that is 
permitting MSOs to share infrastructure including headends and networks, 
under specific conditions: This Ministry had issued guidelines on 
29.12.2021 allowing MSOs to share infrastructure o n voluntary basis. This 
step enables small players to share infrastructure and provide Cable TV 
services without infusing hefty investments in cable infrastructure.  
 

6 
 
As per the guidelines the MSOs can share infrastructure by submitting an 
application before the Ministry along with the terms of agreement between 
them. The sharing is subject to the compliance of terms and conditions of 
the MSO registrations and TRAI‘s regulations.  
 
(v) Streamlining the registration procedure for LCOs:  (a) Currently, the 
registration of Local Cable Operators (LCOs) is carried out at the Local 
Head Post Office of the area of operation of the LCO. The registration 
process is offline due to which LCO face problems.  
 
(b) To address the issues faced by the LCOs, this Ministry is in process of 
developing an online module (within Broadcast Seva Portal) to carry out 
registration of LCOs. Currently, the Ministry is at advance stage of 
implementing online Registration Framework for LCOs. The registration 
shall be granted for a period of 5 years with PAN India validity. The 
registering authority for LCO shall be designated S ection Officer in the 
Ministry.  
 
(vi) The Committee also recommended collaboration with Meity to develop 
a comprehensive digital solution for addressing underreporting among 
cable TV subscribers and absence of oversight mechanism. In this regard, 
it is stated that a Cable Television Monitoring Cell (CTMC) is proposed to 
be setup in the Ministry to ensure that MSOs furnish their subscriber data 
regularly to the Ministry. It has also been proposed to provide a digital 
solution i.e. monitoring devices that sh all be installed at the premises of 
MSOs and would ensure transparency and accountability in the Cable TV 
sector.  
 
(vii) Further, it is stated that this Ministry is working actively to identify and 
address the roadblocks of monitoring mechanism to ensure compliance to 
the extant regulations/ guidelines.  
 
(viii) Furthermore, this Ministry published a ―National Register of LCOs‖ on 
Broadcast Seva Portal on 22.02.2024 to assign a National Registration 
Number to each LCO and compile the National register of L COs. This 
register will provide the details of LCOs to all the stakeholders to connect 
to them for cable services/broadband services. The register is being 
updated timely by this Ministry‖.  
 
10. The Committee note that the Ministry have taken concrete actions on issues 
like (a) strea mlining of procedure for Multi -System Operator (MSO) registration 
renewal - extending the period to ten years; (b) Regulatory Framework for Platform 
Services issued on 30.11.2022;  (c) Guidelines issued on infrastructure sharing on 
29.12.2021 - that is permitting Multi - System Operators (MSOs) to share 
infrastructure, including head -ends and networks, under specific conditions; and  
(d) Streamlining the registration procedure for LCOs, etc.  
The Committee also note that w.r.t. last mile access to Broadband service 
providers, the Ministry have submitted that the Department of Telecommunication  
(DoT) is in the process of framing  Rules under the ambit of ‘Telecommunications 

7 
 
Act, 2023’ and they are also in the process of evaluating TRAI ’s recommendations 
regarding the framework for service authorizations under Section 3 (1) (a) of the 
Act. Since TRAI’s recommendation under Section 3 (i) (b) of the Act is pending, 
DoT may pursue vigorously with TRAI to obtain the same.  The Committee urge 
the Ministry to get the updated status from  DoT and TRAI and apprise them about 
the final decision on the matter at the earliest.  
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 4, 5 and 6) 
 
Role of TRAI 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 4) 
11. The Committee, in their  Original Report, had made  the following 
Observation/Recommendation:– 
―On the decision of TRAI to not place a cap on channel pricing based on 
derived costing methodology for the benefit and protection of consumers, 
TRAI submitted that a channel consists of several programs. The cos t of 
the production of different programs drastically varies based on the actors, 
setup cost, script, copyrights, and other miscellaneous factors. The 
various programs in a given channel also frequently change based on 
their Television Rating Points (TRP),  advertisement potential, and other 
ground reports. Hence, determining the cost of production of a channel at 
all times is an extremely difficult process, perhaps almost impossible. 
They also stated that Broadcasters should be given business flexibility to  
monetize their channels. 
 
Further, due to conflicting positions presented by AIDCF and TRAI during 
the deliberations, the Committee urged both parties to engage in 
constructive dialogue and enhance mutual understanding before 
presenting their respective f acts to the Committee. The Committee 
express disappointment at TRAI's decision to instruct AIDCF to address 
pricing policy discrepancies without holding a meeting. Despite the 
Committee's clear directive, TRAI has persistently refused to engage with 
AIDCF. The Committee emphasized that fostering harmonious relations 
between the parties is crucial for achieving an amicable solution, but 
unfortunately, this collaborative approach has not been observed. The 
Committee acknowledge the complexity involved in dete rmining channel 
pricing due to various factors influencing costing. Nevertheless, it 
emphasizes that TRAI holds a shared responsibility to ensure consumers 
receive services at a fair price. The Committee further recognized the 
paramount importance of provi ding consumers with good Quality -of-
Service (QoS) under all circumstances. Given TRAI's pivotal role in 
fostering a healthy and competitive telecommunications and broadcasting 
ecosystem, the Committee recommend a collaborative effort among all 
stakeholders to address all the issues amicably as it encourages parties to 
engage in constructive discussions, find mutually agreeable solutions, and 

8 
 
take necessary actions to deliver optimal services to consumers. The 
Committee desire to be apprised regularly of the  updates on the progress 
made in this regard‖. 
 
12. The Ministry of information and Broadcasting , in their Action Taken Reply , 
submitted as under:– 
― The recommendation made by the Committee was forwarded to TRAI for 
taking necessary action and submit comments  vide letter dated 
03.04.2024. TRAI vide its letter dated 02.05.2024 has informed that is has 
noted the issue for further consideration.  
 
Further, the subject matter falls under the administrative domain of TRAI, 
no action is required on part of this Ministry‖. 
 
 
Enhanced flexibility to curate personalized packages from bouquets 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 5) 
13. The Committee, in their Original Report, made the following 
observations/recommendations:–  
―The Committee discern that, since DPOs are the primary servi ce 
providers operating through Local Cable Operators (LCOs), therefore, the 
DPOs are strategically positioned to perceive and respond to the nuanced 
preferences and requirements of subscribers. The Committee 
acknowledge that the current practice of compell ing subscribers to opt for 
predefined bouquets offered by Broadcasters acts as a hindrance to 
consumer choice. While the Committee do not question the Broadcasters' 
intent, it perceives that this practice does not align with the interests of 
consumers. The refore, in order to safeguard consumer interests and 
promote freedom of choice, the Committee recommend that Distribution 
Platform Operators (DPOs) be granted the authority to select individual 
channels from broadcasters' bouquets. Further, in order to ens ure that 
consumers have the flexibility to subscribe only to channels of their 
interest, fostering a more personalized viewing experience, the Committee 
recommend that DPOs should only be permitted to choose channels 
based on consumer preferences and remit  to broadcasters the 
proportional price of the selected channels. The Committee wish to be 
apprised of the action taken in this regard‖. 
 
 
14. The Ministry of information and Broadcasting , in their Action Taken Reply , 
submitted as under:– 
―The Committee recomm ended that DPOs may be granted authority to 
select individual channels from broadcasters‘ bouquet on the basis of 
consumer preferences. The proportional prices of these channels are to 
be remitted to broadcasters by them.  
 
In this regard, it is submitted that MIB had already sent a reference to 
TRAI for recommendation on the matter under Section 11(1)(a)(iv) of the 
TRAI Act, 1997 on 06.09.2023. 
 

9 
 
In addition to the above, the report of the Standing Committee was sent to 
TRAI vide this Ministry‘s letter date d 03.04.2024. TRAI vide letter dated 
02.05.2024 has informed that it has noted the issue for further 
consideration. 
Further, the subject matter falls under the administrative domain of TRAI, 
no action is required on part of this Ministry‖. 
Demarcation in the advertising guidelines between pay TV and FTA channels   
(Recommendation Sl. No. 6) 
15. The Committee , in their Original Report, made the following 
observation/recommendation:– 
―The Committee consider that there is a need for a thoughtful examination 
of suc h issues to safeguard consumer interests. The Committee, 
therefore, call upon for a categorization of channels as either ‗Pay -TV‘ or 
‗Free-to-air‘ (FTA), based on the respective sources of revenue. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend for initiating a compr ehensive 
consultation focused on the costing methodology of TV channels. This 
consultation should also aim to tackle the issue where consumers, who 
are essentially paying subscription fees, find themselves subjected to 
advertisements for a significant duration of their viewing experience‖. 
 
16. The Ministry of information and Broadcasting , in their Action Taken Reply , 
submitted as under:– 
―This Ministry has sent a copy of the report to TRAI vide letter dated 
03.04.2024. TRAI vide its letter dated 02.05.2024 has  informed that it has 
noted the issue for further consideration. 
 
Further, the subject matter falls under the administrative domain of TRAI, 
no action is required on part of this Ministry‖. 
 
17. The Committee note that, with respect  to the above -mentioned thre e 
Observations/Recommendations (No. 4, 5 and 6) , the Ministry of Information and 
Broadcasting had forwarded them to TRAI for taking necessary action. In addition, 
the Ministry of I&B have responded that the subject matter (s) falls under the  
administrative domain of TRAI and no action is required on the Ministry’s part. In 
light of the fact that the subject ‘Regulation of Cable Television in India’ relates to 
the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting  and they act as nodal Ministry , the 
Committee recommend them to seek the response from TRAI/DoT for all the three 
above-mentioned Observations/ Recommendations along with the responses on 
the Observations/Recommendations placed under Chapter -V of this Report  and 
furnish the same at the earliest. 
 
 

10 
 
CHAPTER II 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN  ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 1) 
Introduction 
The Committee note that the cable TV industry in India has been an integral part 
of the Media and Entertainment (M&E) sector and forms the back bone of the 
Broadcasting distribution industry which has played a significant role in the growth of the 
electronic media sector. With the growth in digital media, advancement in technology, 
and with the advent of OTT platforms, the cable TV subscriber base  has witnessed a 
decline. The Committee note that as on September 2023, there are 915 Private Satellite 
TV Channels permitted by the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting (MIB) which 
include 361 Pay Channels (257 SD Pay Channels and 104 HD Pay Channels)  and 543 
Free-to-Air (FTA) Channels and there are approximately 332 Broadcasters (including 42 
Pay Broadcasters and 290 FTA Broadcasters). The Committee have been informed that 
there are 998 Multi -System Operators (MSOs) registered with the MIB and there a re 
81706 Cable Operators. The Committee have also been informed that there are 64.18 
million total active Direct -to-Home (DTH) Subscribers, 0.58 million Internet Protocol 
Television (IPTV) Subscribers, 64 million Cable TV Households, 2 million Headend -In-
The-Sky (HITS) Subscribers, 50 million DD Free Dish households in the country. During 
the year 2022, the TV Revenue was Rs. 70,900 crore and out of that Rs. 39,200 crore 
was the subscription revenue and Rs. 31,800 crore was the Advertisement Revenue.   
With respect to TV service value chain, the Committee note that the Broadcasting 
and Cable sector comprises of Broadcasters, Distribution Platform Operators (DPOs), 
and Local Cable Operators (LCOs) to provide satellite television services to the 
consumers and the Broadcaster is responsible for uplinking the signals of their television 
channel to a satellite in an encrypted form. The distributor then receives these signals 
from the satellite and decodes them using the decoder provided by the Broadcaster. The 
distributor is typically a company such as a Multiple System Operator (MSO), a Direct -to-
Home (DTH) operator, a Headend -In-The-Sky (HITS) operator, or an Internet Protocol 
Television (IPTV) operator. Once the distributor has received and decoded the signals, 
they process and merge the TV channel signals of multiple broadcasters and platform 
services. After merging these signals, the distributor encrypts the combined signals and 
retransmits them further, either directly or through the local cable operator (LCO) , to the 
customer. This process ensures that the customer receives a clear and uninterrupted 
signal from the television channel. MSOs stand at the middle point in the hierarchy of the 
Cable Services Sector between the Broadcasters on one side and Local Cab le 
Operators on the other. In some instances, MSOs also provide the services directly to 
their consumers. 
While examining the subject the Committee learnt that there has been a 
continuous decline in Cable TV Households and as per the Report of TRAI, the 
subscriber base of the Cable TV Industry has declined from 98.5 million (in 2018) to 67 
million (in 2021) and further declining. The Committee also observed various constraints 
being faced by stakeholders in this sector. In the succeeding paragraphs, the Com mittee 
have examined various issues involved in the regulation of the cable TV industry in India 

11 
 
and hope that the Observations/Recommendations will help in taking cognizance of the 
concerns related to this industry and addressing them too. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 The observations/recommendations of the Committee in the Report are noted. 
 
 
(Ministry of Information and Broadcasting O.M. No. 
 N-45007/2/2023-DAS (Part-II) dated 17.01.2025) 
 
 (Recommendation Sl. No. 8) 
Issue related to GST Liabilities 
The Com mittee acknowledge the complex dynamics between Multi -System 
Operators (MSOs) and Local Cable Operators (LCOs) within the cable television service 
ecosystem, particularly concerning Goods and Services Tax (GST) liabilities. As informed 
by the stakeholders,  the Supreme Court, in the case of M/s Hathway Sukhamrit Cable 
and Datacom (P) Ltd., has outlined that Local Cable Operators (LCOs) receive signals 
from Multiple System Operators (MSOs), and the ultimate consumers or subscribers 
receive signals from LCOs. Moreover, the judgment has established that the service 
recipient for MSOs is the LCO, and for LCOs, it is the ultimate subscribers. The judgment 
emphasized that notwithstanding the provision of access to television channels through 
set-top boxes by MSOs, the interface between ultimate consumers and cable signals 
remains the exclusive domain of LCOs. The Committee find these observations crucial 
as they help in understanding the distinct roles and responsibilities of MSOs, LCOs, and 
ultimate subscribers. 
 The Committee recognize that LCOs wield control over, manage, and service the 
cable television network, and they are responsible for collecting charges from 
subscribers. The Committee are of the considered opinion that any GST and 
entertainment tax liabilities pertinent to LCOs should be exclusively discharged by LCOs, 
as per the applicable norms. Thus, in order to maintain fair distribution of tax 
responsibilities, the Committee strongly urge to hold an inter -Departmental consultation 
between Ministry of In formation and Broadcasting and Department of Revenue with a 
mandate to define GST responsibilities within the sector, aiming to protect the interests of 
both MSOs and LCOs, with an approach meant to create a fair and effective tax system 
for the cable television sector. 
Reply of the Government 
 With regard to the recommendation regarding GST liabilities between LCO and 
MSO, it is stated that TRU vide its email dated 13.11.2024 has submitted that DGGI 
(Directorate General of Goods and Service Tax Intelligenc e) HQ vide letter dated 
11.08.2024 has instructed its formations that ― the matter involves purely a question of 
fact, as to who is the supplier of services to the end customer i.e. subscriber, in a 
particular case- MSO or his linked LCO. The roles and resp onsibilities of the MSO and 
his linked LCO are fixed in terms of the agreement entered into between them and vary 
according to the agreement between them (as mentioned in the views of MIB).  Therefore 
a detailed examination of the agreements among other aspects can determine whether it 
is the MSO, or his linked LCO, who is the supplier of cable services to the subscriber. 
Based on such examination, GST liability can be correctly fastened on the MSO or the 

12 
 
LCO, as the case may be. The issue appears to be reso lved in light of the above 
instructions.” 
 
(Ministry of Information and Broadcasting O.M. No. 
 N-45007/2/2023-DAS (Part-II) dated 17.01.2025) 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 9) 
Issue of Employment 
 According to ‗All India Digital Cable Federation (AIDCF)‘, an ass ociation of major 
Multi-system Operators functioning in India, approximately 3 lakh employees have lost 
their livelihood in the last 4 years, and additionally, around 3 lakh workforce is on the 
verge of losing their livelihood in cable TV industry across India due to massive reduction 
in cable TV base. When asked to provide the data related to number of job losses that 
have occurred in the past 5 years due to the declining subscriber base in the Cable TV 
industry, the Ministry informed the Committee that th e employment landscape in the 
cable TV sector is predominantly informal and lacks a standardized record -keeping and 
reporting system. Unlike industries with a higher prevalence of contract -based 
employment, the cable TV industry often engages a significant portion of its workforce on 
an informal basis, making it challenging to compile specific data on job losses attributed 
to the declining subscriber base. However, the associations of MSOs and LCOs have 
claimed sustained reduction in the workforce in the in dustry over the last 5 years.  The 
Committee while taking note that the decline in the work force in Cable TV sector is one 
of the inevitable effects of the advancement of technology call upon the Ministry to 
apprise about the measures envisaged to address this issue.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 The Committee has acknowledged that the decline in workforce in cable TV sector 
is inevitable due to advancement in technology. Further, the workforce in sector is 
majorly informal.  
 
Nevertheless, this Ministry has taken several steps to ensure growth in the industry, 
some of these are: 
 
a) Decriminalization of the CTN Act, 1995 through Jan Vishwas (Amendment of 
Provisions) Act, 2023 to ensure investors‘ confidence. 
b) Allowing sharing of infrastructure vide guidelines dat ed 29.12.2021 to do away 
with the need of gigantic investments.  
c) Streamlining MSO Registration renewal process vide amendments in the CTN 
Rules, 1994 on 18.09.2023 to ensure continuity of business.  
d) Developing regulatory framework for PS channels vide guid elines dated 
30.11.2022 thereby recognizing platforms promoting regional content.  
 
These steps are expected to enhance investors‘ confidence and streamline the 
regulatory compliances in the industry thereby increasing the scope of employment 
opportunities in the sector.   
(Ministry of Information and Broadcasting O.M. No. 
 N-45007/2/2023-DAS (Part-II) dated 17.01.2025) 
 

13 
 
 (Recommendation Sl. No. 11) 
Grievance Redressal Mechanism 
The Committee note that ‗The Cable Television Networks (Regulation) Act, 1995‘ 
addresses grievances and complaints related to contents through a three -level structure: 
self-regulation by broadcasters, self -regulating bodies, and oversight by the Central 
Government. The Ministry have informed that with respect to the consumers‘ compla ints 
against cable operators, a robust mechanism i.e. Centralized Public Grievance Redress 
and Monitoring System (CPGRAMS) portal is in place. The portal has been updated 
keeping in mind the exclusive need of consumers in relation to cable TV networks. The  
portal has stakeholders like TRAI, State Authorities (Authorized Officer and State Police 
Authorities) etc. to whom the complaints against cable operators can be forwarded to in 
no time. In addition to this there is a dedicated portal for complaints relat ed to channel 
pricing, bouquet-related issues, quality-related issues etc. is being operated by TRAI.  
The Committee further learnt that the Cable Television Networks Rules, 1994 
were amended on 17th June, 2021 so as to provide a statutory mechanism for re dressal 
of grievances/complaints of citizens relating to content broadcast by television channels. 
As per these Rules, to ensure observance and adherence to the Programme Code and 
Advertisement Code specified under the Cable Television Networks Rules, 1994 , there 
should be a 3-level structure that is at Level I -self-regulation by broadcaster; at Level II - 
Self- Regulation by the self -regulating bodies of the broadcasters; at Level III -an 
oversight mechanism by the Central Government. While noting that ‗The  Cable 
Television Networks (Amendment) Rules, 2021, institutionalizes a statutory mechanism 
for grievance redressal and CPGRAMS portal is in place for consumers‘ complaints 
against cable operators, the Committee desire to be kept apprised of the number of 
grievances addressed at Level I, II and III since 2021. The Committee would also like to 
be apprised about the cases handled by the dedicated portal operated by TRAI that is 
meant for complaints related to channel pricing, bouquet -related issues, quality -related 
issues etc., along with the reasons for delay in addressing the complaints, if any. 
Nevertheless, the Committee also recommend the Ministry to make the grievance 
redressal mechanism more consumer friendly and create awareness drive for Consumer 
about the Grievance Redressal Mechanism that is available as it is very essential for a 
robust and responsive cable TV eco-system. The Committee would like to be apprised of 
the progress made in this regard. 
Reply of the Government 
 
 As regards the number of c omplaints received at level I, II and III of the grievance 
redressal structure in the CTN (Amendment) Rules, 2021, it is stated that since 2021 till 
24.09.2024, 589 complaints have been referred to Level -I i.e. the broadcasters, 185 
complaints have been re ferred to Level -II i.e. the self -regulatory bodies and Advertising 
Standards Council of India (ASCI) and 89 complaints have been referred to Level -III i.e. 
Inter-Departmental Committee (IDC). 
 
(ii) As regards cases handled by TRAI, the recommendations made by the committee 
were sent to TRAI on 03.04.2024, TRAI vide its letter dated 02.05.2024 had informed 
that the TRAI Act, 1997 does not envisage handling of individual consumer complaints. 
Complaints, if any, received in TRAI are forwarded to the concerned service provider for 
an early resolution. Further, the Interconnection Regulations, 2017 has laid down the 
provisions for grievance redressal mechanism. Regulation 29 of the said regulations 
states that the authority may forward the complaints from consume rs to the concerned 
distributor of TV channels. As regard grievance portal, TRAI has deployed an internal 

14 
 
consumer complaint portal through which the complaints received are forwarded to 
respective service providers. As per the data from portal, during the  last one year i.e. 
from 19.04.2023 to 19.04.2024, 1051 complaints were forwarded to MSOs which are on -
boarded on the portal.  
 
(iii) Committee also recommended raising awareness about the existing grievance 
redressal mechanism to make it more consumer fri endly. In this regard, it is stated that 
the ‗Cable Television Networks (Amendment) Rules, 2021‘ accorded widespread 
publicity through various forms of media, including print media, electronic, digital and 
social media. Major newspapers, TV channels, digit al news channels and social media 
handles disseminated the news, informing the public that the Central Govt. has 
established a statutory 3 -tier mechanism to address the grievances and complaints 
related to TV channel programmes.  
 
(iv) Further, a press rel ease was issued on the same day by the Central Govt. to 
ensure widespread publicity among general public. A booklet containing press release 
‗Cable Television Networks (Amendment) Rules, 2021‘ and Rules at a glance was also 
published and made available on the official website of the M/o Information and 
Broadcasting.  
 
(v) In addition to the above, a D.O. letter dated 21.06.2021 was sent from Secretary 
(I&B) to Chief Secretaries of all states/UTs informing them of the development and 
urging necessary action.  The notification was also circulated to all satellite TV channels 
and self-regulating bodies such as IBF, NBA and ASCI. All prominent TV channels also 
ran continuous scrolls at the bottom of their screens to educate and create awareness 
among the general public regarding grievance redressal mechanism. 
  
 
(Ministry of Information and Broadcasting O.M. No. 
 N-45007/2/2023-DAS (Part-II) dated 17.01.2025) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

15 
 
CHAPTER- III 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS   WHICH  THE  COMMITTEE   DO  NOT   DESIRE  TO 
PURSUE  IN  VIEW  OF  THE  REPLIES  OF  THE  GOVERNMENT 
 
-NIL- 

16 
 
 
CHAPTER IV 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS      IN RESPECT OF  WHICH    REPLIES   OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE   NOT  BEEN   ACCEPTED  BY  THE  COMMITTEE  AND  REQUIRE 
REITERATION 
 
 
-NIL- 
 
 

17 
 
CHAPTER V 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF  WHICH REPLIES   
OF THE  GOVERNMENT ARE INTERIM IN NATURE 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 2) 
Regulation of Cable Television in India 
The Committee note that for regulating cable TV, ‗The Cable Television Networks 
(Regulation) Act 1995 (CTN Act)‘ and ‗The Cable Television Network Rules 1994‘ have 
been enacted and they are administered by the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting 
(MIB). The CTN Act comprises 5 chapters and 24 sections and it includes guidelines for 
cable networks operating within the country. The Act outlines provisions for mandatory 
registration of cable operators, categorizing them into Multi -System Operators (MSOs) 
and Local Cable Operators (LCOs). The Ministry of Information and Broadcasting serves 
as the regis tering authority for MSOs whereas the registering authority for LCOs is the 
Head-Post office of the area in which they intend to operate.  
 Initially enacted to safeguard subscriber interests and prevent the transmission of 
content against national interes ts, the Act has undergone amendments to adapt to 
evolving technologies and industry dynamics. The recent amendment was done through 
the Jan Vishwas Act, 2023. On the need for amendment of the CTN Act, 1995, the 
Ministry have informed that parity with other  emerging technologies such as OTT has 
been the constant demand of the cable TV industry. The differential treatment of the 
content over different platforms (such as Programme Code and Advertisement Code for 
TV channels and IT Rules, 2021 for content over the internet) is one of the primary 
reasons for distinctive features for each of the broadcasting services. The Ministry have 
also informed that for creating a level playing field for all broadcasting services, the 
Cable Television Networks (Regulation) Ac t, 1995 may be amended and there is also a 
need to address the issues of satellite -based technologies which are being regulated 
through the old legislation. For this, the Ministry have prepared a draft ‗Broadcasting 
Services (Regulation) Bill, 2023‘ which was in the public domain to seek comments of 
stakeholders/general public by 15th January, 2024. According to the Ministry, this 
proposed legislation aims to serve as a comprehensive framework governing various 
broadcasting services and emerging technologies. 
The Committee further note that as per the notification ‗Broadcasting services and 
cable services to be telecommunications service‘ made in 2004, the Telecom Regulatory 
Authority of India (TRAI) is mandated to regulate the Broadcasting and Cable Service s.  
As per the provisions of the TRAI Act, TRAI has two types of functions, that is Regulatory 
and Recommendatory. The Committee note that the TRAI oversees issues pertaining to 
tariff, quality of service (QoS), and interconnection arrangements among different service 
providers in accordance with the TRAI Act of 1997. In March 2017, TRAI notified the 
Regulatory Framework for ‗Digital Addressable Systems‘ and this framework comprised 
of (i) The Telecommunication (Broadcasting and Cable) Services (Eighth) (Ad dressable 
Systems) Tariff Order (Tariff Order); (ii) The Telecommunication (Broadcasting and 
Cable) Services Interconnection (Addressable Systems) Regulations, (Interconnection 
Regulations); and (iii) The Telecommunication (Broadcasting and Cable) Services  
Standards of Quality of Service and Consumer Protection (Addressable Systems) 
Regulations, (QoS Regulations). 

18 
 
The Committee note that for regulating the Cable TV industry there are not only 
multiple Acts, Rules, Guidelines, etc. but there are also multipl e regulatory bodies like 
MIB, TRAI, DoT, etc. For example, MIB serves as the registering authority for MSOs 
whereas the Head-Post office of the area serves as registering authority for Local Cable 
Operators. Besides, as submitted by MIB there is an urgent need for creating a level 
playing field for all broadcasting services as well as for addressing the need of satellite -
based technologies which are being regulated through the old legislation. In view of the 
foregoing, the Committee are of the opinion that the Cable TV industry needs to be 
regulated through a comprehensive Act and therefore recommend the Ministry to ensure 
that the proposed ‗Broadcasting Services (Regulation) Bill, 2023‘ sees the light of the day 
at the earliest since it will go a long way i n resolving the concerns of this industry. 
Nevertheless, the Committee impress upon the Ministry to ensure that adequate 
consultations are done with all the concerned stakeholders. The Committee recommend 
that all the aspects concerning the cable industry may be taken into consideration while 
bringing in the comprehensive Bill. The Committee would further like to engage in 
constructive discussions regarding the proposed draft legislation at a more mature stage 
of its formulation.  The Committee also desire to be apprised of the timeline by which the 
Ministry would table the ‗Broadcasting Services (Regulation) Bill, 2023‘ for the 
consideration of the Parliament. The Committee desire to be apprised of the progress 
made in this regard. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The draft Broadcasting Services (Regulation) Bill, 2023 was placed in public 
domain on 10.11.2023, seeking views/comments/suggestions of the general public and 
stakeholders till 09.12.2023 which was later extended upto 15.01.2024. Number of 
comments were received and series of consultations were done subsequently. Based on 
the wide range of view expressed during consultations with stakeholders, additional time 
was provided for comments till 15.10.2024. A fresh draft will be published after detailed 
consultations.  
 
 Concerning the timeline for presenting the draft bill before the Honorable 
Parliament, it is stated that post completion of consultations with stakeholders, this 
Ministry shall prepare a draft Cabinet Note on the bill, which will be circulated for Inter-
Ministerial consultation. Following this, the draft bill will be submitted for the Cabinet's 
consideration. This process is expected to take some time. The Committee will be duly 
informed about the progress of this process. 
 
(Ministry of Information and Broadcasting O.M. No. 
 N-45007/2/2023-DAS (Part-II) dated 17.01.2025) 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 7 of Chapter I) 
 
 
 
 

19 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 3) 
Constraints/Challenges Faced with Respect to Cable TV Regulation in India 
With respe ct to the major issues concerning various players of the Cable TV 
industry viz. broadcasters, MSOs, LCOs, consumers, etc, TRAI has submitted that they 
engage with all the stakeholders regularly from time to time to identify and address the 
issues. All the issues identified are duly analyzed for wider impact on the sector. The 
issues requiring changes in policy/regulations are also examined in -depth. They follow 
an elaborate consultation process before issuing any recommendations/regulations. The 
issues are submitted by the stakeholders from time to time. In addition, TRAI constituted 
a committee to deliberate on the issues relating to the sector in November 2021 
comprising all stakeholders including representatives of MSOs, DTH service providers, 
and Broadca sters. As informed to the Committee by All India Digital Cable Federation 
(AIDCF), some of the concerns related to the Cable industry include a declining 
subscriber base, exponential increase in the channel prices by misusing their channel 
pricing freedom by Broadcasters, loss of livelihood of employees in the cable TV sector, 
etc. The Committee were also apprised of some of the constraints/challenges faced by 
the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting with respect to cable TV regulation in India 
include  
(i) Under -reporting of subscribers by cable operators leading to tax evasion and 
submission of inaccurate financial returns; (ii) Absence of robust oversight mechanism at 
the ground level acting as major roadblock in ensuring compliance to the relevant 
regulations/guidelines; (iii) Absence of central database for Local Cable Operators 
because the registration process is offline/manual and all LCOs are currently registered 
at the local head post office of their area of operations; etc. 
The Committee further  note the measures/initiatives taken to address the issues 
concerning various players of the Cable TV industry, TRAI has issued the consultation 
paper on ‗Issues related to New Regulatory Framework for Broadcasting and Cable 
services‘ on 7th May 2022 seeki ng stakeholders‘ comments. On the basis of this 
consultation, on 22nd November 2022, TRAI notified the Telecommunication 
(Broadcasting and Cable) Services (Eighth) (Addressable Systems) Tariff (Third 
Amendment) Order, 2022 and the Telecommunication (Broadc asting and Cable) 
Services (Addressable Systems) Interconnection Regulations (Third Amendment) Order, 
2022. Further, to address various issues, TRAI issued a consultation paper titled ‗Review 
of Regulatory Framework for Broadcasting and Cable services‘ on 23rd August 2023 
seeking stakeholders‘ comments. The Committee have been informed that the 
comments/counter-comments are being analyzed by TRAI. In this regard, the Committee 
desire to be apprised about the updated status regarding the ‗Review of Regulator y 
Framework for Broadcasting and Cable services‘ issued on 23rd August 2023 seeking 
stakeholders‘ comments along with the outcome on the following measures taken by MIB 
to ensure the growth of cable TV sector which includes (i) streamlining of procedures f or 
Multi-System Operator (MSO) registration renewal, extending the period to ten years; (ii) 
Last Mile Access to Broadband service providers; (iii) Regulatory Framework for Platform 
Services issued on 30.11.2022; (iv) guidelines issued on infrastructure sh aring on 
29.12.2021, that is permitting Multi -System Operators (MSOs) to share infrastructure, 
including headends and networks, under specific conditions; (v) streamlining the 
registration procedure for LCOs, etc.  
The Committee further recommend MIB to co llaborate with the Ministry of 
Electronics and Information Technology (Meity) to develop a comprehensive digital 
solution for addressing underreporting among Cable TV subscribers and the absence of 

20 
 
an oversight mechanism. This solution should include an ad vanced digital platform with 
robust data analytics tools to detect and mitigate underreporting, real -time reporting 
features, standardized data protocols, and regular audits for ongoing effectiveness. The 
user-friendly interface will facilitate seamless re porting and monitoring, ensuring 
transparency and accountability within the Cable TV sector. 
The Committee would further urge the Ministry to (i) identify and address the 
issues acting as roadblocks of monitoring mechanism for ensuring compliance to the 
relevant regulations/guidelines; (ii) have a central database for monitoring cable 
operators; (ii) take initiatives for making Ministry of I & B as the registering authority for 
LCOs. The Committee would like to be apprised of the action taken on these issues. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The updated status regarding the ―review of Regulatory Framework for 
Broadcasting and Cable services‖ issued by TRAI on 23.08.2023 for stakeholder‘s 
comments shall be provided by TRAI. As regards other points, the inputs are as follows: 
 
(i) Streamlining of procedure for MSO registration renewal, extending the 
period to 10 years: In this regard, it is stated that this Ministry amended the Cable 
Television Network Rules, 1994 on September 18, 2023, to include provisions related to 
the renewal of MSO registration. According to the amendments, MSO registration will be 
renewed for a period of 10 years. The additional requirements for the renewal process 
have been duly notified in the amended Rules. To ensure a streamlined renewal 
procedure, MSOs are instructed to apply for the renewal of their registrations online 
through the Broadcast Seva Portal.  
 
(ii) Last Mile Access to Broadband Service Providers: (a) It is stated that the CTN 
Rules, 1994 were amended on 18.09.2023 and Rules 5C  was added which reads as 
follows: 
 
“Cable operators may strive to provide last mile access to broadband service 
providers providing internet service or access service, in a fair, transparent and 
Non-discriminatory manner for proliferation of broadband services.” 
 
(b) In addition to the above, a DO letter dated February 19, 2024, from the Secretary 
(I&B) was sent to the Department of Telecommunications requesting the exemption of 
cable operators registered under the Cable Television Networks (CTN) Act, 1995 , from 
the requirements of obtaining a Virtual Network Operator (VNO) license. This exemption 
was sought to facilitate the proliferation of broadband services, especially in rural areas.  
 
(c) Subsequently, a meeting was organized by this Ministry on 27.06 .2024 with the 
representatives from DoT and LCOs/MSOs. During the meeting, it was informed by DoT 
that TRAI‘s recommendations on rationalization of requirements of VNO license are 
under consideration in the department. A reminder dated 17.10.2024 was sent to DoT 
seeking action taken in the matter. In response, DoT vide its DO letter dated 19.11.2024 
stated that ― DoT is in the process of framing of Rules under the ambit of 
Telecommunications Act 2023 pertaining to development, expansion and operation of 
telecommunication services and telecommunication networks; assignment of spectrum; 
and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.  Further, the Department is in 
the process of evaluating the TRAI recommendations dated 18 th September 2024 
regarding the framework for service authorizations under Section 3(1)(a) of the Act. 
However, TRAI’s recommendations concerning authorizations under Section 3(1)(b) of 
the Act are yet to be received. A final decision on the matter will only be taken once the 
matter has been examined in a holistic manner considering all aspects including its 
potential impact on the stakeholders and sector as a whole.” 
 

21 
 
(iii) Regulatory framework for Platform Services (PS) issued on 30.11.2022 : This 
Ministry had issued guidelines for r egistration of PS channels offered by MSOs on 
30.11.2022. The MSOs providing PS channels have been instructed to apply for 
registration of these services online. 
 
(iv) Guidelines issued on infrastructure sharing on 29.12.2021 that is permitting 
MSOs to sha re infrastructure including headends and networks, under specific 
conditions: This Ministry had issued guidelines on 29.12.2021 allowing MSOs to share 
infrastructure on voluntary basis. This step enables small players to share infrastructure 
and provide cable TV services without infusing hefty investments in cable infrastructure.  
 
 As per the guidelines the MSOs can share infrastructure by submitting an 
application before the Ministry along with the terms of agreement between them. The 
sharing is subject t o the compliance of terms and conditions of the MSO registrations 
and TRAI‘s regulations.  
 
(v) Streamlining the registration procedure for LCOs : (a) Currently, the 
registration of Local Cable Operators (LCOs) is carried out at the Local Head Post Office 
of the area of operation of the LCO. The registration process is offline due to which LCO 
face problems.  
 
(b) To address the issues faced by the LCOs, this Ministry is in process of developing 
an online module (within Broadcast Seva Portal) to carry out re gistration of LCOs. 
Currently, the Ministry is at advance stage of implementing online Registration 
Framework for LCOs. The registration shall be granted for a period of 5 years with PAN 
India validity. The registering authority for LCO shall be designated  Section Officer in the 
Ministry.  
 
(vi) The Committee also recommended collaboration with Meity to develop a 
comprehensive digital solution for addressing underreporting among cable TV 
subscribers and absence of oversight mechanism. In this regard, it is stated that a Cable 
Television Monitoring Cell (CTMC) is proposed to be setup in the Ministry to ensure that 
MSOs furnish their subscriber data regularly to the Ministry. It has also been proposed to 
provide a digital solution i.e. monitoring devices that shall be installed at the premises of 
MSOs and would ensure transparency and accountability in the Cable TV sector.  
 
(vii)  Further, it is stated that this Ministry is working actively to identify and address the 
roadblocks of monitoring mechanism to ensu re compliance to the extant regulations/ 
guidelines.  
 
(viii)  Furthermore, this Ministry published a ―National Register of LCOs‖ on Broadcast 
Seva Portal on 22.02.2024 to assign a National Registration Number to each LCO and 
compile the National register of LCOs. This register will provide the details of LCOs to all 
the stakeholders to connect to them for cable services/broadband services. The register 
is being updated timely by this Ministry.  
(Ministry of Information and Broadcasting O.M. No. 
 N-45007/2/2023-DAS (Part-II) dated 17.01.2025) 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 10 of Chapter I) 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 4) 
Role of TRAI 
The predominant business model used in the Indian Cable TV Industry is based 
on the subscription model. This means  that customers are required to pay a subscription 

22 
 
fee to access a range of TV channels and programs. This fee is collected by Local Cable 
Operators (LCOs) or Multi -System Operators (MSOs) who then distribute the revenue 
generated to various parties as per  the terms agreed upon in interconnection 
agreements. The interconnection agreements are contracts executed between the 
MSOs, LCOs, and broadcasters. The revenue distribution is based on a pre -agreed 
percentage split, which is typically determined based on  various factors such as the 
number and type of channels offered, the customer base, and other related factors. The 
revenue share is typically distributed in proportion to the value provided by each party in 
the delivery of TV services. The Committee have been informed that cable TV pricing is 
regulated by the Telecom Regulatory Authority of India (TRAI) under the framework 
known as the ‗New Tariff Order‘ (NTO) and the latest order i.e. NTO 3.0 was introduced 
in 2022 to bring transparency and flexibility to  cable TV pricing for consumers. Under 
NTO, the key points of the pricing policy include (i) Channel Pricing; Channel Bouquet 
Pricing; Network Capacity Fee (NCF) and MRP (Maximum Retail Price). 
With respect to measures taken by TRAI to control and monitor pricing and tariffs 
for cable TV subscribers, TRAI has informed that the framework was successful in 
establishing harmonized business processes in the sector, level playing field, bringing 
transparency in TV channel pricing, reducing litigations among stak eholders and 
providing equal opportunities to smaller Multi System Operators (MSOs). However, after 
a market survey in July -August 2019, the Authority considered it expedient to review 
some provisions, and, after due consultation amendments to the Regulato ry Framework 
2017 were notified on 1st January 2020.  However, the provisions related to the revision 
of television channels‘ prices in compliance with the January 2020 amendments could 
not be implemented due to the legal challenge and the Authority issued  a letter dated 
12th October 2021 to the broadcasters seeking compliance with all the provisions of 
amended Regulatory Framework 2020 as upheld by Hon‘ble Court of Bombay within 10 
days. Consequently, most of the broadcasters submitted their Reference Inte rconnect 
Offers (RIOs) to TRAI in line with the amended Regulatory Framework 2020 and 
published these on their websites in November 2021. As per RIOs filed by the 
broadcasters in November 2021, the new tariffs reflected a common trend i.e., the prices 
of their most popular channels including sports channels were enhanced beyond Rs. 19/- 
per month. Immediately after new tariffs were announced by the broadcasters, TRAI 
received representations from Distribution Platform Operators (DPOs), Associations of 
Local Cable Operators (LCOs), and Consumer Organizations stating that the new tariffs 
as announced by broadcasters would cause a huge increase in consumer payout and 
will also entail wide-scale changes necessitating large scale implementation efforts.   
TRAI al so informed the Committee that DPOs (including All India Digital Cable 
Federation) highlighted difficulties likely to be faced by them in implementing new rates in 
their IT systems and migrating the consumers in bulk to the new tariff regime through the 
informed exercise of options, impacting almost all bouquets, due to upward revision in 
the rates of pay channels and bouquets. To deliberate on the various issues related to 
the implementation of the amended Regulatory Framework 2020 and suggest a way 
forward, a committee consisting of members from the Indian Broadcasting & Digital 
Foundation (IBDF), All India Digital Cable Federation (AIDCF) & DTH Association was 
constituted under the aegis of TRAI. To address the critical issues as identified by 
stakeholders, the Authority, after due consultation, notified the amendments, on 22 nd 
November 2022. The amendments have been duly implemented in January/ February 
2023. The said amendments dated 22 nd November 2022 were challenged by one of the 
stakeholders in the Ho n‘ble High Court of Kerala. The amendments were upheld by the 
Hon‘ble Court. Further, according to TRAI Consumers are greatly empowered by the 
Regulatory Framework. A consumer becomes the real decision maker of what she/he 

23 
 
views and has complete freedom to  choose what he/she wishes to watch and pay only 
for that. The price of every television channel is clearly visible in the Electronic Program 
Guide on television. The consumer is not required to pay any subscription fee for an FTA 
channel if she/ he subscr ibes to one. The amendments of January 2020 have increased 
the number of SD channels from 100 to 200 in the Network Capacity fee (NCF) of a 
maximum of Rs. 130/ - per month. Now NCF for 2nd TV connection (or subsequent 
connections) is not more than 40% of declared NCF per additional TV. 
On the decision of TRAI to not place a cap on channel pricing based on derived 
costing methodology for the benefit and protection of consumers, TRAI submitted that a 
channel consists of several programs. The cost of the produc tion of different programs 
drastically varies based on the actors, setup cost, script, copyrights, and other 
miscellaneous factors. The various programs in a given channel also frequently change 
based on their Television Rating Points (TRP), advertisement potential, and other ground 
reports. Hence, determining the cost of production of a channel at all times is an 
extremely difficult process, perhaps almost impossible. They also stated that 
Broadcasters should be given business flexibility to monetize their channels. 
Further, due to conflicting positions presented by AIDCF and TRAI during the 
deliberations, the Committee urged both parties to engage in constructive dialogue and 
enhance mutual understanding before presenting their respective facts to the Committee. 
The Committee express disappointment at TRAI's decision to instruct AIDCF to address 
pricing policy discrepancies without holding a meeting. Despite the Committee's clear 
directive, TRAI has persistently refused to engage with AIDCF. The Committee 
emphasized that fostering harmonious relations between the parties is crucial for 
achieving an amicable solution, but unfortunately, this collaborative approach has not 
been observed. The Committee acknowledge the complexity involved in determining 
channel pricing due to various factors influencing costing. Nevertheless, it emphasizes 
that TRAI holds a shared responsibility to ensure consumers receive services at a fair 
price. The Committee further recognized the paramount importance of providing 
consumers w ith good Quality -of-Service (QoS) under all circumstances. Given TRAI's 
pivotal role in fostering a healthy and competitive telecommunications and broadcasting 
ecosystem, the Committee recommend a collaborative effort among all stakeholders to 
address all the issues amicably as it encourages parties to engage in constructive 
discussions, find mutually agreeable solutions, and take necessary actions to deliver 
optimal services to consumers. The Committee desire to be apprised regularly of the 
updates on the progress made in this regard. 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The recommendation made by the Committee was forwarded to TRAI for taking 
necessary action and submit comments vide letter dated 03.04.2024. TRAI vide its letter 
dated 02.05.2024 has informed that is has noted the issue for further consideration.  
 
 Further, the subject matter falls under the administrative domain of TRAI, no 
action is required on part of this Ministry. 
 
(Ministry of Information and Broadcasting O.M. No. 
 N-45007/2/2023-DAS (Part-II) dated 17.01.2025) 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 17 of Chapter I) 
 
 

24 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 5) 
Enhanced Flexibility to Curate Personalized Packages from Bouquets 
The Committee note that the central concern within the purview of Cable TV 
Regulations pertains to the prevalent practice of Broadcasters implementing substantial 
discounts in the pricing of their bouquets while maintaining elevated individual prices for 
a-la-carte channels. The Committee was informed by AIDCF that TRAI has given 
complete forbearance to Broadcasters to price their channels at any level (except for a 
notional capping at Rs. 19 if the channels are to be included in Bouquet). This is being 
misused by Broadcasters, as they have significantly increased their Pay TV channel  
Prices by up to 600% after the implementation of the New Tariff Order in 2019 and a 
further hike of up to 200% in some cases after the implementation of NTO 3.0, by force 
bundling all their channels, which is eventually becoming a burden on Pay TV subscriber. 
According to AIDCF, the Broadcaster makes a bouquet of channels (which include one or 
two driver channels and about 7 -8 unpopular channels) and demands MSOs and DTH 
players to sell the same bouquet to a minimum of 90% of the subscriber base without 
breaking the bouquet. MSO does not get the incentive if 90% of subscribers do not 
subscribe to the bouquet intact. This means a common man pays for 7 -8 unwanted 
channels which include English channels, sports channels (which have important events 
only 2-3 months in a year). AIDCF also submitted that the Cable TV monthly prices for 
the consumers have significantly increased from Rs. 200 -300 in 2017-18 to Rs. 350-450 
in 2022-23; DPOs are forced to sell Broadcaster‘s bouquets and A -la-carte prices of the 
channel are artificially hiked, so that consumer is also forced to purchase bouquets only. 
They have also stated that the TRAI consultation paper in 2019 have pointed out this, but 
no action was taken to correct it.  
 The Committee discern that, since DPOs are th e primary service providers 
operating through Local Cable Operators (LCOs), therefore, the DPOs are strategically 
positioned to perceive and respond to the nuanced preferences and requirements of 
subscribers. The Committee acknowledge that the current prac tice of compelling 
subscribers to opt for predefined bouquets offered by Broadcasters acts as a hindrance 
to consumer choice. While the Committee do not question the Broadcasters' intent, it 
perceives that this practice does not align with the interests of  consumers. Therefore, in 
order to safeguard consumer interests and promote freedom of choice, the Committee 
recommend that Distribution Platform Operators (DPOs) be granted the authority to 
select individual channels from broadcasters' bouquets. Further, in order to ensure that 
consumers have the flexibility to subscribe only to channels of their interest, fostering a 
more personalized viewing experience, the Committee recommend that DPOs should 
only be permitted to choose channels based on consumer prefer ences and remit to 
broadcasters the proportional price of the selected channels. The Committee wish to be 
apprised of the action taken in this regard. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The Committee recommended that DPOs may be granted authority to select 
individual channels from broadcasters‘ bouquet on the basis of consumer preferences. 
The proportional prices of these channels are to be remitted to broadcasters by them.  
 
In this regard, it is submitted that MIB had already sent a reference to TRAI for 
recommendation on the matter under Section 11(1)(a)(iv) of the TRAI Act, 1997 on 
06.09.2023. 

25 
 
 
In addition to the above, the report of the Standing Committee was sent to TRAI vide this 
Ministry‘s letter dated 03.04.2024. TRAI vide letter dated 02.05.2024 has inform ed that it 
has noted the issue for further consideration. 
 
Further, the subject matter falls under the administrative domain of TRAI, no action is 
required on part of this Ministry. 
(Ministry of Information and Broadcasting O.M. No. 
 N-45007/2/2023-DAS (Part-II) dated 17.01.2025) 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 17 of Chapter I) 
 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 6) 
Demarcation in the Advertising Guidelines Between Pay TV and FTA Channels 
During the deliberation of the Committee, the stakeholders submi tted that 
Broadcasters push their non -driver channels by bundling them with ‗driver channels‘ to 
earn advertisement revenues. The Committee were further informed that the ‗Pay TV‘ 
channels are showing a plethora of advertisements, despite charging hefty su bscription 
fees from subscribers. It was further stated that establishing a clear demarcation in the 
advertising guidelines between Pay TV and FTA channels is in the interest of the 
consumer. The Committee consider that there is a need for a thoughtful exa mination of 
such issues to safeguard consumer interests. The Committee, therefore, call upon for a 
categorization of channels as either ‗Pay -TV‘ or ‗Free -to-air‘ (FTA), based on the 
respective sources of revenue. The Committee, therefore, recommend for ini tiating a 
comprehensive consultation focused on the costing methodology of TV channels. This 
consultation should also aim to tackle the issue where consumers, who are essentially 
paying subscription fees, find themselves subjected to advertisements for a s ignificant 
duration of their viewing experience. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 This Ministry has sent a copy of the report to TRAI vide letter dated 03.04.2024. 
TRAI vide its letter dated 02.05.2024 has informed that it has noted the issue for further 
consideration. 
 
Further, the subject matter falls under the administrative domain of TRAI, no action is 
required on part of this Ministry. 
 
(Ministry of Information and Broadcasting O.M. No. 
 N-45007/2/2023-DAS (Part-II) dated 17.01.2025) 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 17 of Chapter I) 
 
 
 

26 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 7) 
Issues related to AGR Demand 
With respect to ‗Adjusted Gross Revenue Demand‘ (AGR), AIDCF have informed 
that Department of Telecommunication has raised wrongful demand to the tune of  
Rs. 7,000 crore on Cable TV operators /MSOs by computing license fee on their Cable 
TV revenues (which do not come under the ISP license as MSOs operate under 
registration from Ministry of Information and Broadcasting), whilst license fee on the pure 
internet services itself was exempt under DOT License. It was also stated that several 
MSOs received the demand retrospectively with huge penalty and interest on Penalty 
based on wrong interpretation of the Hon‘ble Supreme Court order delivered on 
24.10.2019, in Union of India vs. Association of Unified Telecom Service Providers of 
India, (2020) 3 SCC 525 (hereinafter referred to as ―AGR Judgment‖) in which MSOs are 
not at all parties and the ISP license/Unified License under which they operate is different 
from UAS license. The amount is so large that the MSOs will be pushed to bankruptcy.  
 AIDCF have also informed that the demands raised by the DoT are unsustainable 
because the ISP licenses issued to MSOs are different from the UAS License considered 
by the Hon‘ ble Supreme Court in the AGR Judgment. In 1999, UAS license holders 
requested the Government for a migration package from a Fixed license fee to a license 
fee as a revenue share as they were not able to pay huge, fixed fees. MSOs are not 
covered by such a migration package. MSOs were never in the actual business of 
providing mobile services to the public like the parties before the Hon‘ble Supreme Court. 
Two businesses - Cable TV and Internet Services - are under two different ministries, 
i.e., the Ministry  of Information and Broadcasting and the Department of 
Telecommunication, respectively, and under different licenses.  When the DoT were 
asked to provide a detailed account of the demands for license fees raised by the DoT 
on Multi System Operators (MSOs) for simultaneously offering internet services under 
Internet service provider licenses and the reasons for the demands, they informed that 
they grant licenses under section 4 of Indian Telegraph Act 1885 to offer various 
telecommunication services includin g Internet services. Any company that proposes to 
offer Internet services is required to obtain the Internet Service provider license granted 
by DoT. It was further added that the matter is still sub judice and the next hearing of the 
case is on 23.01.2024 . Since the matter is sub judice, the Committee would not like to 
furnish its comment at this stage, however, the Committee desire to be kept apprised 
about the development on this issue. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The issue related to alleged wrongful dem and on Adjusted Gross Revenue (AGR) 
by Deptt. of Telecommunications is pending before Hon‘ble Telecom Disputes 
Settlement and Appellate Tribunal. This Ministry has requested the DoT to periodically 
apprise the status to the Committee vide letter dated 03.07.2024. 
 
(Ministry of Information and Broadcasting O.M. No. 
 N-45007/2/2023-DAS (Part-II) dated 17.01.2025) 
 
 
 
 
 

27 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 10) 
Impact of OTT Platforms on the Cable TV 
 The Committee note that the emergence of Over -The-Top (OTT) platforms has 
brought about significant transformations in India's cable TV industry, impacting both 
regulatory frameworks and market dynamics. Since OTT platforms offer cost -effective 
access, on -demand content and flexibility, it has led to eroding of the market share of 
traditional cable TV services. The entry of global players into the Indian market has also 
added to the competition, as they can invest significantly in content creation and 
distribution, posing a substantial challenge to cable TV operators. While cable  TV is 
governed by established regulations such as the Cable Television Networks (Regulation) 
Act, 1995 and the Telecom Regulatory Authority of India (TRAI) Act, 1997, OTT platforms 
have largely operated outside these regulations and they fall under the ‗I nformation 
Technology (Intermediary Guidelines and Digital Media Ethics Code) Rules, 2021‘. 
Content regulation differs as well, with cable TV subject to the Programme Code and 
Advertisement Code, whereas for OTT platforms there is the ‗IT Rules, 2021‘ and content 
regulation on OTT faces controversy due to concerns about objectionable material.  
 Elaborating on the strategies that were being implemented by the Ministry to 
ensure content parity between OTT applications, Cable TV, and DTH subscribers, the 
Ministry informed the Committee that the content provided on linear broadcasting (Cable 
TV, and DTH subscribers) and on-demand platforms like OTT is treated differently owing 
to the expressed consent and desire of consumers exercised while accessing the on -
demand platforms. However, the draft ‗Broadcasting Services (Regulation) Bill, 2023‘ 
which intends to bring on -demand platforms like OTT which has been prepared is also 
under its preview. A single legislation and apex self -regulation body named Broadcast 
Advisory Council (BAC) is expected to bring reasonable parity on content while 
respecting the differences in the nature of broadcasting.  To bring OTT application 
services within the scope of the Cable Television Networks Regulation Act, 1995, and 
‗The Cable T elevision Networks Rules, 1994‘, or other content regulations, the 
Committee note that the MIB have prepared the draft Broadcasting Services (Regulation) 
Bill, 2023. The Committee hope that this legislation would act as an umbrella legislation 
for the Broa dcasting Services as it aims to cover online curated content (for example 
OTT) and publisher of news under its ambit.  
 The Committee further observe that there is a need to rectify the existing disparity 
between Cable TV and OTT Platforms. With the aim of  eliminating content disparities 
across various content delivery platforms, the Committee recommend the Ministry to 
enact a comprehensive regulatory framework. This framework should compel 
Broadcasters to make their content accessible on all available platforms, ensuring a level 
playing field for cable television and analogous technologies. Such measures, would aid 
in promoting fairness, diversity, and accessibility in the content distribution landscape, 
benefiting both consumers and industry stakeholders. The Committee further expect that 
the issue related to content parity will be resolved at the earliest.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The Committee has recommended enacting a comprehensive regulatory 
framework to compel broadcasters to make their content acc essible on all available 
platforms, ensuring a level playing field for cable television and analogous technologies. 
 

28 
 
 In this regard, the differential availability of content over Cable TV and OTT 
platforms may be attributed to their different operational model. OTT platforms provide 
content which is selected by the subscriber thereby making it a ―on -demand‖ scenario. 
On the other hand, content over Cable TV do not undergo such selection and is PUSH 
towards subscriber. 
 
 Nevertheless, the draft Broadcasting Services (Regulation) Bill, 2024 aims to bring 
OTT services under its purview. The OTTs and other services are also aimed to be 
brought under the purview of broadcasting code proposed under the draft Bill.)  
 
(Ministry of Information and Broadcasting O.M. No. 
 N-45007/2/2023-DAS (Part-II) dated 17.01.2025) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     NEW DELHI; DR. NISHIKANT DUBEY, 
   07 March, 2025  Chairperson, 
16 Phalguna, 1946 (Saka) Standing Committee on  
Communications and Information Technology 

29 
 
ANNEXURE – I 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON COMMUNICATIONS AND  
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(2024-25) 
MINUTES OF THE FIFTEENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE 
----------- 
 The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 05 March, 2025 from 1100 hours to          
1346 hours in Main Committee Room, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
DR. NISHIKANT DUBEY- Chairperson 
 MEMBERS 
  
Lok Sabha 
 
 
2. Shri Anil Baluni 
3. Dr. Rabindra Narayan Behera 
4. Shri Appalanaidu Kalisetti 
5. Shri Arun Kumar Sagar 
6. Shri Vishnu Datt Sharma 
 
 
Rajya Sabha 
  
7. Shri Saket Gokhale 
8. Shri V. Vijayendra Prasad  
9. Shri S. Niranjan Reddy 
10. Shri Kartikeya Sharma 
11. Shri Lahar Singh Siroya 
12. Shri K.T.S. Tulsi 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Shri Y.M. Kandpal   - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. A. Jyothirmayi                       - Director 
3. Shri Amrish Kumar             - Deputy Secretary 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the Sitting of the Committee 
convened to consider and adopt Two draft Action Taken Report s i.e. Fifty-fourth and Fifty -
sixth Reports  (17th Lok Sabha) relating to the Ministry of Electro nics and Information 
Technology and Ministry of Information and Broadcasting respectively under the jurisdiction 
of Committee and to have briefing on the subject ‗Impact of Emergence of Artificial 

30 
 
Intelligence and related issues‘ relating to the Ministry o f Electronics and Information 
Technology. 
3. The Committee, then, took up the following two draft Reports for consideration and 
adoption:- 
 
(i) Draft Report on Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Fifty- sixth 
Report (17th Lok Sabha) on ―Regulation of Cable Television in India‖ relating to the 
Ministry of Information and Broadcasting. 
(ii) Draft Report on Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in the ir Fifty- fourth 
Report (17 th Lok Sabha) on ―Digital Payment and Online Security Measures for 
Data Protection ‖ relating to the Ministry of Electronics and Information 
Technology. 
(iii) XXXX….XXXX….. XXXX….XXXX….. XXXX….XXXX….. XXXX….XXXX 
(iv) XXXX….XXXX….. XXXX….XXXX….. XXXX….XXXX….. XXXX….XXXX  
(v) XXXX….XXXX….. XXXX….XXXX….. XXXX….XXXX….. XXXX….XXXX 
4. The Committee adopted the Reports without modifications. 
 
5. The Committee authorized the Chairperson to finalize the draft Action Taken Reports 
and present the same to the House during the current Session of Parliament. 
 
6. XXXX….XXXX….. XXXX….XXXX….. XXXX….XXXX….. XXXX….XXXX 
 
The Committee, then, adjourned. 
 
**** 
 
 
 
 
 
 
________________________________________________________________________ 
XXXX….XXXX     Matter not related to the Report. 
 

31 
 
ANNEXURE – II 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE OBSERVATIONS/ 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THEIR FIFTY-SEVENTH REPORT  
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
[Vide Paragraph No. 5 of Introduction] 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by  the 
Government 
 
          Rec. Sl. Nos.: 1,8,9 and 11 
Total 04 
Percentage    36.36 
(ii)  Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the replies of the Government 
 
         Rec. Sl. No.: NIL  
Total NIL 
Percentage 0 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and require reiteration 
        Rec. Sl. No.: NIL 
 
Total NIL 
Percentage 0 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the replies of the 
Government are of interim in nature 
 
        Rec. Sl. Nos.: 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7 and 10  
Total 07 
Percentage 63.64 
 