 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON COMMUNICATIONS  
AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY  
(2025-26) 
 
 
EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
MINISTRY OF INFORMATION AND BROADCASTING 
 
 
 
 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the 
Committee contained in their Twenty-second Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on 
‘Review of mechanism to curb Fake News’] 
 
 
TWENTY-EIGHTH REPORT 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     August, 2026/ Sravana, 1948 (Saka) 
28 
 


 
TWENTY-EIGHTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
COMMUNICATIONS AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(2025-26) 
 
 
EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
MINISTRY OF INFORMATION AND BROADCASTING 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the 
Committee contained in their Twenty-second Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on 
‘Review of Mechanism to curb Fake News’] 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on           06.08.2026 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on              06.08.2026 
 
 
 
                    LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
                   NEW DELHI 
 
 
                 August, 2026/ Sravana, 1948 (Saka) 


 
CCIT No. 440  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
©2025 By Lok Sabha Secretariat 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok 
Sabha (Seventeenth Edition) and Printed by Lok Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi-110001 
 
 

 
CONTENTS 
 PAGE  
COMPOSITION OF THE 
COMMITTEE.................................................................................................. 
 
INTRODUCTION........................................................................................................................
............ 
 
CHAPTER I Report………………………………………………………………………..........
........... 
 
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government……………………………………………………………………....
...........  
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the replies of the 
Government………………………………..........................  
CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and require 
reiteration ………….........  
CHAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government are of interim in 
nature….........................................................................................  
 ANNEXURES  
I. *Minutes of the 15th Sitting of the Committee held on                              
03.08.2026…......................... 
 
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in their Twenty-second Report ( Eighteenth 
Lok Sabha).  
* Not appended. 
   
 
 
 

 
Composition of the Standing Committee on Communications and  
Information Technology (2025-26) 
 
Dr. Nishikant Dubey - Chairperson 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri C.N. Annadurai 
3. Shri Anil Baluni 
4. Dr. Rabindra Narayan Behera 
5. Shri Anup Sanjay Dhotre 
6. Shri Gurmeet Singh Meet Hayer 
7. Shri Sanjay Haribhau Jadhav 
8. Shri S. Supongmeren Jamir 
9. Shri Appalanaidu Kalisetti 
10. Smt. Poonamben Hematbhai Maadam 
11. Shri G. Kumar Naik 
12. Shri Shafi Parambil 
13. Dr. M.K. Vishnu Prasad 
14. Ms. Kangna Ranaut 
15. Shri Radheshyam Rathiya 
16. Shri Ramasahayam Raghuram Reddy 
17. Shri Arun Kumar Sagar 
18. Shri Devesh Shakya 
19. Shri Vishnu Datt Sharma 
20. Shri Rajesh Verma 
21. Vacant 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
22. Shri Sanjay Bhatia@ 
23. Shri Rajeev Kumar@ 
24. Shri Christopher Manickam@  
25. Shri Amar Pal Maurya 
26. Shri Rajneesh Kumar Agrawal$ 
27. Shri Kanad Purkayastha 
28. Shri S. Niranjan Reddy 
29. Shri Kartikeya Sharma 
30. Shri Lahar Singh Siroya  
31. Shri Bhashyam Rama Krishna$ 
Secretariat 
1.  Shri Harish Chandra Bist — Joint Secretary 
2.  Smt. A. Jyothirmayi  — Director 
3.  Smt. Rinky Singh                — Executive Officer 
____________________________________________ 
Committee constituted w.e.f. 26 th September, 2025 vide Para No.3282 of Bulletin Part -II dated                  
1st October, 2025. 
@ Shri Sanjay Bhatia, Shri Rajeev Kumar and Shri  Christopher Manickam nominated to the Committee, 
w.e.f. 3rd June, 2026 vide Para No. 5267 of Bulletin Part-II dated 4th June, 2026. 
$ Shri Rajneesh Kumar Agrawal and Shri Bhashyam Rama Krishna nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 
23rd July, 2026 vide Para No. 5724 of Bulletin Part-II dated 24th July, 2026. 

 
INTRODUCTION 
I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Communications and Information 
Technology (2025-26), having been authorized by the Committee, present this Twenty-
eighth Report on Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Twenty-second 
Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on the subject ‘Review of mechanism to curb Fake News’ 
relating to the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting. 
2.  The Twenty-second Report was presented to Hon’ble Speaker on 04.10.2025 and 
presented to Lok Sabha/laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 02.12.2025. The Ministry of 
Information and Broadcasting furnished their Action Taken Notes on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Twenty-second Report on 02.02.2026. 
3.  The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their Sitting held on  
03.08.2026. 
4.  For facility of reference and convenience, Observations/Recommendations of the 
Committee have been printed in bold in Chapter-I of the Report.  
5.  An analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Twenty-second Report of the 
Committee is given at Annexure-II. 
 
 
 
 
 
     NEW DELHI; DR. NISHIKANT DUBEY, 
     05 August, 2026  Chairperson, 
14 Sravana, 1948 (Saka) Standing Committee on  
Communications and Information Technology. 

 
1 
 
CHAPTER I 
REPORT 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Communications and Information 
Technology deals with the action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Twenty-second 
Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on the subject ‘Review of mechanism to curb Fake News’ 
relating to the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting. 
 
2. The Twenty-second Report was presented to Lok Sabha/laid in Rajya Sabha on                          
02.12.2025. It contained 12 Observations/Recommendations. Replies of the Government 
in respect of all the Observations/Recommendations have been received from the 
Ministry of Information and Broadcasting and are categorized as under:- 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by 
the Government 
 
Rec. Sl. Nos.:– 1,3, 4, 6, 8, 9, 10, 11 &12 
 
 
Total-09 
Chapter-II 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the replies of the Government 
 
 
Rec. Sl. No.:– NIL 
 
 
Total — NIL  
Chapter-III 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of 
the Government have not been accepted by the Committee and 
require reiteration 
 
Rec. Sl. No.:–  NIL 
 
 
 
Total – NIL  
Chapter-IV 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of 
the Government are of interim in nature  
 
Rec. Sl. No.:– 2, 5, & 7  
 
 
Total – 03 
Chapter-V 
 
3. The Committee trust that utmost importance would be given to 
implementation of the Observations/Recommendations accepted by the 
Government. The Committee further desire that Action Taken Notes on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in Chapter -I of this Report  and final 
action taken replies to the Observations/Recommendations contained in                         
Chapter-V of this Report may be furnished to them at an early date. 
 
4. The Committee will now deal with action taken by the Government on some of 
their recommendations.   
 

2 
 
Regulatory Mechanism for curbing Fake News  
(Recommendation Sl. No. 3) 
5. The Standing Committee on Communications and Information Technology              
(2024-25), in their Twenty-second Report, had recommended as under:- 
“The Committee note that the objective of the Fact Check Unit under Press 
Information Bureau (PIB) is to counter dissemination of fake news and 
misinformation pertaining to the Government of India and to provide people 
with an easy avenue to report suspicious and questionable information for 
fact-checking by following FACT model (Find, Assess, Create and Target). 
The Committee also note that for Print Media - the newspapers have to 
adhere to ‘Norms of Journalistic Conduct’ brought out by Press Council of 
India (PCI).   So far as the contents shown on TV Channels there is 
Programme Code under the Cable Television Networks (Regulation) Act, 
1995, are concerned it, inter -alia, provide that no content which contain 
anything obscene, defamatory, deliberate, false and suggestive innuendos 
and half -truth is broadcast on private satellite TV channels. Besides, TV 
channels are also required to follow ‘The Cable Television Network 
(Amendment) Rules 2021’. For Digital News Publishers, ‘Information 
Technology (Intermediary Guidelines and Digital Media Ethics Code) Rules, 
2021’ (‘IT Rules, 2021’) provide for a Code of Ethics for the publishers of 
news and current affairs on digital media, which, inter -alia, requires 
adherence to the Norms of Journalistic Conduct brought out by PCI and the 
Programme Code under Cable Television Network Regulation Act, 1995. The 
Rules provide for a Three Tier Grievance Redressal Mechanism   to look into 
complaints relating to violation of the Code. However, Rule 9 ( 1) relating to 
adherence of the Code of Ethics by the publishers of news and current affairs 
on digital media and OTT platforms; and Rule 9(3) relating to the three level 
grievance redressal mechanism, have been stayed by the Bombay High 
Court vide their interim order dated 14.8.2021.   
The complaints relating to fake news received in the Ministry are forwarded to 
the concerned news publishers, at Level -I of the Grievance Redressal 
Mechanism, for appropriate action under the IT Rules, 2021. The Ministry 
takes appropriate action against circulation of fake news as per the provisions 
of the institutional mechanism that are available for various media platforms. 
However, the Committee have been informed that in order to augment the 
effectiveness of the efforts to check the spread of fake news there is an 
urgent need for defining fake news and incorporating it in the existing 
regulatory mechanisms of print, electronic and digital media along with 
appropriate deterrent measures. 
While responding about the strength of existing legislative provisions and 
mechanisms to tackle the menace of Fake News, some of the stakeholders 
have submitted that they are adequate. However, according to some of the 
stakeholders it is not adequate in terms of the fact that intermediaries, content 
providers and social media platforms are not covered by the law. The 
Committee understand that digital media does not fall only under the Ministry 
of Information and Broadcasting (MIB). Regulation of digital as well as social 
media is a multi -pronged effort, with distinct roles played by the MIB and 
MeitY, especially under the Information Technology (Intermediary Guidelines 
and Digital Media Ethics Code) Rules, 2021. It is beyond doubt that IT rules, 

3 
 
2021, divide digital media regulation between two Ministries. MIB (Part III) 
administers the Code of Ethics and three -tier grievance redressed 
mechanism for content published by digital news portals and (Over -The-Top) 
OTT streaming platforms. MeitY (Part II) oversees social media 
intermediaries and regulates user -generated content on platforms like You 
Tube, Facebook and X (formerly Twitter). Since digital media operates on 
Information Technology platforms, MeitY’s policies regarding cybersecurity 
and broader IT Act, 2000, provide overarching framework. The Committee, 
therefore, urge upon the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting to augment 
their concerted efforts, in effectively dealing with the challenges and problems 
created by Fake News in digital as well as social media platforms, in 
collaboration with the Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology. In 
order to strengthen the Press Council of India , Online Complaint Portal like 
CPGRAM should be developed. Similarly, there is a need to strengthen the 
Press Council of India. The Committee expect the Ministry to explore the 
option of having an independent centralized monitoring body with 
representatives from MeitY, all the forms of Media and stakeholders for 
adjudicating cross -platform fake news cases and recommend penalties. 
Further, since PCI has submitted that there is a need for amending the 
existing Acts/Rules/Guidelines related to Print Media for tackling the issue of 
‘Fake News’, the Committee recommend the Ministry to set up the Committee 
of experts to suggest amendments in existing Acts/Rules/Guidelines like ‘IT 
Act, 2000’, ‘The Cable Television Network (Regulation) Act 1995, etc. to 
address the misinformation or the fake news effectively. The Committee 
would like to be apprised of the views of the Ministry and action, initiated in 
this regard”. 
 
6. In their Action Taken Reply, t he Ministry of information and Broadcasting 
submitted as under:– 
“In November 2019, PIB established a Fact Check Unit (FCU) to tackle fake 
news about the Government of India, its various Ministries, Departments, 
Public Sector Undertakings, and other Central Government organizations. 
The objective of the Fact Check Unit is to act as a deterrent to creators and 
disseminators of fake news & misinformation and to provide people with an 
easy avenue to report suspicious and questionable information for fact -
checking. Users can submit fact -check requests via these platforms: 
WhatsApp Hotline - +91 8799711259, Email ID -factcheck@pib.gov.in, and 
Website Portal - https://factcheck.pib.gov.in/  
 
Actionable queries are rigorously verified through multiple layers of checks 
using official sources, open data, and technological tools. Queries that cannot 
be verified through open sources are referred to the concerned Ministry via 
the attached PIB Officer for clarification. If a piece of information is found to 
require wider public clarification, the Unit publishes a verified ‘Fact Check’ on 
its social media platforms. Each fact check is classified as Fake, Misleading, 
or True, ensuring transparency and protecting citizens from misinformation. 
The fact-checked content by PIB FCU is taken up with the concerned social 
media platforms for appropriate action under rule 3(1)(b) of the IT Rules, 
2021. 
 
Since its inception, PIB Fact Check has become a crucial component of the 
Government’s digital communications and information integrity strategy. It has 
played a pivotal role in tackling misinformation during high -stakes situations 

4 
 
such as COVID-19 pandemic, G20 Summit, National elections and Operation 
Sindoor. The unit’s work now extends beyond misinformation to digital fraud, 
including fake government websites, insurance scams, and manipulated 
media aimed at misleading the public.  
 
The procedure followed by PCI, in identifying and curbing the ‘Fake News’ is 
as under:  
 
i. To deal with the cases of violation of any Norm of Journalistic 
Conduct, the PCI has a complaint mechanism for dealing with the 
cases of fake/false/defamatory/misleading news wherein it takes suo -
motu cognizance under Regulation 13 of Press Council (Procedure for 
Inquiry) Regulation, 1979, or under Clause 14(1) of the Press Council 
Act, 1978, on receipt of a complaint made to it or otherwise, if the 
Council has reason to believe that a newspaper or news agency has 
offended against the standards of journalistic ethics or public taste or 
that an editor or a working journalist has committed any professional 
misconduct, the Council, after giving the newspaper, or news agency, 
the editor or journalist concerned an opportunity of being heard, holds 
an inquiry in such manner as provided by regulations made under this 
Act and, if it is satisfied that it is necessary so to do, it may, for 
reasons to be recorded in writing, warn, admonish or censure the 
newspaper, the news agency, the editor or the journalist or 
disapprove the conduct of the editor or the journalist, as the case may 
be. 
ii. Further, under Clause 14(2) of the Press Council Act, 1978, if the 
Council is of the opinion that it is necessary or expedient in the public 
interest to do so, it may require any newspaper to publish therein in 
such manner as the Council thinks fit, any particulars relating to any 
inquiry under this section against a newspaper or news agency, an 
editor or a journalist working therein, including the name of such 
newspaper, news agency, editor or journalist.  
iii. PCI also receives complaints through CPGRAM Portal. For dealing 
with complaints received through the Online Complaint Portal like 
CPGRAM also, PCI follows the above mentioned procedure. 
With regard to amendment of the existing Act/Rules/Guidelines related to 
PCI, PCI has been requested by the Ministry vide letter dated 31.07.2025 to 
provide suggestions for amending Press Council Act, 1978 keeping in view 
the current media scenario in the country. 
 
The existing due diligence obligations under section 79(2) read with section 
79(3)(b) of the Information Technology Act, 2000 (“IT Act”) and Rule 3 of the 
Information Technology (Intermediary Guidelines and Digital Media Ethics 
Code) Rules, 2021 (“IT Rules, 2021”) require intermediaries to prevent 
hosting and dissemination of unlawful information and to take expeditious 
action upon receipt of lawful orders or reasoned government intimation. 
 
Further, to protect users in India and the Indian internet at large from the 
emerging harms, criminalities and such other associated risks posed by the 
misuse of technologies and to ensure accountability towards law of the land, 
MeitY constantly engages with and receives inputs from the public and 
stakeholders, including in respect of creation of new laws, strengthening & 
enforcement of existing laws and monitoring level of compliance. 
 
In respect of the synthetically generated information, Ministry of Electronics 
and Information Technology has released draft amendments to the IT Rules, 

5 
 
2021, on October 22, 2025, to further strengthen intermediary due diligence 
obligations for intermediaries, particularly social media intermediaries and 
significant social media intermediaries, as well as for platforms that enable 
the creation or modification of synthetically generated content”. 
 
7. The Committee in their Twenty-second Report, while noting the mechanisms 
to counter dissemination of fake news across Print, T elevision and Digital Media 
had observed that there was an urgent need for defining ‘Fake News’ for 
augmenting the efforts to ch eck fake news. The Committee  had also urged the 
Ministry of Information and Broadcasting (MIB) to strengthen coordination with the 
Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology (MeitY) to effectively address 
the issue of fake news. Further, to strengthen PCI (Press Council of India), the 
Committee had opined to develop an online complaint portal similar to CPGRAMS 
(Centralised Public Grievance Redress and Monitoring System)  and to explore the 
establishment of an independent centralized monitoring body with representation 
from relevant Ministries, media organisations and stakeholders to adjudicate 
cross-platform fake news cases. The Committee had also desired that a 
Committee of experts be constituted to examine and suggest necessary 
amendments to existing Acts, Rules and Guidelines, including the IT Act, 2000 and 
the Cable Television Networks (Regulation) Act, 1995, to effectively tackle 
misinformation and fake news.    
The Ministry, in its Action Taken reply , has submitted that the Fact Check 
Unit (FCU), established in November 2019  by the Ministry of Information and 
Broadcasting under Press Information Bureau (PIB), tackles fake news about the 
Government of India , its various Ministries, Departments, PSUs and other Central 
Government organizations . It provides ample facility for citizens to report  
suspicious and questionable information through fact checking . Citizens can 
register their complaints and seek redressal of grievances/submit fact check 
requests via platforms such as WhatsApp Hotline - +918799711259, Email id- 
factcheck@pib.gov.in, and website portal - https://factcheck.pib.gov.in/. The 
Ministry has informed that  the PCI addresses cases of fake/false/misleading news 
through its complaint redressal mechanism either taking suo-motu cognizance or 
through online platforms including CPGRAMS. Further, in view of the evolving 
media landscape  and to strengthen the PCI , the Ministry  vide letter dated 
31.07.2025 has sought suggestions from PCI for amen ding the ‘Press Council Act, 
1978’. The Ministry has also informed about the existing due diligence obligations 
for intermediaries to prevent hosting and dissemination of unlawful information 

6 
 
under section 79(2) read with section 79(3)(b) of the Information Technology Act, 
2000 (‘IT Act’) and Rule 3 of the Information Technology (Intermediary Guidelines 
and Digital Media Ethics Code) Rules, 2021 ( ‘IT Rules, 2021 ’). The Ministry of 
Information and Broadcasting  in its reply has also stated that MeitY is constantly 
engaging with public and stakeholders for creation of new laws, strengthening and 
enforcement of existing laws and monitoring level of compliance  of the existing 
rules/laws. MeitY has released draft amendments to the IT Rules, 2021 to 
strengthen due diligence obligations for intermediaries, particularly regarding 
creation or modification of synthetically generated content.  
In light of the replies, the Committee would like to be enlightened about year -
wise details of complaints received/resolved through CPGRAMS portal and 
reporting of suspicious as well as questionable information and the success rate 
of its resolution in the Fact Check Unit of Press Information Bureau  under the 
Ministry of Information and Broadcasting since November, 2019.  The Committee 
desire that the suggestions received by the Ministry from the PCI for its letter 
dated 31.07.2025, may be apprised of the Committee along with the action taken  
for amending the PCI Act, 1978 . The Committee may also be made aware of the 
updated status on the draft amendments to the IT Rules, 2021 , released by MeitY  
on 22nd October, 2025.  
As regards Committee’s expectation regarding exploring the option of having 
an independent centralized monitoring body with representatives from MeitY, all 
forms of Media and stakeholders for adjudicating cross -platform fake news cases 
and recommend penalties, the Ministry has replied that the MeitY constantly 
engages and receives inputs from the public and stakeholders in respect of 
creation of new laws, strengthening and enforcement of existing laws and 
monitoring level of compliance. The Committee, therefore, wish to be apprised of 
the details of inputs received from the public and stakeholders  and penalties 
recommended against fake news cases. 
 
Role of Self-Regulatory Mechanism in curbing Fake News  
(Recommendation Sl. No. 4) 
8. The Committee, in their Original Report, had made the following 
Observation/Recommendation:– 
“The Committee note that there are 919 TV channels permitted by MIB (as on 
30.11.2024). Out of this, 318 TV channels are members of Broadcasting 
Content Complaints Council (BCCC) and 58 are members with News 

7 
 
Broadcasters Federation - Professional News Broadcasting Standards 
Authority" (NBF-PNBSA). While noting that 543 Channels were not members 
with any Self Regulatory Body (SRB), the Committee wanted to know from 
the Ministry as to how they could be made part of one or the other SRB. To 
this, the Ministry informed that in order to ensure accountability of 
Broadcasters which are not affiliated with any SRB and to secure effective 
implementation of the three -tier grievance redressal mechanism, MIB have 
introduced a condition that may be included in the uplinking/downlinking 
permissions for satellite TV channels mandating broadcasters to either join an 
SRB registered with the Ministry or establish their own SRB and get it 
registered with them. Details in this regard, the Ministry had communicated to 
the Broadcasters on 30.05.2023. NBDA, informed the Committee that when 
the TV channels find that they are under regulation, they prefer not to be a 
member and in such a situation NBDA has no control over it. Against this 
backdrop, they have been requesting the Ministry, for almost last 16 years, 
that whether channels are members or not, they should be brought under the 
purview of NBDA and regulated by the Self -Regulation Body that MIB have 
created. The Committee are also given to understand that the Ministry has 
not received any request from NBDA for registration as a self -regulatory body 
at level –II under Rule 18 (2) of CTN Rules, 2021. 
While acknowledging the support of most of the Stakeholders for Self -
Regulatory Monitoring Mechanism to curb Fake News, the Committee feel 
that for making the system of Self -regulatory mechanism effective, all TV 
channels should be brought under its umbrella. While endorsing the 
suggestion of NBDA, the Committee appreciate the Ministry’s initiative for 
inclusion of the condition in the uplinking/downlinking permissions for satellite 
TV channels mandating Broadcasters to either join an SRB registered with 
the Ministry or establish their own SRB and get it registered with them. The 
Committee are also of the view that having a fact checking mechanism and 
internal Ombudsman in almost all the media organisations will go a long way 
in strengthening the role of Self Regulatory mechanism and checking the 
menace of misinformation/Fake News. The Committee desire the Ministry of 
Information and Broadcasting to ensure that fact checking mechanism and 
internal ombudsman should be made mandatory in all print, digital and 
electronic media organisations of the country”. 
 
 
9. In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of information and Broadcasting 
submitted as under:– 
“As per Rule 17(1)(iv) of the Cable Television Networks (Amendment) Rules, 
2021, every broadcaster is required to be a member of a self -regulatory body 
(SRB) and comply with its terms and conditions. Accordingly, vide letter dated 
30.05.2023, all broadcasters were advised to become members of a self -
regulatory body. 
 
In respect of digital media, Part -III of the IT Rules, 2021 provides for a three -
level grievance redressal mechanism with two levels of self-regulation- Level I 
being the publisher and Level II being the Self Regulatory Body, and the third 
level being the Oversight Mechanism under the Ministry of Information & 
Broadcasting.   
In respect of the internal ombudsman, Rule 11 of the IT Rules 2021 provides 
that every digital news publisher shall establish a grievance redressal 
mechanism and shall appoint a Grievance Officer based in India, who shall be 

8 
 
responsible for the redressal of grievances received by him; display the 
contact details related to its grievance redressal mechanism and the name 
and contact details of its Grievance Officer at an appropriate place on its 
website or interface, as the case may be; and ensure that the Grievance 
Officer takes a decision on every grievance received by it within fifteen days, 
and communicate the same to the complainant within the specified time. It 
further provides that every digital news publisher shall be a member of a self -
regulating body as referred to in rule 12 and abide by its terms and 
conditions. 
 
With regard to the need for internal ombudsman/grievance officer in print 
media, PCI has been requested by the Ministry vide letter dated 31.07.2025 
to provide suggestions for amending Press Council Act, 1978 keeping in view 
the current media scenario in the Country”. 
 
 
10. The Committee, in their Report, had observed that out of 919 TV Channels 
permitted by the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting, 543 channels were not 
part of any Self Regulatory Body. On being asked how these could be made part of 
a SRB, the Committee were informed that in order to ensure accountability of 
Broadcasters, the MIB have introduced a condition that mandates the 
broadcasters to either  join a SRB registered with  the Ministry or establish their 
own SRB and get it registered with the Ministry and the details in this regard were 
communicated  to the Broadcasters on 30.5.2023. 
The Committee were informed by the NBDA that TV Channels when finding 
that they are under regulation, prefer not to be a member of any regulatory body, 
and in such situation, the NBDA has no control over it. The Committee in this 
regard also noted that the Ministry had not received any request from NBDA for 
registration as a Self Regulatory Body  at level -II under Rule 18(2) of CTN Rules, 
2021. 
 The Committee, in their report, while appreciating the Ministry’s initiative for 
inclusion of condition in uplinking/downlinking permissions for satellite TV 
channels mandating Broadcasters to either join an SRB registered with the 
Ministry or establish their own SRB and get it registered with the Ministry , had 
desired that the Ministry may ensure that fact checking mechanism and internal 
ombudsman should be made mandatory in all print, digital and electronic media 
organizations of the country. 
The Ministry, in its Action Taken Reply, has submitted that as per Rule 
17(1)(iv) of the Cable Television Networks (Amendment) Rules, 2021, every 
broadcaster is required to be a member of a Self Regulatory Body  (SRB) and 
comply with its terms and conditions. Accordingly, an advisory was issued to all 
broadcasters vide letter dated 30.05.2023. 

9 
 
Further, with respect to digital media, the Ministry informed that Part -III of the 
‘IT Rules, 2021’ provides for a three -level grievance redressal mechanism with two 
levels of self -regulation, with publisher at Level -I, Self Regulatory Body at Level -II 
and the oversight mechanism under the MIB at Level-III.  
As regards the internal ombudsman, the Ministry has replied that Rule 11 of 
the ‘IT Rules 2021’ provides that every digital news publisher shall establish a 
Grievance Redressal Mechanism (GRM) and shall appoint a Grievance Officer 
based in India, who shall be responsible for the redressal of grievances received. 
The Ministry, in its Action Taken Reply , has submitted that keeping in view  of the 
current media scenario in the Country and the need for internal 
ombudsman/grievance officer in print media, PCI has been requested by the 
Ministry to provide suggestions for amending Press Council  of India  Act, 1978, 
vide its letter dated 31.07.2025.  
In the light of the aforesaid replies of the Ministry, the Committee may  be 
apprised of the implementation status of the advisory  issued by the Ministry vide 
letter dated 30.05.2023, wherein all the broadcasters were advised to become 
members of a self-regulatory body (SRB). The Committee may also be apprised of 
the details of cases substantiating the effectiveness of the three -level Grievance 
Redressal Mechanism, under ‘IT Rules, 2021’  in checking fake news. Further, the 
Committee may be apprised of the details/status of the reply received from PCI on 
the need for  internal ombudsman/grievance officer in  all print, digital and 
electronic media along with the action taken by the Ministry on the same.  
Artificial Intelligence and Fake News 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 9) 
11. The Committee, in their Original Report, had made the following 
Observation/Recommendation:– 
“The Committee note that advances in technology, particularly in Artificial 
Intelligence (AI), offer promising solutions to address issues related to Fake 
news. However, according to the Ministry, Artificial Intelligence is an evolving 
technology and works on use of pre -existing information available on internet 
and therefore, in its present state of development it cannot be used for a 
subject as complicated as fact checking. But AI could be used to flag 
potentially fake news/ misleading content for review by human intervention as 
a second layer of monitoring. During examination of the subject, several 
examples of personal experience of stakeholders were a revelation as to how 
AI could be used to create videos of fake news and misinformation 
particularly because no information was available with the stakeholders with 
respect to AI generated videos or news. 

10 
 
The Committee note that various research projects and initiatives are 
exploring the use of Artificial Intelligence (AI) in combating fake news. AI and 
machine learning (ML) technologies are increasingly being employed to 
enhance the ability to detect, verify, and prevent the spread of misinformation 
and disinformation. Some key developments and projects in this field include 
(i) AI -based Fact -Checking Tools; (ii) Deep Learning for Image and Video 
Verification: Fake News Detection on Social Media Using AI-based Image; (iii) 
AI for Detecting Disinformation on Social  Media; (iv) AI to Identify 
Misinformation Networks; (v) AI -Powered Tools for Content Verification and 
Fact-Checking; (vi) Collaboration between AI and Fact -Checking Networks; 
etc.  The Committee also note that the Ministry of Electronics and Information 
Technology (MeitY) has constituted a nine -member Committee to examine 
problems related to the ‘issue of deepfakes’. Further, two projects to detect 
fake news, which are currently underway are (i) Fake Speech Detection using 
Deep Learning Framework and (ii) Design and Development of Software for 
Detecting Deepfake Videos and Images. The Committee were apprised that 
internationally there are several ongoing research projects on detecting AI -
generated content and developing AI tools that facilitate the detection of fake 
news.  
The Committee note and acknowledge the role of AI in combating Fake 
News, particularly in detecting misleading visual content, verifying claims, and 
identifying the networks responsible for spreading misinformation. The 
Committee, appreciate the research projects and initiatives which are 
exploring the use of Artificial Intelligence (AI) in combating fake news, 
particularly by MeitY.  The Committee are also aware how AI can be used to 
create ‘Fake News/Misinformation. Thus, with a word of caution, the 
Committee advocate for a balanced approach for using AI to curb Fake News 
wherein AI tools are leveraged with human oversight. The Committee also 
urge for close coordination between the Ministry of Information and 
Broadcasting, Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology (MeitY), 
and other concerned Ministries/Departments to develop concrete legal and 
technological solutions for identifying and prosecuting individuals and entities 
responsible for dissemi nating AI -generated fake news. The Committee 
recommend for inter -Ministerial coordination for exploring the feasibility of 
Licensing requirements for AI content creators and Mandatory labelling of AI -
generated videos and content, and apprise them about the action taken in the 
matter accordingly”. 
 
12. The Ministry of information and Broadcasting, in their Action Taken Reply, 
submitted as under:– 
“The increasing use of Artificial Intelligence in media presents challenges 
such as generation and dissemination of misinformation, deepfakes, 
impersonation, automated amplification of unlawful content, and potential 
harm to users. The Information Technology Act, 2000 (“IT Act”) and the 
Information Technology (Intermediary Guidelines and Digital Media Ethics 
Code) Rules, 2021 (“IT Rules, 2021”) do not distinguish between information 
generated using AI tools and information generated by users for the purpose 
of defining offences. Existing due diligence obligations under section 79(2) 
read with section 79(3)(b) of the IT Act and Rule 3 of the IT Rules, 2021 
require intermediaries to prevent hosting and dissemination of unlawful 
information and to take expeditious action upon receipt of lawful orders or 
reasoned government intimation. 

11 
 
 
Recognising emerging risks from synthetically generated information, MeitY 
has also undertaken consultations and prepared draft amendments to further 
strengthen intermediary due diligence obligations for intermediaries, as well 
as for platforms that enable the creation or modification of synthetically 
generated content. The proposed draft amendments introduce: 
 
i. A clear definition of “synthetically generated information”; 
ii. Labelling and metadata embedding requirements for such information 
to ensure users can distinguish synthetic from authentic content; 
iii. Visibility and audibility standards requiring that synthetic content be 
prominently marked, including a minimum 10% visual or initial audio 
duration coverage; and 
iv. Enhanced verification and declaration obligations for significant social 
media intermediaries (SSMIs), mandating reasonable technical 
measures to confirm whether uploaded content is synthetically 
generated and to label it accordingly. 
      Moreover, MeitY has enacted the DPDP Act, which is a principle 
based and technology agnostic framework rather than prescriptive in 
nature. The focus of the DPDP Act is to strengthen accountability, 
transparency and user safeguards within the legal framework”. 
 
13. Taking cognizance of the fact that various research projects/initiatives were 
being explored to use Artificial Intelligence (AI) for combating fake news and MeitY 
had constituted a nine -member Committee to examine problems related to 
‘deepfakes’, the Committee had advocated for a balanced approach for using AI to 
curb Fake News wherein AI tools are leveraged with human oversight. The 
Committee had also urged for close coordination between the MIB and MeitY, and 
other concerned Ministries/Departments to develop concrete legal and 
technological solutions for identifying and prosecuting individuals/entities who 
were responsible for disseminating AI -generated fake news. The Committee had 
also recommended for inter-Ministerial coordination for exploring the feasibility of 
Licensing requirements for AI content creators and mandatory labe lling of AI -
generated videos and contents.  
The Ministry, in its Action Taken Reply, has submitted that the Information 
Technology Act, 2000 (‘IT Act’) and the Information Technology (Intermediary 
Guidelines and Digital Media Ethics Code) Rules, 2021 (‘IT Rules, 2021’) do not 
distinguish between information generated using AI tools and information 
generated by users for the purpose of defining offences. The Committee are also 
enlightened that while r ecognising the risks emerging from the synthetically 
generated information, MeitY has  undertaken consultations and prepared various 
draft amendments to further strengthen due diligence obligations for 
intermediaries, as well as for platforms that enable the creation or modification of 
synthetically generated content. Taking note of  the efforts made by  MeitY for 

12 
 
preparation of the draft amendments, the Committee  hope that the proposed draft 
amendments will soon become part of the original Act by passing it in Parliament.  
 
Awareness/Training/Media literacy 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 11) 
14. The Committee, in their Original Report, had made the following 
Observation/Recommendation:– 
“The Committee note that Fact Check Unit under PIB, which does fact 
checking only in respect of information pertaining to the Government, uses 
engaging content in the form of memes/Crisp Videos/Awareness Posts and 
has also conducted campaigns such as #FACTREE, #CyberMonday, etc., to 
increase public awareness about the baneful effects of fake news and 
sensitize them against sharing of unverified information. The Committee also 
note that Media organisations have their own awareness and training 
programmes for journalists and public at large. It is also learnt that to enhance 
awareness, the PCI carries out sustained Social Media campaigns by making 
regular updates of Norms on its official Social Media Handle - X. Further, the 
Council while considering the matter regarding strategies and efforts to tackle 
fake news during its meeting held on 22.09.2022, had also recommended for 
inclusion of media studies in academic curriculum. Accordingly, 
communication was sent by PCI to the Ministry of Education vide letter dated 
09.12.2022 for taking necessary action in the matter.  
Further, while noting that one of the causes of ‘Fake News’ proliferation was 
‘Lack of Media Literacy’, the Ministry was asked about their initiatives for 
creating specific programme for generating and creating awareness. To this, 
MIB informed that Media literacy can best be achieved through creating public 
awareness of the harmful effects of fake news and sensitizing citizens and 
other stakeholders against sharing of unverified information. This can be done 
through appropriate outreach activities for citizen engagement particularly for 
younger generation in association with educational institutions. While 
considering the aspect of creating awareness about Fake News, during 
examination of the subject, all the stakeholders unanimously agreed for 
having curriculum for Media literacy at school/college levels. 
The Committee while appreciating the initiatives taken to promote media 
literacy/generating awareness regarding Fake news/ misinformation opine 
that all the stakeholders may mandatorily conduct workshops for generating 
awareness and take initiatives for wider engagements about fake news. The 
Committee also recommend for having broader consultations with all the 
concerned stakeholders including Ministry of Education.  While noting that 
there are many ways to impart media literacy, the Committee urge that media 
literacy beginning at School/College level can have far reaching effect and 
play a crucial role on young minds. The Committee, therefore, call upon the 
Ministry to consider, during their consultation with stakeholders, a 
comprehensive media literacy curriculum which can be designed for the 
educational journey of students. Training the teachers, instructors, librarian s, 
etc., at the school level can also be considered. Besides, public awareness 
campaign, guidelines and frameworks for media literacy are essential for 
encouraging critical thinking. The Committee may be apprised of the concrete 
outcome of the deliberations in this regard. The Ministry may also apprise the 

13 
 
Committee about the concrete action taken by the Ministry of Education with 
respect to the suggestions of PCI for having media studies included in the 
curriculum for the children”. 
 
15. The Ministry of Information and Broadcasting, in their Action Taken Reply, 
submitted as under:– 
“The Press Council is expressly mandated under Section 13 sub section 2(c) 
to ensure on the part of newspapers, news agencies and journalists, the 
maintenance of high standards of public taste and foster a due sense of both 
the rights and responsibilities of citizenship; and under 13(2) (d) to encourage 
the growth of a sense of responsibility and public service among all those 
engaged in the profession of journalism. Towards furtherance of the mandate, 
the Council conducts Internship Programmes twice in a year, namely the 
“Summer Internship Programme (SIP)” and the “Winter Internship Programme 
(WIP)". In 2025, “Autumn Internship Programme” was organized by the 
Council. Applications are invited from eligible students nationwide and 
selection is based on merits. 
 
Conducting workshops across Ministries, Departments, Social Media teams, 
Colleges, and Schools can significantly enhance awareness regarding fake 
news and emerging trends on social media platforms. Such capacity -building 
initiatives help participants develop a foundational understanding of 
misinformation, its modes of dissemination, and effective methods to identify 
and counter it. These workshops can play a critical role in strengthening 
institutional and citizen preparedness against the spread of fake or misleading 
content. 
 
MeitY has launched a program me titled Information Security Education & 
Awareness to generate awareness among users while using Internet. A 
dedicated website has been created for information security awareness that 
generates and upgrades relevant awareness material on a regular basis and 
can be accessed at https://www.infosecawareness.in.  
 
Ministry is also consider ing to work in collaboration with the Ministry of 
Education to undertake joint initiatives to strengthen awareness about 
misinformation and Fake News across educational institutions. Such 
coordinated efforts would enable the systematic dissemination of best 
practices for identifying and countering fake news among students, 
educators, and academic administrators”. 
 
16. The Committee, in their Report , had noted that the Fact check Unit under 
PIB, which does fact checking only in respect of information pertaining to the 
Government, uses engaging content and had also conducted campaigns to 
increase public awareness about the baneful effects of fake news and sensitize 
them against sharing of unverified information.  
The Committee had also noted that Media organizations were having their 
own awareness and training programmes for journalists and public at large. The 
Committee while also noting the ‘lack of media literacy’ as one of the causes of 
‘fake news’ proliferation, had asked the Ministry about their initiatives for creating 

14 
 
specific programme for generating and creating awareness, to which, the MIB 
informed that Media literacy can best be achieved through creating public 
awareness.  
The Committee, in their Report, while appreciating the initiatives taken to 
promote media literacy/generating awareness regarding Fake news/ 
misinformation, had also opined that all the stakeholders may mandatorily 
conduct workshops for generating public awareness about fake news . The 
Committee had also recommended for having broader consultations with all the 
concerned stakeholders including Ministry of Education for having media studies 
included in the curriculum  at school/college level and also to train teachers, 
instructors, librarians etc. at school level.  
 The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply stated that the Press Council is 
expressly mandated under Section 13(2)(c) for maintenance of high standards of 
public taste and foster a due sense of rights and responsibilities of citizenship;   
under Section 13(2)(d) to encourage growth of a sense of responsibility and public 
service among all those engaged in the profession of journalism; and the PCI 
conducts Internship Programmes twice a year to achieve the mandate. The 
Ministry in its reply also stated that conducting workshops across Ministries, 
Departments, Social Media teams, Colleges and Schools can significantly enhance 
awareness regarding fake news. The Ministry informed that the MeitY has 
launched a program me titled Information Security Education & Awareness to 
generate awareness among users while using Internet and a dedicated website for 
information security awareness has also been created. The Ministry is also 
considering to work in collaboration with the Ministry of Education to undertake 
joint initiatives to strengthen awareness about misinformation and Fake News 
across educational institutions.  
In the light of the  above submission, that the Ministry of Information and 
Broadcasting is considering to work in collaboration with the Ministry of 
Education to undertake joint initiatives to strengthen awareness about 
misinformation and Fake News across educational institutions, the Committee 
would like to be apprised of the updated details of the action taken in this regard. 
 
 
 
 
 

15 
 
Social media, Algorithm and Fake News/Misinformation 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 12) 
17. The Committee, in their Original Report, had made the following 
Observation/Recommendation:– 
“During examination of the subject, most of the stakeholders raised concern 
with respect to ‘Safe Harbour’ clause under Section 79 of the IT Act, 2000 
that provides for exemption from liability of intermediary, subject to certain 
safeguards, for any third -party information, data, or communication link made 
available or hosted by him. It was also learnt that for most of the digital news 
publishers on major social media intermediary platforms, the revenue model 
is such that the sensational and potentially fake content gets more traction 
and the algorithms of such platform further amplifies such content. The 
Ministry also informed that algorithms used by social media platforms 
significantly influence how the information spreads online. Since sensational 
and emotionally charged content tends to attract higher engagement, social 
media platforms often prioritize such content, which sometimes are fake or 
misleading. During examination of the subject, most of the stakeholders 
expressed their concern related to amplification of fake news through 
algorithmic biases because this vicious cycle often leads to virality of fake 
news. 
  In this regard, the Ministry also informed that the Hon’ble Minister of 
Information and Broadcasting (HMIB) on one occasion had called for 
accountability in digital media to combat fake news and safeguard democracy 
and had suggested that in changing media landscape and India's diverse 
social and cultural context, there is a need for revisiting the 'Safe Harbour' 
provision for the social media intermediaries. The Committee were also given 
to understand that the Minister had pointed out that algorithms driving digital 
platforms prioritises content that maximises engagement, inciting strong 
reactions and, thereby, defining the revenue for the platform. Since such 
biases have social consequences, particularly in a diverse nation like India, 
there is a need for platforms to come up with solutions to eliminate such 
biases.   
While noting the concerns relating to the intermediary platforms and Big Tech 
companies, the Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology (MeitY) 
was asked to provide their views/suggestions with respect to issues related to 
the subject and regarding user generated content. However, MeitY did not 
provide any suggestion, instead it merely stated that under the given 
Rule/Act, the subject falls under MIB. Considering the technological 
advancements, the Committee note the complex and inter -sectoral issues 
involved in dissemination of misinformation/Fake News and thereby calls for 
coordination between not only different stakeholders of Media, but also 
among different Ministries/Departments. The Committee, therefore, urge MIB 
to ensure an inter -Ministerial coordination mechanism among all those 
concerned. Further, for making social media/intermediary platforms more 
accountable w.r.t peddling Fake content/News, the Committee endorse the 
view that for enforcing transparency in algorithms, introduce stricter fines, and 
penalties for repeat offenders, establish independent regulatory body, use 
technological tools like AI to curb the spread of misinformation, etc.  The 
Ministry may apprise of the Committee about the future course of 

16 
 
action/action taken by them to address the concerns/suggestions made by 
the Hon’ble Minister of Information and Broadcasting regarding ‘Safe Harbour’ 
clause and other related issues. Besides, the Committee urge the Ministry to 
explore ways and means to address the concerns associated with algorithm 
biases and its role in amplifying Fake News and apprise them in this regard.  
The Committee also recommend the Ministry to look into the feasibility of 
following and apprise them accordingly: 
(i) To work with MeitY and other stakeholders and bring out a solution to 
address the issues related to Big Tech Companies and individual content 
creators or influencers; 
(ii) The Ministry may come out with concrete solutions with respect to 
intermediaries/publishers particularly to deal with ‘Safe Harbour’; 
(iii) To have a dedicated Nodal officer (in India) in the Big tech companies; 
etc”. 
 
18. The Ministry of information and Broadcasting, in their Action Taken Reply, 
submitted as under:– 
“Rule 4 of the IT Rules, 2021 provides for several additional due diligence 
obligations specific to SSMIs [i.e., SMIs having over 50 Lakh registered users 
in India]. The key additional due diligence obligations for SSMIs are 
mentioned below. 
Appointment of designated officers based in India and publishing physical 
address to be in India by SSMI under Rule 4(1) and Rule 4(5) of the IT Rules, 
2021 to assist in enforcement of rules & laws of the land:  
I. Rules 4(1) and 4(5) of the IT Rules, 2021 require SSMI to appoint a 
Chief Compliance Officer, a Resident Grievance Officer and a nodal 
contact person, all to be residents in India; and have a physical 
contact address to be in India duly published on its website, mobile 
app or both so as to make them accountable for speedy law 
enforcement and compliance with the IT Act and rules made 
thereunder. 
II. Rule 4(1)(a) prescribes that SSMIs have to appoint a Chief 
Compliance Officer who shall be responsible for ensuring compliance 
with the Act and rules made thereunder and shall be liable in any 
proceedings relating to any relevant third -party information, data or 
communication link made available or hosted by that intermediary 
where he fails to ensure that such intermediary observes due 
diligence while discharging its duties under the Act and rules made 
thereunder. 
III. Rule 4(1)(b) prescribes that SSMIs have to appoint a nodal contact 
person for 24x7 coordination with law enforcement agencies and 
officers to ensure compliance to their orders or requisitions made in 
accordance with the provisions of law or rules made thereunder. 
IV. Rule 4(1)(c) prescribes that SSMIs have to appoint a Resident 
Grievance Officer, who shall, subject to Rule 4(1)(b), be responsible 
for the functions referred to in Rule 3(2) of IT Rules, 2021. 
V. Rule 4(1)(d) prescribes that SSMIs have to publish periodic 
compliance report every month mentioning the details of complaints 
received and action taken thereon, and, in respect of a significant 
social media intermediary, the number of specific communication 
links or parts of information that the intermediary has removed or 
disabled access to in pursuance of any proactive monitoring 

17 
 
conducted by using automated tools or any other relevant information 
as may be specified. 
VI. Rule 4(5) prescribes that a SSMI shall have a physical contact 
address in India published on its website, mobile based application or 
both, as the case may be, for the purposes of receiving the 
communication addressed to it. 
Enabling traceability of the first originator of unlawful information in India on 
specific grounds upon receipt of lawful order under Rule 4(2) of the IT Rules, 
2021:  
I.       Rule 4(2) prescribes that a SSMI providing services primarily in the 
nature of messaging shall enable the identification of the first originator 
of the information on its computer resource as may be required by a 
judicial order passed by a court of competent jurisdiction or an order 
passed under section 69 of IT Act by the Competent Authority as per 
the Information Technology (Procedure and Safeguards for interception, 
monitoring and decryption of information) Rules, 2009, which shall be 
supported with a copy of such information in electronic form. 
II. Such order shall only be passed for the purposes of prevention, detection, 
investigation, prosecution or punishment of an offence related to the 
sovereignty and integrity of India, the security of the State, friendly 
relations with foreign States, or public order, or of incitement to an 
offence relating to the above or in relation with rape, sexually explicit 
material or child sexual abuse material (CSAM), punishable with 
imprisonment for a term of not less than 5 years. 
Deployment of automated tools under Rule 4(4) of the IT Rules, 2021 to 
proactively identify and remove unlawful information and curb their virality:  
 
I.        Rule 4(4) of the IT Rules, 2021 requires SSMI to endeavour 
deployment of technology -based measures or automated tools or 
other mechanisms to proactively identify information that depicts any 
act or simulation in any form depicting rape, child sexual abuse or 
conduct, whether explicit or implicit, or any information which is exactly 
identical in content to information that has previously been removed or 
access to which has been disabled on the computer resource of such 
intermediary under Rule 3(1)(d) of the IT Rules, 2021 in accordance 
with the clause.  
II. Rule 4(4) also requires that the SSMI shall display a notice to any user 
attempting to access any information included under this sub -rule 
stating that such information has been identified by the intermediary 
under the categories referred to in the sub-rule.  
Voluntary verification of user accounts: Rule 4(7) of the IT Rules, 2021 
requires SSMI to enable users who register for their services from India, or 
use their services in India, to voluntarily verify their accounts by using any 
appropriate mechanism, including the active Indian mobile number of such 
users, and where any user voluntarily verifies their account, such user shall 
be provided with a demonstrable and visible mark of verification, which shall 
be visible to all users of the service: However, the information received for the 
purpose of verification under this sub -rule shall not be used for any other 
purpose, unless the user expressly consents to such use. 
 
Power to call for information from SSMIs:  Rule 4(9) of the IT Rules, 2021 
empowers the Government to call for such additional information from any 
SSMI as it may consider necessary for the purposes o f Part-II of the IT Rules, 
2021”. 

18 
 
 
19. The Committee, in their Report, had noted that complex inter-sectoral issues 
are involved in dissemination of misinformation/fake news and therefore had 
desired for coordination among different stakeholders of media as well as inter -
Ministerial coordination between Ministry of Information and Broadcasting  and 
MeitY for addressing the issues related to Big -Tech Companies and individual 
content creators/influencers. Further, the Committee had endorsed the usage of 
technological tools like AI to curb the spread of misinformation and had desired 
the Ministry to come up with concrete solutions for making social 
media/intermediary platforms more accountable  while dealing with  peddling Fake 
content/News, ‘Safe Harbour’ clause and other related issues. Besides, the 
Committee had also urged the Ministry to address the concerns associated with 
algorithm biases and its role in amplifying Fake News.  
The Ministry , in its Action Taken Reply , has mentioned the following key 
additional due diligence obligations specific to SSMIs which are provided under 
‘Rule 4 of the IT Rules, 2021’: --  Appointment of designated officers based in India 
and publishing physical address to be in India by SSMI [under Rule 4(1) and Rule 
4(5) of the IT Rules, 2021] to assist in enforcement of rules and laws of the land; 
Enabling traceability of the first originator of unlawful information in India on 
specific grounds upon receipt of lawful order [under Rule 4(2)]; Deployment of 
automated tools [under Rule 4(4) of the IT Rules, 2021] to proactively identify and 
remove unlawful information and curb their virality; Voluntary verification of user 
accounts  [under Rule 4(7)];  and Power to call for information from SSMIs [under 
Rule 4(9)].  
 
The Ministry, in its Action Taken Reply , has also stated that, Rule 4(4) of the 
IT Rules, 2021 requires SSMI to endeavour deployment of technology -based 
measures or automated tools or other mechanisms to proactively  identify and 
remove unlawful information and curb their virality . In this regard, the Committee 
would like to be apprised of the action taken against SSMIs who have not 
deployed technology-based measures or automated tools or other mechanisms as 
stipulated under Rule 4(4) of ‘IT Rules, 2021’ . Further, w hile noting that Rule 4 of 
the ‘IT Rules, 2021 ’ provides for several additional due diligence obligations 
specific to SSMIs, the Committee desire to be apprised about the effectiveness of 
the implementation of these due diligence obligations, including the number of 
cases handled under these Rules since the notification of ‘IT Rules, 2021’.  

19 
 
CHAPTER II 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN  ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 1) 
Introductory 
 
With advancement in technology, dissemination of ‘Fake 
News’/misinformation is not only through the mainstream media (newspapers, TV) 
but also largely through digital news media and user -generated content on social 
media (X, YouTube etc). Spread of ‘Fake News’, though not unknown, is 
magnified with the onset of electronic media, proliferation of digital platforms and 
widespread use of social media.  In the last decade and a half, almost every 
individual has become a purveyor of news/information and the conventional 
safeguards of editorial control have become almost non -existent. Consequently, 
there has been a massive proliferation of ‘Fake News’ and misinformation. 
Unchecked spread of misinformation in general and ‘Fake News’ in particular, 
have emerged as a global challenge as it pose a serious threat to (a) Public order 
- triggering strong emotional sentiments and confusion; (b) Democratic processes; 
(c) Individual reputation (defamation); (d) Insider trading/prices of the stock 
market; and (e) Credibility of media etc. Given the ongoing digital revolution and 
the rise in usage of digital devices in the Country, ‘Fake News’ is undoubtedly 
becoming a matter of concern.   
 
The Committee note that there are myriad complex and inter-related factors 
that contribute to the spread of ‘Fake News’ and misinformation due to reasons 
which, inter-alia, include (i) Low level of digital and media literacy; (ii) Rise of 
social media platforms; (iii) Technological developments; (iv) Political polarization 
and specific agendas of some individuals, parties or groups (to influence public 
opinion); (v) Financial Incentives (fabricated sensational stories attract more clicks 
and generate followers and advertising revenue for the creators); (vi) Algorithms 
that promote/amplify viral and sensational content; (vii) Technologies like Bots 
amplifying false information, cognitive biases, manipulation through AI -generated 
deepfakes, etc.   
 
Recognizing the impact and challenges associated with ‘Fake News', the 
Committee felt the need to review and assess the effectiveness of the existing 
mechanisms to curb its menace.  In the succeeding paragraphs, the Committee 
after detailed examination of the subject have made their 
Observations/Recommendations on the existing regulatory/institutional 
frameworks/ mechanisms for addressing the issues related to ‘Fake News’. The 
Committee feel that the issue requires a multi -faceted approach and combined 
efforts by individuals, Governments, Print as well as electronic media digital media 
growing and social media platforms in curbing the menace. The Government 
through various initiatives like Regulatory Framework, Fact Checking Initiatives, 
Technology Collaborations, Public Awareness campaigns and Media literacy 
would be able to tackle the spread of Fake News. The Committee desire that the 
hazards of ‘Fake News’/misinformation need to be prevented so as to avoid 
misleading of common people, mental trauma to victims and in maintaining the 

20 
 
credibility and freedom of all forms of Media.  The Committee recommend the 
Ministry to act in right earnest through robust and comprehensive approach and 
provide details of the time bound action taken to address all the issues highlighted 
in the Report.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 The Ministry has taken cognizance of the in -depth analysis and 
comprehensive observations of the Committee on the growing concern of fake 
news and spread of misinformation in this digital age. The Ministry have earlier 
briefed the Committee that it has been actively engaged to fight such 
disinformation and misleading or fake information across the media through its 
available institutional framework as well as through the Fact Check Unit set up in 
November, 2019.  
 
In the Print Media Sector all newspapers have to adhere to the “Norms of 
Journalistic Conduct” brought out by Press Council of India (PCI) which inter alia 
restrains publication of fake/ defamatory/ misleading news. The Council holds 
inquiry into alleged violations of Norms, as per section 14 of the Act, and may 
warn, admonish or censure the newspaper, editors, journalists, etc. as the case 
may be.  
 
Accordingly, there is a well -established regulatory framework in the 
Electronic Media Sector where the content on TV Channels is required to adhere 
to the Programme Code under the Cable Television Networks (Regulation) Act, 
1995, which, inter alia, provide that no content which contains anything obscene, 
defamatory, deliberate, false and suggestive innuendos and half -truths is 
broadcast on private satellite TV channels. Cable Television Network 
(Amendment) Rules 2021, provides for a three -tier grievance redressal 
mechanism to look into the complaints relating to the violation of the Code by the 
TV channels. Appropriate action is taken where violation of Programme Code is 
found.  
 
The Digital Media is different from the other two traditional forms of media 
discussed above in terms of the manner in which the consumers access the 
content. The editorial jurisprudence existing in the traditional forms of media is 
mostly non existence in case of social media leading to unfiltered/ fake/ 
misleading content flow between a consumer and the publisher of information. 
The Information Technology (Intermediary Guidelines and Digital Media Ethics 
Code) Rules, 2021(“IT Rules, 2021”) notified on 25.02.2021 under the Information 
Technology Act, 2000 provides for a Code of Ethics for the publishers of news and 
current affairs on digital media, which, inter alia, requires adherence to the Norms 
of Journalistic Conduct brought out by PCI and the Programme Code under Cable 
Television Network Regulation Act, 1995. Code of Ethics provides for: 
 
• Intermediaries must prevent users from sharing misinformation or information 
which is patently false and untrue or misleading in nature. 
• A three-tier grievance redressal mechanism for adherence to the Code of Ethics is 
also provided. 
• Grievance Officer is appointed by platforms to handle complaints related to false 
or defamatory content within a fixed timeframe. 

21 
 
• Part II of the IT Rules, inter alia, casts an obligation on intermediaries to prevent 
the dissemination of information that is patently false, untrue, or misleading in 
nature. 
The government issues the orders under Section 69A of the IT Act in the 
interest of sovereignty and integrity of India, defence of India, security of the State, 
friendly relations with foreign States or public order or for preventing incitement to 
the commission of any cognizable offence relating to above. 
 
Fact Check Unit 
A Fact Check Unit (FCU) is set up under Press Information Bureau, 
Ministry of Information and Broadcasting in November, 2019 to counter fake news 
relating to the Central Government.  
 
The FCU verifies information concerning the Central Government, its 
Ministries, Departments and PSUs, and issues timely corrections and clarifications 
through official platforms to curb misleading content and ensure accurate public 
communication. 
 
In addition to verification, the Unit also takes Suo Moto cognizance of fake 
news through continuous efforts to identify misinformation related to the 
Government of India, as well as through complaints received from users about 
misleading or suspicious content circulating on government -related matters in the 
digital media domain. 
 
 The institutional framework to check misinformation has been an ever 
evolving and continuous process. The Government of India in consultation with 
different stakeholders has put in place an effective framework while maintaining   
balance between the freedom of press and authentic and fact based reporting.  
 
 Ministry of Information and Broadcasting 
(O.M. No. H-11023/31/2024-Press dated 02/02/2026) 
 
Regulatory Mechanism for curbing Fake News  
(Recommendation Sl. No. 3) 
The Committee note that the objective of the Fact Check Unit under Press 
Information Bureau (PIB) is to counter dissemination of fake news and 
misinformation pertaining to the Government of India and to provide people with 
an easy avenue to report suspicious and questionable information for fact -
checking by following FACT model (Find, Assess, Create and Target). The 
Committee also note that for Print Media - the newspapers have to adhere to 
‘Norms of Journalistic Conduct’ brought out by Press Council of India (PCI).   So 
far as the contents shown on TV Channels there is Programme Code under the 
Cable Television Networks (Regulation) Act, 1995, are concerned it, inter -alia, 
provide that no content which contain anything obscene, defamatory, deliberate, 
false and suggestive innuendos and half -truth is broadcast on private satellite TV 
channels. Besides, TV channels are also required to follow ‘The Cable Television 
Network (Amendment) Rules 2021’. For Digital News Publishers, ‘Information 
Technology (Intermediary Guidelines and Digital Media Ethics Code) Rules, 2021’ 
(‘IT Rules, 2021’) provide for a Code of Ethics for the publishers of news and 
current affairs on digital media, which, inter -alia, requires adherence to the Norms 

22 
 
of Journalistic Conduct brought out by PCI and the Programme Code under Cable 
Television Network Regulation Act, 1995. The Rules provide for a Three Tier 
Grievance Redressal Mechanism   to look into complaints relating to violation of 
the Code. However, Rule 9 (i) relating to adherence of the Code of Ethics by the 
publishers of news and current affairs on digital media and OTT platforms; and 
Rule 9(3) relating to the three level grievance redressal mechanism, have been 
stayed by the Bombay High Court vide their interim order dated 14.8.2021.   
The complaints relating to fake news received in the Ministry are forwarded 
to the concerned news publishers, at Level -I of the Grievance Redressal 
Mechanism, for appropriate action under the IT Rules, 2021. The Ministry takes 
appropriate action against circulation of fake news as per the provisions of the 
institutional mechanism that are available for various media platforms. However, 
the Committee have been informed that in order to augment the effectiveness of 
the efforts to check the spread of fake news there is an urgent need for defining 
fake news and incorporating it in the existing regulatory mechanisms of print, 
electronic and digital media along with appropriate deterrent measures. 
While responding about the strength of existing legislative provisions and 
mechanisms to tackle the menace of Fake News, some of the stakeholders have 
submitted that they are adequate. However, according to some of the 
stakeholders it is not adequate in terms of the fact that intermediaries, content 
providers and social media platforms are not covered by the law. The Committee 
understand that digital media does not fall only under the Ministry of Information 
and Broadcasting (MIB). Regulation of digital as well as social media is a multi -
pronged effort, with distinct roles played by the MIB and MeitY, especially under 
the Information Technology (Intermediary Guidelines and Digital Media Ethics 
Code) Rules, 2021. It is beyond doubt that IT rules, 2021, divide digital media 
regulation between two Ministries. MIB (Part III) administers the Code of Ethics 
and three -tier grievance redressed mechanism for content published by digital 
news portals and (Over -The-Top) OTT streaming platforms. MeitY (Part II) 
oversees social media intermediaries and regulates user -generated content on 
platforms like You Tube, Facebook and X (formerly Twitter). Since digital media 
operates on Information Technology platforms, MeitY’s policies regarding 
cybersecurity and broader IT Act, 2000, provide overarching framework. The 
Committee, therefore, urge upon the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting to 
augment their concerted efforts, in effectively dealing with the challenges and 
problems created by Fake News in digital as well as social media platforms, in 
collaboration with the Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology. In order 
to strengthen the Press Council of India Online Complaint Portal like CPGRAM 
should be developed. Similarly, there is a need to strengthen the Press Council of 
India. The Committee expect the Ministry to explore the option of having an 
independent centralized monitoring body with representatives from MeitY, all the 
forms of Media and stakeholders for adjudicating cross -platform fake news cases 
and recommend penalties. Further, since PCI has submitted that there is a need 
for amending the existing Acts/Rules/Guidelines related to Print Media for tackling 
the issue of ‘Fake News’, the Committee recommend the Ministry to set up the 
Committee of experts to suggest amendments in existing Acts/Rules/Guidelines 
like ‘IT Act, 2000’, ‘The Cable Television Network (Regulation) Act 1995, etc. to 
address the misinformation or the fake news effectively. The Committee would like 
to be apprised of the views of the Ministry and action, initiated in this regard. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
\ 

23 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
In November 2019, PIB established a Fact Check Unit (FCU) to tackle fake 
news about the Government of India, its various Ministries, Departments, Public 
Sector Undertakings, and other Central Government organizations. The objective 
of the Fact Check Unit is to act as a deterrent to creators and disseminators of 
fake news & misinformation and to provide people with an easy avenue to report 
suspicious and questionable information for fact -checking. Users can submit fact -
check requests via these platforms: WhatsApp Hotline - +91 8799711259, Email 
ID -factcheck@pib.gov.in, and Website Portal - https://factcheck.pib.gov.in/  
 
Actionable queries are rigorously verified through multiple layers of checks 
using official sources, open data, and technological tools. Queries that cannot be 
verified through open sources are referred to the concerned Ministry via the 
attached PIB Officer for clarification. If a piece of information is found to require 
wider public clarification, the Unit publishes a verified ‘Fact Check’ on its social 
media platforms. Each fact check is classified as Fake, Misleading, or True, 
ensuring transparency and protecting citizens from misinformation. The fact -
checked content by PIB FCU is taken up with the concerned social media 
platforms for appropriate action under rule 3(1)(b) of the IT Rules, 2021. 
 
Since its inception, PIB Fact Check has become a crucial component of the 
government’s digital communications and information integrity strategy. It has 
played a pivotal role in tackling misinformation during high -stakes situations such 
as COVID-19 pandemic, G20 Summit, National elections and Operation Sindoor. 
The unit’s work now extends beyond misinformation to digital fraud, including fake 
government websites, insurance scams, and manipulated media aimed at 
misleading the public.  
 
The procedure followed by PCI, in identifying and curbing the ‘Fake News’ is as 
under:  
 
i. To deal with the cases of violation of any Norm of Journalistic Conduct, the PCI 
has a complaint mechanism for dealing with the cases of 
fake/false/defamatory/misleading news wherein it takes suo -motu cognizance 
under Regulation 13 of Press Council (Procedure for Inquiry) Regulation, 1979, 
or under Clause 14(1) of the Press Council Act, 1978, on receipt of a complaint 
made to it or otherwise, if the Council has reason to believe that a newspaper 
or news agency has offended against the standards of journalistic ethics or 
public taste or that an editor or a working journalist has committed any 
professional misconduct, the Council, after giving the newspaper, or news 
agency, the editor or journalist concerned an opportunity of being heard, holds 
an inquiry in such manner as provided by regulations made under this Act and, 
if it is satisfied that it is necessary so to do, it may, for reasons to be recorded 
in writing, warn, admonish or censure the newspaper, the news agency, the 
editor or the journalist or disapprove the conduct of the editor or the journalist, 
as the case may be. 
ii. Further, under Clause 14(2) of the Press Council Act, 1978, if the Council is of 
the opinion that it is necessary or expedient in the public interest to do so, it 
may require any newspaper to publish therein in such manner as the Council 
thinks fit, any particulars relating to any inquiry under this section against a 
newspaper or news agency, an editor or a journalist working therein, including 
the name of such newspaper, news agency, editor or journalist.  

24 
 
iii. PCI also receives complaints through CPGRAM Portal. For dealing with 
complaints received through the Online Complaint Portal like CPGRAM also, 
PCI follows the above mentioned procedure. 
 
With regard to amendment of the existing Act/Rules/Guidelines related to 
PCI, PCI has been requested by the Ministry vide letter dated 31.07.2025 to 
provide suggestions for amending Press Council Act, 1978 keeping in view the 
current media scenario in the country. 
 
The existing due diligence obligations under section 79(2) read with section 
79(3)(b) of the Information Technology Act, 2000 (“IT Act”) and Rule 3 of the 
Information Technology (Intermediary Guidelines and Digital Media Ethics Code) 
Rules, 2021 (“IT Rules, 2021”) require intermediaries to prevent hosting and 
dissemination of unlawful information and to take expeditious action upon receipt 
of lawful orders or reasoned government intimation. 
 
Further, to protect users in India and the Indian internet at large from the 
emerging harms, criminalities and such other associated risks posed by the 
misuse of technologies and to ensure accountability towards law of the land, 
MeitY constantly engages with and receives inputs from the public and 
stakeholders, including in respect of creation of new laws, strengthening & 
enforcement of existing laws and monitoring level of compliance. 
 
In respect of the synthetically generated information, Ministry of Electronics 
and Information Technology has released draft amendments to the IT Rules, 
2021, on October 22, 2025, to further strengthen intermediary due diligence 
obligations for intermediaries, particularly social media intermediaries and 
significant social media intermediaries, as well as for platforms that enable the 
creation or modification of synthetically generated content. 
 
Ministry of Information and Broadcasting 
(O.M. No. H-11023/31/2024-Press dated 02/02/2026) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 7 of Chapter I) 
 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 4) 
Role of Self-Regulatory Mechanism in curbing Fake News 
 
 
The Committee note that there are 919 TV channels permitted by MIB (as on 
30.11.2024). Out of this, 318 TV channels are members of Broadcasting Content 
Complaints Council (BCCC) and 58 are members with News Broadcasters 
Federation - Professional News Broadcasting Standards Authority" (NBF -
PNBSA). While noting that 543 Channels were not members with any Self 
Regulatory Body (SRB), the Committee wanted to know from the Ministry as to 
how they could be made part of one or the other SRB. To this, the Ministry 
informed that in order to ensure accountability of Broadcasters which are not 
affiliated with any SRB and to secure effective implementation of the three -tier 

25 
 
grievance redressal mechanism, MIB have introduced a condition that may be 
included in the uplinking/downlinking permissions for satellite TV channels 
mandating broadcasters to either join an SRB registered with the Ministry or 
establish their own SRB and get it registered with them. Details in this regard, the 
Ministry had communicated to the Broadcasters on 30.05.2023. NBDA, informed 
the Committee that when the TV channels find that they are under regulation, they 
prefer not to be a member and in such a situation NBDA has no control over it. 
Against this backdrop, they have been requesting the Ministry, for almost last 16 
years, that whether channels are members or not, they should be brought under 
the purview of NBDA and regulated by the Self -Regulation Body that MIB have 
created. The Committee are also given to understand that the Ministry has not 
received any request from NBDA for registration as a self -regulatory body at level 
–II under Rule 18 (2) of CTN Rules, 2021. 
 
While acknowledging the support of most of the Stakeholders for Self -
Regulatory Monitoring Mechanism to curb Fake News, the Committee feel that for 
making the system of Self-regulatory mechanism effective, all TV channels should 
be brought under its umbrella. While endorsing the suggestion of NBDA, the 
Committee appreciate the Ministry’s initiative for inclusion of the condition in the 
uplinking/downlinking permissions for satellite TV channels mandating 
Broadcasters to either join an SRB registered with the Ministry or establish their 
own SRB and get it registered with them. The Committee are also of the view that 
having a fact checking mechanism and internal Ombudsman in almost all the 
media organisations will go a long way in strengthening the role of Self Regulatory 
mechanism and checking the menace of misinformation/Fake News. The 
Committee desire the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting to ensure that fact 
checking mechanism and internal ombudsman should be made mandatory in all 
print, digital and electronic media organisations of the country.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 As per Rule 17(1)(iv) of the Cable Television Networks (Amendment) 
Rules, 2021, every broadcaster is required to be a member of a self -regulatory 
body (SRB) and comply with its terms and conditions. Accordingly, vide letter 
dated 30.05.2023, all broadcasters were advised to become members of a self -
regulatory body. 
 
 
In respect of digital media, Part -III of the IT Rules, 2021 provides for a 
three-level grievance redressal mechanism with two levels of self -regulation- 
Level I being the publisher and Level II being the Self Regulatory Body, and the 
third level being the Oversight Mechanism under the Ministry of Information & 
Broadcasting. 
   
In respect of the internal ombudsman, Rule 11 of the IT Rules 2021 
provides that every digital news publisher shall establish a grievance redressal 
mechanism and shall appoint a Grievance Officer based in India, who shall be 
responsible for the redressal of grievances received by him; display the contact 
details related to its grievance redressal mechanism and the name and contact 
details of its Grievance Officer at an appropriate place on its website or interface, 
as the case may be; and ensure that the Grievance Officer takes a decision on 
every grievance received by it within fifteen days, and communicate the same to 

26 
 
the complainant within the specified time. It further provides that every digital 
news publisher shall be a member of a self -regulating body as referred to in rule 
12 and abide by its terms and conditions. 
 
 
With regard to the need for internal ombudsman/grievance officer in print 
media, PCI has been requested by the Ministry vide letter dated 31.07.2025 to 
provide suggestions for amending Press Council Act, 1978 keeping in view the 
current media scenario in the country. 
Ministry of Information and Broadcasting 
(O.M. No. H-11023/31/2024-Press dated 02/02/2026) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 10 of Chapter I) 
 
 (Recommendation Sl. No. 6) 
Cases related to Fake News  
 
 The Committee were apprised that there was a Fact Check Unit 
under Press Information Bureau (PIB). But that PIB Fact Check Unit does not 
maintain data with respect to fake news separately for each of the three media 
platforms viz Print, Electronics, and Digital.  As per the submissions, it is seen that 
a total of 1,63,597 queries were received from 2nd April 2020 to 30th April 2025, 
out of which only 53,155 were found to be relevant and suitable action was taken 
thereon. With respect to details of the cases of ‘Fake News’ handled by MIB in last 
5 years, the Ministry informed that the term 'Fake News' is not explicitly defined 
under the Cable Television Networks (Regulation) Act, 1995 and the Rules framed 
thereunder. However, Rule 6(1)(d) of the Programme Code under CTN Rules, 
1994 provides that ‘No programme should be carried in cable service which 
contains anything obscene, defamatory, deliberate, false and suggestive 
innuendos and half truths’. During the last five years action was taken against 
broadcasters in 21 cases for violating Rule 6(1)(d) along with other provisions of 
Programme Code. With respect to Print Media, an analysis of the cases filed 
under Section-13 of the PCI Act for the last 3 years revealed that the number of 
cases filed during the year 2022–23 were 273 and the cases adjudicated were 11. 
Similarly, during the year 2023–24, it was 212 and 63, respectively and during the 
year 2024 -25 they were 210 and 46, respectively.  Further, an analysis of the 
cases filed under Section -14 of the PCI Act for the last 3 years revealed that 
number of cases filed during the year 2022 –23 were 865 and the cases 
adjudicated were 29 whereas during the year 2023 –24 they were 775 and 103, 
respectively and during the year 2024 -25 they were 898 and 41, respectively.  
When asked to explain the reasons for lesser number of cases being adjudicated 
against those filed actually, the Ministry informed that during COVID Pandemic 
regular meetings of the Council could not be held. Further, the position of the 
Chairperson, Press Council of India was vacant from 21.11.2021 to 16.06.2022, 
due to which no meeting took place. The re -constitution of the 15th term Council 
was under way as the 14th term ended on October 5, 2024 and this has resulted 
in a backlog of cases. The Committee urge upon the Ministry to appoint 
Chairperson of the Press Council of India as soon as the vacancy arise in future. 

27 
 
Further with respect to electronic media, an analysis of the action taken on 
matter against Private Satellite TV Channels during 2019 -2025 reveal that the 
number of cases have reduced over the years from 101 to 4. During the year, 
2025 (till 29.04.2025), there was only 01 case. With respect to Digital News 
Publishers, the Committee note that the Government has notified the Information 
Technology (Intermediary Guidelines and Digital Media Ethics Code) Rules, 2021 
under Information Technology Act, 2000 on 25th February, 2021, which, inter -alia, 
provides for a Code of Ethics for adherence by digital news publishers and also a 
three-tier mechanism for redressal of grievances relating to Code of Ethics by 
them.  Besides, Section 69A of the Information Technology Act, 2000, inter -alia, 
empowers the Central Government to issue directions to any Government agency 
or an intermediary to block content in the interest of sovereignty and integrity of 
India, defence of India, security of the State, friendly relations with foreign States 
or public order or for preventing incitement to the commission of any cognizable 
offence relating to such matters. The request for blocking is considered as per the 
laid down procedure in the IT Rules, 2021. The Committee have been informed 
that 15 Writ Petitions have been filed in various High Courts challenging the 
maintainability of the Rules. Hon’ble Supreme Court vide order dated 22.03.2024 
transferred all 15 Writ Petitions to Delhi High Court for further hearing.  While 
noting the plans/proposal of the Ministry to reduce backlog, the Committee 
recommend the Ministry to ensure frequent meetings of Inquiry Committee to hear 
cases and fix a time limit to clear pendency on a fast -track mode and also do 
categorise backlog items in order to expedite their disposal. The Ministry may 
apprise of the Committee about the outcome of the action taken in this regard.”. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 The reason mentioned therein for backlog of cases is that the Council is 
currently not in existence as the 14th Term had ended on October 5, 2024. The 
process of reconstitution of the Council for its 15th term is still underway due to 
pending litigations. Five members for the 15th term were notified on 19.12.2024 
and nine members have been notified on 02.12.2025. 
  
As per Section 6 of the Press Council Act, 1978, the Chairman of the Council shall 
hold office for a period of three years which may extended upto 6 months or till the 
reconstitution of the Council as per Section 5, whichever is earlier. The tenure of 
the last Chairperson ended on December 16, 2025. The Council has nominated a 
Member for the Committee to nominate a new Chairperson. The meeting of the 
Committee to nominate new Chairperson is yet to be convened by Hon’ble 
Chairman of Rajya Sabha. 
 
Taking note of the recommendations, following action plan is proposed for fast 
track redressal of complaints:  
 
i.    Frequent meetings of the Inquiry Committee 
ii.    Minimising adjournment of cases by the Inquiry Committee  
iii.    Prioritization of cases marked urgent by the Hon’ble Chairperson, PCI 
iv.    Listing of matters in chronological order.” 
 
Ministry of Information and Broadcasting 
(O.M. No. H-11023/31/2024-Press dated 02/02/2026) 

28 
 
 (Recommendation Sl. No. 8) 
Grievance Redressal Mechanism 
     
 With respect to Grievance Redressal mechanism, the Ministry have 
informed that there are various statutory and institutional mechanisms available to 
address the menace of fake news, on various media platforms viz. print media, 
electronic media and digital media. For grievances related to Print Media any 
citizen can complain against a newspaper for carrying content that is violative of 
the Norms of Journalistic Conduct. A complainant can also submit a complaint to 
the PCI on Centralised Public Grievance Redress and Monitoring System 
(CPGRAM) of the Government. For Electronic Media, the Rule under the Cable 
Television Networks (Amendment) Rules, 2021 provide for a three -level complaint 
redressal structure. The procedure for Digital Media under the Information 
Technology (Intermediary Guidelines and Digital Media Ethics Code) Rules, 2021 
provides for a three -level institutional framework for redressal of grievances 
related to the violation of Code of Ethics by news publishers on digital media and 
OTT platforms. People can also report fake news to PIB Fact Check Unit via the 
various mechanisms which include (i) WhatsApp Hotline: Users can send 
messages to the dedicated number at +918799711259 to report suspicious 
information or request fact -checking; (ii) Email: Individuals can also send their 
queries or reports via email to socialmedia.pib.gov.in; (iii) The public can also visit 
the official PIB Fact Check portal at https://factcheck.pib.gov.in/ to report or 
request verification of potential fake news. These platforms allow users to easily 
submit information for fact-checking and help in addressing misinformation.   
With respect to grievance redressal mechanism for AI -generated videos, 
one of the Stakeholders informed that according to the law fake videos must be 
removed within 36 to 42 hours, but no one removes them. They are in circulation, 
but no action is taken and out of 15 -20 videos only two or three get removed. In 
the meantime, these videos get millions of views as they do not have ways to stop 
them. Even Police have no mechanism to hold anyone responsible for these 
videos as they are sometimes generated outside the Country. Considering the 
damage inflicted by Fake News in a short span of time, the Ministry was asked 
about the need to re-visit the process especially w.r.t the time taken to dispose off 
the case/to take action against a Channel/portal/print media. To this, they 
informed that the time limit for handling of grievances at various levels of the 
Grievance Redressal Mechanism in respect of the content of broadcasters has 
been prescribed keeping in view the principles of natural justice and taking into 
account the time required for processing of such grievance at these levels. 
Further, with respect to time taken to settle the complaint, the Committee 
note that there is no time limit prescribed for Press Council of India to act on 
complaints and according to PCI such a time limit may be recommended, giving 
exception for procedural delays. Further, under PCI Act, the Complainant is 
required to comply with mandatory requirements under Regulation (3) of Press 
Council (Procedure for Inquiry) Regulation, 1979 within four (4) weeks. The 
Committee also note that currently, there is no mechanism to digitally track and 
notify complainants about the progress of the complaints in PCI. However, while 
appreciating the fact that PCI is in process of developing complaint mechanism 
software with online complaint submission and tracking facility, the Committee 
would like to be kept apprised of the same. Further, while noting the prevalent 
situation with respect viral videos of fake news, the Committee urge the Ministry to 
formulate concrete Time -Bound Grievance Redressal Framework and implement 

29 
 
digital tracking system of the grievances/complaints on the lines of PCI initiative. 
The Ministry may also look into the feasibility of the following and apprise the 
Committee accordingly: 
(i) Prescribe a time limit for PCI Complaint Resolution Mechanism; 
(ii) Have unified digital portal for grievance redressal w.r.t ‘Fake 
News/misinformation; 
(iii)  Emulate best practices of international standard/certain 
States/Union Territories that dedicated helpline number/portal to 
counter misinformation and fake news; 
(iv)  Impress upon Social Media Platforms to strengthen their grievance 
redressal mechanism through helpline number or other recourse for 
dealing with cases of Fake News; and 
(v) Increase public awareness about the existing Grievance Redressal 
Channels/mechanism to prevent misinformation/Fake News. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 To address the menace of fake news/cases of violation of any Norm 
of Journalistic Conduct, the PCI has a complaint mechanism for dealing with the 
cases of fake/false/defamatory/misleading news wherein it takes suo -motu 
cognizance under Regulation 13 of Press Council (Procedure for Inquiry) 
Regulation, 1979, or under Clause 14(1) of the Press Council Act, 1978, on 
receipt of a complaint made to it or otherwise, if the Council has reason to believe 
that a newspaper or news agency has offended against the standards of 
journalistic ethics or public taste or that an editor or a working journalist has 
committed any professional misconduct, the Council, after giving the newspaper, 
or news agency, the editor or journalist concerned an opportunity of being heard, 
holds an inquiry in such manner as provided by regulations made under this Act 
and, if it is satisfied that it is necessary so to do, it may, for reasons to be recorded 
in writing, warn, admonish or censure the newspaper, the news agency, the editor 
or the journalist or disapprove the conduct of the editor or the journalist, as the 
case may be. 
 
For Cable Television Network, the Cable Television Networks (Regulation) 
Act, 1995 and the rules framed thereunder also provide for a three -level complaint 
redressal structure to ensure observance and adherence to the Programme Code 
by the broadcasters. 
 
The Government has notified Information Technology (Intermediary 
Guidelines and Digital Media Ethics Code) Rules, 2021 (IT Rules, 2021) under the 
Information Technology Act, 2000 on 25th February, 2021. Part -III of the Rules, 
inter-alia provide for Code of Ethics for OTT platforms and publishers of news and 
current affairs on digital media. A three -level grievance redressal mechanism has 
been established under the IT Rules, 2021 with two levels of self -regulation- Level 
I being the publisher and Level II being the Self Regulatory Body, and the third 
level being the Oversight Mechanism under the Ministry of Information & 
Broadcasting. The publishers are mandated to appoint Grievance Redressal 
Officer (GRO) at Level -I of the three -level grievance redressal mechanism to 
address grievances regarding violation of Code of Ethics by them in a timely 
manner. 
The operation of Rule 9(1) relating to adherence of the Code of Ethics by 
the publishers of news and current affairs on digital media and OTT platforms; and 

30 
 
Rule 9(3) relating to the three level grievance redressal mechanism have been 
stayed by Hon’ble Bombay High Court in the matter of WP(L) NO.14172 of 2021 - 
Agij Promotion of Nineteenonea Media Pvt. Ltd.& Ors. vs. Union of India and PIL 
(L) No. 14204 OF 2021 -Nikhil Mangesh Wagle vs. Union of India. 
 
Rule 3(1)(d) of the IT Rules 2021 mandates the intermediaries including 
Social Media Intermediaries (SMIs) or Significant Social Media Intermediaries 
SSMIs to ensure expeditious action, well within the timeframes stipulated under 
the IT Rules, 2021 (as early as possible but not later than 36 hours), to remove or 
disable access to information/content that is prohibited under any law for the time 
being in force in relation to the interest of the sovereignty and integrity of India; 
security of the State; friendly relations with foreign States; public order; decency or 
morality; in relation to contempt of court; defamation; incitement to an offence 
relating to the above, or any information which is prohibited under any law for the 
time being in force, upon receipt of a court order or a reasoned intimation from an 
authorised officer at Joint Secretary level in the Appropriate Government or its 
authorised agency. 
 
Grievance redressal mechanism for intermediaries: The grievance 
redressal mechanism under Part II of the IT Rules, 2021 mandated for 
intermediaries is operational as a structured two -tier framework comprising 
platform-level grievance officers under Rule 3(2) and the Grievance Appellate 
Committee (GAC) under Rule 3A. The framework provides time -bound 
acknowledgment and disposal of grievances and an appellate remedy for users. 
The mechanism is continuously monitored and refined through stakeholder 
engagement to enhance efficiency and user trust. 
 
With regard to awareness about the Grievance Appellate Committee, MeitY 
has organized Grievance Appellate Committee workshop on 7 th January 2025 to 
enhance grievance redressal framework for a safer internet. 
 
Ministry of Information and Broadcasting 
(O.M. No. H-11023/31/2024-Press dated 02/02/2026) 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 9) 
 
 
Artificial Intelligence and Fake News 
 The Committee note that advances in technology, particularly in 
Artificial Intelligence (AI), offer promising solutions to address issues related to 
Fake news. However, according to the Ministry, Artificial Intelligence is an 
evolving technology and works on use of pre -existing information available on 
internet and therefore, in its present state of development it cannot be used for a 
subject as complicated as fact checking. But AI could be used to flag potentially 
fake news/ misleading content for review by human intervention as a second layer 
of monitoring. During examination of the subject, several examples of personal 
experience of stakeholders were a revelation as to how AI could be used to create 
videos of fake news and misinformation particularly because no information was 
available with the stakeholders with respect to AI generated videos or news. 
The Committee note that various research projects and initiatives are 
exploring the use of Artificial Intelligence (AI) in combating fake news. AI and 
machine learning (ML) technologies are increasingly being employed to enhance 
the ability to detect, verify, and prevent the spread of misinformation and 

31 
 
disinformation. Some key developments and projects in this field include (i) AI -
based Fact-Checking Tools; (ii) Deep Learning for Image and Video Verification: 
Fake News Detection on Social Media Using AI -based Image; (iii) AI for Detecting 
Disinformation on Social Media; (iv) AI to Identify Misinformation Networks; (v) AI -
Powered Tools for Content Verification and Fact -Checking; (vi) Collaboration 
between AI and Fact -Checking Networks; etc.  The Committee also note that the 
Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology (MeitY) has constituted a nine -
member Committee to examine problems related to the ‘issue of deepfakes’. 
Further, two projects to detect fake news, which are currently underway are (i) 
Fake Speech Detection using Deep Learning Framework and (ii) Design and 
Development of Software for Detecting Deepfake Videos and Images. The 
Committee were apprised that internationally there are several ongoing research 
projects on detecting AI -generated content and developing AI tools that facilitate 
the detection of fake news.  
The Committee note and acknowledge the role of AI in combating Fake 
News, particularly in detecting misleading visual content, verifying claims, and 
identifying the networks responsible for spreading misinformation. The Committee, 
appreciate the research projects and initiatives which are exploring the use of 
Artificial Intelligence (AI) in combating fake news, particularly by MeitY.  The 
Committee are also aware how AI can be used to create ‘Fake 
News/Misinformation. Thus, with a word of caution, the Committee advocate for a 
balanced approach for using AI to curb Fake News wherein AI tools are leveraged 
with human oversight. The Committee also urge for close coordination between 
the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting, Ministry of Electronics and 
Information Technology (MeitY), and other concerned Ministries/Departments to 
develop concrete legal and technological solutions for identifying and prosecuting 
individuals and entities responsible for disseminating AI -generated fake news.  
The Committee recommend for inter -Ministerial coordination for exploring the 
feasibility of Licensing requirements for AI content creators and Mandatory 
labelling of AI -generated videos and content, and apprise them about the action 
taken in the matter accordingly. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The increasing use of Artificial Intelligence in media presents challenges 
such as generation and dissemination of misinformation, deepfakes, 
impersonation, automated amplification of unlawful content, and potential harm to 
users. The Information Technology Act, 2000 (“IT Act”) and the Information 
Technology (Intermediary Guidelines and Digital Media Ethics Code) Rules, 2021 
(“IT Rules, 2021”) do not distinguish between information generated using AI tools 
and information generated by users for the purpose of defining offences. Existing 
due diligence obligations under section 79(2) read with section 79(3)(b) of the IT 
Act and Rule 3 of the IT Rules, 2021 require intermediaries to prevent hosting and 
dissemination of unlawful information and to take expeditious action upon receipt 
of lawful orders or reasoned government intimation. 
 
Recognising emerging risks from synthetically generated information, MeitY 
has also undertaken consultations and prepared draft amendments to further 
strengthen intermediary due diligence obligations for intermediaries, as well as for 
platforms that enable the creation or modification of synthetically generated 
content. The proposed draft amendments introduce: 
 

32 
 
i. A clear definition of “synthetically generated information”; 
ii. Labelling and metadata embedding requirements for such information to 
ensure users can distinguish synthetic from authentic content; 
iii. Visibility and audibility standards requiring that synthetic content be 
prominently marked, including a minimum 10% visual or initial audio duration 
coverage; and 
iv. Enhanced verification and declaration obligations for significant social 
media intermediaries (SSMIs), mandating reasonable technical measures to 
confirm whether uploaded content is synthetically generated and to label it 
accordingly. 
Moreover, MeitY has enacted the DPDP Act, which is a principle based and 
technology agnostic framework rather than prescriptive in nature. The focus of the 
DPDP Act is to strengthen accountability, transparency and user safeguards within 
the legal framework. 
 
 Ministry of Information and Broadcasting 
(O.M. No. H-11023/31/2024-Press dated 02/02/2026) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 16 of Chapter I) 
 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 10) 
Challenges associated with Fake News crossing international borders 
 
 The Committee have been informed that there are certain issues 
associated with Fake News crossing international borders like (i) Jurisdictional 
Issues: different countries have varying laws and regulations regarding 
misinformation, making it difficult to enforce global content moderation; (ii) 
Language Barriers: Fake news can spread across borders in different languages, 
requiring tailored detection tools that may not be universally effective; (iii) Platform 
Control: Global platforms can enable the rapid spread of misinformation across 
borders, but regulating this content consistently worldwide is challenging; (iv) 
Cultural Differences: What is considered misinformation in one country may be 
interpreted differently in another, complicating the global fight against fake news.  
Further, the Committee have been informed that regulating speech on social 
media platforms that transcends geographical boundaries raises significant 
challenges from a regulatory perspective as it raises issues concerning 
jurisdiction. Besides, globally, there are divergent laws, norms and practices for 
regulating content, geopolitical conditions, making transnational regulation of fake 
news difficult. The Ministry have informed that the Publishers of news and current 
affairs on Digital media, which host news relating to India, even if operating from 
outside the Country are subject to the ‘IT Rules, 2021’ and direction for blocking of 
access of their content falling under Section 69A of ‘IT Act’ in India, can be issued 
by the Government. The request for blocking is considered as per the laid down 
procedure in the IT Rules, 2021. The Committee note that in the past, the Ministry 
has issued directions under this Section for blocking access to content emanating 
from foreign jurisdictions in India.  
With respect to international collaboration for curbing fake news, the 
Committee have been informed that India is a member of UNESCO.  Department 

33 
 
of Higher Education under the Central Government has established an Indian 
National Commission for Cooperation (INCCU) with UNESCO having 05 Sub 
Commissions. The Sub Commission on Communication comes under the Ministry 
of Information and Broadcasting and is Chaired by Secretary (I&B). This Sub 
Commission discusses issues related to mass media, journalist freedom etc., in 
the Country. The Committee also learnt that there are several international 
initiatives to combat fake news, such as the EU's Digital Services Act and 
UNESCO’s guidelines for tackling misinformation and India has participated in 
global discussions on misinformation but has not yet fully established binding 
international standards for combating fake news. However, India has collaborated 
with other countries and global tech companies to share information and 
strengthen fact-checking efforts. When asked whether India could emulate any of 
the international best practices related to the regulation of misinformation or ‘Fake 
News’, one of the stakeholders submitted that India should have its own law, and 
the French law on Election Misinformation was a good law which could be looked 
upto for some aspects. The Committee, while acknowledging the complexities 
involved in fake news crossing borders feel that apart from Inter -Ministerial 
collaboration at national level and multi -lateral cooperation with international 
bodies following may also be considered to address the concerns related to 
Cross-Border Fake News and they may be apprised accordingly: 
I. The Ministry may emulate best practices adopted by other countries, for 
example like French Law on Election Misinformation, etc with a perspective of 
dealing with Fake News in India; 
II. To have a small but a dedicated Inter -Ministerial Task Force to deal with issues 
related to cross-border misinformation/Fake News with representatives from the 
Ministry of Information & Broadcasting (MIB), Ministry of External Affairs (MEA), 
Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology (MeitY) and eminent legal 
experts in the field; and 
III.   To conduct nation -wide campaigns to educate citizens about the risks of 
cross-border fake news, especially in regional languages. 
Reply of the Government 
 
 
Inter-Ministerial coordination is ensured at multiple levels within the Government 
to deal with issues related to cross -border misinformation. Some of the existing 
mechanisms are as under: 
 
I. The Inter -Departmental Committee under Part -III of the IT Rules, 2021 is 
chaired by the Authorised Officer appointed by the Ministry of I&B and 
comprises of Members from Ministry of External Affairs, Ministry of Electronics 
and Information Technology, Ministry of Defence, Ministry of Home Affairs, 
among others.  
II. Requests for blocking of content are received by Ministry of I&B and MeitY from 
multiple Ministries/Departments of the Government of India as well as from 
State governments, especially the sensitive border States.  
III. The officers of Press Information Bureau are a ttached to all Government 
Ministries/ Departments and are being responsible for media and 
communication for the concerned Ministry/Department. The PIB officers 

34 
 
attached with Ministries such as MHA, Ministry of Defence, etc. The officers of 
PIB are attached to the Directorate of Public Relations, Ministry of Defence, 
thereby having access to sensitive information related to national security, 
being a sensitive domain prone to disinformation attacks by transnational anti -
India elements. Through the network of officers specialized in the domain of 
information and media, the PIB Fact Check Unit verifies the piece of information 
in question from the concerned Government Ministry, Department, PSUs, etc. 
The PIB officers have easy access to information, including classified and 
sensitive information. Such a unique network of PIB officers across all major 
institutions of the Government makes the PIB fact -checking process swift, 
credible and effective. 
India is a member of UNESCO.  Department of Higher Education under the 
Central Government has established an Indian National Commission for 
Cooperation (INCCU) with UNESCO having 05 Sub Commissions.  The Sub 
Commission on Communication comes under the Ministry of Information and 
Broadcasting and is chaired by Secretary (I&B). This Sub Commission discusses 
issues related to mass media, journalist freedom etc. in the country. The 
outcomes of the meeting of Sub Commission on Communication forms the basis 
of India’s position at UNESCO’s General Conference. 
The PIB FCU prepared targeted content during Operation Sindoor, 
sensitising the public about cross -border fake news and propaganda through 
videos and fact -checks. These interventions also provided contextual information 
on the potential threats such misinformation poses to national security and public 
order.  
MEA also regularly undertakes fact -checking of misleading or false 
information related to india's external affairs In addition, the Ministry has created a 
dedicated X handle, @MEAFactCheck, to proactively counter misinformation and 
provide verified information to the public including through regular pressers, 
issuing statements, interviews and other mechanism. 
MEA also guides our Embassies abroad counter fake news against India 
through multiple channels including domestic and international print, electronic 
and digital media. To strengthen institutional capacity, the Ministry conducts 
training programmes for its officials -both of Headquarters and Missions/Posts 
abroad at various stages of their career, including induction courses and 
specialised modules before foreign postings. These trainings are conducted 
through the Sushma Swaraj Institute of Foreign Service (SSIFS), New Delhi, and 
are also extended ended to other Government of India officials posted abroad. 
Further, an iGOT (Integrated Government Online Training) module on social 
media awareness and media literacy is also being developed to sensitise officials 
of the Government of India on identifying, reporting and countering fake news. 
 
Ministry of Information and Broadcasting  
(O.M. No. H-11023/31/2024-Press dated 02/02/2026) 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 11) 
Awareness/Training/Media literacy 
The Committee note that Fact Check Unit under PIB, which does fact 
checking only in respect of information pertaining to the Government, uses 
engaging content in the form of memes/Crisp Videos/Awareness Posts and has 

35 
 
also conducted campaigns such as #FACTREE, #CyberMonday, etc., to increase 
public awareness about the baneful effects of fake news and sensitize them 
against sharing of unverified information. The Committee also note that Media 
organisations have their own awareness and training programmes for journalists 
and public at large. It is also learnt that to enhance awareness, the PCI carries out 
sustained Social Media campaigns by making regular updates of Norms on its 
official Social Media Handle - X. Further, the Council while considering the matter 
regarding strategies and efforts to tackle fake news during its meeting held on 
22.09.2022, had also recommended for inclusion of media studies in academic 
curriculum. Accordingly, communication was sent by PCI to the Ministry of 
Education vide letter dated 09.12.2022 for taking necessary action in the matter.  
Further, while noting that one of the causes of ‘Fake News’ proliferation 
was ‘Lack of Media Literacy’, the Ministry was asked about their initiatives for 
creating specific programme for generating and creating awareness. To this, MIB 
informed that Media literacy can best be achieved through creating public 
awareness of the harmful effects of fake news and sensitizing citizens and other 
stakeholders against sharing of unverified information. This can be done through 
appropriate outreach activities for citizen engagement particularly for younger 
generation in association with educational institutions. While considering the 
aspect of creating awareness about Fake News, during examination of the 
subject, all the stakeholders unanimously agreed for having curriculum for Media 
literacy at school/college levels. 
The Committee while appreciating the initiatives taken to promote media 
literacy/generating awareness regarding Fake news/ misinformation opine that all 
the stakeholders may mandatorily conduct workshops for generating awareness 
and take initiatives for wider engagements about fake news. The Committee also 
recommend for having broader consultations with all the concerned stakeholders 
including Ministry of Education.  While noting that there are many ways to impart 
media literacy, the Committee urge that media literacy beginning at 
School/College level can have far reaching effect and play a crucial role on young 
minds. The Committee, therefore, call upon the Ministry to consider, during their 
consultation with stakeholders, a comprehensive media literacy curriculum which 
can be designed for the educational journey of a students. Training the teachers, 
instructors, librarian, etc., at the school level can also be considered. Besides, 
public awareness campaign, guidelines and frameworks for media literacy are 
essential for encouraging critical thinking. The Committee may be apprised of the 
concrete outcome of the deliberations in this regard. The Ministry may also 
apprise the Committee about the concrete action taken by the Ministry of 
Education with respect to the suggestions of PCI for having media studies 
included in the curriculum for the children 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Press Council is expressly mandated under Section 13 sub section 
2(c) to ensure on the part of newspapers, news agencies and journalists, the 
maintenance of high standards of public taste and foster a due sense of both the 
rights and responsibilities of citizenship; and under 13(2) (d) to encourage the 
growth of a sense of responsibility and public service among all those engaged in 
the profession of journalism. Towards furtherance of the mandate, the Council 
conducts Internship Programmes twice in a year, namely the “Summer Internship 
Programme (SIP)” and the “Winter Internship Programme (WIP)". In 2025, 

36 
 
“Autumn Internship Programme” was organized by the Council. Applications are 
invited from eligible students nationwide and selection is based on merits. 
 
Conducting workshops across Ministries, Departments, Social Media 
teams, Colleges, and Schools can significantly enhance awareness regarding 
fake news and emerging trends on social media platforms. Such capacity -building 
initiatives help participants develop a foundational understanding of 
misinformation, its modes of dissemination, and effective methods to identify and 
counter it. These workshops can play a critical role in strengthening institutional 
and citizen preparedness against the spread of fake or misleading content. 
 
MeitY has launched a program titled Information Security Education & 
Awareness to generate awareness among users while using Internet. A dedicated 
website has been created for information security awareness that generates and 
upgrades relevant awareness material on a regular basis and can be accessed at 
https://www.infosecawareness.in.  
 
Ministry is also consider to work in collaboration with the Ministry of 
Education to undertake joint initiatives to strengthen awareness about 
misinformation and Fake News across educational institutions. Such coordinated 
efforts would enable the systematic dissemination of best practices for identifying 
and countering fake news among students, educators, and academic 
administrators.  
Ministry of Information and Broadcasting  
(O.M. No. H-11023/31/2024-Press dated 02/02/2026) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 19 of Chapter I) 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No.12) 
 
Social media, Algorithm and Fake News/Misinformation 
 
During examination of the subject, most of the stakeholders raised concern 
with respect to ‘Safe Harbour’ clause under Section 79 of the IT Act, 2000 that 
provides for exemption from liability of intermediary, subject to certain safeguards, 
for any third -party information, data, or communication link made available or 
hosted by him. It was also learnt that for most of the digital news publishers on 
major social media intermediary platforms, the revenue model is such that the 
sensational and potentially fake content gets more traction and the algorithms of 
such platform further amplifies such content. The Ministry also informed that 
algorithms used by social media platforms significantly influence how the 
information spreads online. Since sensational and emotionally charged content 
tends to attract higher engagement, social media platforms often prioritize such 
content, which sometimes are fake or misleading. During examination of the 
subject, most of the stakeholders expressed their concern related to amplification 
of fake news through algorithmic biases because this vicious cycle often leads to 
virality of fake news. 
  In this regard, the Ministry also informed that the Hon’ble Minister of 
Information and Broadcasting (HMIB) on one occasion had called for 
accountability in digital media to combat fake news and safeguard democracy and 

37 
 
had suggested that in changing media landscape and India's diverse social and 
cultural context, there is a need for revisiting the 'Safe Harbour' provision for the 
social media intermediaries. The Committee were also given to understand that 
the Minister had pointed out that algorithms driving digital platforms prioritises 
content that maximises engagement, inciting strong reactions and, thereby, 
defining the revenue for the platform. Since such biases have social 
consequences, particularly in a diverse nation like India, there is a need for 
platforms to come up with solutions to eliminate such biases.   
While noting the concerns relating to the intermediary platforms and Big 
Tech companies, the Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology (MeitY) 
was asked to provide their views/ suggestions with respect to issues related to the 
subject and regarding user generated content. However, MeitY did not provide 
any suggestion, instead it merely stated that under the given Rule/Act, the subject 
falls under MIB. Considering the technological advancements, the Committee note 
the complex and inter -sectoral issues involved in dissemination of 
misinformation/Fake News and thereby calls for coordination between not only 
different stakeholders of Media, but also among different Ministries/Departments. 
The Committee, therefore, urge MIB to ensure an inter -Ministerial coordination 
mechanism among all those concerned. Further, for making social 
media/intermediary platforms more accountable w.r.t peddling Fake 
content/News, the Committee endorse the view that for enforcing transparency in 
algorithms, introduce stricter fines, and penalties for repeat offenders, establish 
independent regulatory body, use technological tools like AI to curb the spread of 
misinformation, etc.  The Ministry may apprise of the Committee about the future 
course of action/action taken by them to address the concerns/suggestions made 
by the Hon’ble Minister of Information and Broadcasting regarding ‘Safe Harbour’ 
clause and other related issues. Besides, the Committee urge the Ministry to 
explore ways and means to address the concerns associated with algorithm 
biases and its role in amplifying Fake News and apprise them in this regard.  The 
Committee also recommend the Ministry to look into the feasibility of following and 
apprise them accordingly: 
(i) To work with MeitY and other stakeholders and bring out a solution to 
address the issues related to Big Tech Companies and individual content creators 
or influencers; 
(ii) The Ministry may come out with concrete solutions with respect to 
intermediaries/publishers particularly to deal with ‘Safe Harbour’; 
(iii) To have a dedicated Nodal officer (in India) in the Big tech companies; etc. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Rule 4 of the IT Rules, 2021 provides for several additional due diligence 
obligations specific to SSMIs [i.e., SMIs having over 50 Lakh registered users in 
India]. The key additional due diligence obligations for SSMIs are mentioned 
below. 
 
Appointment of designated officers based in India and publishing physical 
address to be in India by SSMI under Rule 4(1) and Rule 4(5) of the IT Rules, 
2021 to assist in enforcement of rules & laws of the land:  
 
I. Rules 4(1) and 4(5) of the IT Rules, 2021 require SSMI to appoint a Chief 
Compliance Officer, a Resident Grievance Officer and a nodal contact 

38 
 
person, all to be residents in India; and have a physical contact address to 
be in India duly published on its website, mobile app or both so as to make 
them accountable for speedy law enforcement and compliance with the IT 
Act and rules made thereunder. 
II. Rule 4(1)(a) prescribes that SSMIs have to appoint a Chief Compliance 
Officer who shall be responsible for ensuring compliance with the Act and 
rules made thereunder and shall be liable in any proceedings relating to 
any relevant third -party information, data or communication link made 
available or hosted by that intermediary where he fails to ensure that such 
intermediary observes due diligence while discharging its duties under the 
Act and rules made thereunder. 
III. Rule 4(1)(b) prescribes that SSMIs have to appoint a nodal contact person 
for 24x7 coordination with law enforcement agencies and officers to ensure 
compliance to their orders or requisitions made in accordance with the 
provisions of law or rules made thereunder. 
IV. Rule 4(1)(c) prescribes that SSMIs have to appoint a Resident Grievance 
Officer, who shall, subject to Rule 4(1)(b), be responsible for the functions 
referred to in Rule 3(2) of IT Rules, 2021. 
V. Rule 4(1)(d) prescribes that SSMIs have to publish periodic compliance 
report every month mentioning the details of complaints received and action 
taken thereon, and, in respect of a significant social media intermediary, the 
number of specific communication links or parts of information that the 
intermediary has removed or disabled access to in pursuance of any 
proactive monitoring conducted by using automated tools or any other 
relevant information as may be specified. 
VI. Rule 4(5) prescribes that a SSMI shall have a physical contact address in 
India published on its website, mobile based application or both, as the 
case may be, for the purposes of receiving the communication addressed to 
it. 
Enabling traceability of the first originator of unlawful information in India 
on specific grounds upon receipt of lawful order under Rule 4(2) of the IT 
Rules, 2021:  
I. Rule 4(2) prescribes that a SSMI providing services primarily in the nature 
of messaging shall enable the identification of the first originator of the 
information on its computer resource as may be required by a judicial order 
passed by a court of competent jurisdiction or an order passed under 
section 69 of IT Act by the Competent Authority as per the Information 
Technology (Procedure and Safeguards for interception, monitoring and 
decryption of information) Rules, 2009, which shall be supported with a 
copy of such information in electronic form. 
II. Such order shall only be passed for the purposes of prevention, detection, 
investigation, prosecution or punishment of an offence related to the 
sovereignty and integrity of India, the security of the State, friendly relations 
with foreign States, or public order, or of incitement to an offence relating to 
the above or in relation with rape, sexually explicit material or child sexual 
abuse material (CSAM), punishable with imprisonment for a term of not less 
than 5 years. 
 
Deployment of automated tools under Rule 4(4) of the IT Rules, 2021 to 
proactively identify and remove unlawful information and curb their virality:  
 
I.  Rule 4(4) of the IT Rules, 2021 requires SSMI to endeavour deployment of 

39 
 
technology-based measures or automated tools or other mechanisms to 
proactively identify information that depicts any act or simulation in any form 
depicting rape, child sexual abuse or conduct, whether explicit or implicit, or 
any information which is exactly identical in content to information that has 
previously been removed or access to which has been disabled on the 
computer resource of such intermediary under Rule 3(1)(d) of the IT Rules, 
2021 in accordance with the clause.  
II. Rule 4(4) also requires that the SSMI shall display a notice to any user 
attempting to access any information included under this sub -rule stating 
that such information has been identified by the intermediary under the 
categories referred to in the sub-rule.  
Voluntary verification of user accounts: Rule 4(7) of the IT Rules, 2021 
requires SSMI to enable users who register for their services from India, or use 
their services in India, to voluntarily verify their accounts by using any appropriate 
mechanism, including the active Indian mobile number of such users, and where 
any user voluntarily verifies their account, such user shall be provided with a 
demonstrable and visible mark of verification, which shall be visible to all users of 
the service: However, the information received for the purpose of verification 
under this sub -rule shall not be used for any other purpose, unless the user 
expressly consents to such use. 
 
Power to call for information from SSMIs :Rule 4(9) of the IT Rules, 2021 
empowers the Government to call for such additional information from any SSMI 
as it may consider necessary for the purposes of Part-II of the IT Rules, 2021. 
 
Ministry of Information and Broadcasting  
(O.M. No. H-11023/31/2024-Press dated 02/02/2026) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 22 of Chapter I) 
 
 
 
 
 
 

40 
 
CHAPTER- III 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS  WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO 
PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
-NIL- 

41 
 
CHAPTER IV 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS  IN RESPECT OF  WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND REQUIRE 
REITERATION 
 
-NIL- 
 

42 
 
CHAPTER V 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF  WHICH REPLIES   
OF THE  GOVERNMENT ARE INTERIM IN NATURE 
Need for defining ‘Fake News’ 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 2) 
The Committee during the course of evidence found that the term ‘Fake 
News’ has not been defined under any statute. However, according to the Ministry 
of Information and Broadcasting, Fake News is commonly understood as 
information which is false or misleading and presented as news. According to one 
of the Stakeholders, ‘Fake News’ is generally used to describe fabricated and 
factually inaccurate information and the term is so ambiguous that it inaccurately 
subsumes within its fold “satire”, “opinions”, “criticism”, “clickbait reporting”, 
“biased reporting”, “motivated propaganda” etc., and the term may also be used to 
target and delegitimize the media. During examination of the subject, the 
Stakeholders apprised of the Committee that there is no uniform and clear 
definition for ‘Fake news’ which is being followed worldwide. According to the 
stakeholder(s), the polysemic nature of ‘Fake News’ makes it difficult to define and 
identify. Since the definitive principles cannot be established, ‘Fake News’ cannot 
be defined precisely and definitively and therefore results in vagueness and 
makes it susceptible to grave abuse and misuse. However, some of the 
Stakeholders suggested that there is a need for defining the term ‘Fake News’ as 
it is crucial to any discussion for its regulation. Definitions for Fake News, as 
proposed by some of the Stakeholders are:- 
i. ‘Fake News’ means news, story, information, data and reports which is or 
are wholly or partly false;  
ii. Fake news - Deliberately fabricated or manipulated content disseminated 
with the intent to mislead or harm; 
iii. False reports or Mis - or disinformation that could take the form of articles, 
photographs, video clips, which are disguised as real news, and which are aimed 
at fooling people or manipulating their opinion. The most important parameters in 
this are that these are ‘disguised as real news’ and are ‘aimed at fooling people or 
manipulating opinions’; 
iv. ‘Fake News’ shall mean any false, misleading, or distorted information 
created, disseminated or amplified with the intention to deceive the public and 
meets all the following criteria: (a) It presents itself as containing factual assertions 
about events, individuals, entities, or phenomena excluding opinions, satire, or 
parody clearly identifiable as such; and (b) The information has the capacity to 
significantly mislead a reasonable person, based on objective evidence or the lack 
thereof; and  (c) The dissemination of such information that has the potential to 
cause harm, including but not limited to: (i) incitement to violence, hatred, or 
discrimination; (ii) disruption of public order or safety; (iii) undermining the integrity 
of democratic processes; (iv) causing significant harm to the reputation of 
individuals or entities; or (v) endangering public health. 
In the light of the ambiguity related to the term misinformation/fake news, 
the Committee feel that there is a need for defining the term ‘Fake News’ per se in 
a subtle manner and incorporate suitable clauses in the existing regulatory 
mechanism for print, electronics and digital media while maintaining the delicate 
balance of combating misinformation and protecting freedom of speech and 

43 
 
individual rights as guaranteed under the Constitution. The Committee also 
caution the Ministry to consider all the dimensions and parameters related to the 
term in consultation with the Stakeholders while arriving at its definition. The 
Committee may be apprised of the action taken in this direction. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Ministry has taken cognizance of the in -depth analysis and 
comprehensive observations of the Committee on the growing concern of fake 
news and spread of misinformation in this digital age. The Ministry has earlier 
briefed the Committee that it has been actively engaged to fight such 
disinformation and misleading or fake information across the media through its 
available institutional framework as well as through the Fact Check Unit set up in 
November, 2019. 
 
Multiple existing laws, including provisions under the Bharatiya Nyaya 
Sanhita, 2023, address fake news. As an example, Section 197(1)(d) pertains to 
imputations and assertions, including false or misleading information, prejudicial to 
national integration. Section 353(1)(b) deals with statements, including any false 
information, rumour, or report, including through electronic means, conducing to 
public mischief. Similarly, Section 175 pertains to false information in relation to 
electoral candidates. Other laws such as Consumer Protection Act, 2019 also 
applies for false/misleading claims, especially in relation to advertisements. 
 
The Press Council Act, 1978 pertains to print media. The Council has 
formulated the Norms of Journalistic Conduct for print media to enlighten, 
encourage and guide media persons and aspiring media workers to value and 
practice ethical journalism. The Norms of Journalistic Conduct, 2022 provide for 
norms in the matter of fake news such as: Norm 1 – Accuracy & Fairness; Norm 8 
– Conjecture, Comment and Fact; and Norm 34 – Pre–Publication Verification. 
Some of the provisions under these norms are as under: 
 
Norm 1 - Accuracy and Fairness  
I. The Press shall eschew publication of inaccurate, baseless, graceless, 
misleading or distorted material. All sides of the core issue or subject 
should be reported. Unjustified rumours and surmises should not be set 
forth as facts.  
II. It is incumbent for newspapers to play a positive role in response to 
rumours affecting the credibility of financial institutions having public 
interface.  
III. While it is the duty of the press to expose the wrong doings that come to 
their notice, such reports need to be backed by irrefutable facts and 
evidences.  
IV. The newspaper should not mis -construe or misquote the statements given 
by leader. The statements quoted in editorial should project the true spirit of 
what is being tried to be conveyed by them.  
V. The newspaper is liable for damaging effects of publishing alarming/ 
sensational heading of news story based on Study having no established 
credentials.  
VI. Gossip reaches a localized few, a newspaper report reaches lakhs and 
therefore a more onerous responsibility devolves on the Press towards the 
society.  
VII. Freedom of speech does not give right to newspapers to write about an 

44 
 
institution or individual untrue facts even in a lighter note.  
VIII. An error attributing historically incorrect remarks of grave nature to an 
individual(s) shall not be made. 
IX. Newspaper(s) while covering a news refer to the Comptroller and Auditor 
General of India or any other report shall ensure that the facts and figures 
in news report should be accurate and not imaginary. 
Norm 8 - Conjecture, Comment and Fact  
 
I. Newspaper should not pass on or elevate conjecture, speculation or 
comment as a statement of fact. All these categories should be distinctly 
identified. 
Norm 34 - Pre-Publication Verification  
 
I. On receipt of a report or article of public interest and benefit containing 
imputations or comments against a citizen, the editor should check with due 
care and attention its factual accuracy apart from other authentic sources - 
with the person or the organisation concerned to elicit his/her or its version, 
comments or reaction and publish the same alongside with due correction 
in the report where necessary. In the event of lack or absence of response, 
a footnote to that effect may be appended to the report.  
II. Publication of news such as those pertaining to cancellation of 
examinations or withdrawal of candidates from election should be avoided 
without proper verification and cross checking.  
III. Newspaper should carry the Press Release only after establishing its 
authenticity which should bear the signature of authorized signatory and 
Departmental seal.  
IV. News reports that stem from a gossip or so called roving enquiry affecting 
the personal character of an individual, are not worthy of publication.  
V. Wrongly attributing historically incorrect remarks of grave nature to a 
political leader, which have far reaching repercussions without applying due 
diligence calls for severe action. The publication ought to verify the source 
of such statement at pre-publication stage.  
VI. Sacking of an officer over graft charges is a verifiable fact and the 
newspaper is expected to carry out such verification. Subsequent 
clarifications cannot mitigate the damage. 
VII. The journalists not volunteering to disclose the source of stories/articles 
shall be solely responsible and liable for correctness and authenticity of the 
same. 
VIII. The journalists volunteering to disclose the source of stories/articles then 
the responsibility and liability shall depend upon the nature of the source. 
 To deal with the cases of violation of any Norm of Journalistic 
Conduct, the PCI has a complaint mechanism for dealing with the cases of 
fake/false/defamatory/misleading news wherein it takes suo -motu cognizance 
under Regulation 13 of Press Council (Procedure for Inquiry) Regulation, 1979, or 
under Clause 14(1) of the Press Council Act, 1978, on receipt of a complaint 
made to it or otherwise, if the Council has reason to believe that a newspaper or 
news agency has offended against the standards of journalistic ethics or public 
taste or that an editor or a working journalist has committed any professional 
misconduct, the Council, after giving the newspaper, or news agency, the editor or 
journalist concerned an opportunity of being heard, holds an inquiry in such 
manner as provided by regulations made under this Act and, if it is satisfied that it 
is necessary so to do, it may, for reasons to be recorded in writing, warn, 

45 
 
admonish or censure the newspaper, the news agency, the editor or the journalist 
or disapprove the conduct of the editor or the journalist, as the case may be. 
Further, under Clause 14(2) of the Press Council Act, 1978, if the Council is of the 
opinion that it is necessary or expedient in the public interest to do so, it may 
require any newspaper to publish therein in such manner as the Council thinks fit, 
any particulars relating to any inquiry under this section against a newspaper or 
news agency, an editor or a journalist working therein, including the name of such 
newspaper, news agency, editor or journalist. 
 
The Former Chairman, PCI in his press note dated 03.04.2018 titled 
‘Response of Chairman on Fake News’, defined fake news as ‘news, story, 
information, data, and reports which is or are wholly or partly false.’ He further 
stated that ‘No prudent person should or can justify the dissemination of fake 
news. Fake news is a global menace and if any Government intends to take 
remedial steps to check its spread, per se, there is nothing wrong or obnoxious 
about it, provided that the authority to decide the truthfulness or otherwise of an 
allegation of fake news is entrusted to an independent statutory body like the 
Press Council of India.’ He further stated the procedure how the complaints are 
dealt with at the PCI, which reads as ‘The complaint of fake news is registered as 
complaint by the Council. Such complaints are filed by the individual, the 
Government or any other aggrieved person and are dealt by the Council following 
the laid down procedure in the Press Council Act and Press Council (Procedure 
for Inquiry) Regulations. However, it is only in gross cases of fake news or 
repeated involvement in fake news dissemination that power to suspend or 
cancellation of accreditation of the journalists be resorted to. The allegation needs 
to be determined by the Council before any action is called for.’ 
 
For Cable Television Network, the term ‘Fake News’ is not explicitly defined 
under the Cable Television Networks (Regulation) Act, 1995 or the rules framed 
thereunder. However, Rule 6(1)(d) of the Programme Code under CTN Rules, 
1994 provides that “No programme should be carried in cable service which 
contains anything obscene, defamatory, deliberate, false and suggestive 
innuendos and half-truths.” The term ‘fake news’ is considered as an intrinsic part 
of “false”. The Act and the rules framed thereunder also provide for a three -level 
complaint redressal structure to ensure observance and adherence to the 
Programme Code by the broadcasters. 
 
The Government has notified Information Technology (Intermediary 
Guidelines and Digital Media Ethics Code) Rules, 2021 (IT Rules, 2021) under the 
Information Technology Act, 2000 on 25th February, 2021. Part -III of the Rules, 
inter-alia provide for Code of Ethics for OTT platforms and publishers of news and 
current affairs on digital media. 
  
The Code of Ethics for News Publishers requires adherence to Norms of 
Journalistic Conduct of the Press Council of India under the Press Council Act, 
1978 and Programme Code under section 5 of the Cable Television Networks 
Regulation Act, 1995. It further states that content which is prohibited under any 
law for the time being in force shall not be published or transmitted. Accordingly, 
as per the Code of Ethics, provisions for fake news under the Norms of 
Journalistic Conduct and the Programme Code are applicable to digital media. A 
three-level grievance redressal mechanism has been established under the IT 
Rules, 2021 with two levels of self -regulation- Level I being the publisher and 

46 
 
Level II being the Self Regulatory Body, and the third level being the Oversight 
Mechanism under the Ministry of Information & Broadcasting. The publishers are 
mandated to appoint Grievance Redressal Officer (GRO) at Level -I of the three -
level grievance redressal mechanism to address grievances regarding violation of 
Code of Ethics by them in a timely manner. 
 
After Notification of the Information Technology (Intermediary Guidelines 
and Digital Media Ethics Code) Rules, 2021, 15 Writ Petitions were filed in various 
High Court challenging the maintainability of the Rules. In two of these cases filed 
in Bombay High court - WP(C) NO.14172 of 2021 - Agij Promotion of 
Nineteenonea Media Pvt. Ltd.& Ors. vs. Union of India and WP (C) No.14204 OF 
2021 - Nikhil Mangesh Wagle vs. Union of India, Hon’ble Bombay High Court vide 
its interim order dated 14.08.2021 has stayed the operation of Rule 9(1) relating to 
adherence to the Code of Ethics and Rule 9(3) relating to the three level 
grievance redressal mechanism. This Ministry filed SLPs in Supreme Court 
against the interim order. Hon’ble Supreme Court vide order dated 22.03.2024 
transferred all 15 Writ Petitions to Delhi High Court for further hearing. Presently, 
these petitions are heard by Delhi High Court. 
 
Further, as has been submitted by various industry representatives to the 
Committee, there exist multiple challenges to defining the term ‘fake news’ 
concretely in an evolving media landscape. In some cases, the term “fake news” 
subsumes within its fold “opinions”, “criticism”, “clickbait reporting”, “biased 
reporting”, “motivated propaganda”, “non -updated information”, etc. Even 
internationally, there seems to be no consensus on the definition of ‘fake news’. It 
also includes news content where mistakes are made during the journalistic 
process; satire that exaggerates or uses falsehood as a narrative device; content 
created to deceive, mislead - either by humans or computer code, including Al -
generated simulated videos. A 2018 report by a group of independent High -level 
Group experts of the European Commission on the subject of “fake news and 
online disinformation” noted that the term fake news could be construed to include 
a “spectrum of information types”.  
 
Article 19(1)(a) guarantees the right to freedom of speech and expression 
to all citizens of India. Further, Article 19(2) allows for reasonable restrictions on 
the exercise of this right in the interests of the sovereignty and integrity of India, 
the security of the State, friendly relations with foreign States, public order, 
decency or morality or in relation to contempt of court, defamation or incitement to 
an offence.  
 
In light of the above provisions of the Constitution of India, the existing 
provisions of various laws in relation to print, electronic and digital media, and the 
challenges of defining the term, the Ministry is currently examining the dimensions 
and parameters related to the term to explore the feasibility of defining the term 
‘fake news’ while maintaining the delicate balance of combating misinformation 
and protecting freedom of speech and individual rights as guaranteed under the 
Constitution. 
 
Ministry of Information and Broadcasting 
(O.M. No. H-11023/31/2024-Press dated 02/02/2026) 
 

47 
 
Organizations/ Mechanism involved in Fact Checking 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 5) 
The Committee note that apart from the Fact Check Unit (FCU) of the 
Press Information Bureau (PIB), there are several other organizations that are 
actively involved in monitoring Fake News and related issues in India. These 
include both independent organizations, collaborative initiatives with digital 
platforms, fact-checking agencies, and media organizations. The Committee were 
also given to understand that some organizations use tools to find visually similar 
images online as well as data bases maintained by International Fact Checking 
Network, etc., for checking the veracity of the information. The Committee note 
that despite the fact that there are so many independent fact -checkers, fact-check 
organizations and Fact Check Units of Media organisations, yet they work in 
isolation. Since no single organization, Government or Private, have the capacity 
to cross check and handle the large volume of fake news, the Committee are of 
the opinion that a collaborative effort among all the stakeholders to develop tools 
and technology for detecting Fake News/Misinformation would play a crucial role 
in curbing Fake News. Further, while noting the submission of MIB, that giving 
FCU (under PIB) a statutory basis is necessary for checking Fake News relating 
to the plans, programmes and initiatives of the Government, the Committee 
recommend the Ministry to explore its feasibility and apprise them about the 
same. 
Reply of the Government 
In order to establish a fact -check unit of the Central Government through 
statutory provisions, Rule 3(1)(b)(v) of the IT Rules, 2021 was amended in 2023 
as under (in bold and underlined): 
“3. (1) Due diligence by an intermediary: An intermediary, including [social 
media intermediary, significant social media intermediary and online gaming 
intermediary]1, shall observe the following due diligence while discharging its 
duties, namely:— 
(b) the intermediary shall inform its rules and regulations, privacy policy and 
user agreement to the user in English or any language specified in the Eighth 
Schedule to the Constitution in the language of his choice and shall make 
reasonable efforts to cause the user of its computer resource not to host, display, 
upload, modify, publish, transmit, store, update or share any information that,— 
(v) deceives or misleads the addressee about the origin of the message or 
knowingly and intentionally communicates any misinformation or information 
which is patently false and untrue or misleading in nature or, in respect of any 
business of the Central Government, is identified as fake or false or misleading by 
such fact check unit of the Central Government as the Ministry may, by notification 
published in the Official Gazette, specify;” 
 
Further to the above amendment, on 20.03.2024, Government of India 
notified Fact Check Unit (FCU) under the Press Information Bureau (PIB) of the 
Ministry of Information and Broadcasting (MIB) as the fact check unit of the 
Central Government. 
However, vide Bombay High Court Order dated 26.09.2024 in Kunal Kamra 
and Ors. vs Union of India, the above rule, as amended in 2023, was held 
unconstitutional. With the portion of rule 3(1)(b)(v) pertaining to the fact check unit 
of the Central Government struck down, the notification declaring PIB Fact Check 
Unit as the fact -check unit under the above rule stands annulled. The PIB Fact -

48 
 
Check Unit continues to function as previously before the notification. The 
Government has filed a Special Leave Petition (SLP) in the Hon’ble Supreme 
Court challenging the decision of the Hon’ble High Court. Hon’ble Supreme Court 
vide order dated 22.03.2024 transferred all 15 Writ Petitions to Delhi High Court 
for further hearing. Presently, these petitions are heard by Delhi High Court. 
In respect of using technology to identify misinformation, the PIB Fact 
Check Unit leverages a suite of technological tools to verify viral content, and 
specialized search techniques. These tools are instrumental in detecting 
misleading visuals or videos that are often recirculated on social media in 
distorted contexts related to the Government of India. The PIB Fact Check Unit 
has examined multiple open -source tools for the detection of Fake News and 
misinformation; however, none of the available tools have been found sufficiently 
effective or reliable to surpass the accuracy and judgment achieved through 
manual verification by trained personnel. 
To further strengthen its capabilities, the unit is collaborating with the 
National E- Governance Division (NeGD) to develop an AI -powered chatbot. This 
chatbot will serve as a fast, reliable, and interactive platform for citizens to verify 
claims in real-time. It will also act as a structured digital archive, offering seamless 
access to previously verified fact -checks. This initiative marks a significant step 
towards improving the accessibility and efficiency of fact verification services. 
Additionally, an AI-driven system for real-time detection of fake and digitally 
manipulated content is also being conceptualized, aimed at proactively identifying 
and mitigating emerging threats to information integrity. 
 
Ministry of Information and Broadcasting 
(O.M. No. H-11023/31/2024-Press dated 02/02/2026) 
 
Penal Provisions related to Fake News  
(Recommendation Sl. No. 7) 
While examining the penal provisions that were prevalent for 
telecasting/printing Fake News, the Committee note that it varied for each Media. 
For Print Media - upon being found guilty the Press Council of India (PCI) could 
warn, admonish, censure and disapprove the conduct of the journalist(s). For 
Electronic Media (private satellite TV ch annels) penal actions for proven cases of 
violation of Programme and Advertising Code include advising, warning, 
censuring, admonishing or reprimanding such broadcaster/requiring an apology, 
or content removal or taking the channel/programme off -air for a specified time 
period. Digital Media being governed by IT Act/Rules allows for mild penalties like 
₹25,000 and blocking under Section 69A.  
The Ministry has informed that in the absence of a clear definition of ‘Fake 
News’ and specific provisions in the ru les governing content of different media 
verticals there is no penal provision specific to publication of fake news. The 
Committee were also informed by one of the Stakeholders that currently there is 
no uniform code on this and there is a need for developing a consensus -driven 
code, along with appropriate measures to punish acts of publishing Fake News 
deliberately. It was also stated that these punitive actions should be in the civil 
domain, with no need for criminal action. Besides, the amount of monetary fine is 
to be determined keeping in view various factors - like the size of the publishing 
entity, its reach, recurrence of action, and the gravity or potential harm.  As far as 
the Members of NBDA are concerned, Regulation 7 of the News Broadcasting & 

49 
 
Digital Standards Regulations confer on NBDSA the power to impose penalties for 
violation of the Code of Conduct by the Broadcaster or Digital Publisher and it 
includes; for the first violation issue/express – (a) warning, admonishment, 
censure, disapproval, regret, apology and/or (b) impose a fine of upto Rs. 2 lakhs 
and this keeps increasing in case of second (Rs 5 lakhs), third (Rs 10 lakhs) and 
for fourth violation wherein the fine is upto 1% of the total annual turnover of the 
channel, provided such fine shall not exceed Rs. 25 lakhs. 
On a related issue, some of the stakeholders submitted that there needs to 
be a variation in penalty for repeated offenders, which may vary from warning -
apology-fine-suspension-to complete blocking/taking the channel off Air . It has 
also been noted that there are graded penalty system for different forms of media, 
ranging from mild warning to levying fines culminating upto ₹25 lakh and license 
revocation. The Committee are of the opinion that the amount of fine can be 
increased so as to make it deterrent enough for creators/ publishers of fake news. 
The Committee desire that there is a need for clearly assigning accountability of 
Editors/Content heads for editorial control; of Owners/Publishers for institutional 
failures, of I ntermediaries/Platforms, etc., for peddling ‘Fake News’. There is also 
a need to amend the penal provisions for publishing/telecasting Fake News in 
relevant Act/Rules/Guidelines for each form of Media (print, Electronic, Digital). 
The Ministry may explore the feasibility of cancelling the accreditation of a 
journalist/creator who is found guilty of creating and/or propagating 'Fake News’. 
Needless to say, all these should involve and emerge from a consensus -building 
exercise among media bodies and the relevant stakeholders. 
 
Reply of the Government 
Multiple existing laws, including provisions under the Bharatiya Nyaya 
Sanhita, 2023, address fake news. As an example, Section 197(1)(d) pertains to 
imputations and assertions, including false or misleading information, prejudicial to 
national integration. Section 353(1)(b) deals with statements, including any false 
information, rumour, or report, including through electronic means, conducing to 
public mischief. Similarly, Section 175 pertains to false information in relation to 
electoral candidates. Other laws such as Consumer Protection Act, 2019 also 
applies for false/misleading claims, especially in relation to advertisements. 
The existing framework under the IT Act provides mechanisms to address 
various issues in the digital ecosystem. As per Section 2(1)(w) of the IT Act, an 
“intermediary” includes any person who, on behalf of another, receives, stores, 
transmits, or provides services with respect to electronic records. Intermediaries 
function as conduits for user -generated information and do not initiate, select, 
modify, or control the information they transmit or host. 
Section 79 of the IT Act establishes a conditional exemption from liability 
for intermediaries with respect to third -party information. This protection operates 
only when the intermediary complies with due diligence requirements prescribed 
under the IT Rules, 2021; and upon receiving actual knowledge in the manner 
prescribed, it acts expeditiously to remove or disable access to unlawful 
information. 
Rule 7 of the IT Rules further clarifies that an intermediary that fails to 
comply with due diligence requirements loses the protection of Section 79 and 
becomes liable for punishment under any extant law. For instance, Section 353 of 
the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita (BNS) criminalises dissemination of misinformation 
that creates or promotes false alarm or panic. If an intermediary, after receiving 
actual knowledge as prescribed, does not remove or disable access to such 
content, it may also be prosecuted under Section 353 of the BNS, alongside the 

50 
 
individual who posted the content. These provisions collectively establish a clear 
and enforceable liability framework. 
Further, PCI has been requested by the Ministry vide letter dated 
31.07.2025 to provide suggestions for amending Press Council Act, 1978 keeping 
in view the current media scenario in the country. PCI has informed that the 
matter will be placed before the Council for consideration as and when the Council 
is constituted. Thereafter, the proposed amendment to the Press Council Act, 
1978 will be shared with the Ministry. 
PIB grants accreditation to working journalists as per Central Media 
Accreditation Guidelines - 2022 (CMAG). Central Media Accreditation Committee 
(CMAC) is a committee constituted by the Government of India, chaired by 
Principal D.G, PIB and comprising of up to 25 Members nominated by the 
Government of India to discharge the functions under Central Media Accreditation 
Guidelines. The CMAC once constituted functions for a period of two years from 
the date of its first meeting. 
As per Clause 6.8 (c) of CMAG -2022 " The accreditation is liable to be 
suspended/withdrawn if a journalist who has been granted accreditation - if he/she 
or the news media organization whom he/she represents is found to have 
furnished false/ fraudulent forged information/ documents, in which event the 
working journalist/ media organization shall be debarred from accreditation for up 
to a maximum of five years but not less than two years, as may be decided by 
Central Media Accreditation Committee". 
Ministry of Information and Broadcasting 
(O.M. No. H-11023/31/2024-Press dated 02/02/2026) 
 
 
****** 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
     NEW DELHI; DR. NISHIKANT DUBEY, 
   05 August, 2026  Chairperson, 
14 Sravana, 1948 (Saka) Standing Committee on  
Communications and Information Technology. 

51 
 
ANNEXURE – II 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE OBSERVATIONS/ 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THEIR TWENTY-SECOND REPORT  
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
[Vide Paragraph No. 5 of Introduction] 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by  the 
Government 
 
          Rec. Sl. Nos.: 1,3, 4,6,8,9,10,11 & 12 
Total 09 
Percentage    75 
(ii)  Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the replies of the Government 
 
         Rec. Sl. No.: NIL  
Total 0 
Percentage 0 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and require reiteration 
        Rec. Sl. No.: NIL 
 
Total  01  0 
Percentage 0 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the replies of the 
Government are of interim in nature 
 
        Rec. Sl. Nos.: 2,5 & 7  
Total 03 
Percentage 25 
 
 
 