 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON COMMUNICATIONS  
AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY  
(2025-26) 
 
 
EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
MINISTRY OF INFORMATION AND BROADCASTING 
 
 
 
 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the 
Committee contained in their Twenty sixth Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on the 
subject ‘Demands for Grants (2026-27)’] 
 
 
THIRTY- FOURTH REPORT 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     August, 2026/, Sravana, 1948 (Saka) 
34 
 


 
 
THIRTY- FOURTH REPORT 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
COMMUNICATIONS AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
(2025-26) 
 
 
EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA 
 
 
MINISTRY OF INFORMATION AND BROADCASTING 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations of the 
Committee contained in their Twenty sixth Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on the 
subject ‘Demands for Grants (2026-27)’] 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on          06.08.2026 
Laid in Rajya Sabha on            06.08.2026 
 
 
 
                    LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
                   NEW DELHI 
 
                 August, 2026/, Sravana, 1948 (Saka) 


 
 
CCIT No.  446 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
©2025 By Lok Sabha Secretariat 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok 
Sabha (Seventeenth Edition) and Printed by Lok Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi-110001 
 
 

 
 
CONTENTS 
 PAGE  
COMPOSITION OF THE 
COMMITTEE.................................................................................................. 
 
INTRODUCTION........................................................................................................................
............ 
 
CHAPTER I Report………………………………………………………………………..........
........... 
 
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government……………………………………………………………………....
...........  
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the replies of the 
Government………………………………..........................  
CHAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and require 
reiteration ………….........  
CHAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government are of interim in 
nature….........................................................................................  
 ANNEXURES  
I. *Minutes of the 15th Sitting of the Committee held on  
03.08.2026............................ 
 
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ 
Recommendations contained in their Twenty-sixth Report (Eighteenth Lok 
Sabha). 
*Not appended.  
 
   
 
 

 
 
 Composition of the Standing Committee on Communications and  
Information Technology (2025-26) 
 
Dr. Nishikant Dubey - Chairperson 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Shri C.N. Annadurai 
3. Shri Anil Baluni 
4. Dr. Rabindra Narayan Behera 
5. Shri Anup Sanjay Dhotre 
6. Shri Gurmeet Singh Meet Hayer 
7. Shri Sanjay Haribhau Jadhav 
8. Shri S. Supongmeren Jamir 
9. Shri Appalanaidu Kalisetti 
10. Smt. Poonamben Hematbhai Maadam 
11. Shri G. Kumar Naik 
12. Shri Shafi Parambil 
13. Dr. M.K. Vishnu Prasad 
14. Ms. Kangna Ranaut 
15. Shri Radheshyam Rathiya 
16. Shri Ramasahayam Raghuram Reddy 
17. Shri Arun Kumar Sagar 
18. Shri Devesh Shakya 
19. Shri Vishnu Datt Sharma 
20. Shri Rajesh Verma 
21. Vacant 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
22. Shri Sanjay Bhatia@ 
23. Shri Rajeev Kumar@ 
24. Shri Christopher Manickam@  
25. Shri Amar Pal Maurya 
26. Shri Rajneesh Kumar Agrawal$ 
27. Shri Kanad Purkayastha 
28. Shri S. Niranjan Reddy 
29. Shri Kartikeya Sharma 
30. Shri Lahar Singh Siroya  
31. Shri Bhashyam Rama Krishna$ 
Secretariat 
1.  Shri Harish Chandra Bist — Joint Secretary  
2.  Smt. A. Jyothirmayi  — Director 
3.  Smt. Rinky Singh                — Executive Officer 
____________________________________________ 
Committee constituted w.e.f. 26 th September, 2025 vide Para No.3282 of Bulletin Part -II dated                  
1st October, 2025. 
@ Shri Sanjay Bhatia, Shri Rajeev Kumar and Shri  Christopher Manickam nominated to the Committee, 
w.e.f. 3rd June, 2026 vide Para No. 5267 of Bulletin Part-II dated 4th June, 2026. 
$ Shri Rajneesh Kumar Agrawal and Shri Bhashyam Rama Krishna nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 
23rd July, 2026 vide Para No. 5724 of Bulletin Part-II dated 24th July, 2026. 
 

 
 
INTRODUCTION 
I, the Chairperson, Standing Committee on Communications and Information 
Technology (202 5-26), having been authorized by the Committee, present this Thirty-
fourth Report on Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Twenty-sixth 
Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on the subject ‘Demands for Grants (2026-27)’ relating to 
the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting. 
2.  The Twenty-sixth Report was  presented to  Lok Sabha /laid in Rajya Sabha on           
17.03.2026.  The Ministry of Information and Broadcasting furnished their Action Taken 
Notes on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the Twenty-sixth Report on 
14.07.2026. 
3.  The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their Sitting held on  
03.08.2026. 
4.  For facility of reference and convenience, Observations/Recommendations of the 
Committee have been printed in bold in Chapter-I of the Report.  
5.  An analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Twenty-sixth Report of the Committee 
is given at Annexure-II. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     NEW DELHI; DR. NISHIKANT DUBEY, 
    05 August, 2026  Chairperson, 
14 Sravana, 1948 (Saka) Standing Committee on  
Communications and Information Technology. 

1 
 
CHAPTER I 
REPORT 
This Report of the Standing Committee on Communications and Information 
Technology deals with the action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Twenty-sixth 
Report (Eighteenth Lok Sabha) on the subject ‘Demands for Grants (2026-27) relating to 
the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting. 
 
2. The Twenty-sixth Report was presented to Lok Sabha/laid in Rajya Sabha on                          
17.03.2026. It contained 12 Observations/Recommendations. Replies of the Government 
in respect of all the Observations/Recommendations have been received from the 
Ministry of Information and Broadcasting and are categorized as under:- 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by 
the Government 
 
Rec. Sl. Nos.:– 1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9,10, 11 and 12 
 
 
Total  - 12 
Chapter-II 
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the replies of the Government 
 
 
Rec. Sl. No.:– NIL 
 
 
Total — NIL  
Chapter-III 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of 
the Government have not been accepted by the Committee and 
require reiteration 
 
Rec. Sl. No.:–  NIL 
 
 
 
Total – NIL 
Chapter-IV 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of 
the Government are of interim in nature  
 
Rec. Sl. No.:– NIL 
 
 
Total – NIL 
Chapter-V 
 
3. The Committee trust that utmost importance would be given to 
implementation of the Observations/Recommendations accepted by the 
Government. The Committee further desire that Action Taken Notes on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in Chapter -I of this Report  may be 
furnished to them at an early date. 
 
4. The Committee will now deal with action taken by the Government on some of 
their recommendations.   
 
 

2 
 
CENTRAL SECTOR SCHEMES (CSS) 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 2) 
5. The Standing Committee on Communications and Information Technology              
(2025-26), in their Twenty-sixth Report, had recommended as under:- 
“The Committee note that there are four Central Sector Schemes (CSS) of 
the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting viz. Development 
Communication & Information Dissemination (DCID), Development 
Communication and Dissemination of Filmic Content (DCDFC), Broadcasting 
Infrastructure & Network Development  (BIND) and Supporting Community 
Radio Movement in India (CR).  For the year 2026 -27, against the proposed 
sum of Rs. 1200.50 crore, the allocations for Central Sector Scheme is Rs. 
1361.79 crore. According to the Ministry the enhancement of ₹ 250 crore in 
BE 2026-27 is for ‘Talent Development in Animation, Visual Effects, Gaming 
and Comics (AVGC) Sector’ under the Film Sector, as a component under the 
Central Sector Scheme DCDFC. The objective of the component is to 
promote India and its youth as leaders in content creation by setting up AVGC 
content creator labs in 15,000 secondary schools and 500 colleges in various 
parts of the Country. 
 
During the FY 2025-26, the allocations for ‘Central Sector Schemes’ at 
BE and RE stage were Rs. 1118.49 crore and Rs. 1178 crore respectively. 
The overall actual expenditure till 23.02.2026 was Rs. 747.13 crore which is 
66.80% of RE. Bifurcation of actual expenditure under all the four ‘Central 
Sector Schemes’ [DCID, DCDFC, BIND and Supporting Community Radio 
Movement (SCR) in India] are Rs. 138.48 crore, Rs. 232.46 crore, Rs. 370.33 
crore and Rs. 5.86 crore respectively. This reflects that the expenditure was 
70.61%, 54.84%, 67.33% and 73.25% of RE allocations, respectively. The 
Committee note that for last two years there is under-utilization of funds under 
‘Central Sector Schemes’. The reasons conveyed by the Ministry for 
shortfall/delay with respect to Schemes under Central Sector Schemes  
during the FY 2025 -26, are owing to (i) delay in site allotment at places for 
new FM Transmitter Projects; (ii) delay in erection of towers due to technical 
and administrative issues; (iii) shortage of staff; (iv) cancellation of tenders 
due to administrative reasons and re -tendering; (v) lower than anticipated 
participation, of journalist and withdrawal of media persons; (vi) low demand 
for grants and most of the activities such as Community Radio Awareness 
workshops and Regional Community Radio Sammelans were planned to be 
conducted in the Quarter-3 to Quarter-4; (vii) A major portion of financial grant 
for FY 2025-26 in NER was allocated for production of films that could not be 
picked up as there was delay in review of the applications received under 
Production of Films etc. 
 
The Committee find that even after further rationalization of Schemes, 
there is an under -achievement of both physical and financial targets under 
Central Sector Schemes which calls for a thorough review of the 
implementation process of rationalization.  The Committee call upon the 
Ministry to address the recurring hindrances impacting ‘Central Sector 
Schemes’ on priority basis. The Committee urge the Ministry to ensure proper 
utilisation of funds and adhering to the physical targets under all the Central 

3 
 
Sector Schemes during the FY 2026 -27 as per defined timelines, and like to 
be apprised of the action taken along with the tangible/quantifiable outcomes 
of the steps taken by the Ministry”. 
 
6. In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of information and Broadcasting 
submitted as under:– 
“BIND:  
 
The recommendation of the Committee has been noted. Right from the 
start of financial year, all efforts are being made to utilize the allocated funds 
and adhere to achievement of physical targets as per the pre -defined 
timelines. Some of the measures envisaged for effective utilization of the 
Budgetary allocation during the year 2026-27 are as under: 
a. Regular meetings are convened by the Ministry with Prasar Bharati at 
various levels to monitor progress of projects under the BIND Scheme, 
identify implementation bottlenecks, and take immediate mitigating steps to 
ensure timely execution, with high-priority projects being individually tracked.  
b. BIND expenditure and project progress are a standing agenda at 
senior level where corrective actions are decided and followed up to ensure 
seamless project execution.  
c. Fund requests from Prasar Bharati under the BIND Scheme are 
processed and released on priority to facilitate uninterrupted project 
execution.  
d. An Empowered Committee chaired by Secretary, I&B, mandated to 
apportion funds and allow inter -se allocation among sub -components, 
examines proposals submitted by Prasar Bharati on merit and approves 
necessary reallocations to ensure no infrastructure project suffers for want of 
funds or administrative support.  
e. Regulatory requirements such as Make in India (MII) exemptions are 
taken up on priority with the competent authorities to enable timely 
procurement of equipment sourced from foreign suppliers.  
f. Ministry is conducting regular meetings with the concerned 
stakeholders to get the issues, if any, resolved. 
g. Digital platform viz e -office, e -tendering, procurement through GEM, 
Video conferencing etc. are also being utilized by Prasar Bharati to expedite 
the progress of Projects. It has made the system fast, efficient and 
transparent. 
h. Supply chain bottleneck issues in some instances which led to delays 
in timely supply of equipment from the OEMs, are being addressed by Prasar 
Bharati. 
i. Further, time-consuming works on most of the major SITC projects viz 
Earth station upgradation, OB van projects etc have already been initiated/ 
completed by Prasar Bharati. 
j. Advance action on projects (Specification approvals and Tendering 
process to be taken -up in FY 2026 -27) has already been initiated by Prasar 
Bharati under the current BIND Scheme. 
 
CRS:  
In the current financial year, efforts are being made for proper 
utilization of funds. In the FY: 2026 -27, 10 community radio awareness 
workshops are planned. Besides this, 04 regional sammelans and 01 National 
Sammelan are also planned. Keeping in mind last years’ experience, it is also 
expected that a significant number of applications would also be received for 

4 
 
financial assistance".   
 
DCID: 
 
For optimum and uniform utilization of the allocated funds, Quarterly 
Expenditure Plan (QEP) and Monthly Expenditure Plan (MEP) are being put 
in place and being closely monitored at PIB(Hqrs.). Alongside, physical 
targets of DCID activities among the regions/branches are being fixed through 
Annual and Monthly Action Plan. 
 
DCDFC: 
 
The Ministry has strengthened its monitoring mechanism through 
periodic review meetings with implementing agencies and by closely tracking 
both financial expenditure and physical progress against approved annual 
action plans. Implementing agencies are required to furnish quarterly 
progress reports detailing activities undertaken, targets achieved and 
expenditure incurred. Delays, if any, are identified at an early stage and 
corrective measures are undertaken in consultation with the concerned 
agencies to facilitate timely implementation. 
 
Funds allocated under the DCDFC Scheme for FY 2026 –27 will be 
utilized for the promotion of Indian cinema through various activities in India 
and abroad. These include organizing and supporting major film festivals and 
film markets such as the International Film Festival of India (IFFI) and the 
Mumbai International Film Festival (MIFF), exhibition of children's films in 
schools, participation in international film festivals and markets including 
Cannes, Berlin, MIPCOM, Toronto, and other foreign film festivals, as well as 
providing financial assistance to domestic film festivals and summits. 
Further, the allocated funds will also be utilized for the production of 
documentary films, children's films, and films in various Indian regional 
languages with a view to promoting Indian cinema, preserving cultural 
diversity, and encouraging quality content creation across different segments 
of the film industry”. 
 
7. The Committee , in their Twenty -sixth Report,  had noted that even after 
rationalization of Schemes, there was an under-achievement of both physical and 
financial targets under Central Sector  Schemes. Therefore, the Committee had 
recommended that the Ministry address the recurring hindrances and ensure 
proper utilisation of funds as well as  adhere to the physical targets . The 
Committee had also desired to be  apprised of the tangible/quantifiable outcomes 
of the steps taken by the Ministry. 
The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply, while noting the recommendation of 
the Committee, has stated that right from the start of financial year, all efforts were 
being made to utilize the allocated funds and adhere to achievement of physical 
targets as per the pre-defined timelines. The details of the measures envisaged for 
effective utilization of the budgetary allocation during the Financial Year 2026 -27 

5 
 
have also been submitted in the Action Taken Reply . With respect to Community 
Radio Stations, it is stated that efforts were being made for proper utilization of 
funds. In the FY: 2026 -27, there were 10 community radio awareness workshops 
planned and it is expected that a significant number of applications would also be 
received for financial assistance. Further, for optimum  and uniform utilization of 
the allocated funds  under DCID,  Quarterly Expenditure Plan (QEP) and Monthly 
Expenditure Plan (MEP) were being  put in place and being closely monitored at 
PIB (Hqrs.). For DCDFC, it is stated that f unds allocated for FY 2026 –27 would be 
utilized for the promotion of Indian cinema through various activities in India and 
abroad and for the production of documentary films, children's films, and films in 
various Indian regional languages with a view to promoting Indian cinema, 
preserving cultural diversity, and encouraging quality content creation across 
different segments of the film industry. 
Taking cognizance of the submission of the Ministry/Prasar Bharati, the 
Committee opine that the efforts of the Ministry right from the commencement of 
the financial year  by closely tracking both financial expenditure and physical 
progress would definitely help in meeting the timelines. The Committee, therefore, 
desire to be apprised about the outcome of the steps taken by the Ministry to meet 
the targets under Central Sector Schemes. 
DD Free Dish  
(Recommendation Sl. No. 4) 
8. The Standing Committee on Communications and Information Technology              
(2025-26), in their Twenty-sixth Report, had recommended as under:- 
“The Committee observe that DD Free Dish is a Free -to-Air (FTA) DTH 
Service and an alternative affordable platform for people who do not have 
means to pay high subscription fee of private platforms.  DD Free Dish 
platform, an approved scheme of the Government of India, was launched in 
December 2004 by Prasar Bharati. Since then it is reaching millions of people 
in remote, inaccessible and border areas, becoming a tool for empowerment 
of the masses particularly marginalized and weaker sections of the society. 
Total Bouquet of DD Free Dish consist of 482 TV channels including 35 
Doordarshan channels, 11 HD DD Channels and 95 popular Private TV 
channels, 320 DD Co-Branded Educational channels and 64 Radio channels. 
The Committee note that DD Free Dish signal is available pan India, except 
Andaman & Nicobar Islands and can be viewed with a very modest one -time 
investment of around Rs. 2500/ - towards small Dish, MPEG-4 Free-to-Air Set 
Top Box and other ancillary peripherals. DD Free Dish Set -Top Boxes are 
free to air (FTA) and available in open market and Prasar Bharati has no 
direct control over these Set Top Boxes which are available over the shelf in 

6 
 
open market for general public, hence there is no accurate data available 
regarding viewership of DD Free Dish. As per market estimates and FICCI & 
E&Y report published in March 2025, more than 49 million households are 
viewing DD Free Dish. The Committee understand that there is no monthly 
subscription fees required to tune in to DD Free Dish channels, unlike other 
DTH services. With respect to challenges, the Committee note that DD Free 
Dish viewership is facing challenges in southern and eastern part of India and 
to increase penetration of DD Free Dish set Top Boxes in these regions 
promotional measures are being taken from time to time. As a latest measure, 
17 numbers of popular unrepresented / under represented regional private TV 
channels were onboarded on MPEG -4 slots of DD Free dish Free of cost for 
the period from 01.01.2026 to 31.03.2026, on a pilot basis. 
The Committee perceive that several factors like surfacing of various 
Digital platforms, OTTs, financial stress in market & decreasing popularity of 
linear channels have challenged revenue across all DTH services and it could 
earn only around Rs. 814 crore during FY 2025-26. On the issue of increasing 
the slots, the Ministry have submitted that since revenue of DD Free Dish is 
earned through e Auction of vacant slots on DD Free Dish to private TV 
channels and the yield through e -Auction depends on supply and demand, 
hence, increasing the slots on DD Free Dish, especially MPEG -2 slots 
carrying higher reserve price, could hamper revenue of DD Free Dish further. 
When asked about the road map with respect to DD Free Dish, the Ministry 
have informed that in the financial year 2026-27, the number of MPEG-4 slots 
have been enhanced adequately for annual e -auction to onboard a greater 
number of regional language channels. Besides, unrepresented/under 
represented regional language channels are promoted by reserving slots 
adequately for them at a very nominal / promotional / invitational reserve price 
on MPEG-4 slots of DD Free Dish which may attract more popular regional 
language channels to come on DD Free Dish thereby increasing penetration 
of DD Free Dish Set Top Boxes in those areas. The Committee have also 
learnt that the Scheme for procurement of DTH Set Top Boxes (STBs) for 
Remote, Tribal and LWE areas (under BIND) has undergone a change and is 
now being implemented in Direct Benefit Transfer mode wherein Ministry of 
Electronics and Information Technology (MeitY) in conjunction with the 
Bureau of Indian Standards (BIS) has mandated that in future all television 
sets sold in India must include a built -in satellite tuner that complies with IS 
18112:2022. The final date for mandatory compliance with this order was 26th 
October, 2025, but, it was extended till 26th Jan 2026. The Committee take 
cognizance of the positive development wherein if someone wants to watch 
Free Dish, they will no longer have to purchase a set -top box and the Free 
Dish service will be available simply by installing an antenna.  Once a tuner is 
installed in the television set, there is no subscription and no monthly charge 
and all the channels of DD Free Dish can be accessed freely by the general 
public. Given its importance, the Committee may be apprised of the 
implementation status of rolling out TV sets with built -in satellite tuner in 
compliance with IS 18112:2022. The Committee may be enlightened about 
the details of expansion of DD Free Dish post implementation of the said 
mandate of BIS and MeitY relating to pre-installed digital TV tuners”. 
 
9. In their Action Taken Reply, t he Ministry of information and Broadcasting 
submitted as under:– 
“All the prominent consumer Brands have ﬂoated TV Sets with in -built TV 

7 
 
Tuners in compliance with IS 18112:2022. Prasar Bharati/ Doordarshan is 
collaborating with TV Set OEMs and Set top Box OEMs for implementation of 
advanced Electronic Programming guide with the TV Set OEMs so that 
viewers are able to search the TV Channel of their choice and get better 
viewing experience without requiring Set top Boxes or internet  connection. 
ICEA and other industry bodies are coordinating the interaction of DD/PB with 
technical teams of the TV set OEMs and system designers such as Google 
TV OS, WEB OS, Tizen TV OS and others. 
As of now, proposed date for complete discontinuation of TV Sets of 
earlier models not having DVB (Digital Video Broadcast) Radio Frequency 
(RF) TV Tuner card shall be eﬀective from July 2026. But, as informed to 
Prasar Bharati in its coordination with TV manufacturers, most of the TV sets 
are being provided with in -built TV sets. PB has been asked to engage with 
the TV manufacturers for marketing and promotion of the built in TV Tuners”. 
 
10. In their Original Report, the Committee  had noted that   the Scheme for 
procurement of DTH Set Top Boxes (STBs) for Remote, Tribal and LWE areas 
(under BIND) had undergone a change and would be implemented in Direct Benefit 
Transfer mode wherein the Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology 
(MeitY) in conjunction with the Bureau of Indian Standards (BIS) had mandated 
that in future, all television sets sold in India would include a built-in satellite tuner 
that complies with IS 18112:2022. The final date for mandatory compliance with 
this order was 26 th October, 2025, but, was extended till 26 th January 2026. The 
Committee had taken cognizance of the positive development and  desired to be 
apprised of its implementation status . The Committee  had also desired to know 
about the details of expansion of DD Free Dish after implementation of the said 
mandate of BIS and MeitY relating to pre-installed digital TV tuners. 
The Ministry, in its Action Taken reply, stated that all the prominent consumer 
Brands have ﬂoated TV Sets with in -built TV Tuners in compliance with IS 
18112:2022. It has also been conveyed  that the proposed date for complete 
discontinuation of TV Sets of earlier models not having DVB (Digital Video 
Broadcast) Radio Frequency (RF) TV Tuner card would be eﬀective from July 2026. 
Further, most of the TV sets are being provided with in -built TV Tuners and Prasar 
Bharati has been asked to engage with the TV manufacturers for marketing and 
promotion of the built-in TV Tuners. 
Taking cognisance of the initiatives with respect to DD Free Dish,  the 
Committee desire to be apprised about the implementation of the mandate by BIS 
and MeitY along  with the details of expansion of DD Free Dish  post 
implementation of the said mandate of BIS and MeitY relating to pre -installed 
digital TV tuners.  The Committee would also like to be apprised of  detailed 

8 
 
outcome of the collaboration of Prasar Bharati/DD with TV Set OEMs and Set top 
Box OEMs for implementation of advanced Electronic Programming guide with the 
TV Set OEMs. The Ministry may also apprise the Committee about the measurable 
outcomes of the Prasar Bharati engaging with TV manufacturers for marketing and 
promotion of the built-in TV tuners, rather than shifting of goal post from one date 
to another for mandatory compliance. 
DOORDARSHAN (DD) 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 5) 
11. The Standing Committee on Communications and Information Technology              
(2025-26), in their Twenty-sixth Report, had recommended as under:- 
“ The Committee note that there are 35 Doordarshan satellite TV 
channels including 28 Regional/State channels. The current reach/viewership 
of Doordarshan is 1743.3 lakhs. The Committee note that for the FY 2026 -27, 
out of Rs. 509.24 crore allocated to Prasar Bharati (under BIND), an amount 
of Rs. 299.48 crore has been allocated to Doordarshan. Major 
challenges/hindrances witnessed by the Doordarshan include (i) to be a 
destination for family and clean entertainment even while remaining relevant 
in today's world where technological advancements are taking place rapidly; 
(ii) As a Public Service Broadcaster, Doordarshan is mandated to inform, 
educate, and entertain while ensuring balanced broadcasting. Doordarshan 
faces the dual challenge of adhering to its public service mandate, as outlined 
in the Prasar Bharati Act, and competing with private television 
channels/platforms in a commercially viable manner; (iii) A significant portion 
of Prasar Bharati’s programming focuses on promoting national development, 
socio-economic progress, and national integration; (iv) The integration of 
advanced technologies such as  Artificial Intelligence (AI), Augmented Reality 
(AR) and Virtual Reality (VR) to cater to changing tastes; etc.  
While dealing with the issue of content, the Committee note that Prasar 
Bharati has framed the ‘Content Sourcing Policy 2024’ after amending 
‘Content Sourcing Policy 2023’ and that has resulted in significant 
streamlining of content acquisition, standardized commissioning processes, 
transparent evaluation systems, cost effective matrix and cost negotiation  etc. 
This has led to content acquiring not only for linear platforms but also for 
digital platform - the newly launched OTT (Waves OTT). So far as WAVES 
OTT Platform is concerned, the Committee note that there are 11 million App 
downloads and over 7.3 million registered user accounts under WAVES OTT 
platform and it has 18,000 audio-visual titles, more than 12,000 hours of video 
and audio content available in 12+ Indian languages. The Committee are 
informed about a few initiatives that have been taken under WAVES OTT 
Platform which,inter -alia, include (i) Digitization and streaming of archival 
content; (ii) Conceptualisation and creation of MyWAVES, a proposed citizen -
creator and participatory content platform; (iii) Integration with Government 
and institutional digital platforms, expanding last -mile access and outreach 
across the Country; (iv) Knowledge and publications ecosystem integration, 
including 9,000+ e -books, journals and magazines such as Yojana, 
Kurukshetra, Bal Bharati, Aajkal and Employment News made available 

9 
 
digitally, especially in Tier -2, Tier-3 cities and rural areas; (v) Broad content 
partnerships, involving nearly 400 content partners with regular addition of 
60–75 new titles per month, ensuring continuous content refresh; etc. The 
Committee are given to understand that the Ministry is bringing a structured 
Pay-Per-View (PPV) Policy Framework, so that the platform becomes 
sustainable and does not require greater budgetary support.  Further, under 
the overall banner of Indian Institute of Creative Technology, 15,000 Content 
Creation Labs would be set up in schools and 500 such Labs would be set up 
in colleges.   
On another issue related to Doordarshan Kendras (DDK) regarding 
asset management/monetisation, the Committee note that no study has so far 
been conducted to assess the assets under Doordarshan Kendras in India. In 
this regard, the Ministry informed that Prasar Bharati Board has approved a 
draft monetization plan including feasibility study of Prasar Bharati land 
assets (both Akashvani & Doordarshan). The draft monetization plan 
mentions (i) Prasar Bharati will monetize land assets on PPP model without 
alienating the land; and (ii) The revenue generated will be used by Prasar 
Bharati making itself sustainable. While discussing about asset monetization, 
some of the facts highlighted  during evidence, include (a) all the land and 
building assets have been fully mapped on the Government’s portal along 
with their exact locations and they have geo -tagged locations of these assets; 
(b) Under the Swachhata Abhiyan, during the last three years, about nine lakh 
square feet of space has been vacated in existing buildings; (c) various 
institutions that require space and do not involve extensive public interface 
are being provided surplus space on rent; (d) within the next few months, 
whatever surplus built-up space have been identified, would be rented out so 
that it can become a source of revenue; (e) there are around 70 land assets, 
with approximate value of ₹100 crore and for these locations, a special team 
has been deployed to explore how planned development or redevelopment 
can be undertaken to generate revenue. The Committee understand that the 
Prasar Bharati has signed an MoU with the Gov ernment of Maharashtra 
about five to six months ago. The land belonging to Akashvani is available in 
Mumbai city and work has already begun on a plan to jointly develop a Film 
City in collaboration with the Government of Maharashtra.  
The Committee acknowledge the efforts of the Ministry/Prasar Bharati 
to maintain Doordarshan as a platform for family -friendly and clean 
entertainment medium in an increasingly competitive media ecosystem where 
morality is declining and vulgarity is increasing. The Committee are pleased 
to note that in order to increase its source of revenue the Prasar Bharati 
Board has approved a draft monetization plan to provide its surplus space on 
rent and planned development/redevelopment of its 70 land assets. The 
Committee urge the Ministry to take action on the following and apprise them 
accordingly:- 
(i)To prepare a roadmap for effective implementation and periodic review of 
the ‘Content Sourcing Policy, 2024’; (ii) To ensure continuous content 
enrichment, technological upgradation and wider outreach of the WAVES 
OTT platform, particularly in Tier -2, Tier -3 cities and rural areas. To have 
adequate safeguards in place to ensure affordability, accessibility and public 
interest orientation while implementing the structured Pay -Per-View (PPV) 
Policy Framework for WAVES OTT platform; the PPV framework as well as 
keep the old archival content free of any charge.  (iii) To ensure that content 
Creation Labs in 15,000 schools and 500 such labs in colleges are 

10 
 
implemented in a time -bound manner, adequately equipped with modern 
tools and linked with public broadcasting platforms so that young creators 
across the Country are able to contribute meaningful content reflecting India’s 
diverse culture, languages and traditions; and (iv) To undertake a 
comprehensive national -level assessment of all assets under Doordarshan 
and Akashvani Kendras, finalise the monetisation framework at the earliest, 
develop clear guidelines for leasing, redevelopment and PPP -based 
utilisation of assets and  apprise the Committee of the progress made in 
implementing the asset monetisation plan, including revenue generated and 
projects undertaken, in a time-bound manner”. 
 
12. In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of information and Broadcasting 
submitted as under:– 
“(i)To prepare a roadmap for effective implementation and periodic review of 
the ‘Content Sourcing Policy, 2024’: 
Reply: 
(i) Content Sourcing Policy –2024 was formulated with the objective of 
ensuring transparency, efficiency, cost optimization, quality enhancement and 
wider participation in the sourcing of content across different platforms of 
Prasar Bharati. The Policy has enabled Prasar Bharati to acquire substantial 
hours of content under different modes of acquisitions viz. Commissioning, 
Royalty, License, Sponsorship, Revenue Share and Gratis. The policy also 
has the provision for acquiring content for OTT Platform including third party 
App in App integration with WAVES OTT Platform. Acquiring content from 
various reputed and well -established production houses has paved the way 
for advance planning and scheduling of content for DD National and WAVES 
OTT Platform in a short period of time. 
In order to objectively arrive at the episodic cost of content under 
commissioning and License Fee/Royalty, Content Input Matrix and 
corresponding Cost Slab bracket has also been devised by a High  level 
Committee comprising of members from industry like Producers Guild of 
India, FICCI etc. and the Matrix is in place after approval by Prasar Bharati 
Board. This has helped the Evaluation and Costing committee to arrive at the 
cost of content under commissioning and License Fee/Royalty in a more 
rational and transparent manner. 
For acquiring programmes for Regional Kendras, an Addendum to the 
Content Sourcing Policy 2024 dated 20 th February 2026 has been notified by 
Prasar Bharati. The Addendum empowers Regional Channel Managers to 
source various programmes including low -cost commissioning content at the 
level of Kendra/Channel itself. This will enable acquisition of content as per 
specific need of the regional channels by the respective Kendras in a more 
efficient and timely manner.  
To further improve transparency, accountability and ease of doing 
business for production houses/agencies, the proposals under various modes 
are now being invited through waves bazaar portal. Further, Content 
Acquisition Portal, which is in the final stage of roll out, will enable migration 
of the entire content sourcing workflow to an online digital portal enabling 
faceless processing, content evaluation, faster decision -making and real-time 
status tracking. 
Notification of Content Sourcing Policy 2024 has yielded desired 
results for acquiring meaningful content during the years and as per necessity 

11 
 
and feedbacks received by various stakeholders, periodic review of the 
processes defined in the policy would be undertaken to keep the policy 
contemporary, flexible and outcome oriented. Moreover, Pay per view policy 
is also a step taken by Prasar Bharati for onboarding of content with 
maximum transparency and objectivity. 
 (ii) To ensure continuous content enrichment, technological upgradation and 
wider outreach of the WAVES OTT platform, particularly in Tier-2, Tier-3 cities 
and rural areas. To have adequate safeguards in place to ensure affordability, 
accessibility and public interest orientation while implementing the structured 
Pay-Per-View (PPV) Policy Framework for WAVES OTT platform; the PPV 
framework as well as keep the old archival content free of any charge. 
Reply: 
The status of action taken with regard to the WAVES OTT platform is as 
under: 
Content Enrichment and Platform Growth 
WAVES OTT platform has witnessed significant expansion in its 
content catalogue through a structured content sourcing framework. The 
Content Sourcing Policy, 2024 is under continuous implementation on the 
platform. 
Under this policy, approximately 9,000 hours of content spanning over 12,000 
titles across 15+ languages has been onboarded. Content sourced for linear 
channels is, wherever applicable, also being onboarded with corresponding 
digital rights, thereby ensuring optimal utilisation across platforms. 
The Pay -Per-View (PPV) Policy framework has been introduced as a 
complementary extension of the Content Sourcing Policy, 2024 to address 
the evolving requirements of digital content acquisition and monetization on 
the OTT platform. Under this framework, 26 titles have been made live on the 
platform on a pilot basis. 
User engagement and performance of these titles are being continuously 
monitored through the platform analytics system, and the insights derived are 
being utilized for content strategy, placement, and future acquisitions. 
Content sourced under the policy is periodically reviewed based on the 
following parameters: 
• Content performance analytics  
• User engagement trends 
• Diversity and cost-effectiveness of content 
Archival Content 
Digitisation and onboarding of archival content from Doordarshan and All 
India Radio is being undertaken in a phased and structured manner. 
Approximately, 5,000 hours of Doordarshan and 600 hours of Akashvani 
archival content have been published on the platform so far. 
In line with the Committee’s recommendations, such archival content is being 
made available free of cost on the platform, with a focus on cultural 
preservation and ensuring wider public access. 
PPV Framework 
The PPV framework is presently under refinement based on learning from the 
pilot phase. The revised framework proposes a streaming -minute-based pay 
out model, ensuring a more equitable and performance -linked monetization 
mechanism. 
It is submitted that the platform continues to maintain a public service 
orientation and no paywall has been introduced at this stage 
Both archival and PPV content are currently available free of cost to users, 

12 
 
ensuring affordability and accessibility. 
Appropriate safeguards will continue to be built into the policy to balance 
monetization objectives with public interest. 
Technological Upgradation and Platform Capability 
The platform is being continuously upgraded in coordination with the Master 
System Integrator (MSI) to enhance streaming quality, scalability, and user 
experience. This includes improvements in content delivery, platform 
performance, analytics capabilities, and readiness for advanced features such 
as AI-enabled workflows, multilingual support, and enhanced discoverability. 
Outreach and Expansion 
WAVES OTT is being positioned as a Direct-to-Mobile public service platform, 
with increasing penetration across Tier -2, Tier -3 cities and rural areas. The 
platform integrates 133 Live TV channels and 44  Akashvani radio channels, 
with a continued focus on expanding the live TV and radio ecosystem to 
maximize reach. 
These services are being made available free of cost, enabling seamless 
access to linear broadcast content alongside on -demand oﬀerings, thereby 
strengthening last-mile connectivity and public service delivery. 
This is being achieved through: 
Integration with government and institutional digital platforms 
• Distribution partnerships across telecom and connected device ecosystems  
• Availability of L ive TV channels and radio services to enhance reach and 
accessibility, particularly in underserved regions  
• Focus on regional and multilingual content 
• Targeted user acquisition and awareness initiatives 
WAVES OTT platform is being developed as a scalable, inclusive, and 
technology- enabled public service digital platform. The approach adopted 
balances growth, accessibility, while ensuring adherence to public interest 
objectives as highlighted by the Hon’ble Committee. 
 
(iii) To ensure that content Creation Labs in 15,000 schools and 500 such 
labs in colleges are implemented in a time -bound manner, adequately 
equipped with modern tools and linked with public broadcasting platforms so 
that young creators across the Country are able to contribute meaningful 
content reflecting India’s diverse culture, languages and traditions; and 
Reply:  
Towards implementation, the Ministry conducted stakeholder 
consultation workshop on ‘Talent Development in AVGC through Content 
Creation Labs’ on 12.02.2026 for academic integration, faculty capacity 
building and industry linkages for the proposed labs. Thereafter, a Breakout 
Session under the Post -Budget Webinar on ‘Allocation in Union Budget 
2026–27 for the Orange Economy: AVGC Content Creator Labs (CCLs) in 
Schools & Colleges’ was also organized on 09.03.2026 in coordination with 
the Department of Higher Education and NITI Aayog. 
Thereafter, Ministry also held review meetings with representatives of 
D/o School Education & Literacy and D/o Higher Education of M/o Education, 
IICT and NCVET to deliberate upon the modalities for implementation of 
CCLs.  
The Ministry has recently conducted industry consultations along with 
IICT to deliberate on industry requirements across the AVGC -XR ecosystem 
for curriculum design, skilling pathways, technology requirements, 
employability/internship/ apprenticeship opportunities etc. Based on these 

13 
 
interactions, IICT is working on a proposal for building a future -ready 
workforce in the creative economy sector along with the Concept Note for the 
Pilot CCLs. After, running and assessing the outcomes of the Pilot CCLs, roll -
out of the project across the country will be planned and executed.   
(iv) To undertake a comprehensive national -level assessment of all assets 
under Doordarshan and Akashvani Kendras, finalise the monetisation 
framework at the earliest, develop clear guidelines for leasing, redevelopment 
and PPP -based utilisation of assets and apprise the Committee of the 
progress made in implementing the asset monetisation plan, including 
revenue generated and projects undertaken, in a time-bound manner. 
Reply: 
Based on the approved draft monetization plan by Prasar Bharati 
Board, Prasar Bharati is conducting pre -feasibility study for monetization of 
Prasar Bharati land assets. For this purpose, Prasar Bharati, through a 
tendering process, has engaged M/s CBRE South Asia Pvt. Ltd. (NLMC 
empanelled Agency) on 01.09.2025, for carrying out pre -feasibility study work 
of identified underutilized Prasar Bharati land assets.   Pre-feasibility report is 
scheduled to be completed within one year in phases from the date of 
engagement of agency.   Subsequent to pre -feasibility study, further 
processing will be initiated for monetization of Prasar Bharati Land Assets as 
per the approved framework of the Government. 
For leasing of Office/Residential vacant Spaces, Prasar Bharati has 
formulated a Policy for renting out its vacant space to Central/State Govt. 
Departments, Statutory Organizations and PSUs. After implementation of this 
Policy, Prasar Bharati had leased out its Office/Residential Spaces at 42 
locations with revenue generation of 4.6 crore (approx). In addition to it, some 
of the proposals of leasing Office/Residential vacant space are under process 
with revenue potential of Rs. 15 crore (approx)”. 
 
13.  The Committee had noted some of the challenges witnessed by the 
Ministry/Prasar Bharati and had acknowledged their efforts to maintain 
Doordarshan as a platform for family -friendly and clean entertainment medium as 
well as framing of ‘Content Sourcing Policy, 2024’. Accordingly, the Ministry was 
asked to prepare a road map for effective implementation and periodic review with 
respect to Content Sourcing Policy (CSP2024).  
The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has informed that an Addendum to the 
Content Sourcing Policy 2024 dated 20 th February, 2026 has been notified by 
Prasar Bharati and it has yielded desired results for acquiring meaningful content 
besides sourcing various programmes including low cost commissioning content 
at the level of kendra /channel itself. For ensuring continuous content enrichment, 
technological upgradation and wider outreach of WAVES OTT Platform, the 
Ministry has informed that it is being continuously upgraded with the Master 
System Integration (MSI) to enhance streaming quality, scalability and user 
experience. Also, in line with the Committee’s recommendations, archival content 
was being made available free of cost on the platform. Regarding Pay Per V iew 

14 
 
(PPV) framework, it  is stated that, PPV is presently under refinement based on 
learning from the pilot phase. Currently, both archival and PPV content are 
available free of cost to users. However, appropriate safeguards would be 
continued to be built into the policy to balance monetisation objectives with public 
interest. 
 For ensuring timely implementation of content creation labs in 15000 
schools and in 500 colleges, the Ministry have conducted stakeholder consultation 
workshop on ‘Talent Development in AVGC through Content Creation Labs’ on 
12.02.2026 for academic integration, faculty capacity building and industry 
linkages for the proposed labs and a Breakout Session for the Orange Economy: 
AVGC Content Creation Labs (CCLs) in schools and colleges was also organised 
on 09.03.2026 in coordination with the Department of Higher Education and NITI 
Aayog. Further, based on the review meetings, consultations etc, IICT is working 
on a proposal for building a future-ready workforce in the creative economy sector 
along with the concept Note for the Pilot CCLs and after running and assessing 
the outcomes of Pilot CCLs, roll out of the project across the Country would be 
planned and executed. 
For monetisation of Prasar Bharati land assets, based on the approved draft 
monetisation plan by Prasar Bharati Board, Prasar Bharati is conducting pre -
feasibility study. Pre -feasibility Report is scheduled to be completed within one 
year in phases from the date of engagement of the agency. Subsequent to pre -
feasibility study, further processing would be initiated for monetization of Prasar 
Bharati Land Assets as per the approved framework of the Government. In 
addition to it, some of the proposals of leasing Office/Residential vacant space are 
under process with revenue potential of Rs. 15 Crore (approx). 
While t aking cognisance of the initiatives taken by the  Ministry/Prasar 
Bharati, the Committee recommend that  the concept Note for the Pilot CCLs may 
be completed in a timebound manner and thereafter, prepare a definite timeline for 
rolling out the project across the Country may be ensured so that the vision of 
15000 content creation labs in schools and 500 in colleges are implemented as per 
the targets . The Committee may be apprised about the completion of the pre -
feasibility report for monetisation of Prasar Bharati land assets along with the 
approved framework and roadmap for monetization of Prasar Bharati land assets . 
The Committee desire that expediting the proposal to lease office/residential 
vacant spaces of Prasar Bharati under process with revenue potential of Rs. 15 

15 
 
crore (approx.) would be helpful in reducing the huge financial loss being faced by 
it. The target may be fixed and the outcome may be communicated to the 
Committee at the earliest. 
 
HUMAN RESOURCE IN PRASAR BHARATI  
(Recommendation Sl. No. 7) 
14. The Committee, in their Original Report, had made the following 
Observation/Recommendation:– 
“The Committee note that at present the sanctioned staff strength of Prasar 
Bharati is 45,791. Out of this, 26,129 are for Akashvani/All India Radio and 
19,662 are for Doordarshan. As against this sanctioned strength of 45,791, 
there are 30,598 vacancies in Prasar Bharati. Of this, 14,117 posts are lying 
vacant in Doordarshan and 16,481 in All India Radio (AIR). The Committee 
note that the number of vacant posts has increased from previous FY (2025 -
26) which was 30,221. The Committee understand that due to acute shortage 
of permanent employees, Prasar Bharati is meeting its urgent requirements 
by hiring large number of staff on contractual basis under Contractual 
Engagement Policy 2021 (CEP -2021) of Prasar Bharati. About the steps 
taken to cater to the Manpower needs of the AIR and Doordarshan Kendras, 
the Ministry submitted that to assess optimal number of posts in various 
streams and levels as per the current and future requirement of Prasar 
Bharati, the exercise of HR Transformation is being carried out in consultation 
with a manpower audit agency and only on conclusion and acceptance of the 
recommendations of this exercise, a clear picture on the vacancies to be filled 
in will emerge. The Ministry further submitted that they have directed for a 
review of service closures and outsourcing of activities to be undertaken in 
the best interest of the organization. Also, the Board accorded approval for 
proceeding with Phase -2 of the HR transformation exercise. The Committee 
would, therefore, like to be apprised of the time -bound roadmap for 
completion of the HR Transformation exercise and the details of its outcome”. 
 
 
15. In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of information and Broadcasting 
submitted as under:– 
“The exercise for HR Transformation of Prasar Bharati is underway in 
consultation with a leading consulting agency. This exercise comprises of two 
phases. The agency had submitted its consolidated report conveying its 
recommendations. The same was place before the PB Board in November 
2025 and subsequently, in February 2026, after incorporating the additional 
details as suggested by the Board. The Board broadly accepted the 
recommendations on phase 1 of the HR transformation exercise. The second 
phase of the HR Transformation is likely to begin shortly (and is expected to 
complete in six months thereafter), wherein the issue of alignment of 
manpower will be covered. Further, as desired by the Board, a review of 
service closures and outsourcing of activities is under consideration. 
  
With changing dynamics of operations due to closure of some services and 
upgradation of existing services with intervention of IT and digitization, the 
deployment of floating manpower through outsourcing is under examination 

16 
 
and will be put in place.  
  
Second phase, with study and implementation of reforms/measures, will inter -
alia cover talent acquisition and retention, capacity building / training and 
change management for PB stakeholders including monitoring and evaluation 
of change process and continuously review and improve the restructuring 
process”. 
 
 
16. The Committee, in their Original Report,  had noted that out of the total 
sanctioned staff strength of 45,791 in Prasar Bharati, 14,117 posts were lying 
vacant in All India Radio and 16,481 in Doordarshan. Further due to acute shortage 
of permanent employees , Prasar Bharati was meeting its urgent requirements by 
hiring large number of staff on contractual basis under Contractual Engagement 
Policy - 2021 (CEP -2021). Furthermore, to assess optimal number of posts 
required in various streams and levels, the exercise of HR Transformation was 
being carried out in consultation with a manpower audit agency and only on 
conclusion and acceptance of the recommendations of this exercise, a clear 
picture on the vacancies to be filled in would emerge. Accordingly, the Committee 
had desired to be apprised of the time -bound roadmap for completion of the HR 
Transformation exercise and the details of its outcome. 
The Ministry, in its Action Taken Reply  has informed that the exercise for HR 
Transformation of Prasar Bharati was underway in consultation with a leading 
consulting agency compris ing of two phases. The agency had submitted its 
consolidated report conveying its recommendations  which was placed before the 
Prasar Bharati Board in November 2025 and subsequently, in February 2026, after 
incorporating the additional details as suggested by the Board. The Board broadly 
accepted the recommendations on phase 1 of the HR transformation exercise. The 
second phase of the HR Transformation was likely to begin shortly (and was 
expected to be completed in six months thereafter), wherein the issue of alignment 
of manpower would be covered. Further, as desired by the Board, a review of 
service closures and outsourcing of activities was under consideration. They also 
informed that with changing dynamics of operations due to closure of some 
services and upgradation of existing services with intervention of IT and 
digitization, the deployment of floating manpower through outsourcing was under 
examination and would be put in place. It is further stated in the reply that s econd 
phase, with study and implementation of reforms/measures, would , inter-alia, 
cover talent acquisition and retention, capacity building / training and change 

17 
 
management for PB stakeholders including monitoring and evaluation of change 
process and continuously review and improve the restructuring process. 
In the light of acute shortage of staff in Prasar Bharati  and pending 
completion of the exercise for HR Transformation of Prasar Bharati, the Committee 
desire to be apprised of the Action Taken on reforms/recommendations of the 
aforesaid exercise  and also apprise the Committee about the exact timeline and 
roadmap for commencement and completion of second phase of HR 
Transformation and completely implementing them. The Committee further desire 
to be apprised about the details of the outcome of the HR transformation exercise 
(I and II) along with  details of service closure, outsourcing of activities, talent 
acquisition and retention, capacity building/training and change management for 
Prasar Bharati stakeholders including monitoring and evaluation of change 
process and continuously review and improve the restructuring process.  
SUPPORTING COMMUNITY RADIO MOVEMENT IN INDIA 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 8) 
17. The Standing Committee on Communications and Information Technology              
(2025-26), in their Twenty-sixth Report, had recommended as under:- 
“The Committee note that the Community Radio is an important third -tier 
Radio in Radio Broadcasting, distinct from Public Service Radio broadcasting 
and Commercial Radio. Community Radio Stations (CRSs) are low -power 
Radio Stations, which are meant to be set up and operated by local 
communities. In December 2002, the Government of India approved a policy 
for the grant of license, for setting up of CRS, to well established educational 
institutions. The CR provides a platform for communities to air local voices on 
issues concerning health, nutrition, education, agriculture etc. The Scheme 
(Supporting Community Radio Movement in India) aims to strengthen new 
and existing CRSs with resources, capacity and technology so as to upgrade 
the standard of the stations and increase its reach and visibility to the interior 
regions of India. The Committee are given to understand that the Scheme has 
been revised ‘wherein it is proposed to extend for the period from 2026 -27 to 
2030-31 with a total proposed allocation of Rs. 50 crore. The thrust areas 
under the Scheme are (i) to increase the number of stations in CR dark areas 
and (ii) to have at least one Community Radio Station in each district of the 
Country. At present, 560 CRS are operational in India (till January, 2026). 
With respect to budgetary allocations and expenditure, the Committee note 
that Rs. 8.00 crore has been allocated for the FY 2026 -27 (at BE stage). 
During the FY 2025 -26, the BE and RE allocations were Rs. 17.40 crore and 
Rs. 8.00 crore, respectively, and the actual expenditure till 8 th January, 2026 
was Rs. 4.52 crore which is 56.50 % of RE allocations.   
 
  Initiatives taken under the Scheme ‘Supporting Community Radio 
Movement in India’ include organization of National and Regional 

18 
 
Sammelans, awareness workshops in CR dark areas, etc. However, the 
Committee find that fund utilization has been uneven over the years, and 
Demand for Grants remains limited due to lack of awareness among potential 
beneficiaries. The Committee, therefore, urge the Ministry to streamline grant 
disbursement, strengthen capacity -building programs for CRS staff and 
provide technical support to enhance operational efficiency. The Committee, 
also desire to be apprised of the action taken in respect of the following: - (i) 
Ensure optimum utilistion of allocated funds during the FY 2026 -27; (ii) 
Prepare a definite timeline/roadmap and intensify efforts for ensuring at least 
one Community Radio Station in each district, particularly CR dark areas,  as 
per the vision under the Scheme; (iii) Explore the feasibility of having one 
dedicated training cell for CRS personnel in each State/Zone to improve 
technical skills, content creation and community engagement; and (iv) Involve 
local Government, educational institutions, NGOs, and community 
organizations to promote awareness and local participation”. 
 
18. In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of information and Broadcasting 
submitted as under:– 
 
SI. 
No. 
Observation Action taken 
1. Ensure optimum 
utilistion of allocated 
funds during the FY 
2026-27; 
Major expenditures will be incurred under the 
head of Grant in Aid and Office Expenses. For 
the current Financial Year, it is anticipated that 
approx 70 applications will be processed for 
release of grant. At present, approx 25 
applications are in hand.  
2. Prepare a definite 
timeline/roadmap and 
intensify efforts for 
ensuring at least one 
Community Radio 
Station in each district, 
particularly CR dark 
areas, as per the vision 
under the Scheme; 
State intensive awareness workshops will be 
conducted with potential organizations by 
targeting CR Dark Areas. 
Applicants will be facilitated at all levels of the 
licensing process. 
Training and capacity building exercises will be 
conducted. 
In CR dark areas, coordination with State and 
District administration will be done. 
3. Explore the feasibility of 
having one dedicated 
training cell for CRS 
personnel in each 
State/Zone to improve 
technical skills, content 
creation and community 
engagement; and 
A mechanism shall be developed at the 
regional level for regular trainings and hand 
holding of Letter of Intent Holders and 
operational CRSs. 
4. Involve local 
Government, 
In the workshops, representatives of state 
government and prospective eligible 

19 
 
educational institutions, 
NGOs, and community 
organizations to promote 
awareness and local 
participation. 
 
organizations will be invited. This will include 
educational institutions, NGOs and any other 
organizations which are eligible for setting up 
of CRSs. 
 
 
19. The Committee in their Report noted that utilization of funds for supporting 
Community Radio movement in India was uneven  and limited over the years and 
Demands for Grants remained limited due to lack of awareness among potential 
beneficiaries. The Committee, therefore, had urged the Ministry to streamline grant 
disbursement, strengthen capacity -building program mes for staff  of CRS and 
provide technical support to enhance operational efficiency . The Committee had 
asked the Ministry to ensure optimum utilisation of funds; prepare a definite 
timeline/roadmap and ensure at least one Community Radio Station in each 
district. 
In their Action Taken Reply,  the Ministry has informed that major 
expenditures would be incurred under the head of Grant in Aid and Office 
Expenses. For the current Financial Year, it is anticipated that approx 70 
applications would be processed for release of grant  and a t present, there are 
approx 25 applications in hand . Besides, ensuring at least one Community Radio 
Station in each district, particularly CR dark areas, State intensive awareness 
workshops would be conducted with potential organizations by targeting CR Dark 
Areas in coordination with State and District administration. For exploring the 
feasibility of having one dedicated training cell for CRS perso nnel in each 
State/zone, a mechanism would be developed  at the regional level for regular 
trainings and hand holding of Letter of Intent Holders and operational CRSs.  
Further, in the workshops,  representatives of State Government and prospective 
eligible organizations would be invited  including educational institutions, NGOs 
and any other organizations which are eligible for setting up of CRSs. 
The Committee while noting the action envisaged by the Ministry with 
regard to coordination to be done with the State and District administration , 
educational institution  and intensive awareness workshops to be conducted for 
Community Radio Stations, would like to be apprised about the concrete outcome 
of these proposed actions.  The Committee urge that optimum utilisation of funds 
be ensured for Community Radio Movement in India for having at least one 

20 
 
Community Radio Station in each district, particularly in CR dark areas, as 
envisaged under the Scheme. 
NORTH EASTERN REGION (NER) 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 11) 
20. The Committee, in their Original Report, had made the following 
Observation/Recommendation:– 
“The Committee note that the budgetary allocations for the FY 2026 -27, has 
been fixed at Rs. 111.21 crore at BE stage. The budgetary allocations for 
NER during the financial year 2025 -26 at BE and RE stage, were Rs. 111.85 
crore and Rs. 117.84 crore respectively. Whereas the actual expenditure, till 
31st December, 2025, was Rs. 30.71 crore which is just about 26.16% of RE 
allocations. Under the Schemes/Projects/Organisations of the Ministry of 
Information Broadcasting in North Eastern Region, a trend of under -utilisation 
of funds has been observed during the financial years 2022 -23, 2024-25 and 
2025-26.  Regarding the reasons for low expenditure during the FY 2025 -26, 
the Ministry have informed that it happened due to multiple factors including 
(a) On 12.09.2025 withdrawal of BE allocations for FY 2025 -26 for the 
components ‘Continuing Projects of three year BIND scheme (2017 -20) to be 
completed’ in Project Mode and it was later reinstated on 16.10.2025; (b) 
under DCFDC, receipt of limited number of proposals from the North East 
Districts. Also, as per the directives, NFDC was to limit its investment to 40% 
of the production cost. Hence, in regions like NER, for producers to invest the 
remaining 60% or more was challenging; (c) Under CRS, there was a very 
low level of awareness about CRS in the region, consequently the numbers of 
operational community radio stations in the region were very less.   
With respect to initiatives planned for better performance under the 
Schemes/projects being implemented in North -East Region for the FY 2026 -
27, the Ministry have informed: (a) Under BIND scheme, the frequency of 
monitoring meetings has been increased at all levels, an Apex Committee has 
been constituted to monitor the progress of projects under the Scheme; (b) 
under DCDFC scheme, several measures have been taken for promotion and 
production of feature films, documentaries, animation films in various North 
Eastern languages; (c) under CRS, financial assistance are given to 
Operational Community Radio Stations for purchase of equipment to set -up 
Community Radio Stations, Workshops are held since a significant barrier to 
the expansion of Community Radio Stations (CRSs) across India is that 
eligible organizations don’t know about what community radio is or how it 
works. The purpose of such workshops are spreading awareness among 
eligible organizations; (d) under DCID, Regions/Units -wise Annual and 
Quarterly targets are set up; etc. 
In the light of above, the Committee are of the view that under -utilisation 
undermines the very objective of promoting media infrastructure and cultural 
outreach in the North Eastern Region. The Committee, therefore, urge the 
Ministry to take positive action with respect to the following and apprise them 
accordingly:- (i) Prepare a time -bound action plan for optimum utilisation of 
funds allocated under all the schemes of the North Eastern Region (NER); (ii) 
Prepare a road map with timeline for having at least one Community Radio 
Station (CRS) in each district of the North Eastern States as per the vision 

21 
 
under supporting Community Radio Movement in India and take concrete 
steps accordingly. Also increase awareness among eligible institutions 
ensuring timely financial assistance to establish CRS and to have mechanism 
for impact assessment; (iii) Upgrade technical infrastructure, including 
studios, transmitters, and digital broadcasting equipment, to improve signal 
quality and reach in remote and tribal areas; and (iv) Intensify outreach 
efforts, organise more awareness programmes and extend necessary 
facilitation support so that stakeholders/producers from the NER are 
encouraged to actively participate in such initiatives. Also explore the 
possibility of having regional training hubs  in collaboration with IICT and other 
media institutions to strengthen skill development in NER”. 
 
21. The Ministry of information and Broadcasting, in their Action Taken Reply, 
submitted as under:– 
“(i) Prepare a time-bound action plan for optimum utilisation of funds allocated 
under all the schemes of the North Eastern Region (NER) 
 
BIND: 
 
Details of time-bound projects to be undertaken in the NER in FY 2026-27 are 
as under:  
Sl. No. Brief Description of the projects AT No. Estimated 
Price/AT Price 
in Crore 
Target Date for 
completion of the 
Project  
1.   IP Connectivity at DDK Aizawl  1955 1.59 Q2, 2026-27 
(Equipment 
supplied) 
2.   Upgradation and replacement of 
Earth stations at Agartala, Imphal, 
Kohima, Itanagar, Gangtok and 
Port Blair 
1954 11.33 Q3, 2026-27 
(partial equipment 
delivery at 04 
Kendras) 
3.   Six Camera OB vans for North 
East and other areas 
1949 84.70 Q4, 2026-27 
(Equipment 
supplied to 04 out 
of 09 Consignees) 
4.   Upgradation of Earth Station at 
DDK Shillong, Guwahati and 
Aizawl  
AT yet 
to be 
issued 
14.90 Q2-2026-27 
5.   Replacement/ Installation of 1 kW 
and 10 kW new FM Transmitters 
at 8 places (4 new and 4 
replacement) 
AT yet 
to be 
issued 
- Q4 2026-27 
 
CRS: 
Applications for setting up of CRS and financial assistance shall be processed 
in a time bound manner. 
With regard to DCID and DCDFC, the recommendation of Committee will be 
taken into consideration and all efforts will be made to utilize the full allocation 
in NER. 
 

22 
 
(ii) Prepare a road map with timeline for having at least one Community Radio 
Station (CRS) in each district of the North Eastern States as per the vision 
under supporting Community Radio Movement in India and take concrete 
steps accordingly. Also increase awareness among eligible institutions 
ensuring timely financial assistance to establish CRS and to have mechanism 
for impact assessment; 
 
The following steps are being undertaken in the NER States:- 
• State specific awareness generation activities 
• Timely implementation of various activities of the scheme 
• Stakeholders engagements 
• Awareness generation amongst eligible organizations  
• Training and capacity building 
 
(iii) Upgrade technical infrastructure, including studios, transmitters, and 
digital broadcasting equipment, to improve signal quality and reach in remote 
and tribal areas; 
 
Under BIND scheme, technical facilities at 24X7 Doordarshan regional 
channels including Doordarshan regional channels in North Eastern region 
(NER) are being upgraded with latest technical equipment in the field of 
broadcast technology for HD production & post production. The following 
projects have been envisaged to be undertaken during FY 2026-27 in order to 
upgrade technical infrastructure of PB in NER: 
  
Sl. No. Brief Description of the projects 
1.   IP Connectivity at DDK Aizawl  
2.   Upgradation and replacement of Earth stations at 
Agartala, Imphal, Kohima, Itanagar, Gangtok and 
Port Blair 
3.   Six Camera OB vans for North East and other 
areas 
4.   Upgradation of Earth Station at DDK Shillong, 
Guwahati and Aizawl  
5.   Replacement/ Installation of 1 kW and 10 kW new 
FM Transmitters at 8 places (4 new and 4 
replacement) 
 
Under the CRS Scheme, a provision to provide financial assistance has been 
made for infrastructure support, including support to solar power. In case of 
any emergency situations, stations can also avail emergency grants. 
 
(iv) Intensify outreach efforts, organise more awareness programmes and 
extend necessary facilitation support so that stakeholders/producers from the 

23 
 
NER are encouraged to actively participate in such initiatives.  
 
Under BIND Scheme, Funds are being allocated to  Doordarshan 
Kendras/Stations/channels of the North -East region for fresh/new content 
from the financial year 2023 -24. Doordarshan Kendras/Stations of the North -
East region have produced localized content under various genres by utilizing 
funds allocated under BIND like serials, reality shows, cuisine shows, 
travelogues, telefilms, documentaries, quiz programmes etc. by   utilizing 
services of local artists/talent. Like previous years,  Doordarshan 
Kendras/Stations of the North -East region are also in the process of 
producing programmes in various genres  by utilizing services of local 
artists/talent this year.   
Also explore the possibility of having regional training hubs  in collaboration 
with IICT and other media institutions to strengthen skill development in NER. 
 
After, running and assessing the outcomes of the Pilot CCLs, Ministry shall 
start the roll-out process for establishing CCLs in collaboration with IICT. This 
will also include identifying beneficiary institutions across the nation including 
NER, and those institutes, in a way, will serve as training points for skilling in 
AVGC-XR domains”. 
 
22. The Committee, in their Report , had observed a trend of under -utilisation of 
funds  during three previous financial years and had urged the Ministry to (i) 
Prepare a time-bound action plan for optimum utilisation of funds allocated under 
all the schemes of the North Eastern Region (NER); (ii) Prepare road map with 
timeline for having at least one Community Radio Station (CRS) in each district of 
the North Eastern States; (iii) upgrade technical infrastructure to improve signal 
quality and reach in remote and tribal areas; and (iv)  intensify outreach efforts, 
organise more awareness programmes and extend outreach facilitation support. 
The Ministry, in its Action Taken Reply,  provided details of projects to be 
undertaken in NER for the FY 2026 -27 along with the target dates for their 
completion. They have also furnished details of technical facilities at Doordarshan 
regional channels including Doordarshan regional channels in North Eastern 
region (NER) that are being upgraded with latest technical equipment in the field of 
broadcast technology for HD production and post production.  Besides, they have 
also apprised about the efforts for facilitating/supporting the 
stakeholders/producers from NER and initiatives to strengthen skill in NER. 
In the light of the submissions made by the Ministry, the Committee call upon 
them to adhere to the targeted dates for completion of the projects in NER for the 
FY 2026-27. In addition, the Ministry may continue sustained efforts with respect to 
initiatives mentioned for projects in NER and apprise the Committee about their 
outcome. The Ministry  may also enlighten the Committee about the initiatives 
taken on their recommendation wherein it was stated to prepare a road map with 

24 
 
timeline for having at least one Community Radio Station (CRS) in each district of 
the North Eastern States according to  the vision under supporting Community 
Radio Movement in India and take concrete steps accordingly. 
LIVE EVENT DEVELOPMENT CELL (LEDC) 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 12) 
23. The Standing Committee on Communications and Information Technology              
(2025-26), in their Twenty-sixth Report, had recommended as under:- 
“The Committee do take note of the initiative of the Ministry of Information and 
Broadcasting to establish the Live Event Development Cell (LEDC), as a joint 
working platform involving various Ministries, State Governments, and 
industry stakeholders to promote the emerging ‘concert economy’ in the 
Country.  This being a nascent industry, growing at a rate of about 20 per 
cent seems to have the potential to generate local employment, boost tourism 
and contribute to the creative economy. The Ministry have informed that they 
have already held three meetings of the Joint Working Group, the beta 
version of the single -window portal has been launched and ten event venues 
related to the live -event concert economy are using the portal. The 
Committee do take cognizance of the approach of the Ministry to have (a) a 
single-window clearance mechanism; (b) introducing the concept of pre -
approved venues for sports venues, (c) preparing an SOP for available 
venues so that the live event industry can access pre -approved venues; (d) 
collaborating with other Ministries for skill development in the live events 
sector; (e) engagement with State Governments to facilitate their 
development of dedicated venues for live events, etc,.  However, in order to 
ensure the objective of positioning India as a global hub for concerts and live 
events is achieved, the Committee urge the Ministry to take action on the 
following and apprise of the progress made in operationalising the Live Event 
Development Cell:-  (i) To take expeditious and timely steps to operationalise 
the single-window clearance portal on a full -scale basis; (ii) To ensure that all 
relevant Ministries and statutory authorities are integrated with the platform 
and have effective coordination amongst multiple related stakeholders, (iii) To 
prepare the Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs)in consultation with the 
States/UTs and concerned agencies; and (iv) To design specialised training 
programmes for building skilled workforce for the live events industry and 
strengthen collaboration with the Ministry of Skill Development and 
Entrepreneurship.”. 
 
24. In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of information and Broadcasting 
submitted as under:– 
“(i) A single -window permissions and clearance portal pertaining to live events is 
operational and live on the India Cine Hub Website. 
(URL: https://indiacinehub.gov.in/event-permissions) 
 
(ii) Discussions are currently underway to integrate various relevant 
Ministries and statutory authorities, such as ASI, SAI, DigitalSky Portal 

25 
 
(Ministry of Civil Aviation), Vasant SangeetDwar Portal with the ICH single 
window permissions portal. 
(iii) A Model Executive Order (MEO)/SOP has been prepared after 
consultations with the industry stakeholders and shared on 13 th March 
2026 with States/UTs. 23 States/UTs have indicated that the Model 
Executive Order (MEO)/SOP will be suitably adopted at the earliest. 
(iv) A Skilling Committee led by Vice -Chancellor, Indian Institute of Mass 
Communication (IIMC) and featuring members of Event and Entertainment 
Management Association (EEMA) and Media and Entertainment Skills 
Council was constituted. The Skilling Committee proposed several initiatives 
to strengthen capacity building and skill development in the media and 
entertainment sector. It was informed that certificate and short -term courses 
are proposed to commence sh ortly. Further, elective modules in relevant 
domains are planned to be incorporated into existing academic programmes 
of IIMC from the next academic session beginning in August 2026. States and 
Union Territories may review the skilling modules developed by IIMC and 
explore their adoption or replication through their respective skilling 
institutions to expand outreach and impact. Additionally, the Vice Chancellor, 
IIMC, indicated that skilling initiatives related to the live events sector could 
also be undertaken through IIMC’s five regional centres located across the 
country”. 
 
25. The Committee in their  Report had taken note of the Ministry’s initiatives to 
establish the Live Event Development Cell (LEDC)  as a joint working platform 
involving various Ministries, State Governments, and industry stakeholders to 
promote the emerging ‘concert economy’ in the Country . Accordingly, the 
Committee had urged the Ministry  to take expediti ous and timely steps to 
operationalize the cell.  
From the Action Taken Reply of the Ministry, it is noted that a single-window 
permissions and clearance portal pertaining to live events  is operational and live 
on the India Cine Hub Website  – (URL: https://indiacinehub.gov.in/event-
permissions) and d iscussions are underway to integrate various relevant 
Ministries and statutory authorities. Also, a Model Executive Order (MEO)/SOP has 
been prepared after consultations with the industry stakeholders and shared with 
States/UTs on 13 th March 2026. 23 States/UTs have indicated that the  MEO/SOP 
would be suitably adopted at the earliest . Besides, a Skilling Committee led by 
Vice-Chancellor, Indian Institute of Mass Communication (IIMC) and featuring 
members of Event and Entertainment Management Association (EEMA) and Media 
and Entertainment Skills Council was constituted  which proposed several 
initiatives to strengthen capacity building and skill development in the media and 
entertainment sector including proposed commencement of certificate and short-
term courses . Further, elective modules in relevant domains are planned to be 
incorporated into existing academic programmes of IIMC from the next academic 

26 
 
session beginning in August 2026. 
While noting the progress made for establishing Live Event Development 
Cell (LEDC), the Committee would like to be apprised about the details of the 
Model Executive Order (MEO)/SOP prepared and shared with States/UTs along 
with the status of its adoption by the 23 States/UTs. The Committee would also like 
to be apprised about those States/UTs which have not expressed their willingness 
and the follow up/pursual mechanism to bring the remaining States/UTs into the 
fold for adoption of MEO/SOP. Further, the Ministry may also provide the details of 
the certificate and short -term courses  proposed to be introduced in the Indian 
Institute of Mass Communications  as proposed by the Skilling Committee along 
with their objectives and targeted students. 

27 
 
CHAPTER II 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN  ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 1) 
BUDGET OVERVIEW AND DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2026-27) 
 
         The Committee note that Demand No. 61 covers the expenditure of the Ministry of 
Information and Broadcasting (MIB) including its 7 media units/attached and 
subordinate offices, 2 autonomous bodies, 5 training institutes and 2 Public Sector 
Undertakings (PSUs).  For the financial year (FY) 2026 -27, as against the proposed 
sum of Rs. 5794.81 crore, an amount of Rs. 4551.94 crore has been earmarked for MIB 
at the BE stage. Out of this, Rs. 599.08 crore has been apportioned for the 
‘Establishment Expenditure of the Centre’ against the proposed amount of Rs. 1913.00 
crore; for the ‘Central Sector Schemes’,  Rs. 1361.79 crore has been kept against the 
proposed sum of Rs. 1200.50 crore; and for ‘Other Central Expenditure [including those 
on Central Public Sector Enterprises (CPSEs) and Autonomous Bodies] Rs. 2591.07 
crore has been allocated against the proposed sum of Rs. 2681.31 crore.   
 
The Committee note that during the FY 2025 -26, the BE and RE allocations for 
‘Establishment Expenditure of the Centre’ (EEC) were Rs. 582.50 crore and Rs. 590.46 
crore respectively, whereas the actual expenditure (till 14.01.2026) was Rs. 429.04 
crore. For ‘Central Sector Schemes (CSS),’ the BE and RE for the FY 2025-26 were Rs. 
1118.49 crore and Rs. 1178 crore respectively, and the actual expenditure (till 
14.01.2026), was Rs. 577.99 crore. For ‘Other central expenditure (OCE),’ the BE and 
RE for the FY 2025 -26 were Rs. 2657.39 crore and Rs. 4334.56 crore respectively, 
whereas the actual expenditure (till 14.01.2026), was Rs. 2076.28 crore. Thus, the 
utilization percentage under the aforesaid three categories (EEC, CCS and OCE), 
during the FY 2025 -26, were 72.67%, 49.07%, and 47.90% of their RE allocations 
respectively. The Committee understand that the overall trend of actual expenditure for 
the years 2022 -23, 2023-24 and 2024 -25 have been 96.23%, 96.95% and 93.09% of 
the RE allocations, respectively.  
 
Further, the Committee note that during the financial year (FY) 2025 -26, the BE 
allocation was Rs. 4358.38 crore which was increased to Rs. 6103.02 crore at RE 
stage. The actual expenditure (till 23.02.2026) was Rs. 3508.72 crore, which is 57.49 % 
of RE allocation. Regarding increased allocations at RE stage for the FY 2025 -26, the 
Ministry informed that the increase is because of the telecom charges amounting to Rs. 
1,823.66 crore, which are required to be paid by Prasar Bharati to the Department of 
Telecommunications. While responding to the reason for less utilisation during the FY 
2025-26, the Ministry stated that it is expected that funds will be fully utilized by the end 
of FY 2025 -26. While noting similar submissions of the Ministry made during previous 
DFG (2025-26), the Committee recommend the Ministry to take concrete measures to 
avoid last -quarter expenditure rush and ensure timely fund utilization for achieving 

28 
 
physical targets across the Projects/Schemes/Organisations and hope the Ministry will 
keep up their assurance of making all efforts to utilize the allocated funds from the 
beginning of the financial year and will achieve full utilisation of the funds allocated for 
the FY 2025-26 as well as 2026-27. The Committee may be apprised of the outcome of 
the steps taken to strengthen the monitoring mechanism to review the progress of 
projects periodically and of the initiatives taken for effective utilisation funds during the 
FY 2026-27. The Committee may be apprised of the updated status of the fund utilized 
by the end of FY 2025 -26 along with the financial and physical targets achieved during 
the first quarter of the FY 2026-27. 
Reply of the Government 
The Ministry has strengthening the monitoring mechanism to review the progress 
of projects periodically and taken initiatives for effective utilization funds during the FY 
2026-27.  
 
The updated utilization of funds during the FY 2025 -26 whi ch is 98.73 % 
compared to 95. 78% during the FY 2024 -25. Details category wise Budget Grants and 
the utilization given in the table below. 
 
(Budgetary Figures of FY 2025-26) 
(₹. In crore) 
Category Budget 
Estimates 
Final Grants Expenditure 
2025-26 
% of 
Expenditure 
w.r.t Final 
Grants 
Establishment 
Expenditure 
582.50 595.44 588.19 98.78 
Central Sector 
Schemes  
1118.49 1075.32 1064.15 98.96 
Other Central 
Expenditure 
2657.39 4316.10 4258.43 98.66 
Grand Total-M/o 
I&B 
4358.38 5986.86 5910.77 98.73 
 
 Utilization of funds during the first quarter of FY 2026-27 are given below:- 
(₹. In crore) 
Category Budget 
Estimates 
(2026-27) 
Expenditure in 
Ist quarter  
% of 
Expenditure 
over 
Budget 
Estimate 
Establishment 
Expenditure 
599.08 156.52 26.13 

29 
 
Central Sector 
Schemes  
1361.79  152.67 11.21 
Other Central 
Expenditure 
2591.07 768.96 29.68 
Grand Total -
M/o I&B 
4551.94 1078.15 23.68 
 
The Ministry has strengthening the monitoring mechanism to review the progress 
of projects periodically and taken initiatives for effective utilization funds during the FY 
2026-27.  
 
1. BIND Scheme: 
 
Under the  BIND scheme, the monitoring mechanism to review the progress of 
ongoing/ targeted projects for current financial year under the 2021 -26 has been 
strengthened. APEX committee meetings were held to monitor the progress of ongoing 
projects under the BIND scheme. The Committee met on periodical basis, discoursed 
on each and every project of BIND Scheme, stage wise right from inception of project to 
its completion, and encouraged various project units to expedite the activities for timely 
completion of project.   In these meetings, APEX committee in consultation with Prasar 
Bharati Sectt. has resolved various issues/ hindrance/ impediments coming in 
implementation of project, such as obtaining necessary approvals (IFD, MII exemptions 
etc.)  and timely completion of various stages of procurement (preparation of specs, 
floating of tenders, issue of purchase orders, supply of equipment installation etc.); and 
other concurrent issues.  
 
The following initiatives have been taken for effective utilization funds during the 
FY 2026-27: 
a. Regular meetings are convened by the Ministry to with Prasar Bharati at various 
levels to monitor progress of projects under the BIND Scheme, identify 
implementation bottlenecks, and take immediate mitigating steps to ensure timely 
execution, with high-priority projects being individually tracked.  
b. BIND expenditure and project progress are a standing agenda at senior level 
where corrective actions are decided and followed up to ensure seamless project 
execution.  
c. Fund requests from Prasar Bharati under the BIND Scheme are processed and 
released on priority to facilitate uninterrupted project execution.  
d. An Empowered Committee chaired by Secretary, I&B, mandated to apportion 
funds and allow inter -se allocation among sub -components, examines proposals 
submitted by Prasar Bharati on merit and approves necessary reallocations to 
ensure no infrastructure project suffers for want of funds or administrative support.  

30 
 
e. Regulatory requirements such as Make in India (MII) exemptions are taken up on 
priority with the competent authorities to enable timely procurement of equipment 
sourced from foreign suppliers.  
f. Ministry is conducting regular meetings with the concerned stakeholders to get the 
issues, if any, resolved 
g. Digital platform viz e -office, e -tendering, procurement through GEM, Video 
conferencing etc. are also being utilized by Prasar Bharati to expedite the 
progress of Projects. It has made the system fast, efficient and transparent. 
h. Supply chain bottleneck issues in some instances which led to delays in timely 
supply of equipment from the OEMs, are being addressed by Prasar Bharati. 
i. Further, time -consuming works on most of the major SITC projects viz Earth 
station upgradation, OB van projects etc have already been initiated/ completed 
by Prasar Bharati. 
j. Advance action on projects (Specification approvals and Tendering process to be 
taken-up in FY 2026 -27) has already been initiated by Prasar Bharati under the 
current BIND Scheme. 
 
The physical targets and achievements under the BIND Scheme are provided in the 
Annexure. 
 
2. Supporting Community Radio Movement in India (CRS): 
 
a. In the current financial year, efforts are being made for proper utilization of 
funds. In the FY: 2026 -27, there are 10 community radio awareness workshops 
are planned. Besides this, 04 regional sammelans and 01 National Sammelan are 
also planned. Keeping in mind last years’ experience, it is also expected that a 
significant number of applications would also be received for financial assistance".  
b. In the first quarter a total of 02 community radio stations have become 
operational and 28 Letter of Intent (LoIs) have been issued. 
 
3) DCID Scheme: 
 
Under the DCID scheme, Quarterly Expenditure Plan (QEP) and Monthly 
Expenditure Plan (MEP) are being put in place and being closely monitored at PIB 
(Hqrs) for optimum and uniform utilization of the allocated funds,. Alongside, 
physical targets of DCID activities among the regions/branches are being fixed 
through Annual and Monthly Action Plan. 
 
a. PIB:- 
 
           Physical target achievement during the Quarter-1 is given below: 
 
S.No. Activity Achievement 
01 
 
Vartalap & Varta 22 
02 Press Tours 02 

31 
 
 
b.  NMW: - In the first quarter of 2026 -2027, the New Media Wing continued to 
disseminate information on government policies, initiatives and programmes, 
through social media, via its social media accounts on X (Twitter), Facebook, 
Instagram, YouTube and WhatsApp. A key campaign during this period was that 
on Padma Awards. The SAMVAD 2.0 Integrated Media Feedback Dashboard 
continued to provide media feedback including alerts and reports, on government 
policies and initiatives, especially the issues emerging in light of the West Asia 
Crisis.  
 
c.  CBC: - CBC has spent 17.42 Crores against BE of 99.75 Crores under DCID 
Scheme as on 30.06.2026 on publicity of Programmes and Schemes of 
Government through Print, Electronic and other Media. 
 
4. DFDFC Scheme: 
With regard to DCDFC scheme, the Ministry has strengthened its monitoring 
mechanism through periodic review meetings with implementing agencies and by 
closely tracking both financial expenditure and physical progress against 
approved annual action plans. Implementing agencies are required to furnish 
quarterly progress reports detailing activities undertaken, targets achieved and 
expenditure incurred. Delays, if any, are identified at an early stage and corrective 
measures are undertaken in consultation with the concerned agencies to facilitate 
timely implementation. 
 
The physical targets achieved during the first quarter of the FY 2026-27:  
 
I. Mumbai International Film Festival:  
a. The 19th Mumbai International Film Festival (MIFF 2026) was successfully 
organized from 15 –20 June 2026, reaffirming its position as India's premier 
international festival for documentary, short fiction and animation films. 
 
b. The festival received a record 1,459 entries from across the world, out of which 
148 films under the Competition and Prism categories were selected for 
screening. It conferred 17 awards carrying a total prize money of ₹45 lakh, 
including the Golden Conch Award with a cash prize of ₹10 lakh. The festival also 
witnessed participation of 11 international delegates from 10 countries and 118 
delegates from across India. 
 
c. The Non -Competition Programme showcased over 200 films, including 106 
international films from 46 countries, alongside a diverse Indian programme 
featuring regional cinema, NFDC and PSBT showcases, film school productions, 
AI films, restored classics and emerging filmmakers. The festival also organized 
masterclasses, panel discussions, filmmaker interactions, workshops and a high -
level Round Table Conference, providing a platform for knowledge exchange, 
professional networking and international collaboration in documentary, short 
fiction and animation filmmaking. 

32 
 
 
II. India's Participation at Cannes Film Festival & Marché du Film 2026: 
a. Indian delegation led by Secretary (I&B), participated in Cannes Film Festival. 
India successfully established the Bharat Pavilion under the theme "Stories 
Without Borders" and the India Booth at the Marché du Film 2026, showcasing 
India as a global creative economy partner. 
 
b. The Ministry promoted India's audio -visual ecosystem, including films, OTT, 
AVGC-XR, gaming, animation, documentaries, regional cinema, AI -enabled 
production and creative technologies. More than 25 panel discussions, 
presentations, fireside chats and roundtables were organised, along with 10+ 
bilateral meetings with governments, film commissions, studios and international 
organisations to strengthen global collaborations. 
 
c. The Bharat Pavilion showcased WAVES Bazaar, Film Bazaar, MIFF 
DocuBazaar and BRICS WAVES Bazaar, while facilitating structured B2B 
producer meet-ups with several countries. Around 30 Indian films, documentaries 
and project slates were launched, and participation of State Governments was 
facilitated to promote regional cinema and film tourism. The event also highlighted 
India Cine Hub, co -production opportunities, filming incentives, the AVGC -XR 
ecosystem and the proposed Indian Institute of Creative Technology (IICT). 
 
III. NFHM: Total 20462 minutes were restored under NFHM and delivered to 
NFDC-NFAI in the first quarter of FY 2026-27.  
 
 Ministry of Information and Broadcasting 
(O.M. No. W-11/26/2026-PC Cell dated 15/07/2026) 
CENTRAL SECTOR SCHEMES (CSS) 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 2) 
         The Committee note that there are four Central Sector Schemes  (CSS) of 
the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting viz. Development Communication & 
Information Dissemination (DCID), Development Communication and Dissemination of 
Filmic Content (DCDFC), Broadcasting Infrastructure & Network Development (BIND) 
and Supporting Community Radio Movement in India (CR).  For the year 2026 -27, 
against the proposed sum of Rs. 1200.50 crore, the allocations for Central Sector 
Scheme is Rs. 1361.79 crore. According to the Ministry the enhancement of ₹ 250 crore 
in BE 2026 -27 is for ‘Talent Development in Animation, Visual Effects, Gaming and 
Comics (AVGC) Sector’ under the Film Sector, as a component under the Central 
Sector Scheme DCDFC. The objective of the component is to promote India and its 
youth as leaders in content creation by setting up AVGC content creator labs in 15,000 
secondary schools and 500 colleges in various parts of the Country. 
 
During the FY 2025-26, the allocations for ‘Central Sector Schemes’ at BE and RE 
stage were Rs. 1118.49 crore and Rs. 1178 crore respectively. The overall actual 

33 
 
expenditure till 23.02.2026 was Rs. 747.13 crore which is 66.80% of RE. Bifurcation of 
actual expenditure under all the four ‘Central Sector Schemes’ [DCID, DCDFC, BIND 
and Supporting Community Radio Movement (SCR) in India] are Rs. 138.48 crore, Rs. 
232.46 crore, Rs. 370.33 crore and Rs. 5.86 crore respectively. This reflects that the 
expenditure was 70.61%, 54.84%, 67.33% and 73.25% of RE allocations, respectively. 
The Committee note that for last two years there is under -utilization of funds under 
‘Central Sector Schemes’. The reasons conveyed by the Ministry for shortfall/delay with 
respect to Schemes under Central Sector Schemes  during the FY 2025 -26, are owing 
to (i) delay in site allotment at places for new FM Transmitter Projects; (ii) delay in 
erection of towers due to technical and administrative issues; (iii) shortage of staff; (iv) 
cancellation of tenders due to administrative reasons and re -tendering; (v) lower than 
anticipated participation, of journalist and withdrawal of media persons; (vi) low demand 
for grants and most of the activities such as Community Radio Awareness workshops 
and Regional Community Radio Sammelans were planned to be conducted in the 
Quarter-3 to Quarter -4; (vii) A major portion of financial grant for FY 2025 -26 in NER 
was allocated for production of films that could not be picked up as there was delay in 
review of the applications received under Production of Films etc. 
 
The Committee find that even after further rationalization of Schemes, there is an 
under-achievement of both physical and financial targets under Central Sector Schemes 
which calls for a thorough review of the implementation process of rationalization.  The 
Committee call upon the Ministry to address the recurring hindrances impacting ‘Central 
Sector Schemes’ on priority basis. The Committee urge the Ministry to ensure proper 
utilisation of funds and adhering to the physical targets under all the Central Sector 
Schemes during the FY 2026-27 as per defined timelines, and like to be apprised of the 
action taken along with the tangible/quantifiable outcomes of the steps taken by the 
Ministry.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
BIND:  
The recommendation of the Committee has been noted. Right from the start of 
financial year, all efforts are being made to utilize the allocated funds and adhere to 
achievement of physical targets as per the pre-defined timelines. Some of the measures 
envisaged for effective utilization of the Budgetary allocation during the year 2026 -27 
are as under: 
a. Regular meetings are convened by the Ministry to with Prasar 
Bharati at various levels to monitor progress of projects under the BIND Scheme, 
identify implementation bottlenecks, and take immediate mitigating steps to 
ensure timely execution, with high-priority projects being individually tracked.  
b. BIND expenditure and project progress are a standing agenda at 
senior level where corrective actions are decided and followed up to ensure 
seamless project execution.  
c. Fund requests from Prasar Bharati under the BIND Scheme are 
processed and released on priority to facilitate uninterrupted project execution.  
d. An Empowered Committee chaired by Secretary, I&B, mandated to 
apportion funds and allow inter -se allocation among sub -components, examines 
proposals submitted by Prasar Bharati on merit and approves necessary 

34 
 
reallocations to ensure no infrastructure project suffers for want of funds or 
administrative support.  
e. Regulatory requirements such as Make in India (MII) exemptions are 
taken up on priority with the competent authorities to enable timely procurement of 
equipment sourced from foreign suppliers.  
f. Ministry is conducting regular meetings with the concerned 
stakeholders to get the issues, if any, resolved 
g. Digital platform viz e -office, e-tendering, procurement through GEM, 
Video conferencing etc. are also being utilized by Prasar Bharati to expedite the 
progress of Projects. It has made the system fast, efficient and transparent. 
h. Supply chain bottleneck issues in some instances which led to 
delays in timely supply of equipment from the OEMs, are being addressed by 
Prasar Bharati. 
i. Further, time-consuming works on most of the major SITC projects 
viz Earth station upgradation, OB van projects etc have already been initiated/ 
completed by Prasar Bharati. 
j. Advance action on projects (Specification approvals and Tendering 
process to be taken -up in FY 2026-27) has already been initiated by Prasar 
Bharati under the current BIND Scheme. 
CRS:  
In the current financial year, efforts are being made to for proper utilization of 
funds. In the FY: 2026 -27, there are 10 community radio awareness workshops are 
planned. Besides this, 04 regional sammelans and 01 National Sammelan are also 
planned. Keeping in mind last years’ experience, it is also expected that a significant 
number of applications would also be received for financial assistance".   
DCID: 
For optimum and uniform utilization of the allocated funds, Quarterly Expenditure 
Plan (QEP) and Monthly Expenditure Plan (MEP) are being  put in place and being 
closely monitored at PIB(Hqrs.). Alongside, physical targets of DCID activities among 
the regions/branches are being fixed through Annual and Monthly Action Plan. 
DCDFC: 
The Ministry has strengthened its monitoring mechanism through periodic review 
meetings with implementing agencies and by closely tracking both financial expenditure 
and physical progress against approved annual action plans. Implementing agencies 
are required to furnish quarterly progress reports detailing activities undertaken, targets 
achieved and expenditure incurred. Delays, if any, are identified at an early stage and 
corrective measures are undertaken in consultation with the concerned agencies to 
facilitate timely implementation. 
 
Funds allocated under the DCDFC Scheme for FY 2026 –27 will be utilized for the 
promotion of Indian cinema through various activities in India and abroad. These include 
organizing and supporting major film festivals and film markets such as the International 
Film Festival of India (IFFI) and the Mumbai International Film Festival (MIFF), 
exhibition of children's films in schools, participation in international film festivals and 
markets including Cannes, Berlin, MIPCOM, Toronto, and other foreign film festivals, as 
well as providing financial assistance to domestic film festivals and summits. 

35 
 
 
Further, the allocated funds will also be utilized for the production of documentary 
films, children's films, and films in various Indian regional languages with a view to 
promoting Indian cinema, preserving cultural diversity, and encouraging quality content 
creation across different segments of the film industry. 
 
Ministry of Information and Broadcasting 
(O.M. No. W-11/26/2026-PC Cell dated 23/06/2026) 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 7 of Chapter I) 
 
BROADCASTING SECTOR (INCLUDING PRASAR BHARATI) 
 
Broadcasting Infrastructure and Network Development (BIND) 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 3) 
          The Committee note that the Budgetary allocations for BIND Scheme, for 
the FY 2026 -27 (at BE stage) is Rs. 509.24 crore. During the FY 2025 -26, the BE and 
RE allocations were Rs. 500.00 crore and Rs. 550.00 crore, respectively. The actual 
expenditure till 14 th January, 2026 was Rs. 370.34 crore which is 67.33 % of RE 
allocations. The actual expenditure during the FY 2024 -25 was 36.58% of RE 
allocations.  The Committee note that the  BIND scheme under Prasar Bharati  has 
witnessed under -utilization of allocated funds over the last two Financial Years. The 
Committee understand that non -achievement of targets set under Broadcast 
Infrastructure and Network Development (BIND) during the FY 2025 -26, are due to (i) 
Setting up of 79 production set -up to be upgraded/ added (including Studios, News 
Units & OB Vans); (ii) 14 Satellite Uplink Stations to be upgraded/added (including Earth 
Stations, DSNG Units & DTH Earth Stations); (iii) 22 FM Transmitters to be installed 
(1KW, 5KW & 10KW); etc.  The reasons furnished by the Ministry include (i) On 
12.09.2025 withdrawal of BE allocations for FY 2025-26 for the components ‘Continuing 
Projects of three year BIND scheme (2017 -20) to be completed’ in Project Mode and it 
was later reinstated on 16.10.2025 leading to considerable delay in implementation of 
projects in the scheme/components; (ii) Further, Administrative reasons  and Make –in –
India (MII) clause exemptions for various projects and late delivery of products from 
OEMs clubbed in delay of targeted projects; (iii) cancellation of tenders for transmitter 
procurement which resulted into retendering; etc.  
 
The Committee note that the Ministry has envisaged certain steps to improve 
performance during the FY 2026 -27 and have ensured that all efforts will be made to 
fully utilize the budget allocated in FY 2026-27. There is recurrent under-achievement of 
both physical and financial targets under BIND. The Committee, therefore, call upon the 
Ministry to (i) Optimally utilize the funds allocated for the FY 2026 -27; (ii) align the 
financial progress with physical/performance targets; (iii) have structured intervention in 
monitoring mechanism; (iv) for ongoing projects of current financial year, set the revised 
time lines and action plan to expedite the projects and schemes; (v) procure 

36 
 
transmitters as per set targets and deadlines; and (vi) leverage domestic manufacturing 
and emerging technologies for addressing the challenges associated with importing 
broadcast equipment. The Ministry may apprise the Committee of the blueprint for 
measures taken along with the outcomes on the above suggestions of the Committee. 
 
Reply of the Government 
(i) Optimally utilize the funds allocated for the FY 2026-27; 
Reply: 
Right from the start of financial year, all efforts are being made to  utilize the 
allocated funds and adhere to achievement of physical targets as per the pre -defined 
timelines. Some of the measures envisaged for effective utilization of the Budgetary 
allocation during the year 2026-27 are as under: 
a. Regular meetings are convened by the Ministry to with Prasar Bharati at various 
levels to monitor progress of projects under the BIND Scheme, identify 
implementation bottlenecks, and take immediate mitigating steps to ensure timely 
execution, with high-priority projects being individually tracked.  
b. BIND expenditure and project progress are a standing agenda at senior level 
where corrective actions are decided and followed up to ensure seamless project 
execution.  
c. Fund requests from Prasar Bharati under the BIND Scheme are processed and 
released on priority to facilitate uninterrupted project execution.  
d. An Empowered Committee chaired by Secretary, I&B, mandated to apportion 
funds and allow inter -se allocation among sub -components, examines proposals 
submitted by Prasar Bharati on merit and approves necessary reallocations to 
ensure no infrastructure project suffers for want of funds or administrative support.  
e. Regulatory requirements such as Make in India (MII) exemptions are taken up on 
priority with the competent authorities to enable timely procurement of equipment 
sourced from foreign suppliers.  
f. Ministry is conducting regular meetings with the concerned stakeholders to get the 
issues, if any, resolved  
g. Digital platform viz e -office, e -tendering, procurement through GEM, Video 
conferencing etc. are also being utilized by Prasar Bharati to expedite the 
progress of Projects. It has made the system fast, efficient and transparent. 
h. Supply chain bottleneck issues in some instances which led to delays in timely 
supply of equipment from the OEMs, are being addressed by Prasar Bharati. 
i. Further, time -consuming works on most of the major SITC projects viz Earth 
station upgradation, OB van projects etc have already been initiated/ completed by 
Prasar Bharati. 
j. Advance action on projects (Specification approvals and Tendering process to be 
taken-up in FY 2026 -27) has already been initiated by Prasar Bharati under the 
current BIND Scheme. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(ii) Align the financial progress with physical /performance targets; 

37 
 
Reply: 
The physical targets with financial outlays of the projects to be undertaken for FY 
2026-27 are as under: 
Sl. 
No. 
Brief 
Description 
of the 
projects 
AT No. Estimate
d 
Price/AT 
Price in 
Crore 
Target 
Date for 
completion 
of the 
Project  
(i) Upgradation 
and 
replacement 
of Earth 
stations at 
Leh and 
Vijayawada  
1952 3.96 Q2, 2026 -
27 
(ii) UHD/ HD 
DSNG Vans 
1944 4.08 Q2, 2026 -
27 
(iii)  IP based 
Streamers for 
DD Sports 
and 
1961 3.25 Q1, 2026 -
27 
(Equipment 
supplied) 
 Direct View 
LED Video 
Walls for DD 
News HQ 
  
(iv) Compact 
Camcorders 
and PTZ 
Cameras 
Tendering 
in process 
0.90 Q1, 2026 -
27 
(v) Non-Linear 
Editing Suites  
1963 6.58 Q2, 2026 -
27 
(vi) IP 
Connectivity 
at DDK 
Aizawl & 
Hyderabad 
including 
Studio 
expansion 
Works at 
DDK 
Hyderabad 
1955 1.59 Q2, 2026 -
27 
(Equipment 
supplied) 
(vii) Signal 
Transportatio
n vans based 
on 
connectivity 
via Low Earth 
Orbit 
Satellites 
Tender 
cancelled 
  Tender 
cancelled 
due to lack 
of clarity 
from TRAI 

38 
 
(viii) Upgradation 
and 
replacement 
of Earth 
stations at 
Agartala, 
Imphal, 
Kohima, 
Itanagar, 
Gangtok and 
Port Blair 
1954 11.33 Q3, 2026 -
27 
(partial 
equipment 
delivery at 
04 Kendras) 
(ix)  Six Camera 
OB vans for 
North East 
and other 
areas 
1949 84.70 Q4, 2026 -
27 
(Equipment 
supplied to 
04 out of 09 
Consignees
) 
(x) Vision Mixers 
for DD 
Network 
1957 16.36 Q1, 2026 -
27 
(Equipment 
supplied) 
(xi) UHD Camera 
Channels for 
DD network 
1962 107.55 Q2, 2026 -
27 
(Equipment 
supplied) 
(xii) Integrated 
News Room 
for DD News, 
DD India and 
NSD 
Akashvani 
Tender 
under 
cancellatio
n 
  Tender 
under 
cancellation 
(xiii) TV Studio 
with Native 
UHD Setup 
for remote 
production at 
DD News 
1956 33.51 Q3, 2026 -
27 
(Equipment 
Supplied) 
(xiv) SITC of 02 
Sets of 
Equipment 
chain of DD 
Free Dish 
DTH Platform 
for up-linking 
through newly 
allotted 
additional 02 
transponders 
AT yet to 
be issued 
43.25 Q4, 2026 -
27 
(xv) Automated 
playout and 
File based 
Tender to 
be floated 
in Q1 
55.85 Q4, 2026 -
27 

39 
 
Work flow 
Systems 
2026-27 
(xvi) Single Input 
and Multi 
Input 
Backpacks 
1965 3.99 Q2, 2026 -
27 
(xvii) Super Slow-
motion 
Servers for 
Action 
Replays 
1964 12.46 Q2, 2026 -
27 
(xviii
) 
Upgradation 
of Earth 
Station at 
DDK Shillong, 
Guwahati and 
Aizawl  
AT yet to 
be issued 
14.90 Q2-2026-27 
(xix) Disaster 
Recovery 
Centre for DD 
Free Dish 
DTH platform 
Tendering 
under 
process 
110.00 Q4, 2026 -
27 
(xx) SITC of 
Upgradation 
of 
Compression 
chain, 
Monitoring 
and Power 
supply 
system, 
Replacement 
of RF system 
of C-band 
Earth Station, 
Pitampura 
Delhi and 
Replacement 
of High-power 
Amplifier 
System of 
Earth Station, 
DDK Delhi 
Fresh 
Tendering 
under 
process 
14.50 Q4 2026-27 
(AT-Acceptance of Tender) 
(iii) Have structured intervention in monitoring mechanism; 
Reply: 
Physical and financial progress of the targets set during FY 2026 -27 are being 
regularly monitored and reviewed in the meetings held periodically in the Ministry at the 
Senior Officers level. In Prasar Bharati, Regular Apex committee meetings are held to 
monitor the progress of projects under BIND scheme and the hindrances observed 

40 
 
during the process are resolved with various wings of Directorate General  (DD) in 
consultation with Prasar Bharati Sectt. Digital platform viz e -office, e -tendering, 
procurement through GEM, Video conferencing etc. are also being utilized to expedite 
the progress of Projects. It has made the system fast, efficient and transparent. MII 
related exemptions are being granted on priority and the supply chain bottleneck issues 
are being addressed. Moreover, fund reallocations have been done by inter -se 
adjustments in the scheme components. The projects which were less likely to be 
completed in the given timeline of the year have been dropped and the higher impact 
projects mostly relating to replacement of aged assets has been taken up. The 
Empowered Committee approvals have been granted for the same in the meeting held 
on 10.06.2026 to Prasar Bharati. 
 
(iv) For ongoing projects of current financial year, set the revised time lines and action 
plan to expedite the projects and schemes; 
Reply: 
Details of revised time lines set for ongoing projects of financial year 2025-26, are 
as under:  
Studio Design projects: 
Sr. 
No
. 
AT/ NIT Date Project Details Amt of 
AT (in 
Cr.) 
DP as per AT Expected 
completion date 
1 AT 1944 
dated  
18.07.20
25 
DSNG 
Vans in 
(1+1) 
Configurati
on for UHD 
and HD 
Uplink 
facility 
along with 
Production 
facility 
4.08 17.02.26 Supply 
expected in 
Q1 2026-27 
2 AT 1949 
dated 
30.10.20
25 
SITC of 
Mobile 
Production 
Facilities 
(OB VAN) 
of 06 
Camera 
84.6
9 
28.02.27 04 Nos. OB 
Vans 
Delivered, 
payment 
completed for 
02 units.   
3 AT 1955, 
dated  
29.12.20
25 
IP based 
connectivit
y at DDK 
Hyderabad 
& DDK 
Aizawl 
and Studio 
expansion 
works at 
1.59 28.04.26 Supply 
completed.  

41 
 
DDK 
Hyderabad 
4 AT 1956 
dated 
31.12.20
25 
SITC of 
Native 
UHD 
Studio 
Production 
in SMPTE 
ST2110 IP 
Based 
Workflow  
33.5
1 
30.06.26 Project under 
implementati
on. 
Equipment 
delivery 
completed 
and SITC 
works and 
remaining 
20% payment 
to completed 
in June 2026 
5 AT 1957 
dated 
15.01.20
26 
Supply of 2 
M/E UHD 
Vision 
Mixers 
16.3
6 
14.05.26 Supply 
completed. 
and 
remaining 
10% payment 
to completed 
in June 2026 
6 AT 1958 
dated 
15.01.20
26  
Supply of 
Digital 
Audio 
Mixer 
4.99 14.05.26 Supply 
completed 
90% payment 
completed. 
7 AT 1959 
dated 
15.01.20
26 
Supply of 
3ME Vision 
Mixers and 
Supply of 
UHD/4K 
Camera 
Channels 
17.9
2 
14.05.26 Supply 
Completed, 
90% payment 
completed 
8 AT 1961 
dated 
09.02.20
26 
Supply of 
IP Based 
Streamers 
for DD 
Sports and 
Direct view 
Video for 
DD News 
3.04 08.05.26 Equipment 
supplied.  
remaining 
10% payment 
to completed 
in June 2026 
9 AT1963 
dated 
11.03.20
26  
Supply of 
Non linear 
editing 
system for 
DD 
Network. 
6.59 10.06.26 10.06.2026 
10 AT 1966 
dated 
28.04.20
26 
Procureme
nt of Multi-
Channel 
Video 
1.86 28.03.20
26 
Supply 
completed. 
remaining 
10% payment 

42 
 
Processor to completed 
in June 2026 
11 AT 1965 
dated 
28.04.20
26 
Procureme
nt of Multi-
Inputs and 
Single 
Input 5G 
and 4G 
Cellular 
Mobile 
News 
Gathering 
Units 
(Backpack
s) in 4K 
Technolog
y 
3.99 28.03.20
26 
Supply 
completed. 
remaining 
10% payment 
to completed 
in June 2026 
12 AT 1964 
dated 
28.04.20
26 
Supply of 
Super Slow 
Motion 
Server 
Systems 
12.4
6 
28.03.20
26 
Supply 
completed. 
remaining 
10% payment 
to completed 
in June 2026 
(AT: Acceptance of Tender; NIT: Notice Inviting Tender)  
 
Satellite Design projects: 
Sr. 
No. 
AT/ 
NIT 
Date 
Project Details Amt 
of AT 
(in 
Cr.) 
Expected 
completion 
date 
1a 1939 Upgradation of existing 
four compression chain 
sat DD Free Dish 
Todapur (Part of DD 
FreeDish Expansion 
Sanction 
Amount -Rs 74.50 Cr) 
7  Q1 2026-27 
b   Expansion of DD 
FreeDish Platform by 
SIT Cof Additional two 
streams with RF 
System at Earth 
Station Todapur Delhi 
(Part of DD FreeDish 
Expansion Sanction 
Amount -Rs 74.50Cr) 
43.25 Q4 2026-27 
2a   Disaster Recovery 
Centre at HPT 
110 Q4 2026 -
27(Supply of 

43 
 
Complex Hyderabad 
(Sanction Amount Rs 
122Cr) 
Phase-2 of  
Equipment and 
80%payment) 
2b   Site Preparation at 
Hyderabad 
2.83 Q3 2026-27 
3 1952 Upgradation 
Replacement of 2x 
(1+1) 
Earth Station at Leh 
and Vijaywada 
(Sanction Amount Rs. 
3.96Cr) 
3.96 Q2 2026-27 
4 1954 Upgradation and 
Replacement of 2x 
(1+1) 
Earth Station 
atItanagar, Agartala, 
Kohima, Imphal, 
Gangtok & Port blair 
(Sanction 
AmountRs.40.30Cr) 
11.42 Q2 2026-27 
5   Upgradation & 
Replacement of 2x 
(1+1) Earth Station at 
Aizwal, Guwahati and 
Shillong (Sanction 
Amount Rs.40.30 Cr) 
14.90 Q3 2026-27 
6   Upgradation & 
Replacement of C 
Band 
DTH Earth Station at 
Pitampura and 
Replacement of HPA 
at DDK New Delhi 
(Cont. Scheme-6.59 
Cr+ Rs 40.3 Cr) 
9 Q4 2026 -
27(Supply of 
Equipment) 
(AT: Acceptance of Tender; NIT: Notice Inviting Tender)  
 
WAVES OTT (BIND): 
SN Item 
Amount 
(Rs in 
Crores) 
Details  Status Timeline 
1.   New feature 
development 
and platform 
enhancement 
30.00 To enhance and 
expand platform 
functionalities, 
which are 
beyond the 
original scope, 
through 
Procurement 
action has 
been initiated 
on PAC 
basis.  
  
Sept 
2026 

44 
 
successive 
Change 
Requests (CRs).  
  
a. PDFs 
(Document 
Hosting & 
Reading) 
b. EPUBs (e-
Books with 
interactive 
features) 
c. Image 
Albums 
(Flipbooks, 
cultural/heritage 
archives) 
d. ONDC 
Shopping 
Integration 
e. E-Gaming 
f. App-in-App 
for partner 
OTT/content 
APIs 
g. Live Events 
Streaming 
h. Todapur 
Hardware 
Deployment for 
Live Channels 
i. YouTube-
like UI 
Enhancements 
for better 
discoverability 
j. Referral 
Tracking 
k. Periodicals- 
eMagazine Store 
l. Coming 
Soon feature 
m. MyWaves 
n. Radio 
Integration 
o. Media 
Transcoding and 
Packaging for 
Live Channels 
p. CRM / 
Finance 
Management 

45 
 
System 
2.   Ad Server 
Development 
and 
Integration 
30.00 Design, 
Development, 
Deployment and 
Operation of a 
unified Ad 
Server. 
Procurement 
action has 
been initiated 
on PAC 
basis.  
Mar 
2027 
3.   Cloud 
Infrastructure 
(Storage, 
Computing & 
Redundancy) 
and for 
associated 
services of 
the platform 
10.00 Public cloud 
storage, 
computing, 
messaging, EPG 
etc services for 
the OTT 
platform. 
Order under 
existing 
contract. 
Onward 
invoicing shall 
be processed 
under BIND 
proposal.  
Dec 
2026 
4.   Content 
Delivery 
Network 
Setup & other 
associated 
service 
  
  
  
10.00 Provisioned to 
ensure fast and 
reliable delivery 
of audio-visual 
content across 
geographies. 
Order under 
existing 
contract. 
Onward 
invoicing shall 
be processed 
under BIND 
proposal. 
Dec 
2026 
5.   Software 
Tools for 
Content & 
Platform 
Operations 
5.00 Software Tools 
including AI-
driven tools for 
editing, content 
management, 
rights protection, 
data analytics, 
and workflow 
automation 
Procurement 
action has 
been initiated 
on PAC 
basis. 
Sept 
2026 
6.   Workspace 
Development 
for OTT 
Operations 
5.00 Creation of 
dedicated 
operational 
workspace with 
civil, electrical, 
Networking and 
HVAC support 
for OTT teams. 
Proposal 
under 
submission 
through 
CCW. 
Oct 
2026 
7.   Digitization of 
Legacy 
Content 
5.00 Restoration, 
upscaling, and 
digital 
preservation of 
archival radio/TV 
content.  
Tender specs 
are under 
framing. 
  
Dec 
2026 
8.   Media Asset 
Management 
System 
(MAM) 
10.00 Revival and 
upgradation of 
the existing 
MAM system of 
Specifications 
finalized, 
procurement 
action 
Sept 
2026 

46 
 
the Archives to 
enable access to 
legacy content, 
metadata, and to 
develop 
enhanced 
functionalities for 
managing, 
retrieving, and 
repurposing both 
archival and 
newly acquired 
content assets 
initiated.  
9.   Servers, 
Workstations, 
Storage, 
Network and 
Editing Suites 
10.00 High-
performance IT 
infrastructure for 
media 
processing, 
graphics, and 
editorial 
workflows. 
Specification 
under 
finalization.  
Mar 
2027 
10.   Disaster 
Recovery, 
failover Setup 
at Remote 
Location 
2.00 Creation of a 
geographically 
separate 
disaster recovery 
site to ensure 
service 
continuity. 
Requirement 
and 
Specification 
to be 
finalized. 
Mar 
2027 
  Total 117.00       
  
All efforts are being made to utilize the allocated funds and adhere to achievement 
of physical targets as per the pre -defined timelines. Some of the measures envisaged 
for effective utilization of the budgetary allocation during the year 2026-27 are as under: 
a. Regular meetings are convened by the Ministry to with Prasar Bharati at various 
levels to monitor progress of projects under the BIND Scheme, identify 
implementation bottlenecks, and take immediate mitigating steps to ensure timely 
execution, with high-priority projects being individually tracked.  
b. BIND expenditure and project progress are a standing agenda at senior level 
where corrective actions are decided and followed up to ensure seamless project 
execution.  
c. Fund requests from Prasar Bharati under the BIND Scheme are processed and 
released on priority to facilitate uninterrupted project execution.  
d. An Empowered Committee chaired by Secretary, I&B, mandated to apportion 
funds and allow inter -se allocation among sub -components, examines proposals 
submitted by Prasar Bharati on merit and approves necessary reallocations to 
ensure no infrastructure project suffers for want of funds or administrative 
support.  
e. Regulatory requirements such as Make in India (MII) exemptions are taken up on 
priority with the competent authorities to enable timely procurement of equipment 
sourced from foreign suppliers.  

47 
 
f. Ministry is conducting regular meetings with the concerned stakeholders to get 
the issues, if any, resolved  
g. Digital platform viz e -office, e -tendering, procurement through GEM, Video 
conferencing etc. are also being utilized by Prasar Bharati to expedite the 
progress of Projects. It has made the system fast, efficient and transparent. 
h. Supply chain bottleneck issues in some instances which led to delays in timely 
supply of equipment from the OEMs, are being addressed by Prasar Bharati. 
i. Further, time -consuming works on most of the major SITC projects viz Earth 
station upgradation, OB van projects etc have already been initiated/ completed 
by Prasar Bharati. 
j. Advance action on projects (Specification approvals and Tendering process to be 
taken-up in FY 2026 -27) has already been initiated by Prasar Bharati under the 
current BIND Scheme. 
  
(v) Procure transmitters as per set targets and deadlines:  
Reply: 
Action has been taken to ensure timely purchase of transmitters and allied 
equipments. Some FM Transmitters capacity 20 kW, 10 kW and 05 kW have already 
been supplied to various sites. Order for 1 kW FM Transmitters have been placed. More 
procurements have been planned for replacing the aged transmitters with the approval 
of Empowered Committee. 
 
(vi) Leverage domestic manufacturing and emerging technologies for addressing the 
challenges associated with importing broadcast equipment.  
Reply: 
It is worthwhile mention that most of the broadcast equipments are of foreign make 
and in these circumstances, MII related exemptions are being granted on priority and 
the supply chain bottleneck issues are being addressed. 
 
Ministry of Information and Broadcasting 
(O.M. No. W-11/26/2026-PC Cell dated 23/06/2026) 
 
DD Free Dish  
(Recommendation Sl. No. 4) 
          The Committee observe that DD Free Dish is a Free -to-Air (FTA) DTH 
Service and an alternative affordable platform for people who do not have means to pay 
high subscription fee of private platforms.  DD Free Dish platform, an approved scheme 
of the Government of India, was launched in December 2004 by Prasar Bharati. Since 
then it is reaching millions of people in remote, inaccessible and border areas, 
becoming a tool for empowerment of the masses particularly marginalized and weaker 
sections of the society. Total Bouquet of DD Free Dish consist of 482 TV channels 
including 35 Doordarshan channels, 11 HD DD Channels and 95 popular Private TV 
channels, 320 DD Co -Branded Educational channels and 64 Radio channels. The 

48 
 
Committee note that DD Free Dish signal is available pan India, except Andaman & 
Nicobar Islands and can be viewed with a very modest one -time investment of around 
Rs. 2500/ - towards small Dish, MPEG -4 Free -to-Air Set Top Box and other ancillary 
peripherals. DD Free Dish Set -Top Boxes are free to air (FTA) and available in open 
market and Prasar Bharati has no direct control over these Set Top Boxes which are 
available over the shelf in open market for general public, hence there is no accurate 
data available regarding viewership of DD Free Dish. As per market estimates and 
FICCI & E&Y report published in March 2025, more than 49 million households are 
viewing DD Free Dish. The Committee understand that there is no monthly subscription 
fees required to tune in to DD Free Dish channels, unlike other DTH services. With 
respect to challenges, the Committee note that DD Free Dish viewership is facing 
challenges in southern and eastern part of India and to increase penetration of DD Free 
Dish set Top Boxes in these regions promotional measures are being taken from time to 
time. As a latest measure, 17 numbers of popular unrepresented / under represented 
regional private TV channels were onboarded on MPEG -4 slots of DD Free dish Free of 
cost for the period from 01.01.2026 to 31.03.2026, on a pilot basis. 
The Committee perceive that several factors like surfacing of various Digital 
platforms, OTTs, financial stress in market & decreasing popularity of linear channels 
have challenged revenue across all DTH services and it could earn only around Rs. 814 
crore during FY 2025 -26. On the issue of increasing the slots, the Ministry have 
submitted that since revenue of DD Free Dish is earned through e Auction of vacant 
slots on DD Free Dish to private TV channels and the yield through e -Auction depends 
on supply and demand, hence, increasing the slots on DD Free Dish, especially MPEG -
2 slots carrying higher reserve price, could hamper revenue of DD Free Dish further. 
When asked about the road map with respect to DD Free Dish, the Ministry have 
informed that in the financial year 2026 -27, the number of MPEG -4 slots have been 
enhanced adequately for annual e -auction to onboard a greater number of regional 
language channels. Besides, unrepresented/under represented regional language 
channels are promoted by reserving slots adequately for them at a very nominal / 
promotional / invitational reserve price on MPEG -4 slots of DD Free Dish which may 
attract more popular regional language channels to come on DD Free Dish thereby 
increasing penetration of DD Free Dish Set Top Boxes in those areas. The Committee 
have also learnt that the Scheme for procurement of DTH Set Top Boxes (STBs) for 
Remote, Tribal and LWE areas (under BIND) has undergone a change and is now 
being implemented in Direct Benefit Transfer mode wherein Ministry of Electronics and 
Information Technology (MeitY) in conjunction with the Bureau of Indian Standards 
(BIS) has mandated that in future all television sets sold in India must include a built -in 
satellite tuner that complies with IS 18112:2022. The final date for mandatory 
compliance with this order was 26th October, 2025, but, it was extended till 26th Jan 
2026. The Committee take cognizance of the positive development wherein if someone 
wants to watch Free Dish, they will no longer have to purchase a set -top box and the 
Free Dish service will be available simply by installing an antenna.  Once a tuner is 
installed in the television set, there is no subscription and no monthly charge and all the 
channels of DD Free Dish can be accessed freely by the general public. Given its 
importance, the Committee may be apprised of the implementation status of rolling out 
TV sets with built -in satellite tuner in compliance with IS 18112:2022. The Committee 

49 
 
may be enlightened about the details of expansion of DD Free Dish post implementation 
of the said mandate of BIS and MeitY relating to pre-installed digital TV tuners. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
     All the prominent consumer Brands have ﬂoated TV Sets with in -built TV 
Tuners in compliance with IS 18112:2022. Prasar Bharati/ Doordarshan is collaborating 
with TV Set OEMs and Set top Box OEMs for implementation of advanced Electronic 
Programming guide w ith the TV Set OEMs so that viewers are able to search the TV 
Channel of their choice and get better viewing experience without requiring Set top 
Boxes or internet connection. ICEA and other industry bodies are coordinating the 
interaction of DD/PB with technical teams of the TV set OEMs and system designers 
such as Google TV OS, WEB OS, Tizen TV OS and others. 
As of now, proposed date for complete discontinuation of TV Sets of earlier 
models not having DVB (Digital Video Broadcast) Radio Frequency (RF) TV Tuner card 
shall be eﬀective from July 2026. But, as informed to Prasar Bharati in its coordination 
with TV manufacturers, most of the TV sets are being provided with in -built TV sets. PB 
has been asked to engage with the TV manufacturers for marketing and  promotion of 
the built in TV Tuners. 
 
Ministry of Information and Broadcasting 
(O.M. No. W-11/26/2026-PC Cell dated 23/06/2026) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No.10 of Chapter I) 
 
DOORDARSHAN (DD) 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 5) 
        The Committee note that there are 35 Doordarshan satellite TV channels 
including 28 Regional/State channels. The current reach/viewership of Door   darshan is 
1743.3 lakhs. The Committee note that for the FY 2026 -27, out of Rs. 509.24 crore 
allocated to Prasar Bharati (under BIND), an amount of Rs. 299.48 crore has been 
allocated to Doordarshan. Major challenges/hindrances witnessed by the Doordarshan 
include (i) to be a destination for family and clean entertainment even while remaining 
relevant in today's world where technological advancements are taking place rapidly; (ii) 
As a Public Service Broadcaster, Doordarshan is mandated to inform, educate, and 
entertain while ensuring balanced broadcasting. Doordarshan faces the dual challenge 
of adhering to its public service mandate, as outlined in the Prasar Bharati Act, and 
competing with private television channels/platforms in a commercially viable manner; 
(iii) A significant portion of Prasar Bharati’s programming focuses on promoting national 
development, socio-economic progress, and national integration; (iv) The integration of 
advanced technologies such as  Artificial Intelligence (AI), Augmented Reality (AR) and 
Virtual Reality (VR) to cater to changing tastes; etc.  
 
While dealing with the issue of content, the Committee note that Prasar Bharati 
has framed the ‘Content Sourcing Policy 2024’ after amending ‘Content Sourcing Policy 
2023’ and that has resulted in significant streamlining of content acquisition, 

50 
 
standardized commissioning processes, transparent evaluation systems, cost effective 
matrix and cost negotiationetc. This has led to content acquiring not only for linear 
platforms but also for digital platform - the newly launched OTT (Waves OTT). So far as 
WAVES OTT Platform is concerned, the Committee note that there are 11 million App 
downloads and over 7.3 million registered user accounts under WAVES OTT platform 
and it has 18,000 audio-visual titles, more than 12,000 hours of video and audio content 
available in 12+ Indian languages. The Committee are informed about a few initiatives 
that have been taken under WAVES OTT Platform which,inter -alia, include (i) 
Digitization and streaming of archival content; (ii) Conceptualisation and creation of 
MyWAVES, a proposed citizen -creator and participatory content platform; (iii) 
Integration with Government and institutional digital platforms, expanding last -mile 
access and outreach across the Country; (iv) Knowledge and publications ecosystem 
integration, including 9,000+ e -books, journals and magazines such as Yojana, 
Kurukshetra, Bal Bharati, Aajkal and Employment News made available digitally, 
especially in Tier-2, Tier -3 cities and rural areas; (v) Broad content partnerships, 
involving nearly 400 content partners with regular addition of 60 –75 new titles per 
month, ensuring continuous content refresh; etc. The Committee are given to 
understand that the Ministry is bringing a structured Pay -Per-View (PPV) Policy 
Framework, so that the platform becomes sustainable and does not require greater 
budgetary support.  Further, under the overall banner of Indian Institute of Creative 
Technology, 15,000 Content Creation Labs would be set up in schools and 500 such 
Labs would be set up in colleges.   
 
On another issue related to Doordarshan Kendras (DDK) regarding asset 
management/monetisation, the Committee note that no study has so far been 
conducted to assess the assets under Doordarshan Kendras in India. In this regard, the 
Ministry informed that Prasar Bharati Board has approved a draft monetization plan 
including feasibility study of Prasar Bharati land assets (both Akashvani & 
Doordarshan). The draft monetization plan mentions (i) Prasar Bharati will monetize 
land assets on PPP model without alienating the land; and (ii) The revenue generated 
will be used by Prasar Bharati making itself sustainable. While discussing about asset 
monetization, some of the facts highlighted  during evidence, include (a) all the land and 
building assets have been fully mapped on the Government’s portal along with their 
exact locations and they have geo -tagged locations of these assets; (b) Under the 
Swachhata Abhiyan, during the last three years, about nine lakh square feet of space 
has been vacated in existing buildings; (c) various institutions that require space and do 
not involve extensive p ublic interface are being provided surplus space on rent; (d) 
within the next few months, whatever surplus built-up space have been identified, would 
be rented out so that it can become a source of revenue; (e) there are around 70 land 
assets, with approximate value of ₹100 crore and for these locations, a special team 
has been deployed to explore how planned development or redevelopment can be 
undertaken to generate revenue. The Committee understand that the Prasar Bharati 
has signed an MoU with the Govern ment of Maharashtra about five to six months ago. 
The land belonging to Akashvani is available in Mumbai city and work has already 
begun on a plan to jointly develop a Film City in collaboration with the Government of 
Maharashtra.  

51 
 
 
The Committee acknowledge the efforts of the Ministry/Prasar Bharati to maintain 
Doordarshan as a platform for family -friendly and clean entertainment medium in an 
increasingly competitive media ecosystem where morality is declining and vulgarity is 
increasing. The Committee are pleased to note that in order to increase its source of 
revenue the Prasar Bharati Board has approved a draft monetization plan to provide its 
surplus space on rent and planned development/redevelopment of its 70 land assets. 
The Committee urge the Ministry to take action on the following and apprise them 
accordingly:- 
(i) To prepare a roadmap for effective implementation and periodic review of the 
‘Content Sourcing Policy, 2024’; (ii) To ensure continuous content enrichment, 
technological upgradation and wider outreach of the WAVES OTT platform, particularly 
in Tier-2, Tier-3 cities and rural areas. To have adequate safeguards in place to ensure 
affordability, accessibility and public interest orientation while implementing the 
structured Pay-Per-View (PPV) Policy Framework for WAVES OTT platform; the PPV 
framework as well as keep the old archival content free of any charge.  (iii) To ensure 
that content Creation Labs in 15,000 schools and 500 such labs in colleges are 
implemented in a time -bound manner, adequately equipped with modern tools and 
linked with public broadcasting platforms so that young creators across the Country are 
able to contribute meaningful content reflecting India’s diverse culture, languages and 
traditions; and (iv) To undertake a comprehensive national -level assessment of all 
assets under Doordarshan and Akashvani Kendras, finalise the monetisation framework 
at the earliest, develop clear guidelines for leasing, redevelopment and PPP -based 
utilisation of assets and  apprise the Committee of the progress made in implementing 
the asset monetisation plan, including revenue generated and projects undertaken, in a 
time-bound manner. 
 
Reply of the Government 
(i)To prepare a roadmap for effective implementation and periodic review of the ‘Content 
Sourcing Policy, 2024’: 
Reply: 
(i) Content Sourcing Policy –2024 was formulated with the objective of ensuring 
transparency, efficiency, cost optimization, quality enhancement and wider participation 
in the sourcing of content across different platforms of Prasar Bharati. The Policy has 
enabled Prasar Bharati to acquire substantial hours of content under different modes of 
acquisitions viz. Commissioning, Royalty, License, Sponsorship, Revenue Share and 
Gratis. The policy also has the provision for acquiring content for OTT Platform 
including third party App in App integration with WAVES OTT Platform. Acquiring 
content from various reputed and well -established production houses has paved the 
way for advance planning and scheduling of content for DD National and WAVES OTT 
Platform in a short period of time. 
In order to objectively arrive at the episodic cost of content under commissioning 
and License Fee/Royalty, Content Input Matrix and corresponding Cost Slab bracket 
has also been devised by a High level Committee comprising of members from industry 
like Producers Guild of India, FICCI etc. and the Matrix is in place after approval by 

52 
 
Prasar Bharati Board. This has helped the Evaluation and Costing committee to arrive 
at the cost of content under commissioning and License Fee/Royalty in a more rational 
and transparent manner. 
For acquiring programmes for Regional Kendras, an Addendum to the Content 
Sourcing Policy 2024 dated 20 th February 2026 has been notified by Prasar Bharati. 
The Addendum empowers Regional Channel Managers to source various programmes 
including low-cost commissioning content at the level of Kendra/Channel itself. This will 
enable acquisition of content as per specific need of the regional channels by the 
respective Kendras in a more efficient and timely manner.  
To further improve transparency, accountability and ease of doing business for 
production houses/agencies, the proposals under various modes are now being invited 
through waves bazaar portal. Further, Content Acquisition Portal, which is in the final 
stage of roll out, will enable migration of the entire content sourcing workflow to an 
online digital portal enabling faceless processing, content evaluation, faster decision -
making and real-time status tracking. 
Notification of Content Sourcing Policy 2024 has yielded desired results for 
acquiring meaningful content during the years and as per necessity and feedbacks 
received by various stakeholders, periodic review of the processes defined in the policy 
would be undertaken to keep the policy contemporary, flexible and outcome oriented. 
Moreover, Pay per view policy is also a step taken by Prasar Bharati for onboarding of 
content with maximum transparency and objectivity. 
 (ii) To ensure continuous content enrichment, technological upgradation and 
wider outreach of the WAVES OTT platform, particularly in Tier -2, Tier-3 cities and rural 
areas. To have adequate safeguards in place to ensure affordability, accessibility and 
public interest orientation while implementing the structured Pay -Per-View (PPV) Policy 
Framework for WAVES OTT platform; the PPV framework as well as keep the old 
archival content free of any charge. 
 
Reply: 
The status of action taken with regard to the WAVES OTT platform is as under: 
Content Enrichment and Platform Growth 
WAVES OTT platform has witnessed significant expansion in its content catalogue 
through a structured content sourcing framework. The Content Sourcing Policy, 2024 is 
under continuous implementation on the platform. 
Under this policy, approximately 9,000 hours of content spanning over 12,000 
titles across 15+ languages has been onboarded. Content sourced for linear channels 
is, wherever applicable, also being onboarded with corresponding digital rights, thereby 
ensuring optimal utilisation across platforms. 
The Pay -Per-View (PPV) Policy framework has been introduced as a 
complementary extension of the Content Sourcing Policy, 2024 to address the evolving 
requirements of digital content acquisition and monetization on the OTT platform. Under 
this framework, 26 titles have been made live on the platform on a pilot basis. 
User engagement and performance of these titles are being continuously 
monitored through the platform analytics system, and the insights derived are being 
utilized for content strategy, placement, and future acquisitions. 
Content sourced under the policy is periodically reviewed based on the following 

53 
 
parameters: 
• Content performance analytics  
• User engagement trends 
• Diversity and cost-effectiveness of content 
 
Archival Content 
Digitisation and onboarding of archival content from Doordarshan and All India 
Radio is being undertaken in a phased and structured manner. Approximately, 5, 000 
hours of Doordarshan and 600 hours of Akashvani archival content have been 
published on the platform so far. 
In line with the Committee’s recommendations, such archival content is being 
made available free of cost on the platform, with a focus on cultural preservation and 
ensuring wider public access. 
PPV Framework 
The PPV framework is presently under refinement based on learning from the pilot 
phase. The revised framework proposes a streaming -minutea-based pay out model, 
ensuring a more equitable and performance-linked monetization mechanism. 
It is submitted that the platform continues to maintain a public service orientation 
and no paywall has been introduced at this stage 
Both archival and PPV content are currently available free of cost to users, 
ensuring affordability and accessibility. 
Appropriate safeguards will continue to be built into the policy to balance 
monetization objectives with public interest. 
 
Technological Upgradation and Platform Capability 
The platform is being continuously upgraded in coordination with the Master 
System Integrator (MSI) to enhance streaming quality, scalability, and user experience. 
This includes improvements in content delivery, platform performance, analytics 
capabilities, and readiness for advanced features such as AI -enabled workflows, 
multilingual support, and enhanced discoverability. 
Outreach and Expansion 
WAVES OTT is being positioned as a Direct-to-Mobile public service platform, with 
increasing penetration across Tier -2, Tier -3 cities and rural areas. The platform 
integrates 133 Live TV channels and 44 Akashvani radio channels, with a continued 
focus on expanding the live TV and radio ecosystem to maximize reach. 
These services are being made available free of cost, enabling seamless access 
to linear broadcast content alongside on -demand oﬀerings, thereby strengthening last -
mile connectivity and public service delivery. 
This is being achieved through: 
Integration with government and institutional digital platforms 
• Distribution partnerships across telecom and connected device ecosystems  
Availability of Live TV channels and radio services to enhance reach and 
accessibility, particularly in underserved regions  
• Focus on regional and multilingual content 
• Targeted user acquisition and awareness initiatives 
WAVES OTT platform is being developed as a scalable, inclusive, and technology- 

54 
 
enabled public service digital platform. The approach adopted balances growth, 
accessibility, while ensuring adherence to public interest objectives as highlighted by 
the Hon’ble Committee. 
  
(iii) To ensure that content Creation Labs in 15,000 schools and 500 such labs in 
colleges are implemented in a time -bound manner, adequately equipped with modern 
tools and linked with public broadcasting platforms so that young creators across the 
Country are able to contribute meaningful content reflecting India’s diverse culture, 
languages and traditions; and 
 
Reply:  
Towards implementation, the Ministry conducted stakeholder consultation 
workshop on ‘Talent Development in AVGC through Content Creation Labs’ on 
12.02.2026 for academic integration, faculty capacity building and industry linkages for 
the proposed labs. Thereafter, a Breakout Session under the Post -Budget Webinar on 
‘Allocation in Union Budget 2026 –27 for the Orange Economy: AVGC Content Creator 
Labs (CCLs) in Schools & Colleges’ was also organized on 09.03.2026 in coordination 
with the Department of Higher Education and NITI Aayog. 
Thereafter, Ministry also held review meetings with representatives of D/o School 
Education & Literacy and D/o Higher Education of M/o Education, IICT and NCVET to 
deliberate upon the modalities for implementation of CCLs.  
The Ministry has recently conducted industry consultations along with IICT to 
deliberate on industry requirements across the AVGC -XR ecosystem for curriculum 
design, skilling pathways, technology requirements, employability/internship/ 
apprenticeship opportunities etc. Based on these interactions, IICT is working on a 
proposal for building a future-ready workforce in the creative economy sector along with 
the Concept Note for the Pilot CCLs. After, running and assessing the outcomes of the 
Pilot CCLs, roll-out of the project across the country will be planned and executed.   
(iv) To undertake a comprehensive national -level assessment of all assets under 
Doordarshan and Akashvani Kendras, finalise the monetisation framework at the 
earliest, develop clear guidelines for leasing, redevelopment and PPP -based utilisation 
of assets and apprise the Committee of the progress made in implementing the asset 
monetisation plan, including revenue generated and projects undertaken, in a time -
bound manner. 
 
Reply: 
Based on the approved draft monetization plan by Prasar Bharati Board, Prasar 
Bharati is conducting pre-feasibility study for monetization of Prasar Bharati land assets. 
For this purpose, Prasar Bharati, through a tendering process, has engaged M/s CBRE 
South Asia Pvt. Ltd. (NLMC empanelled Agency) on 01.09.2025, for carrying out pre -
feasibility study work of identified underutilized Prasar Bharati land assets.   Pre-
feasibility report is scheduled to be completed within one year in phases from the date 
of engagement of agency.   Subsequent to pre -feasibility study, further processing will 
be initiated for monetization of Prasar Bharati Land Assets as per the approved 
framework of the Government. 
 

55 
 
For leasing of Office/Residential vacant Spaces, Prasar Bharati has formulated a 
Policy for renting out its vacant space to Central/State Govt. Departments, Statutory 
Organizations and PSUs. After implementation of this Policy, Prasar Bharati had leased 
out its Office/Residential Spaces at 42 locations with revenue generation of 4.6 crore 
(approx). In addition to it, some of the proposals of leasing Office/Residential vacant 
space are under process with revenue potential of Rs. 15 crore (approx). 
 
Ministry of Information and Broadcasting 
(O.M. No. W-11/26/2026-PC Cell dated 23/06/2026) 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No.13 of Chapter I) 
 
All INDIA RADIO (AIR) 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 6) 
 The Committee note that under AIR/Akashvani, during the FY 2025 -26 as against 
budgetary allocations of Rs. 94.76 crore (at BE stage) and Rs. 99.71 crore (tentative at 
RE stage) the actual expenditure upto November, 2025 has been Rs. 34.66 crore which 
is 34.76% of RE allocations. Even during the year 2024 -25, AIR witnessed less 
utilization and the actual expenditure for this period was Rs. 56.90 crore which was 
63.87% of RE allocations. Akashvani has 230 stations with studio and 361 relay stations 
without studio. Out of 230 stations, studios at 127 stations have been digitalized in 2 
phases. Out of this, 98 major stations were digitalized in 10th plan and are due for 
replacement.  Studios at 15 stations have been set up as digital studios in current plan. 
The Committee are aware that an Empowered Committee has approved digitalization of 
studios at 68 stations targeted to be digitalized in FY 2026 -27.  Rest of the studios (20 
new) and 98 major stations for replacement would be digitalized in next plan. The 
Committee note that the common problem under BIND Scheme has also affected the 
performance of AIR which include (i) Acute shortage of staff and (ii) Broadcast 
equipment being imported.  
The Committee note that the necessary exemptions under the Make in India 
provisions have been obtained along with the required import permissions from the 
competent authority and since the process is continuing at a fast pace, they will be able 
to fully utilise the resources. The Committee are further informed that with respect to 
AIR stations in the border areas, a comprehensive geographical mapping exercise have 
been undertaken. The preparation of a plan under the BIND Scheme not only increase 
the output of those transmitters but also expand its coverage, so that access can be 
enhanced in the border areas. Keeping the above scenario in view, the Committee 
desire to be apprised of the action taken along with the outcome on the following 
recommendations:  (i) The Ministry may address the concerns impacting the financial 
and physical targets under AIR and the targets set for the FY 2026 -27;  (ii) The Ministry 
may ensure digitalization of studios at 68 AIR stations targeted for FY 2026 –27 to be 
completed in a time -bound manner, with close monitoring of its progress so as to avoid 
further delays in the modernisation of broadcasting infrastructure; prepare a clear and 
comprehensive roadmap for the digitisation of the remaining studios, including the 20 

56 
 
new studios and the replacement of 98 major stations that were digitalized during the 
10th Plan; (iii) While dealing with geographical mapping exercise undertaken for AIR 
stations in border areas, the Ministry/Prasar Bharati should expedite the implementation 
of plan for strengthening All India Radio infrastructure in border areas; (iv) The Ministry 
may furnish details of the effectiveness of the Apex Committee constituted by Prasar 
Bharati Secretariat to monitor the progress of BIND scheme and the action taken by the 
Committee till date; and (v) The Ministry may complete the ongoing HR Transformation 
exercise at the earliest and implement its recommendations to rationalize and have 
adequate permanent staff across AIR stations in various parts of the Country.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
(i) The Ministry may address the concerns impacting the financial and physical 
targets under AIR and the targets set for the FY 2026-27;  
Reply: 
Through several measures as already listed in replies in respect of 
Recommendation No. 2 and 3, planned efforts are being made by the Ministry to ensure 
that physical as well as financial targets set for FY 2026-27 are achieved. 
 
(ii) The Ministry may ensure digitalization of studios at 68 AIR stations targeted for 
FY 2026 –27 to be completed in a time -bound manner, with close monitoring of its 
progress so as to avoid further delays in the modernisation of broadcasting 
infrastructure; prepare a clear and comprehensive roadmap for the digitisation of the 
remaining studios, including the 20 new studios and the replacement of 98 major 
stations that were digitalized during the 10th Plan; 
 
Reply: 
Tender for Digitalization of studios at 68 AIR station targeted for FY 2026 –27 
digital audio consoles is currently under evaluation. All out efforts are being made to 
finalise the vendor at the earliest.  
127 studios have been digitized under 11th & 12th Plan.  Replacement of analogue 
console of 68 studios by digital console has been approved. The remaining studios 
would be digitized in coming years.  
 
(iii) While dealing with geographical mapping exercise undertaken for AIR stations 
in border areas, the Ministry/Prasar Bharati should expedite the implementation of plan 
for strengthening All India Radio infrastructure in border areas; 
 
Reply:  
1. FM Transmitters: Presently, 116 FM Transmitters are providing coverage along 
bordering area of the country. Additionally, schemes for installation of 20 FM 
Transmitters along border area have been approved. Further, expansion of new stations 
in the border areas would be considered in coming year. 
2. MW Transmitters: - Most of the populated area along border areas are covered 
by MW broadcast by 46 MW Transmitters. 
 In addition to terrestrial transmission, Akashvani is using 3 alternative platforms 
which also disseminate programmes along border areas: 

57 
 
i. Internet Platform: Live Streaming of More than 260 channels on “News on AIR” 
app–. 
ii. DTH Service : 48 channels on ‘’DD Free Dish’’  
iii. OOT Platform: Live Streaming of More than 30 channels on WAVES OTT 
Platform 
 
(iv) The Ministry may furnish details of the effectiveness of the Apex Committee 
constituted by Prasar Bharati Secretariat to monitor the progress of BIND scheme and 
the action taken by the Committee till date; and 
 
Reply:  
APEX committee meetings are held regularly, mostly on weekly basis. During last 
quarter of FY 2025 -26, APEX committee’s emphasis was on timely completion of 
projects targeted for the year.  Necessary instructions and directions were issued for the 
concerned divisions involved in the process of BIND scheme’s ongoing 
projects/tenders.  This has contributed in achieving the targets for the year. Till now 
36 meetings have been concluded and in the recent meeting APEX committee issued 
directions to expedite finalization of tenders.   
APEX committee meetings were held to monitor the progress of ongoing projects 
under the BIND scheme. The Committee met on periodical basis, discoursed on each 
and every project of BIND Scheme, stage wise right from inception of project to its 
completion, Committee and encouraged various project units to expedite the activities 
for timely completion of project.   In these meetings, APEX committee in consultation 
with Prasar Bharati Sectt. has resolved various issues/ hindrance/ impediments coming 
in implementation of project, such as obtaining necessary approvals (IFD, MII 
exemptions etc.)  and timely completion of various stages of procurement (preparation 
of specs, floating of tenders, issue of purchase orders, supply of equipment installation 
etc.); and other concurrent issues.  
Due to the consistent efforts of the APEX committee during the financial year, 
2025-26, out of Rs.550 Cr allocated during RE stage (This was reduced to Rs.513.63 Cr 
as final allocation) , an amount of Rs.513.57 Cr was utilized, which is 99.99% of final 
allocation and 93.38% of RE. This has been by far the maximum expenditure made by 
Prasar Bharati on infrastructure projects under BIND scheme. 
 
(v) The Ministry may complete the ongoing HR Transformation exercise at the 
earliest and implement its recommendations to rationalize and have adequate 
permanent staff across AIR stations in various parts of the Country. 
 
Reply as given in recommendation no 7 below. 
 
Ministry of Information and Broadcasting 
(O.M. No. W-11/26/2026-PC Cell dated 23/06/2026) 
HUMAN RESOURCE IN PRASAR BHARATI  
(Recommendation Sl. No. 7) 
The Committee note that at present the sanctioned staff strength of Prasar Bharati 
is 45,791. Out of this, 26,129 are for Akashvani/All India Radio and 19,662 are for 
Doordarshan. As against this sanctioned strength of 45,791, there are 30,598 vacancies 

58 
 
in Prasar Bharati. Of this, 14,117 posts are lying vacant in Doordarshan and 16,481 in 
All India Radio (AIR). The Committee note that the number of vacant posts has 
increased from previous FY (2025 -26) which was 30,221. The Committee understand 
that due to acute shortage of permanent employees, Prasar Bharati is meeting its 
urgent requirements by hiring large number of staff on contractual basis under 
Contractual Engagement Policy 2021 (CEP -2021) of Prasar Bharati. About the steps 
taken to cater to the Manpower needs of the AIR and Doordarshan Kendras, the 
Ministry submitted that to assess optimal number of posts in various streams and levels 
as per the current and future requirement of Prasar Bharati, the exercise of HR 
Transformation is being carried out in consultation with a manpower audit agency and 
only on conclusion and acceptance of the recommendations of this exercise, a clear 
picture on the vacancies to be filled in will emerge. The Ministry further submitted that 
they have directed for a review of service closures and outsourcing of activities to be 
undertaken in the best interest of the organization. Also, the Board accorded approval 
for proceeding with Phase -2 of the HR transformation exercise. The Committee would, 
therefore, like to be apprised of the time -bound roadmap for completion of the HR 
Transformation exercise and the details of its outcome. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 
The exercise for HR Transformation of Prasar Bharati is underway in consultation 
with a leading consulting agency. This exercise comprises of two phases. The agency 
had submitted its consolidated report conveying its recommendations. The same was 
place before the PB Board in November 2025 and subsequently, in February 2026, after 
incorporating the additional details as suggested by the Board. The Board broadly 
accepted the recommendations on phase 1 of the HR transformation exercise. The 
second phase of the HR Transformation is likely to begin shortly (and is expected to 
complete in six months thereafter), wherein the issue of alignment of manpower will be 
covered. Further, as desired by the Board, a review of service closures and outsourcing 
of activities is under consideration. 
 
With changing dynamics of operations due to closure of some services and 
upgradation of existing services with intervention of IT and digitization, the deployment 
of floating manpower through outsourcing is under examination and will be put in place.  
 
Second phase, with study and implementation of reforms/measures, will inter -alia 
cover talent acquisition and retention, capacity building / training and change 
management for PB stakeholders including monitoring and evaluation of change 
process and continuously review and improve the restructuring process”. 
 
Ministry of Information and Broadcasting 
(O.M. No. W-11/26/2026-PC Cell dated 23/06/2026) 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No.16 of Chapter I) 
 
SUPPORTING COMMUNITY RADIO MOVEMENT IN INDIA  

59 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 8) 
The Committee note that the Community Radio is an important third -tier Radio in 
Radio Broadcasting, distinct from Public Service Radio broadcasting and Commercial 
Radio. Community Radio Stations (CRSs) are low -power Radio Stations, which are 
meant to be set up and operated by local communities. In December 2002, the 
Government of India approved a policy for the grant of license, for setting up of CRS, to 
well established educational institutions. The CR provides a platform for communities to 
air local voices on issues concerning health, nutrition, education, agriculture etc. The 
Scheme (Supporting Community Radio Movement in India) aims to strengthen new and 
existing CRSs with resources, capacity and technology so as to upgrade the standard of 
the stations and increase its reach and visibility to the interior regions of India. The 
Committee are given to understand that the Scheme has been revised ‘wherein it is 
proposed to extend for the period from 2026 -27 to 2030 -31 with a total proposed 
allocation of Rs. 50 crore. The thrust areas under the Scheme are (i) to increase the 
number of stations in CR dark areas and (ii) to have at least one Community Radio 
Station in each district of the Country. At present, 560 CRS are operational in India (till 
January, 2026). With respect to budgetary allocations and expenditure, the Committee 
note that Rs. 8.00 crore has been allocated for the FY 2026 -27 (at BE stage). During 
the FY 2025 -26, the BE and RE allocations were Rs. 17.40 crore and Rs. 8.00 crore, 
respectively, and the actual expenditure till 8 th January, 2026 was Rs. 4.52 crore which 
is 56.50 % of RE allocations.   
 
 Initiatives taken under the Scheme ‘Supporting Community Radio Movement in 
India’ include organization of National and Regional Sammelans, awareness workshops 
in CR dark areas, etc. However, the Committee find that fund utilization has been 
uneven over the years, and Demand for Grants remains limited due to lack of 
awareness among potential beneficiaries. The Committee, therefore, urge the Ministry 
to streamline grant disbursement, strengthen capacity -building programs for CRS staff 
and provide technical support to enhance operational efficiency. The Committee, also 
desire to be apprised of the action taken in respect of the following: - (i) Ensure optimum 
utilistion of allocated funds during the FY 2026 -27; (ii) Prepare a definite 
timeline/roadmap and intensify efforts for ensuring at least one Community Radio 
Station in each district, particularly CR dark areas,  as per the vision under the Scheme; 
(iii) Explore the feasibility of having one dedicated training cell for CRS personnel in 
each State/Zone to improve technical skills, content creation and community 
engagement; and (iv) Involve local Government, educational institutions, NGOs, and 
community organizations to promote awareness and local participation. 
 
Reply of the Government 
Table content. 
S. 
No.  
Observation Action taken 
1. Ensure optimum utilistion of allocated Major expenditures will be incurred 

60 
 
funds during the FY 2026-27; under the head of Grant in Aid and 
Office Expenses. For the current 
Financial Year, it is anticipated that 
approx 70 applications will be 
processed for release of grant. At 
present, approx 25 applications are 
in hand.  
2. Prepare a definite timeline/roadmap 
and intensify efforts for ensuring at 
least one Community Radio Station in 
each district, particularly CR dark 
areas, as per the vision under the 
Scheme; 
State intensive awareness 
workshops will be conducted with 
potential organizations by targeting 
CR Dark Areas. 
 
 Applicants will be facilitated at all 
levels of the licensing process. 
Training and capacity building 
exercises will be conducted. 
 
In CR dark areas, coordination with 
State and District administration will 
be done. 
3. Explore the feasibility of having one 
dedicated training cell for CRS 
personnel in each State/Zone to 
improve technical skills, content 
creation and community engagement; 
and 
A mechanism shall be developed at 
the regional level for regular 
trainings and hand holding of Letter 
of Intent Holders and operational 
CRSs. 
4. Involve local Government, educational 
institutions, NGOs, and community 
organizations to promote awareness 
and local participation. 
 
In the workshops, representatives of 
state government and prospective 
eligible organizations will be invited. 
This will include educational 
institutions, NGOs and any other 
organizations which are eligible for 
setting up of CRSs. 
 
Ministry of Information and Broadcasting 
(O.M. No. W-11/26/2026-PC Cell dated 23/06/2026) 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No.19 of Chapter I) 

61 
 
FILM SECTOR  
NATIONAL CENTRE OF EXCELLENCE (NCOE) FOR ANIMATION, VISUAL EFFECTS 
(VFX), GAMING, COMICS AND EXTENDED REALITY(AVGC-XR)  
(Recommendation Sl. No. 9) 
The Committee note that the AVGC Promotion Task Force was set up by the 
Ministry of Information and Broadcasting in April 2022 after the Union Budget 
announcement and the Task Force submitted its report in December 2022, 
recommending a National AVGC Mission, Centres of Excellence, stronger infrastructure 
and dedicated support for Indian IP and exports.   IICT Mumbai has been established 
and is being developed as a specialised Centre of Excellence to strengthen high -end 
training and research. With a focus on expanding high -quality production capacity, 
developing talent and improving access to international markets, WAVES  2025 was 
organised in May, 2025 as a global platform for the entire Media & Entertainment 
sector. Three verticals of WAVES platform that are supporting the AVGC sector are (i) 
WAVES Bazaar - an year -round, hybrid global marketplace for India’s media and 
entertainment sector. It enables structured B2B meetings, co -production deals and 
showcasing of Indian films, animation, gaming, VFX and XR content to  international 
buyers; (ii) WAVEX - A dedicated startup accelerator and incubator for AVGC -XR and 
emerging media technologies. It provides early -stage studios access to mentorship, 
advanced production and immersive -tech infrastructure, and curated investor linkages 
to help them scale and secure global projects. At WAVES Summit 2025, it facilitated 
pitching for 30 startups to investors while providing exhibition space for over 100 
startups to engage with international studios. Through partnerships with T -Hub and 
IICT, it currently incubates startups, supports Government pilots via innovation 
challenges like Bhashasetu, and provides global exposure through platforms like IFFI, 
successfully aiding startups in securing foreign investment and validating Indian IP 
abroad; (iii) Creatosphere - Annual ‘Create in India challenges’ that runs 30 –35 national 
competitions across animation, gaming, webtoons and digital storytelling. It serves as a 
talent-discovery platform, nurturing new creators and connecting them with mentorship, 
incubation and industry opportunities. Year -wise proposed targets for IICT/WAVES, 
furnished by the Ministry, include (a) IICT, Mumbai to be recognized Deemed University 
under ‘Distinct Institution’ category focusing on 17 specialized courses across 
Animation, VFX, Gaming, and Comics during the FY 2026 -27; (b) IICT, Mumbai to be 
located in its permanent campus and established as a complete university, and 
WAVES, 2027 during the FY 2027-28; and  (c) IICT, Mumbai to fully function as the hub 
of AVGC -XR in India, during the FY 2028 -29.  The Ministry conveyed that these 
initiatives collectively support the formulation of a structured policy and guideline 
framework for the AVGC -XR sector. Further, a dedicated mission for Media and 
Entertainment Sector (including AVGC Sector) is also under its consideration. 
 
With regard to harnessing benefits of AI in the Ministry of Information and 
Broadcasting, on content creation, programming and broadcasting, the Ministry 
submitted that under the WAVES Platform, WaveX (A high -intensity accelerator 

62 
 
connecting Al-focussed M&E startups with global capital) has launched ‘Kalaa Setu’ and 
‘Bhasha Setu’ to invite AI startups to build a real -time multilingual multimedia content 
generation solution for prompt citizen outreach. Under Kalaa Setu and Bhasha Setu, 10 
startups have been selected, and their AI -enabled services are currently being utilized 
on a pilot basis by various media units, including the Press Information Bureau (PIB), 
Central Bureau of Communication (CBC), Doordarshan (DD), Akashvani, New Media 
Wing, and Publications Division. The services being tested include translation of press 
releases and articles into regional languages, video creation, subtitle generation, voice -
overs, e -Books, audio books, audio dubbing in regional languages etc. Based on the 
outcomes of the pilot, a limited RFP is proposed to be floated shortly for empanelling 
the selected startups to provide AI -based services to these media units on a regular 
basis. Further, positioning WAVES as a platform for “entertainment economics and 
technology”, MoI&B has launched Creatosphere (An Al -driven immersion and co -
creation zone), which is part of the broader ecosystem for tech (including AI) adoption in 
M&E. Besides, under Doordarshan, DD News have constituted a Committee to explore 
and evaluate various opportunities for integrating AI technologies into the channel 
operations. Potential applications under consideration include AI anchors, voice -over 
services, and other innovative uses of Artificial Intelligence that could enhance content 
delivery and audience engagement.  
The Committee note that with rapidly evolving technology and increasing internet 
penetration all across the Country, coupled with one of the cheapest data rates, the 
usage of AVGC -XR globally is poised to grow at an exponential pace.  This creates 
abundant opportunities, particularly through the National Centre of Excellence 
[(NCoE)/Indian Institute of Creative Technology (IICT)] which has some key objectives 
like (a) Focussing of creating Indian IP; (b) Leveraging our cultural heritage in new age; 
(c) Create a multiplier effect in the industry; (d) An industry led initiative in partnership 
with State and academia; (e) Integrated focus on education, skilling industry, 
development, innovation; (f) Hub and spoke model of development to be followed; and 
(g) IIIC as the hub and several centers as its spokes dedicated innovation and research 
fund to promote start -up ecosystem. The Committee note that this year's Budget 
announcement under the banner of Indian Institute of Creative Technology for 15,000 
Content Creation Labs, and objectives under NCoE will play a significant role to allow 
our creators to gain access to the latest tools and technologies, generate employment 
and boost ‘Orange Economy’ of the Country. 
Considering that AVGC -XR sector is emerging as a critical pillar of the Creative 
Economy/Orange Economy, the Committee hope that the initiatives undertaken by the 
Ministry under this sector will harness the potential of the Indian AVGC -XR industry and 
urge the Ministry to: - (i) Ensure  that the timeline and targets fixed for 
NCoE/IICT/WAVES are adhered to and the Committee may be apprised of the tangible 
outcome of the initiatives taken under this Sector; (ii) Finalize a National AVGC -XR 
Mission/Policy at the earliest with clear objectives, measurable targets, institutional 
responsibilities, and funding provisions to ensure sustained growth of the AVGC -XR 
sector; (iii) To complete the proposed permanent campus of IICT at Film City, 
Goregaon, on schedule; (iv) Link Talent Discovery to Commercial Viability under the 
‘Talent Development in Animation, Visual Effects, Gaming and Comics (AVGC) Sector’ 
component (under the Central Sector Scheme – DCDFC); (v) Promote Indian IP and 

63 
 
Original Content in animation, gaming, VFX and XR by providing financial incentives, 
co-production frameworks, and export promotion schemes  to reduce dependency on 
outsourced work from global studios; (vi)  Establish additional regional Centres of 
Excellence in collaboration with States, industry and academic institutions to create a 
distributed skill development and research ecosystem to fix year -wise and quarter-wise 
targets for each of the initiatives taken/planned under AVGC Sector; (vii) Furnish details 
with respect to establishment of Animation, Visual Effects, Gaming and Comics (AVGC) 
Content Creator Labs in 15,000 schools and 500 colleges, as announced in Budget 
2026–27 under WAVES/IICT; (viii) Focus on developing a comprehensive curriculum 
and advanced world-class infrastructure for filling up the critical skill gaps in the sector; 
(ix) Furnish details of the States/UTs who participated in WAVES Summit and those 
selected to be part of the WAVES vision; (x) Make WaveX and WAVES Bazaar 
initiatives as continuous platforms to have support throughout the year for incubation, 
mentorship, funding, and global market access for startups, rather than limiting them to 
annual events; and (xi) The Committee are of the view that the Ministry may consider 
formulating clear guidelines to ensure the ethical and responsible use of Artificial 
Intelligence in broadcasting, particularly in the use of AI -based news anchors. The 
Committee urge that AI should be deployed as a complementary tool rather than a 
replacement for human professionals, ensuring that technological adoption does not 
lead to job displacement of one and giving it to some other. The Committee are of the 
opinion that adequate policy measures may also be devised to protect and promote 
human creativity, especially in journalism, films, music and other creative fields so as to 
ensure that technological advancements do not undermine human talent and artistic 
excellence. 
Reply of the Government 
 
(i)    Ensure that the timeline and targets fixed for NCoE/IICT/WAVES are 
adhered to and the Committee may be apprised of the tangible outcome of the 
initiatives taken under this Sector; 
 
Reply: 
   The Ministry has undertaken structured and time -bound interventions to ensure 
adherence to the targets set for NCoE/IICT and WAVES initiatives, with tangible 
progress achieved across institutional development, skilling, innovation, and market 
integration. 
   The Indian Institute of Creative Technologies (IICT), established as a National 
Centre of Excellence, has made significant progress in its institutional development and 
current operations. IICT has been incorporated as a Section 8 company with an interim 
campus operationalised from NFDC, Mumbai since July 2025. It has launched 18+ 
industry-oriented courses with 100+ student enrolments in its initial phase and has 
initiated the process for Deemed University status. IICT has also established strong 
global partnerships with leading technology companies such as Google, Meta, NVIDIA, 
Microsoft, Apple and Adobe etc. and has commenced startup incubation activities, 
thereby demonstrating progress in skilling, research, and innovation. 
    Further, IICT is structurally integrated within the broader WAVES ecosystem, 
enabling a seamless pipeline of Talent (CIC) → Skill (IICT) → Startup (WaveX) → 

64 
 
Market (WAVES Bazaar), thereby ensuring convergence between education, 
incubation, and industry requirements. 
   In addition, IICT has operationalised the National AI Skilling Initiative, launched 
on 23.03.2026 by the Hon’ble Minister of Information & Broadcasting in partnership with 
YouTube, with the objective of democratizing access to high -quality AI training for 
creators and media professionals. The programme aims to train 15,000 participants 
across AVGC and media technology domains. It is being implemented in two phases: 
Phase-I (March –June 2026) comprising a 33 -hour foundational online course, and 
Phase-II (July–December 2026) comprising advanced AI training in hybrid mode. 
Under the broader WAVES framework, tangible outcomes have also been 
achieved through its integrated initiatives. WAVES 2025 witnessed participation from 
over 90 countries with more than 10,000 delegates, facilitating large -scale B2B 
engagements, startups participation, and international collaborations, generating 
significant business and investment opportunities. The next edition of WAVES is 
proposed to be held in 2027, reflecting the Ministry’s commitment to continuity, scale, 
and sustained global engagement. 
The WAVES Bazaar has emerged as a year -round global e-marketplace enabling 
co-productions, investments, and market access, while WaveX has incubated startups 
and CIC has created a nationwide talent pipeline linked to industry and global platforms. 
These outcomes collectively demonstrate that the timelines and targets under the 
NCoE/IICT/WAVES framework are being effectively adhered to, with clear, measurable 
and tangible progress in strengthening India’s AVGC -XR ecosystem, enhancing 
employability, fostering innovation, and positioning India as a global hub for creative 
content and technologies. 
 
(ii)   Finalize a National AVGC -XR Mission/Policy at the earliest with clear 
objectives, measurable targets, institutional responsibilities, and funding provisions to 
ensure sustained growth of the AVGC-XR sector; 
 
Reply: 
  The Ministry is in the process of finalising an integrated National AVGC -XR 
Mission/Policy with clearly defined objectives, measurable outcomes, institutional 
mechanisms and funding framework to ensure sustained and structured growth of the 
sector. In this regard, an Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC) Note is under 
consideration for onward submission to the Department of Expenditure for appraisal and 
approval. 
The proposed policy adopts a mission -mode approach to address key structural 
gaps in the AVGC -XR ecosystem, including fragmented skilling frameworks, limited 
access to finance, low levels of original IP creation, and the absence of an integrated 
national support architecture. It envisages a comprehensive and convergent framework 
covering talent development, content creation, innovation, entrepreneurship, global 
market access and preservation of creative assets. 
The policy is designed to strengthen the entire value chain of the creative 
economy by promoting industry -aligned skilling, incentivising original content and IP 
creation, enabling startup incubation and innovation, and enhancing India’s participation 
in global markets and co-production platforms.  

65 
 
(iii)      To complete the proposed permanent campus of IICT at Film City, 
Goregaon, on schedule; 
 
Reply: 
    The Ministry is taking concerted steps to ensure timely completion of the 
proposed permanent campus of the Indian Institute of Creative Technologies (IICT) at 
Film City, Goregaon, Mumbai. Land measuring 10 acres for the campus has already 
been allocated by the Govt. of Maharashtra, and preparatory activities are progressing 
in a time-bound manner. 
   Clearance-related processes are at an advanced stage, with State -level 
approvals for Wildlife/ESZ already obtained and final approval is expected in the 
forthcoming meeting of the National Board for Wildlife. Further, out of 25 statutory 
clearances required for construction of the new campus, 23 have already been secured, 
with the remaining approvals under active follow-up. 
3.    Simultaneously, IICT is functioning from its interim campus at NFDC, ensuring 
continuity of academic and incubation activities while the permanent infrastructure is 
being developed. This phased approach is aimed at adhering to timelines and ensuring 
the creation of a state-of-the-art campus for the AVGC-XR sector. 
 
(iv)    Link Talent Discovery to Commercial Viability under the ‘Talent Development 
in Animation, Visual Effects, Gaming and Comics (AVGC) Sector’ component (under the 
Central Sector Scheme – DCDFC); 
 
Reply: 
 The Ministry has operationalised a structured ecosystem to l ink talent discovery 
with commercial viability under the AVGC sector through the integrated WAVES 
framework.  
 Under this framework, the Create in India Challenge (CIC) serves as a 
nationwide talent discovery platform, identifying emerging creators, innovators, startups, 
and professionals across AVGC -XR and media & entertainment sectors through 
industry-led challenges and competitions. Talent identified through CIC and other 
initiatives is systematically channelled into the startup accelerator ecosystem under 
WaveX, which provides incubation, mentorship, infrastructure support, and investor 
connect, enabling creators to develop scalable products and intellectual property. 
Startups are supported across the lifecycle from ideation to commercialisation, with 
participation in national and international platforms facilitating market readiness.  
Further, WAVES Bazaar serves as the market access and commercialisation 
platform, functioning as a global e -marketplace that enables B2B interactions, co -
productions, investment linkages, and international distribution opportunities. The 
platform has facilitated thousands of structured meetings and significant business 
discussions, allowing creators and startups to convert creative outputs into viable 
commercial ventures. 
  
This integrated pipeline, linking talent discovery through CIC with incubation 
(WaveX) and market access (WAVES Bazaar), ensures that creative talent is effectively 
translated into entrepreneurship, IP creation, and sustainable economic value within the 

66 
 
AVGC ecosystem.  
 
(v)     Promote Indian IP and Original Content in animation, gaming, VFX and XR 
by providing financial incentives, co -production frameworks, and export promotion 
schemes to reduce dependency on outsourced work from global studios; 
 
Reply: 
The WAVES initiative actively promotes Indian IP and original content in 
animation, gaming, VFX and XR through targeted platforms such as WaveX and 
WAVES Bazaar. WaveX has provided a dedicated ecosystem for startups, enabling 
over 1500 registrations, live pitching opportunities, investor connect, and funding 
support to transform innovative ideas into scalable IP -driven ventures. Complementing 
this, WAVES Bazaar has served as a global marketplace facilitating over 3000 B2B 
meetings and generating significant business outcomes, enabling co -production 
partnerships, content licensing, and international market access. Together, these 
platforms operationalize financial enablement, industry linkages, and export promotion, 
thereby strengthening India’s transition from an outsourcing hub to a creator of globally 
competitive original content.  
 
(vi)   Establish additional regional Centres of Excellence in collaboration with 
States, industry and academic institutions to create a distributed skill development and 
research ecosystem to fix year -wise and quarter -wise targets for each of the initiatives 
taken/planned under AVGC Sector; 
 
Reply: 
The National Centre of Excellence (NCoE) for Animation, Visual Effects, Gaming, 
Comics and Extended Reality has been established at Indian Institute of Creative 
Technologies, Mumbai, as a premier institution for skill development, education, 
innovation and industry collaboration in the AVGC sector. The NCoE is envisaged to 
serve as the anchor institution for developing high -quality talent, industry -aligned 
curriculum, incubation support and research capabilities. 
For expansion at the regional level, a Hub -and-Spoke model is under 
consideration of the Ministry wherein IICT, Mumbai shall function as the central hub, 
while additional regional Centres of Excellence are proposed to be established in 
collaboration with State Governments, industry partners and academic institutions as 
spoke centres. 
 
(vii)   Furnish details with respect to establishment of Animation, Visual Effects, 
Gaming and Comics (AVGC) Content Creator Labs in 15,000 schools and 500 colleges, 
as announced in Budget 2026–27 under WAVES/IICT. 
 
Reply: 
The establishment of Content Creator Labs (CCLs) through IICT in 15,000 schools 
and 500 colleges, was announced by Hon’ble Finance Minister in the Union Budget 
2026–27. 
In pursuance of the Budget Announcement, a stakeholder consultation workshop 
on “Talent Development in AVGC through Content Creation Labs” was held on 

67 
 
12.02.2026 under the chairmanship of Secretary, Ministry of Information & 
Broadcasting, to seek inputs on academic integration, faculty capacity building and 
industry linkages for the proposed labs. Thereafter, a Breakout Session under the Post -
Budget Webinar on “Allocation in Union Budget 2026 –27 for the Orange Economy: 
AVGC Content Creator Labs (CCLs) in Schools & Colleges” was organised on 
09.03.2026 in coordination with the Department of Higher Education and NITI Aayog. 
Further, the Ministry is holding regular meeting with representatives of D/o School 
Education & Literacy and D/o Higher Education under the Ministry of Education, IICT 
and NCVET to deliberate upon the implementation of CCLs in 15,000 schools and 500 
colleges. 
 
(viii)  Focus on developing a comprehensive curriculum and advanced world -class 
infrastructure for filling up the critical skill gaps in the sector; 
 
Reply: 
Focus is being placed on development of a comprehensive curriculum and 
creation of advanced world -class infrastructure to bridge critical skill gaps in the sector. 
With this objective, IICT has been set up by the Government to skill the students with 
latest technologies across AVGC -XR domains and provide industry -ready workforce. 
Further, as per the Union Budget 2026-27 mandate, Content Creator Labs will be set-up 
through IICT in 15000 schools and 500 colleges wherein focus would be towards 
hands-on experience to students in AVGC -XR domains to give them exposure from 
school level itself and to fill up the skill gaps.    
 (ix)   Furnish details of the States/UTs who participated in WAVES Summit and 
those selected to be part of the WAVES vision; 
 
Reply: 
WAVES Summit 2025 witnessed active participation from 15 States namely 
Haryana, Delhi, Madhya Pradesh, Telangana, Gujarat, Goa, Andhra Pradesh, Kerala, 
Rajasthan, Uttar Pradesh, Meghalaya, Punjab and Maharashtra, through dedicated 
State Pavilions and exhibitions. These States formed an integral part of the WAVES 
vision by showcasing their creative ecosystems, facilitating collaborations, and 
contributing to the national objective of positioning India as a global hub for the Media & 
Entertainment sector under the 'Create in India, Create for the World' initiative. 
 
(x)    Make WaveX and WAVES Bazaar initiatives as continuous platforms to have 
support throughout the year for incubation, mentorship, funding, and global market 
access for startups, rather than limiting them to annual events;  
Reply: 
The Ministry has already positioned WaveX and WAVES Bazaar as continuous, 
year-round platforms to provide sustained support for incubation, mentorship, funding, 
and global market access to startups and creators in the AVGC sector. 
WaveX has been operationalised as an ongoing startup accelerator ecosystem, 
with over 120 applications received, around 30+ startups onboarded, and incubation 
support extended through multiple centres across premier institutions. During WAVES 
2025, over 200 startups were engaged, with nearly 100 startups showcasing 

68 
 
innovations and receiving mentorship, investor connect, and opportunities for 
commercialization. The initiative also facilitates continuous participation in national and 
international platforms, enabling sustained exposure and growth.  
Similarly, WAVES Bazaar functions as a 24x7 digital marketplace and networking 
platform, with 6,000+ sellers and over 5,000 global buyers onboarded. It has facilitated 
more than 9,000 structured B2B meetings and generated significant business and 
investment discussions, along with enabling co -productions and global collaborations 
across multiple international markets.  
These initiatives demonstrate that incubation, mentorship, funding support, and 
market access are being provided on a continuous basis, thereby ensuring sustained 
ecosystem development beyond annual events. 
 
(xi) The Committee are of the view that the Ministry may consider formulating clear 
guidelines to ensure the ethical and responsible use of Artificial Intelligence in 
broadcasting, particularly in the use of AI-based news anchors.  
 
Reply:  
The use of Artificial Intelligence (AI) in the broadcasting sector is still at a very 
nascent stage and continues to evolve. As and when it becomes evident, necessary 
steps will be taken, if required, for policy formulation. 
 
Ministry of Information and Broadcasting 
(O.M. No. W-11/26/2026-PC Cell dated 23/06/2026) 
INFORMATION SECTOR  
Press Information Bureau (PIB)  
(Recommendation Sl. No. 10) 
        The Committee note that the Press Information Bureau (PIB) is the nodal 
agency of the Government of India to disseminate information through print, electronic 
and social media on Government policies and programmes, initiatives and 
achievements. It functions as an interface between the Government and the media and 
also provides feedback to the Government on people’s reaction as reflected in the 
media. It also advises the Government on communication strategies best suited to meet 
the needs of the media.  Under PIB, a Fact Check Unit (FCU) was set up in November, 
2019, in order to monitor and check the circulation and dissemination of factually 
incorrect/doctored news and information over different modes of news media and social 
media platforms, which often mislead people on various issues. The mandate of the PIB 
Fact Check Unit is to provide the official/authentic version of any news doing rounds on 
various media platforms by making available the factually correct information in the 
public domain. The PIB -FCU receives communication/messages from the public at 
large through WhatsApp, email, Twitter and PIB’s website. These fact -checks are 
available at the website of PIB. The fact -checked content by PIB -FCU is taken up with 
the concerned social media platforms for appropriate action under rule 3(1)(b) of the IT 
Rules, 2021. Briefing about the Fact Check Unit of PIB, the Ministry informed that during 
Operation Sindoor, the Fact Check Unit of PIB worked round the clock to curb fake 

69 
 
news, quickly detected and issued swift rebuttals to edited videos, misinformation, and 
propaganda and around 1,400 URLs were blocked. The Committee are informed that 
the central Fact -Check Unit which falls under the guidelines of the Information 
Technology (IT) Act, is under judicial review. However, a Fact Check Unit under the 
Press Information Bureau (PIB) is currently functional.  
While Clarifying about the mandate of MIB, the Ministry submitted that under the 
IT Act and the Intermediary Guidelines they deal with IT content and media content 
connected with news and media outlets and to that extent, they make use of the 
relevant provisions for removing content under certain considerations. The Ministry 
further admitted the existence of regulatory gaps in respect of online media and OTT 
platforms.  On a related issue, the Ministry stated that during the last year, on the basis 
of Section 294 of the ‘Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita’ Act and Section 4 of the ‘Indecent 
Representation of Women Act’, 25 OTT platforms were blocked initially, and 
subsequently another 18 platforms were blocked. At present, blocking orders are 
continuously being issued against OTT apps and content circulating in online media. In 
the light of the role and mandate of PIB -FCU, the Committee are of the view that the 
increasing spread of misinformation and manipulated content across various media 
platforms necessitates strengthening of institutional mechanisms for timely verification, 
quick detection and blocking of fake news, harmful content and dissemination of 
authentic information. Accordingly, the Committee seek that the following areas may 
also be explored and apprised them of the outcome: - (i) To enhance the outreach and 
accessibility of the Fact Check Unit under the  PIB through wider public awareness 
campaigns and improved coordination with social media platforms; (ii) To enhance 
technological capabilities, including the use of artificial intelligence tools for real -time 
monitoring of misinformation trends, improved coordination with social media platforms 
to facilitate faster identification and removal of misleading content;  (iii) Expand the Fact 
Check Unit’s capacity   with quantifiable target for the next FY including trained 
personnel for regional languages; (iv) Publish quarterly transparency reports  on 
misinformation identified, corrective action taken, and engagement with media 
platforms; (v) Formulate a comprehensive regulatory framework to effectively address 
issues relating to misinformation, harmful content and public grievances related to it, 
coordinate with other Ministries and MeitY  to close regulatory gaps;and (vi) Develop a 
structured grievance redressal mechanism for online and OTT content, integrating 
Section 79(3)(b) of the IT Act and existing civil redress provisions. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
a) Ministry has taken note of the recommendation of committee with regard to fact 
check and related matter and action will be taken accordingly.  
b) With regard OTT related matter the reply is given below: 
Information Technology (Intermediary Guidelines and Digital Media, Ethics Code) 
Rules, 2021:  
1.  Information Technology (Intermediary Guidelines and Digital Media Ethics Code) 
Rules, 2021 were notified on 25 February, 2021. Part -III of the Rules relating to content 
of OTT platforms is administered by the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting, and 
has three broad features:  

70 
 
i. Code of Ethics for OTT Platforms 
ii. Three Tier Grievance Redressal Mechanism as under : 
a. Level-I- Publisher 
b. Level-II- Self –Regulating Body of publishers, and 
c. Level-III- Oversight Mechanism of Central Government 
iii. Furnishing of information by publishers to the Government. 
2. The Code of Ethics applicable to the OTT platforms provides for the following 
general principles:  
i. A publisher shall not transmit or publish or exhibit any content which is prohibited 
under any law for the time being in force or has been prohibited by any court of 
competent jurisdiction. 
ii. A publisher shall take into consideration the following factors, when deciding to 
feature or transmit or publish or exhibit any content, after duly considering the 
implications of any content as falling under the following categories, and shall 
exercise due caution and discretion in relation to the same, namely:— 
a. content which affects the sovereignty and integrity of India; 
b. content which threatens, endangers or jeopardises the security of the 
State; 
c. content which is detrimental to India’s friendly relations with foreign 
countries; 
d. content which is likely to incite violence or disturb the maintenance of public 
order. 
iii. A publisher shall take into consideration India’s multi -racial and multi -religious 
context and exercise due caution and discretion when featuring the activities, 
beliefs, practices, or views of any racial or religious group.  
3. Age-based Classification of Content: All content transmitted or published or 
exhibited by a publisher of online curated content shall be classified, based on the 
nature and type of content, into the various rating categories. The classification is to be 
done based on aspects such as themes and messages; violence; nudity; sex; language; 
drug and substance abuse; and horror.  
 
Nature of Content (suitable for) Classification 
Unrestricted access, regardless of age, and is family friendly U  
For persons aged 7 years and above, and can be viewed by 
a person under the age of 7 years with parental guidance 
U/A 7+ 
For persons aged 13 years and above, and can be viewed 
by a person under the age of 13 years with parental 
guidance 
U/A 13+ 

71 
 
For persons aged 16 years and above, and can be viewed 
by a person under the age of 16 years with parental 
guidance 
U/A 16+ 
Which is restricted to adults A 
 
4. Display of Classification: The publisher of online curated content shall prominently 
display the classification ratings specific to each content or programme together with a 
content descriptor informing the user about the nature of the content, and advising on 
viewer discretion (if applicable) at the beginning of every programme enabling the user to 
make an informed decision, prior to watching the programme. 
i. The content descriptor should describe various aspects of a film, web -series etc. 
These aspects can be related to depiction of illegal or harmful substances, 
imitable behavior, nudity, language, sex, violence, fear, threat, horror, etc. 
ii. The publisher of online curated content making available content that is classified 
as U/A 13+or higher shall ensure that access control mechanisms, including 
parental locks, are made available for such content. 
iii. A publisher of online curated content which makes available content or 
programmes that is classified as “A” shall implement a reliable age verification 
mechanism for viewership of such content. 
iv. A publisher of online curated content must strive to include classification rating 
and consumer advice for their programmes in any print, televised or online 
promotional or publicity material and prominently display the classification rating 
specific to each such content. 
5. Restriction of access to certain curated content by a child: Every publisher of 
online curated content providing access to online curated content which has an “A” rating 
shall take all efforts to restrict access to such content by a child through the 
implementation of appropriate access control measures. For ‘U/A 13+’ or higher rated 
content, the OTT platform will implement access control mechanisms such as parental 
locks. For ‘A’ rated content, it will implement a reliable age verification mechanism for 
viewership of such content. Therefore, the parents would be empowered to ensure that 
children do not watch potentially sensitive content. 
6. Grievance Redressal Mechanism: A three -level grievance redressal mechanism 
has been established under the rules with two levels of self -regulation- Level I being the 
publisher and Level II being the Self Regulatory Body, and the third level being the 
Oversight Mechanism under the Ministry of Information & Broadcasting. The rules 
provide for an effective grievance redressal mechanism for receiving, processing, and 
time-bound disposal of public grievances related to the Code of Ethics. The self -
regulatory body would be headed by a retired judge of the Supreme Court or of a High 
Court, or by a person of eminence from the relevant field, and can issue advisories to the 
publisher. 
 
7. Action against obscene content on OTT platforms under Section 79(3)(b) of IT 
Act, 2000: Ministry of Information and Broadcasting has taken action to disable certain 

72 
 
OTT platforms publishing obscene content for public access in India. The content 
included sexual innuendos and, in some cases, long portions of sexually explicit scenes 
involving nudity thereby being pornographic in nature. Content of the platforms were 
found in violation of section 67 of the IT Act, Section 294 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita 
(BNS), 2023, and section 4 of the Indecent Representation of Women (Prohibition) Act, 
1986. Some platforms published sexually explicit content in violation of the Section 67A 
of the IT Act. 
a. 18 OTT platforms actioned upon in March, 2024:  19 websites, 10 apps (7 on 
Google Play Store, 3 on Apple App Store) were disabled for public access in India.  
Dreams Films Voovi 
 
Hot Shots 
VIP 
Uncut 
Adda 
Tri Flicks 
 
X Prime 
 
Neon X VIP Beshara
ms 
Hunters Rabbit Xtramood Nuefliks 
MoodX Mojflix Yessma Fugi Chikooflix Prime Play 
 
b. 25 OTT platforms actioned upon on 23 July, 2025: 26 websites and 14 apps (9 on 
Google Play Store, 5 on Apple App Store) associated with these platforms were disabled 
for public access in India.  
Big Shots App Desiflix Boomex NeonX VIP Navarasa Lite 
Gulab App Kangan App Bull App ShowHit Jalva App 
Wow 
Entertainment 
Look 
Entertainment 
Hitprime Fugi Feneo 
ShowX Sol Talkies Adda TV ALTT HotX VIP 
Hulchul App MoodX Triflicks Ullu Mojflix 
 
c. 5 OTT platforms actioned upon on 22 February, 2026: 5 websites and 6 apps (4 
on Google Play Store, 2 on Apple App Store) associated with these platforms were 
disabled for public access in India.  
MoodX VIP Koyal PlayPro Digi Movieplex Feel Jugnu 
As can be seen from above, in some cases the platforms have attempted to circumvent 
the action taken by the Ministry, and have been again actioned upon. 
However, in so far as Fact Check Unit, PIB is concerned, the comments in the report 
have been noted, and necessary action will be taken accordingly. 
 
Ministry of Information and Broadcasting 
(O.M. No. W-11/26/2026-PC Cell dated 23/06/2026) 
 
NORTH EASTERN REGION (NER) 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 11) 
          The Committee note that the budgetary allocations for the FY 2026 -27, has been 
fixed at Rs. 111.21 crore at BE stage. The budgetary allocations for NER during the 
financial year 2025-26 at BE and RE stage, were Rs. 111.85 crore and Rs. 117.84 crore 
respectively. Whereas the actual expenditure, till 31st December, 2025, was Rs. 30.71 

73 
 
crore which is just about  26.16% of RE allocations. Under the 
Schemes/Projects/Organisations of the Ministry of Information Broadcasting in North 
Eastern Region, a trend of under -utilisation of funds has been observed during the 
financial years 2022 -23, 2024 -25 and 2025 -26.  Regarding the reasons for low 
expenditure during the FY 2025 -26, the Ministry have informed that it happened due to 
multiple factors including (a) On 12.09.2025 withdrawal of BE allocations for FY 2025 -26 
for the components ‘Continuing Projects of three year BIND scheme (2017 -20) to be 
completed’ in Project Mode and it was later reinstated on 16.10.2025; (b) under DCFDC, 
receipt of limited number of proposals from the North East Districts. Also, as per the 
directives, NFDC was to limit its investment to 40% of the production cost. Hence, in 
regions like NER, for producers to invest the remaining 60% or more was challenging; 
(c) Under CRS, there was a very low level of awareness about CRS in the region, 
consequently the numbers of operational community radio stations in the region were 
very less.   
With respect to initiatives planned for better performance under the Schemes/projects 
being implemented in North-East Region for the FY 2026-27, the Ministry have informed: 
(a) Under BIND scheme, the frequency of monitoring meetings has been increased at all 
levels, an Apex Committee has been constituted to monitor the progress of projects 
under the Scheme; (b) under DCDFC scheme, several measures have been taken for 
promotion and production of feature films, documentaries, animation films in various 
North Eastern languages; (c) under CRS, financial assistance are given to Operational 
Community Radio Stations for purchase of equipment to set -up Community Radio 
Stations, Workshops are held since a significant barrier to the expansion of Community 
Radio Stations (CRSs) across India is that eligible organizations don’t know about what 
community radio is or how it works. The purpose of such workshops are spreading 
awareness among eligible organizations; (d) under DCID, Regions/Units -wise Annual 
and Quarterly targets are set up; etc. 
In the light of above, the Committee are of the view that under -utilisation undermines the 
very objective of promoting media infrastructure and cultural outreach in the North 
Eastern Region. The Committee, therefore, urge the Ministry to take positive action with 
respect to the following and apprise them accordingly: - (i) Prepare a time -bound action 
plan for optimum utilisation of funds allocated under all the schemes of the North 
Eastern Region (NER); (ii) Prepare a road map with timeline for having at least one 
Community Radio Station (CRS) in each district of the North Eastern States as per the 
vision under supporting Community Radio Movement in India and take concrete steps 
accordingly. Also increase awareness among eligible institutions ensuring timely 
financial assistance to establish CRS and to have mechanism for impact assessment; 
(iii) Upgrade technical infrastructure, including studios, transmitters, and digital 
broadcasting equipment, to improve signal quality and reach in remote and tribal areas; 
and (iv) Intensify outreach efforts, organise more awareness programmes and extend 
necessary facilitation support so that stakeholders/producers from the NER are 
encouraged to actively participate in such initiatives. Also explore the possibility of 
having regional training hubs  in collaboration with IICT and other media institutions to 
strengthen skill development in NER”. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
(i) Prepare a time -bound action plan for optimum utilisation of funds allocated under all 
the schemes of the North Eastern Region (NER) 
BIND: 
 
Details of time-bound projects to be undertaken in the NER in FY 2026-27 are as under:  

74 
 
Sl. 
No. 
Brief Description of the projects AT No. Estimated 
Price/AT Price 
in Crore 
Target Date for 
completion of the 
Project  
  IP Connectivity at DDK Aizawl  1955 1.59 Q2, 2026-27 
(Equipment 
supplied) 
  Upgradation and replacement of 
Earth stations at Agartala, 
Imphal, Kohima, Itanagar, 
Gangtok and Port Blair 
1954 11.33 Q3, 2026-27 
(partial equipment 
delivery at 04 
Kendras) 
  Six Camera OB vans for North 
East and other areas 
1949 84.70 Q4, 2026-27 
(Equipment 
supplied to 04 out 
of 09 Consignees) 
  Upgradation of Earth Station at 
DDK Shillong, Guwahati and 
Aizawl  
AT yet to 
be 
issued 
14.90 Q2-2026-27 
  Replacement/ Installation of 1 
kW and 10 kW new FM 
Transmitters at 8 places (4 new 
and 4 replacement) 
AT yet to 
be 
issued 
- Q4 2026-27 
CRS: 
Applications for setting up of CRS and financial assistance shall be processed in a time 
bound manner 
With regard to DCID and DCDFC, the recommendation of committee will be taken into 
consideration and all efforts will be made to utilize the full allocation in NER. 
 
(ii) Prepare a road map with timeline for having at least one Community Radio Station 
(CRS) in each district of the North Eastern States as per the vision under supporting 
Community Radio Movement in India and take concrete steps accordingly. Also increase 
awareness among eligible institutions ensuring timely financial assistance to establish 
CRS and to have mechanism for impact assessment; 
 
The following steps are being undertaken in the NER States: 
• State specific awareness generation activities 
• Timely implementation of various activities of the scheme 
• Stakeholders engagements 
• Awareness generation amongst eligible organizations  
• Training and capacity building 
 
(iii) Upgrade technical infrastructure, including studios, transmitters, and digital 
broadcasting equipment, to improve signal quality and reach in remote and tribal areas; 
 
Under BIND scheme, technical facilities at 24X7 Doordarshan regional channels 
including Doordarshan regional channels in North Eastern region (NER) are being 
upgraded with latest technical equipment in the field of broadcast technology for HD 
production & post production. The following projects have been envisaged to be 
undertaken during FY 2026-27 in order to upgrade technical infrastructure of PB in NER: 
 Sl. No. Brief Description of the projects 
  IP Connectivity at DDK Aizawl  

75 
 
  Upgradation and replacement of Earth stations at Agartala, Imphal, 
Kohima, Itanagar, Gangtok and Port Blair 
  Six Camera OB vans for North East and other areas 
  Upgradation of Earth Station at DDK Shillong, Guwahati and Aizawl  
  Replacement/ Installation of 1 kW and 10 kW new FM Transmitters at 
8 places (4 new and 4 replacement) 
 
Under the CRS Scheme, a provision to provide financial assistance has been made 
for infrastructure support, including support to solar power. In case of any emergency 
situations, stations can also avail emergency grants. 
 
(iv) Intensify outreach efforts, organise more awareness programmes and extend 
necessary facilitation support so that stakeholders/producers from the NER are 
encouraged to actively participate in such initiatives.  
 
Under BIND Scheme, Funds are being allocated to  Doordarshan 
Kendras/Stations/channels of the North -East region for fresh/new content from the 
financial year 2023 -24. Doordarshan Kendras/Stations of the North -East region have 
produced localized content under various genres by utilizing funds allocated under BIND 
like serials, reality shows, cuisine shows, travelogues, telefilms, documentaries, quiz 
programmes etc. by   utilizing services of local artists/talent. Like previous 
years, Doordarshan Kendras/Stations of the North-East region are also in the process of 
producing programmes in various genres  by utilizing services of local 
artists/talent this year.   
Also explore the possibility of having regional training hubs  in collaboration with IICT 
and other media institutions to strengthen skill development in NER. 
 
After, running and assessing the outcomes of the Pilot CCLs, Ministry shall start the 
roll-out process for establishing CCLs in collaboration with IICT. This will also include 
identifying beneficiary institutions across the nation including NER, and those institutes, 
in a way, will serve as training points for skilling in AVGC-XR domains. 
 
Ministry of Information and Broadcasting 
(O.M. No. W-11/26/2026-PC Cell dated 23/06/2026) 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 22 of Chapter I) 
LIVE EVENT DEVELOPMENT CELL (LEDC) 
 
(Recommendation Sl. No. 12) 
         The Committee do take note of  the initiative of the Ministry of Information and 
Broadcasting to establish the Live Event Development Cell (LEDC), as a joint working 
platform involving various Ministries, State Governments, and industry stakeholders to 
promote the emerging ‘concert economy’ in the Country.  This being a nascent industry, 
growing at a rate of about 20 per cent seems to have the potential to generate local 
employment, boost tourism and contribute to the creative economy. The Ministry have 
informed that they have already held three meetings of the Joint Working Group, the 
beta version of the single -window portal has been launched and ten event venues 
related to the live -event concert economy are using the portal. The Committee do take 
cognizance of the approach of the Ministry to have (a) a single -window clearance 

76 
 
mechanism; (b) introducing the concept of pre -approved venues for sports venues, (c) 
preparing an SOP for available venues so that the live event industry can access pre -
approved venues; (d) collaborating with other Ministries for skill development in the live 
events sector; (e) engagement with State Governments to facilitate their development of 
dedicated venues for live events, etc,.  However, in order to ensure the objective of 
positioning India as a global hub for concerts and live events is achieved, the Committee 
urge the Ministry to take action on the following and apprise of the progress made in 
operationalising the Live Event Development Cell: -  (i) To take expeditious and timely 
steps to operationalise the single -window clearance portal on a full -scale basis; (ii) To 
ensure that all relevant Ministries and statutory authorities are integrated with the 
platform and have effective coordination amongst multiple related stakeholders, (iii) To 
prepare the Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs)in consultation with the States/UTs 
and concerned agencies; and (iv) To design specialised training programmes for 
building skilled workforce for the live events industry and strengthen collaboration with 
the Ministry of Skill Development and Entrepreneurship.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
(i) A single -window permissions and clearance portal pertaining to live events is 
operational and live on the India Cine Hub Website. 
(URL: https://indiacinehub.gov.in/event-permissions) 
 
(ii) Discussions are currently underway to integrate various relevant ministries and 
statutory authorities, such as ASI, SAI, DigitalSky Portal (Ministry of Civil Aviation), 
Vasant SangeetDwar Portal with the ICH single window permissions portal. 
 
(iii) A Model Executive Order (MEO)/SOP has been prepared after consultations with 
the industry stakeholders and shared on 13 th March 2026 with States/UTs. 23 
States/UTs have indicated that the Model Executive Order (MEO)/SOP will be suitably 
adopted at the earliest. 
 
(iv) A Skilling Committee led by Vice -Chancellor, Indian Institute of Mass 
Communication (IIMC) and featuring members of Event and Entertainment Management 
Association (EEMA) and Media and Entertainment Skills Council was constituted. The 
Skilling Committee proposed several initiatives to strengthen capacity building and skill 
development in the media and entertainment sector. It was informed that certificate and 
short-term courses are proposed to commence sh. Further, elective modules in relevant 
domains are planned to be incorporated into existing academic programmes of IIMC 
from the next academic session beginning in August 2026. States and Union Territories 
may review the skilling modules developed by IIMC and explore their adoption or 
replication through their respective skilling institutions to expand outreach and impact. 
Additionally, the Vice Chancellor, IIMC, indicated that skilling initiatives related to the live 
events sector could also be undertaken through IIMC’s five regional centres located 
across the country. 
 
Ministry of Information and Broadcasting 
(O.M. No. W-11/26/2026-PC Cell dated 15/07/2026) 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see Para No. 25 of Chapter I) 
 
 
 
 

77 
 
CHAPTER- III 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS  WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO 
PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT 
-NIL- 

78 
 
CHAPTER IV 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS  IN RESPECT OF  WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND REQUIRE 
REITERATION 
 
 
-NIL- 
 

79 
 
CHAPTER V 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF  WHICH REPLIES   
OF THE  GOVERNMENT ARE INTERIM IN NATURE 
-NIL- 
 
 
                                                          
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     NEW DELHI; DR. NISHIKANT DUBEY, 
   05 August, 2026  Chairperson, 
14 Sravana, 1948 (Saka) Standing Committee on  
Communications and Information Technology. 

80 
 
ANNEXURE – II 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE OBSERVATIONS/ 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THEIR TWENTIETH REPORT  
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
[Vide Paragraph No. 5 of Introduction] 
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by  the 
Government 
 
          Rec. Sl. Nos.: 1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9,10,11 and 12 
Total 12 
Percentage    100 
(ii)  Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the replies of the Government 
 
         Rec. Sl. No.: NIL  
Total 00 
Percentage 0 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and require reiteration 
        Rec. Sl. No.: NIL 
 
Total  01  00 
Percentage 0 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which the replies of the 
Government are of interim in nature 
 
        Rec. Sl. Nos.: NIL  
Total 00 
Percentage 0 
 
 
 