1
THE COMPETITION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2016
By
SHRI DUSHY ANT CHAUTALA, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Competition Act, 2002.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Competition  (Amendment) Act, 2016.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government  may, by  notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In the Competition Act, 2002, in section 53D, in sub-section (1), for the words "who
is, or has been a Judge of the Supreme Court or the Chief Justice of a High Court" the words
"who is a Judge of the Supreme Court or the Chief Justice of a High Court or an advocate for
at least ten years in a High Court or two or more such Courts in succession" shall be
substituted.
Bill No. 100 of  2016
Short title and
commencement.
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5
Amendment
of section
53D.
12 of 2003.
10

2
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The concept of separation of powers was proposed by Montesquieu in the sixteenth
century and the concept of equal opportunity has been highlighted by the framers of the
Constitution through various provisions. These two ideas are required to be incorporated in
the Competition Act, 2002 which provides inter-alia for establishment of a Commission to
prevent practices having adverse effect on competition.
The executive, the legislature and the judiciary are known as the three pillars of
democracy. It is believed that the three should function independently without major
intervention of each other and that would ensure that the respective duties are dishcarged in
the best possible manner. However, at the same time, there should be sufficient check and
balance on these three wings so as to avoid one of them from becoming totalitarian in nature.
In India, the check and balance system has been working effectively. However, it has come to
notice that some of the tribunals and commissions have exclusive provisions where only
retired judges of  the Supreme Court or the High Courts are being appointed by the executives.
This lies absolutely against the spirit of  Constitution.
Therefore, the proposed amendment is put forth to remove the provision for
appointment of retired judges as Chairperson and members. Thus only a sitting judge of the
Supreme Court or a High Court, as the case may be, can be appointed to such post if that
judge wishes to leave his office of Judge voluntary and assents to join Tribunal or
Commission.
The Bill also proposes to insert  provisions wherein an advocate with not less than ten
years of practice becomes eligible to be appointed as the Chairperson of the Tribunal. The
rationale of such could be found in our Constitution which provides for appointment of
advocates with certain years of practice as Judge of the Supreme Court or a High Court. The
same should be applied for Tribunals. This will facilitate the speedy disposal of the cases
pending in Tribunals because the positions in the Tribunals shall not remain vacant for long.
This also captures the idea of providing equal opportunity to people with equal experience
and eligibility.
The proposed amendment seeks to ensure that the doctrine of checks and balances
and right to equality is maintained.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; DUSHYANT CHAUTALA
February 11, 2016.

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE COMPETITION ACT, 2002
(ACT NO. 12 OF 2003)
* * * * * *
53D. (1) The Chairperson of the Appellate Tribunal shall be a person, who is, or has
been a Judge of the Supreme Court or the Chief Justice of a High Court.
* * * * * *
3

GMGIPMRND—31LS(S3)—25-04-2016.
LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Competition Act, 2002.
————
(Shri Dushyant Chautala, M.P .)