THE HINDU ADOPTIONS AND MAINTENANCE (AMENDMENT)
BILL, 2019
By
SHRI RAHUL SHEWALE, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Hindu Adoptions and Maintenance Act, 1956.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventieth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Hindu Adoptions and Maintenance (Amendment)
Act, 2019.
 (2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In section 18 of the Hindu Adoptions and Maintenance Act, 1956 after sub-section
(3), the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:—
"(4) Notwithstanding anything in sub-section (1), where the husband is unable
to provide maintenance to his Hindu wife on account of physical disability, mental
Short title and
commencement.
5
10
Amendment
of section 18.
Bill No. 100 of 2019
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
disorder, disappearance, renunciation of the world by entering, any religious order, the
Hindu wife shall, except where the husband has received his share in the joint family
property, be entitled to claim maintenance during her lifetime from the members of the
joint Hindu family.
Explanation.— In this section, the expression "mental disorder" means mental
illness, arrested or incomplete development of mind, psychopathic disorder or any
other disorder or disabling of mind and include schizophrenia."
5

3
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Section 18 of the Hindu Adoption and Maintenance Act, 1956 provides for the
maintenance of wife by her husband during her life time and section 19 provides for the
maintenance of wife by her father-in-law after the death of her husband. Therefore, the wife
of a person who is incapacitated does not enjoy such right of maintenance against the
relatives of the husband even if the husband is a member of a joint family.
Under the Hindu law, only sons, grandsons and great grandsons and daughters (after
the 2005 amendment to the Hindu Succession Act, 1956) have a natural and inherent right in
birth interest in the joint family property or the coparcenaries property. Other female members
of the family, such as the mother, wife and daughter-in-law do not possess the rights of
coparceners with respect to joint family property. For this reason, the right of maintenance of
female members has been given supreme importance. In cases, where the husband having a
personal obligation to maintain is not able to do, several Courts have upheld the claim of the
wife to receive maintenance from her husband's relatives out of her husband's share in the
joint family property.
Taking  into consideration the above stated factors, the Law Commission of India in its
252nd  Report on "Right of the Hindu Wife to maintenance: A relook at section 18 of the
Hindu Adoptions and Maintenance Act, 1956" recommended an amendment to the said
section 18 to protect the right of a Hindu woman in cases where the husband is not able to
maintain her.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; RAHUL SHEWALE
June 6, 2019.

ANNEXURE
THE HINDU ADOPTIONS AND MAINTENANCE ACT, 1956
(78 OF 1956)
* * * * *
18. (1) Subject to the provisions of this section, a Hindu wife, whether married before
or after the commencement of this Act, shall be entitled to be maintained by her husband
during her lifetime.
(2)  A Hindu wife shall be entitled to live separately from her husband without forfeiting
her claim to maintenance,—
(a) if he is guilty of desertion, that is to say, of abandoning her without reasonable
cause and without her consent or against her wish, or of wilfully neglecting her;
(b) if he has treated her with such cruelty as to cause a reasonable apprehension
in her mind that it will be harmful or injurious to live with her husband;
(c) if he is suffering from a virulent form of leprosy;
(d) if he has any other wife living;
(e) if he keeps a concubine in the same house in which his wife is living or
habitually resides with a concubine elsewhere;
(f) if he has ceased to be a Hindu by conversion to another religion;
(g) if there is any other cause justifying her living separately.
(3) A Hindu wife shall not be entitled to separate residence and maintenance from her
husband if she is unchaste or ceases to be a Hindu by conversion to another religion.
* * * * *
Maintenance
of wife.
4

MGIPMRND—579LS(S3)—20-06-2019.
LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Hindu Adoptions and Maintenance Act, 1956.
————
(Shri Rahul Shewale , M.P.)