: '. ,. As . INTRODUCED IN LOK SABRA. ON 
, 
Bill 'No. 100 of 1989 
THE CONSTITUTION (SIXTY-THIRD AMENDMENT) BILL, 1989 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Constitution of India. 
BE it enat:ted by Parliament in the Fortieth Year of the Republic of 
India as follows: - . 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Sixty-third Amend-
ment) Act, 1989. 
5 (2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government 
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
2. In article 356 of the Constitution. in clause (5), the proviso shall be 
omitted. 
3. Article 3fi9A of the Constitution shall be omitted. 
Short 
titIeand 
com-
mence_ 
ment. 
Amend-
mentot 
article 356. 
Omission 
ot 
article 
359A. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
, The Constitution (Fifty-ninth Amendment) Act, 1988 was passed in 
March, 1988, making certain changes in regard to making a Proclamation 
of Emergency in Punjab and to the duration of President's rule in that 
State. I 
2. On reconsideration, the Government is of the view that there is 
no need for the special powers in regard to the Proclamation of Emer-
gency in Punjab as envisaged in the amendment. It is also considered 
that the ameqsiment to article 356 made by the said Act is no longer 
needed. It is, therefore, considered that the amendments made by the 
aforesaid Act should be repealed. 
3. As regards President's Proclamation issued on 11-5-1967 under 
clause (1) of article 356 of the Constitution, this has been approved 
by both the Houses of Parliament in October, 1989. 
4. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects. 
NEW DELHI; MUFrI MOHAMMED SAYEED. 
The 28th December, 1989.: 
i 7···· 
2 

• 
• 
ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA 
• • • 
PART XVIII 
EMERGENCY PROVISIONS 
• • • 
• 
• 
3M. (1) If the President, on receipt of a report from the Governor of 
a State or otherwise, is satisfied that a situation has arisen in which the 
Government of the State cannot be carried on in acco.rdance with the 
provisions of this Constitution, the President may by Proclamation-
(a) assume to himself all or any of the functions of the Govern-
ment of the State and all or any of the powers vested in or exercisable 
by the Governor or any body or authority in the State other than 
the Legislature of the State; 
(b) declare that the powers of the Legislature of the State shall 
be exercisable by or under the authority of Parliament; 
(c) make such incidental and consequential provisions as appear 
, to the President to be necessary or desirable for giving effect to the 
objects of the Proclamation, including provisions for suspending in 
whole or in part the operation of any provisions of this Constitution 
relating to any body or authority in the State: 
Provided that nothing in this clause shall authorise the President to 
assume to himself any of the powers vested in or exercisable by a High 
Court, or to suspend in whole or in part the operation of any provision of 
this Constitution relating to High Courts. . 
(2) Any such Proclamation may be revoked or varied by a subsequent 
Proclamation. I 
(3) Every Proclamation under this article shall be laid before each 
House of Parliament and shall. except where it is a Proclamation revoking 
a previous Proclamation, cease to operate at the expiration of two months 
unless before the expiration of that period it has been app.roved by resolu-
tions of both Houses of Parliament: 
Provided that if any such Proclamation (not being a Proclamation re· 
voking a previous Proclamation) is issued at a time when the House of the 
People is dissolved or the dissolution of the House of the People takes 
place during the period of two months referred to in this clause, and if a 
resolution approving the Proclamation has been passed by the Council of 
States, but no resolution with respect to such Proclamation has been 
passed by the House of the People before the expiration of that pe,riod. 
3 
Provi. 
sions in 
case of 
failUl'e 
ot 
constitu-
tional 
machi-
neryin 
States. 

4 
the Proclamation shall cease to operate at the expiration of thirty days 
from the date on which the House of the People first sits after its recon-
stitution unless before the expiration of the said period of thirty days 
a resolution approving the Proclamation has been also passed by the 
House of the People. 
(4) A Proclamation so approved shall, unless revoked,.cease to operate 
on the expiration of a period of six months from the date of issue of the 
Proclamation: 
Provided that if and so often as a resolution approving the continu-
ance in force of such a Proclamation is passed by both Houses of Parlia-
ment, the Proclamation shall, unless revoked. continue in foree for a 
further period of six months from the date on which under this clause 
it would otherwise have ceased to operate, but no such Proclamation shall 
in any case remain in foree for more than three years: 
Provided further that if the dissolution of the House of the People 
takes place during any such period of six months and a resolution ap-
proving the continuance in force of such Proclamation has been passed 
by the Council of States, but no resolution with respect to the continu-
ance in force of such Proclamation has been passed by the House of the 
People during the said period. the Proclamation shall cease to operate at 
the expiration of thirty days from the date On which the House of the 
People first sits after its reconstitution unless before the expiration of 
the said period of thirty days a resolution approving the continuance in 
force of the Proclamation has been also passed by the House of the 
People. 
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in clause (4), a resolution 
with respect to the continuance in force of a Proclamation approved under 
clause (3) for any period beyond the expiration of one year from the 
date of issue of such Proclamation shall not be psssed by either House 
of Parliament unless-
, 
(a) a Proclamation of Emergency is in operation, in the whole 
of India or. as the case may be. in the whole or any part of. the 
State, at the time of the passing of such resolution. and 
(b) the Election Commission certifies that the continuance in 
force of the Proclamation approved under clause (3) during the 
period specified' in such resolution is necessary on account of diffi-
culties in holding general elp.ctions to the LegislatiVe Assembly of 
the State concerned: 
Provided that nothing in this clause shall apply to the Proclamation 
issued under dause (1) on the 11th day of May, 1987 with respect to 
the State of Punjab. 
* • * • • 

ANLlAr:: )JO.l 
35IA, Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution, this Part 
-shall, in relation to the State of Punjab, be subject to the following 
modiflcations, namely:-
(It) in article 3a2,-
(i) in clause (1) ,-
(A) for the opening portion, the following shall be 
substituted, namely:-
"If the President is satisfied that a grave emer-
gency exists whereby-
any part of 
whether by 
rebellion; 
(a) the security of India or of 
the territory thereof is threatened, 
war or external aggression or armed 
or 
(b) the integdty of ' India is threatened 
by internal disturbance in the whole or any part 
of the territory of Punjab, 
he may, by Proclamation, make a declaration to that 
effect in respect of .he whole of Punjab or of ~uch 
part of the terr~ thereof as may be specified in 
the Proclamation, '; , 
1O!I)Il1 )() IJ"iJIJHt1-.ruO '.JljJ bn',fO,; OJ 'H.dr'wl 
(B) in the Explanati<Jln,-
(1) after the words "armed .rebellion", the wordS' 
", or that the integrity of India is threatened by 
internal disturbance in the whole or any part of the 
territory of Punjab," shall be inserted.: 
(2) after the words "or rebellion", the words 
"or disturbance" shall be inserted; 
(ii) in clause (9). after the words "armed rebellion", at 
both the places where they occur,· the words "or internal dis-
turbance" shall be inserted;--
(b) in article 358., in clause (1). after the words "or by ex-
ternal aggression", the words "or by armed rebellion, or that 
the integrity of India is threatened by internal disturbance in 
the whOle or any part of the territory of Punjab." shall be 
inserted; 
(c) in article 359, for the words and figures "articles 20 and 
21", at both the places where they occur, the word and figures 
"article 20" 'Shall be substituted, 
'" '" '" 
App,lcll.-
tiOft of 
this 
Part to 
the Stat.! 
of Punjab. 

(Shri .;Wujti Mohammed Sayeed, Minister of Home AffAirs) 