1
Short title and
extent.
THE SPECIAL EDUCA TIONAL FACILITIES (FOR CHILDREN OF
PARENTS LIVING BELOW POVERTY LINE) BILL, 2012
By
SHRI S.S. RAMASUBBU, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for special educational facilities to the children of parents living below
poverty line and for matters connected therewith.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-third Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Special Educational Facilities (For Children of Parents
Living Below Poverty Line) Act, 2012.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “appropriate Government” means in the case of a State, the State Government,
and in other cases, the Central Government; and
(b) “parents living below poverty line” means such parents whose income from
all sources is less than rupees twenty thousand per mensem.
Bill  No. 100 of  2012
Definitions.5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
3. It shall be the duty of the appropriate Government to provide to every child born of
parents living below poverty line, the following facilities, namely:—
(a) free education from school level to the post-graduate level including higher
medical and technical education;
(b) free hostel facilities, uniform, meals and such other assistance and facilities
as are required for the proper education of children; and
(c) gainful employment to the child after he completes his education.
4. The appropriate Government shall provide scholarships upto a maximum of rupees
one thousand per mensem, in deserving cases, to the children of parents living below
poverty line while they are pursuing their education.
5. The appropriate Government shall reserve ten per cent. of the total number of seats
in all medical and technical colleges and institutions of higher studies for children born of
parents living below poverty line.
6. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, makes rules
for carrying out the purposes of the Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Facilities to
children born
of parents
living below
poverty line.
Scholarships.
Power to make
Rules.
Reservation
of seats in
medical and
technical
colleges for
children born
of parents
living below
poverty line.
5
10
15
20

3
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Nearly forty-five per cent. of the total population of our country lives below the
poverty line. Their income is meagre and they fight for their subsistence throughout their
lives. They live hand to mouth existence and cannot even think of providing elementary
education to their children. Since promotion of universal education and establishment of
classless and creedless  society is one of the basic aims of our Constitution, the Government
at the national level as well as at the State level should make provisions for free educational
facilities and provide books, uniform, writing materials, transportation and hostel facilities
free of cost to the children of persons living below poverty line, that is to say, whose total
family income is below twenty thousand rupees per month, so that they could get proper
education and better job opportunities to raise their standard of living. It will be a major step
in eradicating illiteracy from the country. It will also help such children to grow and compete
with children of higher class.
The cost of education and the cost of living has gone up and a ceiling of rupees twenty
thousand per month seems to be reasonable. Keeping this in view, a provision has been
made in the Bill to provide bright students belonging to very poor families a scholarship of
rupees one thousand per mensem.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; S.S. RAMASUBBU
August 7, 2012.

4
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for free education including medical and technical education,
etc. by the appropriate Government to children born of parents living below poverty line. It
also seeks to provide for facilities such as free hostel, uniform, meals etc. to such children.
Clause 4 provides that the appropriate Government shall provide scholarship upto a maximum
of rupees one thousand per mensem in deserving cases, to such children. The Central
Government has to bear the expenditure in respect of Union territories in implementing the
provisions of the Bill. The respective State Government shall bear the expenditure in respect
of their State. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated
Fund of India. It is estimated that a recurring expenditure to the tune of rupees ten thousand
crore is likely to be incurred per annum.
A non-recurring expenditure of rupees twenty thousand crore is also likely to be
incurred.

5
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGA TED LEGISLATION
Clause 6 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. These rules will relate to matters of detail only. The delegation of
legislative powers is, therefore, of a normal character.

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for special educational facilities to the children of parents living below poverty
line and for matters connected therewith.
————
(Shri S.S. Ramasubbu, M.P .)
MGIPMRND—2561LS(S3)—30.08.2012.