_ As myTRoDUCED एप Lox SaBHa ow.

30 MAY 1990

बहा Eatinkd कर oD Gea ad) oe

fat feet aaelenl + iy

eth’ fas)

Bill No. 100 of 1990
ned

THE COAL INDIA (REGULATION OF TRANSFERS AND
VALIDATION) BILL, 1990
A

BILL

| empower the Central Government to direct the transfer of the land,
"or of the rights in or over land or Of the right, title and interest
im relation to a coal mine, coking coal mine or coke oven plant,
vested in the Coal India Limited or in @ subsidiary company to any
subsidiary company of Coal India Limited or any other subsidiary:
company and to validate certain transfers of such land or rights,

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Forty-first Year of the Republic:
of India as follows:—

1, This Act may be called the Coal India (Regulation of Transfers
and Validation) Act, 1990. ~ |

2, In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—

(a) “Coal India” means the Coal India Limited, a Government
company incorporated under the Companies Act, 1956 having its
registered office at Calcutta and includes its predecessor Government
company, namely, the Coal Mines Authority Limited;

(0) “subsidiary company” means the following subsidiary
companies of Coal India, namely:—

(6) the Central Coal Fields Limited, Ranchi and includes
a its predecessor Government कर namely, the National!
Coal Development Corporation Limi d, Ranchi;

(४) the Bharat Coking Coal Limited, Dhanbad;

Short:
title,

Defini-
tions.


Power
of Cen-
tral
Govern-
ment to
direct
‘transfer
of Jand,
rights,
title or
intetest.

Validation
of cer-
tain
transfers.

eo

(iii) the Western Coal Fields Limited, Nagpur;
6०) the Eastern Coal Fields Limited, Sanctoria;

(v) the Central Mine Planning and Design Institute Limi-
ted, Ranchi; ते

(vi) the South-Eastern Cpal Fields Limited, Bilaspur;
(vii) the Northern Coal Fields Limited, Singrauli,

and includes such other subsidiary company of Coal India as may
be incorporated under the Companies Act, 1956 from time to time;

(c) words and expressions used herein and not defined but de-
fined-in the Coking Coal Mines (Nationalisation) Act, 1972 or the
Coal Mines (Nationalisation) Act, 1973, shall have the meanings,
respectively, assigned to them in those Acts.

3. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for
the time being in force, the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, direct that the land or rights in or over such
land or the right, title and interest in relation to a coal mine, coking
coal mine or a coke oven plant vested in the Coal India shall, instead
of continuing to vest in the Coal India, vest in a subsidiary company
or, where such land or right, title or interest vests in a subsidiary com-
pany, in another subsidiary company. 20°

(2) Where the land or the right in or over such land or the right,
title and interest in relation to a coal mine, coking coal mine or a coke
oven plant vest in a subsidiary company under sub-section (1), such
subsidiary company shall, on and from the date of such vesting, be
deemed to have become the lessee in relation to such coal mine or 25
coking coal mine as if a fresh mining lease in relation to such coal
mine or coking coal mine had been granted to it under the Mineral Con-
cession Rules for the maximum period for which such lease could have
been granted under those rules, and all the rights and liabilities of Coal
India or, as the case may be the subsidiary company in relation to such 39
coal mine or coking coal mine shall, on and from the date of such vest-
ing, be deemed to have become the rights and liabilities, respectively,
of subsidiary company first mentioned.

4. A subsidiary company which was operating, or was in control
of, any coal mine, coking coal mine or coke oven plant which was 35
vested in the Coal India, immediately before the commencemen’ of this
Act, shall be deemed to have been vested with the land or the right in
or over such land or the right, title and interest in relation to such
coal mine, coking coal mine or coke oven plant and such vesting shall
be deemed to have been valid and effective at all material times as if 40
a direction had been made by the Central Government under sub-sec-
tion (1) of section 3 and accordingly no suit or other proceeding shall
pe instituted, maintained or continued in any court on the ground that
such subsidiary company was not competent to operate or control such
coal mine, coking coal mine or coke oven plant. 45


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

The Coal industry was nationalised in two phases in 1972 and 1973.
After nationalisation, the doking and mon-coking coal mines in the
Sharia Coal Fields in Bihar and a few mines in Barakar and Mugma
regions were directed to be vested in the Bharat Coking Coal Limited,
Dhanbad. Most of the other coal mines in the States of Assam, Bihar,
West Bengal, Orissa, Madhya Pradesh and Maharashtra were directed
to be vested in the Coal Mines Authority Limited. Subsequently, a
holding company, namely, the Coal India Limited was set up with
effect from 1-11-1975, initially with five subsidiaries, Later two more
subsidiaries were created by delinking certain collieries from the
Central Coal Fields Limited and the Western Coal Fields Limited.

2. Ever since the nationalisation of the coal industry, though the
land or right in or over such land acquired under various Acts and the
right, title and interest in relation to a coal mine or a coke oven plant
were directed to be vested in the Coal India or its predecessor in title,
its subsidiary companies were de facto managing such land, coal mines
or plants.

3, The absence of a formal legal title to the land or the right over
such land or the right, title and interest in relation to a coal mine
or coke oven plant, in the subsidiary companies has exposed them to
litigation and other legal infirmities. While the Companies Act, 1956
contains provisions for reconstruction and amalgamation, such recon-
struction or amalgamation could be given effect to prospectively only
under that Act.

4. It has, therefore, been considered necessary to empower the
Central Government to direct the transfer of land or the rights in or
over such land or the right, title or interest in relation to a coal mine
or coke oven plant vested in the Coal India Limited to a subsidiary
company, or where such land or mine are vested in a subsidiary com-
pany, to another subsidiary company. Tt has also been considered
necessary to validate all purported transfers of land or the rights in
or over such land or the right, title and interest in relation to a coal
mine or coke oven plant from Coal India to a subsidiary company and
from one subsidiary company to another subsidiary company before
the commencement of this Act.

5. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects.

New DE.ut;
The 19th May, 1990. ARIF MOHOMMED KHAN.


LOK SABHA

A
BILL

to empower the Central Government to direct the transfer of the land,
or of the rights in or over land or of the right, title and interest in
relation to a coal mine, coking coal mine or coke oven plant, vested
in the Coal India Limited or in a subsidiary company to any subsi-
diary company of Coal India Limited or any other subsidiary com,
pany and to Validate certain transfer of such land or rights.

(Shri Arif Mohd. Khan, Minister of Bnergy) }