As Insropucep 1n Lox SaBHA

14 JUL 1992

Bill No. 100 of 1992
THE INLAND WATERWAYS AUTHORITY OF INDIA
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 1992
A
BILL

to amend the Inland Waterways Authority of India Act, 1985.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Forty-third Year of the Republic
of India as follows: —

4. This Act may be called the Inland Waterways Authority of India
(Amendment) Act, 1992.

2. Section 16 of the Inland Waterways Authority of India Act, 1985
(hereinafter referred to as the principal Act) shall be omitted.

3. In section 27 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), the portion
beginning with the words “but any jurisdiction, functions, powers or
duties” and ending with the words “be exercised, performed or discharged
10 by the Authority” shall be omitted,

Short
title.

Omission
of sec~
tion 16.

Amend~
ment of
section

27.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

The Inland Waterways Authority of India Act, 1985 (IWAI |
1985) was enacted for the constitution of an Authority for the regula-
tion and development vf inland waterways for butposes of shipping and.
navigation. The provisions of IWAI Act, 1985 are, however, not to affect
the operation of the Inland Vessels Act, 1917 (Central Act 1 of 1917)
and any other Central Act or any State Act in force with respect to
shipping and navigation on any national
section 54A of the Inland Vessels Act, 1917,
power to fix maximum and minimum rates of passengers fares and
freight for goods. Identical powers were, however, conferred on the
Inland Waterways Authority also under section 16 of the IWAT Act,
1985. It is considered expedient that. the powers to fix the aforesaid
rates may continue ito be exercised by the authorities of the State

Government. It is, therefore, proposed to delete section 16 of the IWAT
Act, 1925,

2. In sub-section (2) of section 27 of the IWAI Act, 1985, the juvis-
dictions, functions, powers and duties required to be exercised, performed

way. It has been, therefore, decided to suitably amend sub-section (2)
of section 27 so as to Testore the powers and functions of the authorities
of State Governments in such matters,

3. The Bill seeks to achieve the aforesaid objects.

New डालना;

JAGDISH TYT ‘LER,
The 23rd June, 1992. .


ANNEXURE

Extracts rrom THE INLAND Waterways AutTHority or Inpra Acr, 1985

(82 or 1985)

* * * * 4
16. The Authority may, with the previous approval of the Central Power to
overnment and by notification in the Official Gazette, in respect of any Suet
em of national waterways or of any stretch of any national waterway, 50508

of run between any two stations on a national waterway,— vates for
passen-
(a) fix the maximum or minimum rate per kilometre which may 8°"
be charged for passenger fares for passengers of any class travelling eae is

on inland echanical propelled vessel;

(b) fix the maximum or minimum rates or both such rates per
kilometre which may be charged for freight on goods of any descrip-
tion carried in inland mechanically propelled vessels; and

(c) declare what shall be deemed to be the distance between any
two stations on a national waterway for the purpose of calculating
passengers’ fares or freight on goods where maximum or minimum
rates or both such rates have been fixed under this section.

* * * % *

27, (1) * * * * कै

(2) Nothing in this Act shall affect the operation of the Inland Applica-
essels Act, 1917 or any other Central Act (other than the Indian Ports _ tion, ect.,
et, 1908 and the Major Port Trusts Act, 1963) or any State or provincial of certain
Act in force immediately before the commencement of this Act with Tees
spect to shipping and navigation on any national waterway but any

isdiction, functions, powers or duties required to be exercised, per-

formed or discharged by the State Government or any officer or authority
subordinate to the State Government under any such Act.in so far as

॥ jurisdiction, functions, powers or duties relates or relate to shipping

d navigation or such national waterway or any matter incidental

4hereto or otherwise connected therewith shall, after such commence-

nent. be exercised, performed or discharged by the Authority.


LOK SABHA

A =
a BILL. = :
to amend the Inland Waterways Authority of India Act, 1985

z ~

(Shri Jagdish Tytler, Minister of State of the Mini

stry of Surface —
Transport) oe