BiD Ne. 100 of 1951 ® 
THE INTERNATIONAL FINANCE COR-
PORATION (STATUS, IMMUNITIES 
AND PRIVILEGES) BILL, 1958 
(As INTRODUCED TN Lol< SABHA) 

Ii 

Bill No. 100 of 1958 
THE INTERNATIONAL FINANCE CORPORATION 
(STATUS, IMMUNITIES AND PRIVILEGES) 
BILL, 1958 
(As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA) 
A 
BILL 
to im.plement the international agreement for the establishment and 
operation of the International Finance Corporation in so far as 
it relates to the status, immunities and privileges of that Corpo-
ration, and for matters connected therewith. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Ninth Year of the Republic 
or India as follows:-
1. (1) This Act may be called the International Finance Corpora- Short title 
tion (Status, Immunities end Privileges) Act, 1958. and extent 
5 (2) It extends to the whole of India. 
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,- Definitions. 
(a) "Agreement" means the Agreement for the establish-
ment and operation of the international body known as the 
International Finance Corporation; 
10 (b) "Corporation" means the Internatioool Finance Corpo-
ration established under the Agreement. 
3. (1) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in Conferment 
any other law, the provisions of the Agreement set out in the ~:~us :~ 
Schedule shall have the force of law in India: m~n!ties and pnvJ1eges on 
IS Provided that nothing in Section 9 of Article VI of the Agreement t~e Corpora-
ed tJon and shall be constru a&- conferment 
(a) entitling the Corporation to import into India goods ~~e~i!ies 
free of any duty of customs without any restriction on their and privi-
~. 1 h '. leges on its subsequent sa e t erem, or officers and 
... employees. 

2 
(b) conferring on the Corporation any exemption froni 
duties or taxes which form part of the price of goods sold; or 
(c) conferring on the Corporation any exemption from 
duties or taxes which are in fact no more than charges for 5 
services rendered. 
(2) The Central Government may, from time to time, by notifica-
tion in the Official Gazette, mnend the Schedule in conformity with 
any amendments, duly made and adopted, of the provisions of the 
Agreement set out therein. 
Power to 4. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official 10 
lUke rules. Gazette, make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 
(2) All rules made under this Act'shall be laid for not less than 
thirty days before each House of Parliament as soon as may be after 
they are made and shall be subject to such modifications as Parlia-
ment may make during the session in which they are so laid or the 15 
session immediately following. 
THE SCHEDULE 
[See section 3] 
PROVISIONS OF THE AGREEMENT WHICH SHALL HAVE FORCE 0.. LAW 
ARTICLE III 20 
SECTION 1. Financing Operations 
The Corporation may make investments of its funds in productive 
private enterprises in the territories of its members. The existence 
of a government or other public interest in such an enterprise shall 
not necessarily preclude the Corporation from making an investment 25 
therein. 
... • • • ... ... * ... * 
SECTION 5. Applicability of Certain Foreign Exchange,Restrictiom 
Funds received by or payable to the Corporation in respect of 
an investment of the Corporation made in any member's territories 
pursuant to Section 1 of this Article shall not be free, solely by 30 
reason of any provision of this Agreement, from generally appUcable 
foreign exchange restrictions, regulations and controls in force in 
the territories of that member. 
... ... ... • ... * ... ... • 

3 
ARTICLE VI 
STATUS, IMMUNITIES AND PRMLEGES 
SECTION 1. Purposes of Article 
To enable the Corporation to fulfill the functions with which it 
5 is entrusted, the status, immunities and privileges set forth in this 
Article shall be accorded to the Corporation in the territories of each 
member. 
SECTION 2. Status of the Corporation 
The Corporation shall possess full juridical personality and, in 
10 particular, the capacity: 
(i) to contract; 
(ii) to acquire and dispose of immovable and movable 
property; 
(iii) to institute legal proceedings. 
IS SECTION 3. Position of the Corporation with Regard to Judicial 
Process 
Actions may be brought against the Corporation only in a court 
of competent jurisdiction' in the territories of a member in which the 
Corporation has an office, has appointed an agent for the purpose 
~o of accepting service or notice of process, or has issued or guaranteed 
securities. No actions shall, however, be brought by members or 
persons acting for or driving claims from members. The property 
and assets of the Corporation shall, wheresoever located and by 
whomsoever held, be immune from all forms of seizure, attachment 
25 or execution before the delivery of final judgment against the 
Corporation. 
SECTION 4. Immunity of Asset's from Seizure 
Property and assets of the Corporation, wherever located and 
by whomsoever held, shall be immune from search, reqUisition, 
30 confiscation, expropriation or any other form of seizure by executive 
or legislative action. 
SECTION 5. Immunity of Archives 
The archives of the Corporation shall be inviolable. 
SECTION 6. Freedom of Assets from Restrictions 
35 To the extent necessary to carry out the operations provided for 
ia this Agreement and subject to the provisions of Article III, 
Section 5, and the other provisions of this Agreement, all property 
llnd assets of the Corporation shall be free from restrictions, regula-
tions, controls and moratoria of any nature. 

SECTION 7. Privilege for Communications 
The official communications of the Corporation shall be accorded 
by each member the same treatment that it accords to the official 
communications of other members . 
. SECTION 8. Immunities and Privileges of Officers and Employees S 
All Governors, Directors, Alternates, officers and employees of 
the Corporation: 
(i) shall be immune from legal process with respect to acts 
performed by them in their official capacity; 
(ii) not being local nationals, shall be accorded. the same 10 
immunities from immigration restrictions, alien regis-
tration requirements and national service obligations 
and the same facilities as regards exchange restrictions 
as are accorded by members to the representatives, 
officials, and employees of comparable rank of other I'S 
members; 
(iii) shall be granted the same treatment in respect of 
travelling facilities as is accorded by members to repre-
sentatives, officials and employees of comparable rank 
of other members. 
. SECTION 9. Immunities from Taxation 
20 
(a) The Corporation, its assets, property, income and its opera-
tions and transactions authorised by this Agreement, shall be 
immune from all taxation and from all customs duties. The Corpo-
ration shall also be immune from liability for the collection or pay- 2S 
ment of any tax or duty. 
(b) No tax shall be levied on or in respect of salaries and emolu-
ments paid by the Corporation to Directors, Alternates, officials or 
employees' of the Corporation who are not local citizens, local 
subjects, or othel local nationals. 30 
(c) No taxation of any kind shall be levied on any obligation or 
security issued by the Corporation (including any dividend or inte-
rest thereon) by whomsoever held: 
(i) which discriminates against such obligation or security 
solely because it is issued by the Corporation; or 3S 
(ii) if the sole jurisdictional basis for such taxation is the 
place or currency in which it is issued, made payable 
or paid, or the location of any office or place of business 
maintained by the Corporation. 

5 
10 
5 
(d) No taxation of any kind shall be levied on any obligation or 
security guaranteed by the Corporation (including any dividend 
or interest thereon) by whomsoever held: 
... 
(i) which discriminates against such obligation or security 
solely because it is guaranteed by the Corporation; or 
(ii) if the sole jurisdictional basis for such taxation is the 
location of any office or place of business maintained 
by the Corporation . 
... ... ... ... ... • 
SECTION 11. Waiver 
The Corporation in its discretion may waive any of the privileges 
and immunities conferred under this Article to such extent and upon 
tuCh conditions as it may determine. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The International Finance Corporation has been established by 
an Intemational Agreement to which India is a signatory. Article 
VI of that Agreement provides for the granting to the Corporation 
and its officials and employees certain status, immunities and privi-
leges in the territories of each member country. Section 10 of this 
Article requires each member country to take such action as is 
necessary in its own territories for the purpose of making effective 
in terms of its own law, the principles set forth in the Article. In 
pursuance thereto several member countries have already enacted 
necessary legislation in this behalf. By this Bill, it is proposed to 
enact similar legislation to give effect to the provisions of the said 
Article VI of the International Agreement. 
B. GOP ALA REDDI. 
NEW DELHI; 
The lit September, 1958. 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 4 of the Bill confers power upon the Central Government 
to make rules for carrying out the purposes of the Act. The immu-
nities and privileges of the International Finance Corporation and 
its officials and employees having been specified in the Schedule to 
the Bill, occasions for making rules, if any, will be few and far 
between. The Corporation has not yet started its functions in 
India. It is not possible, therefore, to envisage at this stage the 
matters which may have to be provided for by rules. But as the 
immunities and privileges have been specified in the Bill, it is clear 
that rules, if any, will be confined to matters of procedure and other 
matters of minor detail relating to the enjoyment of those immu-
nities and privileges and their waiver. For instance, if the Corpora-
tion decides to waive any of the immunities or privileges, a rule 
may be necessary prescribing the manner in which and the officer 
of the Government to whom such waiver should be communicated. 
The delegation of legislative power is thus of a normal type. 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
to implement the international agreement for the establishment 
and operation of the International Finance Corporation in so 
far as it relates to the status, immunities and privileges of 
that Corporation, and for matters connected therewith. 
The President has, in pursuance of clause (I) of article I I 7 and 
clause (I) of article 274 of the Constitution of India, re-
commended to Lok Sabha tbe introduction of the Bill. 
M.N. KAUL, 
Secretary. 
(Shri B. Gopaia Redd,._ 
Minister of Revenue and Civil Expenditure.) 