Bill No. 100 of 2015
THE UNIFORM EDUCATION BILL, 2015
BY
SHRI RAKESH SINGH, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for uniform education to all the students from primary level to senior
secondary level in the country
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Uniform Education Act, 2015.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(b) "economically weak student" means a student whose parents' or guardians'
income from all sources does not exceed rupees two thousand per month;
(c) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act; and
(d) "uniform education" means education based on a uniform syllabus for each
standard from primary to higher secondary level in all schools throughout the country.
3. There shall be a uniform system of education in all schools whether owned by or
receiving aid from the appropriate Government or owned or run by private Non-Governmental
Organizations or individuals or societies.
4. It shall be the duty of the appropriate Government to provide to every student, upto
senior secondary level, the following facilities, namely:—
(a) uniform education;
(b) uniform hostel facility at higher secondary level;
(c) breakfast and mid-day meal free of cost;
(d) uniform, books and writing material free of cost; and
(e) scholarship of rupees three hundred per month at primary school level and rupees
five hundred per month at secondary school level to economically weak students.
5. The appropriate Government shall establish and maintain adequate number of
schools in every district in accordance with population and requirement of the area.
6. The appropriate Government shall not recognize, for any purpose, any academic
certificate awarded by a school, which does not follow the uniform education.
7. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other
law for the time being in force.
8. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the provisions of this Act shall
apply to minority institutions only if the management of such institutions convey to the
appropriate Government their willingness to follow the uniform system of education.
9. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act by the Central Government shall be laid, as soon as
may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total
period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or
both the Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect
only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously
done under that rule.
Definitions.
Uniform
system of
education in
all schools.
Free,
compulsory
and uniform
education to
every student.
Establishment
of schools in
every district.
Certificate
not to be
recognised.
Act not to be
in derogation
of any other
law.
Act to apply
to minority
educational
institutions in
certain
situation.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35

3
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
All parents or guardians have a dream of providing good education to their children.
However, poverty stricken parents are not able to provide even the basic education to their
children. On the other hand, children from rich families get very good quality education and
can take up any responsibility in the society after they complete their education. It appears,
therefore, that we have dual system of education—one for the rich and quite another for the
poor.
Ours is a democratic country and every citizen of the country has equal rights. Thus,
this dual nature of education system is not justifiable. There should be such an education
system wherein all students, irrespective of their economic status, get uniform education so
that they may enjoy equal opportunities in life.
Moreover, uniform system of education would also remove the feelings of discrimination,
inferiority complex and denial of equal opportunities in matters of career advancement amongst
students.
Therefore, it is proposed to provide for free and uniform education to all children in the
country.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; RAKESH SINGH
March 16, 2015.

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 4 of the Bill provides that the appropriate Government shall provide free,
compulsory and uniform education to every child from primary school level upto senior
secondary school level. It further provides for facilities like breakfast and mid-day meal,
uniform, books, etc. free of cost to all students and scholarships to economically poor
students. Clause 5 provides that the appropriate Government shall establish and maintain
adequate number of schools in every district. The expenditure relating to States shall be
borne out of the Consolidated Funds of the respective States. However, the expenditure in
respect of Union territories shall be borne out of the Consolidated Fund of India. The Bill,
therefore, if enacted, is likely to involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It
is estimated that a sum of rupees fifteen crore will be involved as recurring expenditure per
annum from the Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees eighteen crore is also likely to be involved.
4

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 9 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Act. As the rules will rebate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative powers is of a normal character.
5

GMGIPMRND—5590LS(S3)—16.04.2015.
LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for uniform education to all the students from primary level to senior secondary
level in the country.
————
(Shri Rakesh Singh, M.P .)