Bill No. 100 of 1959 
THE ADMINISTRATION OF 
EVACUEE PROPERTY (AMEND-
MENT) BILL, 1959 
(As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA 
ON 15TH DECEMBER 1959) 

Bill No. 100 of 1959 
THE ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERTY 
(AMENDMENT) BIll, 1959 
(As INTRODUCED 'IN LoIC SABRA) 
A 
BILL 
ju1ther to amend the Administration of Evacuee Property Act, 1950. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Tenth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows: - Short title. 
1. This Act may be called the Administration of Evacuee Property 
(Amendment) Act, 1959. 
S 2. In section 8 of the Administration of Evacuee Property Act, AmcndlI'cnt 
1950 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), after sub-section of section 8. 
(2), the following sub-section shall be inserted and shall be deemed 
10 
IS 
20 
always to have been inserted, namely:-
"(2A) Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions 
contained in sub-section (2), all property which under any law 
repealed hereby purports to have vested as evacuee property in 
any person exercising the powers of Custodian in any State shall, 
notwithstanding any defect in, or the invalidity of, such law or 
any judgment, decree or order of any court, be deemed for all 
purposes to have validly vested in that person, as if the provi-
sions of such law had been enacted by Parliament and such pro-
perty shall, on the commencement of this Act, be deemed to have 
been evacuee property declared as such within the meaning of 
this Act and accordingly, any order made or other action taken 
by the Custodian or any other authority in relation to such pro-
perty shall be deemed to have been validly and lawfully made 
or taken". 

Ammdl1Wlt 
of Hction 
10. 
3. In section 10 of the principal Act. in sub-section (2). aft .. 
clause (0), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:-
"(p) acquire any property, whether by way of purchase or 
otherwise: 
Provided that no such acquisition !IIhall be made except with 5 
the previous approval of the Custodian-General". 
IntertioD of 4. After section 10 of the principal Act, the following section shall 
Dew aectiOD 
leA. be inserted, namely:-
Power to 
remYer rent 
or damages 
iD respect of 
evacuee 
property 
vested in the 
Cultodian. 
"lOA. (1) Where any person is in arrears of rent in respect 
of any evacuee property vested in the Custodian, the Custodian 10 
may, by order, require that person to pay the same within such 
time and in such instalments as may be specified in the order. 
(2) Where any person is deemed to be holding any evacuee 
property on behalf of the Custodian under sub-section (4) of 
section 8, the Custodian may, having regard to such principles 15 
of assessment of rent as may be prescribed, by order, assess the 
rent payable in respect of such property and that person shall 
be liable to pay the rent so assessed. 
(3) Where any person is, or has at any time been, in 
unauthorised possession of any evacuee property vested in the 20 
Custodian, the Custodian may, having regard to such principles 
of assessment of damages as may be prescribed, assess the 
damages on account of the use and occupation of such property 
and may, by order, require that person to pay the damages with-
in such time and in such instalments as may be specified in the 25 
order. 
(4) Where any person being in possession of any evacuee 
property vested in the Custodian has caused damage to any such 
property, the Custodian may assess the compensation payable on 
account of the damage so ceused and may, by order, require that 30 
person to pay the compensation within such time and in such 
instalments as may be specified in the order. 
(5) No order shall be made under sub-section (2) or sub-
section (3) or sub-section (4), until after the issue of a notice in 
writing to the person concerned calling upon him to show cause 35 
within such time as may be specified in the notice why such 
order should not be made and until his objections, if any, and 
any evidence he may produce in support of the same have been 
considered by the Custodian". 

91 of 19,6. 
5 
10 
S. In section 27 of the principal Act, the following 
shall be inserted at the end, namely:-
Explanation Amendment 
of lection 
~7· 
"Explanation.-The power conferred on the Custodian-
General under this section may be exercised by him in relation 
to any property, notwiths~nding that such property has been 
acquired under section 12 of the Displaced Persons (Compensa-
tion and Rehabilitation) Act, 1954". 
6. After section 41 of the principal Act, the following section shall Inaenio~ of . new aectlon be Inserted, namely:- 4%. 
"42. The Custodian may, for the purpose of securing, adminis- Power to 
tering, preserving and managing any evacuee property and gene- ~~:.tio n. 
:relly for the purpose of enabling him satisfactorily to discharge 
any of the duties imposed on him by or under this Act, require 
any person to submit to him such accounts, books or other docu-
ments or to furnish to him such information relating to any 
evacuee property as he may reasonably think necessary". 
7. In section 48 of the principal Act, in sub-section (3), after the Afmen~ent . o~~~ 
words "IS barred" the words, brackets and figures "or was, at the 
commencement of the Administration of Evacuee Property (Amend-
20 ment) Act, 1956, barred", shall be inserted. 
8. In section 55 of the principal Act, after sub-section (1), the ',,\men~meDt 
following sub-section shall be inserted, namely: _ 0 aect.lon S5 
"(2) Any power exercisable by a State Government by vir-
tue of a direction under sub-section (1) may, unless otherwise 
25 provided in such direction, be exercised also by such officer or 
authority as the State Government may specify in this behalf". 
9. In section 56 of the principal Act, - Amendment 
of aec:tlon S6 
(a) in sub-section (2), after clause (j), the following clause • 
shall be inserted, namely:-
30 "<ij) the manner in which rent of any property or 
damage for unauthorised possession of any property may be 
assessed, and the principles which may be taken into 
account in assessing such rent or damages"; 
(b) for sub-section (4), the following sub-section shall be 
35 substituted, namely:-
II (4) Every rule made under this section shall be laid as 
soon as may be after it is made before each House of Parlia-
ment while it is in session for a period of thirty days which 

may be comprised in one session or in two successive sessions 
and if, before the expiry of the session in which it is so laid 
or the session immediately following, both Houses agree in 
making any modification in the rule, or both Houses agree 
that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter 5 
have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect. 
as the case may be, so however, that any such modification 
or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of 
anything previously done under that rule", 

STATEMENT OF' OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Certain difficulties are being experienced in the working of the 
Administration of Evacuee Property Act, 1950, and they are hindering 
the early completion of residual work. It is proposed to amend the 
Act suitably to remove these difficulties. 
2. Section 8 of the Act was intended to provide for automatic 
vesting of evacuee property in the Custodian where such property 
had vested in any person exerclSlng the powers of Custodian 
under any Provincial or State law repealed thereby. The validity 
of such repealed Provincial or State law has been questioned in 
certain High Courts. It is proposed to make the position clear 
beyond doubt and to validate such vesting. 
3. At present there is no specific provision in the Act empowering 
the Custodian to determine and recover rent or damages from statu-
tory tenants or unauthorised occupants of eV\1cuee property nor for 
the recovery of compensation in cases where damage is caused to 
evacuee property by the occupants. It is proposed to insert a new 
section lOA to empower the Custodian to determine and recover rent 
and damages in such cases. Difficulties are also sometimes experi-
enced where evacuee and non-evacuee interests are inter-mixed and 
the non-evacuee owners are unwilling or not in a position to pur-
chase the evacuee share. In such cases, it is necessary to empower 
the Custodian to purchase non-evacuee property out of the cash 
balances lying with him or in the evacuee pool. Section 10 is 
being suitably amended for the purpose. 
4. Under the existing Act, a Custodian has no powers to call for 
any returns, accounts or other information. This power is necessary 
in the interest of better administration and management of evacuee 
property and a new section 42 is sought to be inserted for the pur-
pose. 
5. Instances have come to notice where some properties were 
wrongly declared to be evacuee property and they were also acquir-
ed. To afford relief in such genuine and hard cases, it is necessary 
to empower the Custodian-General under section 27 to restore such 
property to the non-evacuee owner, even in cases where the property 
has been acquired under the Displaced Persons (Compensation and 
Rehabilitation) Act, 1954. Section 27 is being suitably amended for 
I the purpose. 
'5 

6 
6. When the Central Government delegates any of its powers to 
a State Government, there is no provision in the existing Act enabl-
ing the State Government to re-delegate the power to any officer or 
authority subordinate to it. It is necessary to empower the State 
Government to do so, particularly in relation to management of 
evacuee trust properties and section 55 is proposed to be amended 
suitably for the purpose. 
NEW DELHI; MEHR CHAND KHANNA. 
The 9th December, 1959. 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clausp. 9 of the Bill seeks to amend section 56 of the Act so as 
to enable the Central Government to make rules in regard to the 
principles which may be taken into account in assessing rent or 
damages lnd the manner in which rent or damages may be assessed. 
These are matters of detail and the delegation of legislative power 
is thus of a normal character. 
7 

Powerlof 
revision of 
eu,todian-
General. 
Recovery of 
certain luml 
II arreara of 
land reve-
nue. 
Power to 
make 
rulca. 
ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS FROM THE ADMINISTRATION OF EVACUEE PROPERTY ACT, 1950 
(No. 31 OF 1950) 
• • • .. 
27~ (I) The Custodian-General may at any time, either on his own 
motion or on application made to him in this behalf, call for the 
record of any proceeding in which any Custodian has passed an order 
for the purpose of satisfying himself as to the legality or propriety of 
any such order and may pass such order in relation thereto as he 
thinks fit: 
Provided that the Custodian-General shall not pass an order under 
this sub-section prejudicial to any person without giving him a 
reasonable opportunity of being heard. 
• • • • • 
48. 
• • * • • 
(3) For the purposes of this section, a sum shall be deemed to be 
payable to the Custodian, notwithstanding that its recovery is barred 
by the Indian Limitation Act, 1908, or any other law for the time 9 of 1908• 
being in force relating to limitation of actions. 
• • • • • 
56. 
• • • • • 
(4) All rules made under sub-sections (1) and (2) after the com-
mencement of the Administration of Evacuee Property (Amendment) 
Act, 1953 shall be laid for not less than fourteen days before ParHa- 11 of 1953. 
ment as soon as possible after they are made. 
• • • • • 
8 / 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
funher to amend the Administration Evacuee Property 
Act, 1950. 
(Shri Meltr Chand Khmma. 
Minister of Rehabilitation 
and MinoriTY Affairs) 