East 
Punjab 
Act III 
of 
1949. 
As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABRA ON 
~.3 AUG lSe~ 
Bill No. 100 of 1982. 
THE EAST PUNJAB URBAN RENT RESTRICTION (CHANDIGARH 
AMENDMENT) BILL, 1982 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the EMt Punjab Urban Rent Restriction Act, 1949, 
as in force in the Union territory of Chandigarh. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty-third Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
1. This Act may be called the East Punjab Urban Rent Restriction Short 
(Chandigarh Amendment) Act, 1982. title. 
5 2. In the East Punjab Urban Rent Restriction Act, 1949, as in force 
in the Union territory of Chandigarh (hereinafter referred to as the 
principal Act), in section 1, in sub-section (1), for the words "East 
Punjab", the word "Punjab" shall be substituted. 
Amend-
mentof 
sec-
tion 1. 
3. In section 2 of the principal Act, for clause (d), the following Amend-
10 clause shall be substituted, namely:- mentof 
'(d) "non-residential building" means-
(i) a building being used solely for the purpose of business 
or trade; 
(ii) a building let under a single tenancy for USC for the 
purpose of business or trade and also for the purpose of 
residence. 
Explanation.-For the purposes of this clause, residence in Do 
building only for the purpose of guarding it, shall not be deemed 
to convert a "non-residential building" to a "residential building".'. 
sec-
tion 2. 

Special 
provi-
sion as 
to pend-
ing cases. 
4. The provisions of the principal Act, as amended by this Act, shall 
apply to and in relation to every case, under the principal Act, for 
eviction of a tenant from a building let under a single tenancy for 
use for the purpose of business or trade and also for the purpose of 
residence which is pending immediately before the commencement of 5 
this Act, and any order made in such case before such commencement by 
any authority, shall, on an application made in this behalf to such 
authority, be modified so as to be in conformity with the provisions of the 
principal Act as ame~ by this Act. 
Expla1!4tion.-For the pur,oses of thi6 section, a case relating to JO 
eviction of a tenant shall be deemed to be pending-
(a) if no order has been made in such case for the eviction or 
otherwise of the tenant; or 
(b) if an order has been made in such case for the 
of the tenant and such order remains to be executed. 
eviction 
II) 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The East Punjab Urban Rent Restriction Act, 1949 (East Punjab Act 
No. III of 1949), as in force in Chandigarh provides for restriction on 
increasing rent of certain premises situated within the limits of urban 
areas, and the eviction ()f tenants therefrom. It defines "non-residential 
buildulg" to mean a building being used solely for the purpose of busi-
ness o'r trade. "Residential building" has been defined to mean a build-
ing which is not a non-residential building. Shop-cum-flats were con-
structed in certain sectors. The design and plan of these buildings were 
such that the DCcupant may be able to carry on trade or business on the 
ground floor and reside on the. first floor. The shop-cum-flats do not 
fall within the definition of the expression "non-residential building" 
because these are not being used solely for the pur~se of business or 
trade. Due to this, owners of shop-cum-flats have been able to get the 
tenants evicted by invoking provisions applicable to residential build-
ings. Many eviction cases are also pending. It is proposed to do away 
with the hardship which is being caused to the tenants of INch buildings 
so that they may be brought on par with the tenants of non-residential 
buildings. The amendment is also proposed to De applied to pending 
cases. Opportunity is being taken to SUbstitute the expression "East 
Punjab" occurring in section 1 (1) of the Act by the expression "Punjab". 
The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects. 
NEW DELlfl; P. VENKATASUBBAIAH. 
The 12th July, 1982. 
3 

Short 
title, 
eKtent 
and 
com-
mence-
ment. 
Defini.-
tions. 
ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS FROM THE EAST PuNJAB URBAN RENT REsTRICTION ACT, 1949 
(EAST PUNJAB ACT., No. III OF 1949) 
• • • • • 
1. (1) This Act may be called the East Punjab Urban Rent Restriction 
Act, 1949. 
• • • ... 
2. In this Act. unless there is anything repugnant in the subject or 
context,-
... ... ... ... • 
(d) "non-residential building" means a building being used 
solely for the purpose of business or trade: 
Provided that residence in a building only for the purpose of 
guarding it shall not be deemed to convert a "non-resiaential build-
ing" to a "residential building"; 
... • ... ... ... 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the East Punjab Urban Rent Restriction Act, 1949, 
as in force in the Union territory of Chandigarh. 
--. 
J i "-
(Shri P. Venkatanbbaic:m, 
Minister of State in the 
Mtniatry of 'Home Affair,.) 