As intropucep In Lox SaBHa

Bill No. 100 of 1996

THE CONSTITUTION (EIGHTY-FIRST AMENDMENT) BILL, 1996
A
BILL
further to नल | the Constitution of India.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Forty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—

1. (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Eighty-first Amendment) Act, 1996. Short title
and com-
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by Le

5 notification inthe Official Gazette, appoint.



Insertion of new 2. After article 330 of the Constitution, the following article shall be inserted,
article 330A. namely:-—

Reservation "330A. (1) Seats shall be reserved for women in the House of the People.

of seats for \

ve te + (2) Not less than one-third of the total number of seats reserved under clause
People. (2) of article 330 shall be reserved for women belonging to the Scheduled Castes or,

as the case may be, the Scheduled Tribes:

Provided that nothing in,this clause shall apply in relation to a State or Union
territory so long as the number of seats reserved for Scheduled Castes or Scheduled
Tribes, as the case may be, in that State or Union territory, is less than three.

(3) Not less than one-third (including the number of seats reserved for women
belonging to the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes) of the total number of
seats to be filled by direct election to the House of the People in a State or Union
territory shall be reserved for women and such seals may be allotted by rotation to
different constituencies in that State or Union territory :

Provided that nothing in this clause shall apply in relation to a State or Union
territory so long as the number of seats allotted to such State or Union territory is
less than three.".

Insertion of 3, After article 332 of the Constitution, the following article shall be inserted,
new article namely:—

332A.

Reservation of "332A. (1) Seats shall be reserved for women in the Legislative Assembly of
seats for women every State.

inthe Legisla-

tive Assemblies (2) Not less than one-third of the total number-of seats reserved under clause
of the States. (3) of article 332 shall be reserved for women belonging to the Scheduled Castes or,

as the case may be, the Scheduled Tribes:

Provided that nothing in this clause shall apply in relation to a State so long as
the number of seats reserved for Scheduled Castes or Scheduled Tribes, as the case
may be, in that State, is less than three.

(3) Not less than one-third (including the number of seats reserved for women
belonging to the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes) of the total number of
seats to be filled by direct election in the Legislative Assembly of every State shall
be reserved for women and such. seats may be allotted by rotation to different
constituencies in that State:

Provided that nothing in this clause shall apply in relation to a State so long as
the number of seats allotted to such State is less than three.".

Amendments 4. The Amendments made to the Constitution, by this Act, shall not affect any
nottoaffectthe representation in the House of the People or in the Legislative Assembly of a State until
unease the dissolution of the House or the Assembly, as the case may be, in existence at the
People or commencement of this Act.

Legislative
Assembly.

30

35



STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

Articles 243D and 243T inserted by the Constitution (Seventy-third Amendment)
Act, 1992 and the Constitution, (Seventy-fourth Amendment) Act, 1992 respectively pro-
vide that not less than one-third of the seats shall be reserved for women in every Panchayat
and every Municipality. Further, the said articles provide that, from amongst the seats
reserved for the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes, not less than one-third seats
shall be reserved for women belonging to the Scheduled Castes or, as the case may be, the
Scheduled Tribes, The said articles also provide that such seats reserved for women may
be allotted by rotation to different constituencies.

2. Having provided reservation for women in Panchayats and Municipalities, it is
now proposed to provide reservation for women on the same lines in the House of the
People and in the Legislative Assemblies of the States by amending the Constitution. The
major political parties are in favour of making such reservation for women.

3. The Bill seeks to achieve the aforesaid object.

New Deva, RAMAKANT D. KHALAP.
The 4th September, 1996.

|
|
|



LOK SABHA.

A
Bre
further to amend the Constitution of India,

:

(Shri Ramakant D. Khalap, Minister of State in the Ministry of Law and Justice)

|
|
|