LOK SA.BHA 
CURRIGENDa 
to 
THE DEl>OSIT INstnt&'JCE CORPORA'rION 'Al1ENIl1~T) BILL, 1967 
(To be/es introduced in Lok §abha) 
1. Page 1,-
m ItBill No. 1000 of 1967" ~ "Bill No. 100 of 1967 
2. Page 3, line 30,-
1.2r "clause lt .I.W II section It 
3. Page 11, line 22,-
aft er "three" .i.2I n;" .tW " " , 
4. Page 16, in the marginal heading against section 17,-
m "of paymen by Corportion" 
~ "of payment by Corporation" 
5. Correct line numbers on page 8. 
NEW DELHI-
Ju.y 14 1967 

As nmtODUCED IN ioK SABHA. ON 
BUI No. IO~7. 
THE DEPOSIT INSURANCE CORPORATION 
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 1967 
.a. 
BILL 
further to amend th.e DepoSit IMUmftCe Corporation Ace, 1981. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Eighteenth Yew of the 
Republic of India as follows:-
1. (1) This Act may be called the DepoBit In8u.rance CorporaUoa Shorttttl .. 
(Amendment) Act, 1967. comm ..... 
5 (2) It shall come into force on such date u the Central Govern- ~ ete. 
ment may, by notifi<:ation in the Oftldal Gazette, appoint, and cWrer-
ent dates may be appointed for difterentl provisions of thi8 Act eel 
for dffterent States or for c:Wfennt parts tb.ereoL 
(3) Any reference in any provision inserted in the I>epo.tt In-
.7 of 1981. 10 surance Coxpoll&tion Act, 1961 (hereinafter referred to as the prin-
cipal Act), by any section of this Act to the! commencement ot the 
1 

Deposit Insurance (Amendment) Act, 1967, shall, in rela,tion to a 
State or part thereof, b& construed as a reference to the date on 
which the said section comes into force in that State or part. 
'.1 
Substitu- 2. In the princLpal. Act, for the words and figures "the Banking 
tion of Companies Act, 1949" wherever they occur, the words and figures 5 
:r::::::, "the Banking Regulation Act, 1949" shall be substituted. 
Companies 
Act,l949. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 2. 
3. In section 2 of the principal Act,-
(i) after clause (d), the following clause shall be inserted, 
namely:-
'(dd) "co-operative bank" means a State co-operative 10 
bank, a Central ro-operative bank and a primary co-opera-
tive bank;'; 
(ii) after clause (f), the following clause shall be inserted, 
namely:-
'(0) "defunct co-operative bank" means a co-operative 15 
bank-
(i) which has been prohibited from receiving 
Uesh.deposits; or 
, (ii) which has, heen." orciet"Ed or directed to be 
wound up; or 20 
(iii) which has transferred all its deposit liabilities 
in India to any other institution; or 
'(iv) ,which has ceased to be a co-operative bank 
within the meaning of sub-section (2) of section 36A 
, of the Banking Regulation Act,' 1949; or 2S 
(v) which has converted, itielf. into a non-banking 
co-operative society; or 
. {vi) in respect of which any scheme of compromise 
, or arr~nt.or of reconstruction. has ·been· sancUon-
ed under any law for the time being in,forceandsu ch 30 
sch'emed~s not permit, ¢.be. acceptance of freab .depo-
&its; or 
(vii) which has· been aranted a moratorium which 
11 in operation; or 
10 of 1948. 

f'" . '. ~:: 
(viii) tn respect -of which an -applJOation for winding 
up is pending before the Regbtrar of-<!o-operative So-
cieties or other competent a.utlwrity.under any law ro-
latin.g ,to co-operative societies for ,the time being in 
force in a Sta1e;'; 
(iii) in ~lause (g),-
(a) for the words'~'or a banking company", the worda 
", a banking COl1lp8Ily or a oo-opera.tive .bank" ,shall be sub. 
stituted; 
10 ~b) for the words ccW'lth a bankirlgOompany", the 
wOI'ds!!with a banking coc:mpIrfty. or ,a ao-operative bau" 
shUt· .be .. substituW!d; 
(c) in sub-clause (i), after the words "where a bank-
ing company at the commencement otthis Ac!t", the words 
IS "or where an eligible co-operative bank at the commence-
ment of the Deposit Inliollranae CWporation (Aro:ecdment) 
Act, 1967" shall be inserted; 
20 
30 
35 
(iv) after clause (g), the following clause shall be inserted, 
nameIy:-
C (gg) '"eligible oo-operative bank" means a c0-6perative 
bank the law for the time being governing whieh provides 
that-
(i) an order for the winding up, .or .an.on1er sanc-
tioning a scheme of comprom.ise .or arral'lgement or of 
amalgamation or reconstruction, .of . the bank may be 
made only with the previous sanction in writing of the 
Rserve Bank; 
(ii) an order for the winding up of the bank shall 
be made if so required by the RaIerve BUk in the cir-
cwastaftC8S' referred to· in clauat' 130; 
(iii) if so required·by"the'~e Bank,·~the pub-
lic interest or for preventing the affairs of the bank 
being conducted in a manner detrimental to the inter-
ests of the depositors or for securing the propPr man-
agement of the baRk, ·an ·onler·.shalJ be made for th'" 
supersession of the committee of ·maaaaement or other 
managing body (by whatevf>lr name called). of the 
bank and the appointment· of an adminfstrator therefor 
for web' .. ~ or period; not exceediJig ftve years in 

4 
the aggregate as may from time to time be specified by 
the Regenre Bank; 
(iv) an order for the winding up of the bank or an 
order aanctioning a scheme of compromise or arrange-
ment or of amalgamation or reconstruction or an order 5 
for the supersession of the committee of management 
or other managing body (by whatever name called) of 
the bank and the appointment of an administrator 
therefor made with the previous sanction in writing or 
on the requisition ot the Reserve Bank shall not be 10 
liable to be called. in question in any manner; and 
<v) the liquidator or the ~ bank or the trans-
feree bank, u the case may be, shall be under an obli-
gation. to !"epI.y the Corporation in the circumstances, 
to the extent and in the manner referred to in section IS 
21;'; 
(v) after clause (h), the tondWing elause shall be inserted, 
namely:-
• (hh) "existing co-operative bank" means a co-
operati""" bank carrying on the business of banking at the 20 
oommencem~t of the Deposit Insurance Corporation 
(Amendment) Act, 1967, which either holds a licence at 
woo commetlCt'me.nt under SleCtion 22 of the Banking Regu-
lation Act, 194:9, or having appli'ed for such licence has not lOot 1949. 
been !nforrmed by notice in wrlting by the Reserve Bank 2S 
that a JJcence cannot be granted to it but does not include 
a defunct co-operative bank;'; 
(vi) for clause (i), the following clause shall be !rubstituted, 
~:r:-
• (i) 41inaW'ed bank" mea.ns a banking company or an 30 
eligible co-operative bank for the time being registered 
under the provisions of this Act and includes for the pur-
Pa.eI at sections 18, 17, 18 and 21,-
(i) a banking compan'Y referred to in elause (a) or 
cl.aU8e (b) at eection 13, or 35 
(\i) • e<>-operative bank referred to in clause (n) 
or clause (b) of section 13C, 
the registration wh'ereot has been cancelled under section 
13, or M the' CMe may be, under section 13C;'; 

"10 of 19"11. 
' .. 
2 of 1934. 
5 
5 
(vii) after clause (k), the following clause shall be insert-
ed, namely:-
I (kk) "new co-operative bank" means a co-operative 
bank which begins to transact the business of banking after 
the commencement of the Deposit Insurance Corporation 
(Amendment) Act, 1967, under a licence granted to it under 
section 22 of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949, and includes 
a primary credit society becoming a primary co-operntive 
bank after such commencement;'; 
10 (viii) after claUSe (p), the following clause shall be insert-
ed, namely:- . 
'(q) the expressions "central co-operative bank","CO-
oprerative society", "primary co-operative bank", "primary 
credit SOCiety" and "State co-operative bank" shall have 
15 the meaning:; respectively assigned to them in the Reserve 
Bank of India Act, 1934.'. 
4. For section 4: of the principal Act, the following section shall Substitu-
be SUlbstituted, namely:- tion of new 
section for 
section 4. 
"4. (1) The authorised capital of the C~ration shall be Capital of 
';'0 one crore of rupees but the Central Gorvernment may, in consul- <70rpora-
tation with the Reserve Bank, increasIe such capital from time tlon. 
35 
to time, so, however, that the total authorised cBJPital shaH not 
exceed five crores of rupees. 
(2) The authorised capital for the time being of the Corpo-
ration shall hie fully paid-up and shall stand allotted to the 
Reserve- Bank.". 
5. In section 6 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1) ,- Amend_ 
mentof 
(i) in clause (b), for the words "a Deputy Governor", the section 6. 
words "a Deputy Gorvemor or any other offtcer" shall De sub-
stituted; 
(ii) for clause (d), the following clause shall be substitut-
ed, namely:-
II (d) five directors nominated by the Central Govern-
,ment in consultation with the Referve Bank, three of whom 
shall be persons having special knowledge of commercial 
banking, commerce, industry or finance and two of whom 
shall be persons having special knowledge of, or experience 

Amend-
mentof 
Chapter 
In. 
Insertion 
of new 
sections 
13A, laB, 
l3C and 
130. 
Registra_ 
tion of 
co-opera_ 
tivebanks. 
6 
in, 'co-operative. banking or co-operative movement, and 
none of the directors shall be an officer of Governm'ent or 
of the Reserve Bank or an officer or: other lmlployee of the 
Corporation or a director, an offie'er or other employee of a 
banking company or a co-operative bank or otherwise acti-
vely connected with a ba.nking company or a co-operative 
bank.". 
6. In Chapter In of the principal Act, in the heading, after the 
words "BANKING COMPANIES" the words "AND CO-OPERATIVE BANltS" 
shall be .inserted. 
7. After section 13 of the principal Act, the following sections 
shan be inserted, namely: ~ 
·'13A. (1) No co-operative baltk'shaH. be f€gistered under 
this section unless it is an eligible co-operative bank, 
(2) Subject as aforesaid-
(a) the Corporation shall register every existing co-
operative bank as an insured bank before the expiry of 
thirty days next following th'e commencement of the De-
posit Insurance Corporation (Amendment). Act, 1967; 
(b) the Corporation shall register as an insured bank-
(i) every new co-operative bank [other than a 
primary credit society becoming a primary, co-aperative 
bank after the commencement of the Deposit Jnsurance 
Corporation (Amendmfnt) Act, 1967] as soon 8.'1 may 
be after it is g'l'anred a licence und~r section 22 of the 
Banking RegulaUonAct; 1949; 
(ii) a primary credit society becoming- ta primary 
co-operative bank after such commenCf"lIlent within 
three months of its havin,:! made an application ,for a 
licence under the said section: 
Provided' that-a bank- referred to in clause (b) shall not 
be so registered M it has,.beee. infCJm1lf'd by noticrein writing 
by. the Reserve Bank that such a li~ce cannot be granted 
toil 

I .', . 
5 
10 
1001 1949. 
IS 
lO 
10 of 1949. 
7 
lab. ~very c.:o-op~J:atlv~ oalUt, bemg a deJ.Wlct c.:o-operat!vl! Regiatra-bank at the oommt!!l~-ement 0.1 1.11e .lJeposit .1n:;urance l..uqxm;L- t100 Of 
tion (Amendment) Act, .1l;1(il, by rewson 01 suo-clause (1.'&'1.) or defunct 
sub-cJ.ause ('D~i') 01. clause OJ) at ~t.wn 2.ana.u., Ull1ess It be- ~opera-
. cames a uetunct a()ooperauv~ oank. unaer .any oUlex sub-clltuse ~ 
of that clause, be registered by the CWpol'ation aa··an insured . 
bank as soon as may be after the termination of· the order of 
moratorium, or as the case may be, the rejection or dismissal of 
. the application for its wmdjmg up provided it IS an eligible co-
operative bank and it either h.ol.<1s a licence granted under sec-
tion 22 of the Banking Regulation Act; 1949, or having' ~pplied 
for such licence in acconiance with that section, has not been 
. informed by nouce in writing by the Reserve Bank that a 
licence cannot be granted to it. 
13C. The registration of a co-operative bank as an insured 
bank shall stand. cancelled on the OCCUrC€IlCe of any of the fol-
lowing events, namely:-
(a) if it has been prohibited from accepting fresh de-
posits; or 
(b) if it has been informed by' notice in writing by the 
Reserve Bank that its licence has been oaneelled under sec-
tion 22 of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949, or a licence 
under that section cannot be granted to it; or 
(c) if it has been ordered or directed. to be wound up; 
Cancella-
tion of 
re,iatra-
tion of co-
opeorative 
bank. 
2S or 
1001 UM •• 30 
8S 
(d) if it has transferred all its deposit liabilities in 
India to any other institution; or 
(e) if it has ceased to be a <!O-ape!'ative bank within 
the'meaning of sub-6ection (Z) of section, 36A of the Bank-
ing Regulation Act, 1949; or 
(f) if it has converted itself into a non-banking co-
. "'CIIpIfttive 1OCiety; or 
(g) if in uepect otI. it -my 8Cbezne. oflcampromise or 
arranpment or of reconstruction ... -been . sanctioned by • 
. competent authority ... , the Aid .scheme dOlI DOt permit 
tba uoeptaDct by it of tNrA· d8pOllltaj' or 

Circum.. 
stances in 
which 
Reserve 
Bank may 
require 
winding 
up of co_ 
operative 
banks. 
(h) if it has been amalgamated with any other co-ope-
rative society; or 
(i) if it ceases to be an eligi'ble co-operative bank, that 
is, if the law for the time being governing such ~ative 
bank does not provide for all or any of the matters refer- 5 
red to in clause (gg) of ~ 2. 
13D. (1) The circumstaru:es referred to in sub-claWle (ii) of 
clause (gg) of section 2 (being circumstances in which the 
Reserve Bank may require the winding up of a co-operatiw 
bank) are the following, namely: - 10 
(a) that the ro-operative bank has failed to comply 
with the requirements specified in section 11 of the Hank-
ing Regulation Act, 1949; or 
(b) that the co-operative bank has by reason of the 
provisions of section 22 of th~ said Act become disentitled IS 
to carry on banking bus;iness in India; or 
(c) that the co-operative bank has been prohibited from 
receiving fresh deposits by an order under sub-section (4) 
of section 35 of the said Act or under clause (b) of sub-
section (3A) of section 42 of the Reserve Bank of India 
Act, 1934; or 
(d) that the co-operative bank having failed to comply 
with any requirement of th~ Banking Regulation Act, 1949, 
oth'el' than the requirements laid down in section 11 thereof, 
has continued such f$ilure or, having contravened any pro- 25 
vision of that Act has continued such contravention beyond 
such period or periods as may be specified in that behalf by 
the Reserve Bank from time to time, after notice in writing 
of such failure or contravention has been conveyed to the 
co-opera.ti.~ bank; or 30 
(e) that the co-operative bank is unabl'e to pay its 
debts; Dr 
<f> that in the opinion of the Reserve Bank-
(i) a compromise or arrangemeat sanctioned by a 
competent authority in respect of the co-operative bank 3S 
cannot be WOI'ked satisfaclorily with or without modi-
fications, or 
(ii) the continuance of the co-operative bank 11 
prejudicial to the interests of its depositors. 

• 
(2) Without prejudice to th'e provisions of any other law 
for the time being in force, a co-operative bank shall, for 'ilie 
purpose of clause (e) of sub-section (1), be deemed to be un-
able to pay its debt&-
S (i) if, on the basis of the returns, statements or infor-
mation furnished to the Re6erve Bank under or in pur-
suance of the provisions of the Banking Regulation Act, 
1949, the Reserve Bank is of opinion that the co-operative 
bank is unable to pay its debts; or 
10 (ii) if, the co-operative bank has refused to meet 
any lawful demand made at any of its offices or branches 
within two working days, if such demand is made at a place 
where there is an office, branch or agency of the ReS'erve 
Bank, or within five working days if such demand is made 
I ~ elsewhere and, in 'either case, the Reserve Bank ccrtiflf's in 
writing that the co-operative bank is unable to pay its 
debts.". 
8. In section 14 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), for the Amend-
words "banking company" whereV'er they occur. the words "bank- ment of aection 14. 20 ing company or co-ope,rative bank" shall be substituted. 
9. In section 15 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), in the Amend-
second proviso, after the words and figures "under s'eCtion 13", the ment of 
words, figures and letter "or under section l3C" shall be inserted. section 15. 
10. In section 16 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), in the 
25 first proviso, after the word and figures "section 13", the words, 
brackets, letters and figures "or clause (a) or clause (b) of section 
Amend-
mentof 
aectiOB 18. 
35 
l3C" shall be ins·erted. 
11. In section 17 of the principal Act,- Amend-
(i) in. sub-section (2), for the word .. and ftgurea ''to each ::tof1'l 
depositor of the insured bank in respect of his depostt the em. 
amount payable- under s'eCtion 16 either directly or through the 
liquidator or' through any other agency as the Corporation may 
d~termine'·. the following words, figures, brackets and letters 
shall be substituted, namely:-
"the amount payable under Kctlon 16 in respect of the 
deposit of each depositor-
(4) direCtly to the depositor, or 

10 
(b) to the depositor through such agency as the 
Corporation may determine, or 
(c) to the liquidator."; 
(ii) after sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be 
b1serted, namely:--- ; 
"(3) Where the Corporation pays under sub-section 
(2), any amount in respect of the deposit of a depositor to 
the liquidator, the liquidator shall payor cause to be paid 
that amount to the depositor and any expenses incurred by 
the liquidator in making such payment shall be treated as 10 
expenses incurred in the winding up of the insured bank.". 
Amend- 12. In section 36 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), after 
ment of the words "of its officers", the words "or through such other person 
lection36. 
Amend-
mento! 
aection42. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 48. 
or agency as the Reserve Bank may determine" shall be inserted. 
13. In section 42 of the prindpal Act, for the words "or any other IS 
person authorised by the Corporation", the words "or any other 
person or agency authorised by the Corporation or the Reserve 
Bank" shall be substituted. 
14. In the Explanation to section 48 of the principal Act,-
(i) in clause (a), after the words "and includes", the words 20 
"a co-operative society or" shall be inserted; 
(ii) in clause (b), after the words "in the firm", the words 
"and in relation to a co-operative society includes any member 
of a committee of management or other managing body (by 
whatever name called) to which the management of the affairs 25 
of the bank is entrusted" shall be ins'erted. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The more important provisions of the Banking Regulation Act, 
1949, relating to the control of banking have been extended w~th 
effect from the 1st March, 1966 to (a) the state co-operative banks, 
(b) the J:entral~l}-Operative banks and (c) the larger primary nOD-
agricultural credit societies, commonly known as urban co-operative 
banks. with paid-up capital and reserves of Rs. 1 lakh or more in 
each case. 
2. It was envisaged when the provisions of the Banking Regula-
tion Act, 1949, were extended to these co-operative banks that the 
deposits in these banks should also be protected to the same extent 
and in the same manner as deposits in commercial banks. It is pro-
posed to extend the insurance cover to the co-operative banks pro-
vided the -State Governments amend their co-operative laws to con-
fer on the Reserve Bank powers to take a final decision in regard to 
matters such as the winding up of a co-operative bank or the super-
session of its board of management or the sanction of a scheme of 
compromise or arrangement or amalgamation or reconstruction. 
The Bill seeks to provide for the nece'Ssary amendment to the 
Deposit Insurance Corporation Act, 1961, for this purpose. Oppor-
tunity is also being availed of to increase the number of dirertors 
by three; two of whom will represent the co-operative sector and 
to increase the authorised capital of the Deposit Insurance Corp.)ra-
tion from Rs. 1 crore to Rs. 5 crores. 
3. The noteo& on clauses explain in detail the various provisionu of 
the Bill. 
NEW DELHI; 
The 3rd July, 1967. 
MORARJI PESAI. 
PRESIDENT'S RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLE 117 OF 
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA 
[Copy of letter No. F. 10126165-SB, dated the 11th July. 1967 
from Shri Morarji Desai, Deputy Prime Minister and Minister .0£ 
Finance to the Secretary. Lok Sabha.] 
The President having been infonned of the subject matter of 
the proposed Deposit Insurance Corporation (Amendment) Bill, 
1967, recommends the introduction of the Bill in the Lok Sabha 
under clause (1) of article 117 of the Constitution. 
11 

Notes on clauses 
Clause l.-This provides for the necessary amendments to the 
Deposit Insurance Corporation Act to be brought into force, as and 
when this may be convenient. According to the scheme as envisaged 
in the Bill, the amendments will be brought into force in a State as 
~oon as that State has modified the local laws relating to co-operative 
societies so as to provide for matters referred to in new clause (gg) 
to be inserted in section 2 of the Act. 
Clause 2.-This is self-explanatory. 
Clause 3.-This defines the various categories of co-operative banks 
which are referred to in the Bill. The defmitions are the same as in 
the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934, and in the Banking Regulation 
Act, 1949 as it has been applied to co-operative banks. Before any 
co-operative bank becomes eligible for registration as an insured 
bank, the State law or laws governing that bank will have to be 
modified so as to ensure that the Reserve Bank of India will have 
the final say in regard to proposals for the winding up of the inl:>titu-
tion Or for the sanctioning of any scheme of compromise or arrange-
ment in relation thereto and that provision or superseding the com-
mittee of management will be made, if it is required by the Reserve 
Bank, for any period not exceeding five years. 
Clause 4.-This provides for the authorised capital of the Deposit 
Insurance Corporation to be increased from Rs. 1 crore to Rs. 5 crort~s 
and the entire capital wili be aBotted to the Reserve Bank. 
Clause 5.-This provides for an increase in the number of directors 
of the Corporation from five to eight. Two of the three additional 
directors will be persons with special knowledge or experience of 
co-operative banking or the co-operative movement. 
Clause 7.-This clause inserts four new sections l3A, l3B, l3C and 
13D. Under the proposed new section 13A every existing co-operative 
bank will be register~ as an insured bank before the expiry of thirty 
days from the commencement of the Deposit Insurance CorporatIon 
(Amendment) Act,1967. Similarly every new bank will be registered 
as soon" as it is granted a Hcence under section 22 of the Banking 
Regulation Act, 1949. It has further been provided in that new sec· 
tion that no bank shall be registered under this section unless it is an 
eligible co--operative bank which expression has been defined in the 
12 

11 
Bill. Section l3B is on the same lines as section 12 of the principal 
Act. Section l3C is on the same lines as section 13 of the principal 
Act. One more clause which is not in section 13 has been added to 
this section l3C, that is, clause (i). Section l3D narrates the circum-
st~nces under which the Reserve Bank may take any action for the 
winding up of a co-operative bank. 
Clauses 8, 9 and lO.-These make only formal amendments to the 
principal Act. 
Clause ll.-A new sub-section (3) has been added to section 17 
to make it clear that if the Deposit Insurance Corporation finds it 
n~cessary to use the agency of a liquidator for making any payment, 
the liquidator shall be bound to make the necessary payments, treating 
the additional expenditure, if any, as expenditure incurred in the 
course of the winding up. 
Clauses 12, 13 and 14.-These provide for certain minor and con-
sequential amendments of a clarificatory nature. 

Definitions. 
ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS' ,nOM 'l'IU DEPOSIT INSl1RANCE CORPORAnON AJcT, 19.61 
(47 OF 1961) 
• • .. .. .. 
CHAPTER I 
~.uy 
II .. .. .. .. 
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
II .. 
(9) "deposit" means the aggregate of the unpaid balances 
due to a depositor (other than a foreign Government, the 
Central Government, a State Government or a banking com-
pany) in respect of all his accounts, by whatever name called, 
with a banking company and includes credit balances in any 
cash credit account but does not include,-
(i) where a banking company at the commencement 
of this Act is working under a scheme of compromiSe or 
arrangement or of reconstruction sanctioned by any 
competent authority providing for the acceptance of fresh 
deposits, any amount du'e to the depositor in respect of his 
deposit before the date of the coming into force of the 
scheme to the extent it is not credited after the said date 
under the provisions of that scheme; or 
(ii) any amount due on account of any deposit received 
ou tside India; 
II II .. .. .. 
(i) "insured bank" means a banking company for the time 
being registered under the provisions of this Act and includes 
for the purposes of sections 16, 17, 18 and 21 a banking company 
referred to in claUS'e (a) or clause (b) of section 13 the regis-
tration whereof bas been cancelled under that section; 
• II .. • 
14 

11, 
CHAPTER II 
ESTABLISHMENT AND MANAQEMl:NT 01' THE DEPOSIT INSURANcE 
CORPORATION 
• • • 
4. The authorised capital of the Corporation shall be one crore Capital of 
of rUp,ees, which shall be fully paid-up and shall stand allotted to Corpora-
the Reserve Bank. tion . 
• • • • • 
6. (1) The Board of directors of the Corporation shall consist of Board of 
the following, namely: - directors. 
(a) the Governor for the time being. of the Reserve Bank, 
who shall be the Chairman of the Boar~ 
(b) a Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank nominated 
by that bank; 
(c) an officer of the Central Government nominated by 
that Government: \ 
(d) two directors nominated by the: Central Government 
in c(msultation with the ReSHVe Baak having special know-
ledge of commereial banking or ot carrrrnerce, indUstry or 
finance, neither of whom shall be an· ofJlcer of GOV'ernment or 
of the Reserve Bank or an officer or other employee of the 
Corporation or a director; an oftker or other employee of a 
banking .company or otherwise'.aeijyely cO~d with a banking 
company:. 
• • • • • 
cHAPTEJ( m 
RrmSTRATtON 01' BAiQt:mG col\!PAlUII AI IlftIuam BAftS 
AND LIABILITY 01' COItPOUnolf TO DSPOII'l'OBI 
• •.. • .. 
14; (i~ Where tlie OotfKntlOft. has r.!gfStered any banking Intima_ 
company as an insare4: baDk, it skaU; Withbi thirty days of Its tton of 
relietra_ 
tlon. 

18 
registration, send an intimation in writing to the banking company 
that it has been registered as an insured bank . 
.. • .. • • 
Premium, 15. (1) Every insured bank shall, so long as it continues to be 
Liability 
of Corpo-
ration 
in respect 
of insUll'ed 
deposits, 
registered, be liable to pay a premium to the Corporation on its 
deposits at such rate or rates as may, with the previous approval of 
the Central Government, be notified by the Corporation in the 
Official Gazette from time to time: 
• • • • * 
Provided further that where the registration of any insured hank 
is cancelled under section 13, such cancellation shall not affect the 
liability of that bank for payment of premium for the period before 
such cancellation and of any interest due under the provisions of 
this s'ection, 
.. .. .. .. .. 
16. (1) Where an order for the winding up or liquidation of an 
insured bank is made, the Corporation shall, subject to the other 
provisions of this Act, be liable to pay to every depositor of tha't 
bank in accordance with the provisions of S'eCtion 17 an amount 
equal to the amount due to him in respect of his deposit in that bank 
at the time when such order is made: 
Provided that the liability of the Corporation in respect of an 
insured bank referred to in clause (a) or clause (b) of section 13 
shall be limited to the deposits as on the date of th'e cancellation 
of the rt'girtration: 
• • • • • 
17. (1) • • • .* * 
Manner (2) Before the eXPiry of two m~nths from the receipt of such 
of paymen; list from the liquidator, the Corporation shall pay to each depes!tor 
by Corpor . . th bl 
ti 'n cas of the insured bank In respect of hi. deposit· e amount paya e onl e • throu h of winding under aection 18 either directly or through the liqUIdator or g 
~ of any other agenq as the C<)rporation may determine. 
Insured 
bankl. 
* • • • • 

. MIN I ..... 
. -
.' • • . , 
• (l)The Corporation may for any of the purpoIeI of this Aet Iupecu. 
l'Wqu..t ~. Rllerve Bank to cause In inspeetion. of th. boob and :UN4 
aocwnw QI' an Investi,ation of the atraiI'l of an insured bank to be .a..:: 
~ aD4 QQ Reb requen •• RNeI'V'. Bank .al1 au.. ~ .... 
...... fir {nftlilf.tiGft te " aw:t. hy ....... tllti ..... 
• .. .. .. • 
42. N~ I\lI.t or other legal proo-dinl IhaU ti. apiDlt th. Corpe- ~ 
ration or the Reserve Bank or any director of th'. Board or any oftic:er =-
0: the Corporation or the Reserve Sank or any other peNOn autho- ~ 
I'tse4 by the eorporatIon to dIscharge any tunetiolll under tht. Aet tIaU Atl 
fer ey damage eaus-ed er likely to be eaU8ed by anything whleh 
is in fOOd faith done or intended to be done in pursuanee of this Ad . 
.. .. .. .. .. 
48. (1) Where an offence has b~n eommitted by a eompany, 
• very person who, at th~ time the offence was commUted. was in 
--II! of, and wu responsible to the eMftpany for t!t. eonduet of 
.,. bur'r-. of the company, as well as the oompany, shall be dell!med 
10 be gullty of the offence and ahall be liable to be proceeded .,.m.t 
and pwlished accordJ.ngly: 
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section 8hall render 
any IUCh pef80n liable to any punishment provided in thiJ Act, if 
lw provea that the otrenee was committed without his knowledge 
8r tbt :h. -.reitled .n Iful dill'eBee te prewM the ........ ea eI 
sua eIIfftee. 
(2) NMwfthstandfng anything ecntabled in su~ (I), 
w1s ... e ef!enee UDder this Aet hu been emnm.itted by a emlllpUY 
ed it il J'")veci that the otrenee has been eommttted wttli tM efJftIe'ftt 
fir e'eIftl'lWee. f!4, or is attributable to any gro. negJJpnee eft the 
part of, any direetor, manager, secretary or oth~ offteer of tn. 
eCm!*nY, weh d.freetor, m'anager, secretary or other ofBeer rball als& 
be deemed to be guilty of that ottenee and shall ~ liable to be 1'"'-
eeechd apm.t and punished accordingly. 
Ofreneet 
by eam . 
,... .. 

• .,IIft ..... -r. .. ~ ef \hiI ..... r-
(4) "company" meanS' any' DcJdy corporate and melud-, a 
ftrm or other associatica.:~hN" ;rt I Ala; U1d 
(.,) "directQr", in relatien to a firm, means a ~ in tlta 1nB.' 0.,. 
•• .' 

to,. 
It. 
JILL 
fubI.. • .. 1>.- ~ e.p.._ A.&. Ip'I. 