     AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
                                                             Bill No. 100 of 2021
THE COMPULSORY TEACHING OF SEX EDUCATION INEDUCATIONAL INSTITUTIONS BILL, 2021
By
SHRI RAM MOHAN NAIDU KINJARAPU, M.P .
A
BILL
to provide for compulsory teaching of sex education in educational institutions
and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-second Year of the Republic
of India as follows:–
1. (1)This Act may be called the Compulsory Teaching of Sex Education
in Educational Institutions Act, 2021.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government
may, by notification in the official gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a)“Advisory Council” means the Advisory Council for Sex Education
constituted under section 5;
(b) “appropriate Government” means in the case of a State, the
Government of that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(c) “educational institution” means a school imparting education to
children at primary, middle, secondary or a senior secondary level, recognized
by the appropriate Government or established under an Act of the Central
Government or a State Government;
5
Short title, extent
and
commencement.
Definitions.
10
15

2
(d) “LGBTQI community” means lesbian, gay, bi-sexual, transgender,
queer, intersex community;
(e) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act; and
(f) “sex education” includes education related to contraception, sexuality,
menstrual cycle, gender identity, consent and awareness about sexual abuse,
developing awareness around sexual health, female reproductive health and
hygiene, gender sensitisation, awareness about sex including awareness about
pregnancies and other related issues, safe sex and diseases like Sexual
Transmitted Disease (STD) and Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV) and
such other topics as the Advisory Council may deem appropriate for the
purposes of this Act.
3. From such date, as the Central Government may, by notification in the
Official Gazette specify, sex education shall be taught as a compulsory subject
in all educational institutions from such class onwards as may be determined by
the Central Government on the recommendations of the Advisory Council
constituted under section 5.
4. The appropriate Government shall, within six months of issuance of the
notification under section 3 or from the upcoming academic year after the issuance
of the notification under section 3, issue directions for compulsory teaching of
sex education in all educational institutions within its jurisdiction.
5. (1)  The Central Government shall, within one month of the coming
into force of this Act, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute an
Advisory Council for Sex Education.
(2) The Advisory Council shall consist of—
(a) Secretary, Department of School Education and Literacy, Union
Ministry of Education— ex-officio Chairperson;
(b) Chairperson of the Central Board of Secondary Education, or any
member of the Board nominated by the Chairperson on his behalf— ex-officio
member;
(c) Director of the National Council for Educational Research and
Training or any member of the Council nominated by the Director on his
behalf— ex-officio member;
(d) Chairperson of the National Council for Teacher Education or any
member of the Council nominated by the Director on his behalf— ex-officio
member; and
(e) three eminent persons, having special knowledge or practical
experience in the field of education to be appointed by the Central
Government in such manner as may be prescribed— members.
(3)  The salary and allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions
of service of members appointed under clause (e) of sub-section (2) shall be
such as may be prescribed.
6. (1) The Advisory Council shall make recommendations to the appropriate
Government with a view to ensure that through sex education,—
(a) the issues of gender-based violence, sexual abuse and gender
inequality are root out from the society;
(b) respect for diversity and gender equality is encouraged; and
(c) critical thinking is encouraged to build a strong foundation for lifelong
sexual health of the child.
5
Compulsory
teaching of sex
education in
educational
institutions.
AppropriateGovernment toissue directionsfor compulsoryteaching of sexeducation ineducationalinstitutions.
Constitution of
Advisory
Council.
Functions of
Advisory
Council.
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
(2) Without generality of anything contained in sub-section (1), the Advisory
Council shall:—
 (a) recommend to the Central Government the syllabus of sex education
for each class up to senior secondary level;
(b) recommend to the Central Government the class from which onwards
the sex education shall be taught in educational institutions;
(c) recommend to the appropriate Government the measures to increase
awareness about women’s body rights, children rights and for prevention of
children’s sexual abuse in the educational institutions;
(d) recommend to the appropriate Government the measures to impart
gender sensitization lessons and workshops in schools and to decrease
stereotypes related to gender roles;
(e) recommend to the appropriate Government the measures to increase
awareness about LGBTQI community and their rights amongst children in
the educational institutions;
(f) recommend to the appropriate Government the qualifications of
teachers to be appointed in educational institutions for teaching sex education;
(g) recommend to the appropriate Government, the institutions which
may be given recognition for training teachers in sex education for the purpose
of their appointment and teaching in educational institutions; and
(h) co-ordinate with the appropriate Government, educational institutions
and authorities for ensuring effective implementation of the provisions of
this Act.
7. The appropriate Government shall ensure appointment of such
number of teachers with such qualifications, as may be necessary, for
teaching sex education in educational institutions.
8. The appropriate Government shall conduct annual teachers’ training
programme with a minimum of two psychologists and child counsellors per
school on relevant issues relating to sex education.
9. The appropriate Government shall derecognize such educational
institutions, which do not comply with the provisions of this Act, after giving
such institutions a reasonable opportunity of being heard.
10. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by
law by Parliament in this behalf, provide adequate funds to the States for
carrying out the purpose of this Act.
11. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything
inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force.
12. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette,
make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
 (2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is
made, before each House of Parliament, while  it is in session, for a total period
of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive
sessions, and if,  before the expiry of the session immediately following  the
session or the successive sessions aforesaid,  both Houses  agree in making any
modification in the rule  or both the Houses  agree that the  rule should not be
made,  the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of
no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such  modification or
annulment  shall be without  prejudice  to the validity  of anything  previously
done under that rule.
Appointment
of teachers.
Provision of
teachers’
training.
Derecognition
of schools for
non-compliance
of the
provisions of
the Act.
CentralGovernmentto providefunds.
Power to
make rules.
Act to haveoverridingeffect.
5
10
15
20
25
30
45
35
40

4
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Sex education is often held as a taboo and the large section of the
indian society has a stigma against it. However, the ancient Indian society
was much progressive and advanced in imparting sex education through
sculptures like sculptures in Khajuraho, Badami and Virupaksha temples
and through literature like Kama Sutra, Ananga Ranga and Rati Rahsya.
In today’s time, educational institutions don’t have any form of sex
education in their curriculum and there are still very little attempts taken
by them to incorporate it in the curriculum. Currently,  sex education is
limited to creating awareness about AIDS and Sexually Transmitted Diseases
(STDs), which is not sufficient. Sex education is necessary for respect for
women, safety, family planning and prevention of sexual transmitted
diseases.
A child’s first experience outside his house is at his school. It is, therefore,
responsibility of the schools to empower young people with accurate, age
appropriate and culturally relevant information and to promote healthy
attitudes and develop skills to enable them to respond to real life situations in
positive ways. Sex education must be incorporated in the school curriculum
in non-judgemental and non-stigmatized manner and should be in the simplest
and most understandable medium.
National Education Policy, 2020 is a progressive step for imparting quality
education but it is missing out on sex education and therefore, the policy is
incomplete. The Government has launched “Beti Bachao, Beti Padhao”
campaign but it is the need of the hour to launch “ Beta Padhao, Beti Bachao”
campaign to teach the boys of our country about body rights, gender rights
and about gender equality so the girls of our country can feel safer. Moreover,
India is also signatory to International Conference on Population and
Development (ICPD) Programme of Action, 1994 and so the country is
obligated to provide free and compulsory comprehensive sex education. The
need is not just to help the nation and fulfil its obligation, but it will also be a
reformative step in making Indian education system advanced and progressive.
The Bill, therefore, seeks to provide compulsory sex education in all
educational institutions in order to make it a part of school curriculum.
Hence this Bill.
   NEW DELHI;             RAM MOHAN NAIDU KINJARAPU
March 8, 2021.

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 5 of the Bill provides for constitution of Advisory Council for
Sex Education by the Central Government. It also provides for appointment
of eminent persons, having special knowledge or practical experience in the
field of education by the Central Government. Clause 7 provides for
appointing teachers by appropriate Governments in educational institutions
to teach sex education. Clause 8 provides for conducting training for teachers
of sex education from time to time. Clause 10 provides for adequate funding
by the Central Government. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve
expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that an
annual recurring expenditure of rupees one hundred crores will be involved
from the Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees fifty crore is also likely to
be involved.
5

 MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 12 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules
for carrying out the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate
to matters of detail only, the delegation of legislative power is of normal
character.
6

LOK SABHA
_______
A
BILL
  to provide for compulsory teaching of sex education in educational institutions
and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Ram Mohan Naidu Kinjarapu,M.P.)