As INTRODUCED IN LoK SAlJHA ON 
Bill No. 100 of 1986 
THE ELECTION ~WS (RESl!fRVATION OF SEATS FOR THE 
SCHEDULED TRIBES IN CERTAIN NORTH-EASTERN STATES 
AND UNION TERRITORIES) AMENDMENT BILL, 1986 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the reservation of seats in the House of the People and in 
the Legislutive Assemblies at the States of Meghalaya and Nagaland 
f9T the Scheduled Tribes in P'f.l.TSll-£lnce of the amendments made in 
articles 330 and 332 Of the Constitution by the Constitution (Fifty-
first Amendment) Act, 1984 and for matters connec,ei thereto. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty-seventh Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
1. This Act may be called the Election Laws (Reservation of Se.:lts Short 
fo.r the Scheduled Tribes in certain North-Eastern States and UniO'll title. 
r, Territories) Amendment Act, 1988. 
12. In this Act, unless the CO'lltext otherwise requires, "appointed day" Definition. 
means the 16th day of June, 1986, being the date with effect from which 
the Constitution (Fifty-first Amendment) Act, 1984 has come into force. 
3. In the HOUse of the People, to be constituted at any time after the 
10 appointed day, each of the seats allotted to the States of Meghalaya and 
Nagala'l1d and the Union territories of Arunachal Pradesh and Mizoram 
shall be reserved for the Scheduled Tribes, and the First Schedule to 
43 of 1950. the Representation of the People Act, 1950 shall be deemed to have been 
amended accordingly. 
Reserva-
tion in the 
House of 
the People. 

Reserva-
tion in 
Legisla-
tiveAB-
sembUes 
of !rIegha-
Jaya and 
Nagaland. 
2 
4 .. (1) The Election Commission shall make such amendments as 
may be necessary in the Delimitation of Parliamentary and Assembly 
Constituencies Order, 1976 (without altering the extent of any consti-
tuency as given in that Order) having regard to the provisions of article 
332 of the Cunstitution and the provisions of clause (d) of sub-section (1) 5 
of section 9 of the Delimitation Act, 1972, for the purpose of giving proper 76 of 19n. 
representation to the Scheduled Tribes of the States of Meghalaya and 
Nagaland in the Legis~ative Assemblies, to be constituted at any time after 
the appointed day, of those States and for specifying as to which of the 
assembly constituencies in Meghalaya anti N agaland as specified in the 10 
said Order, shall be the constituencies in which seats shall .be so reserved 
for the Scheduled Tribes, and the Second Schedule to the Representation 
(If the People Act, 1950, shall be deemed to haVe been amended accordingly. 
(2) The Commission shall-
(a) publish its proposals for the amendments referred to in sub- 15 
section (1) in the Gazette of India and in the Official Gazette of the 
States concerned and als') in such other manner as it thinks fit; 
(b) specify a date on or after which such proposals will be 
further considered by iti 
(c) consider all objections and suggestions which may have been iO 
received before the date so specified; and 
(ci) thereafter make the necessary amendments in the said 
Order. 
(3) The Commission shall cause the amendments made by it in· the 
said Order to be published in the Gazette of India and in the Official i5 
Gazette of the States concerned. 
(4) Upon publication in the Gazette of India, every such amendment 
shall have the force of law and shall not be called in question in any 
court. ' .IIJ 
(5) As soon as may be after such publication in the Gazette of India, 30 
every such amendment shall be laid before the House of the People and 
the Legislative Assemblies of the States concerned. 
43 of 1950. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Bill is a sequel to the amendments made in articles 330 and 332 
of the Constitution by the Constitution (Fifty-first Amendment) Act, 
1984 fur the purpose of providing for reservation of seats in the Lok Sabha 
for the Scheduled Tribes in Meghalaya, Nagaland, Arunachal Pradesh 
and Mizoram and for similar reservation in the Legislative Assemblies of 
N agaland and Meghalaya. 
2. Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the number of seats which shall be 
reserved for the Scheduled Tribes in Meghalaya, Nagaland, Arunachal 
Pradesh and Mizoram in the Lok Sabha. Clause 4 of the Bill provid • ..:s 
for the determination, having regard to the provisions of article 332 of 
the Constitution and section 9(1) (d) of the Delimitation Act, 1972, of 
the Assembly constituencies in Meghalaya and Nagaland which shall be 
resreved for the Scheduled Tribes. 
3. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects. 
NEW DELm; 
The 8th A.ugt:st, 1986. A. K. SEN. 
8 
,t' • 

LOK SABHA 
Ji. 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the reservation of seats in the House of the People and 
in the Legislative Assemblies of the States of Megbalaya and Nagaland 
for the Scheduled Tribes in pursuance of the amendments made in 
articles 330 and 332 of the Constitution by the Constitution (Fifty-
first Amendment) Act, 1984 and for matters connected thereto. 
(Shri Asoke Kumar Sen, Minister of 
Law and Justic~e) 