AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Bill No.100 of 2017
THE DATA (PRIVACY AND PROTECTION) BILL, 2017
BY
SHRI BAIJAYANT PANDA, M.P.
————
ARRANGEMENT  OF  CLAUSES
__________
CLAUSES
CHAPTER  I
PRELIMINARY
1. Short title and commencement.
2. Definitions.
3. Application.
CHAPTER  II
RIGHT TO PRIV ACY AND DATA PROTECTION
4. Right to privacy.
5. Express consent.
6. Binding determination.
7. Duly informed.
8. Access to personal data.
9. Rectification of personal data.
10. Seeking removal of personal data.
11. Restrict processing.
12. Data portability.
13. Breach of personal data.
14. Legitimate expectation of due diligence.
15. Reasonable restrictions.
CHAPTER  III
M
ETHODS AND PRINCIPLES OF DATA COLLECTION AND PROTECTION
16. Collection and processing of data with prior consent.
17. Special provisions for consent in case of minors and persons with disability.
18. Purpose of data collection and processing.
19. Collection or processing of personal data.
20. Special provisions for sensitive personal data.
(i)

CLAUSES
CHAPTER  IV
TRANSFER, STORAGE AND SECURITY OF PERSONAL DATA
21. Prohibition on sharing of personal data.
22. Retention of personal data.
23. Prohibition on storage of personal data.
24. Transfer of personal data to third parties.
25. Cross-border transfer of personal data.
26. Pseudo-anonymisation.
27. Notification of breach.
28. Security protocol.
CHAPTER  V
O
BLIGATIONS OF DATA CONTROLLER AND DATA PROCESSORS
29. Collection etc.of data in a fair, lawful and transparent.
30. Responsibly of sharing and use of personal data.
31. Fortification of data security.
32. Maintenance of accurate records.
33. Criminal liability.
34. Appointment of Data Protection Officer.
35. Role of Data Protection Officer.
CHAPTER  VI
S
URVEILLANCE
36. Bar against surveillance.
37. Surveillance by private companies, partnerships or any other body corporate.
38. Surveillance by the State.
39. Duration of surveillance.
40. Security and duty of confidentiality and secrecy.
41. Admissibility in court.
42. No targeted individual profiling.
43. Storage of surveillance.
CHAPTER  VII
D
ATA PRIV ACY AND PROTECTION AUTHORITY
44. Constitution of Data Privacy and Protection Authority.
45. Appointment of Chairperson and members to Authority.
46. Constitution of Benches.
47. Terms of office, conditions of service, removal of Chairperson and members.
48. Procedure and powers of the Authority.
49. Functions of the Bench.
50. Filing of complaints.
51. Issuance of orders.
(ii)

CLAUSES
52. Appeal.
53. Civil Court not to have jurisdiction.
CHAPTER  VIII
OFFENCES AND PENALTIES
54. Punishment for offences related to personal data.
55. Punishment for offences related to Sensitive personal data.
56. Breach of confidentiality and security in certain cases.
57. Compensation in case of harassment and profiling.
58. Penalty for contravention of directions.
59. Cognisance.
CHAPTER  IX
M
ISCELLANEOUS
60. Protection of action taken in good faith
61. Power to remove difficulties
62. Overriding effect
SCHEDULE I—EXEMPTIONS
SCHEDULE II—PRIV ACY NOTICE
(iii)

1
Short title,
extent, and
commencement.
Bill No. 100 of  2017
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
THE DATA (PRIV ACY AND PROTECTION) BILL, 2017
By
SHRI BAIJAY ANT PANDA, M.P.
A
BILL
to codify and safeguard the right to privacy in the digital age and constitute a
 Data Privacy Authority to protect personal data and for matters
connected therewith.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-eighth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
CHAPTER  I
PRELIMINARY
1. (1) This Act may be called the Data (Privacy and Protection) Act, 2017.
(2) It shall extend to the whole of India and, save as otherwise provided in this Act, it
shall also apply to any offence or contravention thereunder committed outside India by
any person.
5

2
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the official Gazette, appoint; and different dates may be appointed for
different provisions of this Act and any reference in any such provisions to the
commencement of this Act shall be construed as a reference to the commencement of
that provision.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "anonymised data" means data or information processed in such a manner
that it no longer relates to an identified or identifiable person;
(b) "Authority" means the Data Privacy and Protection Authority constituted
under section 44;
(c) "armed force" means any body raised or constituted pursuant to or in
connection with, or presently governed by, the Army Act, 1950 (46 of 1950), the
Indian Reserve Forces Act, 1888 (4 of 1888), the Territorial Army Act, 1948 (6 of
1948), the Navy Act, 1957 (62 of 1957), the Air Force Act, 1950 (45 of 1950), the
Reserve and Auxiliary Air Forces Act, 1952 (62 of 1952), the Coast Guard
Act, 1978 (30 of 1978) or the Assam Rifles Act, 2006 (47 of 2006);
(d) "authorised officer" means an officer, not below the rank of a Gazetted Officer,
of an All India Service or a Central Civil Service, as the case may be, who is empowered
by the Central Government, by notification in the Official Gazette, to intercept a
communication of another person or carry out surveillance of another person under
this Act;
(e) "communication" means a word or words, spoken, written or indicated, in
any form, manner or language, encrypted or unencrypted, meaningful or otherwise,
and includes visual representations of words, ideas, symbols and images, whether
transmitted or not transmitted and, if transmitted, irrespective of the medium of
transmission;
(f) "data" shall for the purpose of this Act refer to data as defined under
clause (o) of sub-section ( 1) of section 2 of the Information Technology Act, 2000;
(g) "data controller" means a person who, either alone or jointly or in
combination with other persons, determines the purposes for which and the manner
in which any personal data are used, or are to be, processed;
(h) "data processor" with respect to personal data means any person. apart from
an employee of a data controller, who processes data independently or on behalf of
a data controller;
(i) "interception" or "intercept" means any activity intended to capture, read,
listen to, record and/or copy communication of a person;
(j) "intelligence organisation" means institutions set-up under the Intelligence
Organisations (Restriction of Rights) Act, 1985, the National Investigation Agency
Act, 2008 and/or any other institution set up by the Central Government through an
Act of the Parliament or the Executive for the purpose of collection, monitoring,
processing and/or analysis of information relevant to national security.
(k) "person" shall for the purpose of this Act refer to an individual:
(1) "personal data" means any data or information which relates to a person if
that person can, whether directly or indirectly in conjunction with any other data, be
identified from it and includes sensitive personal data;
(m) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(n) "processing" with respect to data, means obtaining or recording the
information or data or carrying out any operation or set of operations on the
information or data, whether or not by automatic means, including—
Definitions.
21 of 2000.
58 of 1985.
34 of 2008.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
(i) organisation, adaptation or alteration of the information,
(ii) or data,
(iii) retrieval, consultation or use of the information or data,
(iv) disclosure of the information or data by transmission, dissemination
or otherwise making available, or
(v) alignment, combination, blocking, erasure or destruction of the
information or data.
(o) "pseudo-anonymisation" means processing of personal data in such a manner
that the personal data can no longer be attributed to a specific person without the use
of additional information, provided that such additional information is kept separately
and is subject to technical and organisational measures to ensure that the personal
data are not attributed to an identified or identifiable person;
(p) "portability" refers to the extent to which data can be moved, copied,
transferred or shared by any other means between different computers, computer
networks, computer systems, and/or computer resource;
(q) "profiling" means any form of automated processing of personal data
consisting of the use of personal data or information to record and classify behaviour
of individuals to predict and analyse their daily activities for purposes other than
promotion and marketing of goods and services;
(r) "surveillance" means any activity intended to collect, watch, monitor,
intercept, or enhance the ability to do the same with a view to obtain information
about a person, group of persons or class of persons through analysis of any
communication, images, signals, data, movement, behaviour or actions;
(s) "sensitive personal data" means such personal information which consists
of information relating to—
(i) racial or ethnic origins, political or religious views;
(ii) passwords;
(iii) financial information such as bank account or credit card or debit card
or other payment instrument details or financial transactions records;
(iv) physical, physiological and mental health condition;
(v) sexual activity;
(vi) medical records and history;
(vii) biometric data relating to the physical, physiological or behavioural
characteristics of a natural person which allow their unique identification
including, but not limited to, facial images, genetic information, fingerprints,
hand prints, foot prints, iris recognition, hand writing, typing dynamics, gait
analysis and speech recognition;
(viii) any details relating to clauses (i) to (vii) above as provided to body
corporates for providing service; and
(ix) any of the information received under clauses ( i) to ( vii) above by
body corporates for processing, stored or processed under lawful contract or
otherwise:
Provided that any information that is freely and lawfully available or accessible in
public domain or furnished under the Right to Information Act, 2005 or any other law for
the time being in force shall not be regarded as sensitive personal data for the purposes of
this Act; and
22 of 2005
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

4
(t) "third party" means any person. public authority, agency or any other body other
than the person whose data is collected or processed, the controller, the processor, and the
persons who, under the authority of the controller or the processor, are authorized to process
data or are recipients of the data so processed.
3. (1) This Act shall apply to—
(a) collection, use, storage, disclosure and processing of personal data or
information of all persons through wholly or partially automated or manual methods;
(b) data controllers and data processors which are State entities, including
Government agencies or authorised personnel on their behalf as well as private
companies, partnerships or any other body corporate which conduct activities within
the territory of India through a registered place of business or establishment,
irrespective of whether data processing is carried out at such place or outside the
territory of India; and
(c) data controllers and data processors which are State entities, including
Government agencies or authorised personnel on their behalf as well as private
companies, partnerships or any other body corporate which do not have a registered
place of business or establishment in India and offer goods or services to persons in
India, irrespective of consideration, as defined under the Indian Contracts Act, 1872,
being sought in lieu of such goods or services.
(2) Nothing in this Act shall apply to collection or processing of data mentioned in
Schedule I:
Provided that the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette,
amend Schedule I by way of addition and deletion of entries thereto :
Provided further that every notification under sub-section ( 2) shall be issued after
consultation with the Authority and shall be laid before each House of Parliament.
CHAPTER II
R
IGHT TO PRIV ACY AND DATA PROTECTION
4. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force,
pursuant to article 19 and 21 of the Constitution and subject to the provisions of this Act, all
persons shall have a right to privacy.
5. (1) No person shall collect, store, process, disclose or otherwise handle any personal
data of another person, intercept any communication of another person or carry out
surveillance of another person except in accordance with the provisions of this Act.
(2) For the collecting, processing, storing, disclosing and otherwise handling personal
data, express and affirmative consent has to be obtained from the requisite person after full
disclosure of information as required under Schedule II of this Act.
(3) Consent under sub-section (2) shall be considered valid only if it is freely given,
specific, informed and an unambiguous indication of a person's intention to allow collecting,
processing, storing, disclosing and/or otherwise handling personal data.
(4) Notwithstanding the above, consent may be overridden in cases where there is a
legal obligation or medical emergency which is fatal or may likely lead to permanent or
irreversible bodily harm as well as the reasonable restrictions mentioned in section 15:
Provided that any consent may only be overridden to the extent necessary and the
person so affected shall be informed of the same.
6. For the purposes of section 4, every person shall have the final and binding power
to determine the manner in which his personal data is to be dealt with.
Application.
9 of 1872.
Right to privacy.
Express
consent.
Binding
determination.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

5
7. Every person shall be duly informed about the processing of information through
issuance of a privacy notice which shall be concise, timely, updated, transparent, intelligible,
written in clear and plain language (both English and vernacular language), be
easily accessible and provided free of cost to persons with the information specified in
Schedule II;
Provided that where consent is being sought with regard to a written declaration/
online form which contains other clauses and matters, the clauses or portions regarding
the privacy notice should be clearly distinguishable from other clauses and matters.
8. Every person shall have access to his personal data which is collected, processed,
used or stored by Data Controllers and Data Processors, including the right to obtain a
copy and obtain confirmation that his data is being processed along with any supplementary
information corresponding to the information mandated under Schedule II of this Act.
9. (1) Every person shall have the right to have his personal data rectified if it is
inaccurate or incomplete.
(2) Every rectification under sub-section ( 1) shall be carried out by the Data
Controller and/or Data Processor in the manner notified by the Central Government in
consultation with the Authority as it may deem appropriate:
Provided that every rectification shall be completed within a period of sixty days of
receipt of data for rectification.
(3) Any person who collects, receives, stores, processes or otherwise handles any
personal data of another person shall, to the extent possible, ensure that it is not inaccurate
or misleading and, where necessary, is kept up to date.
(4) No person who collects, receives, stores, processes or otherwise handles any
personal data shall deny, to the person to whom any personal data so collected, received,
stored, processed or otherwise handled pertains, the opportunity to review it and, where
necessary, rectify anything that is inaccurate, misleading or not up to date.
10. (I) Every person shall have the right to seek removal of personal data from Data
Controller—
(a) where personal data is no longer necessary with regard to the purpose for
which it was originally collected or processed; or
(b) where the person withdraws consent; or
(c) where personal data has been obtained unlawfully; or
(d) where personal data is required to be erased in accordance with a legal
obligation pursuant to a Court order.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in Sub-section (1), removal of personal data
shall not be allowed if there are overriding legitimate interests and it is necessary—
(a) in the interest of fundamental rights;
(b) for compliance of a legal obligation or court order or an any action
taken by an officer in exercise of the power vested in him;
(c) for establishing or defending a legal claim;
(d) to safeguard public interest.
Illustration
If A, a convicted sex offender, seeks removal from the online sex offender registry
maintained by the Government, the same shall be disallowed in light of the overriding
public interest of safety of women and children.
Person to be
duly informed.
Access to
personal data.
Rectification of
personal data.
Seeking removal
of personal data.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

6
11. (1) During the pendency of consideration of request for removal of specific personal
data, the Data Controller and Data Processor shall restrict processing of the specific personal
data of the person.
(2) It is hereby clarified that sub-clause (1) shall not restrict the collection/storage of
personal data.
12. Every person shall, as and when required, receive the personal data concerning
him, which he has provided to a data controller, in a structured, commonly used and
machine-readable format and have the right to data portability to another data controller
without any hindrance.
13. Every person shall have the right to be duly and promptly informed, within seven
days about any unauthorized access, destruction, use, processing, storage, modification,
de-anonymisation, unauthorized disclosure (either accidental or incidental) or other
reasonably foreseeable risks or data security breaches of pertaining to their personal data.
14. (1) Every person at the stage of giving consent for collection, processing, use or
storage shall be have a legitimate expectation that data controllers and data processors
shall abide by the provisions of this Act.
(2) Data Controllers and/or Data Processors shall take all security measures
necessary for safeguarding and securing the personal data in their custody with due diligence.
15. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the right to privacy shall be
restricted by the Authority in the manner specified by this Act for—
(a) reasonable safeguards for sovereignty or integrity of India, national security
and for the defence of country;
(b) prevention of suspected acts of terrorism, corruption, money laundering,
organised crime, sale or purchase of narcotic and psychotropic substances;
(c) investigation of cognisable and non-bailable offences under the Indian Penal
Code. 1860 after a report has been duly filed under section 154 of the Criminal
Procedure Code, 1973;
(d) investigation of any other offences under the Indian Penal Code, 1860, or
any other Act for the time being in force, after an appropriate order has been obtained
from the requisite judicial authority with regard to existence of probable cause and
providing a fixed time-frame for such collection or processing; and
(e) maintenance of public order in situations of imminent danger of breakdown:
Provided that the above restrictions must be adequate, relevant, proportionate,
not excessive in nature and must be imposed in the manner prescribed.
CHAPTER  III
M
ETHODS AND PRINCIPLES OF DATA COLLECTION AND PROCESSING
16. (1) No personal data shall be collected, processed, stored, accessed or monitored
without prior express consent of the person directly affected by such act.
(2) Consent should be express, affirmative and taken after information as mandated
under Schedule II has been provided to the person in a manner which is clearly
distinguishable, concise, timely, updated, transparent, intelligible, written in clear and plain
language (both English and vernacular language):
Provided that every person subject to data collection shall be duly informed and be
provided fair opportunity or mechanism to revoke consent at any time often has consent to
the collection of personal data has been obtained:
Restrict
processing.
Data portability.
Breach of
personal data.
Legitimate
expectation of
due diligence.
Reasonable
restrictions.
45 of 1860.
2 of 1874.
45 of 1860.
Collection and
processing. etc.
of personal
data with prior
consent.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

7
Provided further that where the purpose of processing of data are changed or added or
varied in any manner whatsoever, such additional data collection or processing which is in
variance of the initial purpose shall not be done without the prior consent of the person.
(3) It shall be the duty of the data processor or controller to duly provide information
and adequate explanation to the person while taking consent about the manner and extent to
which personal data shall be accessed, collected, stored or processed.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section "consent" shall have the same meaning
and safeguards as provided under the Indian Contracts Act, 1872.
17. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 16, where the personal data
belongs to a minor as per the Indian Majority Act 1875, the consent of minor shall be—
(a) obtained from a legal guardian; and
(b) duly verified by the data controllers and processors:
Provided that upon attaining majority, the minor shall have the right to either continue
or terminate the consent given by the legal guardian on his behalf.
(2) In the case of differently abled persons, the data controllers and data processors
shall make special provisions for providing privacy notices and obtaining consent in
accordance with accepted standards and as per directions of the Authority.
18.(1) Every data controller and data processor must duly notify every person of the
purpose for which data is collected, accessed or processed in a comprehensive format and
with the adequate information as provided under Schedule II of the Act:
Provided that in case of multiple purposes, each purpose shall be displayed separately
and the ramifications thereof shall be provided to the person at the time of taking his
consent.
(2) No personal data shall be collected, accessed or processed unless deemed necessary
for achievement of the purpose specified under sub-section (1) and connected to the stated
function:
Provided that if any other personal data is collected it shall be marked as "optional".
(3) Any additional or further processing of personal data for archiving or scientific or
historical or statistical research, shall not be considered incompatible with the initial purpose
if it is,—
(a) bona fide;
(b) in public interest; and
(c) subject to adequate safeguards.
19. Personal data of a person with his consent may be collected or processed lawfully,
if—
(a) necessary for performance of a contract or at a stage immediately prior to
entering into a contract;
(b) required in furtherance of a legal obligation;
(c) in case of a person's medical emergency;
(d) necessary for administration of justice pursuant to a court order:
(e) required for performance of any statutory, governmental or other functions
by data processor or controller as duly specified to the person subject to data collection;
(f) necessary for the legitimate interests pursued by data controller or processor
or the third party to whom data is disclosed after it is duly informed to the person:
Special
provisions for
consent in
case of minors
and persons
with disability.
Purpose of data
collection and
processing.
Collection or
processing of
personal data.
9 of 1875.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

8
Provided that the interests of data processors or controller or third parties shall
be adequately balanced against any prejudicial effect of the same on the rights and
freedoms of the person as guaranteed under this Act and under the Constitution of
India; and
(g) required for any other purpose as may be notified by the Central Government
in consultation with the Authority, from time to time.
20. Notwithstanding anything contained in section 16 or section 19 of this Act,
(1) Sensitive personal data shall not be processed unless express, affirmative and
explicit written consent of the person subject to data collection has been obtained through
letter or fax or email from the said person.
(2) No sensitive personal data under sub-section (1) shall be processed for any purpose
apart from for the specific purpose for which it was collected and/or implementation of
welfare schemes and social protection laws.
(3) If sensitive personal data has been collected by various government agencies,
institutions, authorities or private companies, partnerships or any other body corporate.
for a specific purpose or as a part of a statutory or legal requirement and any form of
collaborating, converging or monitoring between or individually by entities shall be
expressly barred if it amounts to or reasonably lead to —
(a) individual profiling except for circumstances of reasonable restriction as
mentioned under section 15 of this Act; or
(b) mass profiling or profiling of certain group or class of persons without
any lawful reason or adequate basis; or
(c) unlawful access by third parties.
(4) It shall be the duty of the data controller or processor, as the case may be, to
ensure that the sensitive personal data is collected, stored or processed, in accordance
with this Act with reasonable advanced security measures and safeguards to ensure the
safety of such data.
CHAPTER  IV
T
RANSFER, STORAGE AND SECURITY OF PERSONAL DATA
21. No personal data shall be shared in contravention of the provisions of this Act.
22. No personal data shall be retained after the achievement of purpose for which it
was collected and has been duly completed up to the satisfaction of all parties:
Provided that nothing in this section shall apply to databases of sensitive personal
data duly established by the Central Government or State Government, as the case may be.
23. (1) No person shall store any personal data of another person for a period longer
than is necessary to achieve the purpose for which it was collected or received, or, if that
purpose is achieved or ceases to exist for any reason, for any period following such
achievement or cessation.
(2) Save as provided in sub-section (3), any personal data collected or received in
relation to the achievement of a purpose shall, if that purpose is achieved or ceases to exist
for any reason, be destroyed forthwith.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, any personal data may be
stored for a period longer than is necessary to achieve the purpose for which it was collected
or received, or, if that purpose has been achieved or ceases to exist for any reason, for any
period following such achievement or cessation, if —
Special
provisions for
Sensitive
personal data.
Prohibition
on sharing of
personal data.
Retention of
personal data.
Prohibition on
prolonged or
unnecessary
storage of
personal data.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

9
(a) the person to whom it pertains grants his consent to such storage prior to
the purpose for which it was collected or received being achieved or ceasing to exist;
or
(b) it is required to be stored for historical, statistical or research purposes under
the provisions of an Act of Parliament:
Provided that only that amount of personal data that is necessary to achieve the
purpose of storage under this sub-section shall be stored and any personal data that is not
required to be stored for such purpose shall be destroyed forthwith.
24. Any transfer of personal data to a third party shall be done pursuant to taking
express, affirmative consent under Section 16 of this Act and after adequately informing
them of the ramifications thereof in a comprehensive manner the requirements specified
under Section 7 of this Act:
Provided that any transfer of data to third parties shall be done only after ensuring
that the third parties' privacy policies and security standards are in no way less privacy
preserving than that of the transferring party.
25. Any cross border transfer of personal data shall be done pursuant to taking express,
affirmative consent under Section 16 of this Act and after adequately informing them of
the ramifications thereof in a comprehensive manner the requirements specified under
Section 7 of this Act:
Provided that any cross border transfer of data to any entity or person outside the
territory of India shall be done only after ensuring that the privacy policies and security
standards followed by such entity are in no way less privacy preserving than those prescribed
under this Act.
26. For collecting, processing, storing, disclosing and/or otherwise  handling personal
data, pseudo - anonymisation shall be encouraged as far as possible.
27. It shall be the duty of the data controller and data processor, as the case may be,
in case of any breach, unauthorized access, destruction, use, processing, storage,
modification, de-anonymisation, unauthorized disclosure (either accidental or incidental),
or other reasonably foreseeable risks of personal data, to notify to the person who is the
subject of such personal data as well as the Authority and take adequate steps to mitigate
any harm or damage of the data security breach within seven days.
28. It shall be the duty of the data controller and processor, as the case may be,
to maintain adequate security measures and safeguards in accordance with the nature and
form of security protocol as notified by the Central Government in consultation with the
Authority, from time to time.
CHAPTER V
O
BLIGATIONS OF DATA CONTROLLER AND PROCESSORS
29. (1) It shall be the duty of the data controller or processor, as the case may be
to collect, store, access or process the personal data in a fair, lawful and transparent manner
and in compliance with the provisions of this Act.
(2) Any personal data obtained in contravention of sub-section ( 1) shall be deemed
to be unlawfully obtained.
30. It shall be the duty of the data controller or processor or third party, as the case
may be, to ensure that all personal data is reasonably shared only when it is necessary,
while maintaining confidentiality and in compliance with the provisions of this Act.
31. It shall be the duty of the data controller or processor or third party, as the case
may be, to take adequate measure for fortification of data security against unauthorised or
unlawful access or use, accidental loss, damage, or  any form of cyber-attacks:
Transfer of
personal data to
third parties.
Cross-border
transfer of
personal data.
Pseudo-
anonymisation.
Notification of
breach.
Security
protocol.
Collection, etc.
of data in a fair,
lawful and
transparent.
Responsibility
of sharing and
use of personal
data.
Fortification of
data security.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

10
Provided that in the case of a breach of data, it is the duty of the data controller or
processor or third party to notify the affected persons within seven days of the occurrence
of the breach as well as take adequate measures to mitigate any harm or damage:
Provided further that the burden of proof to substantiate that adequate measures are
in accordance with the provisions of this Act, shall lie on the data controller or processor
or third party, as the case may be.
32. It shall be the duty of the data controller or processor or third party, as the case
may be, to maintain accurate records of data collected, accessed, stored and processed
along with record of consent obtained as per the provisions of this Act.
33. Where a data controller or data processor or third party, as the case may be, has
committed an offence under Chapter 8 which is punishable with imprisonment, every person
in-charge of and responsible for the conduct of business shall, irrespective of direct
commercial or financial benefit, incur criminal liability and be punished accordingly:
Provided that nothing contained in this Section shall render any such person in-
charge liable to any punishment, if he proves to the satisfaction of the Authority that such
offence was committed without his knowledge or that he had exercised all due diligence
to prevent the commission of such offence.
34. (1) Every data controller or processor or third party, as the case may be, shall
appoint a Data Protection Officer having adequate technical expertise in the field of data
collection or processing and the ability to address any requests, clarifications or complaints
made with regard to the provisions of this Act:
Provided that the data controllers and processors employing less than live hundred
people and having a per capita turnover of less than one crore rupees may jointly appoint a
Data Protection Officer, for resolving or addressing any requests, clarifications or
complaints made herein in collaboration with other bodies with similar size or turnover.
(2) No additional fee shall be charged for resolving or addressing any requests,
clarifications or complaints made herein.
35. (1) The Data Protection Officer shall—
(a) act as an independent person;
(b) address requests, clarifications or complaints made in writing, including
through electronic form, by any aggrieved person or legal representative thereof;
(c) take steps to initiate an inquiry and commence proceedings within seven
days of receiving the complaint;
(d) resolve the matter within ninety days of receipt of complaint;
(e) recommend the data controller or processor to take action; and
(f) record the proceedings, the results thereof and the reasons for arriving at the
decision in writing.
(2) In cases where the Data Protection Officer has not been appointed or is unable to
or does not adequately resolve the complaints within the stipulated period of ninety days,
the complainant may approach the Data Privacy Authority for redressal of complaints.
CHAPTER  VI
SURVEILLANCE
36. Except for the manner provided in this Act and the rules prescribed thereto, no
person shall conduct or assist in conducting any surveillance of another person.
Maintenance of
accurate
records.
Criminal liability.
Appointment of
Data Protection
Officer.
Role of Data
Protection
Officer.
Bar against
surveillance.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

11
37. Any person except a public servant or authority duly authorised by the Central
Government to order or conduct surveillance or to assist in pending investigation by the
competent authority shall be expressly barred from initiating, assisting, conducting or
abetting any act of surveillance under this Act.
38. (1) The State has the power to collect, process, monitor and intercept personal data
in accordance to the reasonable restrictions provided under section 15.
(2) Any officer authorised by the Central Government, on the basis of information
received or lawfully discovered by police, armed forces, intelligence organisation or any
public official, if satisfied that the information sets out a reasonable threat to sovereignty,
integrity, national security or defence of public order, he may forward the same to the
concerned intelligence organisations.
(3) The concerned intelligence organisation shall, on receipt of information
mentioned under sub-section ( 2), if deem necessary, seek an order from the Authority
who may either reject or issue an order allowing surveillance or interception of personal
data for reasons recorded in writing and addressed to concerned organisation:
Provided that the every case referred to the Authority under this section shall be
processed and an appropriate order shall be passed within a period of sixty days of receipt
of the case:
Provided further that the order should specify the communications or class of
communications to or from the persons or class of persons that shall be subject to the
order.
(4) For the purpose of sub-section (2), a Special division shall be set up by the Central
Government for assistance of the Authority for determination of the cases referred:
Provided that prior to issuing the order, the Authority shall satisfy itself that all other
lawful means to acquire the information sought to be intercepted has been exhausted and
that the proposed interception is reasonable, proportionate and not excessive.
(5) The Special division set up under section ( 4) shall have the power to conduct
preliminary investigation in the manner as prescribed by the Central Government, from
time to time, submit their findings to the Authority who shall thereafter issue a detailed
order to the intelligence organisation:
Provided that in case of military intelligence, which appears to be inaccessible or
sensitive and/or confidential, the Authority shall consult the Cabinet Secretary, Government
of India for the purposes of issuance of order under this section.
(6) After, receipt of order from the Authority the intelligence organisation shall
conduct surveillance in accordance to the express conditions provided in the order.
39. Every order issued under section 38 shall specify the time period for carrying
out the surveillance by the intelligence organisation of the personal data:
Provided that if any extension is required for the surveillance, the intelligence
organisation shall approach the Authority along with reasons for such extension.
40. Every State authority, intelligence organisation or private companies, partnerships
or any other body corporate shall, as the case may be, which participate, assist, co-operate,
conduct or carry out activity to facilitate surveillance pursuant to provisions of this chapter,
take reasonable steps to ensure security of the data so collected and maintain the
confidentiality and secrecy thereof.
41. If at any stage, information or personal data obtained through surveillance is
required to be produced in a court of law, the onus to prove that the same has been collected
in accordance with the provisions of this Act while maintaining a proper chain of custody
Surveillance by
private
companies,
partnerships or
any other body
corporate.
Surveillance by
the State.
Duration of
surveillance.
Security and
duty of
confidentiality
and secrecy.
Admissibility in
court.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

12
without any tampering or external interference shall be on the concerned State authority,
intelligence organisation or private entity, as the case may be.
42. Any targeted profiling of individuals or of a certain section or class of persons
without any basis and harassment, whether physical or financial or other means, shall be
expressly barred and be deemed as violation of privacy under this Act.
43. No information or personal data that is collected in the process of surveillance
which is not relevant for the purposes of evidence or for continuing investigation by the
intelligence organisations shall not be stored by or accessible to the intelligence
organisations after a period of expiry of one year from the date on which the order under
which the information was obtained.
CHAPTER  VII
D
ATA PRIV ACY AUTHORITY
44. The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute an
Authority to be known as the Data Privacy and Protection Authority for carrying out the
purposes of this Act in such manner as may be prescribed.
45. (1) The Central Government shall, in consultation with the Chief Justice of India,
appoint a Chairperson and other members to the Authority in such manner as may be
prescribed.
(2) The Authority shall constitute of judicial members as well as technical members in
equal proportion.
(3) A judicial member shall otherwise be qualified to be a High Court Judge or have
been a member of the Indian Legal Services and have held a post in Grade I of that Service
for at least three years.
(4) A technical member shall have expertise, special knowledge of and adequate
professional experience in technology and processing/collection of data.
(5) The Chairperson of the Authority shall be the senior-most judicial member.
46. (I) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Authority may, by notification in the
Official Gazette, constitute Benches to exercise the jurisdiction, powers and authority
conferred to under this Act.
(2) Each Bench shall consist of at least one judicial and one technical member of the
Authority to be decided by Chairperson in such manner as may be prescribed.
(3) The Benches of the Authority shall sit at New Delhi and at such other places as
the Central Government may, in consultation with the Chairperson of the Authority, by
notification in the Official Gazette, specify.
(4) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify
the areas in relation to which each Bench of the Authority may exercise its territorial
jurisdiction.
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section ( 3), the Chairperson of the
Authority may transfer a member from one Bench to another Bench for carrying out the
purposes of this Act in such manner as may be prescribed.
(6) If at any stage of the hearing of any case or matter it appears to the Chairperson
or a member of the Authority that the case or matter is of such a nature that it ought to be
heard by a Bench consisting of more members, the case or matter may be transferred by
the Chairperson to such Bench as the Chairperson may deem fit.
No targeted
individual
profiling.
Storage of
surveillance.
Constitution of
Data Privacy
Authority.
Appointment
of
Chairperson
and other
members to
the Authority.
Constitution of
Benches.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

13
47. (1) The Chairperson and every member of the Authority shall hold office for a
period of five years or till the age of sixty-five years whichever is earlier:
Provided that no member shall be elected for more than two consecutive terms.
(2) The Central Government shall remove a person from the office of Chairperson or
member, as the case may be, if that person—
(i) has been adjudged as insolvent;
(ii) has been convicted of an offence of moral turpitude or any other offence as
may be deemed appropriate and notified by the Central Government:
(iii) has become physically or mentally incapable of acting as a member;
(iv) has acquired such financial or other interest as is likely to prejudicially affect
completion of duties;
(v) has abused his position in such a manner that continuance in office shall be
prejudicial to public interest:
Provided that no person shall be removed under this sub-section unless he has been
given a reasonable opportunity of being heard in the matter.
(3) The salary and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of service of
Chairperson and members of the Authority shall be such as may be prescribed.
48. (1) The Authority shall not be bound by the procedure laid down by the Code of
Civil Procedure, 1908, but shall be guided by the principles of natural justice and, subject to
the other provisions of this Act and of any rules.
(2) The Authority shall have power to regulate its own procedure including the place
at which it shall have its sittings.
(3) The Authority shall have, for the purposes of discharging its functions under this
Act, the same powers as are vested in a civil court under the Code of Civil
Procedure, 1908, while trying a suit, in respect of the following matters, namely:
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person and examining him
on oath;
(b) requiring the discovery and production of documents or other electronic
records;
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits:
(d) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses or documents;
(e) calling upon any data processor or data controller at any time to furnish in
writing such information or explanation as may be deemed necessary;
(f) hearing and deciding matters where criminal liability is involved with respect
to the provisions of this Act;
(g) issuing an order for search and seizure pursuant to a complaint or suo-moto
if there is prima facie evidence of contravention or violation of this Act;
(h) reviewing its decisions;
(i) dismissing an application for default or deciding it ex parte; and
(j) any other matter which may be prescribed.
(4) Every proceeding before the Authority shall be deemed to be a judicial proceeding
within the meaning of Sections 193 and 228, and for the purposes of section 196 of the
Indian Penal Code, 1860 and the Authority shall be deemed to be a civil court for the
purposes of section 195 and Chapter XXVI of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.
Terms of office,
conditions of
service, removal
of Chairperson
and members.
Procedure and
Powers of the
Authority.5 of 1908.
5 of 1908.
45 of 1860.
2 of 1974.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

14
49. The Authority shall,—
(a) adjudicate all disputes and contraventions of the provisions of this Act
referred to it, impose penalties and punishments thereof;
(b) study and undertake impact assessment of Bills tabled before each House of
Parliament, existing legislation, ordinances and rules pertaining to the subject matter
of this Act as it deems necessary and make recommendations to the concerned
Ministry;
(c) consult with stakeholders on any issues pertaining to the subject matter of
this Act which are of public importance;
(d) consult with the Central Government according to the provisions of this Act;
and
(e) suo-moto initiate inspection of Data Controllers and Data Processors to
assess compliance with the provisions of this Act.
50. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Data Protection Officer or not
received any adjudication despite lapse of ninety days may file a written complaint with
regard to non-compliance, contravention or any other violation of this Act before the
Authority:
Provided that where the Data Protection Officer is not appointed, the person may
directly approach the Authority.
51. The Bench shall upon adjudicating the complaints referred to in section 50 award
fines, call for directive or injunctive measures, compensation and/or imprisonment of
such term as it may deem appropriate.
52. An appeal against the decision of the Bench shall lie to the Telecom Disputes
Settlement Appellate Tribunal set up in accordance with the provisions of the Telecom
Regulatory Authority Act, 1997.
53. No civil court have jurisdiction to entertain any suit or proceedings in respect of
any matter dealt with under the provisions of this Act.
CHAPTER VIII
O
FFENCES AND PENALTIES
54. Whoever, except in compliance with the provisions of this Act, collects, stores,
receives, processes, publishes or otherwise handles personal data shall be punishable with
a term of imprisonment for a term which may extend up to five years and fine which
may extend up to rupees fifty thousand for each day of unlawful access to the personal
data:
Provided that where any offence under this Act has been committed by a company and
it is proved that the offence has been committed with the consent or connivance of, or is
attributable to any neglect on the part of any director, manager, secretary or other officer of
the company, such director, manager, secretary or other officer shall be deemed to be guilty
of that offence, and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.
55. Whoever, except in compliance with the provisions of this Act, collects, stores,
receives, processes, publishes or otherwise handles sensitive personal data shall be
punishable with a term of imprisonment which may extend up to ten years and fine which may
extend up to rupees one lakh for each day of unlawful access to the personal data and shall
also be required to provide adequate compensation to the person whose sensitive personal
data has been breached to be determined by the Authority in such manner as may be
prescribed.
Functions of the
Bench.
Filing of
Complaints.
Issuance of
orders.
Appeal.
Civil Court
not to have
Jurisdiction.
Punishment for
offences related
to personal data.
Punishment
for offences
related to
sensitive
personal data.
24 of 1997.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

15
56. Whoever breaches confidentiality or compromises security of any personal data
being collected as a part of surveillance authorised under this Act shall be liable to be
punished with a term of imprisonment which may extend up to ten years and/or fine which
may extend up to rupees fifty thousand for each day of said breach.
57. Whoever has been victim of profiling and harassment, whether physical or financial
under section 42 shall be entitled to adequate compensation for financial loss and mental
trauma in such manner as may be prescribed.
58. Any wilful non-compliance of a direction or order of the Bench shall be punishable
with imprisonment for a term which may extend upto six month and fine which may extend
upto rupees fifty thousand for each day of said breach.
59. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973,
the offences under this chapter shall be treated as cognizable.
CHAPTER  IX
M
ISCELLANEOUS
60. No suit or other legal proceeding shall lie against the Central Government, State
Government, Chairperson or Member of the Authority, or any person acting under the
direction either of the Central Government, State Government, Chairperson or Member of the
Authority, as the case may be, in respect of anything which is in good faith done or intended
to be done in pursuance of this Act or of any rules or any order made thereunder.
61. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may, by order, published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appears to it to be necessary or expedient
for removing the difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made under this section after the expiry of a
period of three years from the commencement of this Act.
62. The provisions of this Act shall have overriding effect over the Telecom Regulatory
Authority Act, 1997 the Information Technology Act, 2000 or any other legislation pertaining
to collection, processing, interception and monitoring of personal data.
63. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days
which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before
the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions
aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses
agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such
modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification
or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under
that rule.
Breach of
confidentiality
and security in
certain cases.
Compensation
in case of
harassment
and profiling.
Penalty for
contravention
of directions.
Cognizance.2 of 1974.
Protection of
action taken
in good faith.
Power to
remove
difficulties.
Overriding
effect.
Power to make
rules.
24 of 1997.
21 of 2000.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35

SCHEDULE I
[See Section 3(2)]
EXCEPTIONS
This Act shall not apply to collection or processing of data which falls within the
following categories—
1. purely for personal reasons or pertaining to household activities;
2. of a deceased person;
3. eligible to be disclosed under the Right to Information Act, 2005; and
4. that is anonymised and cannot be used to identify the natural person.
16

SCHEDULE II
[See section 3]
PRIVACY NOTICE
Any privacy notice published under this Act must contain the following ingredients—
(a) What personal data or information is being collected;
(b) the purposes of the processing;
(c) the categories of personal data concerned;
(d) the recipients or categories of recipient to whom the personal data have been
or will be disclosed, in particular recipients in third countries or international
organisations along with the safeguards thereof;
(e) where possible, the envisaged period for which the personal data will be
stored, or, if not possible, the criteria used to determine that period;
(f) the existence of the right to request from the controller rectification or
erasure of personal data or restriction of processing of personal data concerning the
data subject or to object to such processing;
(g) the right to lodge a complaint with the competent authority;
(h) where the personal data are not collected from person, any available
information as to their source.
(i) the existence of automated decision-making, including profiling, and
meaningful information about the logic involved, as well as the significance and the
envisaged consequences of such processing for the person.
17

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
While right to life and personal liberty are granted under article 21 of the Constitution
of India, our jurisprudence, judicial pronouncements and case laws have extended it to
encompass inter alia, a life of dignity. However, there is no express statutory grant of right
to privacy.
The Hon'ble Supreme Court has recognised the right to privacy in a limited and
reasonable manner with the landmark case of Kharak Singh v. The State of U.P. It has further
expounded on the principle and safeguards thereof in various landmark cases such as PUCL
v. Union of India and Selvi v. Union of India, delineating the extent of the right to privacy in
communications and the right to withhold consent to certain privacy violations, respectively.
With the increased proliferation of technology in daily lives, it is becoming increasingly
important for us to recognise and implement a meaningful right to privacy as also recognised
by the Special Rapporteur on the Right to Privacy, Office of the High Commissioner for
Human Rights. Further, India has globally, as a party to the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights (UDHR), and the International Covenant for Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR),
acknowledged the right to privacy as an universal human right under Article 12 of the UDHR
and Article 17 of the ICCPR.
On one hand, there is significant success of Aadhaar, which is the largest biometric
database in the world, as a means to implement social welfare schemes and serves as a tool
for financial inclusion. On the other hand, there is reasonable apprehension as to the security
of the information contained in the database and during any information transmission as a
part thereof.
Today, personal data is being collected and processed at a much larger scale that is
not limited to AADHAAR; every application and website we use collects and processes
our personal data. Our personal data is vulnerable to any non-State actor, private entity
around the globe with the technological know-how to access and process this data
unlawfully. It may be utilised by Non-State Actors to target Indian citizens through cyber-
attacks for financial gains as well as to profile the interests of any person. Ready availability
and accessibility of personal data can also assist terror groups or religiously extreme
groups in profiling, propagating extremist ideology and preying on young, poor and
destitute.
The present Bill is an effort to avoid situations like a country-wide hack like in the case
of Estonia in 2007 and the recent global ransomware attack `WannaCry' in 2017. Globally,
data is being considered the new oil and in the coming years, our international trade and
economic relations will depend on the health and bargaining power of our data economy.
Hence it is timely to address the issue on data protection and protect the privacy of all
persons. It intends to provide rights of persons vis-a-vis their own information, as well as
procedures for data collection, data processing, reasonable and targeted surveillance, and
means of redress in case of breaches and violations.
In light of this, while the collection and processing of data is important, there is an
overwhelming need to secure personal data and ensure better security by creating a statutory
obligation to safeguard data and individuals. To that effect, this Bill seeks to establish
Inter alia, a balance between rights of individuals and legitimate intervention by the State.
18

19
The Bill seeks to codify and safeguard the right to privacy for all juristic persons in the
digital age, balanced with the need for data protection in the interests of national security.
Hence this Bill.
NEW DELHI; BAIJAYANT PANDA
April 7, 2017

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 34 of the Bill provides for appointment of Data Protection Officer. Clause 44
provides for establishment of the Data Privacy Authority for carrying out the purposes of
this Act. Clause 45 provides for the appointment of a Chairperson and other members to the
Authority. Clause 46 provides for constitution of Benches by the Authority. The Bill, therefore,
if enacted would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated
that a sum of about rupees ten crores would involve as recurring expenditure per annum from
the Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees fifty crores is also likely to be involved
out of the Consolidated Fund of India.
20

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 63 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Act. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.
21

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to codify and safeguard the right to privacy in the digital age and
constitute a Data Privacy Authority to protect personal data
and  for matters connected therewith.
————
(Shri Baijayant Panda, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—889LS(S3)—10.07.2017.