1
THE CONSTITUTION (ONE HUNDRED AND TWELFTH
AMENDMENT) BILL, 2009
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixtieth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (One Hundred and Twelfth  Amendment)
Act, 2009.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2.  In article 243T of the Constitution,—
(i) in clause (2), for the word “one-third”, the word “one-half” shall be substituted;
(ii) in clause (3), for the word “one-third”, the word “one-half” shall be substituted;
(iii) for clause (4), the following shall be substituted, namely:—
“(4) The offices of  Chairpersons in the Municipalities shall be reserved
for the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes and women in such manner as
the Legislature of a State may, by law, provide:
Short title and
commencement.
Amendment
of article
243T.
Bill No. 100 of  2009
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5
10

2
Provided that the number of offices of Chairpersons reserved for the
Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes in the Municipalities in any State
shall bear, as nearly as may be, the same proportion to the total number of such
offices as the population of the Scheduled Castes in the State or of the Scheduled
Tribes in the State bears to the total population of  that State:
Provided further that not less than one-half of the total number of offices
of Chairpersons reserved for the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes in
the Municipalities shall be reserved for women belonging to the Scheduled
Castes or, as the case may be, the Scheduled Tribes:
Provided also that not less than one-half of the total number of offices of
Chairpersons (including the number of offices reserved for women belonging to
the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes) in the Municipalities shall be
reserved for women:
Provided also that the number of offices reserved under this clause shall
be allotted by rotation to different Municipalities.”.
5
10
15

3
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Parliament enacted the Constitution (Seventy-fourth Amendment) Act in 1992. This
Act has inserted “Part IXA” in the Constitution relating to Municipalities. Article 243T of the
Constitution provides for reservation of seats for the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled
Tribes and also for women in Urban Local Bodies. Clause (2) of Article 243T provides that
not less than one-third of the total number of seats reserved under clause (1) of the said
article shall be reserved for women belonging to the Scheduled Castes or, as the case may be,
the Scheduled Tribes. Similarly, clause (3) of  article 243T provides that not less than one-
third (including the number of seats reserved for women belonging to the Scheduled Castes
and the Scheduled Tribes) of the total number of seats to be filled by direct election in every
Municipality shall be reserved for women and such seats may be allotted by rotation to
different constituencies in a Municipality. Further clause (4) of  article 243T provides that the
offices of  Chairpersons in the Municipalities shall be reserved for the Scheduled Castes, the
Scheduled Tribes and women in such manner as the Legislature of a State may, by law,
provide.
2. The Hon’ble President of India in her address to Parliament on June 4, 2009 stated
that a Bill providing fifty per cent. reservation for women in the Urban Local Bodies would be
moved by the Government as women suffer multiple deprivations of class, caste and gender
and enhancing reservation in Urban Local Bodies will lead to more women entering the
public sphere. Enhancement of reservation for women in Urban Local Bodies will not only
ensure their increased representation and participation in Urban Local Bodies but also
mainstream gender concerns in goverance and decision making process, particularly, those
related to women’s issues such as water supply, sanitation, solid waste management, health
and education. This is only desirable since women constitute nearly half of the population.
3. Accordingly, a Bill has been prepared after inter-Ministerial consultations and the
State Governments. The State Governments of Himachal Pradesh, West Bengal, Bihar, Tamil
Nadu, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh and Andhra Pradesh have supported the proposal for
providing fifty per cent. reservation for women in Urban Local Bodies. The State Governments
of  Bihar, Himachal Pradesh and Madhya Pradesh have already provided for fifty per cent.
reservation for women in Urban Local Bodies.
4. The Bill seeks to achieve the aforesaid objectives.
N
EW DELHI; S.  JAIPAL  REDDY.
The 10th November, 2009

4
ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
* * * * *
243T. (1) * * * * *
(2) Not less than one-third of the total number of seats reserved under clause (1) shall
be reserved for women belonging to the Scheduled Castes or, as the case may be, the
Scheduled Tribes.
(3)  Not less than one-third (including the number of seats reserved for women belonging
to the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes) of the total number of seats to be filled by
direct election in every Municipality shall be reserved for women and such seats may be
allotted by rotation to different constituencies in a Municipality.
(4) The offices of Chairpersons in the Municipalities shall be reserved for the Scheduled
Castes, the Scheduled Tribes and women in such manner as the Legislature of a State may,
by law, provide.
* * * * *
Reservation of
seats.

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Shri S. Jaipal Reddy, Minister of Urban Development)
GMGIPMRND—4588LS(S5)—19-11-2009.