“ aes A 5
sive एवं noituiitenoD oft 30 8६8 ७1०9518 of ober ineeabasane Soh)
-mer2A ovitsleized edi ni noitsinsesiqes yas Josfie 2 MAY 1991
sone, vileleipad 961 Yo roltuloesib rf) Tau sgt 8 MAY 199

toA cist! to snecreoremuoo 901 te poiteixe

Bill No. 101 of 1990 101 of 1990
_ THE CONSTITUTION (SIXTY-NINTH AMENDMENT) BILL, 1990
A
BILL

further to amend the Constitution of India.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Forty-first Year of the Republic of
as follows: —

1, (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Sixty-ninth Amend- short
ment) Act, 1990. title
= - and
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government commen-
y, by Notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. ; semen,

2. (1) In article 332 of the Constitution, after clause (3A), the follow- Amend~

g clause shal] be inserted, namely: — Sere

“(8B) Notwithstanding anything contained in clause (3), until 332,
the readjustment, under article 170, takes effect on the basis
of the first census after the year 2000, of the number of seats
in the Legislative Assembly of the State of Tripura, the seats which
shall be reserved for the Scheduled Tribes in the Legislative Assem-
bly shall be, such number of seats as bears to the total number of
seats, a proportion not less than the number, as on the date of com-
into force of the Constitution (Sixty-ninth Amendment‘) Act,
990, of members belonging to the Scheduled Tribes in the Legis-
v in existence on the said date bears to the total


2

(2) The amendment made to article 332 of the Constitution by sub- |

section (1) shall not affect any representation in the Legislative Assem-
bly of the State of Tripura until the dissolution of the Legislative Assem-
bly existing at the commencement of this Act.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS us

For restoring peace and harmony in the areas of the State of Tripura
where disturbed conditions prevailed, a Memorandum of Settlement
was signed by the Government of India with Tripura National Volun-
teers on 12-8-1988. The said Memorandum provides for a greater share
of tribals in the governance of the State. The said Memorandum envisages
amendment of the Constitution to provide that notwithstanding anything
contained in the Constitution, the number of seats in the Legislative As-
sembly of the State of Tripura reserved for Scheduled Tribes shall be
such number of seats as bears to the total number of seats, a proportion
not less than the number, as on the date of coming into force of the
Constitutional amendment, of members belonging to the Scheduled Tribes
in the existing Assembly bears to the total number of seats in the exist-
ing Assembly. It also provides that the amendments shall not affect
any representation in the existing Assembly of the State of Tripura until
its dissolution.

2. In order to implement the said Memorandum, action is to be taken
to determine the seats which are to be reserved for Scheduled Tribes
in the State of Tripura. Reservation of seats for Scheduled Castes and
Scheduled Tribes in the Legislative Assembly of any State is governed by
the provisions of article 332. of the Constitution.. Having regard to the
special circumstances obtaining in the State of Tripura, it is proposed to
further amend article 332 of the Constitution for making a temporary
provision for the determination of the number of seats reserved for Sche-
duled Tribes until the re-adjustment of seats on the basis of the first
census after the year 2000 under article 170 of the Constitution for the
State of Tripura.

3. The Bill seeks to achieve the aforesaid objects.

New Dscar; F
The 22nd May, 1990. MUFTI MOHAMMED SAYEED.


4

न “ले LOK SABHA i , . ae

A
BILL

further to amend the Constitution of India.

(Shei Mufti Mohammed Sayeed, Minister of Home Affairs)