1
THE BETEL GROWERS (WELFARE) BILL, 2022
By
DR. SUKANTA MAJUMDAR, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for payment of remunerative price to betel growers, free of cost
insurance of betel crop, comprehensive welfare of betel growers and
setting up of betel research centre and for matters
connected therewith.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India
as follows:–
1. (1) This Act may be called the Betel Growers (Welfare) Act, 2022.
(2)  It extends to the whole of India.
(3)  It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may,
by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Bill No. 101 of  2022
AS  INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
5

2
2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires:–
(a) “betel” means the leaf of a plant grown in South and South East Asia
and chewed as mild stimulant;
(b) “betel grower” means a person who cultivates betel;
(c) “Centre” means Betel Research Centre established under section 3;
(d) “Fund” means Betel Growers Welfare Fund constituted under
section 7; and
(e) “prescribed” means prescribed by the rules made under this Act.
  3. (1)  The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official
Gazette, establish a Centre to be known as Betel Research Centre to study,
research and suggest measures to increase the productivity and quality of
betel farming in the country.
    (2)  The headquarters of the Centre shall be at Kolkata in the State
of West Bengal with four regional offices at Lucknow in the State of
Uttar Pradesh, Patna  in the State of Bihar, Hyderabad in the State of
Andhra Pradesh and at Mumbai in the State of Maharashtra and the Centre
may, with the previous approval of the Central Government, establish
branches of the Centre in different parts of the country.
   (3)  The Centre shall consist of such number of experts, officers
and employees to be appointed by the Central Government in such manner
as may be prescribed.
  (4) The salary and allowances payable to and other terms and
conditions of experts, officers and employees of the Centre shall be such
as may be prescribed.
   (5) The Centre shall be operated by such rules as may be prescribed.
  4. The Central Government shall procure the entire betel crop from
the betel growers in the country through such agency and in such manner
as may be prescribed.
  5. The Central Government shall after considering the following, determine
the remunerative price of betel every year,—
(a) expenditure on construction of structures including bareja and mandap
for betel farming;
(b)  increase in the price of pesticides, fertilizers and other inputs;
(c)  total investment of betel growers; and
(d) such other factors as may be prescribed.
  6. The entire betel produced by the betel growers shall be compulsorily
insured free of cost by the Central Government against natural calamities,
fall in the productivity of betel, fall in the price of betel and such other
eventualities as may be prescribed.
  7. (1) The Central Government shall constitute a Fund to be known as
the Betel Growers’ Welfare Fund for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
   (2) The Central Government and the State Government shall
contribute to the Fund in such ratio as may be prescribed.
5
10
15
20
25
30
Definitions.
Betel Research
Centre.
Procurement of
betel crop.
35
Fixation of
remunerative
price of betel.
Insurance.
Betel
Growers
Welfare Fund.
40

  8. The Fund shall be used for the following purposes, namely:—
(a) to provide financial assistance to betel growers for the expenditure on
construction of structures like bareja, mandap for the betel farming, loss to
crop due to pesticides, fertilizers, storm, excessive rain, hailstorming, flood,
drought or in condition of loss of productivity of betel;
(b)  for the payment of compensation to the next kin of betel growers  in the
event of their death;
(c)  to provide free medical services to betel growers and their families;
(d) to provide assistance to betel growers in the event of    disability; and
(e) for such other purposes as may be prescribed.
   9. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette,
make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
     (2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid as soon as may be after it is
made before each House of Parliament while it is in session for a total period of
thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive
sessions and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session
or successive sessions aforesaid both Houses agree in making any modification in
the rule or both  Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case
may be; so however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without
prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
3
5
10
15
20
Utilisation of
Fund.
Power to make
rules.

4
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Agriculture is the main source of income in the country. Since many
decades, condition of agriculture economy is fragile and due to many reasons
people are forced to leave the betel farming due to no support and protection from
the Government. There is a need to upgrade the agricultural technology,
agriculture infrastructure development, investment, easy loan availability and simple
agriculture insurance scheme for betel growers in the country. With the
continuous and integrated efforts, the condition of betel growers may be improved
in the country.
The vast economic potentiality of the betel crop can be adequately
established by the fact that about 15-20 million people consume betel leaves in
India on a regular basis besides those in other countries of the world which may
include over 2 billion consumers. That apart a small boroj of about three decimal
area can generate employment opportunity for an agricultural worker throughout
the year helping him to maintain his family. Further, as far as the national
employment generation is concerned, it is estimated that about 20 million people
derive their livelihood directly or indirectly, partly or fully from production,
processing, handling, transportation and marketing of betel leaves in India, which
includes about 5 million workers from West Bengal.
In this way, the betel crop provides a National Income to the tune of rupees
6000-7000 million every year and at the same time it also provides an income of
rupees 800-1000 million to the State of West Bengal. In addition to this, the
Railways earn about rupees 100 million every year from transporting betel leaves
from State of West Bengal to different parts of India like Bilaspur, Cochin, Gondia,
Gandhinagar, Hyderabad, Jabalpur, Jalgaon, Katni, Nagpur, New Delhi, Raipur,
Srinagar and Trivendram, etc. The leaves are also in great demand in several
other countries of the world where it is either not grown at all or the demand
exceeds the local supply. Consequently, leaves worth about rupees 30-40 million
are exported to the countries like Bahrain, Canada, Great Britain, Hong Kong,
Italy, Kuwait, Nepal, Pakistan, Saudi Arab and many other European countries.
This clearly indicates the foreign exchange earnings.
The deep green heart shaped leaves of betel vine are popularly known as
Paan in India. It is also known as Nagaballi, Nagurvel, Saptaseera, Sompatra,
Tamalapaku, Tambul, Tambuli, Vaksha Patra, Vettilai and Voojangalata etc.
in different parts of the country. There are about 100 varieties of betel vine in the
world, of which about 40 are found in India and 30 in the State of West Bengal.  In
spite of its alienness, the plant is much more popular in India than in any other
country of the world since the antiquity. a well-prepared betel quid is still regarded
as an excellent mouth freshener and mild vitalizer, routinely served on the social,
cultural and religious occasions like marriage, puja (religious  festivals) and
Sraddha ceremony, etc. It is also used as a special item offered to the guests in
order to show respect.
In fact, this edible leaf has achieved an esteemed position in the human
society right from the dawn of civilization, particularly in the countries like

5
Bangladesh, Burma, China, India, Indonesia, Malaysia, Nepal, Pakistan,
Philippines, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Thailand etc. where leaves are
traditionally used for chewing in their natural raw condition along with many
other ingredients like sliced areca nut, slaked lime, coriander, aniseed, clove,
cardamom, sweetener, coconut scrapings, ashes of diamond, pearl, gold and
silver (Ayurvedic preparations), jelly, pepper mint, flavouring agent and fruit
pulp etc.
This Bill, therefore, seeks to provide for improvement in betel
production methods through new research and special provisions for the
welfare of betel growers.
Hence this Bill.
  NEW DELHI;     SUKANTA  MAJUMDAR
8 April, 2022.

6
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for establishment of Research Centre to study,
research and suggest measures to increase the productivity and quality of betel
farming. Clause 4 provides for procurement of betel from betel growers by an
agency to be set up by the Central Government. Clause 5 provides for fixation of
remunerative prices for betel by the Central Government. Clause 6 provides for
compulsory free insurance by the Central Government of betel against natural
calamities, etc.    Clause 7 provides for constitution of a Betel Growers Welfare
Fund to which the Central Government and the State Governments shall
contribute in such ratio as may be prescribed. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would
involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a
recurring expenditure of about rupees one thousand crore will be involved
per annum from the Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring annual expenditure of about rupees one hundred crore is
also likely to be involved.

7
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 9 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for
carrying out the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail
only, the delegation of legislative power is of a normal character.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for payment of remunerative price to betel growers, free of cost
insurance of betel crop, comprehensive welfare of betel growers and
setting up of betel research centre and for matters
connected therewith.
————
(Dr. Sukanta Majumdar, M.P.)