Bill No. 101 .r 196a 
THE FOREIGNERS LAW (APPLICATION 
AND AMENDMENT) BILL, 1962 
(As INTRODUCED IN LoIC SABHA 
ON 13m NoViMBBR, 1962) 

1. 
2. 
- ... ,_. -.. ~ . ...-- -~ .. ~.-- ...... , ~'--'."" ....... 
LOJ{ SABRA 
ICORRIGENDA 
to 
TIlE FOREIGNERS LAW (APPLlctA110N lAND 
AMENDMENT) Bll!.L. 1962. 
(To be/A."/,uroducetl in Lok SGbhG) 
page 1 at the top for the e:dlltiDs'BiIl No.1 of 
1~2' reGtl "Bill No. 101 of 1962'· 
Paa.e 1. line 6. -
For • ForeiJPis' reGtl ·Foret .... 
3. P&8" 1. liae 8. -
. Af·r 'who' ,ilaaerr 't' 
: 4- page I •. liDe 17, -
. Af.' 'iIIserted' :'II.e" 'p' 
Correct liDe Dum"'- GIl pa._ 1 .d 2. 
NEW DELHI; 
November 12. 1962 
KGrfikG 21. 1884 (SokG) 
823"t.&.-ap" 12. 1 1.62/1.1 SO. 
;~..,.;"Jf.~;t~.~~('.:~ •. ,.v:""'to\"~'!(;'....t'-""""~'~ ,"",.LA. I.IC "l8't:'l
P
LeQ nameJy:-
,·Mo. I 01 lib 
NAND 
the FO'I'eign.et" 
t present apply 
Year of the 
pplicatlon and Sbort tid., 
.. law for the APDlicadoll 
, f F . or Act 16 of !p,o orelgtls 19391ftd 
.8 and orders Act 31 of 
" person who 1946 to cu-, , taiD penoDI. 
-.was at any 
.. coDUQAttang ::' ' ... " ',' • 
~ usiltlD': ;,..' ~. 
.ion against, 
tanecfforthe 
:~~ . . 
'" .' Amenclmcnt or Ace 3! of 
ion (Z), the 1946. 
"(g) shall be arrested and detained or eonfbaed;"; 

s 
aUt·No. I 01 i,63 
TIm FOREIGNERS LAW (APPLICATION AND 
AMENDMEN1) BILL, 1962 
(As INTRODUCED IN LOR: 8ABHA) 
A 
BILL 
to apply the Registration of Foreigners Act, 1939 and the For.eigner' 
Act, 1946 to certain persona to whom. they do not at present apply 
and further to amend the Foreigners Act. 1946. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirteenth Year of the 
Republic of India as follows:-
1. This Act may be called the Foreigners Law (Application and Short litle. 
Amendment) Act, 1962. 
Z. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the :FtcatlOD 
time being in force, the provisions of the Registration of Foreigns 1939ct,: of 
Act, 1939, and the Foreigners Act, 1946, and of the rules and orders Act 31 of 
de . h 1946 to cer-ma thereunder shall apply to and in relation to any person w 0 taiD perIODi. 
or either of whose parents, or any of whose grand-parents was at any 
10 time a citizen or subject of any country at war with, or conunittlng .,' ..... _., 
external aggression against, India or of any other country assistlDiJ 
the country at war with, or committing such aggression against, 
India, as they apply to and in relation to foreigners as defined· for the 
purposes of those Acts. 
'" 
IS 3. In the Foreigners Act, 1946,- .. ~ 
(a) in section 3, after clause (f) of sub-section (2), the 1946. 
following clause shall be inserted namely:-
"(g) shall be arrested and detained or confined;"; 

(b) in section 4.-.. 
(i) before sub-section (2), the following sub-aection 
Ihall be inserted, namely:-
"(1) Any foreigner (hereinafter referred to as an 
internee) in respect of whom there is in force any order S 
made under clause (g) of sub-section (2) of section 3, 
directing that he be detained or confined, shall be detain-
ed or confined in such place and manner and subject to 
such conditions as to maintenance, discipline and the 
punishment of offences and breaches of discipline as the 10 
Central Government may from time to time by order 
determine."; 
(ii) for sub-sections (3) and (4), the following sub-
sections shall be substituted, namely:':"'" 
"(3) No person shall-
(a) knowingly assist an internee or a person on 
parole to escape from custody or the place set apart 
for his residence, or knowingly harbour an escaped 
internee or person on parole, or 
IS 
(b} give an escaped internee or person on 20 
parole any assistance with intent thereby to prevent, 
hinder or interfere with the apprehension of the 
internee or the person on parole. 
(4) The Central Government may, by order, provide 
for regulating access to, and the conduct of person in,-2S 
places in India where internees or persons on parole are 
detained or restricted, as the case may be, and for prohi-
biting or regulating the despatch or conveyance from' 
outside such places to or for internees or persons on' 
parole therein of such articles as may be prescribed.". 30 
.. ltcpal,Dd 4. (1) The Foreigners (Application and Amendment) Ordinance, 
aaViDJ. 1962 is hereby repealed. 
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action 
taken under the said Ordinance shall be deemed to have been done 
or taken under this Act, as if this Act had commenced on the 26th 35 
.October, 1962. 
1 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
In view of the present emergency, it is necessary that power • 
. should be available to deal with any person not of Indian origm who 
was at birth a citizen or subject of any country at war with, or 
committing external aggression against, India or of any other country 
assisting the country at war with, or committing such aggression 
against, India but who may have subsequently acquired Indian citi-
zenship in the same manner as a foreigner. It is also necessary to 
take powers to arrest and detain or confine these persons and the 
nationals of all such countries under the Foreigners Act, 1946, 
should the need arise. 
2. Since the Parliamen·t was not in session and immediate action 
had to be taken in the interests of national security, an Ordinance 
called the Foreigners Law (Appl1cation and Amendment) Ordinance, 
1962, was promulgated on the 30th October, 1962, to take the above 
powers. The object of the Bill Is to convert this Ordinance into aD 
Act of Parliament. 
NEW DzLRr; LAL BAHADUR. 
The 7th November, 1962. 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDuM: 
It u proposed to amend the Foreigners Act, 1946, to take powers 
to "arrest arid detain or confl.ne foreigners where such action becomes 
lieceisary during the present emergency. As 'foreigners' is a Union 
mbjeet'all expenditure incurred in connection with such detention. 
'etc., oJ 'foreigners will be met from the Consolidated Fund of India. 
It is Dot posSible to anticipate the order of expenditure as it Will 
depenCl on several uncertain factors including the number of foreign-
ers who may have to be detained. The estimates of the expendituTe 
.f.;tll, however, be placed before Parliament in the form of supple-
mentary demands during tlie current financial year. 

ANNEXuRE 
EXTRACTS FROM THE FOREIGNIiICS AcT, 1946 (31 or 1946) 
• • • 
3. (1) The Central Government may .by order make provision,:r:c 
either generally or with respect to all foreigners or with respect to 0 ... 
any particular foreigner or any prescribed class or de~ription of 
foreigner. for prohibiting. regulating or restricting the entry of 
foreigners into India "or their departure therefrom or their presence 
or continued presence therein. 
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the 
foregoing power, orders made unclerthis section may provide that 
the foreipr-
(4) Iduill not enter India, or shall enter India "only at such 
times and by such route and at such port or place and subject 
to the observance of such conditions on arrival as may be 
prescribed; 
(b) shall Dot depart from India, or shall depart only at 
such times and by such route and from such port or place and 
subject to the observance of such conditiO!l$on depl11"ture as 
may be prescribed; 
(c) shall not remain in India or in" any" prescri~d area 
therein; 
(cc) shall, if he hal been required by order lDlderthls 
. section net to remain in Inaia, meet from any resouwas at his 
di.posal the cost of hi. removal from India and of hi. main-
tenance therein pending such removal: 
(el) ·aball remove him.e.lf to, and remain in. such area in 
India as may be pl"8IICribecl; 
. (e) shaD eomply with such eonditioDS a. ma,be presertbed 
or tpeeffted-
(i) requiring him to reside In 8 P81"tieu1ir plaee; 
(U) imposing any restrictions Oft his mOYeDletlts;. 
(iii) requiring him to furnish such proof of his Identity 
and to repOrt such particulars to "811& lUth6rttY hi" such 
manner and at .such time and. place '81 may. be prescribed 
or spedft .. ; 

(iv) requiring him to allow his photograph and fttlger 
impressions to be taken and to furnish speeimens of h;'" 
handwriting and signature to such authority and at such 
time and p'lace as may be prescribed or specified: 
(~) requiring him to submit himself to such medical 
examination by such authority and at such time and place 
as may be prescribed or specified; 
(vi) p'rohibiting him from association with person!l of 
a prescribed or specified description; 
(vii) prohibiting him from engaging in activities of a 
prescribed or specified description; 
(viii) prohibiting him from using or possessing pres 
cribedor specified articles: 
(~) otherwise regulating his conduct in any SUell 
particular as may be prescribed or speeifted: 
(f) shall enter into a bond with or without sureties for the 
due observance of, or as an alternative to the enforcement of 
any or all prescribed or spe~ified restrictions or conditions; 
and may make provision for -any matter which is to be or may 
be prescribed and for such! incidental and supplementary 
matters as may, in the opinion of the. Centr~l Government. be 
expedient or necessary for giving effect to this Act. 
, , 
(3) Any authority prescribe<J m this behalf may with respect 
to any particular foreigner make orders under clause (e) or clause 
. (I) of IUMeetion (2). " 
C. (1). • • 
• • • • • 
(2) ~y foreigner (hereinafter referred to, a~ a person on 
parole) in respect of whom there is in force 8ft order under clau!lP 
(e) of sub-sectlon (2) of sectlon3 requiring him to reside at a 
place Bet apart for the residence under supervision of a' number of 
foreigners, shall while residing therein be subject t() such conditions 
as to' maintenance, discipline· and ,the, punishment .of offences and 
breaches of discipline as thE:. Central Gov~~ment. may from time to 
time. by -order ·"deteinitne. ' 
(3) No person ·sh81l-
(ell 'knoWIngly aSsist a person "on parol~ \Q eScape from tM 
place set apart for his residence or knowingly harbOUr any !luch 
person. or ' " 

• , 
(b) give a person on parole ~ assistance with inteut 
thereby to prevent, hinder or interfere with the apprehension 
of such person. 
(4) The Central Government may, by order, provide for regulat-
ing access to, and the conduct of persons in, places where persons 
on parole are restricted, and for prohibiting or regulating the 
despatch or conveyance from outside such places to or for such 
persons therein of such articles as may be prescribed . 
• • • 

LOK sADitA 
A 
Bn.L 
to apply the Registration of Foreigners Act, 1939 and the 
Foreigners Act, 1946 to certain persons to whom they 
do not at present apply and further to amend the 
Foreigners Act, 1946. 
The President has, in pursuance of clause (3) of article 117 
of the Constitution of Indh, recommended to Lok Sabha 
the consideration of the Bill. 
-
M.N. KAUL, 
Secretary. 
(Shri 1Al BaIuJdur Shastri, 
Minister 0/ Home Affairs.) 