AS INTRODUCED IN Lok SABHA

Bill No. 101 of 1999

RUBBER GROWERS (PROTECTION) BILL, 1999
5 BY

Surr P.C. THomas, M.P.
A
BILL

to provide for ban on import of natural rubber and to protect the interests
of rubber growers.

Beit enacted by Parliament in the Fiftieth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Rubber Growers (Protection) Act, 1999.
(2) It shall come into force at once.

2.On and from the date of commencement of this Act, no person shall import natural
in any form.

Explanation.— For the purpose of this section, ‘natural rubber’ includes the substances
any kind, which are used as substitutes of natural rubber.

3. (2) The Central Government shall fix remunerative prices for procurement of natural
every year and shall declare the remunerative prices, so fixed well in time,

(2) While fixing the remunerative prices, the Central Government shall take into
unt the cost of production, cost of living index and reasonable profit to growers and
other factors, as it may deem necessary.

4, The Central Government shall procure natural rubber from growers every
rat remunerative prices.

{
| pec 1999"

Short title and
commence-
ment,

Ban on import
of natural rub-
ber.

Procurement of
natural rubber
by Central Gov-
ernment and
fixing of prices
thereof. -

‘Central Goyem-
ment to procure
natural rubber.


2
Actto have over- 5, The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything inc
riding effect. contained therein in any other law for the time being in force.

Power to make

6. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette,
rules.

for carrving out the purposes of this Act.



STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS,

‘The growers producing natural rubber are facing acute hardships as the prices of their
produce has gone down steeply.. There is an unprecedented fall of price of rubber from
es sixty-five to rupees twenty-three per kilo. They are not able to sustain, and are
urdened with debts and liabilities. There are cases of jicidal deaths by growers who
unable to make both ends meet. Out of them, ninty percent. are small and marginal
ers. There are about ten lakh growers and thirly lakh workers whose lives are under
wy strain and their living conditions cannot be ameliorated without sustained and positive
orts by the Government. The import of rubber, the export of articles like polyanthus
ich have replaced rubber for foam production, the callous attitude of authorities concerned
‘not procuring rubber at a reasonable price, has necessitated immediate action by protecting
ers through a legislation.

ए C. THOMAS


_ FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 4 of the Bill provides that Central Government shall take necessary steps fo
procurement of natural rubber at the minimum support price, for which Central assistance i
needed. Therefore, a recurring amount to the tune of rupees five hundred crore per annum
shall be spent by the Central Government for this purpose from the Consolidated Fund of
India.

No non-recurring expenditure is likely to be involved.


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

| 6 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
105९५ of this Bill. The rules will relate to matters of detail only. The delegation of

‘ive power is of a normal character.


LOK SABHA

A
BILL

to provide for ban on import of natural rubber and to protect t!
growers.

ihe interests of |

(Shri P.C. Thomas, M.P)

MGIP(PLL )MRND—1932LS—24.11.1999.