THE FOOD ADULTERATION BILL, 1952 
[As INTRODUCED IN THE HOUSE OF THE PBOPLB] 
A 
BILL 
to make provi8ion for the prevfJntion of adulteration of food. 
BE it enGcted by Parliame~t as follows :-
PULUlINABY 
1. SIlort title IIld eztent.-{l) This Act may be called the Food 
Adulteration Act, 1952. 
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the 'State of Jammu and IS-
Kashmir. . 
''t. Dd1dtloDB.-In this ,Act, unless the context' otherwise requires,-
(i) "adulterated"-an article· of food shall be deemed to be 
adulterated-
(a) if the article sold by a vendor is not of the nature, 10 
substance or quality demanded by the purchaser and is to his 
prejudice; 
(b) if the article has been mixed with any other subsllance 
10 as to reduoe, lower or injuriously atlect itl quality 01' nutritive 
~~; ~ 
(c) if any inferior or cheaper substance has been subl:!tituted 
wholly or in part for the article so as ,to dect injuriously the 
nature, substance. or quality thereof; , 
(d) if any constituent of the article has been wholly or in part 
abstracted flO 88 to affect injuriously 'the· nature, substance or 20 
-quality thereof; . 
{e) if the article had been prepared, packed or kept under 
insanitlary oonditioDB whereby it haa become contaminated or 
injurioul to health; 
(f) if the article, whether manufactured or not, consists 2IS 
wholly or in part of any filthy, putrid, diagamng, rdtten, 
decom~osed or dia,aled animal or :veB.~le .ubetance or is 
otherwIse unfit for human consumption ; 
(g) if the artiola is obtained from a d'ileued e.niJN,l or from 
an animal' feel upon WlwbolelOlIl8 food"; 30 
(h) if tlhere is added to the article folly poisonous or other 
ingredient which renders it injurious to health; 
(i) if the con~ner of the article is compQ8ed, whether wholly 
or in part, of any poisonous or deleterious subst8~ce which renders 
its contAlnts injurious to health; 3lS 
(I) if 01 OOlourins matter o~r~' u..t ,preaoribed in 
respect ihereof and in .mounts nOl .i'hin the presOl'ihd limite 
, . of vlIl"iabUlty i. p1!eseM in the Mticle ; , 

2 
(k) if the article contains. any prohibited preservative or 
permitted preservative in excess of the prescribed limits; 
(l) if the quality or purity of the article falls below the 
presoribed stODdard or its eonstituents are present in quantities. 
which are in ,exoess of the prescribed limits of variability; 
(it) "Central Food Laboratory" means any laboratory or institute 
established or specified under section 4 ; 
(iii) "Committee" means the Central Committee for Food 
Standards constituted -under section 8; 
10 (iv) "Director of the Central Food Laboratory" means the person 
appointed by the Central Government by notification in the Official 
Gazette 88 the Director of the Central Food Laboratory and includes 
any person appointed by the Central Government in like manner 
to perform all or any of the functions of the Director under this Act p 
IlJ (v) "food" means any article used as food or drink by man, other 
than drugs and wa.ter and includes-
(a) any article which ordinarily enters into, or is used in the 
composition or preparation of human food, and 
(b) any flavouring matter or condiments; 
(!Ii) "Food (Health) Authority" means the Director of Medical 
and Health Services or the Chief Officer in charge of Health 
administration in a State by whatever name he is called ; 
(vii) "local area" mesns any area, whether urban or rural, 
d~clared by ille State Government, by notification in ~he Offioial 
Gazette, to be a local area for the purposes of this Act; 
(viiI) "local' authority" means in the calle of-
(1) a local area which i~ 
(4) a municipality, the municipal, board ; 
(b) a cantonment, the cantonment authority; 
80 (c) a notified area, the notified area committee; 
(I) any other local area., such authorit;y as may be prescribed 
by the State Government under this Act; 
(i:z:) "misbraaded"-an article of food shall be deemed to be 
miabranded-
(a) H it i.' an bnitetion of, or ia .. aubstitute for, gr resembles 
in a manner likely to deceive, another article of food under the 
name of which it ia BOld, and is not plainly and conspicuously 
labelled 80 as to: indioate ita ;rue charaoter ; 
(b)' if it i. f&1sely stated to be the product of any place or 
country ; 
(e) i! it is sold by a. name which belongs to another article 
of food; 
, (d) if it i. so Cl9Jou~ or coated, powdere4. or polished that 
the fact that the article i. damaged is concealed or if the article 
is made to appear better or of greater val~ than it re&lly is ; , 

8 
( 6) ii false claims are made for it upon the label or 
otherwise; 
(f) if, when sold in packages which have been sealed or 
prepared by or at the instance of the manufacturer or producer 
and which bear his name and address, the contents of each 5 
package are not conspicuously and correctly stated on the outside 
thereof within ~e ,llmitil of vacla.biIiity 'prescribed under this 
Act; 
(g) if the package containing it, or the label on the pal~kage 
bears any statement, design or device regarding the ingredients 10 
or the substances contained therein, which is false or misleading 
in any material particular : or if the package is otherwise deceptive 
with respect to its contents ; 
(h) if the package containing it or the label on the pAckage 
beArs the name of a fictitious ind;viqual or company as the 16 
manufacturer or producer of the article; 
(i) if it purports to be. or is represented as being. for special 
dietary uses, unless its Jabel beal's such infonnation us may he 
prescribed concerning its vitamin, mineral. or other dietary 
properties in order sufficiently to inform its pur(',hnser a.s to its 20 
value for such uses; 
(j) if ,it contains any a.rtificial flavouring, artificial colouring 
or chemical preservative, without a declaratory label stating 
that fact, or in cont.ravenuon of the requirements of this Act or 
rules made thereunder; 25 
(k) if it it! not la.belled in accordRnce with the requirements 
of this Act or rules made thereunder ; 
(z) "package" means a box, casket, tin, barrel, case, receptacle, 
sack, bag, wrapper or other thing in which an article of food is placed 
or packed; 
(:el) "premises" include any manufacturing shop, stall, or place 
where Rny article of food is sold or manufactured or stored for sale ; 
(:eii) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this 
Act; 
30 
(:eiii) "sale" with its grammatical variations and cognate 36 
expressions, meAns the sale of My article of food, whether for ca8h 
Or on credit or by way of exchange and whether by wholesale or retail, 
for human consumption or use, or for analysis, and includes an agree-
ment for sale, an offer for sale, the exposing for sale or having in 
possession for sRle of any such article, and includes aillo an Ilttempt to 
to sell any such article ; 
(:ei,,) "sample" means a sample of any article of food taken under 
the provisions of this Act or of Any rules made thereunder ; 
(zv) th,e words "unwholesome" and "noxious" when used in 
relation to an article of food mean reape~tively thAt the article is ~ 
harmfull to health or repugnlLllt for bum an use. 
/ 

" CIIlI"TBAL CO_ITTBB POR FOOD STANDARD AND CENTRAL FOOD LABORATORY 
3. The Oentral Oomm1ttee for J'ood Stand8ldll.--(l) The Central 
Uovernment shaU, as soon as may be after the commencement of this Act, 
constitute a Committee called the Central Committee for I!'ood Staudards 
Ii to advise the Central Government and the State Governments on matters 
arising out of the administration of this Act and to carry out the other 
functions assigned to it under this Act. '. 
(2) The Committee shall consist of the following members, nanwly:-
(a) the Director-General, Health Servic", e:r-officio, who shall 
10 be the Chairman; 
(b) the Direotor of the Central Food Laboratory, 6%-offi."io; 
(e) four experts connected with prevention of food adulteration 
from different States nominated by the Central o-overnment ; 
(d) one representative each of the Central :Ministries of Food and 
16 Agriculture, Commerce and Industry, Railways and Defence nominated 
to 
, by the Central Governmenb. 
(e) one repreaeQtative each nominated by the Government of each 
Part A ·Stia.1ie and Part B State.; , 
(f) two representatives nominated by the Central Gov~mment to 
represent the Part C Stat,es. .. 
(3) The members of the Committee referred to in clauses (e), (d), (6) 
and (j) of sub-seotion (2~ ShAll, unless their se"ts bE'come vacant earlier by 
resignation, death or otherwise. be entitled" 'hold office for three years 
and shall be eligible for renomination. 
26 (4) The funCtionll of the Committee may be exercised notwithstanding 
any vacancy therein. 
(5) The Committee may appoint such' and so many sub-committees as 
it'deems fit and may appoint to them persons who are not membere of the 
, Committee to exercise such powers and perform Buch duties aa may, 
30 sub'ject to suob condition .. , if any, 88 the CommittCA may impose, be 
delegated to ihem by the Committee. 
(6) The Committee ma.y. subject to the previous approval of the Central 
Government, make ·bye-la.ws for the purpose of regulating its own proceiure 
and the transaction of ita business. . . 
*5' 6. o..tral 1'a04 ~.~l) The Central Government 
notification in the Offioial Guellte,-
mar, by 
'. 
(a.) establish 8 Central FoOd Laboratory; or 
(b) specify any laboratory or institute as a Oelltral Food ~ra. 
tory; 
40 to carry out the functions 811.truated .tQ the Central Food Laboratory by 
this Act or any rule. }Jlade under this Act. 
, (B) The C.lltrel GovemmeDt may, af1Mu' OOII.8ultaUoD ,,11lh the ("lOm-
'!, mittee, make !lule •. presoribin,-. 
IA) the functions of the O&D~ Food Laboratory: 

a 
(b) the procedure for the submission to the said Laboratory of 
samples of articles of food for analysis or tests, the fGrms of. the 
Laboratory's reports thereon and the fees payable in respect of such 
reports; 
(0) such other matters as may be necessary or expedient to en- IS 
I\ble the said Laboratory to carry out its functions. 
GBNERAL PROViSIONS AS TO FOOD 
6. JI'rohlblttoD of Import of certain artlcJ.ee of food.-From such date 
8S may be fixed by the Central Government by notification in the Official 10 
Gazette in this behalf, no person shall import into India-
(i) any adulterated fopd; 
(ii) any misbranded food; 
(iii) any article of food for the import of which a licence is prescrib-
ed, except in accordance with the conditions of the licence; and 
(iv) any article of food in contra.vention of any_ other provision of 15 
this Act or of any rule made thereunder. 
s. Appllcatlon of law relating to sea customs and powers of Ouatoms 
01llClll.-(1) The la.w for the time being inforce relntiug to sea customs 
and to goods, the import of which is prohibit,ed by section 18 of the Sea. 
Customs Act. 1878 (VIII of 1878) shall, subject to the provisions of 20 
section 16 of this Act. apply in respect of ' articles of food, the import of 
whieh is prohibited under seetion 5 of this Act. a.nd officers of CustomR 
and officers empow6!'ed under that Act to perform the duties imposed 
thereby on a Cusi;oms Collector and other officel'\:l of CustomH shall have 
the same powers in rCApect of such articles of food ~s they have for .the 25 
time being in respect of such goods as aforesaid. 
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-section (1) the Customs 
Collector. or any officer of the Government authorized by the Central 
Government in this behalf. may detain any imported package which he 
suspects to contain any article of food the import of which is prohibited 30 
under section 5 of this Act and sha!i forthwith report such detention t.o t.he 
Director of the Centra.l Food Laboratory and, if required by him, forward 
the package or send samples of any suspected article !Jf food found there-
in to the said Laboratory. 
7. Prohibition of manufact.ure, we, etc. of certain artIc_ of food.- 35 
From such date as may be fixed by the State Government, hy notifioation 
in the Offieial Gazette. in this behalf no person shall himself or by any 
person on his behalf manufacture for sale. or sell or distribute-
(i) any adulterated food: 
(ia) any misbranded food: 
(iii) any article of food for tile sale of which a lidence is prescrib-
ed, exoept in accordance with the conditions of the lioence; 
(i,,) any artiole of food the 8ale of whioh is for the time being 
prohibited by the Food (Health) Authority with a view ~ preventing 
the outbreak or spread of infl'!ctioua diseases; or 
Co) any article of food in contravention of any other provision of 
this Act or of any rule made thereunder. 

6 
ANALYSIS 01' FOOD 
8. Public ADalptI.-The State Govenlment may, by notifioation in 
~e Official Gazette. appoint persons in such number as it thinks fit and 
possessing such qu.uifications as may be prescribed. to be public analysts 
t; and define the local areas over which they shall exercise jurisdiction: 
Provided that no persoll who has any financial interest in the manu-
facture, import or sale of any article of food shall be so appointed: 
Provided further that the State Government may appoint one public 
analyst for two or more Joca~ areas, such local areas bpAng regal'ded as one 
10 unit for the purposes of this Act. 
9. I'ood IDspectora.-(l) Subject ·to the provisiol1s of ~eetion 14 the 
State Goyemment may. by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint 
Fersons in such number aH it thinks fit, having the prescribed qualifica.-
tions to be food inspectors for th.e purposes of this Act. and they shall 
15 exercise their powers within such 10cnI areas as that Government may 
assign to them: 
Provided that no person who has any finan(,ial interest in the manu-
facture, import or sale of any article of food shall be so appointed. 
(2) Every food inspector shall be deemed to be a public servant within 
28 the ulealling of the Indian Penal Code (Act XLV of 1860). 
25 
10. Powers of flood lDIpectora.-(J J A food iilspector shall hove power-
(a) to take samples of any article of lood from-
(i) any person selling such article: 
(il) any person who is in the course of conveying, delivering 
or preparing to deliver such article to a purchaser or consignee; 
(iiI) a. consignee after delivery of any such article to him; and 
(b) to send such sample for analysis to the public analyst for the 
local area. within which such sample has been taken : 
(0) with the previous approval of the health officer having 
30 jurisdiction in the local area concerned, or with the previous approval 
of the Food (Health) Authority, to prohibit the sale of any article of 
food with 0. view to prf'venting the outbreak or spread of ally infectious 
disease. 
(2) Any food inspector may enter and inspect any place where Bny 
35 article of food is ma.nufactured. stored or exposed for sBle Bnd take samples 
of such articlps of food for analysis. 
(8) Where any sample is taken under clause (4) of sub-section (1) or 
sub·section (2). its cost calculated at the rate at which the article is 
usually sold to the public shall be paid to the person from whom it is 
40 taken. . 
(4) If any article intended for food appears to any food inspector to 
be a.dulterated or misbranded. he may seize and carry away such article 
in order th .. ~ it may be dealt with 80S hereinaft~r provided. 
(5) The· power conferred by this section includes power to break open 
45 em'y package in which any article of food may be contained or to hreak 
open the door of any premises where any article of food may he kept for 
u~. J 

7 
11. Jrocedwe to be foJl~.d by food. iDJpector •. -(l) When a food. 
inspector takes a sample of food for analysis, he sball-
(a) give notice in writing then and there of bis intention to have 
it so analysed to the person from whom he has taken the sample; 
(b) separate the sample then and there into three pa.rts &Od ~ark 5 
and seal or fasten up each part in such a manner. as its nature 
permits; and 
(0) (i) deliver one of the parts to .the person from whom the 
sample has been taken; 
(ii) send another part for analysis to the public &llalyst; and 10 
(iii) retain the third part for production in case any legal pro· 
ceedings are taken or for analysis by the Director of the Central 
Food Laboratory under sub-section (2) of section 13, as the cas,e 
may be. 
(2) If the person from whom the sample bas been taken declines to 1tJ 
accept one of the parts, the public analyst rt'oeiving a sample for analysis 
shull divide it into two parts and shall seal or fa.sten up one of those parts 
and l'Ihall oause it, either upon receipt of the sample or when he delivers 
his report, to be delivered to the food inspector who shall ret,ain it for 
production in ca~e I gal proceedings are taken. 2& 
(3) When a sample of allY article of food is taken under sub-section (1) 
or sun-section (2) of section 10, the food inspector shall send a sample 
of it ill accordance with the rules prescribed for sampling to the public 
8naly~t for t.~1C local area concerned. 
(4) ]f the sample of the article is reported by the public analyst t.o be 2.5 
nob adulterated, the article shall be returned at the cost of the Govern. 
, ment to the owner or person from whose possession it was seized. 
(5) An artide of food seized under sub-section (4) of section 10, shall 
be produced. before a magistrate as soon as possible: 
Provided that in the case of any article of which samples have been 30 
-sent to the public analyst for analysis it may be produced on or after the 
receipt of the report of the public analyst. 
(I() If it appears to the magistrate on taking such evidence as he may 
deem necessary that the lU'ticle of food produced before him under sub· 
section (5) is adulterated, he may orde); it- 35 
(a) to be forfeited to the local authority, or 
(b) to be destroyed at the cost of the owner of or the person from 
whom it was seized so as to prevent its being used as human food, 
(c) to be so disposed of as to prevent its being again exposed for 
sale or used for food under its deceptive name. or 40 
(d) to he returned back to the owner for being sold under its 
appropriate name, after taking adequate guarantee from the owner. 
12. Pul'chaaer may have food &D.Ily8e4.-{l) A purchaser of any article 
of food other than a food inspector shall be entitled, on payment of lIueb 
fees as may be prescribed, to have such article analysed by the public '5 
analyst and to receive from him a report of the result of his analysis. 
(2) Before submitting such article to be &Ilalysed as aforesaid the 
purohaser shall notify in writing to the BE-lIer his intention to have it eo 
analysed; and the public analyst on receiving such article for analysis shall 

I 
eJivi4e it into three parts, of which one i. to be analysed, anoth.~r i.e? be 
retained by him in order to be retnlmed with hi .• report ad the ~lrd, to be 
deliver.ed on demand to the seUer: ' 
Pro~ided ,that each part other than the part analyse« shall be marked 
6 and sealed or fastened up in such manner as may be prescribeil. 
18. Bepon of pabllc UI&lJft.--(l) The public analyst shall deliver, in 
such form a8 may be prescribed, a report to the food inspector of the 
result of the analysis of any article of food submitted to him for analysis. 
(2) Where a food inspector or an accused vendor under this Act is not 
10 satisfied with the report given by the public analyst under sub-section (1), 
he may, on payment of the prescribed fee, selld the part of the sample 
mtmtioned in sub-clause (iii) of clause (0) of sub-section (1) of section 11 
to ~e Director of the Central Food Laboratory for report and the Directol 
of the Laboratory shall thereupon grant a certificate in the form prescribed 
15 specifying the result of his analysis. 
(3) The oertifioate issued by the Director of the Central Food Labora-
tory under 1mb-section (2) shall supersede the report given by the publio 
analyst under soo-section (1). 
(4) Where a certificate obtained from the Director of the Central Food 
SO Laboratory under sub-section (2) is produced in uny proceeding under this 
Act, or under sections 272 .to 276 of the Indian Penal Code (Act. XLV of 
1860), it shall not be necessary in such proceeding to prodUCE) any part of 
the sample of food taken for analysis. 
(.5) Any document purporting to be a report signed by a public analyst. 
26 unless it bas been superseded under sub-section (3), or any document 
purporting ,to be a certificate signed by the Director of the Central Food 
Laboratory, may be used 11.9 evidence of the facts stated therein in any 
proceeding under this Act or under sections 272 to 276 of ·the Indian Penal 
Code (Act XL V of 1860): 
30 Provided that these officers shan not be required .to attend the court 
for examination or cross-examination in connection with reports or 
certificates of analysis signed by them under this Act. 
MISOBLLANBOUS 
U. Import of food aDd I&1e of food in ratlW&1 and other premtses.-(l) 
36 The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
appoint any person to exercise the powers of a food insppctor under 
sections 10 and 11,-
(4) at any major port, air port or land customs station in respect 
of any article of food which is being inq>orted through ... lIch port or 
~ station; 
(b) in respect of any railway .tation or group of railway stations 
where food is being .old: 
Provided that the Central Government may, instead of making any 
appointment under this section, authoriae any food inspector ': I Rny S_k. 
U in which the major 'POrt, air port or land euatoms station or rn. hVl\y station 
i8 situate to exercise such pow.ers. 
(9) Every· pe1"lOn appointed or authoris~ under sub-st'f"· ... ' (1) shall 
be deemed to be a food inspeotor for "tae pUJ.1)OS8S of this ~, . ~ 

8 
16. BoWle&Uon 01 foocl poIloD1Dl.-'l'he State Government may, by 
notification in the OflioiaJ Guette. req~ medical practitioners carrying 
on their profession in any local area specified in the notification to report 
all occurrences of food poisoning coming within their cogn~ance to such 
oflicer as may be specified in the notification. 5 
18. I'Iu3.U".-If any person-
(a) whether by himself or by any other person on his behalf, 
imports ink> India or manufacturers for sale, or stores, sells or 
distributes, any article of food in contravention of any of the provisions 
of this Act or of any rule made thereunder, or 1& 
(b) prevents a food inspector from taking. sample as authorised 
by this Act. or 
(c) prevents a food inspector from exercising any other power 
conferred on him by or under this Act, 
be shull. in addition to the penalty to which he may be liable under the 15 
provisions of section 6, be punishable for the first offence with imprison-
ment for a term which mav extend to three months, or with fine, or with 
both. and for a second 0; subsequent otTence with imprisonment for a 
term which may extend to one year, or with fine, or with both. 
17. Oftencea by colJlpWes.-(l) Where an ofience under this Act has 2(} 
been committed by a complllly, every person who Ilt the time the offence 
was committed was in charge of, and was responsible to the company for 
the conduct of. the business of the company, as well as the company, shall 
be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable tb be pro-
ceeded against and punished accordingly: 26 
'Provided that nothing contained in this sub· section shall render any 
luah person liable to any punishment provided in this Act if he proves 
that the offence wus ('ommitted without his knowledge or tha.t he exercised 
all due diligence to prevtmt the commission or- such offence. 
(2) NotWithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), where an 30' 
often('e under this Act has been committed by a oompany and it is proved 
that the offence has been committed with the consent or connivance of, 
or is attributable to any neglect on the part of, any director. manager, 
secretary or other officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary 
or other officer shall also be deemed to be guillty of that offence and sha.ll 35-
be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly. , 
Ezplanation.-For the purposes of ~is seotion-
(a) "company" means any body corpora~. and includes a firm 
or other assooiation of individuals i and 
(b) "director" in relation to a firm means a partner in the firm. 4() 
18. Worf81we of propertr.-Where any person has been convicted 
under this Act for the contravention of any of the provisions of this Act 
or of any rule thereunder, the article of food in respect of which the 
contravention has been committed may be forfeited to the Government. 
19. DeleDOII 'trII.Idl mayor ma, _ be &I1owed III proIICUttou.1UI4.er 46 
t!dI .Act.-(l) It shall be no defence in a prosecution for an offence pertain-
ing to the sale of any adulterated or misbranded article of food to allege 
merely that the vendor was ignorant of the nature, substance or qualify 
of the food sold hy him or that the pumhaeer having purchased any article 50 
for analysis was not prejudiced by the sale. 

10 
(9) A vendor shall not be deemed to have committed an offence if be 
proves-
(i) that the article of food was purchased by him as the same in 
nature, substa.nce and quality as that demanded by the purchaser and 
with a written warranty in the prescribed form, if 8n1.110 the effect 
that it was of auch nature, substance and quality; 
(il) that he had no reason to believe at the time when he sold it 
that the food was not of such nature, substance and quality; and 
(iii) that he sold it in the same state as he purchased it: 
10 Provided .that such a defence shall be open to the vendor only if he 
has, within seven days of the receipt of a copy of the report of the public 
analyst, submitted to the food inspector or the local authority a copy of 
the warranty with a written notice stating that he intends to rely on it and 
specifying the name and address of the pel"son from whom he received it, 
15 and has also sent a like notice of his intention to that person: 
'Provided furthrr that the warranty given by a person resident in any 
area in which this Act is not in force, shall be a defence to the vendor 
only if the vendor proves to the satisfaction of the court that he bad 
taken reasonable steps to ascertain and did in fact believe in, the accuracy 
20 of the statement contained in the warranty. 
(3) Any person by whom a warranty as is referred to in sub-section (9). 
is alleged to have been given sJu,ll be entitled to appear at the hearinK 
and give evidence. 
(4) Where an employer is charged with an offence uner this Act' he 
2J l"hall be entitled, on application duly made by him, to have any other 
person whom he charges as the actual offender brought before the court 
at the time appointed for' hearing, and if, alter the oommission of the 
offence has been proved. the employer proves to the satisfaction of the 
court that he has used due diligence to enforce the execution of this Aot 
30 and that the said other person committed the offence without his 
knowledge, consent or connivance, th said other person shall be convicted 
and the employer shall be acquitted. 
20, Oognllance &Dd trial of o1!encel.--{l) Nil prosecution for an offence 
under thitl Act shall be instituted except by, or with the written consent 
35 of, the State Government or a local authority or a person authorised in 
·this behalf by the State Government or a local authority. 
(2) No court inferior to thut of a magistrate of the second 'clas8 shall 
try any offence under this Act. 
21. Protectlon or actiOll tQ:en In 1004 faltb..-No suit, prosecution or 
40 other legal proceedings shall lie against any person for anything which i~ 
In good faith done or intended to be done under this Aot. 
~2. Power of the Central Government to make rUlea,-1'he Central 
Oovernment may, after consultation with the Committee and subjeot to 
the condition of pr~vious publication, make' rules-
45 (a) specifying the articles of food 01' cla8se8 of food for the import 
of which 'a lioence is required aDd prescribing the form and oonditions 
of such lioenoe. the authority empoy.ereel to issue the same and the 
fees payable therefor; 

11 
(b) d,efining the standards of quality fo~, and fixing the limits of 
'Variability permissible in respect of, any article of f~; 
(0) laying down special provisions for imposing rigorous control 
over the production, distribution and sale of milk and milk products; 
(d) laying down special provisiolls for imposing rigorous control 5 
over the production, distribution and sale of vanaspati lind edible oils, 
including registration of the premises where they are manufactured. 
maintenance of the prt'mises in. a sanitary condition and maintenance 
of the healthy IItate of human beings associated with the production, 10 
distribution and sale of vanaspati and edible oils; 
(e) restricting the packing and labelling of any article of food 
and the design of any' such package or label with 110 view to preventing 
the public or the purchaser being deceived or misled as to the chllJ'Bcter, 
quality or quantity of the article: 
U) defining the qualifications, powers and duties of food inspectors 15 
and publfc analysts; 
(g) prohibiting the sale or defining the conditions of sale of any 
substance which may be injurious to health when used as food or 
restricting in any manner its U!'!P. as an ingredient in the manufucture 
of any article of food or regulating by the issue of licences the manu- 20 
facture or sale of any article of food; 
(h) defining the conditions of sale or conditions for licence of sale 
of any article of food in the interest of public health; 
(i) specifying the manner in which containers for samples of 25 
food purchased for analysis shall be sealed up or fastened up; 
(i) specifying a list of permissible preservatives, other than 
common salt and sugar, 'Which alone shall be used in preserved fruits, 
vegetables or their products or any other al'ticle of food as WEIll as the 
maximum amounts of eaeh preservutitve ; 
(k) specifying the colouring matt.er aud the maximum quantities 30 
thereof which may be used in any article of food; 
(l) providing for the exemption from this Act or of any require-
mellts ?~T1tained th,m ill and subject to such oondition'.!, if an.y, Il.S wily 
be spclned, of any article or classes of artioles of food. 
23. Power of the State Government to make rulel.-(l) The State 35 
Government ma~', after oonsultation with the Committee and subject to the 
condition of prc>"iollil l'uh)iimtion, make rules for the purpose of givh .. ~ (·ired 
to the provisions of this Act in matters not fanng within the purview of 
sectiou 22. 
(2) In partieular. "nd without prejudice to the generality of the 40 
foregoing power, Iiluch ru!es may-
(a) define the powers and duties of the Food (Health) Authority 
IlnJ local lIuthol'ity und jurisdiction of food inspcctc-rs 6!ld pUblic 
analysts; 
(/;1\ l1l'escribe the forms of licence!'! for the ml\!luf~cture for ~Rle. 45 
for the sllle !Iud jor the distri'l>ution of articles of iood or any specified 
article of f()(od or <:\[t~s of articles of food, the form of appliclltion for 

IS 
10 
16 
· . 
mob licences, the c(lnditiOlls subject to which such licen08S may be 
issued, tb autbority empowered to issue the same tmd the fees payable 
therefor; . 
(0) direot a fee to be paid for analysing any artiole of fool or 
for any matter for which a fee may be prescribed under this Act; 
(d) direct that the whole or any part of the filles impO$~d UDder 
thi. Act shall be paid to a local authority on realisation j, 
(6) provide.! for the delegation of the powers and t'uactionB OGDferred 
by this Act on the St~te Government or food authorities to subordhll~te 
authorities. 
H. Bepeal of COrNlPODdiDg lawa.-If, immediately before the 
commencement of this Act, there is in force in any State to whioh this Act 
extonds any lnw corresponding to this Act, that corresponding law shall 
upon such commencemellt stand repealed : 
Provided that in so far as any such corresponding Inw makes ,t>1."ovision 
for any of the matters dealt with in section 7 or for the punishment of 
offences committed in contravention of Rny such law, the repeal sha,n take 
effect only on the do.te fixed by the State Government in exeroil!le of thl' 
powers c~llferred upon it by section 7. 

18 
STATEMENT OF OB.tECTS AND REASONS 
Laws exist in a number of States in India . for the preventi(jn of 
adulteration of focd-stuiJs, bllt they lac~ unifonnity having b!en passed 
at different times without mutual consultation between btstes. 'Ine Jieoo. 
f~ Central legisla.tion for the whole country in this matter has been felt 
since 1937 when a Committee appointed by the Central Advisory Board 
of Health recommended thi'l step. If Adulteration of iuod·stufls ~lId o~hflt 
toods " is now included in thE> Concurrent List in the Constitution of India. 
It has therefore become possible for the Centr~ GOVIR'IID'lent i.e (lflact 
all-india legislation on this subject. The Bill will replace local food 
adlJ1teration laws whEre thE'Y exist and also apply to thr.se States whp.re 
there are no local laws C'D the subject. Among others, it provides for (1) a 
Central Food Laboratory to which food samples can be referred for final 
opinion in disputed cases (clause 4), (2) a Central Committee for Food 
Standards consisting of representatives of Central and State Governments 
to advise on matters arising from the administration of the Act (clause 3) 
and (8) the vesting in the Central Government of the rule.making power 
regarding IItaudards of quality for articles of food and ;Jt)rtain othsr matters 
(clause 22). 
AMBIT KAUR. 
Nsw DBLHI; 
Th.e 81.1, October, 19S2. 

14 
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
The Bill involves eXllenditure to the Central Government on aCl'ount 
of the proposed Ventral Food Laboratory and Inspeotion Staf!, at the BaU-
way Stations and Ports. According to present rough estimates, the total 
expenditure fr.om Centra.l Revenu.es on account of the Dill is not ex· 
pected to exceed Rs. 5,75,000 non-recurring and Rs. 1,48,000 recurring 
per annum. 
The expenditJJre on the enforoement of the Act in the States will devolve 
on State (iovernn)entt aud looal bodieB. 

HOUSE OF THE PEOPLE 
A 
BILL 
to make provision for the prevention of adulteration of food. 
The President haS, in pursuance of clause (3) of article 117 
-of the Constitution of India, reoommended to the House of the 
People the consideration of the Bill. 
M. N. KAUL, 
Secretary. 
(Bajhmari Am"' Kaur, 
JI i",iBter lor B ealtA.) 