THE FAST TRACK COURTS FOR ELECTED REPRESENTATIVES
BILL, 2014
By
SHRI BAIJAY ANT P ANDA, M.P.
A
BILL
to establish fast track courts for trial of cases involving criminal charges against
elected representatives.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-fifth Year of the Republic of  India as
follows:—
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. (1) This Act may be called the Fast Track Courts for Elected Representatives
 Act, 2014.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Bill No. 101 of 2014
TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5

2
(3) In States and Union territories with a Legislature, the provisions of this Act shall
come into force on such date as the State Government or, as the case may be, the Government
of the Union territory may, by notification, appoint:
Provided that the notification shall be issued within one year from the date of
commencement of this Act.
(4) In Union territories without Legislature, the provisions of this Act shall come into
force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification, appoint:
Provided that the notification shall be issued within one year from the date of
commencement of this Act.
(5) Any reference in any provision of this Act to the commencement of this Act shall,
in relation to a State or a Union territory, be construed as a reference to the commencement
of that provision in that State or Union territory, as the case may be.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of that
State, in the case of a Union territory with Legislature, the Government of that Union territory,
and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(b) "Code" means the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973;
(c) "Fast Track Court" means a Fast Track Court established under sub-section (1) or
(2), as the case may be, of section 3;
(d) "Legislature of a State" includes the Legislature of the National Capital Territory of
Delhi and the Legislature of Union territory of Puducherry;
(e) "municipality" means an institution (by whatever name called) of self-Government
constituted under article 243Q of the Constitution;
(f) "panchayat" means an institution (by whatever name called) of self-Government
constituted under article 243B of the Constitution; and
(g) "State Government" includes the Government of the National Capital Territory of
Delhi and the Government of Union territory of Puducherry and the expression "State" shall
be construed accordingly.
CHAPTER II
E
STABLISHMENT OF FAST TRACK COURTS
3. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification, establish one or more Fast
Track Courts for each Union territory without a Legislature to try criminal offences
involving elected representatives of that Union territory.
(2) Every State Government shall, by notification, establish one or more Fast Track
Courts within its jurisdiction to try criminal offences involving elected representatives of
that State.
(3) Every Fast Track Court established under sub-section (1) or (2) shall exercise the
jurisdiction, powers and authority conferred on such Court by or under this Act.
(4) The Fast Track Court shall sit at such place or places, as the appropriate
Government may, by notification, specify.
(5) The Fast Track Court shall be a court of record and shall have all the powers of
such a court including the power to punish for contempt of itself.
4. (1) Every Fast Track Court shall be presided by a Judge to be appointed by the
appropriate Government.
Definitions.
Establishment
of Fast Track
Courts.
Provisions
relating to
Judges of Fast
Track Courts.
2 of 1974.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
(2) The appropriate Government may also appoint such number of additional Judges
to the Fast Track Court as it may, on the basis of the assessment procedure laid down in sub-
section (4), from time to time, deem necessary to appoint:
Provided that the appropriate Government shall record in writing the reasons for arriving
at a decision on the number of Additional Judges to be appointed.
(3) Every appointment under sub-section (1) and sub-section (2) shall be made with
the concurrence of the Chief Justice of the High Court exercising jurisdiction in relation to
that State or Union territory, as the case may be.
(4) The number of additional Judges to be appointed under sub-section (2) shall be on
the basis of an assessment of the requirement of the Fast Track Court and such requirement
shall include, inter alia, the following,—
(a) rate of institution and disposal of cases;
(b) number of cases pending;
(c) nature or type of offences under trial and the duration of trial in each case;
(d) caseload per judge; and
(e) the number of cases where the trial was not completed within a period of
ninety days.
Explanation.—For the purpose of this sub-section, caseload means the number of
cases tried by a Judge.
(5) The assessment under sub-section (4) shall be made at least once in every twenty-
four months and the number of additional Judges to be appointed under sub-section ( 2)
shall be revised in accordance with such assessment:
Provided that the appropriate Government shall record the reasons, in writing, for such
revision.
(6) A person shall not be qualified for appointment as a Judge or an Additional Judge
of a Fast Track Court unless he is, immediately before such appointment, a Session Judge or
an Additional Session Judge in any State.
(7) Where any Additional Judge is, or Additional Judges are, appointed in a Fast
Track Court, the Judge of the Fast Track Court may, from time to time, by general or special
order, in writing, provide for the distribution of business of the Fast Track Court among
himself and the Additional Judge or Additional Judges and also for the disposal of urgent
business in the event of his absence or in the absence of any Additional Judge.
(8) A Fast Track Court may, if it considers it expedient or desirable so to do, sit for any
of its proceedings at any place, other than the ordinary place of its sitting, in the State or the
Union territory in which it is established:
Provided that if the Public Prosecutor certifies to the Fast Track Court that in his
opinion it is necessary for the protection of the accused or any witness or it is expedient in
the interest of justice that the whole or any part of the trial should be held at some place
other than the ordinary place of its sitting, the Fast Track Court may, after hearing the
accused, make an order to that effect unless, for reasons to be recorded in writing, the Fast
Track Court thinks it fit to make any other order.
(9) The expenditure in respect of the salaries, allowances and pensions payable to
the Judges and Additional Judges of the Fast Track Court shall, in the case of a Fast Track
Court established in a State, be charged on the Consolidated Fund of that State and in the
case of a Fast Track Court established by the Central Government, be charged on the
Consolidated Fund of India.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

4
5. (1) For every Fast Track Court, the appropriate Government shall appoint a Public
Prosecutor for conducting in such Court, any prosecution, appeal or other proceeding on
behalf of the appropriate Government.
(2) The appropriate Government may also appoint such number of Additional Public
Prosecutors to the Fast Track Court as it may, on the basis of the assessment procedure
laid down in sub-section (4), from time to time, deem it necessary to appoint:
Provided that the appropriate Government shall  record in writing the reasons for
arriving at a decision on the number of Additional Public Prosecutors appointed.
(3) Every appointment under sub-section (1) and sub-section (2) shall be made with
the concurrence of the Chief Justice of the High Court exercising jurisdiction in relation to
such State or Union territory.
(4) The number of Additional Public Prosecutors to be appointed under sub-section
(2) shall be on the basis of an assessment of the requirements of the Fast Track Court and
such requirement shall include, inter alia, the following:—
(a) rate of institution and disposal of cases;
(b) number of cases pending;
(c) nature or type of offences under trial and the duration of trial in each case;
and
(d) caseload per public prosecutor.
Explanation.— For the purpose of this sub-section, caseload means the number of
cases conducted by a public prosecutor.
(5) The assessment under sub-section ( 4) shall be conducted at least once in every
twenty-four months, and the number of Additional Public Prosecutors to be appointed
under sub-section (2) shall be revised in accordance with such assessment:
Provided that the appropriate Government shall record the reasons in writing for such
revision.
(6) A person shall be eligible to be appointed as a Public Prosecutor or an Additional
Public Prosecutor if he is eligible to be appointed as a Public Prosecutor under section 24 of
the Code.
(7) Every person appointed as a Public Prosecutor or an Additional Public Prosecutor
under this section shall be deemed to be a Public Prosecutor within the meaning of clause
(u) of section 2 of the Code and the provisions of the Code shall apply accordingly.
6. The appropriate Government shall, with the concurrence of the Chief Justice of the
High Court exercising jurisdiction in relation to that State or Union territory, appoint
sufficient number of officers and staff to assist the Fast Track Court in the discharge of its
functions on such terms and conditions of service as may be prescribed by rules made under
this Act.
CHAPTER III
P
ROCEEDINGS IN THE FAST TRACK COURTS
7. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code or in any other law for the time
being in force, all cases involving offences alleged to have been committed under any
criminal law by a member of Parliament or Legislature of a State or a Panchayat or a
Municipality shall be tried by the Fast Track Court having jurisdiction over the area where
the commission of offence took place.
(2) Every case, application or proceeding relating to offences referred to in sub-
section ( 1) pending before any Court, other than a High Court or the Supreme Court,
Provision
relating to
Public
Prosecutors
for Fast Track
Courts.
Officers and
staff of the
Fast Track
Court.
All cases
involving
elected
representatives
to be tried by
Fast Track
Courts.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
2 of 1974.
2 of 1974.

5
immediately before the date of issue of notification under sub-sections ( 1) and ( 2) of
section 3 shall stand transferred to the Fast Track Court having jurisdiction in relation to
that area and the Fast Track Court to which such proceeding stand transferred shall proceed
with such cases from the stage at which they were pending at that time.
8. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code, the Fast Track Court shall
conduct its proceedings on a day-to-day basis excluding public holidays.
(2) The Fast Track Court shall complete every trial within a period of ninety days from
the date of filing of the charge sheet in the Court:
Provided that where the trial cannot be completed within a period of ninety days, the
Fast Track Court shall record in writing the reasons therefor and shall complete the trial
within a further period of not more than ninety days.
(3) Subject to the provisions of this Act, a Fast Track Court shall, for the purpose of
trial of any offence, have all the powers of a Court of Session and shall try such offence, as
if it were a Court of Sessions, in accordance with such procedure as is specified in the Code
for trial before a Court of Session.
9. The Supreme Court may direct transfer of any particular case from one Fast Track
Court to another Fast Track Court if in the opinion of the Supreme Court, it is expedient for
the ends of justice.
10. (1) A Fast Track Court may, on an application made by a witness in any proceeding
before it or by the Public Prosecutor in relation to such witness or on its own motion, give
such directions, as it deem fit, for keeping the identity and address of the witness secret.
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of sub-
section (1), the directions which a Fast Track Court may give shall include—
(a) holding of the proceedings at a protected place;
(b) avoiding the mention of names and addresses of witnesses in its orders,
judgements or any records of the case having access to the public; and
(c) ensuring that the identity and addresses of the witnesses are not disclosed.
(3) Any person who contravenes any direction issued under this section shall be
punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years or with fine or with
both.
11. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code, an appeal shall lie from any
judgement, sentence or order, not being interlocutory order, of a Fast Track Court to the
High Court both on facts and on law.
(2) Every appeal under this section shall be preferred within a period of thirty days
from the date of the judgement, sentence or order.
12. (1) The appropriate  Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make
rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as
may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total
period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or
both the Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect
only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously
done under that rule.
(3) Every rule made by the State Governments under this Act shall be laid, as soon as
may be after it is made, before the State Legislature.
Fast Track
Court to try
cases on day-
to-day basis.
Transfer of
cases from
one Fast
Track Court
to another.
Measures for
keeping the
identity and
address of the
witness secret.
2 of 1974.
2 of 1974.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
Appeal.

6
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The systemic flaws that pervade our judicial system have come into sharp focus in
recent times. India is infamous for its snail-paced judiciary and the gargantuan pendency of
cases in the subordinate and High Courts. As on 31st December, 2011, a massive three crore
cases were pending in the High Courts and Subordinate Courts across the country;
ten per cent. of such cases were pending for more than a decade.
At the level of the subordinate judiciary, criminal cases constitute seventy-one
per cent. of the total cases pending before the courts. This shocking figure displays the
apathy of the State towards the protection of its citizens. The  ultimate aim of criminal law is
the protection of personal liberty against invasion by others. In the words of Judge
Curtis-Raleigh, “The law should not be seen to sit by limply, while those who defy it go free,
and those who seek its protection lose hope”.
India has an overworked and understaffed judiciary. According to the Chief Justice of
India, there are six judges per million people in India, an abysmally low number as compared
to developed countries; the United States of America boasts of a ratio as high as 125 judges
per million people. Despite the report of the Law Commission in 1987, which had
recommended immediately raising this ratio to 50, and to 100 by the year 2000, no significant
steps have been taken.
The judicial system needs a complete overhaul to facilitate fair trial and speedy justice.
However, it must be recognized that improving the entire system will require significant
investment and political will. Until such time that a complete overhaul can be undertaken, at
the very least, we can initiate changes by attacking the roots of the problem.
One of the most cancerous of these roots is the criminalization of politics. As per the
report of the Association for Democratic Reforms, 76 of the 543 members elected to the
Lok Sabha in 2009 had been charged with serious charges such as murder, rape and dacoity.
Not only does this reflect poorly on the country, but it is also highly demoralizing for the
general public. There is an urgent need to break this criminal-political nexus, which can be
facilitated only if criminal cases against elected representatives are expeditiously disposed.
Under the present system, political patronage and a ‘culture of adjournment’ collude
to prevent speedy trial against elected representatives. In a country where the judicial
system is overburdened, a simple tweak would be to ‘fast track’ criminal cases against
elected representatives with a mandate that all relevant cases be adjudicated within ninety
days. If this provision is put in place it will go a long way towards resolving the issue.
Unlike some other proposals that bar candidates from contesting elections if charged with
criminal cases, this solution does not vitiate the presumption of innocence.
This Bill seeks to establish Fast Track Courts in all States and Union territories of
India with a mandate to ensure speedy trial of cases involving criminal offences by elected
representatives. Cases involving elected representatives that are presently being tried
across different courts in the country will stand transferred to the Fast Track Courts having
jurisdiction in the area. Barring exceptional circumstances, a Fast Track Court shall complete
trial within ninety days from the date of filing of charge-sheet.
To ensure that these Fast Track Courts don’t suffer from the same impediments as
regular courts, this Bill provides that the number of Judges to be appointed to each court
must be decided based on an objective criteria that takes into account caseload, pendency
and most importantly, the percentage of cases that remain unresolved even after the
stipulated deadline of ninety days. This provision will act as a check on the power of the
executive to change the judicial strength of these courts.

7
Furthermore, to ensure that proceedings do not suffer due to ineffective or biased
prosecution, this Bill prescribes that the Government must appoint public prosecutors with
the ‘concurrence’ of the Chief Justice of the High Court having jurisdiction in the area. The
number of prosecutors required for effective distribution of workload must also be decided
based on an objective criteria, similar to the one used above. This will reduce Government
discretion in appointment of prosecutors.
All Members of Parliament (MPs), Members of State Legislatures (MLAs and MLCs)
and Members of Panchayats and Municipalities established under the State Panchayati Raj
Legislations are sought to be covered under the provisions of the Bill. This implies that all
elected representatives at the Centre, in the States and in local self-Government institutions
such as Gram Panchayats, Block Panchayats or Panchayat Samitis, District Panchayats or
Zila Parishads, Nagar Panchayats, Municipal Councils and Municipal Corporations will be
subjected to the provisions of this Bill.
It is strongly felt that any attempt at decriminalizing politics will have to begin with
this amendment. This will go a long way in restoring the confidence of our people in the
judiciary and in redeeming the commitment of the political class towards justice.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; BAIJAYANT PANDA
July 7, 2014.
————
PRESIDENT’S RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLES 117(1) AND
117(3) OF THE CONSTITUTION
————
[Copy of D.O. No. 15017/6/2013-JUS(M) dated 1 September, 2014 from Shri Ravi Shankar
Prasad, Minister of Law and Justice and Communications and Information Technology to
the Secretary-General, Lok Sabha].
The President, having been informed of the subject matter of the Fast Track Courts
for Elected Representatives Bill, 2014 by Shri Baijayant Panda, Member of Parliament,
recommends the introduction and consideration of the Bill in Lok Sabha under clauses (1)
and (3) of article 117, respectively, of the Constitution.

8
FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the establishment of Fast Track Courts by the Central
and State Governments to deal exclusively with cases involving offences committed by
elected representatives. Clause 4 provides that every Fast Track Court shall be presided
over by a Judge to be appointed by the appropriate Government. It also provides for
appointment of Additional judges to the Fast Track Courts by the appropriate Government.
It further provides that the expenditure in respect of the salaries, allowances and pensions
payable in respect of the Judges and Additional Judges of the Fast Track Courts shall be
charged on the Consolidated Fund of the respective States and in respect of Union territories
on the Consolidated Fund of India. Clause 5 provides that the appropriate Government
shall appoint public prosecutors and additional public prosecutors for the purposes of this
Act. Clause 6 provides that the appropriate Government shall provide adequate number of
officers and staff to assist the Fast Track Courts in their functioning. The expenditure in
respect of States shall be met out of the Consolidated Fund of the respective States. However,
the expenditure in respect of Union territories shall be met out of the Consolidated Fund of
India. It is estimated that a sum of rupees fifty crore will be involved as recurring expenditure
per annum.
A non-recurring expenditure of rupees one hundred crore is also likely to be involved.

9
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 9 of the Bill provides that the appropriate Government may make rules for
carrying out the purposes of this Bill. As the rules to be made relate to matters of detail only,
the delegation of legislative power is of a normal character.

LOK  SABHA
——————
A
BILL
to establish fast track courts for trial of cases involving criminal charges against
elected representatives.
————
(Shri Baijayant Panda, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—1429LS(S3)—01-11-2014.