CURR! GEN DA 
to 
It-ri~ C,&'J1"',dAL L.AVIS (3XT~j SION TO J.AllflvlU AND KASHMIR) BILL, 1967 
(To be/As introduced in Lok Sabha) 
1. ~age 2, line 25,-
after "penal ty" insert " 'I , 
2. Page 5, line 5,-
for "CORPORATION" X~ "COltPORATIONS" 
3. Page 5, line 28,-
after "Kashmir" .Q.!!!i..:t 
4. Page 12, .. line 6,-
It " • 
for IIGovedrunent" ..!:.W "Government" 
-. 5. Page 17, in the marginal heading to section 56,-
after "death" insert-t'in certain" 
NEH DELHI-
JulY 18, 1967 
Asadha 27, 1889 ( Saka) 
.-

As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA ON 
1 9 JUL 1967 
Bill No. 101 011'" 
THE CENTRAL LAWS (EXTENSION TO JAMMU 
AND KASHMIR) BILL, 1967 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the extension of certain Central LaWB to the State of 
Jammu and Kashmir. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Eighteenth Year of th\! 
Republic of India as follows:-
1. (1) This Act may be called the Central Laws (Extension 1.0 Short 
Jammu and Kashmir) Act, 1967. tltJeand 
commence-
S (2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Gov- 1DtIftt. 
emment may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
2. (1) The Acts mentioned In the Schedule and all rules, orders Esten-
and reeu1ations made thereunder are hereby extended to, aDd lion ADd 
shall be in fore .. In, the State of Jammu 8Jld Kashmir. amend. 
ment of 
10 (2) With elect from the eommeacemeut of this Ad, tbe AcU certain 
mentieDed ill the Schedule shan be amended as sped"" thereiD. , Jaw, 

Construc-
tion of 
referen-
ces to 
luws not 
in force in 
Jammu 
and 
Kashmir. 
Construc-
tion of 
referen-
ce!! to 
authori-
tie! 
where 
new 
authori-
ties have 
~ecn 
constitu-
ted. 
Repeals 
and 
savings. 
2 
'1" 
3. Any reference in any Act mentioned in the' Schedule to ~ 
law which is not in force in the State of Jammu and Kashmir shall, 
in relation to that State, be cO'nstrued as a reference to the cor-
responding law, if a'ny, in force in that State. 
4. Any reference by whatever form of words in any law for 5 
the time being in force in the State of Jammu and Kashmir to any 
authority competent at the date of the passing of that law to ex!!r-
cise any powers Or discharge any functions in that State shall, 
where a corresponding new authority has heen constituted by or 
under any law now extended to that State, have effect as if it were 10 
a reference to the new authority. 
5. If immediat~ly before the commencement of this Act there is 
in force in the State of Jammu and Kashmir any law correspond-
ing to any Act now extended to that State, that la w shall, save as 
otherwb:e expressly provided in this Act, stand repealed on such J 5 
commencement: 
Provided that the rep<!al shal). not affect-
•. • -- (a) the previous operation of any law so repealed or any-
. thi'oa duly done or suffered thereunder, 
(b) any right, privilege, obligation or liability acquired, ac- 20 
crued or incurred under any law so repealed, 
(c) any penalty, forfeiture or punishment incurred in res-
pect of any offence committed against any law so repealed, or 
(d) any investigation, legal proceeding or n:medy in respect 
of any such right, privilege, obligation, liability, penalty for- 25 
feiture or punishment as afore~aid; 
and any such investigation, legal proceeding or remedy may be ins-
tituted, continued or enforced, and any such penalty, forfeiture or 
punishment may be imposed, as if this Act had not been passed: 
. .ProvidE!d further that, subject to the preceding proviso, anything 30 
do~ Or any action taken (including any appointment or delegation 
maIde, rtotiRcation. instruction or direction issued" form, bye-law or 

3 
9Cheme framed, certificate obtained, permit or licence granted or re-
gistration effected) under any such law shall be deemed to have 
been done or taken under the corresponding provisions of the Act 
now extended to that State, and shall continue to be in force accord-
S ingly unless and until superseded by anything done or any Rction 
taken under the said Act. 
6. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the pmvisions of Power 
any Act now extended to the State of Jammu and Kashmir, the to remove 
Central Government may, by order notified in the Official Gazette. ~iftlcul-
10 k h . . . h ~ t· t 't tIel, rna e suo provIsIons or give suc IU,rcc 10ns as appear 0 J neces-
sary for the removal of the difficulty. 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the 
foregoing power, any such notified order may,-
(a) specify the corresponding authorities within the mean-
Ising of section 4. 
(b) provide for the transfer of any matter pending imme-
diately before the commencement of this Act before any court, 
tribunal or other authority, to any corresponding court, tribunal 
or other authority for disposal, 
20 (e) specify the areaS' or circumstances in which, or the ex-
tent to which, or the conditions subject to which, anythlnlo! d<me 
or any action taken (i'ncluding any of the matters specified in 
the second proviso to section 5) under any law repealed by that 
section shall be recognised or given effect to under the carres-
as ponding provision of the Act now extended. 

THE SCHEDULE 
(See section 2) 
ACTS 
THE OFFICIAL TRUSTEES ACT, 1913 
(2 OF 1913) 
" 
Section I.-In sub-section (2), omit "except the state of Jammu 
and Kashmir". 
THE MOTOR VEHICLES ACT, 1939 
(4 OF 1939) 
5 
Section I.-In sub-section (2), omit "except the State of Jammu 10 
and Kashmir". 
Section 2.-Omit clause (9A). 
Section 9.-Omit sub-sections (2) and (4). 
Section 28.-Omit sub-sections (2), (3), (4) and (5). 
8«tion 29.-ln sub-sectiO'n (1) ,-
(a) in clause (a) omit "or"; 
(b) omit clause (b). 
Section 3B.-For sub-section (4), substitute-
"(4) A certificate of fitness issued under this Act shall, 
15 
while it remains effective, be valid throughout India.". 20 
Section 42.-ln sub-section (3), omit clause (h). 
Section 63.-Omit sub-sectiO'n (5) . 
Section 96.-(a) In SUb-section (2A), omit "in the State of 
Jammu and Kashmir or" and in the proviso, omit "of the State of 
Jammu and Kashmir or"; 25 
(b) In sub-section (6), omit "of the State of Jammu Bnd 
Kashmir or"; 
The Sixth Schedule.-In the first and second columns, after 
"West Bengal" and the entry relating thereto in the second column, 
insert "Jammu and Kashmir" and "J & K" respectively. 30 
4 

s 
10 
THZ 'I'RANsFI!lR OF PRIsONERS ACT, 1950 
(29 OF 1950) 
"-
Section I.-In sub-section (2), omit "except the State of Jammu 
and Kashmir". 
THE ROAD TRANSPORT CORPORATION ACT, 1950 
(64 OF 1950) 
Section I.-In sub-section (2), omit "the State of Jammu and 
Kashmir and". 
THE MINES ACT, 1952 
(35 OF 1952) 
Section I.-In sub-section (2), omit "except the State of Jammu 
and Kashmir". 
THE EsSENTIAL COMMODITIES ACT, 1955 
(10 OF 1955) 
15 Section I.-In sub-section (2), omit "except the state of Jammu 
and Kashmir". 
THE COMPANIES ACT, 1956 
(1 OF 1956) 
Section I.-In sub-sectio'n (3) ,-
20 (a) omit first proviso; 
(b) in the second proviso, omit "further". --..., ...... ~ 
Section 3.-In sub-clause (f) (2) of clause (ii) of sub-section (1), 
inl'ert at the end "in so far as banking, insurance and financial cor-
porations are concerned, and before the commencement of the Cen-
2S tral Laws (Extension to Jammu and Kashmir) Act, 1967 i'n so far 
a~ other corporations are concerned". 
30 
35 
After section 620B, insert-
"Special provision a.~ to Companies in Jammu and Kashmir. 
62OC. The Central Government may by notification in the Special 
Officia'l Gazette direct that with effect from the commencement provision 
of the Central 'Laws (Extension to Jammu and Kashmir) Act, 8j; to compa-1967 or any subsequent date, any of the provisions of this Act niea in 
specified in the notification shall not apply, or shall apply only Jammu 
with such exceptions and modifications or adaptaticna as may and 
be specified in the notification, to- . Kashmir. 
(a) any existing company in the state of Jammu and 
Kashmir; 
(b) any company registered in that State under this 
Act after the commencement of the Central Laws (Exten. 
sion to Jammu and Kashmir) Act, 1967 .... 

THE APPRENTICES AcT, 1961 
(52 OF 1961) 
• r; .... /' .,! 
Section 1.-ln sub-section (2), omit "except the State of Jammu 
and Kashmir". 
THE ADMINISTRATORS..G&NERAL ACT, 1963 
(45 OF 1963) 
Section l.-ln sub-section (2), omit "except the State of Jammu 
and Kashmir". 
Section 20.- (a) In sub-section (1), for "the territories to which 
s 
this Act extends", substitute "India"; (0 
(b) after sub-sectio'n (2), insert-
"(3) Any probate or letters of administration granted by 
the High Court for the State of Jammu and Kashmir before the 
commencement of the Central Laws (extension to Jammu and 
Kashmir) Act, 1967 shall, after such commencement, be as IS 
effective as if such probate or letters of admi'nistration had 
been granted under this section.". 
Omit section 21. 
Section 37.- (a) In clause (a), for "to which this Act extends", 
substitute "in India"; 20 
(b) Omit "or in the State of Jammu and Kashmir". 
Spction 56.-For "the territories to which this Act exte'nds" Rnd 
for "the said territories", substitute "India". 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The President has issued Orders under article 370 of the Consti-
tution Rpplying certain entries in the Union and Concurrent List!! 
in the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution to Jammu and Kashmir 
State. "Chis Bill is intended to extend some of the Central laws 
relating to these subjects to that State, 
NEW DELHI; 
The 22nd Mcuy, 1967. 
Y. B. CHAVAN. 
PRESIDENTS RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLE 117 OF 
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA 
[Copy of letter No. F. 1/13/67-K, dated the 13th July, 1967 from 
Shri Y. B. Chavan, Minister of Home Affairs to the Secretary, 
Lok Sabha.] . 
The President having been informed of the subject-matter of 
the Central Laws (Extension to Jammu and Kashmir) BiU, 1967, 
recommends to the Lok Sabha the introduction and consideration of 
the Bill under article 117 (1) and (3) of the Constitution. 
7 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Clause 2 of the Bill read with the Schedule to the Bill seeks to 
extend to the State of Jammu and Kashmir the Central Acts mention-
ed in the Schedule. The extension o! some of the Acts mentioned 
in the Schedule, indicated below, will involve expenditure from 
the Consolidated Fund of India. The financial implications of the 
exte'nsion of the said Acts are set out below:-
THE MINES ACT, 1952 
The Chief Inspector of Mines will be responsible for the enforce-
ment of the Act in the State of Jammu and Kashmir also. Arecurr-
:ng expenditure of Rs. 1,000/- on the travelling allowances of officers 
visiting the mines located in the State for inspection purposes for 
about four months in a year would be incurred. Expenditure to the 
extent of Rs. 1,000/- is likely to be incurred during the current 
inancial year (1967-68). 
THE ApPRENTICES ACT, 1961 
Assuming that on an average 180 apprentices would be placed in 
industry in Jammu and Kashmir State during the three years of the 
Fourth Plan from 1968-69 to 1970-71, the total expenditure for that 
period on this account is estimated at Rs. 12.42 lakhs. As most of the 
employers in the State are likely to be employing leia than 500 workers 
in an establishment, 50 per cent. share of Government for the period 
in question would come to Rs. 6.21 lakhs. Of this, the share of the 
Central Government and the State Government would be about 
Rs. 3.73 lakhs and Rs. 2.48 lakhs, respectively. The annual expendi-
ture on the part of the Central Government is estimated at Rs. 1.24 
lakhs. No expenditure will be incurred on this account during the 
current ftnanctal year . (1967-68). 
THE COMPANIES AcT, 1956 
The main expenditure to be incurred would be in regard to the 
establishment of the offices of the Registrar of Companies and of the 
Official Liquidator in Jammu and Kashmir State under the provisions 
of sections 609 and 448, respectively, of the Act. This expenditure will 
be of a recurring nature. A sum of Rs. 17,000/- is likely to be 
"'lCpended during the current financial year (1967-68). 
8 

2. The extension of the Acts aforesaid to the State of Jammu and 
Kashmir will thus involve the Central Government in an approximate 
expenditure of Rs. 1,42,000/- per annum. Insofar as the curre'nt 
financial year (1~7-68) is concerned, a sum of Rs. 18,000/- will be 
expended and this expenditure will be met by the Ministries admi-
'Jlistratively concerned with the Acts from their own budgets. Pro-
visions during future years will also be made by those Ministries 
in their budgets. 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATIOn 
Clause 6 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to provide 
by orders notified in the Official Gazette for the removal of difficul-
ties that may arise in giving effect to its provisions. The Bill seeks 
to extend various Acts to the State of Jammu and Kashmir and it is 
the normal practice to insert in Bills extending enactments to terri-
tories, a provision for the removal of difficulties which may arise in 
the course of transition from the old to the new state of affairs. 
Clause 6 (2) of the Bill indicates the principal matters in respect of 
which orders may be issued. The delegation of legislative power, 
in the circumsta'nces, is of normal character. 
10 
, ... ~ 
. \ 

• 
ANNEXURE 
"'4XTRACT Ji'ROM THE OFFICIAL TRUSTEES AcT, 1913 
(2 OF 1913) 
• • • • 
1. (1) • • • • • Short 
till (2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu ext~t 
and Kashmir. and 
• 
• 
• • • 
EXTRACTS FROM THE MOTOR VEHICLES AcT, 1939 
(4 OF 1939) 
• • • 
• 
• 
Com-
mence-
m~nt. 
1. (1) • • • • • 
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of 
and Kashmir: 
Short 
title, 
Jammu extent 
and 
• 
2. 
(9A) 
tends; 
• 
9. (1) 
• 
• 
"India" 
• 
• 
• 
• 
means the 
• 
• 
cam-
• • mcnce-
ment. 
• • • Deftni-
territories to which this Act ex- tions. 
• • 
• • • Extent of 
(2) Subject, in the case of international driving permits issued in validity 
pursuance of any International Convention relative to motor traffic ~! driv-
to which the Central Government is for the time being a party, to llc~nce. 
any rules made by the Central Government under section 92 and 
subject in any other case to the provisions of sub-section (4). 
a driving licence to drive a motor vehic1e issued by a competent 
authority in the State of Jammu and Kashmir shall, if the holder is 
ordinarily resident in that State, be valid throughout India as if it 
were a driving licence issued under this Act: 
Provided that such holder is not disqualified under any of the pro-
visions of this Act for holding or obtaining a driving licence in India . 
• • • • • 
II 

Effective-
ness in 
India of 
registra-
tion. 
(4) If the Central Government is satisfied that licences issued 
in India under this Aot are not effective in the State of Jammu and 
Kashmir or are effective subject to unreasonable conditions or that 
like conditions and requirements to those imposed by this Act are not 
imposed in a reasonable degree upon the issue of licences in the State, 
the Central Govednment shall, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, declare that licences generally or any particulaJ; class of dri-
ving l~cence issued in that State shall not be valid in India . 
• • • • • 
28. (1) • • • • • 
(2) Subject, in the case of international motor vehicle certificates 
issued in pursuance of any international convention relative to motor 
traffic to which the Central Government is for the time being a party, 
to any rules made by the Central Government under section 92, and 
subject in any other case to the provisions of sub-section (3) and sub-
section (4) of this section, a motor vehicle registered by a competent 
authority in the State of Jammu and Kashmir shall not require to be 
registered in India: 
Provided that there is in force in respect of the vehicle a certificate 
issued by the competent authority conforming to and containing sub-
stantially the same particulars as a certificate of registration in Form 
G as set forth in the First Schedule and that such certificate does n.ot 
assign to the vehicle a standard of performance in any respect mate-
rially greater than that assignable or permissible under this Act or 
the rules made thereunder for a motor vehicle of like make and model 
in the State in which the vehicle is to ,be driven. 
(3) A certificate complying with the requirements of the proviso 
to sub-section (2) shall be effective throughout India and the provi-
sions of this Act shall be applicable thereto as if it were a certificate 
of registration issued under this Act. 
(4) Sub-section (2) shall not apply to any motor vehicle previ-
ously registered in India, if the certificate of registration of the vehi-
cle in India is for the time being suspended or cancelled for any reason 
other than that of permanent removal of the vehicle from India. 
(5) If at any time the Central Government is satisfied that motor 
vehicles registered in India under this Act are 'not permitted to be 
driven in the State of Jammu and Kashmir without fresh registration 
in the State or are permitted to be driven only subject to unreason-
able conditions or' that like conditions and requirements to those im-
posed under this Act (incl\lding the specification of the particulars 

13 
required by Form G as set forth in the First Schedule) are not im-
posed in a reasonable degree upon the issue and for the continued 
effectiveness of certificates of registration in the State as aforesaid, 
the Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
declare that certificates of registration generally or in respect of any 
particular class of motor vehicle issued in the State shall not be effec· 
tive in India. 
29. (1) When a motor vehicle-
(a) registered in one State has been kept in another State, or ASSign.! ment 0 
(b) registered in the State of Jammu and Kashmir has been fresh re. 
kept in India, gilltn-
for a period exceeding twelve months, the owner of the vehicle shall ~:'k on 
apply to the registering authority, within whose jurisdiction the vehi- removal 
cle then is, for the assignment of a new registration ~ark and shall t(\ 
present the certificate of registration to that registering authority. 8snother tate. 
* • • • • * 
38. (1) • • • • * ecrti-
(4) A certificate of fitness issued under this Act shall, while it fteate of 
remains effective, be valid throughout India, and a State Govern- tl:n:ss 
ment may, by notification in the Official Gazette, declare that subject ;o;ana-
to such conditions as may be specified in the notification, certificates vehicles. 
of fitness issued by a competE''Dt authcrity in the State of Jammu and 
Kashmir shall, while they remain effective, be valid in the State as 
if they were issued under this Act. 
* 
• 
• 
• • • 
42. (I) * • • 
(3) Sub-section (I) shall not apply-
• • • 
* 
• 
• 
* 
* Neces-
lIity for 
permits. 
* 
(h) subject to any prescribed C(]Ilditions. to any transport 
vehicle owned by the Government of the State of Jammu and 
Kashmir and used for Government purposes unconnected with 
any commercial enterprise; or 
* * 
63. (I) * • 
• 
• 
• 
• 
* 
• Valida-
tfon of 
(5) A State Government may, by rules made under section 68, permits 
specify the conditions subject to which a document issued by a com. for use 
petent authority in the State of Jammu and Kashmir authorising r~~~~e 
the use of a motor vehicle as a transport vehicle may be deemed 11'1 

which 
granted. 
Duty of 
insurers 
to satisfy 
judg-
ments 
against 
persons 
insured 
ill res-
pe.ct of 
third 
party 
risks. 
14 
for the purposes of sub-section (1) to be a permit, granted under 
this Chapter in the State. 
* * * • * • 
96. (1) • • • • • 
(2A) Where any such judgment as is referred to in sub-6ection 
(1) is obtained from a Court in the State of Jammu and Kashmir 
or in a reciprocating country and in the case of a foreign judgment 
is, by virtue of the' provisiOO'l.9 of section 13 of the Code of Civil 
Procedure, 1908, conclusive as to any matter adjudicated upon by it, lof 1008. 
the insurer (being an insurer registered under the Insurance Act, 
1938, 8IIld whether or not he' is registered under the COlTesponding 4 of 1'1138. 
law of the reciprocating country) shall be liable to the person entitl-
ed to thE' benefit of the decree in the manner and to the extent 
speCified in sub-section (1), as if the judgment were given by a 
Court in India: 
Provided that no sum shall be payable by the insurer in respect 
of any such judgment unless, before or after the commencement of 
the proceedings in which the judgment is given, the insurer had 
'notice through the Court concerned of the bringing of the proceed-
ings and the insw-er to whom notice is so given is entitled under 
the corresponding law of the State of Jammu and Kashmir or of 
the reciprocating country, to be made a party to the proceedings 
and to defend the action on grounds similar to those specified in sub-
rrection (2). 
• • • • • • 
(6) No insurer to whom the notice referred to in sub-section (2) 
or sub-section (2A) has been given shall be entitled to avoid his 
liability to any person entitled to the benefit of any such judgment 
as ilS referred to in sub-section (1) or sub-section (2A) otherwise 
than in the manner provided for in sub-section (2) or in the corres-
ponding law of the State of Jammu and Kashmir or of th~ reci-
procating country, as the case may be. 
• • • • 
THE SIXTH SCHEDULE 
[See sections 24 (3) and 29 (2)] 
REGISTRATION MARKS 
• • 
One of the groups of letters specified in the seco'nd column 
followed by anyone other letter shall be used as the registratiO'll 
mark for a vehicle in the State specified in the first column. 
• 
" 
• 
West Bengal. 
• 
• 
• 
• • • 
WB,WG. 
• • • 

• 
18 
txTRACT FROM THE TRANSFER OF PRISONERS ACT, 1950 
(29 OF 1950) 
* * ... ... 
1. (1) ... • • ... 
• 
• Short titlt: and 
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu extent. 
nnd Kashmir. 
• 
• 
• • ... ... 
EXTRACT FROM THE ROAD TRANSPORa' COttPORATIONS ACT, 1950 
(64 OF 1950) 
• • • * 
1. (1) ... ... ... ... 
• 
... 
• Short 
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of .Tammu title, 
and Kashmi,r and the Union territory of Delhi. cY-tdcnt an com· 
... ... ... * ... mcnoo-
ment. 
EXTRACT FROM THE MINFS ACT, 1952 
(35 OF 1952) 
1. (1) ... ... ... ... • Short 
tille, . 
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu extent 
and Kashmir. and com· 
• 
... ... ... ... 
EXTRACT FROM THE EsSENTIAL COMMODITIES ACT. 1955 
(10 OF 1955) 
• • • • 
• ... • ... 
... mence· 
ment. 
• 
... 1. (1) Short 
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu title 
and Kashmir. and extent. 
• 
EXTRACTS FROM THE COMPANIES AJ:r, 1956 
(1 OF 1956) 
• • • • 
1. (1)· ... ... ... ... Short 
(3) It extends to the whole of India: title, 
com-Provided that it shall not apply to the State of Jammu and menee. 
Kashmir except to the extent to which the provisions of this Act ment and 
relate to the incorporation, regulation and winding up of banking, extent. 
insurance and ftnan.cifl corporations: 
J ., .. 
Provided further that it shall apply to the State of Nagaland 
subject to such modifications, if any, as the Central Government 
may. by notification in the Official Gazette, specify . 
• • • • ... 

Defini-
tions of 
"com-
pany", 
"existing 
com-
pany", 
"private 
com-
pany", 
and 
"public 
com-
peny". 
16 
3. (1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, the 
expressions "company", "existing company", "private company" and 
"public company" shall, subject to the provisions of sub-section (2) I 
have the meanings specified below:-
• 
... ... ... ... ... 
(Vi) "existing company" means a company formed and 
registered under any of the previous companies laws specified 
below:-
... ... ... ... ... 
~f) Any law corresponding to any of the Acts or the 
Ordinance aforesaid and in force-
(1) in the merged territories or in a Part B State 
(other than the State of Jammu and Kashmir), or any 
part thereof, before the extension thereto of the Indian 
Companies Act, 1913; or 7 of 1913. 
(2) in the State of Jammu and Kashmir, or a'ny part 
thereof, before the commencement of the Jammu and 
Kashmir (Extensi.()n of Laws) Act, 1956; 62 of 1956 . 
... ... ... ... 
EXTRACT FROM TIlE ,ApPRENTICES ACT, 1961 
(52 OF 1961) 
... 
Short title, 1. (1)'" ... ... ... ... 
extent, (2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu 
commence- and Kashmir. 
ment and 
application. 
Short 
title, 
extent 
and 
com-
mence-
ment. 
Effect of 
probate 
or letters 
granted 
to Admi-
nistrator_ 
General. 
Ef!eet of 
,rant by 
thl' 
Hflh 
Court of 
... ... ... ... ... 
ExTRCTS FROM TilE ADMINISTRATORs-GENERAL ACT, 1963 
(45 OF 1963) 
... ... ... ... ... 
1. (1) ... ... ... ... ... 
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu 
and Kashmir. 
... ... ... ... ... 
20. (1) Probate or letters of administration granted by the High 
Court to the Administrator-General of any State shall have effect 
over all the assets of the deceased throughout the territories to 
which this Act extends and shall be conclusive as to the represen-
tative title against all debtors of the deceased and all persons holding 
such assets, and shall afford full indemnity to all debtors paying 
their debts and all persons deliveri'ng up such assets to such Admi-
nistrator-Genera1. 
• • • • 
21. Probate or letters of administration granted by the High 
Court far the State of Jammu and Kashmir to the Administrator-
General of that State shall have effect over all the assets of the 

17 
deeaMlCi ~ .u tile State. 110 1De Hi&h eaun, oi which • ~. 
eerWicate ia ... 10 by 4lb.e Hieh Court for the State at. Jammu and aM 
X.lbm1r that such grant hu been made, and Ihall be conc1uaive .: ....... 
as to the representative title .&ainst all debton of the deceued and 
all perlOIli holding IUCh assets, aDd shall a1!ord full indemnity to all 
debtors paymg their debt. and: III per8Ol'l8 deliverina Uip wch .... 
to such A.dmin.iltntor...Qeneral . 
• • • • • 
37. ~ 
(a) a penon not having his domicile in any State to which Tranafer 
~ Act utead8 hu died leaving U98tII in any State and in the of certain 
country in which he had his domicile at the time of his death, ~etat te .... 8CU or 
and or admi-
(b) proceedinp for the adm.i.n.Wtration CJf h.UI estate with nistratOl' 
respect to 8aget.s in any such State have been taken under lec- :"coc:;n-
tion 29 or section 30, and domicile 
(c) there has been a grant of administration in the cou'ntry for dlstri· 
of dimiclle with respect 1:0 the aaseta in that country, bution. 
the holder of the certificate granted. under section 2~ or section 30, 
or the Adm..inistrator-General, 8& the cue may be, after havin& 
given the prescribed notice for credliton and others to send in to 
him their claims against the estate of the deceased, and after having 
discharged, at the expiration of the time therein named, such law-
ful claims as he has notice of, may, inItead of himself distributing 
any surplUs or residue of. the deceased'. property to persons residing 
out of India or in the State of Jammu and Kashmir who are en,tr..led 
thereto, transfer, with the cxmsenJt of the executor or administrator, 
as the case may be, in the country of domicile, the surplus or 
residue to IWn for dUtribution to thOle persons. 
• • • • • 
56. Notwithsta.nding anything in tltis Act, or in any other law PrOYi-
for the time ,being in force, the Central GoverrlJIW!llt may, by gene- aion tor 
ral or special order, cIIirect that, where a subject of a foreign Stat. adminil-
dies in the territories to which this Act extends, and it appears that ~:~~~_ 
there is no one in the 8Iid territories, other than the Administrator- lular 
General, entitled 110 apply to a court of competent jurisdiction for Otftcer 
letters of administration of the estate of the deceased, letters of In cue 
adminiatration shall, oa. the application to such court by any Consu- 0lt death 
~ c rcwn-far Oftlcer Ott IIUCh 1,-1 ..... State, be granted to such Coosular Vlucer t "'.......... lances 
:>n such terms and cond.itioos .. the Court may, subject to any 0: 
rules made In th1t behalf by the Central Govenunent, think fit to foreicn 
impose. subject. 
• • • • • 

LOK SABRA 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the extension of CCrtllin Central Laws to the 
State of Jammu and Kashmir. 
(Shri Y. E., Chp.Vlm, 
Minister of Home Affairs.) 