, 
i 
06 0119"7. 
As lNTIODuCm IN' Lox &.u ON 
BW No. 101 of 188& 
THE DELHI FIRE PREVENTION AND FIRE SAFETY BILL, 1988 
A 
BILL 
to 'l'nake more effective proviBion fO'l' thle fire prevention and fire salet.!1 
• measures in certain buildings and premises in the Union territOf1l 
of Delhi. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty-seventh Year of the RepubUc 
of India as follows:- . 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Delhi Fire Prevention and Fire 
Safety Act, 1986. 
5 (2) It extendc; to the-whole of th~ Union territory of Delhi. 
10 
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government 
may, by notification in the Official Gazett~, appoint. 
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requJ.res,-
(a) "Administrator" means the Admini'Strator of Delhi appointed 
by the President under articl~ 239 of the Constitution; . ~. 
(b) "Appellate Tribunal" means the Appellate Tribunal consti-
tuted under section 347 A of the Delhi Municipal Corporation Act, 
1957; 
(c) "building" means a house, outhouse, stable, latrine, urinal, 
shed, hut, wall (other than a boundary wall) or any other structure, 
whether of masonry. bricks, wood, mud, metal or other material; 
(d) "building bye-laws" means the bYNaws made under section 
28: of the Cantonments Act, 1924 or the bye-laws made under section 
Short 
tme, ex-
tent and 
COIIUIleDc:e-
1T1eflt. 
Deflnl. 
iions. 

I 
481 of the Delhi Municipal Coxporation Act, 1~7 or the by .. :iawi 
made under section 188, sub-section (3) of section 189 and sub-section 
,(1) of section 190 of the Punjab Municipal Act, 1911, as in force in 
New Delhi or the regulations made under sub-section (1) of section 
57 of the Delhi Development Act, 1957, relating to buildings; 5 
(e) IIChief Fire Officer" means the Chief Fire Ofticer appointed by' 
the Municipal Corporation of Delhi established under the Delhi 
Municipal Corporation Act, 19m; 
(1) "Delhi" means the Union territory of Delhi; 
(g) "fire prevention and fire safety measures" means such 10 
mtasures as are necessary in accordance with the bullding bye-
laws for the prevention, control and fighting of fire and for ensuring 
the safety of life and property in case of fire; 
(h) "lpcal authority" means the Delhi Cantonment Board estab-
Puojab 
Act ILl 
of 1911. 
61 of 1917. 
66 ot 1957. 
lished under the Cantonments Act, 1924, the Delhi Development 15 2 of 1924. 
Authority established under the Delhi Development Act, 1957, the 61 of 1957. 
Delhi Municipal Corporation established under the Delhi Municipal 
Corporation Act, 1957, the New Delhi Municipal Committee established 66 of 1957. 
under the Punjab Municipal Act, 1911, as in force in New Delhi or Punjab 
any other authority under any other law, which may be notified 20 ~~~ 
in this behalf by the Administrator with the prior approval of the . 
Central Government; 
(i) "nominated authority" means an officer not below the 
rank of a Station Officer nominated by the Chief Fire Offi.cer, and 
includes an officer nominated by a local authority or a railway 25 
administration as a nominated authority for the purposes of this 
Act· , 
(j) "occupier" includes-
(i) any person who for the time being is paying or is liable 
to pay to the owner the rent or any portion of the rent of the land go 
or building in respect of which such rent is paid or is payable; 
(ii) an owner in occupation of, or otherwise using his land 
or building; 
(ui) a rent-free tenant of any land or building; 
(i1J) a licensee in occupation of any land or building; and 3~ 
(v) any person Who is liable to pay to the owner damages 
for the use and occupation of any land or building; 
(k) "owner" includes a person who for the time being is receiving 
or is entitled to receive, the rent of any land or building whether on 
his own account or on account of himself and others or as an agent, 4. 
trustee, guardian or receiver or any oth4u- person or who should so 
receive the rent or be entitled to receive it if the land or building or 
part thereof wer~ let to a tenant and also includes-
(i) the custodian of evacuee property in .respect of evacuee 
property vested in him under the Administration of Evacuee 41': 
ProPE'rty Act, 1950; ~ 31 of 1950. 
(ii) the Director of Estates of the Government of India, the oJ. 
, Secretary of the Delhi Development Authority, constituted under 
tbe Delhi Development Act, 1957, the pt1eral manaaer 'of a 61 of 'ie',. 

.. oll ..... 
6ofl908. 
5 
3 
railway and the h* of a Government department, in respect of 
propeJ'ties under their respective control; 
. (Z) "premises" means any land or any building or part of a 
building appurtenant thereto which is used for storing explosives, 
explosive substances and dangerously inflammable substances. 
20 of 1951. 10 
.. 
ExP'14114tion-In this clause, "explosive", "explosive substances" 
and "dangerously inflammable substances" shall have the meanings, 
resoectIvely, assigned to them in the Explosives Act, 1884, the 
Explosive Substances Act, 1908 and the Inflammable Substances Act, 
1952. I 
3. ~1) The nominated authority may, after giving' tnree hours' notice 
·to the occupier, or, if there be no occupier, to the owner of any building 
having such heiJl'ht as may be specified by rules framed under this Act, 
15 "l" premises, enter and ·inspect ·the said building or premises at any 
time between sunrise and sunset where such inspection appears neces-
sary for ascertaining the adequacy or contravention of fire prevention 
and fire safety measures: 
Provided thAt the nominatid authority may enter into and insDect any 
lIO "'undin~ or premises at any time if it apnears to it to be eXDecUent and 
"IP('essary to do so in order to ensure safety of life and property. 
(2\ The' nominated authority shall be provided with all po!;sible assis .. 
tance tiv the owner 01" occupier, as the caose may be. of the building or 
premises for carrying out the inspection under sub-section (1). 
(3) When anv buildin~ or premisec; used as a human dwe11in~ Is 
t.l5 entered under sUb--section (1), due re~ard shall be paid to the social and 
.-eHlrlnu!; sentiment'S of the oecupiers; and. before anv apartment ill the 
dctua! occupancy of any woman. who accordinl! to the cUlitom does not 
anDear in "ublic, is entered under sub-section '(1). notice shall be ~ven 
to her that she is at liberty to withdraw, and every reasonable facility 
:Jo shall be afforded to her for withdrawing. 
:C. '(lr The nominated autliority shall. after the completion of the 
i.JlSt,)eCtion of the building or premises under section 3. record its views 
on the aeviations from, or the contraventions of. tlie· building bve-laws 
with re~ard to tlie fire prevention and fire safety measures and the 
S5 InaClequacy of such measures provided therein ~th reference 'to ·the 
'hp!f7bt. of the building or the nature of aetivities carried nn in such 
bui1din~ or premises and issue a notice to the owner or .:>ecnpier of sucn 
huilainl!' or premises directing him to undertaKe such' measures as may 
lie RpecifleCl in tlie notice. 
40 '(2)' TJie nominated authorit~ shall also give a repOrt of any inspec-
tion made liy it under section 3 to the Chief Fire Officer. 
s. '(1)' Wnere, on receipt of a reDort from the nominated authority 
11n"er Rub-!IIeetion . (2), of section, 4. it apnears to the Chief Fire OffiCP.f 
tllat tlie condition of any 1:iuildingo or premises is dan~erous to life or 
+5 property, lie shall, without prejudice to any action taken unCler se:tion ~'. 
1;y oraer, require tlie persons in possession or occuDation of such build·· 
inlt or premises to reffl,9Ve themselves from such building' or premisor;: 
forthwith', 
!:nIpeetion 
of build-
ings, .pre-
mises. etc. 
Ileasures 
for ftr. 
prevention 
andftre 
satltty. 
Power to 
seal Ii. 
buildinlfs 
or pre-
mises. 

Provision 
r8lardinl 
certain 
buiIdinp 
and pre. 
mises. 
Default 
powers 
of the 
Chief 
EVe 
Ofticer. 
• '\ppeals. 
(2) If an order made by t1.c Chief Fire OfBcer under sub.section (1) 
is not complied with, the Chief Fire Officer may direct any police oftlctr 
having jurisdiction in the area to remove such persons from the building 
or premises and such oftlcer shall comply with such directions. 
(3) After the removal of the persons under sub-section (1) or sub- 5 
'Seetion (2), as the case may be. the Chief Fire Officer shall seal the 
building or prem •. 
(4) No person shall remove such seal eseept under an order made by 
the Chief Fire OfBcer. 
6. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the 
10 
lime being, in force, the Chief Fire Officer may enter and inspect any 
building, the construction of which was completed on or before the 6th 
day of June, 1983 (being the date on which the current building bye-laws 
had come into force) or any building which was under construction on 5 
such date if such inspection appears necessary for ascertaining the J 
adequacy of fire prevention and fire safety measures in such building. 
(2) The entry and inspection under sub-section (1) shall be done by 
the Chief Fire Officer in the manner laid down in section 3. 
(3) The Chief Fire Officer shall, after inspection of the building or 
nremises under sub-section (1), and aftel: taking into consideration.- !.IO 
(i) the provisions of the building bye-laws in ac~ordance ""ith 
which 1he plan of the said building or premises was sanctioned; 
(ii) the conditions imoosed. if any, bv the local authority at the 
time of the sanctJon of the plan of the said building or premises; and 
(iii) the minimum standards for fire prevention and fire safety 25 
measures specified for such building or premises under the rules 
framed under this Act, 
issue a notice to the owner or ~pjer of sue" buildinl:( or premises stat-
ing therein the inRdequBCV in re~ard to the fire prevention and fire 
safety measures in it and direct the owner or oecuoier to undertake mea. go 
sures for rectifying the said inadequacy within such period as he may 
consider just and reasonable. 
7. (1) The Chief Fire' Officer shall, in the event of non-compliance of 
any notice issued under section 4 or section 6, take 'Such steps as may be 
necesaary for the com.pliance of such notice. 35 
(Z) All expenses incurred by the Chief Fire Offteer in Tel at; on to any 
'Steps taktm bY him un-fer sub. section (1) shall he 'Davable by the own~ 
or occupier on demand and shall, if not paid within ten days after such 
demand, be recoverable as arrears of land revenue . 
8. (1) Any person aggrieved bv any notice or order of the 4° 
nominated authority or the Chief Fire Officer may prefer an appeal 
against such notice or order to the Appellate Tribunal within thirty days 
from the date of the notice or order appealed against: 
Provided that the Appellate Tribune} may entertain an appeal after 
the expiry of the said period of thirtv davs ilit is satisfied that there was 43 
sufficient caUCle fOT: not filing it within that period. 
'(2) An a,pp.,eal shall lie to the Administrator avainst the omeT of the 
Appellate Tribunal confirming, modifyinl!' or annul1in~ a notice ot' an 
order issued or made under this Act within thirty days from the date of 
the o~er of the Appellate Tribunal: ' . SO 

Provided that tho AdmiDietrator may entertain an appeal after tlIe 
expiry of the said periOd of thirty days if he is satisfted that there wu 
sufftcient cause for .not ftlin'S it within that period. 
(3) An appeal to the Appellate Tribunal or the Administrator shall 
5 be made in such form and shall be accompanied by a copy of the notice 
or order appealed against and by IUCh fees u may be specified by rulea 
made. under this Act. 
(4) The provisions of section 347C of th .. Delhi Municipal Corporation 
66 of 1957. Act, 1957, and the rules made thereunder, shall, SO far as may be, apply 
J n to the disposal of an appeal under this section all; they apply to the dis-
posal of an appeal under that Act. 
9. No court shall entertain any suit, application or othe'r proceed .. 
ing in respect of nny notice or order under this Act and no such notice or 
order shall be called in question otherwise than by preferring an appeal 
15 under this Act. ' 
Bar of 
juriadie-
tiOD of 
courti. 
If). Whoever contravenes any provision of this Act shall, without pre- PenaltieL 
judice to any other action taken against him under section 7, be punish-
able with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months, or 
with fine which may extend to fifty thousand rupees, or with both and 
1010 where the offence is a continuing one, with a further flne which may 
extend to three thousand rupees for every day after the first during 
which such offence' continues. ~ 
11. (1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a 
company, every person who. at the time the offence was committed, was 
25 in charge of, and was responsible to, the company for the conduct of the 
business of thp. company, as well as the company, shall be deemed to be 
guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and 
punished accordingly: 
Provided that nolhing contained in this sub-section shall render any 
:;0 such person liable to any punishment if he proves that the offence wu 
(!nmmitted without his knowledgp. or that he had exercised all due diU-
~ence to prevent t.11e rommission of such oft'ence. 
(~) Notwithstanding an"thing ('ontained in sub-section (1), where any 
offence under this Act haq been committed bv a company and it is proved 
35 tnat the offence has been ~ommitted with the consent or connivance of, 
or is attributable to any ne~lect on the part of, anv director, mana~r, 
secretary or other officer of the companv. such director. manal!el". seen!-
tary or other officer shall also be deemed to be ~untv of tltat offence and 
shall be liabJe to he proce~ded against and punished accordingly. 
40 E:t'Pktnation.-For the purposes of this section,-
(n) "company" means a body r.orporate an~ includeR a firm or 
other association of individnalb: and 
(0) "director", in relation to a flrm, means a partner in the firm. 
12. No court shall proceed to the trial of an offence under this Act, 
45 except on the complaint of. or upon information received hom, the 
nominated authority. 
Offeneel 
by COM-
panies. 
Sanction 
o{ prole-
cutlon. 
13. No court inf'erior to that of a Metropolitan MRgisn-ate shall try' an Jmildic-
offence puniRhabJe under this Act. doD. 

6 
Protection 1'- ,No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against any 
of aetion perIOD for anything which is in good faith done OJ" intended to be done 
::t f~th. under this Act or any rules made thereunder. 
Offers to 
be public 
aervant. 
Power to 
make 
raJ-. 
15. Every officer acting under the provisions of this Act shall be 
cleemed to be a public servant within the meaning of section 21 of the 5 
Indian Penal Code. 4$ of 1860. 
16. (1) The Administrator may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules for ~g out the provisions of this Act. 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of ,the 
foregoing power, such rules may provide for- 10 
(4) the height of the building under sUb-section (1) of section 3; 
(b) the minimum standards for fire preventi0s:t and fire safety 
meMures for the purposes of clause (iii) of sub-section (3) of sec-
tion 8~ ! 
(c) the form in which an appeal shall be made and the fees that 15 
shall accompany such appeal under sub-section (3) of section 8; 
(d) any other matter which is required to be provided by rules. 
(3) The Central Government shall cause every rule made under this 
Act to be laid, as lIIoon as may be after it is made, before each House of 
Parliament, v. hile it is in session, for a total period of thirty daY$ which 20 
ma.y be comprised in one session or in two or more successive' sessions, 
and if, before the expiry 'Of the session immediately following the session 
or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any 
modification In the rule or both H9uses agree that the rule should not be 
made, the rule shnll thereafter have effect only in such modified form or 25 
be of no effect, as the case ma~' be; so, however, that any such modification 
or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything pre-
vioWlly done under that ru1e. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Delhi Fire Brigade, which is controlled by the Delhi Municipal 
Corporation, is responsible for taking fire-fighting and fire safetY, 
measures in the entire Union territory of Delhi. The existing pro-
visions in the Delhi Municipal Corporation Act, 1957, to enf~rce the 
fire safety measures, particularly in multi-storey buildings, had been 
found to be most inadequate in the absence of the necessary statutory 
authority for the fire prevention enforcement agencies to compel the 
owners of buildings to carry out the necessary measures for prevention 
of fires. No specific penalties are provided in the Act for the contraven-
tion Of any ftre safety measures and such penalties are also not adequate 
enough to effectively curb the violations of the fire prevention measures 
provided under the Act. It has also been found that the owners of build-
ings do not provide the necessary fire safety measures in buildings as 
required by the building plans approved by local authorities. Although 
the Delhi Fire Brigade exercises jurisdiction over the' entire Union te.rri-
tory of Delhi, the four local authorities existing in the Union territory of 
Delhi are governed by their own respective laws and there is no unified 
single agency which is clothed with the necessary powers to coordinate 
the fire prevention, fighting or safety measures. In view of this position, 
it is felt that in order to eft'ectively control the fires occurring in the 
Union territory of Delhi and to take necessary safety measures for the 
prevention of such fi.res, it is necessarr to provide for fire prevention and 
fire safety measures in the Union territory of Delhi. 
2. The Bill, accordinely, provides for the follOWing, among other mat-
ters. namely:-. 
(i) All buildings having such height as may be specified by rules 
and premises used for storing exp1osives, explosive Bubstances and 
dangerously in1J.ammable substances, shall be provided. with the 
requisite fire prevention and fire safety measures. 
(U) Provision has been made for inspection of buildings and 
premise~ by the nominated authority, appointed by the Chief Fire 
Officer, for ascertaining the adequacy or contraventio~ of fire pre-
vention and fire safety measures required to be taken by the occu. 
pier or owner of the building or I?remises. 
(iii) Contravention of any of the prOvisions of the Bill will be 
punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six 
months, or with fine extending to fifty thousand rupees, or with both. 
In the case of continuing offences, the o1fender will be liable for 
punishment of fine up to three thousand rupees for every day for 
which the offellce is continued. 
? 

i 
(tv) Provision for an appeal aga1DBt any notice or order of the 
Chief Fire Ofticer or the nominated authority to the Appellate 
Tribunal and against the wder of the Appellate Tribunal to the 
Administrator has been proposed. 
3. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects. , 
'1 
ARUN NEHRU. 
The 12th Augult, 1986. 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 16 of the Bill empowers the Administrator to make rules for 
carrying out the provisions of the Bill. The matters with reBpteCt to which 
rules may be made relate to the height of the building, the minimum 
standards for fire prevention and fire safety measures, the form in which 
an appeal II made, the fees payable in respect of such appeal and any 
other matter which is required to be provided by rules. 
2. The matters in relation to which the power to make rules is pro-
posed to be conferred on the Administrator are matters of procedure and 
administrative detail. The delegation of legislative power is. therefore. 
f)f a normal cliaracter. 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
to make more effective provision for the fire prevention and fire safety 
measures in certain buildings and premises in the Union territory 
of Delhi. 
(Shri Arun Nehru, Minister of State in the Depart·ment of 
Internat Security) 