1
THE TELECOM REGULATORY AUTHORITY OF INDIA
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 2016
By
SHRI DUSHY ANT CHAUTALA, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Telecom Regulatory Authority of India Act, 1997.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Telecom Regulatory Authority of India  (Amendment)
Act, 2016.
(2) It shall come into force on the such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Bill No. 101 of  2016
Short title and
commencement.
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
2. In the Telecom Regulatory Authority of India Act, 1997, in section 14C, in clause (a)
for the words "is, or has been, a Judge of the Supreme Court or the Chief Justice of a High
Court" the words "is a Judge of the Supreme Court or the Chief Justice of a High Court or an
advocate for at least ten years in a High Court or of two or more such Courts in succession"
shall be substituted.
Amendment
of section
14C.
24 of 1997.
5

3
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
The concept of separation of powers was proposed by Montesquieu in the sixteenth
century and the concept of equal opportunity has been highlighted by the makers of the
Constitution through various provisions. These two ideas are required to be incorporated in
the Telecom Regulatory Authority of India Act, 1997 which provides for establishment of a
Telecom Regulatory Authority of India and Telecom Dispute Settlement and Appellate Tribunal
to regulate the telecommunication services, adjudicate disputes, dispose of appeals to protect
the interests of service providers and consumers of telecom sector.
The executive, the legislature and the judiciary are known as the three pillars of
democracy. It is believed that the three should function independently without major
intervention of each other and that would ensure that the respective duties are discharged in
the best possible manner. However, at the same time, there should be sufficient check and
balance on these three wings so as to avoid one of them from becoming totalitarian in nature,
in India, the check and balance system has been working effectively. However, it has come to
notice that some of the tribunals and commissions have exclusive provisions where retired
judges of the Supreme Court or the High Courts are being appointed by the executives. This
lies absolutely against the spirit of Constitution.
Therefore the amendment is put forth to remove the provision for appointment of
retired judges as Chairperson and members. Thus only a sitting judge of the Supreme Court
or a High Court, as the case may be, can be appointed to this post if that judge wishes to
leave his office of Judge voluntary and assents to join tribunal.
The second part of the amendment makes provisions wherein an advocate with not
less than ten years of practice becomes eligible to be appointed as the Chairperson of the
Tribunal. The rationale of such could be found in our Constitution which provides
appointment of advocates with certain years of practice as Judge of the Supreme Court or a
High Court. The same should be applied for Tribunals. This will facilitate the speedy disposal
of the cases in front of the tribunals. This shall facilitate the speedy disposal of the cases
pending in tribunals because the positions in the Tribunals shall not remain vacant for long.
This also captures the idea of providing equal opportunity to people with equal experience
and eligibility.
Therefore, the proposed amendment is to ensure that the doctrine of checks and
balances and right to equality is maintained.
N
EW DELHI; DUSHYANT CHAUTALA
February 11,  2016.

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE TELECOM REGULATORY AUTHORITY OF INDIA
ACT, 1997
(ACT NO. 24 OF 1997)
* * * * * *
14C. A person shall not be qualified for appointment as the Chairperson or a member
of the Appellate Tribunal unless he—
(a) in the case of Chairperson, is, or has been a Judge of the Supreme Court or
the Chief Justice of a High Court;
* * * * * *
4

GMGIPMRND—34LS(S3)—25.04.2016.
LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Telecom Regulatory Authority of India Act, 1997.
————
(Shri Dushyant Chautala, M.P .)