THE ARMS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2010
A
BILL
further to amend the Arms Act, 1959.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-first Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. This Act may be called the Arms (Amendment) Act, 2010.
2.  In section 13 of the Arms Act, 1959 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act),—
(a) in sub-section (2),—
(i) for the words “within the prescribed time”, the words  “within sixty
days from the date of receipt  of application by him and in case such officer fails
to do so, he shall record the reasons therefor and intimate the same to the
licensing authority:” shall be substituted;
(ii) the following proviso shall be inserted, namely: —
“Provided that in case the licensing authority is of the opinion that
the reasons for such failure are not sufficient or convincing, he may
Short title.
Amendment
of section 13.
54 of 1959.
TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Bill No. 102 of 2010

2
Insertion of
new section
30A.
Punitive action
for failure to
furnish report
under section
13.
recommend to the concerned authorities to initiate punitive action, under
section 30A, against the officer in charge of the concerned police station
for such failure to send the report within the time specified under this
sub-section .”;
(b) in sub-section (2A), the proviso shall be omitted.
3.  After section 30 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted,
namely:—
“30A. In case a police officer,—
(a) fails to send the report under section 13 and the reasons for such
failure given by such officer are not sufficient or convincing; or
(b) has failed to give reasons for failure to send the report under section 13,
such failure  to send the report or failure to give reasons shall be dereliction of duty by
such police officer and he shall be proceeded against and punished for dereliction of
his duty under the service rules applicable to him.”.

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Arms Act, 1959 and rules made thereunder regulates the acquisition, transfer of
arms and ammunition and punishment for contravention of the provisions of the Act.
2. Under the existing provisions, it is compulsory to obtain under section 3 of the
Arms Act, 1959 a licence for acquisition and possession of firearms and ammunition.  Section
13 of the Arms Act, 1959, inter alia, lays down the procedure for grant of such licences which
requires the licensing authority to call for the report of the officer incharge of the nearest
police station on the application for grant of such licence. Such police officer is required to
send his report within the prescribed time. After making such enquiry as the licensing au-
thority may consider necessary and on receipt of report from the officer incharge of the
nearest police station, the licensing authority may grant the licence or refuse to grant the
same. However, the proviso to sub-section (2A) of section 13 of the aforesaid Act empowers
the licensing authority to grant an arms licence where the report of the police authorities has
not been received within the prescribed time.
3. Proliferation of arms and ammunition, whether licensed or not, in the country dis-
rupt the social order and development, vitiate the law and order situation, directly contrib-
utes towards lethality of violent acts, and needs to be curbed. It is, thus, imperative to ensure
that arms licences are issued to the bonafide persons by the licensing authority concerned
after due verification of their antecedents by the police authority concerned.
4. In view of the foregoing paragraph, it has become necessary to make the procedure
for grant of licence for the acquisition, transfer of arms and ammunition more specific. The
provisions of the Arms (Amendment) Bill, 2010 proposes to –
(a) amend sub-section (2) of section 13 of the Arms Act, 1959 so as to specify in
the Act itself the time limit of sixty days from the date of receipt of application for
sending the aforesaid report by the officer incharge of the nearest police station and to
record the reasons for failure to send the report within the specified time;
(b) insert a proviso sub-section (2) of section 13 of the Arms Act, 1959 so as to
provide that the licensing authority may recommend to the concerned authorities to
initiate punitive action under section 30A (proposed to be inserted in the Bill), against
the officer in charge of the concerned police station in case the police officer fails to
submit the report within the specified time or the licensing authority is of the opinion
that the reasons for failure to submit report by the officer incharge of the nearest police
station are not sufficient or convincing;
(c) omit the proviso to sub-section (2A) of section 13 of the Arms Act, 1959 so as
to do away with the discretion of the licensing authority to issue the licence without
receipt of the  report from the officer incharge of the nearest police station;
(d) insert a new section 30A in the Arms Act, 1959 to provide for punitive action
for failure  to send the report or failure to give sufficient or convincing reasons for not
sending the report within the time limit of sixty days proposed to be specified.
5.  The Bill seeks to achieve the above object.
N
EW DELHI; P. CHIDAMBARAM.
The 5th August, 2010.
3

Grant of
licences.
4
ANNEXURE
EXTRACT  FROM THE  ARMS ACT, 1959
(54 OF 1959)
* * * * *
CHAPTER III
PROVISIONS RELATING TO LICENCES
13. (1) * * * * *
(2) On receipt of an application, the licensing authority shall call for the report  of the
officer in charge of the nearest police station on that application, and such officer shall send
his report within the prescribed time.
(2A) The licensing authority, after such inquiry, if any, as it may consider necessary,
and after considering the report received under sub-section ( 2), shall, subject to the other
provisions of this Chapter, by order in writing either grant the licence or refuse to grant the
same:
Provided that where the officer in charge of the nearest police station does not send
his report on the application within the prescribed time, the licensing authority may, if it
deems fit, make such order, after the expiry of the prescribed time, without further waiting for
that report.
* * * * *

RAJYA   SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Arms Act, 1959.
————
(Shri P. Chidambaram, Minister of House Afairs)
LOK SABHA
GMGIPMRND—3958LS (S5)—17-08-2010.