Short title and
commencement.
THE ELECTRICITY (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2016
By
SHRI DUSHYANT CHAUTALA, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Electricity Act, 2003 .
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Electricity (Amendment) Act, 2016.
(2) It shall come into force on the such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the official Gazette, appoint.
2. In section 113 of the Electricity Act, 2003, in sub-section (1), in clause (a), for the
words "is, or has been, a Judge of the Supreme Court or the Chief Justice of a High Court,"
the words "is a Judge of the Supreme Court or the Chief Justice of a High Court or an
advocate for at least ten years in a High Court or two or more such Courts in succession"
shall be substituted.
Amendment
of section
113.
36 of 2003.
Bill No. 102 of 2016
5
10
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The concept of separation of powers was proposed by Montesquieu in the sixteenth
century and the concept of equal opportunity has been highlighted by the framers of the
Constitution through various provisions. These two ideas are required to be incorporated in
the Electricity Act, 2003, which provides inter alia for rationalization of electricity tariff,
ensuring transparent policies regarding subsidies, constitution of Central Electricity Authority
and such other matters.
The executive, the legislature and the judiciary are known as the three pillars of
democracy. It is expected that the three should function independently without major
intervention of each other which would ensure that the respective duties are discharged in
the best possible manner. However, at the same time, there should be sufficient checks and
balances on these three wings so to avoid any one of them from becoming totalitarian in
nature. In India, the checks and balances system has been working effectively. However, it
has come to notice that some of the Tribunals and Commissions have exclusive provisions
where retired judges of the Supreme Court or High Courts are being appointed by the
executives. This lies absolutely against the spirit of Constitution.
Therefore, the proposed amendment seeks to remove the provision for appointment of
retired judges as the Chairperson and members of Tribunal, Commission or Authority. Thus
only a sitting judge of the Supreme Court or a High Court, as the case may be, can be
appointed to such post if that judge wishes to leave his office voluntarily and assents to join
Tribunal or Commission.
The Bill also seeks to insert provisions wherein an advocate with not less than ten
years of practice becomes eligible to be appointed as the Chairperson of the Tribunal. The
rational of such could be found in our Constitution which provides for appointment of
advocate with certain years of practice as Judge of the Supreme Court or a High Court. The
same should be applied for Tribunals. This will facilitate the speedy disposal of the cases
pending before the Tribunals because the positions in the Tribunals shall not remain vacant
for long. This also captures the idea of providing equal opportunity to people with equal
experience and eligibility.
The proposed amendment seeks to ensure that the doctrine of Checks and Balances
and Right to equality is maintained.
N
EW DELHI; DUSHYANT CHAUTALA
February 11, 2016.
2

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE ELECTRICITY ACT, 2003
(ACT NO. 36 OF 2003)
* * * * *
113. (1) A person shall not be qualified for appointment as the Chairperson of the
Appellate Tribunal or a Member of the Appellate Tribunal unless he—
(a) In the case of the Chairperson of the Appellate Tribunal, is, or has been, a
Judge of the Supreme Court, or the Chief Justice of a High Court; and
* * * * *
Qualification
for
appointment
of
Chairperson
and Member
of Appellate
Tribunal.
3

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Electricity Act, 2003.
————
(Shri Dushyant Chautala, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—5311LS(S3)—25-04-2016.