‘ a ‘As myrnopucep wy Lox Saba on

3! MAY i999

Bill No. 102 of 1990
ee nee

THE CITIZENSHIP (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1990

A
BILL
further to amend the Citizenship Act, 1955.

Bz it enacted by Parliament in the Forty-first Year of the Republic of
India as follows:—

1. This Act may be called the Citizenship (Amendment) Act, 1990,

2. In section 4 of the Citizenship Act, 1955 (hereinafter referred to as
5 the principal Act),—

(०) in sub-section (1),— ba

@ for the words, figures and letters “A person born outside
India on or after the 26th January, 1950, shall be a citizen of
India by descent if his father is a citizen of India at the time of
his birth”, the following shall be substituted, namely: —

“A person born outside India,—
(@) on or after the 26th January, 1950, but before
the commencement of the Citizenship (Amendment)

Act, 1990, shall be a citizen of India by descent if his
father is a citizen of India at the time of his birth;

Ne

Shor,
title,

Amend-
ment of
section


Amend-
ment of

section 8,

रद emia? a

(0) on or after such commencement, shall be a citi-
zen of India by descent if either of his parents is a citizen
of India at the time of his birth”;

(ii) in the opening portion of the proviso, after the words
“Gf the father of such a person”, the words, brackets and letter 5
“referred to in clause (a)” shall be inserted;

(iii) after the proviso, the following proviso shall be in-
serted, namely:—

“Provided further that if either of the parents of such
a person referred to in clause (b) was a citizen of India by 10
descent only, that person shall not be a citizen of India by
virtue of this section unless—

(a) his birth is registered at an Indian consulate
within one year of its occurrence or the commencement
of the Citizenship (Amendment) Act, 1990, whichever is 15
later, or, with the permission of the Central Government,
after the expiry of the said period; or

(0) either of his parents is, at the time of his birth,
in service under a Government in India.”;

(b) in sub-section (3), for the words “any male person”, the 20
words “any person” shall be substituted,

3. In section 8 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), for the words
‘a male person”, the words “a person” shall be substituted.



STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

India is a signatory to’ the Convention oh Elimination ot ail Forms
of Discrimination against Women adopted by the General Assembly of
the United Nations on 18th December, 1979. Article 9(2) of the Conven-
tion requires that the “States Parties shall grant women equal rights with
men with respect to the nationality of their children”. Sub-section (1) of
section 4 of the Citizenship Act, 1955 provides that a person born outside
India on or after 26th January, 1950 shall be a citizen of India by descent
only if his father is an Indian citizen at the time of his birth. With a view
fo eliminate discrimination against women in respect of ‘nationality of
their children and in order to bring the provisions of the Citizenship Act,
1955 in conformity with article 9(2) of the aforesaid Convention, it is
proposed to amend the said Act so as to provide that every person born
‘outside India on or after the coming into force of the provisions of the
Bill shall become’ a citizen of India by descent if either of his parent is a
| of India.

2. The Bill seeks to achieve the aforesaid object.

New ऐश का; MUFTI MOHAMMED SAYEED.
The 24th May, 1990.
a :

£9 af



Citizen-
ship by
descent,

Renuncia.
tion of
citizen-
ship.

ANNEXURE
Extracts FROM THE CITIZENSHIP Act, 1955

(57 ०७ 1955)
* * * * *

4. (1) A person born outside India on or after the 26th January, 1950,
shall be a citizen of India by descent if his father is a citizen of India at
the time of his birth:

Provided that if the father of such a persor was a citizen of India by
descent only, that person shall not be a citizen of India by virtue of this
section unless—

(@) his birth is registered at an Indian consulate within one
year of its oceurrence or the commencement of this Act, whichever
is later, or, with the permission of the Central Government, after
the expiry of the said period; or

(0) his father is, at the time of his birth, in service under a
Government in India,
* * * * *
(3) For the purposes of the proviso to sub-section (1), any male
person born outside undivided India who was, or was deemed to be, a

citizen of India at the commencement of the Constitution shall be
deemed to be a citizen, of India by descent, only.

* * * * *
8. (1) * * * * *

(2) Where a male person ceases to be a citizen of India under sub-
section (1), every minor child of that person shall thereupon cease to
be a citizen of India:

Provided that any such child may, within one year after attaining
full age, make a declaration that he wishes to resume Indian citizenship
and shall thereupon again become a citizen of India.

* * * * *


LOK SABHA

A
BILL
further to amend the Citizenship Act, 1955.

(Shri Mufti Mohammed Sayeed, Minister of Home Affairs.)