THE REDUCTION OF FOOD WASTAGE AND REDISTRIBUTION
OF EXCESS FOOD BILL, 2020
By
SHRI SYED IMTIAZ JALEEL, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for a legal framework for reduction of food wastage and redistribution
of excess food and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
WHEREAS food is essential for life and its equitable distribution is critical for the
well-being of all sections of the society:
AND WHEREAS despite India ranking second amongst all countries in terms of
agricultural production, foodgrains worth rupees two hundred and forty-four crores
go waste each day in the country:
   Bill No.  102 of  2020
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
AND WHEREAS nearly 19.4 crore people sleep on an empty stomach every day,
4500 children die of malnutrition every day in India and India    has been ranked at 102
position out of 117 countries in the Global Hunger Index, 2019;
A
ND WHEREAS food wastage results in pollution, widespread hunger, diseases
arising out of improper disposal of food waste and malnutrition have detrimental
consequences for quality of life and the economy;
A
ND WHEREAS article 47 of the Constitution requires the State to raise the level
of nutrition of its people and improve public health;
AND WHEREAS the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India has recognised that the
Right to Life enshrined in article 21 of the Constitution includes the Right to Food;
NOW THEREFORE it is essential to provide for a legal frame work for the reduction
of food wastage and to ensure redistribution of excess food.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-first year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Reduction of Food Wastage and Redistribution
of Excess Food Bill, 2020.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date, not being later than sixty days from the
date of assent of the President, as the Central Government may, by notification in the
Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires:—
(a) "caterer" means any person who provides services of cooking and
serving food at any event (including but not limited to weddings, receptions,
conferences and birthdays) on payment basis;
(b) "eatery" means an establishment that serves food in their premises,
including but not limited to hotels and restaurants;
(c) "empanelled organisation" means an organisation engaged in
collecting extra food from establishments and redistributing it to persons in
need, and is enumerated by the municipal body for the purposes of this Act;
(d) "municipal body" means an institution of local self-Government
constituted under article 243Q of the Constitution excluding the Nagar
Panchayats;
(e) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act; and
(f) "super market" means any undertaking, whether public or private,
operating for profit and carrying out activities relating to storage, distribution
and sale of food or food ingredients.
3. (1) The Central Government shall, in consultation with the associations of
restaurateurs, associations of caterers, civil society organisations working in the area
of food redistribution and such other stakeholders as it may deem fit, issue regulations
for reduction of food wastage in eateries and events and redistribution of excess food
by empanelled organisations.
(2) The regulations under sub-section (1) shall provide for—
(a) a mechanism for periodic inspections by eateries, caterers and
empanelled organisations to ensure that the regulations are being complied
with by them;
(b) monetary or other penalties on eateries, caterers and empanelled
organisations in case of contravention of the regulations; and
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Definitions.
Role of Central
Government.
 5
 5
 10
 15
 20
 25
 30
 35

3
(c) incentives to eateries, caterers and empanelled organisation for
exceptional performance.
(3) The Central Government shall provide adequate financial and technical
assistance to each State Government and municipal body so as to enable them to
discharge their duties in an efficient manner under this Act.
4. (1) The State Government may, in consultation with the Central Government
keeping in view the context of its food industry and its social,  political and economic
conditions,  make amendments to the regulations issued by the Central Government
under sub-section (1) of section 3 for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every State Government shall, for the purposes of sub-section (1),—
(a) notify the quantity of food that eateries may serve per customer in
consultation with the associations of restaurateurs and such other stakeholders
as it may deem fit  in such manner as may be prescribed:
(b) encourage businesses through regulations to create cyclical
manufacturing processes to reduce, reuse and recycle their food waste;
(c) ensure provision of intellectual, administrative and implementation
leadership in relation to food wastage reduction and food redistribution in such
manner as may be prescribed;
(d) launch mass awareness campaigns and create capacity building
programs in relation to food wastage reduction and food  redistribution in
such manner as may be prescribed; and
(e) provide periodic skill training to all persons involved in the
implementation of this Act in such manner as may be prescribed.
5. (1) The municipal bodies shall enumerate and create a network of empanelled
organisations working in the area of' food re-distribution for the purpose of collecting
extra food from eateries and events and donate it to persons in need in such manner
as may be prescribed.
(2) The municipal bodies shall, for the purposes of sub-section (1),—
(a) formulate operating procedure including logistical support in the form
of carriage vehicles to carry out collection of extra food from eateries and
events and donate it to the persons in need;
(b) in association with schools, colleges, organisations and businesses
in a fair and non-discriminatory manner sensitise and create awareness against
food wastage through distribution of pamphlets, organisation of rallies, prabhat
pheris, putting up of posters in eateries and by such other method as it may
deem appropriate;
(c) provide community refrigerators or encourage such other methods
as would reduce food wastage and ensure redistribution of extra food; and
(d) formulate operating procedure to carry out collection of food items,
which are close to expiry date, from supermarkets to enable their distribution by
empanelled organizations to the persons in need.
6. (1) It shall be the responsibility of every eatery, caterer and supermarket to
have mandatory institutional arrangement with any one or more of the empanelled
organisations for collection and redistribution of extra food served at the eatery or an
event serviced by the caterer, respectively in such manner as may be prescribed.
(2) Every eatery is hereby prohibited from disposing off extra food that has not
become stale and to donate such food to empanelled organisation.
Role of State
Governments.
Role of
Municipal
Bodies.
Role of eateries,
supermarkets
and caterers.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

4
(3) Every eatery, supermarket and caterer, as the case may be, shall mandatorily
report, on a biannual basis, details of the level of food wastage each day in the eatery
per month across supply chain of supermarket and in each event organised by a
caterer and the progress they have made in donating extra food or food provisions to
empanelled organisations, or municipal body.
7. Every empanelled organisation shall collect extra food or food provisions
from eateries, supermarkets and caterers and redistribute it to the persons in need in
a prompt manner before the food or food provisions become stale on a fair and non-
discriminatory basis in such manner as may be prescribed.
8. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament
by law in this behalf, provide adequate funds to the empanelled organisation, from
time to time, for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
9. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act. the
Central Government may. by order published in the Official Gazette, make such
provisions not inconsistent with the provisions of this act, as it appears to be necessary
or expedient for removing the difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of the period of three
years from the date of commencement of this Act.
10. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything
inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force.
11. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette,
make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is
made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of
thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session,
or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification
in the rule or both the Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may
be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice
to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Duties of
empanelled
organisations.
Central
Government to
provide adequate
funds.
Power to
remove
difficulties.
Act to have
overriding
effect.
Power to make
rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30

5
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Food is essential for life and health and its equitable distribution is critical for
well-being of all sections of the society. Despite India ranking second amongst all
countries in terms of agricultural production, foodgrains worth rupees two hundred
and forty four crores go waste each day in the country. Nearly 19.4 crore people sleep
on an empty stomach every day, while 4500 children die of malnutrition every day in
India, and India has been ranked at 102 out of 117 countries in the Global Hunger
Index, 2019.
Food wastage results in pollution, widespread hunger, diseases arising out of
improper disposal of food waste and malnutrition have detrimental consequences for
quality of life and the economy.
Article 47 of the Constitution requires the State to raise the level of nutrition of
its people and improve public health. The Hon'ble Supreme Court of India has
recognised that the Right to Life enshrined in article 21 of the Constitution includes
the right to food. Therefore, it is essential to provide for a legal framework for the
reduction of food wastage and to ensure redistribution of excess food.
The Bill, therefore, seeks to:
(i) empower Central Government to issue regulations for reduction of food
wastage in eateries and events, redistribution of excess food by empanelled
organisations, mechanism for periodic inspections and penalties for contravention of
the regulations and incentives for exceptional performance;
(ii) empower State Governments to make amendments to the regulations issued
by the Central Government in the context of the conditions of the State including
notifying the sizes of food portions that eateries may serve per customer, regulations
for businesses to create cyclical manufacturing processes to reduce, reuse, and recycle
their food waste, provide intellectual, administrative and implementational leadership,
undertake mass awareness campaigns and capacity building programs and to ensure
periodic training and upskilling of personnel;
(iii) obligate the municipal bodies to enumerate and create a network of
empanelled organisations to collect extra food from eateries and events and donate it
to persons in need;, formulate operating procedure for collection and redistribution
of extra food; provide logistical support in the form of carriage vehicles. etc.; sensitise
and create awareness against food wastage, consider setting up other methods to
reduce food wastage and redistribution of extra food, to formulate operating procedure
to carry out collection of food provisions from supermarkets to enable its distribution
by empanelled organisations;
(iv) obligate eateries and caterers to have mandatory institutional arrangement
with empanelled organisations for collection and redistribution of extra food, prohibit
them from disposing off extra food and donate the same and mandatorily report
details of the level of food waste and the progress they have made in donating extra
food or food provisions to empanelled organisation; and
(v) enable empanelled organisations to collect extra food or food provisions
from eateries, supermarkets and caterers in a prompt manner before the food or food
provisions become stale and redistribute the same to persons in need on a fair and
non-discriminatory basis.
The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
N
EW DELHI; SYED IMTIAZ JALEEL
February 28, 2020

6
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides that the Central Government shall provide adequate
financial and technical assistance to State Governments and municipal bodies to
discharge their duties under this Act. Clause 4 provides that the State Governments
shall provide intellectual, administrative and implementational leadership, undertake
mass awareness campaigns and capacity building programs and conduct periodic
training and upskilling of all personnel. Clause 5 provides that municipal bodies shall
sensitise and create awareness against food wastage and provision of community
refrigerators or such other methods to reduce food wastage and redistribution of
extra food. Clause 8 provides that the Central Government shall, after due appropriation
made by Parliament by law in this behalf, provide adequate funds to the empanelled
organisation, from time to time, for car rying out the purposes of this Act. The Bill,
therefore, if enacted will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It
is estimated that a recurring expenditure of about rupees one thousand crore per
annum would involve from the Consolidated Fund of India.
No non-recurring expenditure is likely to be involved.

7
MEMORANDUM OF DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 3 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make regulations for
reduction of food wastage in eateries and events, redistribution of excess food by
empanelled organisations, periodic inspections to ensure that the stipulations of the
regulations are being complied with, and provide for penalties for violation of the
regulations. Clause 4 empowers State Governments to make amendments to the
regulations issued by the Central Government, in relation to the context of food
industry and social political and economic conditions of the State, notify the sizes of
food portions that eateries may serve per customer, and issue regulations for cyclical
manufacturing processes to reduce, reuse, and recycle food waste, and turning food
waste into compost. Clause 5 empowers municipal bodies to formulate operating
procedure to carry out collection of extra food from eateries and events and donate it
to persons in need and to carry out collection of food provisions which are close to
expiry date from supermarkets and grocery stores to enable its distribution by
empanelled organisation. Clause 11 empowers the Central Government to make rules
for carrying out the purposes of the Bill. As the regulations, operating procedure and
rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of legislative power is of a
normal character.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for a legal framework for reduction of food wastage and redistribution of
excess food and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Syed Imtiaz Jaleel, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—62LS(S3)—11.06.2020.