THE CINEMATOGRAPH (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2010
BY
SHRI ANANDRAO VITHOBA ADSUL, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Cinematograph Act, 1952.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-first Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. This Act may be called the Cinematograph (Amendment) Act, 2010.
2. In section 2 of the Cinematograph Act, 1952 (hereinafter referred to as the principal
Act), for clause (dd), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:—
"(dd) 'film' means a cinematograph film but does not include a programme telecast on
television;".
TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Bill No. 71 of 2010
Short title.
Amendment of
section 2.
37 of 1952
5

2
 3.  After Part II of the principal Act, the following Part shall be inserted, namely:—
"PART IIA
CERTIFICATION OF PROGRAMMES TELECAST ON TELEVISION
9A. (1) For the purpose of sanctioning programmes telecast on television for public
exhibition, the Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute
a Board of Television Programmes Certification.
(2) The Board of Television Programmes Certification shall consist of a Chairman
and six other members, who shall be appointed by the Central Government.
(3) The Chairman of the Board of Television Programmes Certification shall receive
such salary and allowances as may be determined by the Central Government, and other
members shall receive such allowances or fees for attending the meetings of the Board of
Television Programmes Certification as may be prescribed.
(4) The other terms and conditions of service of the members of the Board of Television
Programmes Certification shall be such as may be prescribed.
9B. (1) The Board of Television Programmes Certification shall have regional offices
in every State and Union Territory.
(2) Every Regional Office of the Board of Television Programmes Certification shall
have a Director and such other members as may be prescribed.
(3) The terms and conditions of service of Directors and other members in Regional
Offices of the Board of Television Programmes Certification shall be such as may be prescribed.
9C. All provisions relating to certification of films in this Act shall apply mutatis
mutandis to programmes telecast on television.".
9D.  (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for the purpose of carrying into effect the provisions of this Part.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Insertion of
new Part IIA.
Establishment
of Board of
Television
Programmes
Certification.
Regional
Offices of
Board of
Television
Programmes
Certification.
Provision of
the Act to
apply mutatis
mutandis to
television
programmes.
Power to make
rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
There has been a steep increase in the number of programmes telecast on television
channels. The number of channels has also increased considerably over the years. However,
there is virtually no scrutiny by any Government agency having regard to the nature, content
and theme of the programmes. Even a cursory scrutiny is not done. As such, many
programmes blatantly violate ethical norms. At present there is a Board of Film Certification
which sanctions films for public exhibition. These films are mostly screened in cinema halls.
But the programmes telecast on television are not subject to such censor or regulation.
Programmes exhibiting violence and crime are likely to misguide the youth and children.
Childern are vulnerable to such programmes and take to violence and crime in many cases.
It is accordingly proposed that a separate Board of Television Programmes Certification
should be set up to scrutinise and give appropriate certification to programmes telecast on
television channels.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; ANANDRAO  VITHOBA  ADSUL
May 7, 2010.
3

FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill seeks, inter-alia, to set up a separate Board for sanctioning television
programmes. There is also a provision for setting up of regional offices in every State and
Union territory. The proposal to establish a Board and regional offices is likely to involve
expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that an annual recurring
expenditure of about rupees ten crores will be involved.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees one hundred crores is also likely to be
involved.
4

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 3 of the Bill seeks to insert, inter-alia, a new section 9D in the principal Act,
which empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out the purposes of the
Bill. Since the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of legislative power is
of a normal character.
5

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CINEMATOGRAPH ACT, 1952.
(ACT NO. 37 OF 1952)
* * * * * * *
2. ****  *  *
(a) * * * * * *
(b) * * * * * *
(c) * * * * * *
(d) * * * * * *
(dd) "film" means a cinematograph film
* * * * * * *
Definitions.
6

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Cinematograph Act, 1952.
————
(Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—2651LS(S5)—14-07-2010.