~ 
Bill No. 102 of 1958 ~ 
THE HIGH COURT JUDGES (CONDI-
TIONS OF SERVICE) AMEND-
MENT BILL, 1958 
(As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA) 

Bm No. 102 of 1958 
THE HIGH COURT JUDGES (CONDITIONS OF 
SERVICE) AMENDMENT BILL, 1958 
(As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA) 
BILL 
further to amend the High Court Judges (Conditions of Service) 
Act, 1954. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Ninth Year of the Republic of 
India as follows:-
1. (1) This Act may be called the High Court Judges (Conditions of Short title 
Service) Amendment Act, 1958. and com-mencement. 
5 (2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 1st day of 
November, 1956. 
2. In section 2 of the High Court Judges (Conditions of Ser,lce) Amendment 
Act, 1954 (hereinafter refl"rrl"d to as the principal Act), in sub-section of section %. 
(1), in clause (g), for the words "and acting Chief Justice of a High 
10 Com·t", the words "an acting Chief Justice, an additional Judge and 
8n acting Judge of the High Court" shall be substituted. 
3. In section (j of the principal Act, for the words "and not more Amendment 
than once", the words "or for two or more periods, not exceeding in ofsection 6. 
the aggregate, six months" shall be substituted. 
15 4. In section 8 of the principal Act, for the words "Extraordinary A nd 
leave not exceeding six months in duration may be granted to a Judge of~:Cti~Il~~ 
not more than once", the words "Extraordinary leave may be granted 
to a Judge for a period not exceeding six months, or for two or more 
periods, not exceeding in the aggregate, six months" shall be substi-
20 tuted. 

Amendment 
of section 
14· 
Amendment 
of section 
18. 
2 
5. In section 14 of the principal Act, after the proviso, the follow-
ing further proviso shall be inserted, namely:-
"Provided further that if a Judge at the time of his appoint-
ment is in receipt of a pension (other than a disability or wound 
pension) in respect of any previous service in the Union or a 5 
State, the pension payable under this Act shall be in lieu of, and 
not in addition to, that pension.". 
6. In section 18 of the principal Act, the proviso shall be omitted. 
Insertion. of 7. After section 23 of the principal Act, the following sections shall 
new sections be inserted namely'-.23A and , • 10 
.23B. 
Vacation of 
High 
Courts. 
Special 
prOVisions in 
respect of 
continuing 
Judges. 
Amendment 
of section 
24· 
"23A. (1) Every High Court shall have a vacation or vacations 
for such period or periods as may, from time to time, be fixed by 
the President, by order notified in this behalf in the Official 
Gazette, and every such order shall have effect notwithstanding 
anything contained in any othet law, rule or order regulating the 15 
vacation of the High Court. 
(2) Every order made under sub-section (1) shall be laid 
before each House of Parliament. 
zaB. (1) In the calculation of the service for pension of a 
continuing Judge for the purposes of this Act, his previous service 7.0 
for pension as a Chief Justice or as a Judge of a former High 
Court in a Part B State, under tht~ provisions of the IIigh Court 
Judges' (Part B States) Order, 1953, or any other order or rule 
then applicable to him, shall be reckoned as service for pension 
as a Chief Justice or, as the case may be, as a Judge under this 25 
Act. 
(2) In the calculation of the amount of leave at the credit of 
a continuing Judge for the purposes of this Act, the amount of 
leave due to him immediately before the 1st day of November, 
1956, under the provisions of the High Court Judges (Part B .·,0 
States) Order, 1953, or any other order or rule then applicable 
to him, shall be added to the amount of leave at his credit under 
this Act. 
(3) In this section, "continuing Judge" means a Judge of a 
former High Court in a Part B State who on the lst day of Nov- 35 
ember, 1956, or on any date subsequent thereto has become or 
been appointed as a Judge of a High Court for a State.". . 
8. In section 24 of the principal Act, fur sub-section (3), the follow-
ing sub-section shall be substituted, namely:-
"(3) All rules made under this section shall be laid for not 40 
less than thirty days before each House of Parliament as soon as 

3 
may be after they are made and shall be subject to such modifica-
tions as Parliament may make during the session in which they 
are so laid or the session immediately following.". 
9. Section 25 of the principal Act shall be re-numbered as sub- Amendment 
S section (1) thereof and after sub-section (1) as so re-num bered, the of section 
following sub-section shall be inserted, namely: _ 2S· 
"(2) Nothing contained in this Act, as amended by the High 
Court Judges (Conditions of Service) Amendment Act, 1958, shall 
have effect so as to give to a Chief Justice or a Judge of a former 
fO High Court in a Part B State less favourable terms in respect 
of his allowances or his rights in respect of leave of absence 
(including the leave allowances) or pension than those to which 
he would be entitled under the High Court Judges (Part B States) 
Order, 1953, or any other order or rule then applicable to him, 
15 if he had continued as a Judge of that High Court, his service 
as a Judge on or after the 1st day of November, 1956, being 
treated as service in that High Court.". 
20 
25 
10. In the First Schedule to the principal Act,- Amendment 
of the Firat 
(a) in Part 1, to paragraph 9, the following proviso shall be Schedule. 
added, namely:-
"Provided that nothing in this paragraph shall apply-
(a) to an additional Judge or acting Judge; or 
(b) to a Judge who at the time of his appointment 
is in receipt of a pension (other than a disability or 
wound pension) in respect of any previous service 
under the Union or a State."; 
(b) in Part II, for paragraph 3, the following paragraph 
shall be substituted, namely:-
"3. Tf such a Judge has completed not less than seven 
30 years of service for pension in a High Court, he shall be en-
titled to an additional pension in accordance with- the follow-
ing scale:-
Per annum. 
Rs. 
3S For seven completed years of service for pension 1,333 
For eight completed years of service for pension 1,600 
For nine completed years of service for pension 1,866 
For ten completed years of service for pension 2,133 
For eleven completed years of service for pension 2,400 
40 For twelve or more completed years of 
service for pension 2,666 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The High Court Judges (Conditions of Service) Act, 1954, lays 
down the conditions of service of Judges of the High Courts. When 
it was enacted, there was no provision in the Constitution for the 
appointment of acting or additional Judges in High Courts. Such a 
provision was introduced by an amendment of the Constitution 
with effect from the 1st November, 1956. It is, therefore, proposed 
to provide that service rendered by acting and additional Judges of 
High Courts shall count as service as a Judge for the purposes of 
High Court Judges (Conditions of Service) Act, 1954. 
2. A number of Judges of the former High Courts in Part B 
States are now functioning as Judges of High Courts on the reor-
ganisation of States. It is proposed to provide that their previous 
service for pension under the High Court Judges (Part B States) 
Order, 1953, or any other order or rule then applicable to them $hould 
be added to their service for pension under the Act of 1954. It 
is further proposed that the amount of leave standing at their credit 
on the 31st October, 1956, should be added to their leave account 
under the Act of 1954. 
3. Certain minor as well as clarificatory amendments, which 
have been found necessary as a result of the working of the Act of 
1954, have also been included in this Bill. 
NEW DELHI; GOVIND BALLABH PANT. 
The 9th September, 1958. 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Clause 2 of the Bill enlarges the definition of the word "Judge" 
so as to include an acting Judge and an additional Judge. Service 
rendered as an acting Judge or an additional Judge would, there-
fore, count for service for the purposes of leave and pension. This 
would involve some small additional expenditure to Government. 
2. A number of Judges of the former High Courts in Part B 
States are now functioning as Judges of High Courts. The proposed 
section 23B in clause 7 of the Bill provides that their previous service 
for pension under the High Court Judges (Part B States) Order, 
1953, or any other order or rule then applicable to them should be 
added to their service for pension under the Act of 1954. It is 
further provided that such Judges should be enabled to carry forward 
the leave standing at their credit on 31st October, 1956, under the 
rules then applicable to them and to enjoy it under the Act of 1954. 
The amount of pension and leave allowances admissible under 
the order of 1953 were slightly less than those admissible under the 
Act of 1954. This may involve some extra expenditure to Govern-
ment, but it is not possible to calculate the additional burden on this 
account. The extra expenditure is not, however, expected to be 
appreciable. 
3. The Bill, if enacted and brought into operation, might involve 
some additional expenditure on account of leave allowances and 
pension payable to Judges. The expenditure involved on account 
of leave allowances will be a charge on the Consolidated Fund of the 
States concerned whilst the pensions payable to such Judges are 
first charged on the Consolidated Fund of India and recovered from 
the States concerned,! 
s 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
The proposed section 23A in clause 7 of the Bill seeks to empower 
the President to regulate the vacation of each High Court by order 
notified in the Official Gazette. Different orders may have to be 
issued for different High Courts and such orders may also have to 
be revised from time to time. It is not, therefore, possible to lay 
down the period of vacation to be enjoyed by each High Court in 
the Bill itself. Every such order will, however, be laid before 
each House of Parliament. The delegation of legislative power is 
thus of a normal character. 

ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS FROM THE HIGH COURT JUDGES (CONDITIONS OF SERVICE) ACT, 
1954. 
(28 OF 1954) 
... • ... ... ... ... 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
... • • • • ... 
2. (1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
... ... ... 
(g) "Judge" means a Judge of a High Court and includes 
the Chief Justice and acting Chief Justice of a High Court; 
... ... • 
CHAPTER II 
LEAVE 
... ... ... • • • 
Definitions . 
6. Subject to the maximum limit specified in sub-section (1) of Grant of 
section 5, leave on half allowances may be granted to a Judge illieavo DOt 
excess of the amount at his credit- due. 
(i) on medical certificate; or 
(ii) otherwise than on medical certificate, for not more than 
six months and not more than once during the whole period of 
his service as a Judge: 
Provided that no such leave shall be granted if the Judge is not 
expected to return to duty at the end of such leave and earn the 
leave granted. 
... • • • ... • 
8. Extraordinary leaw not exceeding six months in duration may axtrlOrdi-
be granted to a Judge not more than once during the whole period nary leave. 
of his service as a Judge in excess of any leave permissible under 
the foregoing provisions of this Chapter, but no salary or allowances 
shall be payable during, or in respect of, such leave. 
... . ... . 
7 

J 
( 
:2 
Pension pay 
able to 
ludaes. 
Conversion .. 
of aterlm, 
pension into 
rupees. 
Power to 
make rules. 
8 
CHAPTER III 
PENSIOKS 
14. Subject to the provisions of this Act, every Judge shall, on 
his retirement, be paid a Pension in accordance with the scale and 
provisions in Part I of the First Schedule: 
Provided that no such pension shall be payable to a Judge unless-
(a) he has completed not less than twelve years of service 
for pension; or 
(b) he has attain~d the a~ of sixty years; or 
(c) his retirement is medically certified to be necessitated 
by ill-health. 
Explanation.-In t1o1is section 'Judge' means a Judge who is not 
a member of the Indian Civil Service or has not held any other 
pensionable civil post under the Union or a State and includes a 
Judge who being a member of the Indian Civil Service or having 
held any other pensionable civil post under the Union or a State has 
elected to receive the pension payable under Part I of the First 
Schedule. 
'" '" '" '" '" '" 
18. Pensions expressed in sterling only shall, if paid in India, be 
converted into rupees at such rate of exchange as the Central Gov-
ernment may, from time to time, specify in this behalf: 
Provided that nothing in this section shall affect any specrific 
privilege in respect of the conversion ot sterling pensions which 
was conferred by any rules previousty in force in respect of persons 
who, on the 1st February, 1921, were members of the Indian Civil 
Service. 
'" • '" '" '" '" 
CHAPTER IV 
MISCELLANEOUS 
24. 
• • • '" • • 
(3) All rules made under the provisions of this Act shall be laid. 
as soon as may be, before each House of Parliament. 
• • • • • • 

9 
THE FIRST SCHEDULE 
(See sections 14 and 15) 
PENSIONS OF JUDGES 
PART I 
:) 
'" ... ... 
9. Where a Judge to whom this Part appli'es retires or has retired 
at any time after the 26th January",' 1950 without being eligible for 
a pension under any other provision of this Part, then, notwithstand-
ing" anything· contained in the foregoing provisions, a pension of 
Rs. 6,000 per annum shall be payable to such a Judge . 
... ... • ... ... ... 
PART II 
... ... ... ... ... • 
3. If such a Judge has completed not less than seven years of 
service for pension in a High Court, he shall be entitled to an addi-
tional pension in accordance with the following scale: 
Per annum. 
£ 
For seven cOl1lpleted years of Ser~jce for p~nsiori 100 
For eight completed ye~s of service for p~nsion 120 
For nine completed years of service for pension 140 
For ten completed years of service for pension 160 
For eleven completed years of service for pension 180 
For twelve or more completed years of service for pension 200 
• • • • 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the High Court Judges (Conditions of Service) 
Act, 1954. 
The President has, in pursuance of clauses (I) and (3) of article 
117 of tne Constitution of India, recommended to Lok Sabha 
the introduction and consideration of the BiII. 
M. N. KAUL, 
Secretary. 
(Shri Govind Ballabh Pant, 
Minister of Home Affairs.) 