~o AUC'.; 
As INTRoDUCED IN LoK SABHA ON 
THE TAXATION LAWS (AMENDMENT AND MISCELLANEOUS 
PROVISIONS) BILL. 1986. 
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
1. Short title and commencement. 
CHAPTER II 
AMENDMENTS TO THE INCOME-TAX ACT 
2. Amendment of section 2. 
3. Amendment of section 10. 
4. Amendment of section lOA. 
5. Amendment of section 3"2. 
ti. Amendment of section 34. 
7. Amendment of section 41. 
8. Amendment of section 4:~. 
9. Substitution of new section for se:tion 50. 
10. Amendment of section BOHH. 
11. Amendment of section BOHHC. 
J 2. Amendment of section 139. 
13. Amendment of se~tion 220. 
14. Amendment of section 221. 
15. Amendment of section 245B. 
16. Amendment of section 245D. 
17. Amendment of section 245F. 
IS. Amendment of section 270. 
19. Amendment of section 271. 
20. Amendment of section 271A. 
21. Amendment of section 271B. 
22. Amendment of section 2'i'"2A. 
23. Amendment of section 272AA. 
24. Amendment of section 272B. 
25. Amendment of section 273. 
26. Tn!;ertion of new section 273B. 
(', 1 

(ij) 
27. Amendment of sections 276A, 276AB, 276B, 276DD and 276E. 
28. J nsertion of new section 278AA. 
29. Insertion of new section 278E. 
30. Omission of the Eighth Schedule. 
31. Omission of the N~nth . Schedule. 
32. Consequential amendments. 
CHAPTER III 
AMENDMENTS TO THE WEALTH-TAX ACT, 1957 
33. Amendment of section 18. 
34. Amendment of section 18A. 
35. Amendment of section 22B. 
36. Amendment of section 22D. 
37. Amendment of section 22F. 
38. Amendment of section 35EE. 
39. Insertion of new section 35-0. 
CHAPTER IV 
AMENDMENTS TO THE GIFT-TAX ACT, 1958 
40. Amendment of section 17. 
41. Insertion of new section 3SD. 
CHAPTER V 
MISCELLANEOUS 
42. Housing and Urban Development Corporation Ltd. to be exempt for 
a certain period from liability to pay income-tax and !'urtax. 

8ill No. 102 of 1986 
THE TAXATION LAWS (AMENDMENT AND MISCELLANEOUS 
PROVISIONS) BILL, 1986 
A 
BILL 
!url1ler 10 amend the Income-tax Act, 1961, the Wealth-tax Act, 1957, the 
Gift-tax Act, 1958 and to provide for exemption to a Government 
company from income-tax and surtax for a specified period. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty-seventh Year of the Republic 
of Inelia as follows:'-
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
5 1. (1) This Act may be called the Taxation Laws (Amendment and 
Miscellaneous Provisions) Act, 1986. 
(2) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, it shall come into force 
at onr:e. 
CHAT'TER II 
ro AMENDMENTS '1'0 THE INCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 
43 or 1961. 2. In section 2 of the Income-tax Act, 1961 (hereafter in this Chapter 
,referred to as the Income-tax Act), after clause. (10), the following clause 
shall he inserted with effect from the 1st day of April, 1988, namely:-
.' (11) "block of assets" means a group of assets faUing within a 
15 class of assets, being buildings, machinery, plant or furnitUre, in res-
pect of which the same percentage of depreciation is prescribed;'. 
Short 
title 
and com-
mencement, 
Amend-
ment of 
section 2. 

Amend-
mearof 
section 10. 
Amend-
mCll1 of 
<;cclion \ 0.0\. 
Amca4_ 
meat of 
section 32. 
2 
3. In section 10 of the Income-tax Act, for clause (17), the foll~wing 
~use shall be substituted and shall be deemed to have been substItuted 
with effect from the 1st day of April. 1986, namely:-
.. (17) any income by way of-
(i) daily allowance received by any person by reason of his ;, 
membership of Parliament or of any State Legislature or of any 
Committee thereof; or 
• (ii) all other allowances not exceeding rupees twelve hund-
red and fifty per month in the aggregate received by any person 
by reason of his membership of Parliament or of any Committee 10 
t hereof, or all other allowances not exceeding rupees six hund-
red per month in the aggregate received by any person by reason 
of his membership of any State Legislature or any Committee 
thereof, which the Central Government may, by notification in 
the Official Gazette. specify in this behalf;" . 
... In section lOA of the Income-tax Act. with effect from the 1st day 
c-f April, 1987,-
(a) for sub-section (3). the following sub-section shall be subs-
tituled. namely:-
.. (3) The profits and gains referred to in subsection (1):.In 
~hall not be included in the total income of the assessee in res-
pect of any five consecutive assessment years, falling within a 
period of eight years beginning with the assessment year rele-
vant to the previous year in which the industrial undertaking 
hegins to manufacture or produce articles or things, specified by :.IS 
the assessee at his option: 
Provided that nothing in this .sub-section shall be construed 
to extend the aforesaid five assessment years to cover any period 
after the expiry of the said period of eight years."; 
(b) in sub-section (7). the words "for the initial assessment 30 
year" shall be omitted; 
(c) in the Explanation occurring at the end, for '!lause (ii), the 
fnUowing clause shall be substituted, namely:-
• (ii) "relevant assessment years" means the five consecutive 
as!;essment years specified by the assessee at his option under 35 
sub-section (3) .'. ' 
5. In section 32 of the Income-tax Act, with effect from the 1st day of 
April. 1988,-
(1) in sub-section (1) ,-
(a) clause (i) shall be omitted; 
(b) in clause (ii) ,-
(i) for the opening pHragraph, the following shall l··e 
substituted, namely:-
"in the case ot any block of assets, such percentage 
on the written down value thereof as may be pres- 45-
cribed: "; 

5 
IU 
3 
(ii) in the second proviso, the -words, brackets and 
figures "or clause (iii)" shall be omitted; 
(iii) after the second proviso, the following E;r,tl~anations 
shall be inserted, namely:-
'Exp.l.anation I.-Where the business or profession of 
the assessee is carried on in a building not Qwned by him 
but in respect of which the assessee holds a lease or other 
righl of occupancy and any capital expenditure is incurred 
by the assessee for the purposes of the busiuess or profes-
sion on the construction of any structure or doing of any 
work, in or in relation to, and by way of renovation or 
extension of, or improvement to, the building, then, the 
provisions of this clause shall apply 8S if the said struc-
tUre or work is a building owned by the as~ .. ssee. 
Explanation 2.-For the purposes of this clause "writ-
ten down value of the block of assets" shall have the same 
meaning as in clause (c) of sub-section (6) of section 43; 
(d clauses (iia). (iii), (iv), (v) and (tn) shall be omitted; 
(2) sub-section (lA) shall be omitted; 
20 (3) in sub-section (2), for the words, brackets, figures and 
letters "under clause (i) or clause (ii) or clause (iia) or clause (iv) 
or (·lause (v) or clause (vi) of sub-section (1) or under clause (i) of 
sub-section (lA) ", the words brackets and figures "under clause 
(ii) of sub-section (1)" shall be substituted; 
2j I)'. In section 34 of the Income-tax Act, sub-sections (1) and (2) shall 
bt: omitted with effect from the 1st day of April, 1988. 
7. In section 41 of the Income-tax Act, with effe~t from the 1st day 
01 April. 1988.-
(a) sub-section (2) and (2A) and the Explanations thereunder 
:.Ie) shall be omitted; 
'L") 
45 
(b) in sub-section (4), for the Explanation, the follOWing Expla-
nation shall be substituted. namely:-
. Explanation.-For the purposes of sub-section (3) ,--
(1) "moneys payable" in respect of any -'uilding. ma-
chinery, plant or furniture includes-
(a) any insurance, salvage or compensation moneys 
payable in respert thereof; 
(b) where the building, machinery,plant Or furni-
ture is sold, the price for which it is sold, 
so, however, that where the actual cost of a motor car is, 
in accordance with the proviso to clause (1) of section 43, 
taken to be twenty-five thousand rupees, the moneys pay-
able in respect of such motor car shall be taken to be a sum 
which bears to the amount for whieh the motor car is sold or, 
as the case may be, the amount of any insurance, salvage or 
AIll.:nJ-
IlIcnt of 
section 34. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 41. 

Amend· 
menl 
of section 
43. 
4 
compensation moneys payable in respect thereof (including 
the amount of scrap value if any) the same proportion as the 
amount of twenty-five thousand rupees bears to the actual 
cost of the motor ear to the as'sessee as it would have been 
computed before applying the said proviso~ 5 
(2) "sold" includes a transfer by way of exchange or 
a compulsory acquisition under any law for the time being 
in force but does not include a transfer, in a scheme of 
amalgamation, of any asset by the "malgamating company 
to the amalgamated company where the amalgamated Com- I (I 
pany is an Indian company: 
(c) in sub-section (5), the wor'ds, brackets, figures and letter 
"sub-section (2), sub-seetion (2A)," shall be omitted.. 
8. In section 43 of the Income-tax Act, with effect from t.he 1st day 
of April, 1988- 15 
(i) in clause (1) ,-
(a) in Explanation 1, for the words. brackets. figure;; and 
lelter "clause (i), clause (ii) or clause (iii) of S11:)·sectinn (1) 
or sub-section (lA)" the words, brackets and figurp <; "c1aw:e (ii) 
of sub-section (1)" ~hall be substituted; 20 
(b) for Explanation 2, the following Explanation shall be 
substituted, namely:-
'Explanation 2.-Where an asset is acquired by the as-
sessee by way of gift or inheritance, the actual cost of the 
asset to the assessee shall be the actual cost to the pr~ous 25 
owner, as reduced by-
(a) the amount of depreciation actually allowed 
under this Act and the corresponding provisions of the 
Indian Income-tax Act, 1922 in respect of any previous 11 lit I":!::. 
year relevant to the assessment year commencing before 30 
the 1st day of April, 1988; and 
(b) the amount of depreciation that would have 
been allowable to the assessee for any assessment year 
commencing on or after the 1st day of April, 1988, as if 
the asset was the only asset in the relevant block of 35 
assets.'; 
(c) for Explanation 4, the following Expllanation shall be 
substituted, namely:-
"Explanation 4.-Where any asset which had onCe belonged 
to the assessee and had been used by him for the purposes of 40 
his business or profession and thereafter ceased to be his 
property by reason of transfer or otherwise, is re-acquired 
by him,.tb.e actual cost to the assessee shall be-
(I) the actual cost to him when he first acquired the 
assets as reduced by- 45 
(II) the amount of depreciation actually allowed 
to him under this Act or under the corresponding 

-, 
provisions of the Indian Income-tax Act, 1922, in I! of ]')n. 
respect of any previous year relevant to the assess-
ment year commencing be~ore the 1st day of April, 
1988; and . 
(b) the amount of depreciation that would have 
been allowable to the assessee for any assessment 
year commencing on Or after the 1st day of April, 
1988, as if the asset was the only asset in the rele-
vant block of assets; or 
(ii) the actual price for which the asset is re-acquir-
ed by him, 
whichever is less."; 
(ii) in clause (6),-
(a) after the proviso, the following clause shall be inserted, 
15 namely:-
"}I J .J 
1] 
45 
C/ (c) in the case of any block of assets,-
(i) in respect of any previous year relevant to the 
assessment year commencing on the 1st day of April, 
1988, the aggregate of the written down values of all the 
assets falling within that block of assets at the beginning 
of the previous year and adjusted,-
(A) by the increase by the actual cost of any 
asset falling within that block, acquired during the 
previous year; and 
(8) by the reduction of the moneys payable in 
respect of any asset falling within that block, which 
is sold or discarded or demolished or destroyed 
during that previous year together with the amount 
of the scrap value, if any, 'So, however, that the 
amount of such reduction does not exceed the writ-
ten down value as so increased; and 
(ii) in respect of any previous year relevant to the 
assessment year commencing on or after the 1st day of 
April, 1989, the written down value of that block of 
assets in the immediately preceding previous year as 
reduced by the depreciation actually allowed in respect 
of the block of assets in relation to the said preceding 
previous year and as further adjusted by the increase or 
the reduction referred to in item (i) _"; 
(b) in Explano,tion 1, for the words "any asset", the words 
"any asset or any block of assets" shall be substituted; 
(c) for E:t'planations 2 and 2A, the following Explanation 
shall be substituted, namely:-
"Explanation 2-Where in any previous year, any 
block of assets is transferred,-
(n) by a holding company to its subsidiary company 
or by a subsidiary company to its holding company and 

Sub~lJllI­
lion or 
n~w 
~cctio:l 
r"T 
~ection 50. 
Spec:ial 
provision 
for compu-
tation 
of 
Capital 
gains 
in c35e 
of deprc-
cia"le 
assets. 
6 
the conditions of clause (iv) or, as the caSe may be, ot 
clause (v) of se::tion 47 are satisfied; or 
(b) by the amalgamating company to the amalga-
mated company in a scheme of amalgamation, and the 
amalgamated company is an Indian company. 5 
then, notwithstanding anything contained in clause (1), the 
actual cost of the block of assets in the case of the transferee 
company or the amalgamated company, as the case may be, 
shall be the written down value of the block of assets as in 
the case of the transferor company or the amalgamating 10 
company for the immediately preceding previous year as 
reduced by the amount of uepreciation actually allowed in 
relation to the said preceding previous year."; 
(d) after Exp.1.anation 3, the following Explanation shall be 
inserted, namely:--
• Explanation 4.--For the purposes of this clause. the 
expressions "moneys payable" and "sold" shall have the same 
meaning as in the Explanation below sub-section (4) of 
section 41.'. 
9. For section 50 of the Income-tax Act. the following section shall he :.:" 
sllbstituted with effect from the 1st day of April. 1988, namely:-
"50. Notwithstanding anything contained in clause (42A) of sec-
~ion 2, where the capital asset is an asset forming part of a block of 
assets in respect of which depreciation has been allowed under thi~ 
Act .Jr under the In1ian Income-tax Act, 1922, the provisions of se::- 25 I i <If \9Z2. 
tions 48 and 49 shall be subject to the following modifications:--
"(1) where the full value of the consideration received or 
accruing as a result of the transfer of the asset together with the 
full value of such consideration received or accruing as a result 
of the transfer of any other capital asset falling within the block 3" 
of assets during the previous year, exceeds the aggregate of the 
following amounts, namely:-
(i) expenditure incurred wholly and exclusively in con-
nection with such transfer or transfers; 
(ii) the written down value of the block of 8Sfe f s at the 35 
beginning of the previous year; and 
(iii) the actual cost of any asset falling within the block 
of assets acquired during the previous year, 
such excess shall be deemed to be the capital gains arising from 
the transfer of. short-term capital assets; 40 
(2) where any block of IlSIIets ceases to exist as such, for 
the reason that all the auets in that block are transferred during 
the previous year, the cost of acquisition of the block of assets 
shall be the written down value of the block of assets at the 

beJinnina of the previous year, as increased by the actual cost of 
any asset falling within that block of assets, acquired by the 
asllel8ee dUring the previous year and the income received or 
8ccnUng as a result of such tranlder or trMl8~8 shall be deemed 
to be the capital gains arising from the transfer of short.-tem 
capital assets.". 
10. In section 80HH of the Income-tax Act, for the Ezplanation 
below sub-section (10), the following sub-section shall be substituted. 
namely:-
10 '(11) For the purposes of this section, "backward area" means such 
area 8S the Central Government may, having regard to the stage 
of development of that area, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
specify in this behalf: 
Provided that any notification under this sub-section may be 
J 5 issued so as to have retrospective effecr to a date not earlier than 
the 1st day of April, 1983.'. 
Amend-
ment of 
sectiun 
MIHH. 
11. In section SOHHC of the Income-tax Act. with effect from the Amend-
1st day of April, 1987.- ment of 
lIe~ti(ln 
(it) in sub-section (1), for the portion beginning with the words RO HHC. 
20 "deduction of an amount" and ending with the words "Provided 
that", the following shall be substituted. namely:-
"Deduction equal to thc' aggregate of--
(a) four per cent. of the net foreign. exchange realisation; and 
(b) fifty per cent. of so much of the profits derived by the 
2!j assessee from the export of such goods or merchandisf' as ex-
35 
45 
ceeds the amount referred to in clause (a): . 
Provided that. ~he deduction under this sub-section shall 
n(\t exceed the profits derived by the assessf'l' from the export 
of such goods or meTC.'handise: 
Provided further that"; 
(b) after sub-section (3) and before' the Explanation, the follow-
ing sub-section shall be imlel'ted, namely:-
"(4) The deduction under sub-section (1) shall not be 
admissible unless the assessee furniShes in the prescribed form. 
along witli the return of income, the report of an accountant, 
as aefined in the Explanation below sub-section (2) of section 
288, certifying that the deduction has ~een correctly claimed on 
the basis of the amount of net foreign. exchange realisation as 
determined in accordance with the Import and Export Policy 
of the Government of India for the. relevant period."; 
(c) after clause (b) of the Explanation, the follOWing clause .shall 
be inserted, namely:-
• (c) Unet foreign exchange realisation" means the total free 
~n board val\.Je of exports out of India of goods and merchandise 
to which this section applies as reduced by the aggregate of the 
~ost insurance and freight vaiue of all categories of import 

Amend· 
ment 
of section 
139. 
Amend-
ment 
of -.ection 
2». 
licences, to be iasued by the Chief Controller of Import. and 
Exports, Government of India, to which the assessee is entitled 
dllrmg the previous year, either against export obligation or 
against 'exports as replenishments.'. 
12. In section la9 of the Income-tax Act,-
(a) in sub-section (3), for the portion beginning with the words 
"within such further time" and ending with the words "in his discre-
tion, allow", the following shall be substituted with etfect from the 
1st day of April, 1987, namely:-
"by the thirty-first day of July of the assessment year rele- 10 
vanl to the previous year during which the loss was sustained"; 
(b) after sub-section (9), the following sub-section shall be insert-
ed and shall be deemed to have been inserted with effect from the 1st 
day of April, 1986, namely: -
"(10) NotWithstanding anything contained in any other pro- 15 
vision of this Act, a return of income which shows the total 
income below the maximum amount which is not chargeable to 
tax shall be deemed never to have been furnished: 
Provided that nothing hereinbefore 
to.-
contained shall apply 
(a) a return furnished in response to 3 notice under sub-
sectipn (2) or section 148; 
(b) a return of a partner of a firm; 
20 
(c) a return of a person woo has claimed exemption of 
income from property held for charitable or religious pur- 25 
poses; 
(d) a return of loss which has been furnished before the 
thirty-first day of July of the assessment year relevant to 
the previous year during which the loss was sustained: 
(e) a return furnished under sub-section (4B) in respect go 
of a po1itic~l party; and 
<f) a return furnished in support of a claim for refund 
under section 237.". 
13. In section 220 of the Income-tax Act, in sub-section (2A),-
(a) in the opening portion, for the words "the Board may" and 35 
"on the recommendation made by the Commissioner in this behalf, It 
is satisfied", the words ·'the CommiSSioner may" and "he is satisfied" 
shall, respectively, be substituted with effect from the 1st day of 
April, 1987; 
(b) for the words "interest payable by an assessee", "would caUl& 40 
genuine hardship" and "interest was payable", the words"interest 
paid or payable by an assessee", "has caused or would cause genufne 
hardship" and "interest has been paid or was payable" shall, respecti-
vely, be substituted and shall be deemed to have been substituted 
with (1Ject from the 1st day of October, 1984. 45 

14. In section 221 of the Income-tax Act, in sub-section (1), for the Amend-
IIeCOnd proviso, the following proviso shall be substituted, namely: _ ment 
of section 
"Provided further that where the assessee proves to the satisfac- 221. 
tion of the Income-tax Offieer that the default was for good and 
5 sufficient reasons, no penalty shall be levied under this section.". 
I 
10 
15. In ~ection 245B of the Income-tax Act,-
(a) in sub-section (2), for the words "and two other members", 
the words "and as many Vice-Chairmen and other members as the 
Central Government thinks fit" shall be substituted; 
(b) sub-section (2A) shall be omitted; 
(c) in sub-section (3) ,-
(i) in the opening portion, after the word "Chairman", the 
w~rd '"Vice-Chairmen" shall be inserted; 
lii) in the first proviso, after the word "Chairman", the 
Amend-
ment 
of scctio. 
245B. 
15 word ", Vice-Chairman" shall be inserted; 
(iii) the second proviso shall be omitted. 
16. In section 245D of the Income-tax Act, sub-section (5) shall be Amend-
omitted. ment 
of seCtiOD 
2450. 
17. In section 245F of the Income-tax Act, for sub-section (5), the fo1- Amend-
20 lowing sub-sections shall be substituted, namely: - ment of 
~ction 
, , 
j 
• '. 
.35 
"(5) The powers or functions of the Settlement Commission may 145F. 
be exercised or discharged by Benches constituted by the Chairman 
of the Settlement Commission from amongst the members thereof; 
(6) A Bench constituted under sub-section (5) shall consist of 
three members, one of whom shall be the Chaimlan or a Vice-
Chairman; 
(7) The Settlement Commission shall, subject to the provisions 
of this Chapter, have power to regulate its own procedure and the 
procedure of Benches thereof in all matters arising out of the exer-
cise of its powers or of the discharge of its functions, including the 
places at which the Benches shall hold their sittings.". 
18. In section 270 of the Income-tax Act, the words "without reason- Amend-
able excuse" shall be omitted. ment ot section 
270. 
19. In section 271 of the Income-tax Act, in sub-section (1) ,- Amend-
mentol 
(a) the words "without reasonable cause", wherever they occur, section 
shall be omitted: 271. 
(b) in E.xplOMtion 1,-
(i) in clause (B) for the words "not able to substantiate,", 
the words "not able to substantiate and fails to prove that such 
.xpJanat~~n is bona ,fide .!lr.td that all the facts relating to the same 

Amend-
meniof 
section 
271A. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 
:71 B. 
Amend· 
mentol 
section 
272A. 
Amend-
mento! 
section 
272AA. 
Amend-
mentor 
section 
272B. 
Amend-
mentof 
section 
D. 
10 
and material to the computation of his total income have been 
disclosed by him," shall be substituted; 
(ii) the proviso shall be omitted; 
(c) in ExPlanation 5, for the portion beginning with the words 
··unless such income is" and ending with the words "before the said 5 
date", the following shall be substituted, namely:-
·'unless.--
(1) such income is, or the transactions resulting in such 
income are recorded,-
(i) in a case falling under c1au5e (a), before the date 10 
of the search; and 
(ii) in 3 case falling under clause (b), on or before 
~uch dat.e, 
in the books of accounts, if any, maintained by him for any 
source of income or such income is otherwise disclosed to the J 5 
Commissioner before the said date; or 
(2) he, in the course of the search, makes a statement 
under sub-section (4) of section 132 that any money. bullion, 
jewellery or other valuable article or thing found in his poss-
ession ur under his control, h~s "been acquired out of. his in- ~n 
come which has not been disclosed so far in his return of 
income to be furnished before the expiry of time specifted in 
clause (a) or clause (b) of sub-section (1) of section 1:J9, and 
also specifies in the statemen.t the manner in which such 
income has been derived and pays the tax, together with 25 
interest if any, in respect of such income.". 
20. In section 271A of the Income-tax Act, the words", without reason-
able caust!," shall be' omitted. 
21. In section 271B of the Income-tax Act. the wor~s ", without reason-
able cause," shall be omitted. 
, 
22. In section 272A of the Income-tax Act, 'in su~section (2) , the 
word!- ", without reasonable cause or excuse," shall be omitted. 
23. In section 272AA of the income-tax Act, the words ". without 
reast)nable cause," shall be omitted. 
24. In section 272B of the Income-tax Act, the words ". without rea- 35 
son able cause," shall be omitted. 
25. In section 273 of the Income-tax Act, the words "without reason-
able cause", wherever they occur, shall be omitted, 

10 
.11 
26. After section 273A of the Income-tax Act, the foflowing section Inaer-
ahall be inserted, namely:- tion of 
new 
section 
273B. 
·'273B. Notwithstanding anything contained in the provisions of 
seetion 270, clause (a) or clause (b) of sub-section (1) of section 271, 
section 271A, section 271 B, sub-section (2) of section 272A, section 
272AA, section 272B or dause (b) of sub-section (2) of section 273, 
no penalty shall be imposable on the person or the assessee, as the 
case may be, for any failure' referred to in the said provis~ons if he 
proves that there was reasonable cause for the said failure.". 
27, In section 276A, 276AB, 276B, 27600 and 276E, the 
", without reasonable cause oj' excuse," shall be omitted. 
words 
Penalty 
not to 
be im· 
posed in 
certain 
casali. 
Amend. 
ment of 
sections 
276A, 
276AB, 
276L, 
276DD 
and 
276E. 
28. After section 278A of the Income-tax Act, the following section insertion 
si1;lll he in'Scril'd. namely:- of new 
'::;78AA. Notwithstanding anything contained in the provisions 
of section 276A, section 276AB, section 276B, section 276QO or sec-
t!on 276E, no person shall be punishable for any failure referred to 
in the said provisions if he proves that there was reasonable cause 
for such failure.". 
section 
278AA. 
Punish-
ment 
not 
to be 
imposed 
in certain 
cases. 
29. In the Income-tax Act. after section 2780. the following section 
20 shall be inserted, namely:-
'Inser· 
tion of 
new 
r;ection 
278E. 
'278E. (1) ln any prosecution for any offence under this Act which 
requires a culpable mental state on the part of the accused, the court 
sbaJ.I presume the existence of such mental state but it shall be a 
defence for the accused to prove the fact that he had rio such mental 
state with respect to the act charged as an offence in that proseC'ution. 
Explanation.--In this sub-section, "culpable mental state" in-
cludes intention, moti.ve or knowledge of a fact, or belief in, or rea-
son to believe, a fact. 
(2) For the purposes of this section, a fact is said to be proved 
only when the court believes it to exist beyond reasonable doubt and 
not merely when its existence is established 'by a preponderance of 
probability.'. 
30. In the Income-tax Act, the Eighth Schedule shall be omitted and 
shall be deemed to have veen omitted with effect from the 1st day of 
35 Aprjl, 1984, 
Presum-
ption as 
to culp-
able 
mental 
state. 
Omission 
9f the 
Eighth 
Schedule. 

Omission 
of the 
Ninth 
Sdlcdu1c. 
, 
12 
31. In the Income-tax Act, the Ninth Schedule shall be omitted wtth 
eftect from the 1st day of April, 1988. 
32. The following amendmenls (being amendments of a consequential 
nature) shall be made in the Income-tax Act with effect from the 1st day 
of April, 1988, namely:- ' 5 
(4) in seetion 32A, in sul>section (2), in the EzPlcInt&1.fion., for 
clause (1), the following clause shaH be substituted, nameiy:-
• (1) (4) "new ship" or "new aircraft" includes a ship or air-
craft which before the date of acquisition by the assessee was 
used by any other person, if it was not at any time previou'IJ to 10 
the date, of such acquisition owned by ally person resident in 
India; 
(b) "new machinery or plant" includes machinery or plant 
which before its installation by the assessee was used outside 
India by any other person, if the foHowing conditions are ful- 15 
fUled, namely:-
(i) such machinery or plant was not, at any time pre-
vious to the date ot ~uch installation by the assessee, used 
in India; 
(ti) such machinery or plant is imported into India from 20 
any country outside India; and 
(iii) no deduction on account of depreciation in respect 
of such machinery or plant has been allOWed or js allowable 
under the provisions of the Inelian Income-tax Act, 1922 or II of 1922-
this Act' in computfn~ the total income of any person for 25 
any period prior to the date of the installation of the machi-
nery or plant by the assessee.'; 
(b) in section 35,-
(1) in sub-section (2)-
(i) in clause (iv), for the words, brackets. fil'Ures and 30 
letters "clauses (i), (ii). (Ha) , (Ui) and (iv) of sub-section 
(1) or under sub-section (lA)", the words, brackets and 
figures "clause (ii) of sub-s,:,ction (1)" shall be substit.uted; 
(ii) in clause (v), for the words, brackets and fhrures 
"clauses (i), (ii) and (iii) of 8ub~tion (1)", the words. 
brackets and figures "clause Hi) of sub-section (1)" shall be 
substituted; 
(2)' In sub-section (28), in dRUse (e). for the words, brack-
ets, figures and letters "c1aus~s (i). (ii). (iia) and (iii) of sub-
section (1) or under sub-section (J A \". thf> words. brackets and 40 
figures "clause (ii) of sub-sectioJ", (J)" shall be substituted; 
'(c) in section 38. in !1ub-section (2), for the words, brackets, 
figures and letters uclaus-s (i). on. (Hit) ~nd (iin of sub-sectlon (I)' 
and SUb-sectlOll (1A) ft, the words. br~c1tets ~nd ftgures "c1awre (tt)' 
of $J1};)-s~ction (1) It 81,111 be substituted: - ·.U 
~, 

13 
(4) in eection 55, in IUb«ction <.1) ,-
(i) for the words and figures "sections 48, 49 and 50", the 
words and ft~ "sections 48 and 49" shall be substituted; 
(ii) clause (a) shall be omitted; 
5 (e) in section 57, in clause (ii),-
(i) the brackets, figure and letter ", (lA)" shall be omitted; 
(ii) for the words and. figures "sections 34 and 38", the word 
and figures "section 38" shall be substituted; 
(f) in section 59, sub-sections (2) and (3) and the &rplanation 
10 occurring thereunder shall be omitted; 
(g) in section 155, in the Explanation below sub-section (4A), 
for the words, brackets and figures "E~la1I4tion to .clnuse (vi) of 
sub-section (1) of section 32", the words, brackets, ftgUl'es and letter 
"Explanation below 9ub-section (2) of section 32A" shall be substi. 
15 tuted. 
CHAPTER III 
AMENDMENTS TO THE WEALTH-TAx ACT, 1957 
33. In section 18 of the Wealth-tax Act. 1957 (hereafter in this Chap-
ter referred to as the Wealth-tax Act)-
20 (a) the words "without reasonable cause", wherever they occur, 
..... 
35 
• 
ir 
shall be omitted; 
(b) in sub-section (1) ,-
(i) after clause (Hi), before Explanation 1. the following 
prOVISo shall be inserted, namely:-
"Provided that in the cases referred to in clause (a) or 
clouse (b), no penalty shall be imposable if the person proves 
that there was reasonable cause for the failure referred to in 
those clauses."; 
(ii) in ExPlanation. 2,-
(1) in clause (B), for the words "not able to substan-
tiate," the words "not able to substantiate and fails to prove 
that 9uch explanation is bona fide and that all the facts 
relating to the same and material to the computation of his 
llet wealth have been disclosed by him," shall be substi-
tuted; 
(2) the proviso shall be omitted. 
(iii) in Explanation 5, for the portion beginning with the words 
"unlesa such assets are recorded" and ending with the words 
"before the said date", the following shall be substituted, namely:-
"unless--
(1) such assets ~r~ recorded,-
(i) in a case falling under clause (a). before the date of 
the search; and J 
Amend-
ment of 
section 18. 

Amend-
ment of 
section 
18A. 
Amend-
ment of 
secti.on. 
22 B. 
Am€:'nd-
ment ot 
section 
22 D. 
Amend.. 
mentof 
section 
22F. 
I 
14 
(ii) in a case falling under clause (b), on or before such 
date, 
in the books of account, if any, maintained by him or such assets 
are otherwise disclosed to the Commissioner before the said datej 
or 
(2) he, in the course of the search, makes a statement under 
Mlb-lection (4) of section 37A that any money, bullion, jewellery 
5 
or other valuable article or thing found in his possession or undf'r 
his control, fotlns part of his net wealth which has not been dis-
closed so far in his return of net wealth to be furnished before 10 
the expiry of the time specified in sub-section (1) of section 14, 
and also specifies in the statement the manner in which such net 
wealth haa been acquired and pays the tax. together with interest, 
if any, in respect of such net wealth.". 
34. In section 18A of the Wealth·tax Act, in sub-section (2) ,-
(i) the words ", without reasonable cause," shall be omitted; 
(i.i) the following proviso shall be inserted. at the end. namely:·-
"Provided. that no penalty shall be imposable under this sub-
section, if the person proves that there was reasonable cause for the 
said failur~.". 
35. In section 22B of the Wealth·tax Act,--
(a) in sub-section (2), for the words "and two other members" 
the words "and as many Vice-Chairmen and other members as the 
Central Government thinks fit" shall be substituted; 
(b) sub-section (2A) shall be omitted; 
(c) in sub-section (3) ,-
(i) in the opening portion, after the word "Chairman", 1he 
word ", Vice--Chainnen" shall be insertedj 
(ii) in the first proviso, after the word "Chairman", the word 
", Vice·Chainnan" shell be inserted; 
(iii) the second proviso shall be omitted. 
36, In section 220 of the Wealth·tax Act, sub-section (5) shall be 
omitted. 
37. In section 22F of the Wealth-tax Act, for sub-section (5\ the 
15 
go 
following SubleCtions shall be ~ubstituted, namely: - .35 
~ 
"(5) The powers or functiops of the Settlement Commission may 
be exercised or discharged. by Benches constituted by the Chairman of 
the Settlement Commission from amongst the members thereof; 
"( 6) a Bench constituted under sub-section (') shall consist of 
three members. one of wb.om shall be the Chairman or a Vice- .0 
Chai~m; , 
• 
(.7) the Settlement Commission shall, subject to the provisions 
of this Chapter, have power to regulate its own proced\lre and the 
, 

18 of 19S8. 
procedure of Benches thereof in all matters ansmg out of the 
exercise of its 'powers or of the discharge of ib functions, includina 
the places at which the Bcn~bcs shall hold their sittinas.". 
38. In section 35EE ot the Wealth-tax Act,-
(i) the words ", without reasonable cause or excuse," shall be 
omitted; 
(ii) the following proviSO shall be inserted at the end, namely:-
"Provided that no person shall be punishable under this 
section if he proves that there was reasonable cause or excuse for 
Amend-
ment of 
section 
3.5EE. 
10 the said fallure.". 
20 
35 
39. After section 35N of the Wealth-tax Act, the following section Insertion 
shall be inserted, namely:- of new 
section 
35-0. 
'35-0 (l) In any prosecution for any offence under this Act, 
which requires a culpable mental state on the part of the accused, 
the court shall presume the existence of such mental state but it 
shall be a defence for the accused to prove the fact that he had 
no sllch mental state with respect to the act charged as an offence 
in that prosecution. 
Explanation.-In this sub-section, "culpable mental state" in-
clades intention, motive or knowledge of a fact, or belief in, or reason 
to believe, a fact. . I 
(2) For the purposes of this section, a fact is said to be proved 
on~y when the court believes it' to exist beyond reasonable doubt 
and not merely when its existence is established by a preponderance 
of probability.'. i .. ':: .. . 
CHAPTER IV 
AMENDMENTS TO THE GIFT-TAX ACT, 1958 
presump. 
tion as to 
culpable 
mental 
state. 
40. In section 17 of the Gift-tax Act, 1958 (hereafter in this Chapter Amond-
referred to as the Gift-tax Act), in sub-section (1),- meot of 
~ection 11. (i) the words "without reasonable cause", wherever they occur, 
shall be omitted; 
(ii) the following proviso shall be inserted at the end, namely:-
"Provided that in the cases referred to in clause (a) or 
clause (b), no penalty shall be imposable if the person proves 
that there was reasonable cause for the failure referred to in 
those clauses.". 
~ " .. h 
41. In the Gift-tax Act, after section 35C, the following section shall 
be inserted, namely:-
'35D. (1) In any prosecution for any offence under this Act 
which requires a culpable mental state on the part of the accused, 
the COUl"t shall presume the existence of such mental state b~t it 
shall be a detence for the accused to prove the fact that he had no 
In5Crtion 
of new 
section 
~m. 
Presump-
tion 118 to 
culpable 
meatal 
state. 

fiousing 
and 
Urban 
Develop-
ment 
Corpora-. 
tion Ltd. 
to be 
exempt 
for a 
certain 
period 
from 
liability 
to pay 
income-
tax and 
surtax. 
16 
such mental state with reapect to the' act charpd as an ot!ellce in 
that prosecution. . 
Expla.nation.-In this sulHlection, uculpa~e mental state" in-
cludes intention, motive or knowledge of a fact, or belief in, or reason 
to believe, a fact. , 5 
(2) For the purposes of this section, a fact is said to be proved 
only when the court be:lieves it to exmt beyond reasonable doubt and 
not merely when its existence is established by a preponderance of 
probability.'. 
CHAPTER V • 10 
MISCELLANEOUS 
42. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Income-tax Act, 1981 
at' the Companies (Profits) Surtax Act, 1964, the Housing and Urban 
Development Corporation Ltd. (a Government company as deftned in 
43 of 1961. 
7of19U 
section 617 of the Companies Act, 1956) shall not be liable to pay any 15 lof1958. 
tax- tFi ..... J I I ~., 
(a) on its income for the previous year relevant to the assessment 
year commencing on the 1st day of April, 1986 and for the four pre-
vious years next foUowin'g that previous year; and 
(b) on chargeable profits for the previous years relevant to gO 
the· assessment yea.rs commencing on the 1st day of April, 1986 and 
the 1st day of April, 1987. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASoNs 
The Bill proposes to amend the Ill'COme-tax Act, 1961, the Wealth-tax 
Act, 1957. the Gift·tax Act, 1958 and to provide exemption to a Govern-
ment company from income-tax and surtax for a limited period. These 
amendments are intended mainly to implement certain proposals included 
in the Long Term Fiscal Policy, the Budget Speech for 1986-87 and certain 
announcements made in the Lok Sabha on the 5th May, 1986. 
The amendments to the direct tax laws are proposed to be made for the 
following purposes, namely:-
(a) to empower the Central Government to exempt by notification 
certain allowances received by the Members of Parliament and 
of the State Legislatures; 
(b) to enable a taxpayer deriving any profits or gains from an indus-
trial undertaking in any free trade zone to avail of the exist-
ing tax holiday of five years, at any time within a time frame 
of eight years beginning from the year in which the industrial 
undertaking commences production; 
(c) to introduce a system of allowing depreciation in respect of 
blocks of assets in place of the present system of depreciation on 
individual assets; 
(d) to empoyer the Central Government to declare by notification 
any area as "backward area" for the purposes of tax holiday; 
(e) to pl'Ovide that the deduction in respect of profits retained for 
export business will be equal to the aggregate of the four per 
cent of the net foreign exchange realisation and fifty per cent. of 
the remaining export profitt:i subject to the condition that the 
deductions shall not exceed the export profits; 
(f) to provIde, wIth certain exceptions,· that a return showing income 
below the taxable limit shall be deemed never to have been fur-
nished and to deny the benefit of carry forward of losses in a 
case where the return is furnished after the 31st July in the 
relevant year; 
(g) to delegate to the Commissioner of Income-tax the existing 
powers of the Central Board of Direct Taxes to reduce or waive 
interest paid or payable for late payment or non-payment of 
taxes subject to the fulfilment of certain ~onditions; 
(h) to enable the Central Government to' reorganise the Set~lement 
Commission so that it may consist of a Chairman and as many 
Vice-Chairmen and members as it thinks fit; 
(I) to remove weaknesses in the provisions in the direct tax laws 
in respect of penalties and prosecutions so as to shift the burden 
17 

18 
of Pl'oof on tbe assessee and to provide that once th" evasion of 
tax is proved, the intention to evade need not be proved by tbe 
Income-tax Department; 
(j) to remove an anomaly in the existing provisions in respect of 
cases where penalty is impossible for concealment of income 
even if the taxpayer has no intention to fabricate evidence or to 
conceal his undisclosed in<:ome after search and seizure; 
(k) to continue the exemption to the Housing and Urban Develop-
ment Corporation Limited from the payment of income-tax and 
~urtax for a limited period. 
The BiH seeks to achieve the above objects. 
NEW DELHI; VISHW ANATH PRATAP SINGH, 
13th August, 1986. 
PR~SIDENT'S RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLE 111 AND 274 Or 
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA 
[Copy of letter No. 155J57J86-TPL, dated the 13th August, 1986 from 
~hri Vishwanath Pratap Singh to the Secretary-General, Lok Sabhal 
The President, baving been informed of the subject matter of the pro-
posed Bill, further to amend the Income-tax Act, 1961, wealth-tax Act, 
1957. Gift-tax Act, 1958 and exempt the total income and chargeable pro-
fits of the Housing and Urban Development Corporation Limited from 
income-tax and surtax respectively, has recommended under article 117(1) 
and article 274(1) of the Constitution of India, introduction and also con-
sideration under article 117(3) of the Taxation Laws (Amendment and 
Miscellaneous Provisions) Bill, 1986, in Lok Sabba. 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM. 
Clauses 15 and 35 of the Bill seek to amend sectioD 245B of the Income-
tax Act, lli61 and section 22B of the Wealth-tax Act, 1957, respectively. 
to enable the Central Government to reorganise the Income-tax Settlement 
Comm~lJion and the Wealth-tax Settlement Commission by appolnttna a 
Chaltmttn and as many Vice-Chairmen and members as it thinks ft.t. 
2. Clauses 17 and 37 of the aill seek to empower the Chairman of the 
Income-tax Settlement Commission and wealdt-tax Settlement Commis-
sion to constitute Benches to discharge the functions of the said Settlement" 
Commission. Each Bench will consist of three membet:'s. 
3. The implementation of the said provisions will call for the appoint-
ment of additional officers and staff. The expenditure likely to be involv-
ed in the first year on addition of one more Bench consisting of a Vice-
Chairman and two members is estimated at rupees five lakhs as recurring 
expenditure and rupees three lakhs as non-recurring expenditure. 
4. The Bill does not involve any other expenditure of a re~urring or 
non-recurring nature. 
19 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 5(.1) (b) of the Bill seeks to empower the Central Government to 
prescrilJe percentage on the written down value of any block of assets 
which may be allowed as a deduction under section 32 of the Income-tax 
Act. 1961. Clause l1(b) of the Bill seeks to insert sub-section (4) in 
section 80HHC whereunder the Central Government is proposed to be 
empowered to prescribe the form in which 'the accountant will give the 
report regarding the claim by the assessee of the amount of any foreign 
exchange realisation. The matters in respect of which rules may be made 
by the Central Government are matters of administrative detail. 
2. The delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal 
character. 
2Q 

ANNEXURE 
Ex'l!RA.C'l's nlOM THE" INCOMB-T AX AcT, 1961 
(43 OF 1961) 
... ... ... ... 
10. In computing the total income of a previous year of any-person, any 
income falling within any of the following clauses shall not be included-
... ... ... • 
(17) any daily allowance reeeived by any person by reason of his 
membership of Parliament or of any State Legislature or of any Com-
mittee thereof or any allowance received 'by a member of either House 
of Parliament under the Members of Parliament (Additional Faci-
lities) Rules, 1975; 
• • • 
lOA. (1) '" • • • 
(3) The profits and gains referred to in sub-section (1) shall not 
be included in the total income of the assessee in respect of the assess-
ment year relevant to the previous year in which the industrial under-
taking begins to manufacture or produce articles or things (such assess-
ment year being hereafter in this section referred to al the initial assess-
ment year) and each of the four assessment years immediately succeed-
ing the initial as!!e!!sment year. 
(7) Notwithstanding anything contained in the foregoing proviSions 
of this section, where the assessee, before the expiry of the time allowed 
under sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) of section 139. whether fixed 
nMtrlnally or on extension, for fumishing the retum of income for the 
initial asseSfiment ye~r, furnishes to the Income-tax Officer a decla-
ration in writing that the provisions of this section may' ntrt be made 
applicable to him, the provisions of this section sha:ll not apply to him 
fnr any of the relevant assessment years. 
E;cplll1tation.-For the purposes of this section.-
(i) "free trade zone" means the Kandla Free Trade Zone and the 
Santacruz Electronics Export ProcessinR; Zone and includes any other 
free trade zone which the Central Government "may, by notification in 
the Official Gazette, specify for the purposes of this set!tlon; 
(ii) "relevant\ assessment years" means the inidal assessment 
year and four assessment years immediately succeeding the initial 
asseRsment year. 
• • • • • 
21 
Incomes 
not in-
cluded hi 
total 
income. 
Special 
provision 
in respect 
ofncwly 
established 
industrial 
undertak-
inp in 
free trade 
zone~, 

Depr~ia­
tion. 
22 
38. (1) In respect of depreciation of buildings, machinery, plant or 
furniture owned by the assessee and used for the purposes of the busi-
ness or profession, lhe following deductions shall, !3ubject to the provi-
sions of section 34, be allowed-
(i) in the case of ships other than ships ordinarily plying on 
inland waters, such percentage on the actual cost thereof to the 
assessee as may, in any case or class of cases or in respect of any 
period or periods. be prescribed: 
Provided that different percentages ~ay be prescribed for dif-
ferent periods having regard to the date of acquisition of the ship; 
(if) in the case of buildings, machinery, plant or furniture, other 
than ships covered by clause (i), such percentage on the written 
down value thereof as may in any case or class of cases be prescribed: 
Provided that where the actual cost of any machinery Of plant 
does not exceed seven hund-red and fifty' rupees, the actual cost 
thereof shall be allowed as a deduction in respect of the previous 
year in which such machinery or plant is first put to use by the 
assessee for the purposes of his business or profession: 
Provided further that no deduction shall be allowed under this 
clause or clause (iii) in respect of any motor car manufactured out-
side India, where such motor car is acquired by the assessee after the 
28th day of February, 1975 and is used otherwise Uian in a business 
of running it on hire for tourists: 
(iia) in the case of any new machinery or plant (other than ships 
and aircraft) which has o(len installed after the 31st day of March, 1980 
but before the 1st day of April. 1985, a further sum equal to one-half 
of the amount admissible under clause (ii) (exclusive of extra allow-
ance for double or multiple shift working of the machinery or plant 
and the extra allowance in respect of machinery or plant installed in 
any premises used as a hob·1) in respect of the previous year in which 
such machinery or plant is installed or, if the machinery or plant is 
first put to use in the immediately succeeding previous year than, 
in respect of that previous year: 
Provided that no Cleduction shall be allowed under this clause in 
respect of-
. (ta)' any machinery or plant installed in any office premises or 
any residential accommodation; 
'(b) any office appliances or road transport vehicles; and 
(e) any machinery or plant, the whole of the actual cost of 
which is allowed as a deduction (whethef bv way of depreclatlon 
or otherwise) in computin~ the income char~eable under the 
head "Profits and gains of busine,:;s or profession" of anyone pre-
viOUI y~ar. ' '"!'"V ... 

23 
ExpZanati<>n.-For the purposes of this claue,-
(a) "new machinery or plant" shalJ have the meaning 
assigned to it in clause (2) of the Explanation below clause 
(vi) of this sub-~ection; 
(b) "residential accommodation" includes accommodation 
in the nature of a guest house but does not include premises 
used as a hot.el; 
(iii) in the case of arlY building. machinery, plant or furniture 
which is sold., discarded, demolished or destroyed in the previous year 
(other than the previous year in which it is first brought into use), the 
amount by which the moneys payable in respect of such building, 
machinery, plant or furniture, together with the amount of scrap value, 
if any, fall short of the written down value thereof: 
Provided that such deficiency is actually written off in the books 
of the assessee. 
Explanation.-For the purposes of this clause,-
(1) "Moneys payable" in respect of any building machinery, 
plant or furniture inc1udes-
(a) any insurance. salvage or compensation moneys pay-
able in respect thereof; ~ 
(b) where the building, machinery, plant or furniture fs 
sold, the price for which it is sold, 
so, however, that where the actual cost of a motor car is, in accor-
dance with the proviso to clause (1) of section 43, taken to be 
twenty-five thousand rupees, the moneys payable in respect of such 
motor car shall be taken to be a sum which bears to the amount for 
which the motor car is sold or, as the case may be, the amount of 
any insurance, salv~l!~e Or compensation moneys payable in respect 
thereof (including the amount of scrap value, if any) the same 
proportion as the amount of twenty-five thousand rupees bears to 
the actual cost of the motor car to the assessee as it would have 
been computed before applying the said proviso; 
(2) "sold" includes a transfer by way of exchange or a com-
pulsory acquisition under any law for the time being in force hut 
does not include a transfer, in a scheme of amalgamation, of any 
asset by the amalgamating company to the amalgamated company 
where the amalgamated company is an Indian company; 
(iv) in the case of any building which has been newly erected 
after the 31st day of March, 1961, where the building is used solely for 
the purpose of residence of persons emp)oyed in the business and the 
income of each such person chargeable under the head "Salaries" is 
ten thousand rupees. or less, or where the building is used solely or 
mainly for the welfare of $uch persons as a hospital creche, school 
canteen, library, recreational centre, shelter, rest-room or lunch-room. 
a sum equal to forty per cent. of the actual cost of the building to the 
assessee ill respect of the previous year of erection of the building; but 
any such sum shall not be deductible in determIning the written down 
value for the purposes of clause (ii) of sub-section (1); 

(v) in tbe case of any new building, the erection of which is com-
pleted after the 31st day of March, 1967, where the building is owned 
by an Indian company and used by such company as a hotel and such 
hotel is for the time being approved in this behalf by the Central 
Government, a sum equal to twenty-five per cent. of the actual. cost of 
erection of the building to the assessee, in respect of the previous yeG 
in whieh the erection of the building is completed or, if such building 
is first brought into use as a hotel in the immediately succeeding pre-
vious year, then in respect of that previous year; but any such sum 
shall not be deductible in determining the written down value for the 
purposes of clause (it); 
(vi) in the case of a new ship or a new aircraft acquired after the 
31st day of May, 1974 by an assessee engaged: in the business of opera-
tion of ships or aircraft or in the case of new machinery or plant (other 
than office appliances or road transport vehicles) installed after that 
date for the purposes of business of generation or distributioR of elec-
tricity or any other form of power or of construction, manufacture or 
production of anyone or more of the articles or things specified in 
items 1 to 24 (both inclusive) in the list in the Ninth Schedule or in 
the case of new machinery or plant (other than office appliances or road 
transport vehicles) installed after that date in a small-scale industrial 
undertaking for the purposes of business of manufactUre or production 
of any other articles or things, a sum equal to twenty per cent of the 
actual cost of the ship, aircraft, machinery or plant to the assessee, in 
respect of the previous year in which the ship or aircraft is acquired or 
the machinery or plant is installed, or if the ship, aircraft, machinery 
(lr plant is first put to us~ in the immediately succeeding previous 
year, then, in respect of that previous year; but any such sum shall not 
be deductible in determining the written down value for the purposes 
of clause (ii) ~ 
Provided that the assessee may, before the expiry of the time allow-
ed under sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) of section 139, whether 
fixedori&inally or on extension, for furnishing the return of income for 
the assessment year in respect of which the first becomes entitled to 
deduction under this clause, furnish to the Income-tax Officer a decla-
ration in writing that the provisions of this clause shall not apply to 
him, and if he does so, the proviSions of this clause shall not apply to 
him for that assessment year and for every subsequent assessment 
year; so, however, that the assessee may, by notice in writing furnished 
to the Income-tax Officer before the expiry of the time allowed under 
SUb-section (1) or sUb-::;ection (2) of section 139, whether fixed origi-
nally or on extension, for furnishing the return of income for any such 
subsequent assessment year, revoke hi~ declaration and upon such re-
vocation, the proviSions of this clause shall apply to the allSessee for 
. that subsequent assessment year and for every assessment year there-
after: ....... 
Provided further that no deduction shall be allowed under this 
clause in respect of-
(4) any machinery or plant installed in any office premises or 
any residential accommodation, including any accommodation in 
the nature of a guest-house: 

II of 1922. 
25 
(b) any ship, aircraft, machinery or p1ant in ·respect of whlcJlr. 
the deduction by way of development rebate is allowable under 
section 33; and 
(e) any ship or aircraft acquired after the 31st day of March, 
1976 or any machinery or plant installed after that date. . 
Exp14nation.-For the purposes of this clause,-
(1) "new ship" or "new aircraft" includes a ship or air-
craft which before the date of acquisition by the assE!SSeO was 
used by any other person, if it was not at any time previous 
to the date of such acquisition owned by any person resident 
in India: 
(2) "new machinery or plant" includes machinery or plant 
which before its installation by the assessee was used outside 
India by any other person, if the following conditions are ful-
filled, namely:-
(a.) such machinery or plant was not, at any time pre..-
vious to the date of such installation by the assessee, 
used in India; 
(b) such machinery or plant is imported into India 
from any country outside India; and 
(e) no deduction on account of depreciation in res-
pect of such machinery or plant has been allowed or is 
allowable under the p~ovisions of the Indian Income-tax 
Act, 1922 or this Act in computing the total income of any 
person for any period prior to the date of the installation 
of the machinery or plant by the assessee: 
(3) an industrial undertaking shall be deemed to be a 
small-scale industrial undertaking, if the aggregate value of 
the maChinery and plant installed, as on the last day of the 
previous year, for the purposes of the business of the under..J 
taking does not exceed seven hundred and fifty thousand 
rupees; and for this purpose the value of any machinery or 
plant shall be,-
(a.) in the case of any machinery or plant owned by 
the assessee, the actual cost ther'~of to the assessee; and 
(b) in the case of any machinery or plant hired by the 
assessee, the actual cost thereof as in the case of the 
owner of such machinery or plant. 
(lA) Where the business or profesSion is carried on in a building Dot 
owned by the assessee but in respect of which the assessee holds a lease 
or other right of occupancy and any capital expenditure is incurred by the 
assessee for the purposes of the business or profession after the 31st day of 
March, 1970 on the construction of any structure or doing of any work in 
or in relation to, and by way of renovation or extension of, or improvement 
to, the building, then, in respect' of depreciation of such structure or work, 
the following deductions shall. subject to the provisions of section 34. be 
allowed-
(i) such percentage on the written down value of the structure or 
work as may in any ease or class of cases be prescribed; 

Inveft/· 
melli 
allowaac:c. 
26 
(ii) in the case of lUll' such structure or work which is sold, dis-
carded, demolished, destroyed or is surrendered as a result of the 
determination of the lease or other right of occupancy in respect of the 
building in the previous year (other than the previous year in which 
it is constructed or done) the amount by which the moneys payable in 
respect of such structure or work together with the amount of SCl'ap 
value, if any, fall short of the written down value thereof: 
Provided that such defiCiency is actually written off in the books 
el the assessee. 
E.tplcmation.-For the purposes of this clause,-o 
(i) "moneys payable", in respect of any structure or work, 
includes-
(a) any insurance or compensation moneys payable in res.-
pect thereof; 
(b) where the structure Or work is sold, the price for 
which it is soldj and 
(ii) "sold" shan have the meaning assigned to it in the 
Explanation to clause (iii) of sub-section (1). 
(2) Where, in the asseSSnl.:nt of the assessee, (or, if the assessee is a 
rc:~tered firm or an unregistered firm assessed a9 a registered firm, in the 
assesament of its partners) full effect cal1not be given to any allowance 
under clause (i) Or clause (ii) or clause (Ha) or clause (iv) or clause (t:) 
er clause (vi) of sub-section (1) or under clause (i) of sub-section (lA) 
in any previoUs year owing to there being no profits or gains chargeable 
for that previous year, or owing to the profits or gains chargeable being 
less than the allowance, then, subject to the provisions of sub-section (2) 
ef section 72 and sub-section (3) of section 73, the allowance or part of 
ibe allowance to which effect has not been given as the case may be, shall 
be edded to the amount of the allowance for depreciation for the following 
previous year and deemed to be part of th2t allowance, or if there is no sucb 
allowance for that previous year, be deemed to be the allowance f.or that 
previo 11s year, and so on for the succeeding previous years. 
32A. (1) '" '" '" 
(2) The ship or aircraft or machinery or plant referred to in sub-
section (1) shall be the following namely:-
(a) a new ship or new aircraft acquired after the 31st day of 
March, 1976, by an assessee engaged in the business of operation of 
ahips or aircraft; 
(b) any new machinery or plant installed after the 31st day of 
March, 1976-
(i) for the purposes of business of generation or distribu-
tion of electricity or any other form of power; or 
(ii) in a small-scale industrial undertaking for the purposes 
of business of manufacture or production of any article or thing; 
or 

II of 1'22. 
2 of 1886. 
27 
(iii) in any oth~r industrial undertaking for the purposes of 
business of construction, manufacture or production of any 
article or thing, not being an article or thing sp.!cified in the list 
in the Eleventh Schedule; 
(c) any new machinery or plant installed after the 31st day of 
March, 1983, but before the 1st day of April, 1988, for the purposes 
()f business of repairs to ocean-going vessels or other powered craft 
if the business is carried on by an Indian company and the business 
so carried on is for the time being approved for the purposes of this 
clause by the Central Government. 
Explana.tion.-For the purposes ·of this sub-section and sub-
5ections (2B) , (2C) and (4) '.-
(1) "new ship" or "new aircraft" or "new machinery or 
plant" shall have the same meanings as in the Explanation to 
clause (vi) of sub-section (1) of section 32; 
• • • * 
34. (1) The deductions referred to sub-section (l) or sub-section 
(lA) of section 32 shall be allowed only if the prescribed particulars hav! 
lteen furnished; and the deduction referred to in section 33 shall be allowed 
enly if the particulars prescribed for the purpose of clause (i) and clause 
(ii) of sub-section (1) of section 32 have been furnished by the assessee in 
respect of the ship Or machinery or plant 
(2) For the purposes of section 32-
(i) the aggregate of all deductionf; in respect of depreciation made 
under sub-section (1) or sub-section (1A) of section 32 or under the 
Indian Income-tax Act, 1922 Or under any Act repealed by that Act or 
under the Indian Income-tax Act, 1886, shall, in no case, exceed the 
actual cost to the assessee of the bl\ilding, macfiinery, ptant, furni-
tUl'e, structure or work. as the case may be; 
Explanation.-Where a capital asset is transferred-
(i) by a holding company to its subSidiary company or by a 
subsidiary company to its holding company, or 
(ii) by a company to another company in a scheme of amalga-
mation. 
and the conditions specified in clause (iv), or clause (1'), or, as 
the case may be, clause (vi) of section 47 are satisfied, then, in 
determining the aggregate of all deductions In respect of deprecia-
tion under this clause, account shall also be taken of the deductions 
in respect of depreciation allowed in the case of the company from 
which the asset has been transferred; 
(ii) nothing in clause (i) or clause (ii) or clause (Ha) or clause 
(iv) o~ clause (v) or clause (vi) of sub-section (1) of section 32 
shall be deemed to authorise the allowance for any previous year of 
any sum in respect of any building, machinery, plant or furniture sold, 
discarded, demolished or destroyed in that year; 
(iii) nothing in elause (i) of sub-section (lA) of section 32 
shall be deemed to authorise the allowance for any previous year 
Condi-
tions for 
deprecia-
tion ;tl-
low'ance 
and deve-
lopmeat 
rebate. 

Expendi-
ture on 
scientific 
research 
Building. 
etc., 
partly 
used for 
business. 
etc., or 
DOt ex-
clusively 
so used. 
Profits 
chargeable 
28 
of any sum. in respect of any structure or work in or in relation 
to a building referred to in that sub-section which is sold. discard-
ed, demolished or destroyed or is surrendered as a result of ·the 
determination of the lease or other right of occupancy in respect 
of the building in that year. 
35. (1) 
(2) 
• 
... 
... ... 
... ... 
• • • 
... ... • 
(iv) where a deduction is allowed for any previous year under 
this section in respect of expenditure represented wholly or partly by 
an asset, no deduction shall be allowed under clauses (i), (ii) , (iia) , 
(iii) and (iv) of sub-section (1) or under sub-section (IA) of section 
32 for the same or any other previous year in respect of that asset; 
(v) where the asset mentioned in clause (ii) is used in the busi-
ness after it ceases to be used for scientific research related to that 
business, depreciation shall be admissible under clauses (i) , (ii) and 
(iii) of sub-section (1) of section 32. 
(2B) • ... • ... ... ... 
(e) Where a deduction is allowed for any previous year under 
this sub-section in respect of expenditure represented wholly or partly 
by an asset, no de<iuct.ion shall be allowed in respect of that asset 
under clauses (i), (ii) , (iia) and (iii) of sub-section (1) or under 
sub-section (IA) of section 32 for the same or any subsequent 
previous year. 
• ... • • ... 
38. (1) ... ... • ... • ... 
(2) Where any building, machinery, plant or furniture is not exc1u-
sivt"ly used for the purposes of the business or profession, the deductions 
under sub-clause (ii) of clause (a) and clause (c) of section 30, 
clauses (i) and (ii) of section 31 and clauses (i), (ii), (iia) and (iii) of 
sub-section (1) and sub-section (IA) of section 32 shall be restricted to 
a :fair proportionate part thereof which the Income-tax Officer may deter-
mine, having regard to the user of such building. machinery, plant or 
furniture for the purposes of the business or profession. 
... • ... • 
41. (1) • • • • • 
to tax. (2) Where any building, machinery, :plant or furniture which is owned by 
the assessee aDd which was or has been used for the purposes of business or 
profession is sold, discarded, demolished or destroyed and the moneys payable 
;n respect of such building, machinery, plant or furniture, as the case may be, 
together with 'the amount ~ scrap value. if any, exceed the written down value, 
so much of the excess as does not exceed the difference between; the actual cost 
a~d the written down value shall be chargeable to income-tax as income of the 
business Or 'J*ofession of· the previous year in which the moneys payable for 
the building, machinery, plant or furniture became due: 

29 
Provided that where the building sold, discarded, demolished or destroyed 
is a building to which Explanation 5 to section 43 applies, and the moneys pay-
able in respect of such building, together with the amount of scrap value, if any, 
exceed the actual cost as determined under that Explanation, so much of the 
excess as does not exceed the difference between the actual cost so determined 
and the written down value shall be chargeable to income-tax as income of the 
business or profession of such previous year: 
Provided further that where 8ft asset representing expenditure of a capital 
nature On scientific 'research within the meaning of clause (c) of sub-section 
(2B) oi section 35, read with clauae (4) of section 43 owiJed by the 8S6eSsee 
which was or has been used for the purposes of business after it ceased to be· 
used for the ·purpose of scientific research related to the business is sold, dis-
carded, demolished or destroyed, the provisions of this sub-section shall apply 
as if for the words "actuaJ cost", at the first place where they occur, the words 
"actual cost as increased by twenty..five per cent, thereor' had been substituted. 
Explc.nation.-Where the moneys 'Payable in respect of the building, machi-
nery, plan.t or fumiture referred to in this sub-section become due in a previous 
year in wbich the business or profession for the purpose of which the building, 
machinery, plant Or furniture was being used is no longer in existence, the 
provisions of this sub-section shall apply as if the business or profession is· in 
existence in that previous year. 
(2A) Where any structure or work in or in connection with a building, be-
ing the structure or work referred ,to in sub-section (1A) of section 32, is sold, 
discarded, demolished, destroyed or is surrendered as a result of the determina-
tion of the lease Or other right of occupancy in respect of the building and the 
moneys payable in respect of such structure or work together With the amount 
of !;crap value, if any, exceed the written down value, so much of the excess as 
does not exceed the difference between the actual cost of the structure or work 
and its written down value shall be chatgeable to income-tax as income of the 
husine!ll: Or profession of the previous yoar in which the moneys payable for 
the structure or work became due. 
Explanation I.-Where the moneys payable in reSpect of the structure or 
work referred to in this sub-section become due in a previous year in which 
the business Or profession for the putpOse of which the structure or work was 
con"tructed or done is no longer in existence, the provisions of this sub-section 
sball apply as if the business Or profession wore in existence in that previous 
year. 
Explanation 2 -For the ,PUl'POSCS of this sub-section, tbe expression 
"moneys payable" and the e1lpressioo "sold" shall have the same meaninp as 
in sub-section (1A) of SCQtioo 32. 
• • • • 
(4) Where·a deduction has been allowed in resPect of a bad debt or F'art 
of debt under ttte provisiODS of clause (vii) of sub-section (1 ) of section 36, 
then, if the amount subsequently recovered. on any such debt or part is greater 
than the difference between the debt or pan of debt and the mnount so allowed, 
the excess shatl be deemed to be prollts and gains of busineS$ or profession, and 
accordingly chargeable to income-tax as the income of the previous year in 
which it is recovered, whether the business or profession in respect of which 
the deduotion has been allowed is in existence in that year or not. 

DefinitiolUl 
of certain 
terms 
relevant 
to income 
from 
profits 
and gains 
of busi-
ness or 
profes-
sion. 
30 
ExpJanaiion.- The expression "moneys payable" and the expression "so,td" 
in &ub-section.s (2) and (3} shall have the same meanil18S as in sub-section 
(1) of section 32. 
(5) Where the business or profession rcfecre:d to in this section is no longer 
in existence and there is income chargeable 'to t.ax under sub-section (1), sub-
section (2). sub-section (2A), !iub-section (3) or sub-section (4) in respect 
of th·at business Or prcfession, any loss, not being a loss sustained in specu-
lation business or under the head "capital gains", which arose in that business or 
.profession during the previoUs year in which it ceased ,to exist and which could 
not be set off against any other income of that previous year shall, sO far as may 
he. be set off against. the income chargeable to tax under the sub-.sections afore-
said. 
• • • • • 
43. In sections 28 to 41 and in this section, unless the context otherwisE 
requires-
(1) "acluu) cost" means the actual cost of the asscts to the assessee, 
reduced by that portion of the cost thereof, if any, as has been met directly 
or indirectly by any other person or authority: 
Provided that where the actual cost of an asset, being a motor car 
which is acquired by the assessee after the 31st day of March. 1967 but 
hefore the lst day of March, 1975. and is used otherwise than in a business 
of running it on hire for louOstS. exceeds twenty-five thousand rupees, the 
excess of the actual cost over such amount shall be ignor&:l, and the actual 
cost thereOf shall be taken to be twenty.,five thousand rupees. 
Explanation J .-Where an asset is used in the business after It 
ceases to be used for scientific research related to that business and a 
deduction has to be made under clause (i), clause (ii) or clause (iii) of 
sub-section (1) or su b-section (1 A) Qf section 32 in respect of that asset. 
the actual cost of the asset to the assessee shall be the actual cost to the 
assessee as reduced by the amount of any deduction allowed under 
clause (iv) of sub-section (I) of section 35 or under any correspondin~ 
provision of the Indian Income-tax Act, 1922. It of 1922. 
ExplanatiOn 2_Wher~ an asset is acquired by the assessee by way nf 
gift or inheritance, the lsctual cost of the asset to the assessee shall 
be the written down vallie thereof as in the case of the previous owner 
for the previous year in which the asset is so acquired or the market 
value thereof on the da~ of such acquisition, whichever is the less . 
• • • • • 
Explanation 4_Where assets which had once belonged to the 
assessee and had been uaed by him for the purposes of his business 
or profession and thereafter ceased to be his prope?ty by reason of 
transfer or otherWise, are re-acquired by him, the actual cost to the 
assessee shan be the actual cost to him when he first acquired the 
assets less the depreCiation actually allowed to him under this Act 
or under the corre&ponding provisions' of the Indian 
Income-tax Act, 1922, diminished by any loss . deducted,· or 
as the case may be, increased by any profit assessed, under the' pro- 11 of 1922. 

11 of 1922. 
2 of 1886. 
11 of 1922. 
.- 31 
VlIIlons of clause (iii) of sub-section (/), or clause (ii) of sub-section 
(lA) , -of section 32 or &ub-section (2) or sub-section (2A) of section 
41 of this Act or under the corresponding provisions of the Indian 
Income-tax Act, 1922, or the actual price for which the asset is re-
acquired. by him, whichever is the less . 
• • • • • 
(6) "written down value" means--
(a) in the case of assets acquired in the previous year, the 
actual cost to the assessee; 
(b) in the case of assets acquired before the previous year, 
the actual cost to the assessee less all depreciation, actually allow-
ed to him under this Act, or under the Indian Income-tax Act, 1922 
or any Act repealed by that Act, or under any executive orders 
issued when the Indian Income-tax Act, 1886 was in force: 
Provided that in determining the written down value in respect 
of buildings. machinery or plant for the purposes of clause (i?) of 
sub-section (1) of section 32, "depreciation actually allowed" shall 
not include depreciation allowed under sub-clauses (a), (b) and (e) 
of clause (vi) of sub-section (2) of sect,on 10 of the Indian Income-
tax Act, 1922, where such depreciation was not deductible in deter-
mining the written down value for the purposes of the said claUse 
(vi). 
Explanation 1.-When in a case of succession in business or pro-
fession, an assessment is made on the successor under sub-section (2) 
of section 170 the written down value of any asset shall be the 
amount which would have been taken as its written down value if the 
assessment had been made directly on thepe.rscn succeeded to. 
Explanation 2.-When any capital asset is transferred by a hold-
ing company to its subsidiary company or by a subsidiary company 
to its holding company, then, if the conditions of clause (!v) or as the 
case may be, of clause (v) of section 47 are satisfied. the written 
down value of the transferred capital asset to the transferee com-
'pany shall be taken to be the saTTle as it would have been if the trans-
feror company had continuf'd to hold the capital asset for tbe purposes 
of its business. 
Explanation 2 A .-Where. in A scheme of amal~amation, any capi-
tal asset is transferred by the amahramatin~ comDanv to the amallla-
mated company and the ~malgamated companv is an Indian company, 
the written down value of the transferred capital asset to the amal-
~amated company shan be taken to be the same as it would have 
. been if the amal~amating company had continued to hold the capital 
asset for the purpm1es of its business. I 
·Erplanlltion 3'.-Any allowance in respect of anv depreciation 
ra:rripd f"rwam under flub-section (2) of section 32 shan be deemed to 
be denrnciation "actu~lly allowed". 
• • • • • 

Special 
provision 
for com-
pUling co .. 1 
of fttquisi-
lion in 
the case of 
depreciable 
assets. 
Mea.ningof 
"adjusted", 
"cost of 
improve-
ment" and 
"cost of 
acquisi-
tion". 
Oeductions. 
Profits 
charFable 
to tax. 
32 
SO. Where the capital asset is an asset in respect of which a de~tion 
on account of depreciation has been obtained by the assessee in any" pre-
vious year either under this Act or under the Indian Income-tax. Act, 11 of 1992. 
1922" or any Act repealed by that Act, or under executive Qt'c:lersialued :1 of 1886. 
when the Indian Income-tax Act, 1886, was in force, the prcwiJiGllS of 
sections 48 and 49 shall be subject to the following modifications:-
(1) The written down value, as defined in clause (6) of section 
43 of the asset as adjusted shall be taken as the cost ofacqu~ition of 
the asset. 
(2) Where under any provision of .section 49, read ,with sub-
section (2) of section 55, the fair market value of the asset on the 
1st day of April, 1974. is to be ~aken into account at the option 
of the assessee, then, the cost of acquisition of the asset shall, at the 
option of the assessee, be the fair market value of the asset on the 
said date as reduced by the amount of depreciation, if any, allowed 
to the assessee after the said date, and as adjusted. 
55. (1) For the purposes of sections 48, 49 and 50,-
(0) "adjusted", in relation to written down value or fair market value. 
means diminished by any loss deducted or increased by any profit assessed, 
under the provisions of clause (iii) of sub-section (J), or clause (ii) of sub-
section (lA), of section 32 Or sub-section (2) or sub--section (2A) of section. 
41, as the case may be, the computatiOn for this purpose being made with 
reference to the period commencin2 from the 1st day of April, 1974, ~ cases 
to which clause (2) of ~ection 50 applies; - ,. 
• • • • • 
. 5'7. The iocome ch-.1rgeable under the head "Income from other 6OUlalS" shall 
be computed after making the. foUowing deductions, namely:-
0) in the case of di"liden-ds, any rl!asonable sum paid by way of com-
mission or remuneraticn to a banker o~ any o'her person for the purpose" of 
" realising such dividend on behalf of the assessee; 
(ij) in the case of incame of-the n:atttrt·teferr~· t~ i~ clauses fiil- ~d 
(iii) of sub-section (i) of section 56, deductions, so far as may be, in accor-
dance with the provision" of sub-clause (ii) of claUSe (0) and clause (e) of 
section 30, section 31. and sub-sections (1). (l A) and (2) of section 32 and 
subject to the provisions of sections 34 and 38; 
• • • • • 
9. (1) • • • • 
(2) When any building, machinery. plant or furniture to which clauses (ii) 
and (iil') of sub-section (2) 'of section 56 apply are s(,ld, di~arded, demolisbed or 
destroyed, the provisions of sub-section (2) of section 41 shan apply, so far as 
may be, in computing the income cf an assessee under section 56 as they apply in 
computing the income of an asses~ee under t~e head "Profits and ~ains of business 
or profession". . . 

Return 
l,r income. 
33 
(3) . Whore any SottlICturo or wort reterted to in sub-secti\)n (lA) of section 
32 in OdD relation to a 'building to whiCh dause (iii) of sub-section' (2) of secti6n 
S6 2pplies is sold, discarded. demolished or destroyed or is surrendered as a 
result of the detccmination o£'the lease or other right of occupancy in l"~t of the 
building, the provisions of sub-section (2A) of section 41 shan apply, so far as 
may be, in computing the income of an a.~sc:o;see under section S6 as they apply 
in computing the income of an assessee under .the head "Profits and gains of 
business or professioo", 
Explanation_flor the pw'pose of this sectien, th.! expression "sold" shall 
have the same meaning as in s~tion (1) of section 32. 
... ... ... ... 
80BB. (1) • ... ... ... ... 
(10) Nothing contained in this section shall apply in relation to any 
undertaking engaged in mining. 
Explanation..-In this section, "backward area" means an area speci-
fied in the list in the Eighth Schedule, 
... ... ... ... • 
SOHBe. (1) Where an assessee, being an Indian company or a person 
(other than a company) resident in India, is engaged in the business of 
export out of India of any goods or merchandise to which this section 
upplies, there shall, in accordance with and subject to the provisions of 
this section, be allowed, in computing the total income of the assessee, a 
deduction of an amount, not exceeding fifty per cent. of the pronts derived 
by the assessee from the export of such goods or merchandise: 
Provided that an amount equal to the amount of the deduction claim-
ed under this sub-section is debited to the profit and loss account of the 
previous year in respect of which the deduction is to be al1(,wed and 
credited to a reserve account to be utilised for the purposes of the business 
of the assessee . 
• ... 
139. (1) ... 
... • 
CHAPTER XIV 
PROCEDURE FOR ASSESSMENT 
* ... 
... 
... 
(3) If any person who has not been served with a notice under sub-
section (2), has sustained a loss in any previous year under the head 
"Profits and gains of business or profes'!lion" or under the head "Capital 
gains" and claims that the loss or any part thereof should be carried 
forward under sub-section (1) of section 72 or sub-section (2) of section 
73, or sub-section (1) of section 74 or sub-section (3) of section 74A, he 
may furnish, within the time allowed under sub-section (l) or within 
such further time which, on an app!ication made in the pt'escribed 
manner, the Income-tax Officer may, in his discretion, allow, a return 
of loss in the prescribed form and verified in the prescribed manner and 
1 
Deduction 
in respect 
of profits 
and gains 
from 
newly 
established 
indu .. trial 
undertake 
inss or 
hotel 
hu~iness 
in back-
ward 
areas. 
Deduction 
in respect 
.,f prc-
fits re-
tainl.'~' 
.!ltport 
hu~inesl. 

Other 
amend-
ments. 
When tall 
payable 
and when 
aSlellee 
deemed 
in default. 
Penalty 
payable 
when 
to in 
default. 
containing such other particulars as may be preiCl'ibed, and all t1le 
provisiona of this Act shall apply as if It were a retum under suboosection 
(1). . 
• 
155. (1) 
(4A) 
• 
• 
• ... 
• 
... 
... 
• 
... ... 
(b) at any time before the expiry of ten years from the end 
of the previous year in which the ship or aircraft was acquired or 
the machinery or plant was installed, the assessee does not utilise 
the amount credited to the reserve account under sub-section (4) 
of 5ection 32A for the purposes of acquiring a new ship or a new 
aircraft or new machinery or plant other than machinery or plant 
of lhe nature referred to in clauSes (a), (b) and (d) of the proviso 
to sub-section (1) of section 32A for the pw-poses of the business 
of the undertaking; or 
• • ... • ... 
Explanation.-For the purposes of clause (b), "new ship" or 
"new aircraft" or "new machinery or plant" shall have the same 
meanings as in the Ex~lanat"on to clause (vi) of sub-section (1) of 
section 32. 
(: .. • ... 
220. (1) ... • • • • 
(2A) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (2), the Board 
may reduce or waive the amount of interest payable by an assessee 
under "the said sub-section if, on the recommendation made by the Com-
missioner in this behalf, it is satisfied thnt-
(0 .payment of such amount would cause genuine hardship to 
the assessee: 
(iii) defaUlt in the payment of the amount on which interest was 
payable under .the said sub-section was due to circumstances beyond 
the control of the assessee; and 
(i'ii) the assessee has co-operated in any inquiry relating to the 
allessment or any proceeding for the recovery of any amount due 
from him. 
.. ... • 
221. (l) When an assessee is in default oX' is deemed to be in default 
in making a payment of tax, he shall, in addition to the amount of the 
arrears and the amount of inte'rest payable unde.r sUb-section (2) of 
section 220, be liable by way Of penalty. to pay such amount as the 
Income-tax Officer may direct, and in the caSe of a continuing default, 
such further amount or amounts as the Income-tax Officer may. from 
time to time, direct, so, however, that the total amount of penalty does 
not exceed the amount of tax in arrears: 
Provided that befQl'e levying any such penalty. the assessee 'Shall be 
given a reasonable" opportu~ity of being heard: 
PrOvided further that where the Income-tax Officer is satisfied that 
the default was for good and sUftictent reasons, no penalty shall be levied 
UDder this section. 

35 
Expla.7U!tion. ........ For the removal of doubt, it is hereby declared that an 
assessee shall not cease to be liable to any penalty under this sub-section 
merely by re'ason of the fact that before the levy of such penalty he has 
paid the tax. 
• • • • • 
2458. (1) The Central Governhlellt shall constitute a commission tg 
be called the Income-tax Settlement COmmiSsion (hereafter in this 
Chapter referred to as "the Settlement Commission") for the settlement 
of cases under this Chapter. 
(2) The Settlement Commission shall consist of a Chairman and two 
other members and shall function within the Department of the Central 
Government dealing with di,rect taxes. 
(2A) Notwithstanding anything contained 'in sub~ction (2), when 
the post of one of the other members of the Settlement Commission is 
vacant for any reason, the Chairman and the other mer.lber of the Settle-
ment Commission may function as, and exercise and discharge the powers 
and functions of, the Settlement Commission under this Chapter: 
Provided that if in any case the Chairman and members 'So func-
tioning differ on any point o.r points, they shall state the point or points 
on which they differ and refer the same as soon as may be after the 
said vacancy is filled, to the member appointed to fill the vacancy for 
hearing on such point or point'S and such point or points shall be decided 
according to his opinion. 
(3) The Chairman and other members Of the Settlement eonimis-
sion shall be appointed by the Central Government from amongst pe.rsons 
of intl"grity and outstanding ability, having special knowledge. of, and 
experience in, problems relating to direct taxes and business accounts: 
Provided that, where a member of the Board is appointed as the 
Chairman or as a member of the Settlement Commission, he shall cease 
to be a member of the Board: 
Provided further that, until the members are appointed under this 
sub-section, it shall be competent for the Central Government to require, 
from time to time, any two members of the Board to serve' as members 
ot the Settlement Commission for such period as the Central Government 
thinks fit, in addition to their duties as members of the Board. 
• • • • 
WD. (1) '" '" • • • 
(5) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (2A) of section 245B, the 
materials brought on record before the Settlement Commission shall be 
considered by all the members thereof before passing any order under 
sub-eection (4) and, in the case of a difference of opinion among the 
membt.rs, the opinion of the majority shall prevail and such order shall 
be expressed in terms of the' views of the majority . 
• '" • • 
245F. (1) '" '" '" • • 
(5) The Settlement Commis'Sion shall, subject to the provisions of this 
Chapter, have power to regulate its own procedure (including the fixation 
of places and times of its rneeting-;) and may act notwithstanding that 
Income-laX 
SettlelDOlll 
CommiflSioD. 
Procedure 
of receipt 
of an appli-
cation under 
section 
24JC. 
Powers 
and pro-
cedure of 
Soldemeat 
Oomminion 

Failure.' to 
furnish 
infor-
mation 
reprdiq 
securitiel, 
etc. 
Failure 
to furnish 
returns, 
comply 
with 
notices 
conceal-
ment of 
income. 
etc. 
·l 
all the members of the. Settlell1ent Commi881on are not presen~ at any 
of its meetings. 
• • • 
Z7U. If any p~rson without reasonable excuse fails to comply with a 
notice issued under sub-section (6) of section 94, the Income-tax Officer 
may direct that such person shall .pay by way of penalty a sum not ex-
ceeding five hundred rupees and by way of further penalty a like amount 
for every day after the Infliction of SUch penalty during which the 
failul'e contmues. . . 
271. (1) If the Income-tax Officer or the ~ppellate Assistant Com-
missioner or the Commissioner (Appeals) in the course of any proceed-
ings under this Act, is satisfied that any pe;rson-
(a) has without reasonable cause failed to furnish the return of 
total income which he was ~uired to fl,lrnish under sub-section (l) 
of section 139 or by notice given under sub-section (2) of section 139 
or section 148 or has without reasonable cause failed to furnish it 
within· the time allowed and in the manner requi,red by sub-section 
(l) of section 139 or by such notice, as the case JDaY be, or 
(b) has without reasonable cause failed to comply with a notice 
under 'Sub-section (1) of section 142 or sub-section (2) of section 143 
or falls to comply with a direct on issued under sub-section (2A) of 
section 142, or 
(c) has concealed the particulars of his income or fUrllished 
inaccurate particulars of such income, 
he may di.rect that such person shall pay by way of penalty,-
(i) in the cases referred to in clause (a) ,-
(a) in the case of a person referred to in sub-section (4A) 
of section 139 where the total income in respect of which he is 
assessable as a representative assessee does not exceed the 
maximUm amount which is not chargeable to income-tax, a sum 
not exceeding one per cent. of the to~al income computed under 
this Act without giving e1fect to the provisions of sections 11 and 
12, for each year o.r part thereof during which the default 
continued; 
(b) in any other case, in addition to the amount of the tax, 
if any, payable by him, a sum equal to two per cent. of the 
assessed tax for every month during which the default continued. 
E:z:plCL1&CLtiOfl..-In this clause, "assessed tax" means tax as reduced 
by the awn, if any, deducted at source under Chapter XVIl-B or paid 
in advance under Chapter XVII-C; 
(ii)· in the cases referred to in clause (b), in addition to any tax 
payable by him, a sum which shall not be less than ten per cent. but 
which shall not exceed fifty per cent. of the amount of the tax, if 
any, which 'would have:been avoided if the income returned by 
such person had ,been accepted as the correct income; 
(iii) in the cases referred to in clause (c), in addition to any tax 
payable by him, a sum which shall not be less than, but which shall 
not exceed twice, the amount of tax soufht to be evaded by reason 
. of the concealment of particulars of his income or the furnishing of 
inaccurate particulars of such income: 

, .37 
Provided that,· if in a c!\Se falling under clause (c), the amount of 
. income (as determined by the Income-tax Oftlcer on assessment) in 
respect of which the . particulars have been concealed or inaccurate 
particulars have been fUrnished exceeds a su~ of twenty-five thousand 
rupees, the Income-tax Officer shall not is'Sue any direction for payment 
by way of penalty without the previous approval of the Inspecting 
Assistant Commissioner. 
E:rptallatiO'n I.-Where in respect of any facts material to the com-
putation of the total income of any person under this Act,-
(A) such person fails to offer an explanation or offe.rs an expla-
nation which is found by the Income-tax Officer or the Appellate 
Assistant Commissioner or the Commission~ (Appeals) to be false, or 
(B) such person offers an explanation which he is notable to 
substantiate, 
then, the amount added or disallowed in computing the total income 
of such person as a result thereof shall, for the purposes of clause (c) 
of this sub-section, be deemed to represent the income in respect of 
\vhich particulars have been concealed: 
Provided that nothing contained in this Explanation shall apply to 
"I case referred to in clause (B) in respect of any amount added or dis-
'Howed as a result of the rejection of any explanation offered by such 
oerson, if sut"h explanation is bona fi~ and all the facts relating to the 
!'lame and material to the computation of his total income have been. 
disclosed by him. 
Exp7an'ation 2.-Where the source of any receipt, deposit, outgoing 
or investment in any assessment year is claimed by any person to be an 
amount which had been added in computing the income or deducted 
in computing the loss in the assessment of such person for any earlier 
assessment year or years but in respect of which no penalty under 
clause (iii) of this sub-section had been levied, that part of the amount 
so added or deducted in such earlier assessment year immediately 
preceding the year in which the receipt, deposit, outgoing or investment 
appears (such earlier assessment year hereafter in this Exp1.ar.ation 
referred to as the first preceding year) which is sufficient to cover the 
amount represented by such receipt, deposit or· outgoin~ or value of 
such investment (such amount or value hereafter in this Explanation 
referred to as the utllised amount) shall be treated as the income of the 
assessee, particulars of which had been· concealed or inaccurate parti-
culars of which had been furnished for the first preceding year; and 
where the amount so added or deducted in the first precedinS{ year is 
not suffir-l('nf tf' t''lver the utiIiRed amount, that nat"t of the amount so 
added or ncductei in the year immediatelv precedinl!' the first precedin<t 
veal' which is sufficient to cover such part of the utilised amount as io:; 
not ~o covered shall be treated to be the income of the assessee, parti· 
r-ulars of which had been concealed or inaccurate particulars or whit'h 
h'l.d been furnished for the veal' immediatelv preceding the first nreced-
inS{ vear and so on, until the entire utilised amount is covered by the 
amounts l'!0 ndded- or deducted in such earlier assessment ~'ears. 
F~planati(jn 3.-Where any person who has not previouslv been 
11 of 1922. as<;es~ed ~l~d~r the Indian Income-tax A-t, 1922, or under this Act. faUs. 

38 
without l'edSionable cause, to furnisb within the period specified in sub-
clause (iii) of clause (a) of sub-section (1) of section 153 8 return of hJs 
incollle which he is required to furnish under section 139 in respect of 
any assessment year commencing on or after the 1st day of April, 1974, 
and, until the expiry of the period aforesaid, no notice has been issued 
to him under sub-section (2) of section 139 or section 148 and the Income-
tax Officer or the Appellate Assistant Commissioner or the Commis-
sioner (Appeals) is satisfied that in respect of such assessment year sucn 
pers..,n has taxable income, then, such perso;l shall, for the purposes of 
daul:Ie (c) of this sub-section, be deemed to have concealed the parti-
culars of his income in respect of such assessment year, notwithstanding 
that such person furnishes a return of his income at any time after. the 
expiry of the period aforesaid in pursuance of a notice under section 148, 
Explallati.on 4.-For the purposes of clause (iii) of. tllis sub-section, 
the expression "the amount of tax sougnt to be evaded:",-
(a)· in any case where the amount of income in respect of which 
particulars have been concealed or inaccurate particulars have been 
furnished exceeds the total income assessed, means the tax that 
would have been chargeab!e on the income in respect of which parti-
culars have been concealed or inaccurate particulars have been fur-
'lished had such income been the total income; 
(b) in any case to which Explanation 3 applies, means the tax 
on the total income assessed; 
(c) in any other case, means the difference between the tax on 
the total income assessed and the tax that would have been charge-
able bad such total income been reduced by the amount of income 
in rESpect of which particulars have been concealed or inaccurate 
particulars have been furnished. 
<ExPlanation 5.-Where in the course of a search under section 132, 
the· aseessee· is ·found to be the owner of any money, bunion, jewellery 
or other valuable article or thing (hereafter in this Explanation referred 
to u assets) and the assessee claims that such assets have been acqUired 
by him by utilising (wholly or in part) his income,""':' 
,(a) for any previous. year which has ended before the date of 
the search, but the return of income for such year haa not been 
furnished before the said date, or, where such return has been fur-
nishf!d before the said d'lte,. such income has not been declared 
therein; or 
(b) for any previous year which is to end on or after the date 
of the search, 
then, notwithstanding that such income. is declared by him in any return 
of income furnished on or after the date of the search, he shall, for the 
purpo8E!~ of imposition of a penalty under clause (c) of sub-section (1) 
of this section, be deemed to have concealed the particulars of his in-
~ome or furnished inaccurate particulars of such income, unless such 
income is, or the transactions resulting in such income are, recorded-
(i) in a case falling under clause (a), before the date of the 
se:lrch; and 
,.". . 

39 
(ii) in a case falling under clause (b), on or before such date, 
in the Looks of account, if any, mSintained by him for any source of 
income or such income is otherwise disclosed to the Commissioner be-
fore tile said date. 
• • • • • 
Z71A. Without prejudice to the provisions of section 271, it any pers,on, 
without reasonable cause, fails to keep and maintain any such books of 
account and other documents as required by section 44AA or the rules 
made thereunder, in respect of any previous year or to retain such books 
c.'~ account and other documents for the }Jeriod specified in the said rules, 
the Income-tax Officer or the ApPellate Assistant Commissioner or the 
Commissioner (Appeals) m.ay direct that such person shall pay, by way 
of penalty, a sum which shall not be less than ten per cent. but which 
shall not exceed fifty per cent. of the amount of the tax, it any, which 
would have been avoided if the income returned, by such person had 
been accepted as the correct income. 
271D. If any person fails, without reasonable cause, to get his accounts 
~mdited in respect of any previous year or years relevant to an assess-
ment year or obtain a report of such audit as required under section 44AB, 
the Income-tax Officer may direct that such person ~hall pay, by 
way of penalty, a sum equal fa one-half per cent. of the total sales, 
turnover or gross receipts, as the case may be, in busines~, or of the 
gross receipts in profession, in such previous ye~r or years or a sum 
of one hundred thousand rupees, whichever is less. 
272A, (1) • • • • • 
(2) If a person, without reasonable cause or excuse, fails.-
(a) to furnish in due time any of the returns or statements men-
tioned in section 133, section 206, section 285, section 285B or section 
286; or 
(b) to allow inspection of any register referred to in section 134 
or of any entry in such register or to allow copies of such register 
or of any entry therein to be taken; Or 
(ba) to deliver or cause to be delivered in due time a copy of 
the decI:1J'ation mentioned in section 197A; or 
(c) to furnish a certificate as required by section 203; or 
(d) to deduct and pay tax as required by sub-section (2) of 
sectbll 226, . 
he shall pay. hy way of penalty, a sum which may extend to ten rupees 
for everv day during which the failure continues. 
• • • 
272AA. (1) If a person, without reasonable C811se, fails to comply with 
the provisions of section 133B, he shall, on an order passerl by the 
Inspecting Assistant Commissioner; Assistant Director of Inspection or 
the Income-tax Officer, as the case may be, pay, by way of penalty, a 
sum which may extend to one thousand rupees. 
(2) No order under sub-section (1) shall be passed liDless the person 
on whom the penalty is proposed to be imposec:i is given an opportunity 
of being heard in the matter. . 
Failure 
to keep, 
maintain 
Or retain 
books of 
account, 
documents. 
etc. 
Failure 
to get 
accounts 
audited. 
Penalty 
for failure 
to answer 
questions, 
sign state-
ments, allow 
inspections, 
Penalty 
for 
failure 
to comply 
with the 
provisions 
of section 
1338. 

Pe •• lty lor 
failure to 
comply 
wit .. the 
proviaioDa 
of sec:tioa 
13'A. 
Fal. 
estima .. 
of, or 
_ilure 
to pay, 
advance 
tall:. 
40 
2128. (1) If a person, without reasonable cause, fails to comply with 
the provisiolll of section 139A, he shall, on an order passed by the 
Income-tax Officer, pay, by way of penalty, a sum which may ex-tend 
to five· hundred rupees. 
(2) No order under sub-section (1) shall be passed unless the person 
on whom the penalty is proposed to be imposed is given an opportunity 
of being heard in the matter. 
273. (1) If the Income-tax Officer, in the course of any proceeding! 
in connection with the regular assessment for any assessment year, is 
sa tisfied that aDy assessee-
(a) has furnished under clause (0) of sub-section (1) of section 
209A a etatement of the advance tax payable by him which he knew 
or had reason to beUeve to be untrue, or 
(b) has without reasonable cause failed to furnish a statement 
of the advance tax payable by him in accordance with the provisions 
of clause (a) of sub-section (1) of section 209A, 
he may direct that such person shall, in addition to the amount of tax, 
if any, payable by him, pay by way of penalty a sum-
(i) which, in the case referred to in clause (0), shall not be less 
than ten per cent. but shall not exceed one and a haU times the 
amount by which the tax actually paid during the financial year 
immediately preceding the assessment year under the provisions of 
Chapter XVII-C falls short of-
(1) seventy-five per cent. of the assessed tax as defined in 
sub-section (5) of section 215, or 
(2) the amount which would have been payable by way of 
advance tax if the assessee had furnished a correct and com-
plete statement in accordance with the provisions of clause (a) 
of sub-section (1) of section 209A, 
whichever is less; 
(ii) which, in the case referred to in clause (b), shall not be 
less than ten per cent. but shall not exceed one and a half times of 
seventy-five per cent. of the assessed tax as defined in sub-section (5) 
of section 215: 
Provided that in the case of· an assessee, being a company, the 
provisions of this sub-section shall have effect as if for the words 
"seventy-five per cent.", at both the places where they occur, the 
words "eighty_three and one-third per cent." had been substituted. 
(2) If the Income-tax Officer, in the course of any proceedings in 
connection with the regular assessment for the asseSsment year commenc-
ing on the 1st day of April, 19'10 'or ,any subsequent assessment year, is 
satisfied that any assessee-
(a) has furnished under sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) or 
sub-section (3) or sub-section (5)· of section 209A, or under sub-
section (1) or sub-section (2) of section 212, an estimate of the ad-
vance tu payable by him which he knew or had reason to believe 
to be untrue, or 
(aa) has furnished under sub-aection (4) of seetion 209A or 
under lub-section (3A) of section 212 an estimate of the advance tax 

41 
payable by him which he knew or had reason to believe to be untrue, 
or . i I -;:"~ 
(b) bas without reasonabLe cause faUed to furnish an estimate 
of the advance tax payable by him in accordance with the provisions 
of clause (b) of sub~ection (1) of section 209A, or 
(c) has without reasonable cause failed to furnish an estimate 
of the advance tax payable by him in accordance with the provisions 
of sub-section (4) of section 209A or sub-section (3A) of section 
212, 
he may direct that such person shall, in addition to the amount of tax, 
if any, p~yable by ,him, pay by way of penalty a sum-
(i) which, in the case referred to in clause (a.) ,shall not be less 
than ten per cent. but shall not exceed one and a half times the 
amount by which the tax actually paid during the financial year 
immediately preceding the assessment year under the proviSions of 
Chapter XVII-C falls short of-
(l) seventy-five per cent. of the assessed tax as defined in 
sub-section (5) of section 215, or 
(2) where a statement under clause (a) of sub-section (1) 
of seetion 209A was furnilhed by the assessee or where a notice 
under section 210 was issued to the assessee, the amount payable 
under such statement or, as the case may be, such notice; 
(ia) which, in the case referred to in clause (oa>, shall not be 
less than ten per cent. but shall not exceed one and a half times the 
amount by which the tax actually paid during the financial year 
immediately preceding the assessment year under the provisions of 
Chapter XVII-C falls short of seventy-five per cent. of the assessed 
tax as defined in sub-section (5) ot section 215; 
(ii) which, in the case referred to in clause (b), shall not be 
less than ten per cent. but shall not exceed one and a half times of 
seventy-five per cent. of the assessed tax as defined in sub-section (5) 
of section 215; and 
(iii) which, in the case referred to in clause (c), shall not be 
less t.han ten per cent. but shall not exceed one and a half times 
the amount by which-
(a) where the assessee has sent a statement under clause 
(a), or an estimate under clause (b), of sub-section (1) of sectton 
209A, or an estimate in lieu of a statement under sub-section (2) 
of that section, the tax payable in accordance with such state-
ment or estimate; or 
(b) where the assessee. was required to pay advance· tax in 
accordance with the notice issued to him under !JeCI;ion 210, the 
tax payable under such notice, 
falls short of seventy-five per cent. of the assessed tax as defined in 
sub-section (5) of section 215: 
Provided that in the case of an assessee, being a company, the pro-
visions of this sub-section shall have effect as if for the words "seventy-
five per cent.", wherever they occur, the words "eighty-three and one-
third per cent." had been ,ubstituted. 
Explanation.- Por the purposes of clause (ia), the amount pai~ by 
the assessee on Gr before the date extended by the CommissiOfler un.der 
the first proviso to sub-section (4) of section WA or, a& the ease 

Failure 
to comply 
with the 
provisions 
ofaub. 
sections (1) 
and (3) of 
section 178. 
Failure 
to comply 
with the 
provisions 
of sections 
269 ue, 
269 UE 
and 
269UL 
Failure 
to deduct 
or pay 
tax. 
Failure 
10 comply 
with the 
provisions 
of section 
269SS. 
42 
may be, lust proviso to sub-section (:1A) of section 212 shall, where 
the date so extended falls beyond the financial year immediately preced-
ing the assef'sment year, also be regarded as tax actually paid during 
that financial year. 
• • • ~. • • 
276A. If a person, without reasonable cause or excuse,-
(i) fails to give the notice in accordance with sub-section (1) of 
section 178; or . 
(ii) fails to set aside the amount as required by sub-section (3) 
of that section; or 
(iii) parts with any of the assets of the company or the proper .. 
ties in hi8 hands in contravention of the provisions of the aforesaid 
sub-.. e"tion, 
he shall be punishable with rigorous imprisonment for a term which 
may extend to two years: 
Provided that in the absence of special and adequate reasons to the-
contrary to be recorded in the judgment of the court, such imprisonment 
shall not be for less than six :months . 
• • • • • 
276AB. Whoever, without reasonable cause or excuse, fails to 
comply with the provisions of section 269UC or fails to 'surrender or 
deliver possession of the property under sub-section (2) of section 269UE 
or ~ontravenes the provisions of sub-section (2) of section 269UL shall 
be punishable with rigorous imprisonment for 3 term which may extend 
to two years and shall also be . liable to fine: 
Provided that in the absence of special and adequate reasons to the 
~nntrary to be recorded in the judgment of the court, such imprisonment 
shall not be for less than six months. 
276B. If a person, without reasonable caUSe or excuse, fails to deduct 
Q!, after deducting, fails to pay the tax as required by or under the pro-
visions of sub-section (9) of section 80E of Chapter XVII-B, he shall be 
punishable,-
(i) in a case where the amount of tax which he has failed to 
rleduct or pay exceeds one hundred thousand rupees, with rigorous 
imprisonment for a term which ~hal1 not be less than six months 
but wh!eh may extend to seven years and with fine; 
(ii) in any other case, with rigorous imprisonment for a term 
which £haU not be less than three months but which may extend 
to three years and with fine. 
• • 
. 376JJD. 1£ a person, 'wIthout reasonable cause or excuse, takes or 
accepts any loan or deposit in contravention of the provisions of section 
269S$. he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which m:1Y 
extend to two ye:1rs a1.1~ shall also be liabJe to fine equal to the amount 
"If such loan or _OBit. 

43 
Z18E. If a person, without reasonable cause or excuse, repays any 
deposit referred to in section 269T otherwise than in accordance with 
the provisions of that section, he shall. be punishable with imprisonment 
for a term which may extend to two years and shall also be liable to 
. fine equal to the amount of such deposit. 
• • • 
THE EIGHTH SCHEDULE 
(See section BOHR) 
List of backward arecu 
• 
N am e of Stale or Union territory Backward areas 
--- ---,,----_. ----_. __ ._._-
Andhra Pradesh 
Assam. 
Bihar . 
• 
Gujtrraf 
Himaclm{ Pradesh 
Jammu and Ka.rh'TIir 
Kamataka 
Ktrala 
Th~ di!ltricts of Anantpur, Chiu()Or, Cudd-
apah Karim:lagar, Khammam, Kurnool, 
Mahhubnagar, Medak, Nalgonda, Nellore, 
Nizamahad, Gngole, Srikakulam and 
Warangal. 
The di!ltricts of Cae-har, Goalpara, Kamrup, 
Lakhimpw', Mikir Hills, North Cachar 
Hills and Nowgong. 
The districts of Aurangabad, Begusarai, 
Bhagalpur, Bh'~pur, Darbhanga, East 
Champaran, Gaya, Madhubani, Mong-hyr, 
Muzaffarpur, Nalanda, Nawadah, Pala-
mau, Purnea, Saharsa, Samastipur, 
Santhal Parganas, Saran, Sitamarhi, 
Siwan, "aish~lj and 'Vest Champaran. 
The districts of Amreli, Banas Kantha, 
Bharuch. Bhavnagar, Jun~gadh, Kutch, 
Mahcsana, Panch Mahals, Sabar Kantha 
and SUf(·ndranagar. 
The distrie-ts of Bh.iwani. Hissar, Jind and 
Mahendragarh. . 
Thr district~ o/,Chamua, Hamirptir, Kangra, 
Kinnaur, Kulu, Lahul and Spiti, Sirmur. 
Solan and Una. 
The districts ofAnantn:lg, Baramula, Doda, 
Jammu, Kathua, Ladakh, Punch, Rajauri 
Srinagar and UdhamJ1l1r. . 
The district~ of Belgaum, .Bidar, Bijapur, 
Dharwar, Gu)ual'ga, Hassan, l\'1ysore, 
North Kanara, Raichur, South Kanara 
and Tumku. 
The distri (Is c.f A1lepr<:y, Cammnore, Mala-
ptuam, Trichur and Trivandmm. 
-------._------_ .. _._ .. _----_.-
Failure to 
comply 
with the 
provisions 
of Section 
269T • 

(I) 
MadJrJa Praduh 
MaIul,ashl,a . 
M."ipur 
Meghalaya 
Nagalanil • 
Orissa . 
Punjab. 
Rajastiuln 
Sikkim 
T amit Nodll • 
Trijlllra 
-----------------_._. --
The di8trictl of Balaghat, Baatar, Hetul, 
Bilaspur, Bhind, Chhatarp':lr, Chhind-
wara, Damoh, Datis, Dewu, Dhar, 
Guna, Hoshangabad, jhabua, Khargone, 
Mandla, Mandsaur, Morena, Narsim-
hapur, Panna, Raigarh, Raipur, Raisen, 
Rajgarh, Rajnandgaon, Ratlam, Rewa, 
Sagar, Sehore, Seoni, Shajapur, Shivpuri, 
Sidhi, Surguja, Tikkamgarh and Vidisha. 
The districts of Aurangabad, Bhandara, 
Bhir, Buldhaua, Chandrapur, Dhulia and 
Jalgaon; the district of Kolaba excluding 
such portion thereof as is comprised in the 
area designated as the site for the proposed 
new town of New Bombay by notification 
No. RPB 1171-18J24-I.W., dated the 20th 
March, 1971, issued under sub-section (I) 
of section 113 of the Maharashtra Regional 
and Town Planning Act, 1966 (Maharash-
tra Act 37 of 1966) by the Government of 
Maharashtra (Under Development, Public 
Health and Housing Department) as 
amended by notification No. RPB 1173-1-
RPC, dated thc 16th August, 1973, issued 
by that Government; the districts of 
Nanded, Osmanabad, Parbhani, Ratnagiri 
and Yeotmal. 
The whole of the State. 
The districts of Garo Hills, Jaintia Hill'! and 
Khasi Hills. 
The whole of the State. 
The districl& of Balasore, Bolangir, Dhcn-
kanal, Kalahandi, Keonjhar, Koraput, 
Mayurbhanj and Phulbani. 
The district of Bhatinda; so much of the 
district of Faridkot as formed part of the 
district of Bhatinda on the 31 st dar of 
July, 1972; the di.'Itricts of Ferozepur, 
Gurdaspur, Hoshiarpur and Sangrur. 
The districts of Alwar, Banswara, Harmer, 
Bhilwara, Churu, Dungarpur, Jaisalmer, 
Jalor, Jhalawar Jhunjhunu, Jodhpur, 
Nagaur, Sikar, Sirohi, Tonk and Udaipur. 
The whole of the State. 
The districti of Dharmapuri, Kanyakumari, 
Madurai, North Arcot, Ramanathapuram, 
South Arcot, Thanjavur and Tiruchira-
palli. 
The whole of the State. 

UtlfJ1' Pradesh 
West Bengal. 
The districts of Almora, Azamgarh, Baha-
raich, Ballia,· Banda, Bara Banki, Ba.'1ti, 
Budaun, Bulandshahr, Chamoli, Deoria~ 
Etah, Etawah, Faizabad, Farrukhabad, 
Fatehpur, Garhwal, Ghazipur, Gonda, 
Hamirpur, Hardoi, Jalaun, Jaunpur, 
Jhansi, Mainpuri, Mathura, Moradabad, 
Pilibhit, Pithoragarh, Pratapgarh. Rae 
Bareli, Rampur, Shahjahanpur, Sitapur, 
Sultanpur, Tehri-Garhwal, Unnao and 
Uttarka'lhi. 
The districts ofBankura, Birhhum, Burdw-.m, 
Cooch Behar, Darjeeling, Hooghly, Jal-
paiguri, MaIda, Midnapore, Murshidabad 
Nadia, Purulia and West Dinajpur. 
Andaman and .VicobfJ1' Islands The whole of the Union territory. 
The whole of the Union territory. Arunachal Pradesh 
Dadra and ]I{agar Havtli 
Goa, Daman and Diu 
Lakshadweep 
Mizoram 
Pondichmy 
The whole of the Union territory. 
The whole of the Union territory. 
The whole of the Union territory. 
The whole of the Union territory. 
The whole of the Union territory. 
-_ .. _----- .--.. ------------- ... ----- ._--_._--
Explanauon.-Save as otherwise expre9Sly provided, reference to any 
district in this Schedule shall be construed,-
(i) in the case of the districts of Aurangabad, Begusarai, Bhojpur, 
Gaya, Monghyr, Nalanda and N8IW'8dah in the State of Bihar; the 
district of Ferozepur in the State of Punjab; and the district of Rampur 
in the State of Uttar Pradesh, as a reference to the areas comprised 
in the district CODctS'Ded on the. 15th day of March, 1976, being the 
date of introductiCll of the Finance Bill. 19'16· in the House of the 
People; and 
(ii) in the ·case of any other district, as a referenc~ to the areas 
comprised in that district on the 3rd day of September, 1973, being 
the date of introduction of the Direct Taxes (Amendment) Bill, 1973 
in the House Of the People. 
THE NINTH SCHEDULE 
[See Section 32 (1) (vi)] 
Lilt of '4rticlh 07' thitag. 
1. Iron and steel (metal). 
2. Non-fer.rous metala. 

016. ' 
3. Ferro-alloys and special st~. 
4. Steel castings and forgings and alloy, malleable and S. G. iron 
castings. 
5. Thermal and hydro power generation equipment. 
6. Transfor~ers and switch gears. 
7. Electric motors. 
8. Industrial and agricultu.ral machinery. 
9. Earth moving machinery. 
10. Machine tools. 
11. Fertilisers, namely, ammonium sulphate, ammonium sulphate nit-
rate (double salt), ammonium nitrate, caldum ammonium nitrate (nitro-
lime stone). ammonium chloride, super phosphate, urea and complex 
fertilisers of synthetic origin containing both nitrogen and phospho,rus, 
such as ammonium phosphates. ammonium sulphate pho'sphate and am-
monium nitro phosphate. 
12. Soda ash. 
13. Caustic soda. 
14. Commercial vehicles. 
15. Ships. 
16. Aircraft. 
17. Tyres and tubes. 
18. Paper, pulp and newsprint. 
19. Sugar. 
20. Vegetable oils. 
21. Textiles (including those dyed,printed or otherwise processed) 
made wholly or maiJl!y of cotton, including cotton yam, hosiery and rope. 
22. Textiles (including those dyed, printed or otherwise processed) 
made wholLy or mainly of jute, including Jute twine and jute rope. 
23. Cement and refractories. 
24. Pesticides. 
Exp14na.tion.-The article specified in item 24 does not include any 
formulation of pesticides unless the formulation is prepared by the manu-
facturer or producer of the basic pesticidal cbemieals from which such 
formulation has been prepared. 
25. Carbon and graphite products. 
26. Inorganic heavy chemicals (othet than soda ash and caustic soda 
mentioned in items 12 and 13 respectively). 
27. Organic heavy chemiCals. 
28. Synthetic, rubber and rubber chemicals' (meludihg carbon black). 
29. Industrial explosives. 

47 
30. Basic drugs. 
31. Industrial sewing mac1i1nes. 
32. Finished leather and leather goods (including footwear made 
wholly or mainly of leatheJ:). 
33. Electronic components and raw materials; computers and periphe-
rals; communication equipment; process control, inStrumentation, indus-
trial and professional grade electronic equipment. -
• 
• 
• • • 
EXTRACT FROM THE WEALTH-TAX Ac:r, 1957 
(27 OF 1957) 
• • 
• 
• 
18. (1) If the Wealth-tax: Ofticer, Appellate Assistallt Commissioner, 
Commissioner (Appeals), Commissioner or Appellate Tribunal in the 
course of any proceedings under this Act is satisfied that any person-
(a) has without reasonable cause failed to furnish the return 
which he is required' to furnish under sub-section (1) of section 14 
or by notice given under sub-section (:2) of section 14 or section 1'/, 
or has without reasonable cause failed to furnish it within the time 
allOWed and in the manner required by sub-section (1) of section 14 
or by such notice, as the case may be; or 
(b) has without reasonable cause failed to comply with a notice 
under sub-section (2) or sUb-section (4) of section 16; or 
(c) has concealed the particulars of any assets or furnished in-
accurate particulars of any assets or debts; 
he or it mrty, by order in writing, direct that such person shall pay by 
way of penalty-
(i) in the cases referred to in clause (a), in addition to the 
amount of wealth-tax, if any, payable by him, a sum equal to two 
per cent. of the assessed tax for every month during which the 
default continued. 
E;cplanation.-In this clause, "assessed tax" means the wealth-
tax (.hargeable under the provisions of this Act; 
(ii) in the cases referred to in clause (b), in addition to the 
amount of wealth-tax payable by him, a sum which shall not be 
less than ten per cent., but which shall not exceed fifty per cent. 
of the amount of the. wealth-tax, if any, which would have been 
avoided if the net wealth returned by such person had been accept-
ed aN the correct net wealth; 
(iii) in the cases referred to in clause (c). in addition to auy 
wealth-tax payable by him, a sym which shall not be less than, 
but which shall not exceed five times, the amount of tax sought to be 
evaded by reason of the concealment of particulars of any assets or 
Penalty 
lor failure 
to furnish 
returns, to 
comply 
with 
notices 
and con_ 
ceaimentof 
assets, etc. 

the furnishing of inaccurate particulars in respect of any a8l8t5 or 
debts. 
E:rplGnatiCln I.-For the purposes of clause (iii) of thiB sub-section, 
~e expression "the amount of tax sought .to be evaded"-
(a) in a case to which Explanation 3 applies, means the tax 
on the net wealth assessed; 
(b) in any other case, means the difference between the tax on 
the net wealth assessed and the tax that would have been charge-
able had the net wealth assessed. been red.uced by the amount 
which r~presents the value of any assets in respect of which parti-
culars have been concealed or iDaccurate particulars have been 
furnished and of any debts in respect of which inaccurate parti-
culars have been furnished. 
E.l:pLanatiOtl 2.-Where in respect of any iacts material to the compu-
tation of the net wealth of any person under this Act.-
(A) such person fails to offer an explanation or offers an 
explanation which is found by the Wealth-tax Officer or the Appel-
late Assi~tant Commissioner or the Commissioner (Appeals) to be 
false, or I 
(8) such person offers an explanation wfiich he is not able to 
substantiate, 
then, the amount added or disallowed in computing the net wealth of 
such persoo as a result thereof shall, for the purposes of clause (c) of 
this Bub-section, be deemed to represent the value of the assets in 
respect of which particulars have been concealed: 
Provided that nothing contained in this Explanation .~hall apply to 
a case referred to in clause (8) in respect of any amount added or dis-
allowed as a result of the rejection of any explanation offered by such 
person, if such explan!ltion is bona fide and all the facts relating to the 
same and. material to the computation of his net wealth have been dis-
closed by him. 
Explanation 3.-Where any person who has not previously been 
assessed under this Act fails, without reasonable cause, to furnish 
within the period specified in clause (a) or, as the case may be, clause 
(b) of SUb-section (1) of section 17A a return of his net wealth which 
he is required to furnish under section 14 in respect of any assessment 
year and, until the expiry of either of the periods applicable to him, no 
notice had been issued to him under sub-section (2) of section 14 or 
sub-section (1) of section 17 and the Wealth-tax Oftlcer or the Appellate 
Assistant Commissioner or the Commissioner (Appeals) is satisfied that 
in respect of such assessment year such person has Rssessable net 
wealth, then, such person shall,for the purposes of clause (c) of this 
sub-section, be deemed to have concealed the particulars of his assets 
or fumished inaccurate particulars of any assets or debts in respect of 
such assessment year, notwithstanding that such person furniaheg a 
return of his net wealth at any time after the expiry of either of the 

49 
periods aforesaid applicable to him in pursuance of a notice UDder 
section 17. 
Exp,~C:l'nation 4.-Where the value of any asset returned by any 
person is less than seventy per cent. of the value of s.J.ch asset as deter-
mined in'lQ assessment UDder section 16 or section 17, such person 
·shall be deemed to have furnished inacc:urate particulars of such asset 
within the meaning of clause (c) of this sub-section, unless he proves 
that the value of the asset as returned by him is the correct value. 
"Explanation 5.-Where in the course of a search under section 37A, 
the assessee is found to be- the owner of any money, bullion, jewellery 
or other valuable article or thing (hereafter in this Explanation referred 
to as assets) and the assessee claims that such assets represent or form 
part of his net wealth,-
(a) on any valuation date falling be~ore the date of the search, 
but the return in respe-:t of the net wealth on such date has not been 
furnished before the date of the search or, where such return has been 
furnished before the said date. such assets have not been declared in 
such return: or 
(b) of any valuation date falling on or after the date of the 
search, 
then, notwithstanding that such assets are declared by him in any re-
turn of net wealth furnished on or after the date of the search, he shall, 
for the purposes of im.position of a penalty under clause (c) of sub-section 
(1) of this section. be deemed to have concealed the particulars of such 
assets Or furnished inaccurate parti<:ulars of such ass~ts, unless such 
assets are recorded,-
(i) in a case falling under clause (a), before the date of the 
search; and 
(ii) in a case falling under clause (b). on Or before such date, 
in the books of account, if any, maintained bv him or such assets are 
otherwise disclosed to the Commissioner before the said date.". 
(2) No order shall be made under sub-section (1) Wlless the perf;on 
concerned has been given a reasonable opportunity of bein~ heard. 
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in clause (iii) of sub-
section (1), if, in a case falling under clause (c) of that sub-section, 
the amount (as determined by the Wealth-tax Officer on assessment) in 
respect of which penalty is imposable under clause (c:) aforesaid 
exceeds a sum of twenty-five thousand rupees, the Wealth-tax Officer 
shall not issue any direction under sub-section (1) for payment by way 
of penalty without the previous approval of the Inspecting Assistant 
Commissiuner. 
(3A) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, the penalty 
imposed under clause (iii) of sub-section (1) read with Explanation .~ 
to that sub-section and the penalty imposed under clause (i) of that 
<;ub-section shall not exceed, in the aggregate, five times the amount of 
the tax sought to be evaded. 

Penalty for 
failure to 
answer 
questions, 
sign state_ 
ments, allow 
inspec-
tions, etc:. 
,50 
(4) An Appellate Assistant Commissio~er, a Comm~ioner 
(Appeals), a Commissioner or the Appellate TrIbunal on making an 
order, under this section imposing a penalty, shall forthwith send a copy 
of the sam€' to the Wealth-tax Officer. 
(5) No order imposing a penalty under this section shall be passed-
(a) in a case where the assessment to which the proceedings for 
imposition of penalty relate is the subject matter of an appeal to 
the Apptlllate Assistant Commissioner or Commissioner (Appeals) 
under section 23 or an appeal to the Appellate Tribunal undet' sub-
section (2) of section 24, after the expiration of a period of-
(i) two years from the end 'of the financial year in which 
the proceedings. in the course of which action for imposition of 
penalty has been initiated, are completed, or 
(ii) six months from the end of the month in which the 
order of the Appellate Assistant Commissioner or Commissioner 
(Appeals) or, as the case may be, the Appellate Tribunal is 
received by the Commissioner, 
whichever period expires later; 
(b) in any other case, after the expiTation of two years from 
the end of the financial year in which proceedings, in the course 
of which action for imposition of penalty has been ini.tiated, are 
completed. 
Explanation_In computing the period of limitation [or the pur-
poses of this section,-
(i) any period during which the immunity granted under 
section 22H remained in force; 
(ii) the time taken in giving an opportunity to the assessee to 
be re-heard under the proviso to section 39; and 
(iii) any period during which a proceeding under this section 
for the levy of penalty is stayed by an order or injunction of a:lY 
court, 
shall be excluded. 
IRA. (1) ... ... ... ... 
(2) If. a person, without reasonable cause, fails to furnish in due 
time such statement or information which such person is bound to 
furnish to the Wealth-tax Officer under section 38, he shall pay, by way 
of penalty, a sum which may extend to ten rupees for every day during 
which the failure continues. 
(3) No order shall be made under this section except by an Appel-
late Assistant Commissioner or an Inspecting Assistant Commissioner 
or a Commissioner (Appeals) or a Commissioner, and where a contrA-
vention, fflilure or default for which any penalty is imposable under· 
this section occurs in the course of any proceeding before a Wealth-tax 
Officer, thE' Wealth-tax Offt~er shall refer the case to the Inspecting 
Assistant Commissioner or a Commissioner (Appeals) for passing such 
orders as he deems fit. . 

5<1 
(4) No order under this section shall be passed. by any ofticer refer-
red to· in sub-6ection (3), unless the person on whom the peilalty is 
proposed to be imposed is given an opportunity of being heard in the 
matter by such oftlcar • 
•• .. • • • 
ZZB. (1) The Central Government shall constitute a Commission to 
be called the Wealth·tax Settlement Commission (hereafter in this 
Chapter referred to as "the Settlement Commission',) for the se.ttlement 
of cases under this Chapter. 
(2) The Settlement Commission shall consist of a Chairman lind two 
other members and shall function within the Department of the Central 
Government dealing with direct taxes. . 
(2A) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub·section (2), when 
the post of one of the other members of the Settlement Commission is 
vacant for any reason, the Chairman and the other member of the 
Settlement Commission may function as, and exercise and discharge the 
powers and functions of, the Settlement Commission under this Chapter: 
Provided that if in any case the Chairman and member so function. 
in~ differ on any point or points, they shall state the point or points on 
which they differ and refer the same, as soon as may be aftp.r the said 
vacancy is: filled, to the member appointed to fill the vacancy for hearil1.g' 
on such point or points and such point or points shall be deci~ed accord-
ing to his opinion. 
(3) The Chairman and other members of the Settlement Commi~sion 
shall be appointed bv the ~p.nt.rpI Government from amon.:rst p .. t"Sons of 
integrity and oub;tandin(! ability. hAvine- special kn{lwlenee of. and ex-
perience in, px:ob1ems relaffilg to direct taxes and business accnuntc;: 
Provided that, where a member of the Board is appointen as the 
Chairman or as a member of the Settlement Com~ission, he shall cease to 
be a member of the Board: 
Provided further that, until the members are appointed under this 
sub-section, it shall be competent for the Central Government to require, 
from time to time. any two members of the Board to serve as members 
of the Settlement Commission for such period as the CentrR.I Govemrrent 
thinks fit, in addition to their duties as members of the Boarc1. 
• • • • • • 
22D. (1) (. 
(5) Subject to the provisions of sub.section (2A) of section :1.2B. the 
materials brought on record before the Settlement Commission shall be 
considered by all the members thereof before passing any order under 
sub-seC!tion (4) and, in the case of a difference of opinion among the 
members, the opinion of the majority shall prevail and such order shall 
be expressed in terms of the views of the Majority . 
• • • • 
Wealth-tax 
settlemeDt 
com-
mission. 
l'nlccuure 
on 
receipt of 
an applica· 
tion UDder 
~ccl ion 22C. 

PoWeR 
and 
procedure 
,.f 
Settlement 
Conllniuio" 
Failure to 
furnish 
particulars 
under 
section 
34ACC. 
Penalty for 
failure to 
furnish 
returns, to 
comply 
with 
notiCCll 
aad COIl-
cealment 
of sifts, 
etc. 
52 
ZZI'. (1) • • • • 
(oS) The Settlement Commission shall, subject to the provisions of 
this Chapter, have power to regulate its own procedlue (including the 
fixation of places and times of its meetings) and may act notwithstanding 
that all the members of the Settlement Commission are not present at any 
of its meetings . 
• • • • • 
35EE. If a person referred to in sec.tion 34ACC fails, vyithout reason-
able cause or excuse, to intimate to the Board the particulars of convic-
tion or finding referred to in the said section, he shall be punishable with 
rigorous imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years and 
shall also be liable to fine. 
• • • ... 
ExTRACTs FROM THE GIFT-TAX ACT, 1958 
(18 OF '958) 
... • ... 
• 
• 
17. (1) If the Gift-tax Officer, Appellate Assistant Commissioner, 
Commissioner (Appeals), Commissioner or Appellate Tribunal, in the 
COllrse of any proceedings under this Act, is satisfied that 'iny person-
(a) has without reasonable cause failed to furnish the return 
required to be furnished under sub-section (1) of section 13 or by 
notice given under sub-section (2) of section 13 or section 16 or 
has, without reasonable cause, failed to furnish it within the time 
allowpd and in the manner required by sub-section (1) of section 
13 or by such notice, as the case may be, or 
(b) has without reasonable cause failed to comply witb a notice 
under sUb-section (2) or sub-section (4) of section 15; or 
(c) has concealed the particulars of any gift or deliberately 
furnished inaccurate r>articulars thereof. 
he or it may, ~y order in writing, direct that such person shall pay 
l,y way of penalty-
(i) in the cases referred to in clause (a), in addition to the 
amount of the ~ft-tax, if any, pavable by him, a sum equal to two 
rer cent. of the assessed tax for every month during which the 
default continued. 
E;r.planation.-In this clause, "assessed tax" means the gift-tax 
chargeable under the provisions of this Act as reduced bv the 
amount. if any, for whieh credit is allowed under section 18; 
(ii) in the cases referred to in clause (b). in addition to the 
aT'lount of gift-tax payable by him, a sum which shall not be If1~ 
than ten per cent. but which shall not exceed ftftv per cent. of the 
amount of tlie tax, if any, which would have been avoMed if the 
return made by such person had been accepted as correct; 

(iii) in the cases referred to in clause '(c), in addition to any' 
gift-tax payable by him, a sum which shall not be less than twenty 
per cent. but which shall not exceed one and half times the amount 
of the tax, if any, which would have been avoided if the return 
mil de by such person had been accepted as correct . 
• • • • ... 
(4) An Appellate Assistant Commissioner, a Commissioner 
(Appeals), a Commissioner or the Appellate Tribunal on malring an 
order under this section imposing penalty, shall forthwith send a copy 
fJ{ the same to the Gift-tax Officer . 
... ... ... ... ... 

tot( SABHA 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Income-tax Act, 1961, the Wealth-tax Act, 1957, the 
Gift-tax: Act" 1958 and to provide for exemption to a Government 
company from income-tax and surtax for a specified period. 
(ShTi ViBhwanath PratG.p Sift.gh. 
Minister of Fincmce) 