1
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
THE PROHIBITION OF PUBLICATION AND DISSEMINATION OF
OBJECTIONABLE MA TERIAL ON RELIGION BILL, 2022
By
SHRI SUNIL KUMAR SINGH, M.P.
A
BILL
to prohibit the publication and dissemination of objectionable material on religion in
any form in the country and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Prohibition of Publication and Dissemination of
Objectionable Material on Religion Act, 2022.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force with immediate effect.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “Agency” means the agency for prohibition of publication and dissemination
of objectionable material on religion as established under section 4;
Definitions.
Bill  No. 102 of  2022
AS  INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5

2
5
10
15
20
25
30
(b) “complaint” means an objection registered with the Agency by any Indian
citizen or institution;
(c) “dissemination” means information communicated through recorded
messages on telephones, radio, television, internet film-strip, movies or videos along with
other means of communication;
(d) “objectionable material” means any publication or dissemination of contents
hurting the religious sentiments of any Indian citizen;
(e) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act; and
(f) “publication” means a book, article, picture, photograph, pamphlet,
advertisement on poster, banner or any other printed document.
3. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for time being in force, the
publication and dissemination of objectionable material on any religion in the country is
hereby prohibited.
4. (1) The Central Government shall, as soon as may be, by notification in
the Official Gazette, establish an Agency to be known as the Agency for
Prohibition of Publication and Dissemination of Objectionable Material on Religion
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) The Central Government shall appoint such number of officers and staff as it
considers necessary for the efficient functioning of the Agency.
(3) The salary and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of service of
the officers and staff employed in the Agency shall be such as may prescribed.
(4) The headquarters of the Agency shall be at such place, as may be prescribed.
5. The Agency shall—
(a) register complaints pertaining to the publication and advertisement on
dissemination of objectionable material on religion received from concerned
institutions and public, and their  redressal;
(b) investigate the complaints duly registered;
(c) impose a prohibition on publication and dissemination thereof, on the basis of
the outcome of investigation; and
(d) derecognise the respective publisher and advertising agency involved in
publication and dissemination of objectionable material on religion.
6. Whoever contravenes the provisions of section 3 shall be punished with
imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than two years but which may extend upto
five years and with a fine which may extend upto one lakh rupees.
Prohibition of
publication
and
dissemination
of
objectionable
material on
religions.
Establishment
of an agency
for
prohibition
of publication
and
dissemination
of material
on religion.
Functions
of the
agency.
Penalty.

3
7. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by
law in this behalf, provide to the Agency, such requisite funds, from time to time, as may
be necessary, for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
8. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything
inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force.
9. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under his Act shall be laid as soon as may be after it is made before
each House of the State Legislature while it is in session for a total period of thirty days
which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions and if, before
the expiry of the session immediately following the session or successive sessions
aforesaid both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree
that the rule should not be made, the rules shall thereafter have effect only in such modified
form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under
such rule.
Power to
make
rules.
Act to
have
overriding
effect.
Funds to be
provided by
Central
Government.
5
10
15

4
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
In recent times, there has been a sudden rise in the cases of Publication and
dissemination of objectionable material on religion in the country. Certain mischievous
elements try to hurt the religious sentiments of citizens of the country with support from
certain publishers and advertising agencies. In the name of right to freedom of expression
enshrined in our Constitution, they tend to threaten the integrity of the country. Such
publication and dissemination of objectionable material on religion needs to be restricted in
order to preserve the secular fabric of the country.
Hence, this Bill.
    NEW DELHI; SUNIL KUMAR SINGH
7 March, 2022.

5
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 4 of the Bill provides for the establishment of an Agency for Prohibition of
Publication and Dissemination of Objectionable Material on Religion and appointment of
officers and employees in the Agency. Clause 7 provides that Central Government shall
provide the funds for carrying out the purposes of this Act. The Bill, therefore, if enacted,
will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that an annual
recurring expenditure of about rupees one hundred crore is likely to be involved from the
Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of rupees six hundred crore is also likely to be involved.

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGA TED LEGISLA TION
Clause 9 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying
out the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation
of legislative power is of a normal character.
6

7
LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to prohibit the publication and dissemination of objectionable material on religion in any
form in the country and for matters connected therewith and incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Sunil Kumar Singh, M.P .)