As INTRQpUCED IN Lok SABHA

Ave cw

Bill No._102 of 2000

THE USE OF INDIAN LANGUAGES IN COMMERCIAL
ADVERTISEMENTS AND ON PACKAGES OF CONSUMER
GOODS BILL, 2000
By
Dr. LaXxMINARAYAN PANDEY, M.P.

A
BILL

to provide for the compulsory use of Hindi language and one of the other Indian languages
Specified in the Eighth Schedule to the Constitution in all commercial advertisements
and on packages of consumer goods and. [for matters connected therewith.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-first Year of the Republic of India as
|

1. (J) This Act may be called the Use of Indian Languages in Commercial
Advertisements and on Packages of Consumer Goods Act, 2000.

(2) Itextends to the whole of India.

@) Ieshall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint. ‘

Shorttitle,
extent and
commence-
ment,


: 2
का

' Hindi
se ०।
‘and one other (0) भा commercial advertisements, whether handwritten, printed or broadcast

noe दि through radio or television network or through any other form of communication to
००-८० -# which general public has access, for the purpose of promotion of business, commerce,
trade, service, industry or any other related field; and

(i all matters including the details of product, brand name ot content therein
and related matter printed or handwritten or otherwise on every packed article of
food, drink, drug, cosmetic, or any other item which is meant for tuman consumption,
shall be in Hindi language .2 Devanagari script and in one of the other Indian ianguages

specified in the Eighth Schedule to the Constitution:
Provided that if foreign language is used in any advertisement, brand name or
otherwise, the matter in that language shall be inscribed below the matter in both the

Indian languages.

Punishment, 3. Whoever violates or abets to violate the provisions of section 2 shall be punishable
with imprisonment which shall not be less than six months but which may extend to one
year or with fine which shall not be less than two thousand rupees but which may extend to
five thousand rupees, or with both.


।
।
|

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

Even after fifty years of independence, Indian languages have not found a place,
they deserve. Itis irony of fate that altiough our Constitution recognises eighteen languages,
most of the commercial work is done in a foreign language, i.e., in English. We have
become so obsessed with the thought that we cannot work properly without the use of
English language. Every commercial company tends to show its greatmess in getting its
labels, advertisements, etc. printed in English language.

‘The Bill is being brought forward with the sole objective of increasing propagation
and promotion of Indian languages in place of English language and thereby promoting
nationalism and self-pride by removing the illusion and mental slavery of English language.

New Deu; LAXMINARAYAN PANDEY
Aprit 18, 2000.


LOK SABHA

A
BILL

to provide for the compulsory use of Hindi language and one of the other
Indian languages specified in the Eighth Schedule to the Constitution
in all commercial advertisements and on packages of consumer
goods and for matters connected therewith.

(Dr. Laxminarayan Pandey, M.P.)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—1413LS—23-6-2000.