1
THE MICRO, SMALL AND MEDIUM ENTERPRISES
DEVELOPMENT (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2018
A
BILL
to amend the Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises Development Act, 2006.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-ninth Y ear of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises Development
(Amendment) Act, 2018.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In the Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises Development Act, 2006 (hereinafter
referred to as the principal Act), in section 7,—
(a) for sub-section (1), the following sub-sections shall be substituted, namely:—
“(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 11B of the Industries
(Development and Regulation) Act, 1951, the Central Government may, for the
Short title and
commencement.
Amendment of
section 7.
27 of 2006.
65 of 1951.
Bill No. 102 of 2018
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
  5
10

2
purposes of this Act, by notification and having regard to the provisions of
sub-sections (4) and ( 5), classify any class or classes of enterprises, whether
proprietorship, Hindu undivided family, association of persons, co-operative
society, partnership firm, company or undertaking, by whatever name called,
engaged in the manufacture or production of goods pertaining to any industry
specified in the First Schedule to the Industries (Development and Regulation)
Act, 1951,  or engaged in providing or rendering of services, as—
(i) a micro enterprise, where the annual turnover does not exceed
five crore rupees;
(ii) a small enterprise, where the annual turnover is more than five
crore rupees but does not exceed seventy-five crore rupees;
(iii) a medium enterprise, where the annual turnover is more than
seventy-five crore rupees but does not exceed two hundred and fifty crore
rupees.
(1A)  The Central Government may, by notification, vary the turnover
limits, which shall not exceed thrice the limits, specified in sub-section (1) for
the purposes of development of micro, small and medium enterprises.”;
(b) in sub-section (9),—
(i) for the words “criterion of investment”, the words “criterion of annual
turnover” shall be substituted;
(ii) for the words “as part of small enterprises”, the words “as part of
small and medium enterprises”  shall be substituted.
3. In section 14 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), the words, brackets and figure
“sub-section (1) of ”  shall be omitted.
Amendment of
section 14.
5
10
15
20

3
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises Development Act, 2006 (the said Act) was
enacted to provide for facilitating the promotion and development and enhancing the
competitiveness of micro, small and medium enterprises. The said Act, inter alia, provides
for classification of the enterprises as micro, small or medium based on their investment in
plant and machinery or equipment. Over a period of time, it has been felt necessary to
change the criteria for the classification in order to align it with the need of current times and
changing business ecosystem.
2. In the course of consultation with various stakeholders, it has been noted that the
criterion of investment in plant and machinery or equipment entails physical verification
having associated transaction costs. It also incentivises the tendency in the promoters of the
enterprises to keep the investment size small in a particular business entity in order to retain
the benefits associated with micro or small enterprises category. While evaluating various
alternatives, it has been considered appropriate that if the annual turnover is taken as a
criterion for classification, the information available with goods and services tax network
and other sources can be used for determination of the category of the enterprises. Overall,
the turnover based clasification will promote the ease of doing business and will put in place
a non-discretionary, transparent and objective classification system.
3. In view of the above, it is proposed to amend section 7 of the Micro, Small and
Medium Enterprises Development Act, 2006 to—
(a) provide for change in the criterion of classification of micro, small and medium
enterprises from the existing criterion of investment in plant and machinery or
equipment to a new criterion based on annual turnover of the enterprises; and
(b) confer power upon the Central Government to vary, the turnover limits, by
notification which shall not exceed thrice the limits specified in sub-section ( 1) of
section 7 for the purpose of development of micro, small and medium enterprises.
4. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects.
N
EW DELHI; GIRIRAJ SINGH
The  22nd  March, 2018.

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Sub-clause (a) of clause 2 of the Bill seeks to insert sub-section ( 1A) in section 7 of
the Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises Development Act, 2006, so as to confer power
upon the Central Government to vary the turnover limits relating to the classification of
micro, small and medium enterprises by way of notification.
2. The matters in respect of which the notification may be issued under the proposed
legislation are matters of procedure or administrative details and it is not practicable to
provide for them in the Bill itself. The delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a
normal character.
4

ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS  FROM THE MICRO, SMALL AND MEDIUM ENTERPRISES  DEVELOPMENT  ACT, 2006
(27 OF 2006)
*****
CHAPTER III
CLASSIFICATION OF ENTERPRISES, ADVISORY COMMITTEE AND MEMORANDUM OF MICRO, SMALL AND
MEDIUM ENTERPRISES
7. ( 1) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 11B of the Industries
(Development and Regulation) Act, 1951, the Central Government may, for the purposes
of this Act, by notification and having regard to the provisions of sub-sections (4) and (5),
classify any class or classes of enterprises, whether proprietorship, Hindu undivided family,
association of persons, co-operative society, partnership firm, company or undertaking, by
whatever name called,—
(a) in the case of the enterprises engaged in the manufacture or production of
goods pertaining to any industry specified in the First Schedule to the Industries
(Development and Regulation) Act, 1951, as—
(i) a micro enterprise, where the investment in plant and machinery does
not exceed twenty-five lakh rupees;
(ii) a small enterprise, where the investment in plant and machinery is
more than twenty-five lakh rupees but does not exceed five crore rupees; or
(iii) a medium enterprise, where the investment in plant and machinery is
more than five crore rupees but does not exceed ten crore rupees;
(b) in the case of the enterprises engaged in providing or rendering of services,
as—
(i) a micro enterprise, where the investment in equipment does not exceed
ten lakh rupees;
(ii) a small enterprise, where the investment in equipment is more than
ten lakh rupees but does not exceed two crore rupees; or
(iii) a medium enterprise, where the investment in equipment is more
than two crore rupees but does not exceed five crore rupees.
Explanation 1.—For the removal of doubts, it is hereby clarified that in calculating
the investment in plant and machinery, the cost of pollution control, research and
development, industrial safety devices and such other items as may be specified, by
notification, shall be excluded.
Explanation 2.—It is clarified that the provisions of section 29B of the Industries
(Development and Regulation) Act, 1951, shall be applicable to the enterprises specified in
sub-clauses (i) and (ii) of clause (a) of sub-section (1) of this section.
*****
(9) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 11B of the Industries (Development
and Regulation) Act, 1951 and clause (h) of section 2 of the Khadi and Village Industries
Commission Act, 1956, the Central Government may, while classifying any class or classes
of enterprises under sub-section (1), vary, from time to time, the criterion of investment and
also consider criteria or standards in respect of employment or turnover of the enterprises
Classification
of enterprises.
5
65 of 1951.
65 of 1951.
65 of 1951.
65 of 1951.
61 of 1956.

6
and include in such classification the micro or tiny enterprises or the village enterprises, as
part of small enterprises.
*****
14 .( 1) * * * * *
(2) The Fund or Funds shall be utilised exclusively for the measures specified in
sub-section (1) of section 9
.
*****
Administration
and utilisation
of Fund or
Funds.

LOK SABHA
—————
A
BILL
to amend the Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises Development Act, 2006.
—————
(Shri Giriraj Singh, Minister of State for Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises)
MGIPMRND—5190LS(S3)—28.03.2018.