1
THE RIGHT OF CHILDREN TO FREE AND COMPULSORY
EDUCATION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2017
By
SHRI MAHEISH GIRRI, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education Act, 2009.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-eighthYear of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Right of Children to Free and Compulsory  Education
(Amendment) Act, 2017.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government  may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. For section 27 of the Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education Act,
2009, the following section shall be substituted, namely:—
"27. No teacher shall be deployed for any non-educational purposes other than
the disaster relief duties.".
Short title and
commencement.
Bill No. 102 of  2017
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Substitution of
new section
for section 27.
Prohibition of
deployment of
teachers for
non-educa-
tional
purposes.
35 of 2009.
5

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Section 27 of the Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education Act, 2009 states
that "no teacher shall be deployed for any non-educational purposes other than the
decennial population census, disaster relief duties or duties relating to elections to the local
authority or the State Legislatures or Parliament, as the case may be". This results in teachers
having extra burden of work resulting in poor teaching practices by them in schools. Our
country already suffers from large number of vacant teacher posts and these additional
responsibilities add to work load of school teachers in Government run schools.
To enhance the quality of education, it is imperative to focus on every little aspect
connected therein. By involving teachers in other activities apart from educational purpose
such as elections and collecting census data results into more mental stress and hence lead
to inefficient performance by them in schools. Only focussing on teacher training programs
alone would not suffice if they will be given additional responsibilities like collecting door to
door census data.
The Bill, therefore, seeks to amend the Right of Children to Free and Compulsory
Education Act, 2009 with a view to relieve teachers from getting deployed for any non-
educational purpose except disaster relief duties.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI: MAHEISH GIRRI
November 21, 2016.
2

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE RIGHT OF CHILDREN TO FREE AND COMPULSORY EDUCATION ACT, 2009
* * * * * *
27. No teacher shall be deployed for any non-educational purposes other than the
decennial population census, disaster relief duties or duties relating to elections to the local
authority or State Legislatures or Parliaments, as the case may be.
* * * * * *
3

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education Act, 2009.
————
(Shri Maheish Girri, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—4116LS(S3)—10.07.2017.