8m Ho. I. ot I",. 
THE COMPANIES (AMENDMENT) 
BILL, 1962 
(As INTRODUCBD IN Lol( SABRA 
ON 13111 NOVBMBER, 1962) 

8W No. roz of 1963 
THE COMPANIES (AMENDMENT) BnL, 1962 
(As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABRA) 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Companies Ad, 1956. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirteenth Year of the 
Republic of India as follows:-
1. (1) This Act may be called the Companies (Amendment) Short title 
and dura-Act, .1962. tion. 
S (2) It shall remain in force during the period of operation of the 
Proclamation of Emergency issued under clause (1) of article 352 
of the Constitution on the 26th. October, 1962. 
J of I9S6. 2. In the Companies Act, 1956, after section 293A, the following Insertion 
section shall be inserted, namely: - ~:n 
293B. 
10 "293B. (1) The Board of directors of any company may, Power of 
notwithstanding anything contained in sections 293 and 293A = to 
or in the memorandum, articles or any other instrument relating tribut~:; 
to the company, contribute such amount as it thinks fit to the ~cfi National 
National Defence Fund or any other Fund approved by the Fun~~C:tc. 
15 Central Government for the purpose of national defence. 
(2) Every company shall disclose in its profit and loss 
.~ceo:unt the total amount or amounts contributed by it to the 
Fund referred to in sub-section (1), during the financial year 
to which the account relates.". 
20 ~. (1) The Companies (Amendment) Ordinance, 1962, is hereby Repeal and 
repealed. . savina. 
(2) Notwithstanding svch repeal, anything done Under, the said 
Ordinance shall be deeme1t. to have been done under this Act as if 
this Act had commenced ~ the 3rd November, 1962. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Section 293 (1) (e) of the Companies Act, 19,56, provides that the 
Board of directors of a public company or of a private company, 
which is a subsidiary. of a public company, may contribute to chari-
table and other funds not directly relating to the business of the 
company or the wel,fare of its employees, any amount not exceeding 
in aggregate, in any financial year, rupees twenty-five thousand or 
five per cent. of its average net profits during the three financial 
years immediately preceding, whichever is greater. If the Board 
wishes to exceed this limit, it must obtain the consent of the' com-
pany in general meeting. The general meeting of a company can 
be called by giving not less than 21 days' clear notice. Thus, the 
convening and holding of a general meeting of a public company 
necessarily entails time and expense. 
2. Although the above-mentioned restrictions regarding contri-
butions to charitable or other funds are not applicable to the private 
companie~ which are not subsidiary of public companies, it may not 
be possible for many such companies to· make such contributions in 
view of the provisions of their memorandum or articles of associa-
tion. 
3. It was felt that companies may like to make generous contribu-
tions to the National pefence Fund which has recently been created 
by the Government to meet the emergency which has arisen as a 
result of China's aggression against India, uninhibited by the limits 
and conditions imposed by section 293 (1) (e) of the Companies Act, 
1956, or by their memorandum or articles of association. Hence, an 
Ordinance, namely, the Companies (Amendment) Ordinance, 1962. 
was promulgated by the President on the 3rd November, 1962, 
authorizing the Board of directors of companies themselves to make 
contributions to the National Defence Fund or any other Fund 
approved by the Central Government for the purpose of national 
defence, without any limit and without obtaining the sanction of 
the company in general meeting. 
4. The present Bill seeks to replace the aforesaid Ordinance with 
the addition of a provision for the disclosure in the profit and lOBS 
account of a CQmpany of the amounts of contributions made to the 
National Defence Fund or to any other Fund approved for the 
purpose of National Defence by the Central Government. 
N. KANUNGO. 
NEW Dam; 
The 7th Nooem.beT', 1962. 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Companies Act, 1956. 
(Shri Nityanand Kanungo, 
Minister of Industries in 
the Ministry of Commerce 
& Industry) 