‘As InTRopucED IN Lox SaBHA ON

~ 8 301 1992

Bill No. 102 of 1992
SS

THE JAMMU AND KASHMIR STATE LEGISLATURE
(DELEGATION OF POWERS) BILL, 1992

A
BILL

| confer on the President the, power of the Legislature of the State oft
Jammu and Kashmir to make laws.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Forty-third Year of the Republic
of India as follows: —

1. This Act may be called the Jammu and Kashmir State Legisla-
ture (Delegation of Powers) Act, 1992.

5 2. In this Act, “Proclamation” means the Proclamation issued on the
18th day of July, 1990, under article 356 of the Constitution, by the
President, and published with the notification of the Government of
India in the Ministry of Home Affairs No. G.S.R. 647(E) of the said
date. | :

10. 3. (7) The power of the Legislature of the State of Jammu and
Kashmir to make laws, whieh has been declared by the Proclamation
to be exercisable by or under the authority of Parliament, is hereby
conferred on the President.

(2) In exercise of the said power, the President may, from time
5 to time, whether Parliament is or is not in session, enact, as a Presi-
dent's Act, a Bill containing such provisions as hq considers necessary:

Short title,

Definition.

Confer-
ment on
the
President
ofthe
power of
the State
Legislature
sos
laws.


2

rt =
ever he considers it practicable to do so, consult a Committee constituted
for the purpose, consisting of ten members of the House of the People
nominated by the Speaker and five members of the Council of States no-
minated by the Chairman,

(3) Every Act enacted by the President under sub-section (2) shall,
as soon as may be after enactment, be laid before each House of
Parliament,

(@ Either House of Parliament may, by resolution passed within
thirty days from the date on which the Act has been laid before it under 10.
sub-section (3), which period may be comprised in one session or in two
successive sessions, direct any modifications to be made in the Act and
if the modifications are agreed to by the other House of Parliament
during the session in which the Act has been so laid before it or the
session succeeding, such modifications shall be given effect to by the 15
President by enacting an amending Act under sub-section (2):

Provided that nothing in this sub-section shall affect the validity of जज
the Act or of any action taken thereunder before it is so amended.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

Under the Proclamation issued by the President on the 18th July,

the powers of the Legislature of the State of Jammu and Kash-
‘are now exercisable by or under the authority of Parliament.
€ are a number of amendments to various State enactments made
ng the Governor's Rule of the State whose validity is due to expire
July, 1992. Because of the large number of such enactments invol-
it may not be possible for Parliament to find sufficient time to
et the same. It is, therefore, proposed that Parliament may, in
rdance with the provisions of sub-clause (a) of clause (71७ of
icle 357 of the Constitution, confer by law on the President the
wwers of the Legislature of the State of Jammu and Kashmir to make
Jaws for the State. The present Bill is intended to give effect to this
josal. : ‘

2. The Bill seeks to achieve the aforesaid object.»

“New Deut; 8. 8. CHAVAN.
The sth July, 1992.


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

The proyiso to sub-clause (2) of clause 3 of the Bill provides
constitution of a Committee for consultation regarding Presid
consisting of 10 Members of the House of the People and 5
of the Council of States. Expenses to be incurred in connection w
meetings of the Consultative Committee would be met from the
lidated Fund of India. This Committee will meet as and when.
sary. The expenditure is not expected to be larga and is not
exceed Rs. 1.50 lakhs during the period the Proclamation
force. The Bill, if enacted, will not involve any non-recurring
diture. -


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

The powers of the Legislature ef the State ef Jammu and Kashmir
to make laws, which hag been declared by the Proclamation issued
under article 356 of the Constitution in respect of that State on the 18th
July, 1990, to be exercisable by or under the authority of Parliament,
is sought to be conferred on the President under article 357 (1) (@) of the
Constitution as applicable to-the State of Jammu and Kashmir.
Before exercising the aforesaid power, the President is required,
whenever he considers it practicable to do so, to consult a
Committee of members of Parliament constituted for the pur-
pose in accordance with the provisions of the proviso to sub-clause
(2) of clause 3. Any Act enacted by: the President jin exercise of
the aforesaid power is required to be laid before each House of Par-
liament and Parliament may direct modifications to be made in that
Act. The delegation of legislative power is in pursuance of the ex-
Press provision in this behalf in article 357(1)(a) of the Constitution
and is necessary as it will not ba easy for Parliament to find time to
deal with the various legislative measures that may be required in
respect of the State of Jammu and Kashmir. Under the circumstances
arising out of the issue of the Proclamation under article 356 of the
Constitution, this delegation of legislative power is limited to the
period when the aforesaid Proclamation dated the 18th July, 1990, will
continue to be in force. To the extent that it has been usual for Parlia-
ment to confer on the President such legislative powers, the delegutiun
is of a normal character.


LOK SABHA

A
BILL

=
Jammu and Kashmir to make laws,

(Shri S. B. Chaven, Minister of Home ‘Affairs)