As introduced in Lok Sabha
                   
                                                       
          
Bill  No. 102 of 2024
THE VICTIMS OF NATURAL LIGHTNING DISASTER 
(COMPENSATION) BILL, 2024
By
 Shri V .K. Sreekandan,  M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for the rehabilitation and compensation to the victims of natural lightning  
strike disaster and for matters connected therewith.
Be it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fifth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Victims of Natural Lightning Disaster (Compensation) 
Act, 2024.
(2) It extends to the whole of India. 
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title, 
extent and 
commencement.
5

2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— 
(a) “appropriate Authority” means an Officer appointed under section 3; 
(b) “natural lightning disaster”  means the disaster caused due to lightning strike which 
generally occurs during rain or prior to it; 
(c) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act; and 
(d) “victims of natural calamity” means a person who suffers physical bodily harm or 
whose property, including livestock, crop, orchard, field, machine or tools, is lost, destroyed 
or damaged due to lightning strike and includes, in the case of death of such victim due to 
lightning disaster, his family members.
   3.  (1) The Central Government shall, in consultation with the State Governments 
appoint an Appropriate Authority in such a manner as may be prescribed for providing 
financial assistance and other benefits to the victims of lightning disaster. 
   (2) The Appropriate Authority appointed under sub-section ( 1) shall be provided 
with such staff as may be necessary for efficient discharge of his duties under this Act.
   (3)  It shall be the duty of the Appropriate Authority to ensure provision of food, 
medical care, adequate shelter and financial assistance to the victims of lightning 
disaster in such a manner as may be prescribed.
   (4) The financial assistance to the victims of lightning disaster shall be disbursed as 
early as possible but not later than three months from the occurrence of the lightning disaster.
   4. (1) A claim for receiving financial assistance shall be made in the prescribed form 
by the victims of lightning strike to the Appropriate Authority, who shall disburse the 
financial assistance to the victims, after making such inquiry and in such manner, as may be 
prescribed. 
   (2) The victim of lightning disaster shall be provided with the following financial 
assistance and other benefits:— 
    (a) in case of loss of life, 
(i) financial assistance in the form of a compensation of not less than rupees 
ten lakh shall be given to the next of the kin of the deceased; and 
(ii) suitable employment shall be provided to one of the dependants of the 
deceased; 
 (b) in case of severe injury,— 
(i) medical treatment free of cost; and  
(ii) such financial assistance as, in the opinion of the Appropriate Authority, 
is necessary for his rehabilitation, subject to a minimum amount of rupees 
two lakh and maximum amount of rupees five lakh; 
 (c) in case of damage to the dwelling unit or property of any forms which 
includes commercial space, machine, tools and vehicle, victim shall be provided 
2
Definitions.
10
5
Appointment 
of Appropriate 
Authority.
Financial 
assistance and 
other benefits.
15
25
30
35
20

with such financial assistance as is required for the repair or reconstruction of 
dwelling unit or property after due assessment by recognised assessors;
 (d) in case of loss of livestock, the victim shall be given adequate financial 
assistance in proportion to the losses suffered by him.
   5. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other 
law for the time being in force.
   6.  (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central 
Government may, by general or special order published in the Official Gazette, make such 
provisions not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as appear to it to be necessary or 
expedient for the removal of the difficulty:  
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of a period of two years from 
the date of the commencement of this Act. 
(2) Every order made under this section shall, as soon as may be after it is made, be laid 
before each House of Parliament.
   7.  (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules 
for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 
   (2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, 
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which 
may be comprised of one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the 
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, 
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the 
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or 
be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment 
shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
    
Power to make 
rules.
Power to remove 
difficulties.
Savings.
3
10
5
15
20

STATEMENT  OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
 The loss of lives and damages to dwelling units, commercial spaces, machines, 
tools, crops, livestock, etc. due to lightning strikes across the country have increased in 
recent times. 
 There has been nearly a 35 per cent. increase in the overall count of lightning 
strikes and 40 per cent. increase in incidents of cloud to ground lightning in the country. 
Thunderstorms and lightning have emerged as major weather hazards in recent years, killing 
about 2,500 people annually and the most affected are people in rural areas or working 
outdoors are most at risk. 
 Because of the climate change constituting heat waves further in coming years, the 
lightning strikes are also expected to increase more.  
 India suffers huge human casualties from lightning compared to other developed 
countries and about two people in a million die from lightning and properties worth several 
crores get damaged in India each year. 
 A bolt from the blue that kills thousands in India and yet the Central Government 
is yet to declare lightning a natural disaster, saying that deaths caused by lightning can be 
avoided through education and awareness. This justification by the Central Government 
cannot and will not be accepted  as every disaster can be prevented by education and 
awareness and not only the lightning disaster alone. 
 Many States have been demanding the Central Government to declare lightning 
strike a natural disaster. Therefore, the Central Government should declare lightning a 
natural disaster or calamity to get compensation for the victims of this lightning natural 
disaster.
 Hence this Bill.
       New Delhi;                                    V .K. SREEKANDAN 
July 9,  2024.
4

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
 Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the appointment of an Appropriate Authority 
for providing financial assistance and rehabilitation measures to the victims of lightning 
disaster. Clause 4 provides for financial assistance of rupees ten lakh to the next of kin 
of a person who dies in any lightning disaster and medical treatment for injured persons 
and other welfare measures for the victims of lightning disaster.  The Bill, therefore, if 
enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is not possible to 
give an exact estimate of the actual expenditure to be involved to meet any unpredictable 
eventuality. However, it is estimated that recurring expenditure of rupees one thousand crore 
per annum would be involved from the Consolidated Fund of India. 
 A non-recurring expenditure to the tune of rupees five thousand crore is also  likely 
to be involved. 
 
  
                               
5

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
 Clause 7 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying 
out the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation 
of legislative power is of a normal character. 
6

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the rehabilitation and compensation to the victims  of natural lightning  
strike disaster and for matters connected therewith.
————
(Shri V .K. Sreekandan, M.P.)
7