1
Short title and
commencement.
THE   COMPANIES (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2019
By
SHRIMATI SUPRIYA SULE, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Companies Act, 2013.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Seventieth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Companies (Amendment) Act, 2019.
(2) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In section 135 of the Companies Act, 2013 (hereinafter referred to as the principle
Act),—
(a) in sub-section (3),—
(i) after clause (a), the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:—
"Provided that while formulating and recommending Corporate
Social Responsibility Policy, the activities mentioned under entries (i), (ii),
(iia), (iv) and (v) of the Schedule VII relating to health and education shall
be given priority in expenditure to be undertaken by the Company;";
Bill  No. 102 of  2019
Amendment
of section
135.
18 of 2013.
10
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
(ii) for clause (b), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:—
"(b) recommend the amount of expenditure to be incurred on the
activities referred to in clause (a) on priority basis, with at least sixty
per cent. of the Corporate Social Responsibility expenditure by the
companies shall be incurred in health and education related activities
mentioned under entries (i), (ii), (iia), (iv) and (v) of the Schedule VII;"
(b) in sub-section 4, after clause (a), the following proviso shall be inserted,
namely:—
"Provided that the Corporate Social Responsibility Policy of the company
shall have provision for priority spending of at least sixty per cent. of its Corporate
Social Responsibility expenditure on activities mentioned under entries (i), (ii),
(iia), (iv) and (v) of the Schedule VII;";
(c) in sub-section (5), for the second proviso and explanation thereto, the
following proviso and explanation thereto shall be substituted, namely:—
"Provided further that the company shall spend at least sixty per cent. of
the amount earmarked for Corporate Social Responsibility on activities mentioned
under entries (i), (ii), (iia), (iv) and (v) of the Schedule VII including expenditure
on health and education in vernacular languages;
Explanation.—  For the purposes of this section —
(a) "net profit" shall not include such sums as may be prescribed, and shall be
calculated in accordance with the provisions of section 198; and
(b) "expenditure on education in vernacular languages" shall mean investment
to promote primary and secondary education in local languages.".
3. In Schedule VII of the principal Act,—
(a) after entry (ii), the following entry and explanation thereto shall be inserted,
namely:—
 "( iia) promotion of primary and secondary education in vernacular
languages.
Explanation.—For the purpose of this clause, "vernacular languages" shall mean
any local language in which education is imparted to at least fifty students; and".
Amendment
of Schedule
VII.
5
10
15
20
25
30

STA TEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Article 350A of the Constitution of India, under Special Directives, directs the States
and local authorities to provide facilities for instruction of education in the mother-tongue at
primary level. It reads as—'It shall be the endeavour of every State and of every local
authority within the State to provide adequate facilities for instruction in the mother-tongue
at the primary stage of education to children belonging to linguistic minority groups; and
the President may issue such directions to any State as he considers necessary or proper for
securing the provision of such facilities'.
Thus Government has the responsibility and the child has the right to have primary
education in the local and vernacular languages prevalent in the State, so long as there is
sufficient demand for it. This importance of primary education to the child in mother-tongue
is recognised by various Education Commissions constituted since 1948. For example, the
Conference of Education Ministers of the State (1948) recommended that mother-tongue be
adopted as a medium of instruction in schools at primary and secondary levels. Research
study by UNESCO on the impact of mother-tongue based instruction on children learning at
primary levels, revealed that mother tongue based education particularly benefited children
from linguistic minorities, rural areas and girls. In such cases, there were found to be less
dropouts and better learning outcomes. As per another research study in 2002, parents are
also more likely to participate in the education process of their child and communicate with
teachers, when education is provided to children in mother-tongue.
Another research suggests that the ability of the child to learn a second language is
not inhibited, when the medium of instruction in the primary school is their mother-tongue.
On the contrary, studies establish that literacy in mother-tongue lays down strong linguistic
and cognitive foundation for learning a second language.
Despite this importance of health and education, the Corporate Social Responsibility
(CSR) earmarked expenditure on health and education out of the total CSR expenditure has
not increased much. In 2014-15 just eighteen per cent. of CSR expenditure was spent on
healthcare and only twenty-six per cent on education, totalling development sector spending
to around forty-four per cent. In the next two financial years, the CSR related expenditure on
health and education plateaued off around forty-four per cent — forty-eight per cent.
The Bill, therefore, seeks to amend the Companies Act, 2013 with a view to:—
(a) recognise the importance of primary and secondary education in the mother tongue;
(b) provide for spending of at least sixty per cent. amount earmarked for Corporate
Social Responsibility (CSR) by companies, on priority basis on health and education in
mother-tongue at primary and secondary level; and
(c) provide for companies to spend on primary and secondary education in local
languages, as long as there are at least fifty students demanding it.
The Bill thus champions for the availability of healthcare services, primary education
in local languages, rights of linguistic minorities, by mandating individual companies to
prioritise their CSR expenditure in them.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; SUPRIYA  SULE
June 6, 2019.
3

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE COMPANIES ACT, 2013
* * * * *
135. ( 1) * * * * *
(2)* * * * *
(3) The Corporate Social Responsibility Committee shall,—
(a) formulate and recommend to the Board, a Corporate Social Responsibility
Policy which shall indicate the activities to be undertaken by the company as specified
in Schedule VII;
(b) recommend the amount of expenditure to be incurred on the activities referred
to in clause (a); and
* * * * *
(4) The Board of every company referred to in sub-section (1) shall,—
(a) after taking into account the recommendations made by the Corporate Social
Responsibility Committee, approve the Corporate Social Responsibility Policy for the
company and disclose contents of such Policy in its report and also place it on the
company's website, if any, in such manner as may be prescribed; and
* * * * *
(5) The Board of every company referred to in sub-section (1), shall ensure that the
company spends, in every financial year, at least two per cent. of the average net profits of
the company made during the three immediately preceding financial years, in pursuance of
its Corporate Social Responsibility Policy:
Provided that the company shall give preference to the local area and areas around it
where it operates, for spending the amount earmarked for Corporate Social Responsibility
activities:
Provided further that if the company fails to spend such amount, the Board shall, in its
report made under clause (o) of sub-section (3) of section 134, specify the reasons for not
spending the amount.
Explanation.— For the purposes of this section —average net profit shall be calculated
in accordance with the provisions of section 198.
4
Corporate
Social
Responsibility.

5
* * * * *
SCHEDULE  VII
(See section 135)
Activities which may be included by companies in their Corporate Social Responsibility
Policies Activities relating to:—
(i) eradicating extreme hunger and poverty;
(ii) promotion of education;
* * * * *

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Companies Act, 2013.
————
(Shrimati Supriya Sule, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—493LS(S3)—20-06-2019.