I 
As INTRODUCED IN LoK SABHA ON 
~. 
I· 
Bill No. 102 of 1881 
THE BRITISH INDIA CORPORATION UMITED (ACQUISITION OF 
SHARES) BILL, 1981 
A 
BILL 
to provide fm' the acquisition of certain shares of the British India Cor-
poration Limited with a view to securing the propeT management of 
the affairs of the Company and the continuity and development of 
the production of goods which Il'I'e vital to the needs of the countTy 
and for matters connected therewith fYf' incidental thereto. 
WHEREAS Messrs. British India Corporation Limited, Kanpur, are 
engaged in the manufacture and production of pure and blended woollen 
fabrics which are vital to the needs of the general public; 
AND WH.IRJ:AS as a result of an investigation macle under section 15 of 
88 of 1981. 5 the Industries (Development and Regulation) Act, 1951, certain directions 
were iSSUed. to the Company under section 16 of that Act which, inter Cilia. 
included the modernisation of the plant and machinery of the under-
takings of the Company; 
AND WHEREAS for the purpose of carrying out the sail'\. directions, public 
10 financial institutions had advanced large sums of money to the Company; 
, AND WHEREAS the Central Government and certain· public financial 
institutions have also invested considerable funds in the share capital of 
the Company; 
AND WHEREAs the State Bank of India has advanced consic\erable sums 
15 to tlie Company and a part thereof has been gu8l1lnteed by the Central 
Government; . 

Shorttltle 
andcom J 
mence-
IQeDt 
De1lnitioDl. 
:a 
AJ:m W'BJIBAS further .investment of large sums of money is neceSSlll'J 
for the maintenance and development of the production af the under-
takings of the Company and for securing the proper management of the 
aftaira of the Company; 
AND WHERIlAS acquisition by the Central Government .f an effective 5 
control over the affairs of the Company is necessary to enable it to make 
the investments aforesaid; 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty-second Year of the RepubUc 
of India as fo11owa:-
CHAPTER I 
1. (1) This Act may be called the British India Corporation Limited 
(Acquisition of Shares) Act, 1981. 
10 
(Z) It shall be deemed to have come into force em the 11th day of 15 June, 1981. 
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
(a) "appointed day" means the 11th day Of June, 1981; 
(b) "bank" means a banldng company within the meaning of 
the Banking Regulation Act, 1949; 
(c) "Commissioner" means the Commissioner of Payments· ao 
appointed under section 6; 
(el) "Company" means the British India Corporation Limited, 
10 of 1949. 
being a company within the meaning of the Companies Act, 1956, 1 of 19D8. 
and having its registered office at Sutherland House, Kanpur, in the 
State of Uttar Pradesh; a5 
(e) "notification" means a notification publishe<\ in the Oftlclal 
Gazette; 
. (f) "share" means a share, whether ordinary or preference, In 
the capital of the Company, and includes a share pledged by any 
shBJeholder with any baDk or other crectltor, but does not include 80 
any share in the capital ot the Company held by-
(i) the Central Government; 
(H) any State Government; 
(ii' the State Bank of India, established under section 3 
of the State Bank of India Act, 1955, andfts 8UbsidIary banks; 85 23 of 1965. 
(tv) thIe :ute m.urance Corporation of India, estabHsbed 
under section 3 of the Ufe Insurance Corporation Act, 1986; 31 of 1956. 
(v) the Unit Trust Of India, estaolished under seetIoft 3 of 
the Unit Trust of India Act, 1963' . ' 82 at 1963. 
(vi) any corresponding new bank, within the m.ean'ing of 40 
the Banking Companies ~cqui'sltion and Transfer of Under-
takings) Act, 1970;' 6 of 1t'70. 

.0 ot 1980. 
(vii) any cd~nding new bank, within the mean1ni of 
the Banking COalpanies (Acquisition and Tnnsfer of Under-
takin&s) Act, 1980j 
5'7 of 1972. 5 
(viii) any general insurance company nationalised. by the 
General Insurance Business (Nationalisation) Act, 1972; 
1 of 1956. 
1 of 1958, 
1 of 1956. 
10 
15 
120 
25 
(g) ''sharehoJder'' meaD,-
(i) a person who, immediately before the appointed. day, 
was registered by the Company as the holder of any sb.a.Ile and. 
includes his legal representative; or 
(it) a perHJl who, before the appoimted day, had lodged 
wWh tbeCompany a proper Wtrum.ent of transfer of any share 
in the .fonD pre6Clibed under aectioo 106 of the Companies Act, 
1856, and. frXecuted. in accordance with the provisions of that 
section; or 
(ai) a penon who clai.ma under a proper instrumen.\ of 
transfer of any share in the form p.wcribed under .seetioI:L 106 
of the Companies Act, 1M, and. ~livers au.ca iuVument to the 
CommiMiODer, duly executed, on or bef~ such date as tb.e 
Central Government may, by notifi.catioll, specify in t.b.iS b,ehalf; 
.(h.) "specified date"means such date aa the Central Governsnent 
may, tor the purpose of any pl"ovision of this Act, by notification, 
~ and different dates may be specified. for di1lerent pro~ons 
of thia Act; 
(i) words and expressions used herein and not defined but 
deftned in the Companies Act, 1956, have the meaningsrespective1y 
assigned. to ~m in that Act. 
CHAPTER II 
Al:Ql1ISITlOllJ 01' THE SHARBS OF THE CoMPAlC'Y 
3. (1) OIl the appointed day, all the shares of the Company shaH, by, 
30 virtue of this Act, stand transferred to, and vest iD, the Central! Govern .. 
ment. 1*' .• ' 
(2) n. Central Governmeat shall be deemed, on and from tbie 
appoilHed day, to have been registered in the Register of members at 
the Comany as tile b.oldter of each ahare which stands transferred to, 
S5 aDd vested in, it by virtue of the pcovisions of SUb-section (1). 
(3) All the shares which have vested in the Central Government 
under sub-section (1), shall, by force of such vesting, be freed and 
discharsed of all trusts, liabilities, obligations, mortgages, charges, 
liens and. other encumbrances affecting them, and any attachment, 
40 injunction or any decree or order of the court, tribunal or other autho-
rity restricting t~ use of such shares in any manner, shall be deemed 
to have been withdrawn. 
(4) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that the pre>-
visions of sub-sections (1) and (2) shall not be deemed to affect-
(a) any right of the Company subsisting, immediately ·before 
the appointed day, aga1nst any shareholder to recover from such 
Transfer 
and vest .. 
ingot 
shares of 
the Com-
panyin 
the Cen-
tral 
Govern· 
'ment. 

Manage-
ment 
of the 
Company. 
Payment 
of 
amounts. 
Appoint-
ment of 
Commls-
sioner of 
Pay-
ments. 
Payment 
by the 
Central 
Govern-
ment 
to the 
Commis-
sIoner. 
, abareholder ,any sum, of money on the ground that the ~eholdet 
has not paid or credited to the Companyj the whole or any part of 
the value of the shares held by him, or, on any othergrowid what-
8Oe\I'eI';or 
(b) any right of the shareholder subsisting, immediately 5 
before the appointed day, against the Company to receive any dividend 
or other payment due from the Company. 
4. For the purpose of' enabling tb,ie Company to function as, a Gov-
ernment company, the Central Government may, by notification, make 
such provisions (including changes in the Board of . Directors, and lO 
amendrn/mts in the memonmdum and articles of association, of the 
Company) as it may consider necessary and the provisions so made 
shall have effect notwithstanding anything contained in the Companies 
Act, 1956. 1 of 19M 
.. 5.(1) For the transfer to, and vesting in, the Central Govemment, 15 
under section 3, ~ the shal'es of the Company, tbere shall begiveD by 
the 'Central Government to the shareholden of the Company, in cash 
and in the manner speclfted in section 7, an amount of rupees twenty-two 
lakhs and sDty ,thousand. 
(2) The 8DlOUbt referred to in sub-seetien (1), shaJl carry simple 20 
interest 1It the rate of four per cent, pet' aDDum for the period com-
mencing. on the appoillted day and ending on the date on which payment 
of sucb amount is made by the Central Government to the Commissioner. 
6. (1) The Central Government sball,for the purpose of dbbul'Sing 
the amounts payable to shareholders of the Company under section 5, 25 
by notification, appoint a Commissioner of Payments. 
(2) The Central Government may . appoint sueb other persons u it 
may think fit to assist the Commissioner and thereupon the CommiMioner 
, may authorise ODe or more of such penons also to exercise all or aa)' of 
the powers exercisable by him under this Ad, and difterent persons ma,. 30 
be authorised to exercise different powers. 
(3) Any person authorised. by the CoJDJDisslGiler to 8Xel'dse _y of 
tbe powers exereisahle by tbe ComnUasioner may. exercise thole powers 
in the same manner and with the same effect 'as U they have been eeafer:red 
on tbat :person diredly by this Act, and, not by' way of authorisatieD. 35 
(4) The salaries ad allowances of the CollUll.iraaioner and othert 
persons appointed under this section .han be defrayed out of tbe c.n-
solidated Fund of India. ' 
7. (1) ~ Central Government shall, within thirty days from 
the specified date, pay, in cash, to the Commissioner, for payment 40 
to the shareholders of the Company,-
(a) an amount equal to the amount speciflled in suh-section (1) 
Of section 5; and 
(b) an amount equal to the amount determined under sub-
section (2) of seetion 5. , 45 

(2) A deposit acoount shall be opened by the Central GQvetn'" 
ment lin favour of the Commilsioner, in the Public Account of India, 
and every amount paid under this Act to the Commissioner.shall be 
deposited by him to the 'credit df the said deposit account and the said 
5 deposit account shall be operated. by the Commissioner. 
(3) The interest accruing on the amount standing to the credit 
of t~ deposit account, referred to in sub-section (2), shall enW'e to 
the benefit of the shareholders of the Company. 
8. (1) Every shareholder, having a claim in relation to rany share 
10 acquired by this Act, shall prefer such claim before the Commissioner 
within thirty days from the specified date: 
Provided that if the CommissiOner is satisfied that the claimant Wal> 
prevented by suftici,ent cause from preferring the claim within the 
period of thirty days, he may entertain the claim within a further 
15 period of thirty days and not thereafter. 
(2) Ev~ shareholder of a preference share shall have a pre--
ferential cladm with regard to the amount paid by the Central Govern-
ment to the Commissioner. 
9. On receipt of .the claims madre under section 8, theCommis-
20 sioner sball separately arrange the claims in relation to preference 
shares and in relation to the ordinary shares and examine the claims 
in f!elatiOn to each wah share. . 
10. (1) After examining the claims, the Commissioner shall fix 
a certain date on or before which every claimant shall file the proof 
25 of his claim or ,be jeXCluded from the benefit of· the disbursements made 
by' the Commissioner. 
(2) Not less than fourteen days' notice of the date so fixed shall 
be .,given by ad~t in one issue of the daily newspaper in the 
EngliSh lansuage and in one issue of such daily newspaper in the re-
30 gioQall~e as the Commissioner may consi~r suitable, and every 
such notice shall call upon the claimant to 1l1e the proof of his claim 
with the CommiSSioner within the time specified in the adV!ertisement. 
(3) Every claimant, who fails to file the proof of hiS claim within 
the time specifted by the CommissioDjer, shall be excluded from the 
35 disbursement made by the Corrimi,ssioner. 
(4) The Commissioner shall, after such investigation as may, in 
b'i's opinion, be necessary, and after giving t~ Company an opportu-
nity of refuting the claim and after giving the claimant a reasonable 
opportunity of being heard, in writing, admit or reject the claim in 
40 wh.ole or in part. 
(5) Thje Commissioner shall have the power to r~gulate his own 
procedure in all matters arising out of the discharge of his functi'ons, 
. including the place or places at which he will hold his sittings and. 
shall, for the purpose of making an investigation under this Act, 
Claims to 
be made 
to the 
Commis-
sioner. 
Exam1na. 
nation of 
claims., 
Admls· 
sion or 
rejection 
of claims. 

Diaburse--
me.atqt 
JDGDe7 
by the 
Commis-
siner to 
claimants. 
Undis-
bursed 
orUD-
claimed 
amount 
to be 
deposited 
to the 
general 
revenue 
account. 
Powerot 
inspec-
tion. 
have the same powers as are ~ ill a <:ivil court \U2der the Code of 
Civil Proced.uIe, .1908, while tryiDg.a wit, ill ~·of tee ,ipllowblg 
matters, nwaely=-
(4) the summoning and enforcing the attendance of any 
witness and examrn'ng him OD. c:tath; 5 
(tt) the discovery and pro<hictiOB of any d~D'UNat or other 
mateIlial object producible as evicleo.<lej 
(c) the reception of evidel1ce on amdaVits; 
(d)tbe issWng .of any commjasioo fDr ~ examiQaUOIl of wit-
(6) ADy investigation before the CommissiOner sh'8ll be deemed 
to be a judicial proceeding within the meaning of sectiou 193 and 228 
Gt the 1nd.ian Peaal Code BDd the CQDlID1iSioner shall bte deemed. w . be 
8 civil court »r. the purposes of section 34f) and Chapter XXVi of the 
10 
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973. 15 
.(7) A claimant, who is dissatisfied with the decision of the Com-
missioner, may prefer an appeal against the decision to the principal 
CIvil c~urt of origiilal jurIsdiction within the local limits of whose 
jurisdiction the registered office of the Company is situated. 
1L (1) After admit~ a claim undIer this Act, the amount due in 20 
r~pect of each. share acqu.i11e<l by virtue of this Act ahall be paid by .the 
Commissioner at the rate of rupees ten per preference share, and at the' 
rate of fifty paise per ordinary share to lJ¥' person or ,pe1'soo.s to whom 
such sums are due, and on such payment, the liability of the Central 
Government in respect of tb,e share 90 acquired. shall stand discharged. 25 
(Z) The CoU\:1'N,ssiouer shall also apportion amongst the share-
holclers. the amount paid to him by way of interest under sub-JeCtion 
" . 
Sot 1908. 
45011860. 
2 ot 1974, 
\ 
(3) of section 7, and such apportionment shall be made on the basis of " 
the amount due to each shareholder. ~'I' 
12. Anymaney paid to the CommissioDer whiCh reoJatna .ua4is- 30 
bursed or unclaimed 011 the dateimmed.ia1jely preced.ing tAle date on 
which the omce of the CommissiODer is fiDally wouad up, sMIJ. be 
tranl6trr.ed by the Commilsioner ~ his oftice is bally wound up 
to the general revenue &CCOUDt of tbe Central Government; but a claim 
to any money so transferred may be preferred to the Central Govern- 35 
ment by the person entitled to such payment and shall be dealt with as 
if such transfer had nat been made, the order, if any, for payment of 
the claim bemg treated. as an order for the refund of· ~ue. 
(b) l'equire any person to make &DiY staMment or .tum.iIh any 45 
1Df0l'JDltion which may. be nquirai by theCo~"'OIl8r. 
/ 

7 
14. Where there is any dispute as to the persons· or persona who are 
entitled to any amount payable under this Act (ine1uding any dispute 
as to who are the legal representatives of any deceased claimant to the 
amount), the Commissioner may, after making such inquiry as he may 
5 deem fit, make the payment to such person as appears to him to be best 
entitled to receive the amount: 
Provided that if the Commissioner is unable to determine as to who 
is the person entitled to the amount and considers that the matter could 
more appropriately be c\ealt with by the principal civil court of original 
10 jurisdiction within the local limits of whose jurisdiction the registered 
oftlce of the Company is situated, he may refer such dispute to the said 
court, whose decision thereon shall be final: 
Provided further that nothing contained herein shall affect the liability 
of any person, who may receive the whole or any part of the amount 
15 allowed UDder this Act, to pay the same to the person lawfully entitled 
thereto. 
15. Where any dispute has been referred un'Cler section 14 by the 
Commissioner to the civil court referred to therein, he shall deposit the 
amount in that court. 
CHAPTER III 
MlscELLA.NEOUS 
16. The provislons of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding ey-
thing inconsistent therewith contained in any law, other than this Act, 
or in any instrument having effect by virt'lle of any law, other than this 
25 Act. 
17. If any person,-
(a) makes any ~laim for any payment unaer this Act, knowfug' 
or having reason to believe that such claim is false or without any 
basis; or ' 
30 (b) when required under this Act so to do,-
(i) omits or fails to produce any register or record of the 
Company; 'or 
(ti) makes any statement or furnishes any information 
which is false in any material particular and which he knows 
35 or believes to be false or c\oes not believe to be true; or 
(c) makes any such statement as aforesaid in any book, account, 
record, register, retunt or other document, 
he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend 
to two years, or with flne which may extend to two thousand rupees, or 
40 with both. 
18. (1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a 
company, every person who, at the time the offence was committ.ed, was 
in charge of, and was responsible to, the company for the conduct of the 
business of the company as well as the company, shall be Jieemed to be 
Powered 
Commis-
sioner to 
inquire 
into dis-
putes as 
to amount. 
Deposit 
of amount 
in court 
Act to 
have 
over-
riding 
effect, 
Penalties. 
Offences 
by com-
panies. 

Limita-
tion of 
cOlDi-
zanceof 
offences. 
Power 
to make 
rules. 
Repeal 
and 
saving. 
8 
guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded aaam,t and 
punished accordingly: 
Provide<! that nothing contained in this sUb-section shall render any 
such peI'SOn liable to any punishment, if he proves that the offence was 
committed without his knowledge or that he had exercised all due 5 
diligence to prevent the commission of such offence. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), where 
any offence under this Act has been committed with the consent or 
eonnivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of, any cUree-
tor, manager, secretary or other officer, such director, manager, secretary 10 
or other officer shall be deemed to be guilty 0'1. that offence and shall be 
liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly. 
EzplanatiDn..-For the pUl'p06es. of this section,-
(4) "company" means any body corporate arul includes aflrm 
or other association of individuals; and I 
(0). ''director'', in relation to a firm, means a partner in the 
firm. 
11. No court shall take cognizance of an offence pun!shable under thfs 
Act, except with the previous sanction of the Central Government or of 
an ofticer authorised by that Government in this behalf. ~o 
D. (1) The Central Governinent may, by notification, make rules to 
carry out the provisions of this Act. 
(2) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall 
be laid, as soon as may be after it is marte, before each House of Parlia-
ment, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may ~5 
be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and 
;f, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or 
the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modi-
fication in the rule or both Houses a~ee that the rule should not be 
made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or 30 
be of no effect, 8.<; the case mav be; so, however. that any S'L1Ch modifica-
tion or annulment shall be without prejudiCe to the validity of anything 
previously done under that rule. ' 
21. (1) The British India Corporation (Acquisition of Shares) Ordi- 8 of 1881. 
nance, 1981. is hereby repealed. .35 
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action talren 
under the Ordinance' so repealed shall be deemed to have been done or 
taken under the corresponding provisions of this Act, 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
British India Corporation Limited, Kanpur, was registered as a Public 
Limited Company in 1920. The Corporation had two Woollen Mills 
directly owned and run by it, namely, Cawnpore Woollen Mills (CWM), 
Kanpur and New Egerton Woollen Mills (NEWM), Dhariwal. Together, 
these units employed about 8,000 persons and were engagecl in the manu-
facture of pure woollen and blended. goods. Besides, the Corporation 
Illso had substantial shares in various other companies, like the Elgin 
Mias Co. Ltd., Bruahware Ltd., Cawnpore Textiles Ltd., Cawnpore Sugar 
Works LUl. Champarun Sugar Co. Ltd., Saran Engineering Co. etc. 
2. The Issued and Subscribed Capital of the Corporation was Rs. 4.06 
crores consisting of 81,000 Cumulative Preference Shares (valued at RB. 81 
lakhs) aJUi 65,00,000 Ordinary Shares (valued at RB. 325 lakhs). The 
President of India and Public Financial Institutions together held sub-
ltantial shares in the Corporation. The other major shareholrlers belong. 
ed to the Bajoria family. The ftnam:ial performance of the Corporation 
during the last two to three years had been becoming a matter of great 
cQnCern. Lo~ses were mounting and liquidity position was severely aftect.. 
e<i. The Corporation was on the verge rIf collapse, thus, affecting the 
production of goods so vital to the needs of general public, besides affect-
ing the employment of a large number of persons directly on the one 
hand and adversely affecting the interests of the Government, public 
financial institutions and the State Bank of India, its bankers, on- the 
other. The Central Government had repeatedly to issue guarantees 
totalling Rs. 817 lakhs to keep the Company going. 
3. The plant and machinery of the Corporation required to be moder-
nized and renovated but the Corporation was not in a position to com-
plete even the first phase of this important exercise. Further, substantial 
investments of public funcis were called for. However, it was considered 
prudent for the Government and for the financial institutions to invest 
more funds in the Corporation only if the ownership vests wholly with 
the Government. It was, therefore, decided to acquire compulsorily all 
the shares of the Company which were in private hands. Accordingly, 
the British India Corporation (Acquisition of Shares) Ordinance, 1981 
(No.5 of 1981) was promulgatert by the President on 11th June, 1981. 
4. The Ordinance. apart from providing for acquisition and transfer • of all privately held shares of the Company to the Central Government, 
9 

10 
provided for payment of an amount for such acquisition, management of 
the undertakings of the Corporation after acquiring its ownership, ap-
pointment of a Commissioner of Payments for the purpose of disbursing 
the amount payable to the sbarehol~ ,qf the Company whose shares are 
so acquired and for other incio.ental and consequential matters. 
5. This Bill seeks to replace the aforesaid Ordinance. 
NEW DELHI; PRANAB MUKHERJEE 
The 11th August, 1981. 
PRESIDENT'S RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLES 117 AND 274 
OF THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA 
[Copy of letter No. 22111/81-WT(iii) , dated the 11th August, 1981 from 
Shri Pranab Kumar Mukherjee, Minister of Commerce and Steel and 
Mines to the Secretary. Lok Sabha.] 
The President, having been informed of the subject matter df. the 
Bill to provide for the acquisition and transfer of the shares of the 
British India .Corporation Limited, Kanpur, held in' private hands, to the 
Central Government with a view to securing the proper management of 
the affairs of the Company and the continuity and development of the 
production of goods which are vital to the needs of the country and for 
mafters connected therewith or incidental thereto, recommends under 
clauses (1) and (3) of article 117 and cl8'UBe (1) of article 274 (If the 
Constitution. the introduction of the said Bill in and ita consideration by 
Lok Sabha, 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
SUb-clause (1) of clause 3 of the Bill provides for the acqu1siUon of 
the shares of the British IncUa Corporation Ltd., Kanpur, by the Central 
Government. 
2. SUb-clause (1) of clause 5 of the Bill provides for payment, in cash, 
and in the manner specified in Chapter II of the Bill, of an amount of 
Rs. 22,60,000 (rupees twenty-two lakhs and sixty thouaand OJ?ly) for the 
transfer to and vesting in the Central Government of the shares of the 
Company. 
3. Sub-clause (2) of clause 5 of the Bill provides for payment of a 
further amount of simple interest at the rate of four per cent. per annum 
in respect of the amount payable under sub-clause (1) of clause 5, for the 
period commencing on the appointed day and ending on the date on 
which payment of such amount is made by tfte Central Government to 
the Commissioner of Payments. It is estimateri. that this amount is like-
ly to be of the order of about Rs. 7,500 (rupees seven thousand and five 
hundred only) per month. 
4. Clause 6 of the Bill provides for the appointment of a Commissioner 
of Payments by the Central Government with adequate staff to assist him 
for the purpose of disbursing the amounts payable to the shareholders of 
the Company. The salary and allowances of the Commissioner of Pay-
ments and his staff ann expenditure on office and establishment will be 
defrayed out of the Consolidated Fund of India. The estimated expen-
diture on this a<:count is likely to be eventually of the order of Rs. 25,000 
(rupees twenty-five thousand only) per month, but the exact quantum 
cannot be estimated at this stage. In 1981-82, the Expenditure on this 
account is likely to be about Rs. 50,000 (Rupees fifty thousand only). 
5. The Bill. if enacted, is not likely to involve any other recurring or 
non-recurring expenditure. 
11 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Though there is no spt'!Cific provision in the Bill which would require 
the making of the rules, it may not be possible to rule out altogether 
any contingency that may arise in future which might necessitate the 
making df rules. Hence, as a matter of abundant caution, claUJe 20 has 
been incorporated In the aiD to empower the Central Govemment to 
make rules to carry out tlte provisions bf the Bill. '!be matters in 
respect of which such rules may be made wauld relate to procedure or 
other details. The delegation of legislative power involved would be of 
a normal and routine character. 
12 

( 
, 
LOK SABRA 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the acquisiti.on of certain shares of the British India 
Corporation Limited with a view to securing the prbper manage-
ment of the aftairs of the Company and the continuity aDd develop-
ment of the production of goods which are vital to the needs of the 
country and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto. 
(Shri Pranab Kumar Mukhe7-;ee. 
Minilter of Commerce and Steel and 
Mine,.) 