THE CESS LAWS (REPEALING AND AMENDING) BILL, 2005
A
BILL
to repeal certain enactments and to amend certain other enactments relating to levy of
cess on certain items.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. This Act may be called the Cess Laws (Repealing and Amending) Act, 2005.
2.  The enactments specified in the First Schedule are hereby repealed to the extent
mentioned in the fourth column thereof.
3.  The enactment specified in the Second Schedule is hereby amended to the extent
and in the manner mentioned in the fourth column thereof.
4.  (1) The repeal or amendment by this Act of any enactment shall not—
(a) affect any other enactment in which the repealed enactment has been
applied, incorporated or referred to;
(b) affect the validity, invalidity, effect or consequences of anything already
done or suffered, or any right, title, obligation or liability already acquired, accrued
or incurred or any remedy or proceeding in respect thereof, or any release or
discharge of or from any debt, penalty, obligation, liability, claim or demand, or
any indemnity already granted, or the proof of any past act or thing;
Short title.
Repeal of
certain
enactments.
Amendment
of Act 26 of
1975.
Savings.
Bill No. 102 of 2005
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5
10

2
Collection
and payment
of arrears of
duties.
(c) affect any principle or rule of law, or established jurisdiction, form or
course of pleading, practice or procedure, or existing usage, custom, privilege,
restriction, exemption, office or appointment, notwithstanding that the same
respectively may have been in any manner affirmed or recognised or derived by,
in or from any enactment hereby repealed;
(d) revive or restore any jurisdiction, office, custom, liability, right, title,
privilege, restriction, exemption, usage, practice, procedure or other matter or
thing not now existing or in force.
(2) The mention of particular matters in sub-section (1) shall not be held to prejudice or
affect the general application of section 6 of the General Clauses Act, 1897, with regard to the
effect of repeals.
5.  Notwithstanding the repeal of the enactments specified in the First Schedule or the
amendments in the enactment as specified in the Second Schedule, the proceeds of duties
levied under the said enactments immediately preceding date on which the Cess Laws
(Repealing and Amending) Bill, 2005 receives the assent of the President,—
(i) if collected by the collecting agencies but not paid into the Reserve Bank of
India; and
(ii) if not collected by the collecting agencies,
shall be paid or as the case may be, collected and paid into the Reserve Bank of India for
being credited to the Consolidated Fund of India.
10 of 1897.
5
10
15
20

THE FIRST SCHEDULE
(See section 2)
Repeals
 Year No. Short title Extent of repeal
  1  2 3            4
 1942 7 The Coffee Act, 1942 Sections 11
and  13.
 1972 13 The Marine Products Export Development Authority Sections 14
Act, 1972 and 15.
 1986 3 The Agricultural and Processed Food Products Export The whole.
 Cess Act, 1985
 1986 11 The Spices Cess Act, 1986 The whole.
3
5
10

THE SECOND SCHEDULE
(See section 3)
Amendments
 Year No. Short title Amendments
  1 2 3            4
 1975 26 The Tobacco Cess Act, 1975 ( i) Section 4 shall be omitted.
(ii) In section 5, for the words
and figures “duties of excise
and customs levied under
sections 3 and 4 respectively”,
the words and figure “duty of
excise levied under section 3”
shall be substituted.
4
5
10

5
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
At present the export of several agricultural products are subject to levy of cess
under different enactments such as,  the Agricultural and Processed Food Products Export
Cess Act, 1985, the Tobacco Cess Act, 1975, the Spices Cess Act, 1986, the Marine Products
Export Development Authority Act, 1975, and the Coffee Act, 1942.
2.  In recent years, international trade in agricultural products  has become extremely
challenging for India with the emergence of new competitors. Some of these competitors
have a negligible domestic demand and can export almost their entire produce at very cheap
rates, thus, displacing the conventional demand for Indian products in the international
market.  Further, many developed countries provide huge subsidies to support their domestic
agriculture.  These subsidies enable these developed countries to establish and corner large
shares in global markets.  A cess on Indian exports is a handicap to our exporters and provide
other countries exporters with a competitive edge.
3.  From a policy perspective, the Central Government has taken the consistent view
that taxes and duties ought not to be exported. The cess levied under all  Acts referred to
above is unambiguously an export tax.  Imposition of such an export duty tax is clearly
anomalous and runs counter to policy.  It reduces competitiveness of agricultural exports
and is plainly unjustifiable.  The only action consistent with Government’s avowed policy is
to do away with the cess collected under abovesaid statutes.
4.  Since the cess is levied as a duty of customs, the exporter is required to go
through the rigours of all customs procedures before the commodity can be physically
shipped out of the country.  This entails transaction costs, delays, and compliance with
procedural formalities.  Most exporters have complained bitterly about these transaction
costs and have strongly pleaded for altogether removing all such cess levies.
5.  The enactments levying the cess do not contain any provision for grant of
exemption.   It is, therefore, proposed to repeal the Agricultural and Processed Food Products
Export Cess Act, 1985, the Spices Cess Act, 1986, sections 14 and 15 of the Marine Products
Export Development Authority  Act, 1972, sections 11 and 13 of the Coffee Act, 1942; and to
amend the Tobacco Cess Act, 1975,  to abolish cess on the export of agricultural products
levied under the respective Acts.
6.  This Bill seeks to achieve the above objects.
N
EW DELHI;
The 21st July, 2005. KAMAL NATH .

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
The proposed Bill provides repealing of the Agricultural and Processed Food
Products Export Cess Act, 1985, the Spices Cess Act, 1986, sections 14 and 15 of the Marine
Products Export Development Authority Act, 1972, sections 11 and 13 of the Coffee Act,
1942; and to amend the Tobacco Cess Act, 1975, to abolish cess on the export of agricultural
produces levied under the respective Acts.
No recurring or non-recurring expenditure is involved in the administration of the
proposed legislation.
6

ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE COFFEE ACT, 1942
(7 OF 1942)
* * * * *
Duties of Customs and of Excise
11.  A duty of customs shall be levied on all coffee produced in India and exported
from India at such rate not exceeding fifty rupees per quintal as may be fixed by the
Central Government by notification in the Official Gazette.
* * * * *
13. (1) The proceeds of the duty of customs levied under this Act (all of which shall
form part of the Consolidated Fund of India), reduced by the cost  of collection as
determined by the Central Government, shall, if Parliament by appropriation made by law
in this behalf so provides, be paid to the Board for being utilised for the purposes of this
Act.
(2) The provisions of the Customs Act, 1962, and the rules and regulations made
thereunder, shall, as far as may be, apply in relation to—
(a) the refund of the duty of customs where coffee is exported and subsequently
imported into India; and
(b) the export, without payment of the duty of customs, of coffee which is
subsequently to be imported into India.
—————
E
XTRACTS FROM THE MARINE PRODUCTS EXPORT DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY ACT, 1972
(13 OF 1972)
* * * * *
CHAPTER IV
FINANCE, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT
14. (1) There shall be levied on all marine products which are exported, a cess for
the purposes of this Act at such rate not exceeding three per cent. ad valorem  as the
Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, fix.
(2) The cess levied under sub-section ( 1) shall be in addition to any cess or duty
leviable on marine products under any other law for the time being in force.
(3) The provisions of the Customs Act, 1962, and the rules and regulations made
thereunder, including those relating to refunds and exemptions from duty, shall, as far as
may be, apply in relation to the levy and collection of the cess leviable under sub-section
(1) as they apply in relation to the levy and collection of a duty of customs under that
Act or those rules and regulations.
Duty of
customs.
Payment of
proceeds of
duty to the
Board.
52 of 1962.
Imposition
of a cess
on marine
products
exported.
52 of 1962.
7

8
15. The proceeds of the cess levied under section 14 shall first be credited to the
Consolidated Fund of India and the Central Government may, if Parliament by appropriation
made by law in this behalf so provides, pay to the Authority, from time to time, from out
of such proceeds, after deducting the expenses of collection, such sums of money as it
may think fit for being utilised for the purposes of this Act.
* * * * *
E
XTRACTS FROM THE TOBACCO CESS ACT, 1975
(26 OF 1975)
* * * * *
4. (1) There shall be levied and collected, by way of a cess for the purposes of the
Tobacco Board Act, 1975, a duty of customs at such rate not exceeding one per cent. ad
valorem  as the Central Government may specify, by notification in the Official Gazette,
on all tobacco, which is exported.
Explanation.—“Exported” means taken out of India by land, sea or air.
(2) The duties of customs levied under sub-section ( 1) shall be in addition to any
cess or duty leviable on tobacco under any other law for the time being in force.
(3) The provisions of the Customs Act, 1962 and the rules and regulations made
thereunder, including those relating to refunds and exemptions from duty, shall, as far as
may be, apply in relation to the levy and collection of the duty of customs leviable under
sub-section (1) as they apply in relation to the levy and collection of duties of customs
under that Act or those rules and regulations.
5.  The proceeds of the duties of  excise and customs levied under sections 3 and
4 respectively shall first be credited to the Consolidated Fund of India and the Central
Government may, if Parliament, by appropriation made by law in this behalf, so provides,
pay to the Board, from time to time, from out of such proceeds, after deducting the
expenses on collection, such sums of money as it may think fit for being utilised for the
purposes of the Tobacco Board Act, 1975.
* * * * *
Payment of
proceeds of
cess to the
Authority.
Duties of
customs on
tobacco.
Crediting
proceeds of
duties to
Consolidated
Fund of India.
4 of 1975.
52 of 1962.
4 of 1975.

LOK  SABHA
—————
A
BILL
to repeal certain enactments and to amend certain other enactments relating to levy of
cess on certain items.
—————
(Shri Kamal Nath, Minister of Commerce and Industry )
MGIPMRND—2170LS(S3)—05-08-2005.