... -. 
LOX S~Hil. 
C O'1RIGEND1.. 
to 
THE FOOD CCR.POR.:a.TIO.lifS (.:.J'£Nl).L.ffilift') BILL, 1967 
(';tQ.. be/':'EL_~intrQduc_e_d_ID.. Lok; Sabpa) ~ 
1. Page 3, line 1,-
after" clause (a)" insert "shall" 
2. On the docket page,-
for "Food Cornoration 1i..ct" - .. 
read "Food Coroorations ~ct" -- . 
3. Oorrect line numbers oh page 2. 
NEl;.f DELHI; 
July 21, 1967 
4.sad~ 30, '1'889 ~Saka) 

"'~~.;eI waa 44. 
As INTRODUCED IN LoK SABHA ON 
BIll No. 103 at 1", 
THE FOOD CORPORATIONS (AMENDMENT) 
BILL, 1967 
A 
BILL 
to ttme'nd the Food Corporations Act, 1964 and to declare tilt! Central 
Government as the appropriate Government under the Indus-
trial Disputes Act, 1947 in relation to the Food Corporation of 
India. 
B& it enacted by Parliament in the Eightetenth Year of the 
Republic of India as follows:-
1. This Act may be called the Food Corporations (Amendment) Short 
A~t, It17. title. 
37 at 1964. S l. At1m' Rction 1.2 of the Food Corporati~ns Act, 1964, the follow- lnaertion 
IBg IftIiCtion, shall be inserted, narnely:- at new 
section 
12A. "12A. (1) Wh~re the Central Government has oeued or Special 
ceases to perform any functions which under section 13 are provisions 

for trans-
fer of 
Govern-
ment em-
ployees 
to the 
Corpora-
tion in 
certain 
cases. 
2 
functions of tne Corporation, it shall be lawful tor the Central 
Governme'nt to transfer, by order and with effect from such 
date or dates (which may be either retrospective to any date 
not earlier than the 1st January, 1965, or prospective) as may 
be specified in the order, to the Corporation any of the officers 5 
or employees serving in the Department of the Central Govern-
ment dealing with food or any of its subordinate or attached 
offices and engaged in the performance of those functions: 
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-sectiO'n shall 
apply to any officer or employee not in service in such Depart- 10 
ment or office on the 1st day of July, 1966. 
(2) In making an order under sub-section (1), the Central 
Government shall, as far as may be, take into consideration the 
functions which the Central Government h&s ceased or ceases 
to perform and the areas i'n which such functions have been or IS 
are performed. 
(3) An officer or other employee transferred by an order 
made under sub-section (1) shall, on and from the date of trans-
fer, cease to be an employee of the Central Government and 
become an employee of the Corporation with such designation 2.0 
as the Corporation may determine and shall, subject to the pro-
visions of sub-sections (4), (5) and (6) t be governed by the 
regulations made by the Corporation under this Act as respects 
remuneration and other conditions of service including pension, 
leave and provident fund, and shall cO'ntinue to be an officer I)r 2.5 
employee of the Corporation unless and until his employment 
is terminated by the Curporation. 
(4) Every officer or other employee transferred by aOn order 
made under sub-section (1) shall, within six months from the 
date of transfer, exercise his option in writing to be govemeci,- 30 
--' 
(a) by the scale of pay applicable to the post held by 
him under the Governme'nt immediately before the date of 
transfer or by the scale of pay applicable to the post under 
the Corporation to which he is transferred, 
(b) by the retirement or other terminal benefits 35 
admissible to employees of the Central Government in 
accordance with the rules and orders of the Central Govern-
ment as amended from time to time or the provident fund or 
other terminal benefits admissible to the employeee of the 
Corporation under the regulations made by the Corpora~ion 
under this Act, 
and such option once exercised shal1 be final: 

3 
., ~>ro\tided that the option exercised under clause (n)' iJuU be 
appUcable only in respect of the post to which such officer or 
employee is transferred to the Corporation and on appointment 
to a higher post under the Corporation, he shall be eligible only 
S for the scale of pay applicable to such higher post: 
Provided further that if immediately before the date of his 
transfer any such officer or employee is offil'iating in a hip-her 
post under the Government either in a leave vacancy or in any 
othier vacancy of a specified duration, his pay, on transfer, shall 
10 be proter-ted for the unexpired period of such vacancy and 
thereafter h~ shall be entitled to the scale of pay applicable to 
the post under the Government to which he would have revert-
ed or to the scale of pav applicable to the post under the Cor-
poration to which he is transferred, whichever he may opt: 
I S Provided also that when an officer or I)thH employee sprv-
ing in the Department of the Ministry of the Central Govern-
ment dealing with food or in any of its attached or subordinate 
offices is promoted to officiate in a higher post in the Depart-
ment or office subsequent to the transfer to the Corporation of 
20 any other officer or employee senior to him i~ that Department 
or office befOr'e such transfer, the officer or other employee who 
is promoted to officiate in such higher post shan, on transfer to 
the Corporation, be entitled only to the scale ot pay applica·bIe 
to the post he would have held but for such promotion or the 
2S scale of pay applicab1c to the post under the Corporation to 
which he is transferred, whicheVer he may opt. 
(5) No offi~r or other enlployee transferred by an order 
made under sub-section (1) • ...;.. 
(4) shall be dismisaed or removed by an authority 
30 subordinate to that com.~tent to make a similar or equi-
valent appointment under the Corporation as may be pres-
cribed; 
(b) shall be dismissed or removed or reduced in rank 
except after an inquiry in which he has been inform~ of 
3S the charges against him and given a reasonable opportunity 
of. being heard in respect of those charges and where it is 
proposed, after such inquiry, to impose on him any such 
penalty, until he has heen given a rea.Clonable opportunity 
of making a representation on the penalty proposed, but 

Amend-
ment of 
section 2 
of Act 14 
of 1~7. 
4 
or...ty onth'e basis of the evid~ce addueed during :.ucll 
tnqu.iry: 
Prpvided that this clause shall )lot app1.Y,-
(i) where an offi-cer or employee is dismissed or 
removed Dr reduced in rank .On the ground .Of conduct S 
which hEU! led t.O his conviction on a criminal charge; or 
(ii) where th'e authority empowewd to diimiss or 
fetn(We an officer oremploye,e or .t6 r:educebim in rank 
is satisfied that for some reason, t.O be recDrded by that ._ 
authority in writing, it is not reasonably .prac.t.icable to 1\0 
hold such inquiry; or 
(iii) to an officer or employee who, after transfer 
to th'e C.Orporation, is appointed to a higher post under 
the CorporatiDn in response to an open advertisement 
and in cDmpetitiDn with .Outsiders. 15 
(6) If, in respect .Of any such officer or employee as aforesaid, 
a question arises whether it is·reasonably practicable to hold such 
inquiry as is referred to in sub-seetion (5), the decision thereon 
of the authority empowered to dismiss or remove him 01:' tD 
reduCe him in rank shall be final. 2.0 
(7) Nothing contained in sub-section (J) &hall.apply.to the 
members of the Central Secretariat Service or any other service 
or to persons on deputation to the Department refel'l'ed to in 
that sub-section OT to any of its attached Dr subordinate offices 
from any .Ministry of the Central Govel"nment or from any State 2S 
Government Dr from al1Y organisation.". 
3. In section 2 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, in sub-clause 
(i) .Of clause (a), after the words and figures "the Unit Trust of 
India Act, 1963, or", the words and/figures "the Food Corporation of 
India established under section 3, or a Board of Management estab- 30 
llshed for two or more contiguous States under section 16, of the 
Food Corporations Act, 1964, or" shall be interted. 37 of 1964. 

STATEMENT OP 09MC!rs AND REASONS 
With the establishment of the 'Food Corporation of' India under 
the Food Corporations Act, 1964, the work relating to the storage, 
movement, distrilNtion and sale of foodg1l8ins, perfOllned by the 
Regional Directorates under the Food Department of the Govern-
ment, is being gradually transferred to the 'Food Corporation of 
India. The staff working in the Regional Directorates are alsobefng 
transferred to the C~P9ration along with. Ute work. The object of 
this Bill is to prescribe the conditions of service in regard to pay, 
peDSion ami other similar matters ,wlorich·watci be aipplicable to the 
employees on their transfer to the OoopoNtion. .hi"doing so, care 
has 'been taken to EIJl9UI'e 1hatthe pay, 'pension 2IfDcltVltber·conditions 
of seI'Vice .... e 'mt, .s far as ,possible, adverse. eft-*ed ioa :account of 
sudl transfer. . ... ., 
2. OpporWility isbei'.Qg .tak!en to: _laee ,Ita Celddl Govern-
ment ,as the 'appropriate -Govef,unent' luder'1Ae iJxlw ..... 1 Disputes 
Act, l~, in relation to the l'ooclCorpDr.at.acmrot"lIfdiii. 
~.~ ... ". 
NBW DBLHIj 
The 1st ltJ.ly, 1917. 
JAGJIN'AN RAM. 

Defini-
tions. 
ANNEXURE 
EXTRACT FROM THE lNDUSTJtIAL DISPUTES ACT, 1947 
(14 01' 1947) 
• • • • 
Z. In this Act, unless there is anything repugnant in the subject 
or context,-
(/I) "appropriate Government" mea'nS-
(i) in relation to any industrial dispute concerning any 
industry carried on by or U'nder the authority of the Central 
Government or ,by a railway company or concerning any 
such controlled industry as may be specified in this behalf 
by the Central Government or in relation to an industrial 
dispute concerning the Employees' State Insurance Corpora-
tion established under section 3 of the Employees' State 
Insurance Act, 1948, or the "Indian Airlines" and "Air- 34 of 1948 
India" Corporations established under section 3 of the Air 27 of 1953: 
Corporat!ons Act, 1953, or the Agricultural Refinance Cor-
poration established under section 3 of the Agricultural 
Re1lnanc:e Corporation Act, 1963, or the Deposit Insurance 10 of 1963. 
Corporation established under section 3 of the Deposit Insu-
rance Corporation Act, 1961, or the Unit Trust of India 47 of 1961. 
established under section 3 of the Unit Trust of India Act, 52 of 1963. 
1963, or a banking or an insurance company, a mine, an oil-
field, a Cantonment Board, or a major port, the Central 
Government, and 
• • • • 
6 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
to amend the Food Corporation Act, 1964 and to declare the 
Central Government as the appropriate Government under 
the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 in relation to the Food 
Corporation of India. 
(Shri Jagjivan Ram, 
Minister of Food and 
Agriculture. ) 