As INTRODUCt:D IN Lolt SABHA ON' 
• -' ...... - .fFl 
'-2 AU~ ,~r 
Bill He. 103 Of 1986 
TH~ JUVENILE JUSTICE BtLL, 1988 
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
CLAUSFS 
1. Short title, extent and commencement. 
2. Definitions. 
3. Continuation of inquiry in respect of juvenile who has ceased to 
be a juvenile. 
CHAPTER II 
COMPETENT A Ui'HOIUTI'ES AND INSTITUTrONS FOR JtJV£NiLES 
4. Juvenile Welfare Boards. 
5. Juvenile Courts. 
{i. Procedure, etc., in relation to Boards and Juvenile Cc)urts 
7. Power of Board and Juvenile Court. 
8. Procedure to be followed by a Magistrate not empowered under 
the Act. 
9. Juvenile homes. 
10. Special homes. 
11. Observation homes. 
12. After-care organisations. 
tHAPTERIII 
NEGLECTED JUVENILES 
13. Production of neglected juveniles before Boards. 
14. Special procedure to be followed when neglected juvenile has 
parents. 
15. Inquiry by Board regarding neglected juveniles. 
16. Power to ec;nunit neglected juvenile' to suitable custody. 
17. Uncontrollable juveniles. 
CHAPTER IV 
DELINQUENT .TUVENILES 
1&. BaU and custody of Juveniles. 
19-. Infonnation to parent or guardian or probation otftcer. 
&.\ 

11 
CLAUSES 
20. Inquiry by Juvenile Court regarding delinquent juveniles. 
21. Orders that may be passed regarding delinquent juveniles. 
22. Orders that may not be passed against delinquent juveniles. 
23. Proceeding under Chaptet VIII of the Criminal Procedure Code 
not competent against juvenile. 
24. No joint trial of juvenile and person not a juvenile. 
25. R~moval of disqualiftcation attaching to conviction. 
26. Special provision in respect of pending cases. 
CHAPTER V 
PROCEDURE OF COMPETENT AUTHORITIES GENERALLY AND APPEALS AND REVISION 
FROM ORDERS OF SUICH AUTHORITIES 
27. Sittings, etc., of Boards and Juvenile Courts. 
28. Persons who may be present before competent authority. 
29. Attendance of parent or guardian of juvenile. 
30. Dispensing with attendance of juvenile. 
31. Committal to approved place of juvenile suffering from dangerous 
disease and his future disposal. 
32. Presumption and determination of age. 
33. Circumstances to be taken into consideration in making orders 
under the Act. 
34. Sending a juvenile outside jurisdiction. 
35. Reports to be treated as confidential. 
36. Prohibition of pUblication of names, etc., of juveni]es involved i:1 
any proceeding under the Act. 
37. Appeals. 
38. Revision. 
39. Procedure in inquiries, appeals and revision proceedingS'. 
40. Power to amend orders. 
CHAPTER VI 
SPECIAL OFFENCES IN RESPECT OF JUVENILES 
41. Punishment for cruelty to juvenile. 
42. Employment of Juveniles for bagging. 
43. Penalty for giving intoxicating liquor or narcotic drugs or psy-
chotropic substance to a juvenile. 
44. Exploitation of juvenile employees. 
45. Alternative punishments. 
CHAPTER VII 
MISCELLANIlOUS 
46. Power of State Government to discharge and transfer juveniles. 
47. Transfers between juvenile homes, etc., under the Act,and 
juvenile homes, etc., of like nature in dJfferent'parbl 'of ,IndIa . 
• 

iii 
CLAUSES 
48. Transfer of juveniles of unsound mind or suffering from leprosy 
o~ addicted to drugs. 
49. Placing out on. licence. 
50. Provision in respect of escaped juveniles. 
51. Contribution by parents. 
52. Fund. 
53. Advisory Board. 
54. Visitors. 
55. Control of custodian over juvenile. 
56. Delinquent juvenile undergOing sentence at commencement of the 
Act. 
57. Appointment of officers. 
58. Officers appointed under the Act to be public servants. 
59. Procedure in respect of bonds. 
GO. Delegation of powers. 
61. Protection of action -taken in good faith. 
62. Power to make rules. 
63. Repeal and savings. 

BIll No. 103 of 1986' 
THE JUVENILE JUSTICE BIU., 1986 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the care, protection, treatment, development and rehabi-
litation of neglected or delinquent juveniles and for th"'.? adjudication 
of certain matter. ,elating to, and disposition oj, delinquent 
juveniles. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty-seventh Year of the 
Republic of India as follows:-
CHAPrER I 
PuLIMINAKY 
5 1. (1) This Act may be called the Juvenile Justice Act, 1986. 
(2) It extends to the whole of India except tlle State of Jammu and 
Kashmir. 
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government 
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint, and different dates 
10 may be appointed for cU1!erent provisions of this Act and for different 
States. 
15 
Z. In thi~ Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
(a) "begging" means-
(i) aoliclting or receiving alms in a public place or entering 
into any private premises for the purpose of soliciting or receiving 
alms, whether under the pretence of singing, dancing, fortune-
telling, performing tricks or selling articles or otherwise; 
Short 
title, 
extent 
alld 
com· 
mece· 
ment. 
Defini· 
tions. 

2 
(ii) exposing or exhibiting, with the object of obtaining 
or extorting alm:;, any sore, wound, injury, deformity or disease, 
whether of himself or of any other person or of an animal; 
(iii) allowing oneself to be used as an. exhibit for the pur-
pose of soliciting or receiving alms; 5 
(b) "Board" means a Juvenile Welfare Board· constituted under 
section 4; 
(c) "brothel", "prostitute", "prostitution" and "public place" shall 
have the meanings respectively assigned to them in tha Suppression 
of Immoral Traftlc in Women and Girls Act, 1956; 10 104ofl956. 
(dj "competent au LilOlity" means, in relation to neglected 
juveniles, a Board and, in relation to delinition juveniles, a Juvenile 
Court and 'where no such Board or Juvenile Court has been constitu-
ted, includes any (;()urt empowered under sub-section (2) of section 7 
to exercise the powers conferred on a Board or Juvenile Court; 15 
(e) "delinquent jUv'enile" means a juvenile who has been found 
to have committed an offenee; 
<f> "fit person" or "fit institution" means any person or institu-
tion . (not being a police station o. jail) found fit by the competent 
authority to leceive and take care of a juvenile entrusted to his or 20 
its care and protection on the terms and conditions specified by the 
competent authority; 
(g) "guardian" in relation to a juvenile, includes any person 
who in the opinion of the competent authority, having cognizance of 
any proceeding in relation to a juvenile, has, for the .time being, the 25 
actual charge of, or control over, that juvenile; 
(h) "Juvenile" means a boy who has not attained the age of 
sixteen years or a girl who has not attained the aga of eighteen 
years; 
(i) "Juvenile Court" means a Court constituted under section 5, So 
(j) "juvenile home" means an institution established or certified 
by the State Government under section 9 as a juvenile home; 
(k) "narcotic drug" and "psychotropic substance" shall have 
the meanings respectively assigned to them in the Narcotic Drugs 
and Psychotropic Substances Act, 1985; 35. 61 of 1985. 
(1) "neglected juvenile" means. a juvenile who---
(i) is found begging; or 
(ii) is found without hav~ng any home or setUed place of 
abode and without any ostensible means of subsistence and is 
destitute; 
(iii) has a parent or guardian who is unftt or ;ncapacitated 
to exercise control over the juvenile; or 
(iv) liyes in a brothel or with a prostitute or frequently goes 
to any place used for the purpose of prostitution, or is found to 

20 of 19.58. 
2 of 1974. 
5 
3 
.associate with any prostitute or any other person who leae's an 
immoral, drunken or depraved life; 
(v) who is being or is likely to be abused or exploited for-
immoral or illegal purposes or unconscionable gain; 
(m) "observation home" means any institution or place establish-
ed or recognised by the Sbte Government under sectioll 11 as an 
observation home; 
(n) "offence" means an offence punisha~le under any law for 
the time beirtg in force; 
10 (0) "place of saf~ty" means any place or institution (not being 
. a police station or jail), the person in charge of which is willing tem-
porarily to· receive and take care of a juvenile and which in the 
opinion of the competent authority may.be a place of safety for the 
juvenile; 
IS (p) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this 
. Act: 
(q) "probation officer" means an officer appointed as a probation 
officer under this Act or un,der the Probation of Offenders Act, 1958; 
(r) "special home" means an institution established or certifiecJ 
by the State Government under section 10; 
(8) "supervision", in relation to a juvenile placed under the care 
of any parent, guardian or other fit person or· fit institution under 
this Act" means the supervision. of that juvenile by a probati.Dn officer 
for the purpose of ensuring that the juvenile is properly looked after 
and that the conditions imposed by the competent authority are com-
plied with; 
(t) all words and expressions used but not defined in this Act 
and defined· in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, shall have the 
meanings respectively assigned to them in that Code. 
~o 3. Where an inquiry has been initiated against a juvenile :md during 
the course of such inquiry the juvenile ceases to be such, then, notwith-
standing anything contained in this Act or in any other law for the time 
being in force, the inquiry may be continued and ore'ers may be made in 
respect of such person as if such person had continued to be a juveniJe. 
35 CHAPTER II 
COMPETENT AUTHORITIES AND INSTITUTIONS FOR JUVENII.ES 
Con-
tinuation 
of 
inquiry in 
respect of 
juvenile 
who has 
ceased 
tobea 
juvenile. 
4. (1) The State Government may, by notification in the Official Juvenile 
Gazette, constitute fot any area specified in the notification, one or mo.t;e Welfare 
Juvenile Welfare Boards for exercising the pewers and discharging the Boards. 
40 duties conferred or imposed on ~uch Board in relaHon to neglected juve-
niles. under this Aet. 
(2) A Board shall consist of a Chairman and such other members as 
the State Government thinks fit to appoint of whom not iess than one 
shall be a woman; and every such member shal1·be"vest~d with the powers 
2 of 1974. 45 of a Magistrate under the· Cod~. of Crimhal·Procedure, 1973. 

JuveJllle 
Courts. 
Proce-
dure. etc .. 
in re· 
lation to 
Boards 
~nd 
Juvenile 
Courts. 
Powers of 
Board 
and 
Juvenile 
Court. 
4 
(3) The Board shall function as a Bench of Magistrates and Ehall have 
lhe powers conferred by the. Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, on a Met-
ropolibm Magistrate or, as the case may be, a. Judicial Magistrate of the 
first class. 
5. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal 5 
2 (If 1974. 
Procedure, 1973, the State Government may, by notification in the Official 2 of 1974. 
Gazette, constitute for any area specified. in the notification, one or more 
.Tuvenile Courts for exercising the powers apd discharging the duties con-
ferred or imposed on such Court in relation to delinquent juveniles 
under this Act. Ut 
(2) A Juvenile Court shall consist of such number of Metropolitan 
Magistrates or judicial Magistrates of the first class, as the case may be, 
forming a Bench as the State Government thinks fit to appoint, of whom 
one shall be designated as the Principal Magistrate; and every such Bench 
shall have the powers conferred by the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.. 15 2 of 1974. 
on a Metropolitan Magistrate or. as the case may be, a Judicial Magistrate 
of the first class. 
(3) Every Juvenile Court shall be assisted by a panel of two honorary 
social workers possessing such qualifications as may be prescribed, of 
whom at least one shall be a woman. and such panel shall be appointed 20 
by the State Government. 
6. (1) In the event of any difference of opinion among the members 
of a Board or among the Magistrates of a Juvenile Court, the opinion of 
the majority shall prevail, but where there is no such majority, the 
opinion of the Chairman or of the Principal Magistrate, as the case may 25 
be, shall prevail. 
(2) A Board or Juvenile Court may act notwithstanding the flbsence 
of any member of the Board or. as the case may be, any MagiBtrate of 
the Juvenile Court, and no order'made by the Board or Juvenile Court 
shall be invalid by reason only of the absence of any member or Magis- 30 
trate, as the case may be, during any stage of the proceeding. 
(3) No person shall be appointed as a member of the Board or as a 
Magistrate in the Juvenile Court unless he has, in the opinion of the State 
Government, special knowledge of child psychology and child welfare. 
7. (1) Where a Board or a Juvenile Court has been constituted for 35 
any area, such Board or Court shall, notwithstanding anything contained in 
any other law for the time being in force but save as otherwise expressly 
provided in this Act, have power to deal exclUSively with all proceedings 
under this Act relating to neglected juveniles or delinquent juveniles, as 
the case may be: 40 
Provided that a Board Or a Juvenile Court may, if it is of opinion 
that it is necessary so to do having regard to the circumstances of the 
case, transfer any proceedings to any Juvenile' Court Or Board, as the 
case may be: 
Provided further that where there is any difference of opinion between 45 
a Board and a Juvenile Court regarding the transfer of any proceedings 
under the first proviso, it shall be referred to the Chief Metropolitan 

Magistrate or, as the case may be, the Chief Judicial. Magistrate for deci..; 
sion, and in a case where the District Magistrate is functioning as a Board 
or a Juvenile Court, such difference of opinion shall be referred to the 
Court of Session, and the decision of the Chief Metropolitan Magistrate 
5 or Chief Judicial Magistrate or, as the case may be, the Court of Session 
on such reference shall be final. 
(2) Where no Board or Juvenile Court has been constituted for any 
area, the powers conferred on the Board or the Juvenile Court by or' 
under this Act shall be exercised in that area, only by the following,. 
10 namely:-
(a) the District Magistrate; or 
(b) the Sub-Divisional Magistrate; or 
(c) any MetrO!>Olitan Magistrate or Judicial 
first. class, as the case may be. 
Magistrate of the 
15 (3) The powers conferred on the Board or Juvenile Court by or under 
this Act may also be exercised by the High Court and the Court of SeSlloD, 
when the proceeding comes before them in appeal, revision or otherwise. 
8. (1) When any Magistrate not empowered to exercise the powers of 
8 Board or a Juvenile Court under this Act is of opinion that a person 
20 urought before him under any of the provisions of this Act (otherwise 
than for the purpose of giving evidence) is a juvenile, he shall record sueb 
opinion and forward the juvenile and the record of the proceeding to the 
competent authority having jurisdiction over the proceeding, 
(2) The competent authority to which the proceeding is forwarded 
25 under sub-section (1) shall hold the inquiry all if the juvenile had original-
ly been brought before it, I· I ,L 
9. (I) The State Government may establish and maintain as many 
juvenile homes as may be necessary for the reception of neglected 
juveniles under this Act. .' f 
30 (2) Where the State Government is of optnion that any institution 
other than a home established or maintained under sub-section (1) is fit 
for the reception of the neglected juveniles to be sent there under this 
Act, it may certify such institution as a juvenile home for the purposes 
of this Act. 
35 (3) Every juvenile home to which a neglected juvenile is Fent under 
this Act shall not only provide the juvenile with accommodation, mainten-
ance and facilities for education vocational training and rehabilitation, but 
also provide him with facilities for the development of his character and 
40 lAbiJities and give him necessary training for protecting himself against 
moral danger or exploitation and shall also perform such other functions 
as may be prescribed to ensure all round growth and development of his 
perflonality. . 
·(4) The State Government may, by rules made under this Act, pro-
45 vide for the management of juvenile homes, including the standards aDd 
the nature of services to be maintained by them and the circumstances 
under which, and the manner in which, the Certification of a Juvenile 
home may be granted or withdrawn. 
ProcedUI't 
to be 
followed 
by 8 
Maaistr ... 
not em. 
J)O\'WINd 
under the 
Act, 
Juv~nile 
homes .. 

Special 
homes. 
to. (1) The State Government may establish and maintain as many 
special homes as may be necessary for the reception of delinquent 
juveniles under this Act. 
(2) Where the State Government is of opinion that any institution 
other than a home established or maintained under sub-section (1), is fit 5 
for the reception of the delinquent juveniles to be sent there under this 
Act, it may certify such institution as a special home for the purposes 
of this Act. 
(3) Every special home to which a delinquent juvenile is sent under 
th.is Act shall not' only provide the juvenile with accommodation, main. IO 
tenancl! and facilities for education, vocational training and rehabilitation, 
but also plovide him with facilities for the development of his character 
and abilities and give him necessary training for his reformation and shall 
also perform such other functions as may be prescJibed to ensure all round 
growth and development of his personality. 
(4) The State Government may, by rules made under this Act, pro-
vide for the management of special homes, including the standards and the 
nature of services to be maintained by them, and the circumstances under 
which, and the manner in which, the certification of a special home may 
be granted or withdrawn. 
15 
211 
(5) The rules made under sub-section (4) may also provide for the 
classification and separation of delinquent juveniles on the basis of age 
and nautre of offences committed by them. , 
Observation 11. (1) The State Government may establish and maintain as many 
homes. observation homes as may Le necessary for the temporary reception of 
juveniles during the pendency of nny inquiry regarding them under this 25 
After·care 
organisa· 
tions. 
Act .tlU . .;ti 
(2) Where the State Government is of opinion that any institution 
other than a home established or maintained under sub-section (1), is fit 
for the temporary reception of juveniles during the pendency of any in-
quiry regarding them under this Act, it may recognise such institution as 30 
an observation home for the purposes of this Act. 
(3) Every observation home to which a juvenile is s~nt under this Act 
shail not only provide the juvenile with accommodation, maintenance and 
facilities for medical examination and treatment, but also provide him 
with facilities for useful occupation. t 35 
(4) The State Government may by rules made under this Act, provide 
for the management of observation homes, including the standards and the 
nature of services to be maintained by them, and the circumstances under 
Which, and the manner in which, an institution may. be recognised as an 
observation home or the recognition m;'l.y be withdrawn. ~ 
12. The State Government may, by rules made under this Act, pro-
vide- . 
(a) for the establishment or recognition of after-care organi. 
sations and the powers thDt may be exercis~d by them for effectively 
4° 
carrying out their functions under thi~ Act; ~ 45 
(b) for a scheme of after-care programme to be followed by suc1i 
after-care organisations for the purpose of taking care of juvenUe. 

7 
after they leave juvenile homes or special homes a.ld for the purpose 
of enabling them to lead an honest, Industrious and useful life; 
5 
(c) for the preparation or submission of a report by the proba-
tion officer in respect of each juvenile prior to his discharge from a 
juvenile home or special home, as the case may be, regarding the 
necessity and nature of after-care of such juvenile, the period of such 
after-care, supervision thereof and for the submission of report by 
the probation officer on the progress of each such juvenile; 
10 
(d) for the standards and the nature of services to be maintained 
by such after-care organisations; 
(e) for such other matters as may be necessary for the purpose 
of effectively carrying out the scheme of after-care programme of 
juveniles. 
CHAPTER III 
NEGLECTED JUVENILES 
13. (1) If any police officer or any other person or organisation autho-
rised by the State Government inthis behalf. 1jy general or special order. 
is of opinion that a person is apparently a neglected juvenile, such police 
officer or other person or organisation may take charge of that person for 
20 bringing him before a Board. ' . ~t: 
(2) When information is given to an ufficer-in-charge of a police station 
Cl.bout any neglected juvenile found within the limits of such station, he 
shall enter in a book to be kept for the purpose the substance of such 
ir.formation and take such :lction thereon as he deems fit and if such 
25 officer does not propose to t:lke charge of the juvenile. hE' shall forward a 
cr.py of the entry made to the Board. J -, 
(3) Every juvenile taken charge of under sub-section (I) shall be 
brought before the Board without any loss of time but within a period of 
twenty-four hours of such charge taken ('xeluding the tim~ necessary for 
30 the journey from the place where the juvenile h:ld been taken charge of 
to the Board. 
(4) Every juvenile taken charge of under sub-section (1) shall, unless 
he is kept with his parent or guardian, be sent to an observation home 
(but not to a police station or jail) until he can be brought before a 
35 Board. 
14. (1) If a person, who in the opinion of the police officer or the 
authorised person or organisation is a neglected juvenile. has a parent or 
guardian who has the actual charge of, or contro] over. the ,iuvenile, the 
police officer or the authorised person or the organisation may, instead of 
4(' taking charge of the juvenile. make a report .to the Board for initiating an 
tnquiry regarding that juvenile. 'I 
(2) On receipt of a report under sub-section (l), the Board may call 
upon the parent or guardian to produce the juvenile before it and to show 
cause why the juvenile should not be dealt with as a,neglected juvenile 
45 under the provisions of this Act and if it appear$,to,theJ~Qard that, the 
Production 
of neglected 
juveniles 
before 
Boards. 
Special pro. 
cedure to 
be follow-
ed when 
neglected 
juvenile 
has 
pllrenl~. 

Inquiry by 
Board 
regardinl 
neglected 
JQvcniles. 
Power to 
commit 
neglected 
juvenile to 
luJtabie 
custody. 
8 
juvenile is likely to be removed from its jurisdiction or to be concealed, 
it mltY immediately order his removal (if neces~ry by issuing a search 
warrant for the immediate production of the juvenile) to an observation 
home or a place of safety. 
. 15. (1) When a person alleged to be a neglected juvenile is produced , 
before 8 Board, it !ihall examine the police officer or the authorised person 
or the organisation who brought the juvenile or made the report and re-
cord the substance of such examination and hold the inquiry jn the pres-
cribed manner and may make such orders in relation to the juvenile as it 
may deem fit. llJ 
(2) Where a Board is satisfied on inquiry that a juvenile is a neglected 
juvenile ann that it js expedient so to deal with him, the Board may 
make an order directing the juvenlre'toDe sent to a juvtnile home for the 
period until he ceases to be a juvenile: 
Provided that the Board may, for reasons to be recorded, extend the 15 
period of such stay, but in no case the period of stay shall extend beyond 
the time when the juvenile attains the age of eighteen years, in the case 
of a boy, or twenty years, in the case of a girl: 
Provided further that the Board may, if it is satisfied that having 
regard to the circumstances of the case it is expedient so to do, for rea· 20 
sons to be recorded, reduce the period of stay to such period as it thinks 
fit; -
(3) During the pendency of any inquiry regarding a juvenile, the 
juvenile shall, unless he is kept with his p~rent or guardian, be sent to 
an observation home or a place of safety for such period as may be specifl· 25 
ed in the order of the Board: 
Provided that no juvenile shall be kept with his parent or guardian if. 
in the opinion of the Board, !luch parent or gUQrdian is unfit or unable 
to exercise 01' does not exercise proper care and control over the juvenile. 
16. (1) If the Board so thinks fit, it may, instead of making an order 30 
under sub-section (2) of section'15, for sending the juvenile to a juvenile 
home, make an order placing the juvenile uiider the - care of a parent, 
guardian or other fit person, on such parent, guardian or fit person execut· 
ing a bond with or without surety jo.be ~esponsible for the good behaviour 
and well-being of the juvenile and for the observance of such conditions 35 
as the Board may think fit to impose. 
(2) At the time of making an order under sub-section (1) or at any' 
time subsequently. the Board may, in addition, make ~n order that the 
juvenile be placed under supervision for any period not exceeding three 
years in t~e first instan~e. 40 
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1) 01' sub-
section (2), if at any time it appears to the Board, on receiving a report 
from the probation officeI' or otherwise, that there has been a breach of 
any of the conditicma imposed by it in respect of the juvenile, it may, 
after ma'kInt such iaquiry al it deems fit, order the juvenile to b. sent 4~ 
to 8 jUveQAe home, " 

2 of li74. 
9 
17. Where a pa.rentor guardian ·of a juvenile complains to the l;!oard 
that he is not able to eHrciM prqpercare and control over the juvenile 
and the Board is satisfied on inquiry that proceedings under this Act 
should be initiated regarding the juvenile, it may send the Juvenile to 
5 an observation home or a place of safety and make such further inquiry 
as it may deem fit and the provisions of 'Section 15 and section IS shall~ 
as far as may be, apply to such proceedings. 
CHAPTER IV 
DELINQUENT JUVENILES 
10 18. (1) When any person accused of a bailable or non-bailable offence 
and apparently a juvenile is arrested or detained or awears or is 
brought before a Juvenile .Court, such person shall, notwithstanding 
anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, or in any 
other law for the' time being in force, be released on bail with or without 
I ~ surety but he shall not be so released if there appear reasonable grounds 
for believing that the release is likely to bring him into association with 
any known criminal or expose him to moral danger or that his release 
would defeat the ends of justice. 
(2) When such person havin~ been arrested is not released on bail 
20 under sub-section (1) by the officer-in-charge of the police station, such 
officer shall cause him to be kept in an observation home or a place of 
safety in the prescribed manner (but not in a police station or jail) until 
he can be brought before a Juvenile Court. 
(3) When such person is not released on bail under sub-section (1) 
:lS by the Juvenile Court, it shall, instead of committing him to prison. make 
an order sending him to an observation home 0,1' a place of safety for 
such period during the pendency of the inquiry regarding him as may be 
specified in the-order. 
Uncon. 
trollable 
juveniles. 
Bail 
and 
custody 
of 
juvenilc~. 
19. Where a j,uvenile is arrested, the officer-in-charge of the police Infor· 
::10 station to which the juvenile is brought shan, as soon as may be after mati on 
the arrest, inform- to parent or 
35 
(a) the parent or guardian of the juvenile, if he can be found, 
of such arrest and direct him. to be present, at the Juvenile Court 
bp.fore_ which the ju~enile will appear;.and 
'(b) the probation officer of such a.rrest in order to enable him to 
obtain information regarding the antecedents and family history of 
the juvenile and other material circumstances likely to be of assis-
tance to the Juvenile Court for making the inquiry. 
20. Where a iuvenile having been charged with an offence appel\rs ()r 
4° is p.roduced before a Juvenile Court, the Juvenile Court shall hold the 
inquiry in accordance with ~he privi'Sions of 'section 39 and may, subjert 
to the provisions of this Act. make such order in relation to the juvenile 
all it deems ftt. ! 
guardian 
or pro. 
bation 
officer. 
Inquiry 
by 
Juvcline 
Court 
regarding' 
delin-
quent 
juveniles. 

Orden 
tiwt may 
be 
passed 
regarding 
delin-
quent 
juveniles. 
10 
n. (1) Where a Juvenile Court is satisfied on inquiry that a juvenile 
has committed an offence, then, notwithstanding anything to the contrary 
contained in any other law for the time being in force, the Juvenile 
Court may, if it so thinks fit,- ' 
(a) allow the juvenile to go home after advice or admonition; 5 
(b) direct the juvenile to be released. on probation of good 
conduct and placed under the care of any parent, guardian or 
other fit person on such parent, guardian or other fit person executing 
a bond. with or without surety as that Court may require, for the 
good behaviour and well-being of the juvenile for a'Dy period not 10 
exceeding t.hree years; 
(e) direct the juvenile to be released on probation of good 
conduct and placed under the care of any fit institution for the good 
behaviour and well-being of the juvenile for any period ;'lot exceed- 15 i'Dg three years; 
(d) make an <>.rder directing the juvenile to be sent to a special 
home,--T" 
(i) in the case of a boy over fourteen years of age or of a 
girl over sixteen years of age, for a period of not less than three 
20 
years; 
('ii) in the case of any other j,uvenile, for the period until he 
ceases to be a juvenile: 
Provided that the Juvenile Court may. if it is satisfied that having 
regard to the nature of the offence and the circumstances of the case 
it is expedient so to do, for reasons to be recorded, reduce the perion 25 
of stay to such period as it thinks fit: 
Provided further that the Juvenile Court may, for reasons to be 
recorded, extend the period of such stay, but in no case the pet:iod of 
stay shall extend beyond the time when the juvenile attains the age 0 
of ei~hteen years, in the case of a boy. or twenty years, in the case of 3 
a girl; 
(e) order the juvenile to pay a flne if he is over fourteen years 
of age and earns money. I 
(2) Where an order unde,~ clause (b). clause (c) or clause (e) of 
sub-section (1) is made, the Juvenile Court may, if it is of opinion that 35 
in thp. interests of the juvenile and of the public it is' expedient so to do, 
in addition make an order that the' delinquent juvenile shllU remain 
under the supervision of a probation officer named in the order durin~! 
such period, not exceeding th.ree years, as may be specified therein, and 
may in such supervision order impose 'such condition'S as it deems 'Deces· 40 
sary ror the due su~el'visioh of the delinquent juvenile: 
Provided that if at any timc afterwards it appears to the Juvenile 
Court on receiving a report from the probation officer or otherwise, that 
thc delinquent juvenile has not been of good behaviour during the period 
of supervi';;lon or that the fit institution under whose care the juvenile 45 
was placed )s no longer able or wil1in~ to ensure th~ p,ood behaviour and 
well-being of the juvenile it may, after making such inquiry as it deems 
fit. order the delinquent juvenile to be sent to a special home. 

"- ,,-
., 
2 of 1974. 
11 
(3) The Juveni1~ Court making a supervision order under sub-section 
(2), shall explain to the juvenile and the parent, guardian or other fit 
person or fit institution, as the case may be, under whose care the 
juvenile has been placed, the te.rms and conditions of the order and shall 
5 forthwith furnish one copy of the supervision order to the juvenile, the 
parent, guardian or other fit person or tit institution, a'S the case may be, 
the sureties, if any, and the probation officer. 
(4) In determining the special home, or any pe.rson or institution to 
whose custody a juvenile is to be committed or entrusted under this Act, 
/0 the Court shall pay due regard to the religious denomination of the 
juvenile to ensure that religious instruction contrary to the religious 
persuation of the juvenile is not imparted to him. 
22. (1) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in any 
other law for the time being in force, no delinquent juvenile shall be 
15 sentenced to death or imprisonment, or committed to _prison in default af 
payment of fine or in default of furnishing security: 
Provided that where a juvenile who has attained the age of fourteen 
years has committed an offence and the Juvenile Court is satisfied that 
the offence committed is of so serious a nature or that his conduct and 
20 behaviour have been such that it would not be in his interest or in the 
interest of other juvenile in a special home to send him. to such special 
home and that none of the other measures provided under this Act is 
suitable or sufficient, the .JUftnile Court, may order the delinquent 
juvenile to be kept in safe eultody in such place and manner as it tlJinks 
25 fit and shall report the case ... the orders of the State Government. 
(2) On receipt of a repolt from a Juvenile Court under sub-section 
(1), the State Government _By make such arrangement in respect of 
the juvenile as it deems proper and may order such delinquent juvenile 
to be detained at such place _d on such conditions as it thinks fit: 
30 Provided that the period ", detention so ordered shall not exceed the 
maximum period of imprisonment to which the juvenile could have been 
sentenced for the offence committed. 
23. Notwithstanding anythIng to the contrary contained in the Code 
of Criminal Procedure, 1973, no proceeding shall be instituted and no 
35 order shall be passed against a juvenile under Chapter VIII of the said 
Code. 
24. (1) Notwithstanding anything eontaitled in section 223 of the Code 
2 of 1974. of Criminal Procedure, 1973 or iQ any other ·law for the time being in 
2 of 19i4. 
force, no juvenile shall be charged with or tried for, any offence together 
40 with a person who is not a juvenile. 
(2) If a juvenile is accused of an offence for which under section 223 
of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, or any other law for the time 
being in force, such juvenile and any person who is not· a juvenile would, 
Orders 
that 
may not be 
passed 
against 
de lin-
q:l'~nt 
jllvr'niles. 
Procee-
ding, 
under 
Chapter 
vrn 
of the 
Code of 
Criminal 
Proee-
ciurl' 
not 
com-
petent 
ngain:;t 
juvenile. 
No joint 
trial 
of 
juvenile 
and 
person 
nol II 
juvenile. 

Removal' 
of dis-
quali-
fication 
attaching 
to con-
Viction. 
Specilll 
pro-
vision 
in res-
peel of 
pending 
cases. 
Sittings, 
etc., of 
Boards 
and 
Juvenile 
Courts. 
Persons 
who 
maybe 
present 
before 
compe~ 
tent 
lluthO-
rity. 
12 
but for the prohibition eontained in lu1Hection (1), have been charged 
and tried together, the court taking copizance of that offence shall 
direct separate trials of the juvenile and the othel' person. 
25. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law, a juv~i1. 
who has committed an offence and has been dealt with under the pro- 5 
visions of this Act shall not suffer disqualtftcation, if any, attaching to a 
conviction of an offence under such law. 
26. Notwith'Standing anything contained in this Act, all proceedings 
in respect of a juvenile pending in any court in any area on the date on 
which this Act comes into force in that area, shall be continued in that 10 
court as if this Act had not been passed and if the court finds that the 
juvenile has committed an offence, it shall record such finding and. 
instead of passing any sentence in respect of the juvenile, forward ·the 
juvenile to the Juvenile Court which shall pasa orders in l'espect of that 
juvenile in accol'dance with the provisions of this Act as if it had been 15 
satisfied on inquiry under this Act that the juvenile has committed the 
offence. 
CHAPTER V 
PROCEDURE OF COMPETENT AUTHORITIrS GENERALLY AND APPEALS Ad 
REVISION FROM: ORDERS OF SUCH AUTHORITIES 
27. (1) A Board or a Juvenile Court shall hold its sittings at such 
place, on such day and in such manner, as may be prescribed. 
(2) A Magistrate empowered to exercise the powers of a Board or, 
20 
as the case may be, a Juvenile Court under sub-section (2) of section 7' 
shall, while holding any inquiry regarding a juvenile under this Act, as 25 
far as practicable, sit in a building or room different from that in which 
the ordinary sittings of Civil and Criminal Courts are held, or on 
different days or at times different from those at which the ordinary 
sittings of such Courts are held. 
(3) An inquiry regarding a juvenile under this Act shall be held 30 
expeditiously and shall ordinarily be completed within a period of 
thrne months from the date of its commencement, unless, for special 
l'p.a!;onS to be recorded in writing, the competent authority otherwi9~ 
directs. 
28. (1) Save as provided in this Act, no person shall be present at 35 
any sitting of a competent authority, excel?t-
(a) any officer of the competent authority, or 
(b) the parties to the inquiry before the competent authority, 
the parent or guardian of the juvenile and other persons directly 
concerned in the inquiry including police oftlcers and legal practi~ 40 
tloners, and 
(c) such other persons as the competent authority may permit 
to be present. 

3 of 1898. 
4 of 1912. 
18 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), if at any 
stage during an inquiry, a competent authority considers it to be 
expedient in the interest of the juvenile or on grounds of decency or 
morality that any person including the police officers, legal practitioners, 
S the jarent, guardian or the juvenile himself should withdraw, the 
competent authority may give such direction, and if any person refuses 
to comply with such direction, the competent authority may have him 
l'emoVEld and may, for this purpose, cause to be used such force as may 
be neceasary. 
10 (3) No legal practitioner ~ll be entitled to appear before a Board 
in any ease or proceeding before it, except with the special permission 
of that Board. ' 
29. Any competent authority before which a juvenile is brought 
Hnder any of the provisions of this Act may, whenever it so thinks tit, 
IS '-eq\1ire any parent or guardian having the actual charge of, or control 
over, the juvenile to be present at any proceeding in respect of the 
juvenile. 
.0. If, at any stage during the course of an inquiry, a competent 
authority is satisfied that the attendance of the juvenile is not essential 
20 !:rlr tne purpose of the inquiry, the competent authority may dispense 
with hIs attendance and proceed with the inquiry in the absence of the 
juveline. 
at. (1) When a juvenile who has been brought before a competent 
luthority under this Act is found to be suffering from a disease requiring 
2S prolonged medical treatment or physical or mental complaint that will 
respond to treatment, the competent authority may send the juvenile 
to any place recognised to be an approved place in accordance with 
the rules made under this Act for such period as it may think n~Y 
for the required treatment. 
30 (2) Where a juvenile is found to be suffering from leprosy or is of 
unsound mind, he shan be dealt with under the provisions of the 
Lepers Act, 1898 or the Indian Lunacy Act, 1912, as the case may be. 
(3) Where a competent authority has taken action under sub-
section (1) in the case of juvenile suffering from an infectious or 
35 contagious disease, the competent authority before restoring the said 
juvenile to bispartner in marriage, if there has been such, or to the 
guE.rdian~ as the case may be, shall, where it is satisfied that such action 
will be in the interest of the said juvenile call upon his partner in 
40 narriage or the guardian, as the case may be, to satisfy the competent 
authority by submitting to medical examination that such partner or 
guardian win not re-infect the juvenile in respect of whom the order has 
been passed. 
om t~nt authority that a person 
32. (1) Where it appears to a c pe. 'ons of this Act (otherwise 
.:I f the proVlsl '45 hrought before it un",er any 0 'd )·s a l'uvenile the competent f .. geVlenCe 1 , 
than tor the purpose 0 ~Vln. as to the age of that person and for 
authority shall make due lnqw~ b necessary and shan 
that r.urpose shall take such evidence as may e 
Attend. 
ance of 
parent or 
guardian 
of 
juvenile. 
Dispens-
ingwith 
attend. 
ance of 
juvenile. 
Commit. 
tal to 
approveCf 
place of 
juvenile 
sufter. 
ingfrom 
dangerous 
disease 
and his 
future 
dispol8l. 
PreeUlftp. 
tionand 
determi-
nation 
of .... 

Cil'C'UlDll-
tances to 
betaken 
intoconai-
deration 
inmalrjn , 
Ol'deIrs 
UDder 
the Act. 
sending a 
juveilUe 
outside 
jurisdic. 
tion. 
Reporte 
to be 
treatedaa 
·cozdldeD-
tiel. 
record 8 finding whether the person is a juvenile Or not, stating his 
age as nearly as may be. 
(2) No order of a competent authority shall be deemed to have 
become invalid merely by any subsequent proof that the person 'in 
respect of whom the order has heeu made is not a juVeDile, ad the age S 
Jeeorded by the competent authority to be the' qe of; the p4ftOJl 10 
brought before it shall, W the purposes of 'this ·Act,be diemed to be 
the true age of that person. . 
33. In making any order in respect 'of a juvenile under . this' Act, a 
competent authority shall take into consideration the tollowing circum- 10 
~tances, namely:- . 
(a) the age of the juvenile; 
(b) the state of physical and mental health of the Juvenile; 
(e) the circumstances in which the juvenile was and is ltving; 
(d) the reports made by the probation officer; 15 
(e) the religious persuation of the juvenile; 
(j) such other circumstances as may, in ·the opinion of the 
competent authority, require to be taken into con&ideration in the 
inrerest of the welfare of the juvenile: 
Provided that in the case of a delinquent juvenile, the. above circtlm- 20 
stances shall be taken into consideration after the Juvenile Court has 
recorded a finding against the juvenile that he has committed the 
I)ffence: 
Provided further that if no report of the probation oftieer i8 reeeiVed 
within ten weeks of his being informed under ·'seetion 19, ft'18tiaUbe 25 
open to the Juvenile Court to proceed without it. 
34. In the case of a neglected or delinquent juvenile whose ordinary 
place of residence lies outside th,e jurisdiction of the compent authority 
before which he is brought, the comPetent authority may, if satisfied 
after due inquiry that it is expedient so to do, send the juvenile back 30 
to a relative or other person who is fit and willing to receive him at 
his ordinary place of residence and exercise proper care and control 
over him, notwithstanding that such place of residence is outside the 
jurisdiction of! the competent authority; and the ~t authority 
exercising jurisdiction over the place to which the juvenile i. sent shall 35 
in respect of any matter arising subsequently have ~e same powers 
in relation to the juvenile as if the original order had been passed by 
itself. ' 
35. The report of the probation officer or any circumstance considered 
by the competent authority under section 33 shall be treated as 40 
confidential: 
Provided that the competent ~uthority may, if it so thlnk~ ·1It, com· 
munlcate the substance thereof to thejuvenUe. or his :Parent cir guirdian 
and may give such juveline, patent or guardia.ft an opportunity of pro-

1:; 
dueing,such eviqence as may be relevant to the matter stated in the 
repQrt. 
36. (1) No report in any newspaper, magazine or news sheet of any 
inquiry regardiDg, a juve~e under this Act shall d~8~ tbe name, 
S address or school or any otber particulars calculated' to lead to the 
identification of the juvenile n<;lr shall any picture of any such juvenile 
be pub1ished: 
Provided that for reasons to be recorded in writing, the authority 
holding the inquiry may permit such disclosure, if in its opinion such 
10 di!lclosure is in the interest of the juvenile. 
(2) Any person contravening the provisions of sub-section (1) shall 
be pun!sl)able with fiQe which may extend to one thousand rupees. 
37, (1). Subj~t to the provisions of this section, eny person aggrieved 
by an order made by a competent authority und~r this Act may, within 
I S thirty days from the date of such order, prefer an appeal to the Court 
of Session: 
Provided that the Court of Session may entertain the appeal after 
the expiry of the said period 'of thirty days if it is' ·satisfied that the 
aprellant was prevented by sufficient cause from filing the appeal in 
20 time. 
(2) No appeal sllall lie from-
(a) any order of acquittal made by the Juvenile Court in res-
pect of a juvenile alleged to have committed an offence; or 
(b) any order made by a Board in respect of a finding that 3 
2S person is not a neglected juvenile: 
(3) No second appeal shaU lie from any order of the Court of 
Session passe4 in .ap~~I under this section. 
ProhIbi-
tion of 
publi. 
cation of 
names, etc. 
of juvenilet 
involved 
in ally 
proceed. 
ingunder 
the Act. 
A.ppeaJ,. 
38. The High Court may, at any time, either of its own motion or Revision. 
OD an. app1i~ation rece~ve!i, in thi~ behalf, call for the rec~rd of any 
30 proceeding in which any competent authority or Court of Session has 
passed an order for th~ p1lrpose of s~ti~fying itself as 10 th£!, le~a1ity or 
propriety' of any suc:h. order and may pass such order in relation thereto 
as It' thfnks fit: 
P~'ovided that the High Court shall not pass an order under this 
3S c:ecHon prejudicial to any person without giving him a reasonable oppor-
tunity of being heard. 
39. (1) Save as otherwise expressly provided by this Act, a compe-
t«!nt authority while holding any inquiry under any of the provisions 
of this Act, shall follow such procedure as may be prescribed and 
40 subiect thereto, shall follow, as far as may be, the procedure laid 
do\vn in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, for trials in summons 
cases. 
2 of 1974.. (2) Save as otherwise expresslv provided by or under this Act. the 
"rn~dure to be followed in hearing appeals or revision proceerti.,1lS 
45 unrler this Act shan be, as far as prac~icablet in accordance with the 
2 of 1974. provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure. 1973. 
~­
dur~ 'in 
inquiries, 
appeals 
and 
revision 
pr~ 
• 

Power 
to amend 
orders. 
Punish-
mentior 
er-.Ieltyto 
juvenile. 
Employ_ 
mentof 
juveniles 
for 
begging. 
Penalty 
for 
giving in-
toxicating 
liquor or 
narcotic 
drug or 
psychotro-
pic sub-
stance to 
a juve-
nUe. 
Exploita-
tionof 
'uvenile 
employees. 
16 
40. (1) Without prejudice to the provisions for appeal and revision 
under this Act, any competent authority may, either on its own motion 
or on an application received in this behalf, amend any order as to the 
institution to which a juvenile is to be sent or as to the person under 
whose care or supervision a juvenile is to be placed under this Act. S 
(2) Clerical mistakes in orders passed by a competent authority or 
errors arising therein from any accidental slip or omission may, at any 
time, be (:orrected by the competent authority either on its motion or 
on an application received in this behalf. 
CHAPTER VI 
SPECIAL OFTENCES IN RESPECT OF JUV'ENU.ES 
41. (1) Whover, having the actual charge of, our control over, n 
juvenile, assaults, abandons, exposes or wilfully neglects the juvenile 
10 
or causes or procures him to be assaulted, abandoned, exposed or 
nep,lected in a manner likely to cause such juvenile unnecessary mental IS 
or physical suffering shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term 
which may extend to six months, or with fine, or with both. 
(2) No court shall take cognizance of an offence punishable under 
sub-section (1) unless the complaint is filed with the previous sanction 
of the State Government or an officer authorised by it in thi!> behalf. 20 
42. (1) Whoever employs or uses any juvenile for the purposes of 
begging or causes any juvenile to beg shall be punishable with imprison-
ment for a term which may extend to three years and shall also be 
liable to fine. 
(2) Whoever, having the actual charge of, or control over, a 25 
;uvenile abets the commission of the offence punishable under sub-
c:ection (1), shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which 
may extend to one year and shall also be liable to fine. 
(3) The offence punishable under this section shall be cognizable 
43. Whoever gives, or causes to be given, to any iuvenile, any 30 
intoxicating liquor in a public place or any narcotic drug or psychotropic 
substance except upon the order of a duly qualified medical practitioner 
or in case of sickness shall be punishable with imprisonment for a 
term which may extend to three years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
44. Whoever ostensibly procures a juvenile for the purpose- of any 35 
employment and withholds the earnings of the juvenile or uses· such 
earnings for his own purposes shall be punishable with imprisonment 
for a term which may extend to three years and shall also be liable to 
fine. 

17 
45. Where an act or olIUSSlon constitutes an offence punishable 
under this Act and also under any other Central or State Act, then, 
notwithstanding anything contained in any law for the time being in 
force, the offender found guilty of such offence shall be liable to punish. 
ment only under such Act as provides for punishment which is greater 
5 jn degree. 
CHAPI'ER VII 
MISCELLANEOUS 
46. (1) The State Government may, notwithstanding anything con-
10 tained in this Act, at any time, order a neglected or delinquent juvenile 
to be discharged from the juvenile home or special home, either 
ahsolutely or on such conditions as it may think fit to impose. 
(2) The State Government may, notwithstanding anything contained 
in this Act, order-
1 S (a) a neglected juvenile to be transferred from one juvenile 
20 
25 
home to another; 
(b) a delinquent juvenile to be transferred from one special 
home to another or from a special home to a borstal school where 
such school exists or from a special home to a juvenile home; 
(c) a neglected juvenile or a delinquent juvenile to be trans-
ferred from a juvenile home or a special home to a fit person or a 
fit institution; 
(d) a juvenile who has been released on licence which has 
been revoked or forfeited, to be sent to the special home or juvenile 
home from which be was released or to any other juvenile home 
or special home or borstal school: 
Provided that the total period of the stay of the juvenile in a 
juveline home or a special home Or a fit institution or under a fit person 
shall not be increased by such transfer. 
30 (3) The State Govemment may, notwithstanding anvthinll contain-
prj in this Act, at any time, discharge a juvenile from the care of any 
person under whom he was placed under this Act either absolutely or 
on such conditions as may think fit to impose. 
47. (1). The Govemment of a State may direct nnv nel!le~te~ 
3S il1"enile or delinquent juvenile to be transferred from any juvenile 
nome or special home within the State to any other juvenile home, 
spe('ial hn'11e or institution of a like nature in any other State with the 
consent of the Government of that State. 
(2) The Government of a State may. by general nr soecial o.,.der. 
40 provide for the reception in a )uvenile home or special hom~ within 
1:he State of a neglected juvenile or delinQuent juvenile detained in a 
iuvenilp- home 01' mecial home or institution of Ii like n,tnrc in nnv 
other StIlte where the Government of that State makps An order for 
, • .,,,1, transfer, and upon sucli transfer the orovisions of thic; A"'f- ,,1,.,11 
45 aonlv to such juvenile as if he han been ori~nallv ordcred to be sent 
tn such juvenile home or special home under this Act. 
Alter. 
native 
punish. 
ments. 
Power of 
state 
Govern-
mentto 
discharge 
and 
transfer 
iuveniles. 
Transfen..1 
between 
juvenile 
homes, 
etc., under 
the Act 
andjuve-
nile 
homes, 
etc., of 
like 
nature in 
different 
parts of 
Inc1iL 

TraD8I-. 
ofj1lUl8-
nileIof 
unaound 
mind 
orau1fer-
in, from 
leprosy 
or addict.. 
ecHo 
drugs. 
Placing 
out on 
licence. 
,F) 
48. . (1) Where it appears. to the State GovernQlent that any juvenile 
kept in a special home or juvenile home or institution. in pursu.nce of 
this Act is suffering from leprosy or is of unsound mind, or is addicted 
to any narcotic drug or psychotropic substance, the State Government 
may order his removal to a leper asylum or mental hospital or treat- 5 
ment centre for drug addicts or other place of safe custody for being 
kept there for sUCh period not exceeding the period for which he is re-
quired to be kept in custody under the orders of the competent autho-
rity or for such further period as may be, certified by the medical officer 
to be necf!SS8l'y for the proper treatment ot the juvenile. 10 
(2) Where it appears to the State Government that the juvenile 
is cured of leprosy or of unsoundness of mind or drug addiction it may, 
if the juvenile is still liable to be kept in custody, order the person 
having charge of the juvenile to send him to the special home or 
juvenile home or institution from which he was removed or, if the 15 
juvenile is no longer liable to be kept in custody, order him to be 
discharged. 
49. (1) When a juvenile is kept in a juvenile home or special home. 
the State Government may, if it so thinks fit, release the juvenile from 
the juvenile home or special home and grant him a written licence 20 
for such period and Qn such conditions as may be specified, in the 
licence permitting him to live with, or under the supervision of, any 
responsible person named in the licence willing to receive and take 
charge of him with a view to educate him and train him for some useful 
trade or calling. '25 
(2) Any licence so granted under sub-section (1) shall be in force 
for the· period ~fied in the licence Or until revoked or forfeited. by 
the breach of any of the conditions on which. it was graJlted. 
(3) The State Government. may, at any ti~. by order in writing 
revoke any such licence and order the juvenile to return . to the 30 
juvenile home or special home from which he was released or to any 
other juvenile home or special home, and shall do so at the. desire of 
the person with whom or under whose. supervision the juvenile has 
beeR permitted to live in accordance with a licence granted under sub-
section (1). 
(4) When a licence has been revoked or forleited and the juvenile 
refuses or fails to return to the special home or juvenile home to which 
he was dir.ected so to return, the State Govermnent may, if necessary. 
cause him to be taken charge. of and to be taken back to the 9peclal 
35 
home· or juvenile home. 40 
(5) The time during which a juvenile is absent from a special home 
or juvenile home in. 'pursuance of a licence granted under this section 
shall be deemed to be part of the time for which he is liable to be 
kept in custody in the special 'home or juvenile home: 
Provid~ that when a juvenile has failed to. relurn to the S~l home 4S 
or juvenile home on the licence being, revoked, or ,fcrlei~df the time 
which elapses after lUs failure SQ to return shall be·excluded in computing. 
the time during which he is liable to be kept in custody. 

2 of 1974. 
2 of 1974. 
19 
5D~ NotwitbsiaDdiBg anything to the contrary contained in any other 
law for the tuneeeing in force, -any police ofticer may take charge 
-, without warrant of a juvenile who has escaped from. a special home or a 
juvenile home or from the care of a person under whom he was placed 
5 under this Act and shall send the juvenile back to the special home or 
, the juvenile hameor that person, as the case may be; and no proaeedlDg 
shall be instituted in respect of the juvenile by reason of such escape 
but the 'Special home, juvenile home or the person may, after giving the 
information to the competent authority which passed the order in respect 
10 of the "juvenile,take such stePs against the juvenile as may be deemed 
n~ssary. 
Provision 
in respect 
ofeocaped 
juveniles. 
51. (1) The competent authority which makes an order for sending Constitu-
a neglected juvenile or a delinquent juvenile to a juvenile home or a tion by 
special home or plaCing the ju-venile under the care of a fit person or fit parents. 
15 ilistitution may make an order requiring the parent or other per~n liable 
to maintain the juvenile to contribute to his maintenance, if able to do 
so, in the prescribed mai'lner. ' 
(2) The competent authority before making any order under sub-
section (1) shall inquire tntritbe eircumtances of the parent or other 
:.!o person liable to maintain the juvenile and shall record evidence, if any, 
in the preSence of the parent or 'Sueh other· person, as the case may be. 
(3) The person liable to maintain a juvenile shall, fOr the purposes 
of sub-section (1) I include in the case of illegitimacy, his putative father: 
Provided-that where the juvenile is illegitimate and an order for his 
25 maintenancehas'lteen made under section 125 of the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1973, the competent authority shall not ordinarily make an 
order for contribution again'st the putative father, but may order the 
whole or -any part of the IRIMS accruing due under the said order for 
maintenance to be pai~ to such person as may be named by the campe-
30 tent authority and such sum shall be· paid by him towards the mainten-
ance of the juvenile. ' 
(4) Any order made under this 'Section may be' enforced in the same 
manner as an order under section 125 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 
1973. -
35 D. (1) The State -Government may create a Fund under such name Fund. 
as .it thinks ftt for thewelfa~ and rehabilitation of the juveniles dealt 
with under this Act. 
(2) There shall be credited to the Fund such voluntary donations, 
contributions' or subscriptions as may be made by any individual or 
40 organisation. 
-(3) The Fund created tmder- aub-eection (1) shall be administered 
by such officers or authority; -In such mlllllller and for such purposes as 
may be prescribed. 
53.(1)Th~State Gbvernment' may· ron'Btitute an Advisory Board Advisory 
45 to advise it on matters relating to the establishment and maintenance Board. 
of homes, mobilisation of resources, provision Of faCiUties for education, 
training and rehabilitation of negiected and deUnquent juvenlles and 
coordination among the various oftlcial and non-omcial agencies 
concerned. I ~. < i -, I·!", ~_ I . .,' 
• • • 

Visitors. 
Control of 
custodian 
'over 
juvenile. 
Delinqu-
entjuve-
nile 
under-
going 
sentence 
atcommen-
Cement 
of the 
Act. 
Appoint-
mentof 
officers. 
(2) The Advisory Board shall consist of such number of o1Bcera and 
other persons as the State Government thinks ilt and may also include 
~ and the representatives of volWltary organisations engaged tn 
the relevant areas. 
54. (1) The State Government may nominate not more than three 
non-officials to be Visitor'S for each of the homes established under this 5 
Act. 
(2) A Visitor nominated for a home under sub-section (l) shall 
periodically visit such home and make a rePort to the State Government. 
55. Any person in whose custody a juvenile is placed in pu.rsuance of 10 
this Act shall, while the order is in force, have the like control over the 
juvenile as he would have if he were his parent, and shall be responsible 
for his maintenance, and the juvenile shall continue in his custody for 
the period stated by the competent authority, notwithstanding that he 
is claimed by his parent or any other person:' 15 
Provided that no juvenile while in such custody shall be carried except 
with the permission Of the competent authority. ! 
56. l'n any area in which this Act is brought into force, the State 
Government may djrect that a delinquent juvenile who is undergoing 
any sentence of imprisonment at the commencement of this Act shall, 20 
in lieu of undergoing such sentence, be sent to a special home or be 
kept in safe custody in such place and manner as the State Government 
thinks fit, for the remainder of the period Of the sentence; and the pro-
visions of this Act shall apply to the juvenile as if he had been ordered 
by a Juvenile Court to be sent to such special home or, 88 the case may 25 
be, ordered to be' detained under sub-section (2) of section 22. 
57. (1) The State Government may appoint as many probation 
officers, officers for the inspection of special homes, juvenile homes, ob-
servation homes or after-care organisations and such other officers as 
it may deem necessary for carrying out the purposes of this Act. So 
(2) It shall be the duty of the probation o~ -
(4) to inquire, in accordance with the direction of a competent 
authority, into the antecedents and family history of any juvenile 
accused of an offence, with a view to assist the authority in making 
the inquiry; 35 
(b) to visit neglected and delinquent j,uveni1es at such intervals 
as the probation officer may think fit; 
(c) to report to the competent authority a8 to the behaviour of 
any neglected or delinquent ju~nUe; I 
(d) to advi'Se and assist neglected or delinquent juveniles and, 40 
if necessary, endeavour to ftnd them suitable employment; 
(e) where a neglected or delinquent j,uveni1eis placed under the 
care of ally person or institution on certain condlt;tons. to see whether 
such conditions are being compUed with; and 
(f) to perform such other duties as may be prescribed. 45 

-45 of 1860. 
21 
(3), Any other empowered in this behalf by the State, Government 
may enter any special home, juvenile home, observation home . or after-
care organisation and make a complete inspection, thereOf in all its 
departments and of alI papers, registers and accounts relating theretc. and 
5 shall submit the report of such inspection to the State Government. 
58. Probation officers and other oftl.cers appointed in pursuance of this 
Act shall be' deemed to be public servants within the meaning of \;ection 
21 of the Indian Penal Code. 
59. The provisions of Chapter XXXIII of the Code of Criminal Pro-
2 of 1974. 10 cedure, 1973, shall, as far as may 'be, apply to bonds taken under this 
Act. 
. ) 
60. The State Government may, by general or special order. direct 
that any power exercisable by it under this Act shall, in such circum-
stan.ces ~md under such conditions, if any, as may be specified in the 
15 order, be exercisable also by an officer subordinate to that Government. 
61. No suit or other legal proceeding shall lie against the State Gov-
ernment or any probation officer or other ofti.cer appointed under this 
Act in respect of anything which is in good faith done or intended to be 
done in pursuance of this Act or of any rules or orders made thereunder. 
2(1 82. (1) The State Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, make rules to car.ry out the purposes of this Act. 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the 
foregoing power, such l'ules may p:o'v'ide for all or any of the fol1ow-
, ,. ing mattp.rs, namely:-
,'\ 
25 (a) the places at which, the days on which, the time at which, 
and the manner in \vh:ch a competent authority may hold it. 
sittings; 
(b) the procedure to be followed by a competent authority in 
holding inquiries under this Act, and the mode of dealing with 
juveniles suffering from dangerous diseases, or mental complaints; 
(c) the circumstances in which, and the conditiobs subj~ to 
which an institution may be certified as a special home or a juvenile's 
home or reco~ised as an observation home, and the cert1ftcatlon or 
recognition withdrawn; I 
OftI.cers 
appointed 
under the 
Act 
to be 
public 
servants. 
Proce-
du.rein 
r',:spect 
ofbondl3 . 
Delega-
tion of 
powers. 
Protec-
tionol 
action 
taken 
in lood 
faith. 
Power to 
make 
rules. 

Repeal 
and 
savings. 
22 
(d) the inte.rnal management of special homes, juvenile homes 
and observation homes Mnd the standards and the nature of services 
to be maintained by them; 
(e) the functions and responsibilities of special hornes, juvenUe 
homes and observation homes; 5 
<f) the inspection of special home&, juvenile homes, observation 
homes and after<are organisations; 
(g) the establishment, management and functions of after-cal:e 
organisations; the circulll'Stances in which, and the conditions subject 
to which an institution may be recognised as an after-care organisa- 10 
tion and such other matters as are referred. to in section 12; 
(h) the qualifications and duties of probation officers; 
(i) the recruitment and training of person'S appointed to carry 
out the purposes of this Act and the terms and conditions of their 
service. 15 , 
(j) the conditions subject to which a girl who is a neglected or 
delinquent juvenile may be escorted from one place to another, and 
the manner in which a juvenile may be sent outside the jurisdiction 
of a competent authority; 
(k) the manner in which contribution for the maintenance of a 20 
juvenile may be ordered to be paid by a parent or gua.rdian; 
(l) the officers or authorities by whom, the manner in which and 
the ~e for which the Fund created under section ~ shall be 
administered; 
(m) th,e conditions under which a juvenile may be placed out on 25 
licence and the form and conditions of such licence; 
(fl.) the conditions subject to which j,uveniles may be placed 
under the care of any parent, guardian or other fit person or fit 
institution under this Act and the obligations of such persons or 
institutioQs towards the juveniles SO placed; 30 
(0) any other matter which has to be, or may be, prescribed; 
(3) Every rule made by a State Government under this Act shall be 
laid, as soon a5; may be after it is made, before the Legislature of that 
State. 
63. If, immediately before the date on which this Act comes into 35 
force in any State, there is in force in that State, any law corresponding to 
this Act, that law shall stand repealed on the said date: 
Provided that the' repeal shall not affect-
(a) the previous operation of any law so repealed or anything 
duly done or suffered the.reunder;· or 40 
'._' . (b) any right, privilege, obUgation or liability acquired, accrued 
or Il)Curred under any law so repealed; or 
(c) any penalty, forfeiture or punishment iIMNl'.red in ~ct of 
any offence committed against any law 'So repealed; Or 

23 
(d) any investigation, legal proceeding or remedy in respect of 
any such right, privilege, obligation, liability, penalty. forfeiture or 
punishment as aforesaid; 
and any such investigation, legal proceeding Or remedy may be instituted, 
~) continued or enforced and any such penalty, forfeiture or purushment 
may be imposed, a'S if this Act had not been passed. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
A review of the working of the existing Children Acts would indio 
cate that much greater attention is required to be given to children who 
may be found in situations of social maladjustment, delinquency or 
neglect. The justice system as available for adults is not considered 
suitabje for being applied to juvenile. It is also necessary that a uni-
form juvenile justice system should be available throughout the country 
which should make adequate provision for dealing with all aspects in the 
changing social, cultural and economic situation in the country. There 
is also need for larger irwolvement of informal systems and community 
based welfare agencies in the care. protection, treatment, development 
and rehabilitation of such juveniles. 
2. In this context, the proposed legislation aims at achieving the fol-
lowing objectives:-
(i) to lay down a uniform legal framework for juvenile justice 
in the country so as to ensure that no child under any circumstances 
is lodged in jail or police lock-up. This is bebg ensured by estab-
lishing Juvenile Welfare Boards and Juvenile Courts; 
(ii) to provide for a specialised approach towards the preven-
tion and treatment of juvenile delinquency in its full range in keep-
ing with the developmental needs of the child found in any situation 
of social maladjustment; 
(iii) to spell out the machinery and infrastructure required for 
the care, protection, treatment, development and rehabilitation of 
various categories of children coming within the 'pi.uview of the 
juvenile justice system. This is proposed to be' achieved by estab, 
lishing Observation homes. juvenile homes for neglected juveniles 
and special homes for delinquent-juvenjles; 
(vi) to establish norms and standards for the administration of 
juvenile justice in terms of investigation and prosecution, adjudica. 
tion and disposition. and care. treatment and rehabilitation; 
(v) to develop appropriate linkages and coordination between 
the formal system of juvenile justice and voluntary agencies engag-
ed in the welfare of neglected or socially maladjusted children and 
to specifically define the 8l't!as of their responsibilities and roles; 
(vi) to constitute special oftences in relation to juveniles and 
provide' for punishments therefor; 
(vii) to bring the operation of the juvenile justice system In the 
country in conformity with the United Nations Standard Minimum 
Rule for the Administrltion of Juvenile Justice. 

25 
4. As its various provisions come into force in dUferent parts of the 
country they would replace the corresponding laws on the subject such 
as the Children Act, 1960 and other State enactments on the subject. 
The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects. 
NEW DmD; 
The 20th Au.gust, 1986. RAJENDRA KUMARI BAJPAI 
PRESIDENT'S RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLE 117 OF THE 
CONSTITUTION OF INDIA 
[Copy of letter No. 8-1/8lH)D, from Dr. (Smt.) Rajendra Kumari 
Bajpai, Minister of State of the Ministry of Welfare to tl)e Secretary-
General. Lok Sabha.] 
The President, having been informed of the subject matter of the 
proposed Bill, namely the Juvenile Justice Bill, 1986, recommends to 
Lok Sabha the consideration of the Bill under article 117(3) of the Cons-
titution of India. 

Clause 2.-This clause defines the various expressions used in the Bill. 
Sub-clause (d) of this clause defines "juvenile" as to mean a boy who has 
not attained the age of sixteen years or a girl who has not ·attained the 
ale of eichteen· yean. Moat of the definitions of the expressions u.-ct in 
the Bill are based on the definitions in the Children Act. 1960. Sub-
clause (h) defines the words "narcotic drug" and "psychotropic sub-
stance". These words shall have the meaning respectively assigned to 
them in the Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Act, 1985. 
Clause 3.-This clause provides for the continuation of inquiry in res-
pect of a juvenile, who has ceased to be a juvenile. 
Clauses 4 to 12.-These clauses provide for the constitution (If Juvenile 
Welfare Boards (clause 4); Juvenile Courts (clause 5); juvenile homes 
(claU8e 9); special homes (dause 10): observation homes (clause 11) 
and after-care organisations (clause 12). aause 6 provides for the pro-
cedure in relation to powers of Juvenile Courts. Clause 7 specifies the 
powers of the Boards and Juvenile Courts. Clause 8 preseribes the pro-
cedure to be followed by a Magistrate not empowered under the pl'l .... 
posed legislation. 
Clauses 13 to 17.-These clauses pl'ovide iGr the produetwn of nealect-
ed juveniles before &arda (clau.e 13), apeeial proeedure to be feJlowed 
when neglected juvenile has parents (clause 14), inquiry of Board re-
garding neglected juvenile (clause 15) and power to commit neglected 
juvenile to suitable custody (clause 16). Clause 17 deals with uncon-
trollable juveniles. 
Clauses 18 to 26.-These clauses deal with delinquent jm'eniles in 
matters relating to their bail and custody, information as to their arrest 
10 parent or guardian or probation officer; orders that mayor may not 
be passed against them. Clause 26 provides special provisions in r":R-
pect of pending cases in any Court, etc. 
ClatL.'le~; 27 to 4O.-These clauses provide for the procedure to be 
followed by the Boards and Juvenile Courts in disposing of caf'les relat-
ing to juvNliles. Clause 36 prohibits the publication of name. address 
or SChOOl of any juvenile involved in any proceedings. Clauae 37 makes 
provision for appeal against the order made by a competent authority. 
Clause 38 empowers the High Court to revise the orders which any com-
petent authority Or Court of Session has passed. It furthel' pro·vides 
that the High Court shall not pass an order which is prejudicial to any 
person without giving him a reasonable opportunity of b~ing heart'. 
Clause 39 provides' for the procedure to be followed. in inquiries. anneals 
and revision proceedings. Clause 40 empowers the competent authorit" 
to amend orders, etc. 

Clauaes 41 to 45.-Cllluse 41 provides for punishment for cruelty to 
juvenile by penons having actual charge or control. Clause 42 provides 
punishment to persons who employ juvenile for begging. Clause 43 
prescribes penalty for giving intoxicating liquor or narcotic drugs or 
psychotropic substances to a juvenile. Clause 44 provides punishment 
for a person who employs a juvenile for the purpose of exploitation and 
withholds the earnings of the juvenile. Clause 45 provides that in 
cases where an act or omission constitutes an offence punishable under 
this law and also in any other Act for the time being in force, then in 
that case the punishment which is greater in degree under this law or 
under the other Act, shall be awarded to the offender. 
c.~tLses 46 to 48.-These clauses empower the State Government 
to order discharge and transfer of juveniles from one juvenile home 
to another, etc. 
Clause 49.-This clause empowers the State Government to release 
the juvenile from the juvenile home or special home and grant him a 
written licence permitting him to live with or under the supervision of 
any responsible person named in the licence, who is willing to receive 
such juvenile. 
Clause 5Q.-This clause makes the provision in respect of juvenile 
who have escaped from the special home or juvenile home or from the 
care of a person under whom he was placed. 
Clause 51.-:-This clause empowers the competent authority to make 
an order requiring the parent or other person liable to maintain the 
juvpnile to contribute to his maintenance. 
Clause 52.-This cIauseauthorises the State Government to create 
a Fund under such name as it thinks fit for the welfare and rehabilita-
tion of juveniles dealt with under the proposed law. 
Clause 53.-This clause empowers the State Government to consti-
tute an Advisory Board to advise the State Government on the matters 
relating to the establishment and maintenance of homes, mobilisation 
of resources, provision of facilities for education, training and rehabili-
tation of neglected and delinquent juveniles, etc. 
Clau~ 54.-Under this clause the State Government is authorised 
to nominate not more than three non-officials to be the Visitors for each 
. of the homes established under the proposed law and the Visitor is 
requ~red to submit a periodical report of his visit to the home to the 
State Government. 
Clause 55.-This clause provides for control of the custodian over 
juveniles. 
Clause 56.-This clause makes a provision for delinquent juvenile 
undergoing sentence on the date of the commencement of this law. 
Clause 57.-This clause empowers the State Government to appoint 
officers, etc., for carrying out the purposes of this law. 
Clause 58.-This clause declares the officers appointed under the 
provisions of this law to be public servants within the meaning of sec-
tion 21 of the Indian Penal Code. 

Clause M.-This clause makes the provision of Chapter XXXIII of 
the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 applicaple to bonds taken under 
this law. 
Clause 60.-This clause empowers the State Government to delegate 
it~ powers. 
Clause 61.-This clause provides for protection of acts of theofticers 
appointed under this law. 
Clause 62.-This clause deals with the powers of the State Govern-
ment to make rules. 
Clause 63.-This is a usual clause of repeal and savings. 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
The proposed legislation aims at bringing about a basic uniformity in 
the implementation of the various legislative provisions and in bringing 
about a qualitative improvement in the functioning of institutions set up 
under the Children's Act, 1960 and analogous laws enacted by the St.'\te 
Governments. Thus, this legislation would be implemented largely by 
the states and similarly in respect of Union Territories the existing infra-
structure available under the Children's Act, 1960 as amended in 1978 
passed. by Parliament would be reorganised and utilised. The emphasis 
would be shifted from institutional care to bringing in family and the 
community in the task of care, protection, treatment, development and 
rehabilitation of neglected anddeUnquent children. 
Expenditure incurred on this by the States will be met out of their 
respective ConsoUdated Funds. Expenditure incurred On this by Union 
territories will be met out of Consolidated Fund of India and it is expect-
ed to be of the same order as at present of about Rs. 1.00 crore 30 lakhs 
of recurring nature and 15 lakhs of non-recurring nature for the Children's 
Act, 1960 which will be replaced by this law .. 
29 

MEMORANDUM Rr.GAllDING DELBGATlJ) LEGISLATION 
Clause 62 of the Bill empowers the State Governinent to make rules 
to caITy out the purposes of the Bill when enacted. Sub-Claulle (2) 'of 
that clause enumerates the various matters in fespect of WhiCh rules may 
be made. These matters relate,· among others, to the proCedure to be 
followed by a competent authority in holding sittings, inquiries and mode 
of deallng wtthjuvmi1es sUffering from dangerous diseases or :mental 
compl8ints, certification and recognition of institutions as special homes, 
juvenne homes, obseJ;Vation hcnnes, aft~r-care homes and inspection of 
\'arious in·stitutionS set up or recognised under this Act, the recruitment, 
training, qualifications and duties of probation officers and other persons 
appointed to carry outtbe 'purposes of this Act, the manner in which a 
juvenile may be sent outside the jurisdiction of a Court. the ccnditions 
under which a juvenile may be placed out on licence and the form and 
conditions subject to which· juveniles may be .placcd under the care of 
parents, guardian or any other person, af> well as the obligation of such 
person towards the juveniles, t1)e manner in which and the purposes for 
which, the Fund is to be administered. 
~. The matters in respect of which rules may be made are matters of 
procedure or detail. The delegation of legislative power is. thus. of a 
normal character. 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
to provide f~r the care, protection, treatment, development and rehabili-
tation of neglected or delinquent juveniles and for the adjudication 
of certain matters relating to, and disposition of, delinquent juveniles. 
(Dr ~ (Smt.) R4jen.dra KUmGri Bajpa.i. 
Minister of State of the 
Ministry of Welfare) 