1
THE ECONOMICALLY WEAKER CLASS (PROVISION OF
CERTAIN FACILITIES) BILL, 2016
By
DR. RAMESH POKHRIYAL 'NISHANK', M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for certain facilities to persons belonging to economically weaker class and
for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Economically Weaker Class (Provision of Certain
Facilities) Act, 2016.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Bill No. 103 of  2016
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
5

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(i) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(ii) "family" means husband, wife and dependent children; and
(iii) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. For the purposes of this Act, a family shall be deemed to belong to the economically
weaker class if the monthly income of such family from all sources is not more than three
thousand rupees:
Provided that the Central Government may, having regard to the cost of living and
earning opportunities available in any State or part of that State and taking into consideration
such other factors, as it may deem necessary, prescribe an income ceiling of more than
rupees three thousand for such State or part of such State.
4. (1) The Central Government shall, in consultation with the State Governments,
determine the manner of identifying families belonging to economically weaker class.
(2) The Central Government shall give wide publicity to the manner by which families
belonging to economically weaker class shall be identified.
5. (1) The appropriate Government shall designate a nodal officer in every district to
identify the families belonging to economically weaker class living in that district.
(2) Every nodal officer shall prepare, maintain and publish the list of families belonging
to economically weaker class in such form and manner as may be prescribed.
(3) The nodal officer shall review and revise the list, referred to in sub-section (2), from
time to time.
6. (1) Any person, who objects to the inclusion or omission of any family in the list,
may file a complaint with the nodal officer within such time and in such form and manner as
may be prescribed.
(2) On receipt of a complaint under sub-section (1), the nodal officer shall, after giving
the complainant and the affected family an opportunity of being heard, dispose of the
complaint in such manner, as may be prescribed, within a period of thirty days from the date
of receipt of such complaint.
7. The Central Government shall provide suitable employment to at least one eligible
member of the family belonging to economically weaker class:
Provided that where suitable employment with a minimum monthly salary of rupees
ten thousand to at least one eligible member of a family is not provided, a monthly subsistence
allowance of not less than rupees ten thousand or rupees ten thousand minus monthly
Salary, as the case may be, shall be provided to such family by the Central Government till
such time the eligible member of that family is provided with suitable employment with a
minimum monthly salary of rupees ten thousand:
Provided further that the Central Government may, having regard to the cost of living
and earning opportunity in any State or part of that State and taking into consideration such
other factors, as it may deem necessary, for the purposes of first proviso, increase or
decrease the amount of minimum monthly salary of rupees ten thousand.
8. The appropriate Government shall provide the following facilities to the members of
the families belongning to economically weaker class, namely:—
Definitions.
Criteria for
identification
of persons
belonging to
economically
weaker class.
Central
Government
to determine
manner for
identification
of persons
belonging to
economically
weaker class.
Designation
of nodal
officer for
identification
of persons
belonging to
economically
weaker class.
Complaint
against
inclusion or
omission of a
name in the
list.
Central
Government
to provide
suitable
employment.
Certain
facilities to be
provided by the
appropriate
Government.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
(i) scholarship of an amount not exceeding rupees twenty thousand per annum
to every student for pursuing education upto senior secondary level;
(ii) scholarship of an amount not exceeding rupees one lakh to every student for
pursuing higher or professional or technical education;
(iii) loan facilities from nationalized banks for self-employment at an interest
rate which shall not be more than four per cent. per annum;
(iv) free health care facilities in all Government hospitals including
reimbursement of expenses, not exceeding rupees two lakhs, for treatment taken in
emergent situations in private hospitals;
(v) payment of disability allowance in case the earning member of a family is
disabled, partly or fully, due to an accident;
(vi) provision of supply of essential commodities of daily use at subsidized
rates; and
(vii) housing facility at subsidized rates.
9. The expenditure incurred on payment of subsistence allowance under section 7
and providing facilities under section 8 shall be borne by the Central Government and the
State Governments in such ratio, as may be prescribed.
10. There shall be reserved such percentage of seats, as may be prescribed, in all
educational institution, including technical and professional institutions, in favour of children
of families belonging to economically weaker class.
11. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent
therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force.
12. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of the Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Contribution
towards
payment of
subsistence
allowance and
providing
facilities by
the Central
and State
Governments.
Reservation
of seats in all
educational
institutions
including
technical and
professional
institutions.
Act to have
overriding
effect.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS  AND REASONS
Majority of our population is living below poverty line in miserable conditions. Our
Government has made considerable efforts and taken initiatives for the upliftment of people
belonging to the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes and the Other Backward Class. But
the fact remains that the problems of majority of the population are still to be addressed
properly. A large chunk of population, who are not covered under any of the welfare schemes,
is economically backward. The people belonging to economically weaker class are also
socially and educationally backward as they do not have enough money or resources for
pursuing higher education. A high percentage of our population earns less than rupees one
hundred per day and it is almost impossible to meet the expenditure incurred on maintaining
even a small family with this paltry amount.
Most of them are rickshaw pullers, beedi workers, agricultural, labourers, etc. and do
not have any facilities for sending their children to schools. Even if their children get admission
in schools, they do not have money to buy books, stationery and other items. They do not
have access to any health facilities and solely depend on Government hospitals in emergent
situations. They do not have any resource to take up any self-employment schemes.
It is the responsibility of a welfare State to address the problems of persons belonging
to economically weaker class of the society. Therefore, it is proposed to provide some
facilities to economically backward people who are in genuine need of help from the State.
The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
N
EW DELHI; RAMESH POKHRIYAL 'NISHANK'
March 11, 2016.
4

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 4 of the Bill provides for publicity to the manner for identification of families
belonging to economically weaker class by the Central Government. Clause 5 provides for
preparation, maintenance and publication of list of families belonging to economically weaker
class by the nodal officer in every district. Clause 7 provides for suitable employment to at
least one eligible member of the family belonging to economically weaker class. It also
provides for a monthly subsistence allowance in case suitable employment is not provided
to at least one eligible member of the family till such time the eligible member of the family is
provided with suitable employment. Clause 8 provides for certain facilities like scholarship to
students, healthcare facilities, loan at cheaper interest rate, housing facility and supply of
essential commodities at subsidized rates etc. to the families belonging to economically
weaker class by the appropriate Government. Clause 9 provides for contribution by the
Central Governments and State Governments towards payment of subsistence allowance
and providing facilities under the Act. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure
from the Consolidated Fund of India.
It is estimated that an annual recurring expenditure of about rupees twenty thousand
crores will be involved.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees nine hundred crores is also likely to be
involved.
5

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLA TION
Clause 12 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.
6

GMGIPMRND—5331LS(S3)—25-04-2016.
LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for certain facilities to persons belonging to economically weaker class and for
matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Dr. Ramesh Pokhriyal 'Nishank', M.P.)