1
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2009
By
SHRI OM PRAKASH YADAV, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixtieth  Year of  the Republic of India as follows:—
1. This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment)  Act, 2009.
2. In the Eighth Schedule to the Constitution, entries 3 to 22 shall be re-numbered as
entries 4 to 23 and before entry 4 as so re-numbered, the following entry shall be inserted,
namely:—
“3. Bhojpuri.”
Short title.
Amendment
of the Eighth
Schedule.
Bill No. 103 of 2009
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA ON 4-12-2009
5

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Bhojpuri language which originated in the Gangetic plains of India is a very old and rich
language with its origin in the Sanskrit language. Bhojpuri is the mother tongue of a large
number of people in eastern Uttar Pradesh, western Bihar, Jharkhand and some parts of
Madhya Pradesh as well as in several other countries. In Mauritius this language is spoken by
a large number of people. It is estimated that around one hundred forty million people speak
Bhojpuri. Bhojpuri films are highly popular in the country and abroad and have deep impact on
the Hindi film industry.
Bhojpuri language has a rich literature and cultural heritage. The great scholar Mahapandit
Rahul Sankrityayan wrote some of his works in Bhojpuri. There have been some other eminent
writers of Bhojpuri like Viveki Rai and Bhikhari Thakur, who is known as the Shakespeare of
Bhojpuri. Some other eminent writers in Hindi such as Bhartendu Harishchandra,
Mahavir Prasad Dwivedi and Munshi Premchand have been deeply influenced by Bhojpuri
language. Bhojpuri language and its literature is gaining new heights because of the efforts of
various scholars.
Many personalities with Bhojpuri background have achieved highest positions in the
country. Various International Conferences have been organized to promote Bhojpuri. At present
Indira Gandhi National Open University is planning to start a certificate course in Bhojpuri
language. In Uttar Pradesh and Bihar movements have been initiated to give Bhojpuri language
its due place.
But it is unfortunate that the “Bhojpuri” language is yet to find a place in the Eighth
Schedule to the Constitution.
For the promotion of literacy and the development of this language, it is necessary that
this language be included in the Eighth Schedule to the Constitution.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; OM PRAKASH Y ADAV
November 3, 2009.
2

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
EIGHTH  SCHEDULE
[Articles 344(1) and 351]
Languages
1. Assamese.
2. Bengali.
3. Bodo.
4. Dogri.
5. Gujarati.
6. Hindi.
7. Kannada.
8. Kashmiri.
9. Konkani.
10. Maithili.
11. Malayalam.
12. Manipuri.
13. Marathi.
14. Nepali.
15. Oriya.
16. Punjabi.
17. Sanskrit.
18. Santhali.
19. Sindhi.
20. Tamil.
21. Telugu.
22. Urdu.
******
3

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Shri Om Prakash Yadav, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—5106LS(S5)—04-12-2009.