1
THE GIRLS (FREE AND COMPULSORY) EDUCATION
BILL, 2015
By
SHRI RAKESH SINGH, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for free and compulsory education to every girl whose parents are living
below poverty line.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Girls (Free and Compulsory) Education Act, 2015.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Bill No. 103 of  2015
Definitions.
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
(b) “education” means education from primary level to the post graduation
level and includes technical and medical education;
(c) “girl” means a female who has not attained the age of twenty-five years;
(d) “parent” includes the adoptive or step parent and guardian of a girl;
(e) “parents living below poverty line” in relation to a girl means parents whose
income from all sources does not exceed rupees three thousand per month; and
(f) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. The appropriate Government shall provide free and compulsory education to every
girl whose parents are living below poverty line and are ordinarily residing in its territorial
jurisdiction.
Explanation.—For the purpose of this section, ‘‘free education’’ includes:—
(i) supply of books, writing materials and school uniform free of cost;
(ii) provision of mid-day meal and hostel facilities free of cost;
(iii) payment of monthly stipend at the rate of not less than rupees one hundred
at the primary level, rupees two hundred up to the middle level and rupees five
hundred up to the higher secondary level; and
(iv) provision of financial assistance for pursuing higher education including
technical and medical education.
4. The appropriate Government shall establish and maintain or cause to be established
or maintained adequate number of schools, universities and institutions within its territorial
jurisdiction in order to ensure education of girls.
5. (1) It shall be the duty of every parent to admit or cause to be admitted his girl child
in school.
(2) No parent shall withdraw his girl child from a school or an institution of higher
education, as the case may be, till she completes her course.
6. No person shall employ a girl in any job which prevents her from receiving education
upto such level, as may be determined by the Central Government.
7. Any person including parents, who for any reason prevents, restrains or obstructs
a girl from attending school or receiving education, shall be punished with simple imprisonment
for a term which may extend to one year and shall also be liable to fine.
8. The Central Government shall provide adequate funds to the State Governments for
effective implementation of the provisions of this Act.
9. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the provisions of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be, so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Free and
compulsory
education to
every girl.
Punishments.
Central
Government
to provide
adequate funds
to the State
Governments.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
Establishment
of schools
and
universities.
Duty of
parents to
admit their
girl child to
school.
Prohibition
on
employment
of girl.

3
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The ability to read and write is an essential element of human faculty. Literacy is the
first step towards acquiring the tools of learning and opening the doors of knowledge and
information. Education, apart from opening opportunities for girls, also empowers them to
resist oppression and claim their rights.
In our country, girls belong to weaker and vulnerable section of the society. Although
many steps have been taken to improve their condition, yet nothing concrete has been done.
Even today, girls are not treated equally and are subjected to discrimination by their parents.
They are kept away from school and are forced to assist their mothers in household affairs
and are deprived of the joys of childhood. In various States, the menace of child marriage is
still rampant and parents force their daughters into child marriage as they feel that their
daughters are not safe after attaining the age of ten years.
It is an opportune time to take stock of the situation and to ensure that girls belonging
to poor families are given free and compulsory education. Free education should also include
stationery items, uniform, writing materials, books, hostel facilities, transport facilities, etc.
free of cost to encourage the girls to get enrolled for education. This will not only help in
eradicating illiteracy from the country but will also enable the girls to grow and compete with
their male counterparts and raise their voice against any kind of injustice or exploitation.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; RAKESH SINGH
March 16, 2015.

4
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides that the appropriate Government shall provide free and
compulsory education to every girl whose parents are living below poverty line. Clause 4
provides that appropriate Government shall establish and maintain schools and other
instituions of higher learning. Clause 8 provides for providing adequate funds to the state
governments for effective implementation of the provisions of the Act. The Bill, therefore, if
enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a
sum of rupees fifteen hundred crore would be involved as recurring expenditure per annum.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees eighteen hundred crore is also likely to
be involved.

5
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 5 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the provisions of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for free and compulsory education to every girl whose parents are living
below poverty line.
————
(Shri Rakesh Singh, M.P .)
MGIPMRND—5591LS(S3)—16-04-2015.