हर

.. 'फ6 कड एएफ्00एटाफ0 mv Lox SabHa

SUNT At further to amend the Constitution of India, _

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Forty-third Year of the Republic
of India as follows: —

1. (7) This Act may be called the Constitution  (Seventy-seventh
Amendment) Act, 1992.

5 (2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.

2. In article 323B of the Constitution, in clause (2),—
(०) sub-clauses (४) and 6) shall be re-lettered as sub-clauses
6) and (j), and before sub-clause (@), as so re-lettered, the fallow-
10 ing sub-clause shall be inserted, namely:—

““(h) rent, its regulation and control and tenancy issues
including the right. title and interest of landlords and tenants;”;
(b) in sub-clause (i), as so re-lettered, for the brackets and letter

“(g)”, the brackets and letter “(h)” shall be substituted;
(c) in sub-clause (j), as so re-lettered, for the brackets and
R letter “(h)”, the brackets and Jetter “(i)” shall be substituted.

title

com-
mence
ment.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

The operation of the Rent Contre} Legislations, as are today in
‘various States, suffers from major weaknesses and has led to various
unintended consequences. Some of the deleterious legal consequences
include mounting and unending litigation, inability of the courts to
provide timely justice, evolution of practices and systems to bypass
the operations of rent legislations and steady shrinkage of rental hous-
ing market. 2

2. The Supreme Court, taking note of the precarious state of rent
litigation in the country, in the case of Prabhakaran Nair and others
Vs, State of Tamil Nadu (Civil Writ Petition 506 of 1986 and other
writs) observed that the Supreme Court and the High Courts should be
relieved of the heavy burden of rent litigation. Tiers of appeals
should be curtailed. Laws should be simple, rational and clear, Litiga-
tions must come to end quickly. The idea of a National Rent Tribunal
on an all-India basis with quicker procedure should be examined.

3. It is proposed to amend article 3238 in Part XIVA of the Consti-
tution so as to-give timely relief to the rent litigants by providing for
setting up of State-level Rent Tribunals in order to reduce the tiers of
appeals and fo exclude the jurisdiction of all courts, except that of the
Supreyne Court, under article 136 of the Constitution.

4. The Bill seeks to achieve the aforesaid objects.

New Detar, "SHEILA KAUE,
The Wrd June, 1992. ;



ANNEXURE

EXTRACTS FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF Inpra

* a * * *

3238, (1) The appropriate Legislature may, by law, provide for the tribunals
dj tion or tial by tribunals of any disputes, complaints, ण for other
with respect to all or any of the matters specified in clause matters.
with respect 10 which such Legislature has power to make laws.

(2) The matters referred to in clause (1) are the following,

amely: —

* * * * *

(h) offences against laws with respect to any of the matters
specified in sub-clauses (a) to (g) and fees in respect of any of
those matters; 2

(0) any matter incidental to any of the mattets specified in sub-
clauses (a) to (h).

* + * * @



Doms eae

Boise

arstee 9:
to २४६६ १

cite के 45777:

A

BILL

(Smt. Sheila Kaul, Minister of Urban Development)

to