LO K s..WHA 
CORRI GKNDUH 
to 
THE DElliI DEVELOPMENT (AMENDHENT) BILL, 1983 
(To be/As introduced in Lok Sabha) 
Page 2, line 16,-
before "in any case" insert 
NEW DEIHl; 
Au~st a" 1983 < 
Bhara 3, 1905 (saRa) 
"or W'i~h both " , 

As INTRODUCFJ> IN LoK SABHA 
" 
:.1.... 
Bill No. 103 of 1983 
TBJ: DELHI DEVELOPMENT (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1983. 
A 
BILL 
further to' ameud the Delhi Development Act, 1957. 
BE It enacted by Parliament in the Thirty-fourth Year of the 
Republic of India as follows:-
1. (1) This Act may be called the Delhi Development (Amendment) 
Act, 1983. ' 
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government 
5 may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint and different dates 
may be appointed for different provisions of this Act. 
Short 
'title and 
commen. 
cement. 
2. In section 5 of the Delhi Development Act, 1957 (hereinafter refer- Amend. 
red to as the principal Act), in sub-section (2), for clauSe (e), the ment of 
61 of 1957. 10 following clauses shall be substituted, namely:- section 
15 
"(e) two persons representing the Delhi Electric Supply Com-
mittee and the Delhi' Water sUpply and Sewage Disposal 
Committee of the said Corporation, oi whom-
(i) one shall be elected by the members of the Delhi 
Electric Supply Committee from among themselves; and 
(ii) one shall be elected by the members of the Delhi Watet 
Supply and Sewage Disposal Committee from among 
themselves; 
5. 

Amend-
ment of 
section 
29. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 
30. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 
al. 
(. 
2 
(ee) one representative of the Delhi Transport Corporation to 
be nominated by the Central Government;". 
3. In section 29 of the prineipal Act. in sub-section (1), for the 
words "shall be punishDble with fine which may extend to ten 
thousand rupees. and in the caSe of a continuing offence, with further 5 
fine which may extend to five hundred rupees for every day during 
which such offence continues after conviction for the first commission 
of the offence", the following shall he substituted, namely:-
"shall be punishable.-
(a) with rigorous imprisonment which may extend to 10 
three years, if such development relates to utilising, selling or 
otherwise dealing with any land with a view to the setting up 
of a colony without a layout plan; and 
(h) with simple imprisonment which may extend to six 
months, or with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees, r 5 
in any case, other than those referred to in clause (a) ". 
4. In section 30 of the principal Act,-
(a) sub-sed ion (2) shall be omitted; 
(b) in sub-section (3), for the words, brackets and figure "the 
chairman or the Central Government on the appeal and subject only 110 
to such decision the order under sub-section (J) or, as the case may 
be,", the words "the Ceptral Government on the appeal and subject 
only to such decision" sl1all be substituted. 
5. In section 31 of the principal Act,-
(0) in sub-section (2), after the words "place of development", Q5 
the words "or tl) seize <lny construction material, tool, machinery, 
scaffolding or other thing!; used in such' development" shall be 
inserted; 
(b) after sub-section (2), the following sub-sections shall be 
inserted. namely: - 30 
"(2A) Any of the things caused to be seized by the Autho-
rity or the officer of the Authority or the competent authority, as 
the case may be, under sub-section (2) shall, unless the 
owner thereof turns up to take back such things and pays to 
the Authority. the officer of the Authority or the competent 35 
authority, as the case may be, the charges for the r,emoval or 
storage of such things, be disposed of by it or him by public 
auction or in S'Uch other manner and within such time as the 
AuthOrity, the officer of the Authority or the competent autho-
rity thinks fit. 40 
(2B) The charges for the removal and storage of the things 
sold under sub-section (2A) shall be paid out of the proceeds 
of the sale thereof and the balance, if any, shall be paid to the 
owner of the things sold on a claim being made therefor within 
a period of one year from the date of sale, and if no such claim 45 
is made within the said period, shall be credited to the fund 
of the Authority or the competent authority as the case may b " . , e. ; 
(c) sub-section (7) shall be omitted. 

66 of 
1957 .. 
5 
10 
20 
30 
35 
C. After section 31 of the principal Act, the following sections shalt 
be inse~ed, namely:-
'3IA. (1) It shall be lawful for the Authority or the competent 
authority, as the case may be, at any time, before or after making 
an order for the removal or discontinuance of any development 
under section 30 or section 31, to make an order directing the sealing 
of such development in the manner prescribed by rules, for the 
purpose of carrying out the provisions of this Act, or for preventing 
any dispute as to the nat'..tre and extent of such development. 
(2) Where any development has. been sealed. the Authority or 
the competent authority. as the case may be, may, for the purpose 
of removing or discontinuing such de'!elopment order the seal to 
be removed. 
(.1) No person shall remove such seal except-
(a) under, an order made by the Authority or the competent 
authority under ~uh-section (2); or 
(b) under an order of the Appellate Tribunal or the Ad-
ministrator of the Union territory of Delhi. made in an appeal 
under this Act. 
Insertion 
of new 
seQtions 
31A, 31B, 
31C, 3ID 
and 31E. 
Power to 
seal un-
authorised 
develop.. 
ment. 
31B. The Appellatr.- Trihunal or Appellate Tribunals . constituted Appellate 
under section 347A of the Delhi Municipal Corporation Act, 1957, Tribunal. 
shall be deemed to be the Appellate Tribunal or Appellate Tribunals 
for deCiding appeals 'Imder section 31C, and the provisions of 
section 347A and section 347C of the Delhi Municipal Corporation Act, 
1957, and the rules made thereunder, shall so far as may be, apply for 
the purposes of this Act as they apply for the purposes of that Act. 
31C. (1) Any person aggrieved by any of the following orders Appeals . 
. made under this Act, may prefer an appeal to the Appellate Tri-
bunal, namely:-
(a) an order of the Authority granting or refusing to 
grant pennission for development under sub-section (3) of 
section 13; 
(b) an order of the Authority or the local authority dis-
posing of any land under section 21; 
(c) an order of an officer of the Authority or the compe-
tent authority made under sub-section (1) of section 30, for the 
removal of any development; 
(d) an order of the Authority or an officer of the Authority, 
or the competent authority made under sub-section (1) of 
section 31, for dl~continlJing any development; 
(e) an order of the Authority or the competent authority 
made under section 31A, directing the sealing of any develop· 
ment. 

Appeals 
against 
orders 
of Appel-
late Tri-
bunal. 
Bar of 
jurisdic-
tion of 
courts. 
4 
(2) An appeal under this section shall be filed within thirty days 
from the date of the order appealed against:_ 
Provided that the Appellate Tribunal may entertain an appeal 
after the expiry of the said period of thirty days if it is satisfied that 
there was sufficient cause for not filing it within that period. 
(3) An appeal to the Appellate Tribunal shall be made in such 
:Corm and shall be accompanied by a copy of the order appealed 
against and by S'U,ch fees as may be prescribed by rules. 
5 
31D. (1) An appeal shall lie to the Administrator of the Union 
territory of Delhi against an order of the Appellate Tribunal, 10 
confirming, modifying or annulling an order of the Authority, 
officer of the Authority, local authority or competent authority. as 
the case may be. under this Act. 
(2) The provisions of sub-sections (2) and (3) of section 31C and 
the provisions of section 347C of the Delhi Municipal Corporation 15 
Act, 195-7. and the rules made thereunder, shall, so far as may be. B6 of 195~ 
apply to the filing and disposal of an appeal under this section as they 
apply to the filing and disposal of an appenl under the said section 
31C. 
(.1) An order of the, Administrator on an appeal under this sec- 20 
tion, a~d subject only to such order. an order of the Appellate Tribu-
nal under section 3lC and subject to such orders of the Adminis-
trator or an Appellate Tribunal, an order of the Authority, officer 
of the Authority. local authority or competent authority appealable 
under this Act shall be final. 25 
Explanation.-In sections 30, 31, 3lA. and 3lD, "competent 
authority" in relation to a local authority means any authority 
or officer of that ,local authority empowered or authorised to 
order demolition or stoppage of buildings or works, in accordance 
with the prOvisions made by or under the law governing such local 3 
authority. 0 
:lIE. (1) After the commencement of section 6 of the Delhi 
Development (Amendment) Act, 1983. no court shall entertain any 
suit, application of other proceedings in respect of any order appeal-
able under section 3lC, and no such order shall be called in question 35 
otherwise than by preferring an appeal 'Under that section. 
(4) NotWithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), 
every suit, application or other proceeding pending in any court 
immediately before the commencement of section 6 of the Delhi 
Development (Amendment) Act, ]983, in respect of any order, 40 
appealable under section 3le shall continue to be dealt with and 
disposed of by that court as if the said section had not been brought 
into force.'. 

2 of 1974. 
2 of 1974. 
5 
10 
7. After section 34 of the principal Act, the following section shall Insertion 
be inserted, namely:- of new 
section 
34A. 
"34A. The Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, shall apply to an 
offence under sub-section (1) of section 29 as if it were a cogniz-
able offence,-
(i) for the purposes of investigation of such offence, and 
(ii) for the purposes of all matters other than-
(1) matters referred ,to in section 42 of that Code, 
and 
(2) arrest of a person except on the complaint of, or 
upon information received from:-
(a) such officer of the Authdrity not below the 
rank of a Director as may be appointed by the Admi-
nistrator of the Union territory of Delhi, if the offence 
is committed in relation to a development area; 
(b) such officer of the Municipal Corporation of 
Delhi not below the rank of a Deputy Commissioner as 
may be appOinted by the Administrator of the Union 
territory of Delhi, if the offence is committed in rela-
tion to any area within the local limits of that Cor-
poration; or . 
(c) the Secretary, New Delhi Municipal Com-
mittee, if the offence is committed in relation to any 
area within the local limits of that Committee: 
Provided that no offence which relates to any deviation from 
the permission, approval or sanction given under section 12 and 
which could be compounded under the provisions of this Act, shall 
be cognizable:'. 
Certain 
offences 
to be 
cogn!-
zable. 
8. In section 48 of the principal Act, for the words "magistrate of Amend-
3~ the first class", the words "Metropolitan Magistrate" shall be substi- ment of 
tuted; section 48. 
9. In section 50 of the prinCipal Act, for the portion beginning with i\mend-
the word and figures "section 32" and ending with th(' words "first ment of 
class", the words and figures "section 29 of the Code of Criminal Pro- section 50. 
cedure, 1973, it shall be lawful for any court of a Metropolitan Magis-
35 trate" shall be substituted. 
45 
10. In section 52 of the principal Act, in sub-section (3), after the Amend-
words "under this Act", the words Ie, except the power to hear appeals," mcnt or 
shall be inserted. section 
52. 
11. In sub-section (2) of section 56 of the principal Act, after clause Amend-(jjj) , the following clauses shall be inserted, namely:- ment of 
"(ja) the manner in which the sealing' of any development section 56, 
under sub-section (1) of section 31A shall be made; 
(jb) the form in which an appeal shaJl be made to the Appellate 
Tribunal under sub-section (3) of section' 3lC and the fees that 
shall accompany such appeal;", 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Delhi Development Act, 1957, provides for the constitution of 
the Delhi Development Authority for the purposes of development of 
Delhi according to plan and for preventing haphazard growth of 
colonies and townships in Delhi. For achieving the objects for wh~ch 
the Authority had been constituted, the Authority had been makmg 
civic sur~ys of Delhi and preparing master plans and zonal. develop-
ment plans for the development of land in the Union territory of Delhi. 
However, owing to unexpected increase in the population of Delhi in 
recent years, there had been a near scramble for occupying vacant land 
unauthorisedly and to develop them into colonies in contravention of 
the master plan or the zonal development plans prepared by the Autho-
rity. As a result of this, growth of unauthorised colonies, encroach-
ment on public streets and unauthorised constructions on public and 
private land have assumed alarming proportions. The Authority and 
other local authorities exercising jurisdiction in the Union territory of 
Delhi have no~ been able to effectively prevent these activities because 
of person'S taking recourse to legal. proceedings and obtaining ex parte 
stay or.ders from civil courts. These stay orders remain operative for 
years till the final settlement of legal proceedings with the result that 
the object of achieving the planned growth of Delhi is being defeated 
Further, prosecutions for such unauthorised development and use 
of .land have also not proved effective because of impOSition of meagre 
fines by courts. In order, therefore, to enable the Authority to effective-
ly curb these activities and to' ensure the development t>f land in 
accordance with the plans, it is proposed to amend the Act. 
2. The Bill, therefore, provides, among other things, for the follow-
ing changes in the Act, namely:-
(i) At present. the Authority has power to make orders for 
the removal or discontinuance of any unauthorised de~lopment. 
It is proposed to give ¢e Authority the power to seal any un-
authorised development either before or after making such orders 
for removal' or discontinuance. The' sealing of any unauthorised 
development in pursuance of an order made by the AuthOrity can. 
be removed only by the Authority for the purpose of removing or 
discontinuing such development, or in pursuance of any order 
made by the Appellate Tribunai or the Administrator of the Union 
territory of Delhi in any appeal made under the provisions of the 
Act. ' 
(ii) It is proposed to provide for appeals against the orders of 
the Authority or local authority under the provisions of the Act to an 
Appellate Tribuna]. The Appellate Tribunal or the Appellate Tribu-
nals .p~OP()sed La be constituted under the provisions of the Delhi 
MumcI~al Corpo~~t~on Act, 1957, would be deemed to be the Appe-
llate TrIbunal or I f1bunals for the purposes of hearing appeals under 
6 

7 
this Act also. A further appeal agaiJ;lst the orders of the Appellate 
Tribunal would lie to the Administrator of the Union territory of 
Delhi. The orders made by the Appellate Tribunal or the Adminis-
trator of the Union territory, as the case may be, on such appeals 
will be final and no civil court shall have any jurisdiction to entertain 
any proceedings in respect of orders made under the Act for which 
appeals shall lie to the Appellate Tribunal. The provisions of the 
Delhi Municipal Corporation Act. 1957, and the rules made there-
under regardipg the procedure to be' followed by the Appel1ate Tri-
bunals in respect of hearing appeals under that Act are being made 
applicable to the Appellate Tribunal while hearing appeals under tht-
Act, whi.ch will include the prohibition of giving any ex parte ~tay 
of orders made by the Authority or local authority. 
(iii) It is proposed to change the penalty of fine now specified 
for offences under the Act to include imprisonment also and to 
make some of the offences cognizable. 
(iv) Opportunity is being availed of to make certain other 
changes of a consequential and minor nature. 
3. The Bill 'seeks to achieve the above objects. 
NEW DELHI; BUTA SINGH. 
The 16th August, 1983. 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 11 of the Bill seeks to insert two new clauses in sub-section 
(2) of section 56 of the Delhi Development Act, 1957, so as to enable 
the Central Government to make rules in respect ofc~rtain matters 
provided in the Bill. These matters, inter alia, relate to the manner in 
which the sealing of any development under sub-section (1) of new sec-
tion 3tA shall be made, the form in which an appeal shall be made to 
the Appellate Tribunal under sub-section (3) of new section 31C and 
the fees that shall accompany such appeal. 
2. The matters with respect to which rules may be made under the 
ftforesaid provisions are matters of procedure or detail. The delegation of 
legislative power is, therefore, normal in character . 
• 

ANNEXURE 
EXTRAC18 FROM THE DELHI DEVELOPMEN'l' ACT, 1957 
61 OP 1957 
... • • ... 
d. (1) • • • 
(2) The advisory council shall consist of the following members, 
namely:-
... ... ... ... 
(e) three persons representing the Delhi Electric Supply Com-
mittee, the Delhi Transport Committee and the De1.hi Water Supply 
and Sewage Disposal Committee of the said Corporation, of whom-
(i) one shall be elected by the members of the Dellli Electric 
Supply Committee from among themselves; 
(ii) one shall be elected by th~ members of th~ De!hi Trans-
port Committee fr,)m among themselves; and 
(iii) one shall be elected by the members of the Delhi 
Water Supply and Sewage Disposal Committee from among 
themselves; 
... ... • ... ... 
• 
Advisory 
Council. 
29. (1) Any person who whether at his own instance or at the instance Penalties. 
of any other person or any body (including a department of Govern-
ment) undertakes or carries out development of any land in contraven-
tion of the master plan or zonal development plan or without the per-
mission, approval or sanction referred to in section 12 Ol" in contraven-
tion of any condition subject to which s:1ch .,ermissio'n, approval or 
sanction has been gpanted, shall be pun!shable with fine which may 
extend to ten thousand rupees, and in the case of a continuing offence, 
with further .fine which may extend to five hundred rupees for every day 
during which such offence cont'nues after conviction for the first com-
mission of the offence . 
... ... • ... 
30. (1) ... • ... • • 
(2) Any person aggrieved by an order under sub-section (1) may 
appeal to the chairman of 'he Authority against that order within 
thirty days from the date thereof; and the chairman may after hearing 
the parties to the appeal either allow or dismiss the appeal or may re-
verse or vary any part of the order . 
• ... • • • 
(3) The decision of the chairman or the Central Gove-nment on the 
app'!al and subject only to such decision the order under sub-section 
9 
Order of 
demoli-
tion of 
build-
ing. 

Power to 
stopdeve-
lopmcnt. 
Juris-
diction 
of courts. 
Magis-
trate's 
power to 
impose 
enhanced 
penalties. 
Power to 
delegate. 
10 
(/) or, as the case may be, the direction under sub-section (lA), shall 
be final and shall not be questioned in any court. 
... ... • • 
:11. (1) .. ... • • 
(2) Where such development is not discontinued in pursuance of 
the order under sub-section (1). the A'.1thority or the officer of the 
Authcrity or the competent llUthority, as the case may be, may require 
any police officer to remove the person by whom the development has 
been commenced and all his assistants and workmen from the place of 
development within such time as may be specified in the requisition and 
:ouch police officer shall comply with the requisition accordingly, 
... ., ... • ... 
(7) In section 30 nnd in this section, "compet~nt authority" in rela-
tion to a local authority means any authority or officer of that local 
authority empowered or authorised to order demolition or stoppage of 
buildings or works, in accordance with the provisions made by or under 
• the law governing such local authori~y, 
... ... ... ... • 
48, No c01p"t inferior to that of a magi~trate of th~ first class shall try 
an offence punishable under this Act, 
• ... • • • 
SO. Notwithstanding anything contained in section 32 of the Code of 
Criminal Procedure, 1898, it shall be lawful for any court of a magis-
trate of the first class to pass any sentence authorised by this Act in 
exc~ss of its powers under the said section. 
... • • • • 
52. (1) • ... ... ... • 
(3) The Administrator of the Union territory of Delhi may by noti-
fication in the Official Gazette, direct that any power exercisable by him 
under this Act may also be exercised by such officer as may be men-
tic.ned therein, in such cases and subject to such conditions, if any, as 
may be specified therein . 
... • • • • 
5 of 1891. 

LOK SABRA 
A 
BILL 
further to amend tbe Delhi Development Act, 1957 
(Shri Buta Singh, Minister of 
Parliamentary Affairs, Sports 
and Works and Housing.) 