1
THE MINES AND MINERALS (DEVELOPMENT AND
REGULATION) AMENDMENT BILL, 2014
By
SHRI VINCENT H. PALA, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation)
Act, 1957
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-fifth  Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1.  This Act may be called the Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation)
Amendment Act, 2014.
Bill No.  103 of  2014
TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Short title.

2
2. After section 3 of the Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Act, 1957,
the following heading and section thereunder shall be inserted, namely:—
‘‘PROVISIONS OF THE ACT NOT TO APPLY TO COAL
MINING IN SCHEDULED AREAS
3A. (1) Nothing in this Act shall apply to operations already being undertaken or to be
undertaken for the purpose of mining of coal in a traditional or customary manner in the tribal
areas specified in the Sixth Schedule to the Constitution.
(2) For the purpose of sub-section (1), the State Government concerned shall, by
notification in official Gazette, specify the tribal areas where mining of coal is undertaken in
a traditional or customary manner.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the District Council for each
autonomous area may regulate the operation of mining of coal in that autonomous area in
public interest.’’.
Insertion of
new section
3A.
67 of 1957
Act not to
apply in
relation to
coal mining
in tribal areas
specified in
the Sixth
Schedule to
the
Constitution.
10
5

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Recent trends in the administration of justice particularly by the National Green Tribunal
have intrusive and obliterating effects on the traditional and customary coal mining activities
in Meghalaya and other North-Eastern States.
The customary and traditional economic practices of the communities in the North-
East India need statutory safeguards especially when the Constitution guarantees for the
preservation of the history, heritage, culture, economy and polity of the North-Eastern States.
The recent interim order of the National Green Tribunal banning the rat-hole coal
mining in Meghalaya has resulted in deleterious economic consequences. The protection of
environment should not be at the cost of humanity. If there is a conflict between livelihood
and protection of environment, the former has to be favoured. Such contentious protection
of environment at the cost of the interests of labourers and traditional workers is not indicative
of a progressive society.
The Bill seeks to protect the economic life of the citizens living in the North-Eastern
States by exempting the areas where coal mining is undertaken in traditional or customary
ways from the application of the Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Act,
1957. The Bill also empowers the concerned State Governments to notify such areas and
further empowers the District Councils of autonomous areas specified in the Sixth Schedule
to the Constitution to regulate such traditional and customary coal mining in public interest.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; VINCENT  H. PALA
July 22, 2014.
3

GMGIPMRND—2517LS(S3)—31.10.2014.
LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Act, 1957
————
(Shri Vincent H. Pala, M.P.)