1. 
10K SAI3RA. 
OJRRIGENDA 
to 
. THE MERClIA.Nr . S:Ill'PING (A!-1ENDMENT) BILL, 1982 
LTo be/As introduced in l()k &bha 7 
Page 4, lirE 1 , -
!Ql: "sub- section" ~ II sub- sections" 
2. Page 7, in the marginal heading t..., propo sed section 356B,-
ts:u: "Derinations" l:e...ad "Defjnitions" 
3. Page 10, line 12,-
!Q1: "appointed" .r.e..ad "A.uthorised" 
4. Page 15, in the marginal heading to clause 12, ~ 
!Q...r "411" ~ "411A.." . 
/ 
5. Page 15, in the marginal hervUng to proposed section 411A.,-
after "Powers" ;J;n.sert "of" 
6. PA.ge 17, in the marginal heRding t·) l)l'vP"IJ~rl qr·,.j;1 •• 'n \'.J~{H\ 
!QJ:. "Registars" ~ "Reetstrars" 
7. Page 17, line 22,-
Arter "boats" insert-
"(hereafter in this Part referred to as registr'3.r)" 
8. Page 17, line 23,-
~ "such" 
9. Page '17, line 40,-
.!21: "to a registr~r" ~ "to the registrar" 
10. Page 18, in the marginal heading to proposed section 4351i,-
ts:u:. "0 r" ~ "to " 
11. Page 19, line 42,-
~ "of Indian fishing boats" 
12. Page 20, line 3,-
a.t:t~;r;: ''boat'' ;1.nser t "a" 
13. Page 24, line 3,-
m "on II llt.a.d "0 r" 
P.T.O. 

2 -
14. Page 26, line 12,-
o...ill11 "a" 
15. Page 26, in the m~rp'in'll heqding to cl?~use 17,-
after "A~t" insert "5" 
16. Pa~e 26, line 28,-
.fo r" "c') rre spannr" 1:Q..aQ. "corre spondin gIl 
17. Page 27, line 19,-
( 1) " nu: lI( see)" rQ..ad "( C'J' 
(11) !Q1: "we>rd" ~ "words" 
18. Page 32, line 20,-
Lll: "pre scribed I, ~ "pre scribe" 
19. P age It 3, line 33,-
fsll: "circum! t'3Jlce" ~ "circumstance" 
20. Page 43, line 35,-
ru "or" nw.d "nJr " 
21. Fage 43, line 45,-
!Q!: "my " mad "m~" 
22.- F~Ge 43, line 52,-
f.Q1: "ope ation" l..23.d "oper'lt:i..or; I, 
23. P:J.ge 43, line 8. from bottom,-. 
!Ql:. "356( 2) n ~ "356C( 2) " 
:NEW DElliI· " , 
August 6, 1982 
Srav~na 15, 1904 (Saka) 

B1U No. 103 of 1-. 
• 
THE MERCHANT SHIPPING (AMENDMENT) BII.J." 1982 
/1l:rther to ame-rtd tile Merch4n.t ShiPPi'Rg Act, 1906. 
Sa i~ enacted by Parliament in the Thirty-third Year of the RepubUc 
Qf India as follows:-
1. This Act may be called the Merchant Shipping (Amendment) Act, Short 
1982. title. 
'" of 1_ 5 2. For section 2 of the Merchant Shipping Act, 19158 (here1D.atter Sublti-
tuUoD 
ofDeW' 
aectiOill 
lor 
10 
I~ 
10 
referred to as the principal Act), the following section shall be IUbati-
tuted, namely:-
sectlon.a. 
"2. (1) Unless otherwise expressly provided. the prOv1s1ona 0'1. Applica-
this Act which apply to- tion of Act. 
(a) any vess~l whi.ch is registered.in India; or 
(b) any vessel which 18 reqUired by this Act to be 10 1'81111-
tt~l·edi or 
(c) .any other vessel which Is owned wholly by persons to 
each of whom any of the descriptions specified in clause (4) or 
in clause (b) or in clause (c). as the case may be, of section 21 
applies. 
mall 80 apply wherever the vessel may be. 
(2) Unless otherwise expressly provided, the provisions of this 
Act which apply to vessels other than those referred to in su.b-Ieo-
Uon (1) shall 10 apply only while any such vessel is within India, 
m.clucUnl the terr1torial waters thereaL" 

2 
~~­
meni ot 
sectionS. 
~. 1n. se~\)'Qn ~ ot the pri.ncipal Act, in clause (37), for the :figures, 
letters and words "17th day of June, 1960", the figures, letters and worda 
"1st day of November, 1974" shall be substituted. 
AmeDd-
meutot 
section. 2.2.. 
Amend-
ment of 
section '74. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 8'1. 
Amend-
ment of 
eectlon 1'15 
Amend-
ment of 
section 
282. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 
144. 
4. In section 22 of the prinCipal Act. the following E:rplanation shall 
be inserte<i at the end, namely: _ 5 
'Explana.tion.-For the purposes of this section, "ship" does not 
include a fishing vessel.'. 
5. In section 74 of the principal Act, for clause <j) of sub-section (2), 
tbe following clause shall be substituted, namely:-
"(j) the fees that may be levied for the survey or inspedion of 10 
any ship for the p1D'pOSe5 of I'0gistration and the manner in which 
sueh fees may be collected;". 
6. In section 87 of the principctl Act, after clause (d), the followiDl 
clause shall be inserted, namely:-
"( dd) fix the fees that may be levied for surveyor inspection of 15 
a ship for ensuring compliance with tbe provisions of this Part and 
provide the manner in which such fees may be collected;". 
7. In section 175 01 the principal Acl, after claWie (e) of sub-sec'tion 
(2), the followmg clause shall be inserted., namely:-
"(I) the fees that may be levied for the survey or inspection of 10 
crew spaces and for scrutiny of plans of crew accOlJl]D.odation spac ... 
and the manner in which such fees may be collected;". 
8. In section 282 of the principal Act,-
(a) in clause (w), the word "and" occurring at the end shall be 
onritied; ~5 
(b) after clause (w), the following claUSe shall be inserted, 
namely:-
'( (ww) the fees that may be levied for the survey or inspection 
of piJpim ships with respect to sanitary conditions, provision of 
stores, medical ~Jities available on such ships and such other 30 
purposes that may be relevant for compliance with the provisions 
of this Part relating to pilgrim ships and the manner in which 
such fees may be collected; ". 
9. In section 344 of the principal Act, after clause (c) of sub-section 
(2), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:- 35 
(( (d) the fees to be eharged for the surveyor inspection of hull, 
maChinery, boilers, electrical appliances and other fittings and the 
materials ..- for their construction, fire appliances, life savlal 
appliances, radio communications equipment, radar, echo' lOundiq 
device and gyro comP886, or testing or approval of BIly of the fore-
loin&, equipments or materials UHd for their manufacture, or exami- 40 
nation of plans of construction of any part of ship's huD,· machinery. 
electrical appliances and other equipment aforesaid and the manner 
bl whieh such fees may be recovered.". 

80 of 1978. 
5 
10 
10. After Part XA of the principal Act, the following Part shall be 
!merted, namely:-
'PART XB 
CIVIL LIABILITY FOR on. POLLUTION DAMAGE 
352G. This Part applies to-
(a) every Indian ship wherever it is; and 
(b) every foreign ship while it is at a port or place in India 
or withln the territorial waters of India or any marine areas 
adjacent thereto over which India has, or may hereaft~r have, 
exclusive jurisdiction in regard to control of marine pollUtion 
under the Territorial Waters, Continental Shelf, Exclusive 
Economic Zone and other Maritime Zones Act, 1976, or any other 
law for the time being in force. 
352H. (1) In this Part, unless the context otherwise reqw~,-
15 (a) "incident" means any occurrernce, or series of occurrences 
110 
having the same origin, which causes pollution damage; 
(b) "oil" means any persistent oil such as crude oU, fuel oil, 
heavy diesel oil, lubricating oil and whale oil, whether carried 
OD board a tanker as cargo or fuel; 
(C) "owner" means-
(i) the person registered as owner of the ship and in-
cludes the operator who for the time being is in charge of the 
ship and the master of the ship; or 
(ii) in the absence of registration, the person owning the 
ship; or 
(iii) in the case of a tanker owned by a foreign Stat&, the 
person registered in that State as operator of the ship; 
(d) "pollution damage" means loss or damage caused out-
side the ship by contamination resulting from escape or discharge 
30 of oil from that ship, wherever such escape or discharge 0CC'lll'B, 
and includes the costs of preventive measures and further 1088 
or damage caused by preventive measures; so, however, that the 
provisions of clause (a) of sub-section (1) of section 352B shall 
not apply to such loss or damage; 
(e) "preventive measures" means any reasonable measures 
taken by any person after the incident to prevent or minimise 
pollution damage. 
(2) In this Part-
(a) the expression "franc" shall have the same meaning as 
is 'assigned to it in clause (b) of section 352; and 
(b) the expression "tonns,ge" shall mean the tonnage of a 
ship determined in accordance with the provisions of section 
352B and where it is not so determinable. it shall mean forty 
per cent. of the weight in tons of oil cargo the ship is capable of 
45 carrying. 
InIertion 
otnew 
PartXB. 
Applica-
tion. 
IDe1lnltionlo 

LtabUlt;J 
of owner. 
LtmltatiOD 
of 
Uabilit)'. 
CoDItttu-
tion or 
JJmltatJoa 
tund. 
4 
3621. (1) Save as otlierwise provided in sub-lIection (2) I (3) 
and (4) I the owner at the time of an incident, or, where the incident 
consists of a series of occunences, at the time of first of such occurren-
ces, shall be liable for any pollution damage caused by 011 which hal 
escaped or been discharged from the ship as a result of the incident. .5 
(2) No liability for pollution damage shall attach to the owner 
under sub-section (1). if he proves that the pollution damage-
(a) resulted from an act of war, hostilities, civil war, in-
ItU'l'eCtion or 8 natural phenomenon of! an exceptional, inevitable 
and irresistible character; or 10 
(b) was wholly caused by an act or omiSRioo done with 
intent to caUSe such damage by any other person: or 
(e) was wholly caused by the negligence or other wrongful 
act of any government or other authOrity responsible for the 
maintenance of lights or other navigational aids in exercise of its 15 
functioll5 in that behalf. 
(3) Where, with respect to any incident, the owner proves that 
the pollution damage resulted, either wholly or partlally, from '8Jl 
aet or omission done, with intent to cause such damage, by the penon 
who suffered damage, or from the negligence of that person, the owner gO 
shall be exonerated. wholly or, as the case may be, partially. from 
liability to that person. 
(4) Where, in lIny incident, pollUtion damage result!' from escape 
or dil!lchar~ of oil ft-om two or more ships, the owners of all such 
"hips shall be jointly and severally liable for all such damage which g~ 
is not reasonably separable. 
(5) No claim for pollution damage shall be made against any 
owner otherwise than in accordance with the provisions of th1s 
section. 
(6) No claim tor pollution damage shall be made against any So 
servant or agent Of the owner. 
352J. (1) Save as otherwise provided in sub-section (2), the 
owner may limit hi;; liability under section 352I in respect of any 
incident to an aggregate amotmt of-
(a) two thousand francs for each ton of the ship', tonnate; or 55 
(b) two hundred and ten million francs, 
whichever is lower. 
(2) Where any incident causing pollution damage occurs u • 
result of the actual fault of the owner, he shall not be entitled to 
Hmit his liabiUty under sub-section (1). 40 
352K. (1) (~. Any owner desiring to avail of the beneftt of 
limitation of his Jiability under sub-section (1) of section 352.J shall 
make an application to the High Court for constitution of a limitation 
fund (hereafter tn this Part referred to as fund). 
(b) Such fund may be constituted either by depoahJng the sum 45 
1dth the High Court or by furnishing bank guarantee or aueh other 
eeeurity 88, in the t:)pinion of the High Court, Is satisfactory. 

(2) (a) The insurer or any other person providing flnanc1a1 
security to the owner may apply to the High Court for constitution of 
the fund under sub-section (1) and any fund so constituted. shall have 
the same effect as if it were constituted by the owner. , 
5 (b) Such fund may be constituted even in cases where sub-
section (2) of section 352J applies but in any such event constitution 
of the fund shall not prejudice the rights of any claimant against the 
owner for full compensation exceeding the amount deposited or 
secured in the fund. 
{O (3) The amount in francs to be deposited or secured in the fup.d 
15 
under S'Ub-section (1) shall be converted in rupees on the basis of 
ofticial value in rupees of the gold contents of franc on the date of 
t:Onstitution of the fund. 
362L. (1) Where the owner or any of his servants or agents or 
any other person providing him insurance or other financial, security 
has, as a result of incident in question, paid any compensation 'to any 
claimant, such person shall, up to the amount so paid by him, be entitled 
to acquire by BubroJ!ation the rights to which the claimant so compen-
sated would be entitled to. 
!.IO (2) Where the owner or any other person providing him insurance 
or other flnancial securitv establishes that he mav. at a later date. be 
compelled to pav to any person, in whole or in part. any amount hy 
wav of comoenqlltfnn for nol111tion ifamap.e ('auy-if bv the incMent with 
resnect to which he wculr! have heen entit'e~ t.o a('outre bv 8uhro-
li5 J!atlon the riltht of tbe c'a;mllnt hA.d the comnPnsllt;on heen nIlfd 
before the fund wal'; di~trfhuteif. the In,,.h Cn11Tf. mav nrifet" that 
sufficient amount from the fund may provic:;ionllllv he set asMa to 
enable the owner or such other persOTl to e!1force his claim against the 
fund at a later date. 
So 
45 
352M. (n The Hie:h Court shllll con"lnlfrtllt.o All claims against 
the fund including those arising under section 352L. 
(2) Anv claim in respect of exoenses reRsonAb'v incurred or 
eserfflces reasonably made bV the owner vnlunblIilv tn nrP.Vent or 
minimise pollution damage shal1 rank equally with other claims 
a~inst the fund. 
(3) Subiect to the provisions of sub-section (2) of section 3521.1, 
the Hi~h Court shall distribute the amC7Unt in the fund amon~ all 
claimants in proportion to their established claims. 
352N. '(n The owner of every Inifian ship whfch carries 2000 
tons or more oil in bulk as carlto shall. in respect of such ship. ma'n-
tain an insurance or other financial security for an amount equivalent 
to-
(a) two tliausand 'francs for each ton of ship·!; tonnage; or 
(b) two hundred and ten mUllon francs , 
whichever is lower. 
(2) In respect of every Indian ship which mafntain5 insurance 
or other flnancial security under sub-seclion (1), there shall be issued 
by the Director-General a certificate in such form and gi"fn~ such 
particulars as may be prescrihed. 
Acquisi-
tion ot 
right for 
compen.. 
sation by 
lubrop-
tion. 
Consoli-
dation of 
clabnan4 
distribu-
tion of 
fund. 
Compul-
sory 
insurance 
orotber 
ftnanelal 
guarantee. 

Accep-
tance of 
c:erti-
deates 
issued 
outside 
IneUe. 
Ban on 
enterlnl 
or 
leavinl 
an Indlan 
port 
without 
Certlft-
ca" 
Govern-
ment 
ship'. 
Power 
to make 
rulIs 
Substitu-
tion of 
new 
Part tor 
Part 
XIA. 
Commen-
cement 
and 
appUca-
t1on. 
e 
(3) On an application by the owner or agent of any foreign lhip. 
the Dh'ector-General may issue a certificate under sub-section (2) 
in respect of such foreign ship on production of satisfactory evidence 
relating to maintenance of insurance or other financial security in 
aecorda.."lce with the provisions of the International Convention on 5 
CiVil Liability for Oil Pollution Damage signed at Brussels on the 
29th day of November, 1969. 
(4) For every certificate issued under sub-sections (2) and (S) 
there shall be charged such fee as may be prescribed. 
3520. Any certificate issued by a competent authority in any 10 
country outside India to a ship registered in that country or any 
certificate issued by R competent Buthority of any CO'LUltry which is 
a contracting party to the International Convention on Civil Liability 
for Oil Pollution Damage signed at Brussels on the 29th day of 
November, 1969, to any ship wherever registered, shall be accepted 15 
at any port or place in India as if it were issued un~er this Act. 
352P. (1) No Indian ship, which has on board 2000 tone or more 
oil in bulk as cargo shall enter or leave or attempt to enter or lea". 
any port or place in India unless it carries on board a certtftcate 
i8f(ued under sub-section (2) of section 352N or a certificate accepted 20 
under section 3520. 
(2) No ship other than an Indian ship carryin~ 2000 tons or mote 
011 in bulk as cargo, wherever registered, shall enter or leave or 
attempt to enter or leave any port or place in India unless It 
carries on board a certificate issued under sub-section (3) of section 115 
352N or a certificate accepted under section 3520. 
(3) No customs officer shall ~ant inward entry or outward 
clearance to anv ship to which sub-section (1) or. as the caee may 
be. sub-section (2) apt>lies. unless its master produces a cert1ftcate 
required under the respective sub-section. 30 
352Q. Nothinl! in thfF: Part shall at>nlv to any Ship of war or any 
shit> for the time beinl! used bv the Government 0'1 any country for 
purposes other than commercial purposes. 
352R. The Central Government may make rules prescrfblng-
(0) the form of certificate to be issued by the Director- 35 
General under sub-section (2) of section 352N and the particulars 
which it may contain; 
(b) feee which may be charged for issue of certificates under 
section 3S2N.'. 
I 
11. For Part XIA of the principal Act, the follOwing Part' shall be dl' 
substituted, namely: - I 
'PART XIA 
P1mvBN'rroN AND CONTAINMENT 0'" POLL"tmON OF THIl SEA BY OIL 
356A. (1) The prOVisions of this Part shall come into force on sueh 
date as the Central Government may, by notification in the Oftlclal 45 
Gazette, appoint, and different dates may be appointed for different 
provisions of this Part. 
(I) This Part shall apply to-
(0) tankers of one hundred and fifty tons gross or more; 
(b) other ships of five hundred tons gross or more; and 5" 
(c) off-shore instaUatiOD8. 

10 of 1978. 
5 
10 
31i6B. In this Part, unless the context otherwise requires,-
(a) "cargo" includes ballat!lt and ship's stores and fuel; 
(b) "coast" includes any island forming part of India; 
(c) "coastal waters" means any part of the territorial 
waters of India, or any marine areas adjacent thereto over which 
India has, Of, may hereafter have exclusive jurisdiction in 
regard to control of marine pollution under the Territorial 
Waters, Continental Shelf, Exclusive Economic Zone and other 
Maritime Zones Act, 1976, or any other law for the time belne in 
force; 
(d) "Convention" means the International Convention for 
the Prevention of Pollution of the Sea by Oil, 1954, signed in 
London on the 12th day of May, 1954, as amended trom time to 
time; 
1.1 (e) "discharge", in relation to oil or oily mixture, m38ll8 
any discharge or escape, however caused; 
(f) the expression "tram nearest land" shall mean the base-
line from which the territorial sea of the territory in question is 
established in accordance with the Geneva Convention on the 
ao Territorial Sea and the Contiguous Zone, 1958, except that In 
relation to north-eastern coast of Australia it shall mean from a 
line drawn 'from a point on the coast of Australia in latitude 11° 
South, longitude 142° 08 East to a point in latitude 10· 35' South. 
longitude 141°55' East-
liS thence to a point latitude 10°00' South, longitude 142°06' 
East 
thence to a point latitude 9°10' South, longitude 143°52' 
Bast 
thence to a point latitude 9°00' South, longitude 144°8(Y 
East 
thence to a point latitude 13°00' South, longitude 144°()(Y 
East 
thence to a point latitude 15°00' South, longitude 146°OCY 
East ' 
thence to a point latitude 18°00' South, longitude 147°00' 
East 
the'llce to a point latitude 21°00' South, longitude 153°00' 
East 
thence to a point on the coast of Australia in latitude 
24°42' South, longitude 153°15' East; 
(g) "instantaneous rate of discharge of oil content" means 
the rate of discharge of oil in litres per hour at any instant 
divided by the speed of the Ship in knots at the same instant; 
(Il) "mile" means a nautical mile of 1852 metres· • • 
(i) "oft-shore installation" means an installation, whether 
mobUe or ftxed, which is used or is intended to be used for under-
nea· 
naUoa.. 
.. 

Prohlbi-
tiona 
.. to 
dischar. 
.eofo1l 
or on, 
mixture, 
8 
water exploffltion 0)' exploitation ot crude oil, petrolel,UU or 
other eimilar mineral oils, under leale, lioeonce or any other 
form of contractual arrangement and includes-
(a) 'any installation which could be moved from place 
to p1a(Je under its OWlI motive power or otherwise; and 
(b) a pipe-line; 
(j) "oil" means-
(1.) crude oil; 
(ii) fuel oil; 
5 
(iii) heavy diegel oil conforming to such specifications as 10 
may be prescribed; and 
(iv) lubricating oil; 
(k) "oily mixture'> me~t)}~ Ii mixtw'e with iUlY 011 content; 
-
(0 "oil reception facilities" in relation to a port, means 
:facUitiea for enabling vessels using the poTt to discharge or 15 
deposit oU residues; 
(m) "ship" means any sea-going vessel of any type what-
soever, including a Boating craft, whether self-propelled or 
towed by another vessel, making a sea-voyage; 
(n) "tanker" means a ship in which greater part of the cargo 110 
.pace js com tructed Or adapted for the carriage of liquid cargoes 
in bulk and which is not, for the time being, l'9rrying a- cargo 
other than oil in that part of its cargo space. 
PRoVISION!'; lI'OR PRlM!:NTION OF POLLUTION 
356C. (1) No oU or oily mixture aha.ll be discharged. from an 25 
Indian tanker anywhere into the sea or from a foreign tanker any· 
where within the coastal waters of India except where each of the 
following conditions is satisfied, nam.ely:-
to-
(a.) the tanker is proceeding en-route; 
(b) the instantaneous rate of discharge of oil content does SO 
not exceed sixty litres per mile; 
(c) the total quantity of oil discharged does not exceed 
1/15,000 part of the total carrying capacity of the tanker; 
(d) the tanker;s more than 50 miles from nearest land; 
and 35 
(e) the tanker is not within the designated areas noti1led. 
as such under sub-section (6) of section 7 of the Territorial 
Warers, Continental Shelf, Exclusive Econ0mic Zone and other 
Maritime Zones Act, 1976: 80 of It'l8, 
Provided that the provisions of this sub-section shall not apply 40 
(t) the discharge of ballast from a cargo tank whJch, 
a1nce the cargo 'vas last carried therein, has been so cleaned 
that any afft.uent therefrom would, if discharged from a 45 

5 
10 
15 
., of 19'18. !;IO 
9 
stationary tanker into clean calm waters on a clear day, produce 
no visible traces of oil on the surface of the water; or 
(ii) the discharge of oil or oily m;xture from machinery 
space bilges, if any such discharge is made in compliance with 
the provisions of sub-section (2) as if it were made from a ship 
other than a tanker. 
(Z) No oil or oily mixture shall be discharged from an Indian 
ship other than a tanker anywhere into the sea or from a foreign 
ship other than a tanker within the coastal waters of India except 
where each of the following conditions is satisfied, namely:-
(a) the ship is proceeding en-route; 
(b) the instantaneous rate of discharge of oil content does 
not exceed sixty litres per mile; 
(c) the oil content of the discharge is less than one hundred 
parts per million parts of the oily mixture; 
(d) the discharge is made as far from nearest land as practi-
cable; and 
(e) the ship is not within the designated areas notified as 
such under sub-sect!on (6) of section 7 of the Territorial Waters, 
Continental She~f, Exclusive Economic Zone and other Maritime 
Zones Act, 1976. 
(3) The discharge of oil or oily mixture into the sea from any 
off-shore installation is hereby prohibited. 
356D. Nothing in section 356C shall apply to-
(a) the discharge of oil or oily mixture from a ship or an 
off-shore installation for the purpose of-
(i) safety of such ship or off-shore installation; or 
(ii) preventing damage to such ship or off-shore instal-
lation . or cargo, if any, on board such ship or off-shore in-
stallation; or 
(iii) saving life at sea; 
(b) the escape Of oil or oily mixture resulting from damage 
to or unavoidable leakage from a ship or an oft-shore installation 
if,after occurrence of the leakage, all reasonable precautions 
35 have been taken for the purpose of preventing or m;nimising 
such escape; 
45 
(c) the discharge of oily mixture from the bilges of a ship 
during the period of twelve months following the date on which 
this section comes into force. 
356E. For the purpose of preventing or reducing discharges of 
oil 'and oily mixtures into the sea, the Central Government may 
make rules requiring Indian ships to be fitted with such equipment 
and to comply with such other requirements (including requirements 
for preventing the escape of fuel oil or crude oil or heavy diesel 
Oil into bilges) as may be prescrtQ~(" 
Prohibi-
tion not 
to apply 
in certain 
cases. 
Equip-
ment in 
ships to 
prevent 
oil 
pollution. 

ou 
record 
book. 
Inspec-
tion and 
control of 
ships to 
which 
the 
Conven-
tion 
applies. 
Informa-
tion 
regarding 
contra_ 
ventionof 
the 
provisions 
of the 
Conven-
tion. 
10 
356F, (1) Every Indian tanker and every other Indian ship 
which uses oil as fuel shall maintain on board the tanker or such 
other ship an oil record book in the prescribed form: 
Provided that different forms may be prescribed for tankers and 
other ships. 5 
(2) The manner in which the oil record book shall be m'aintained, 
the nature of entrie& to be made therein, the time and circum-
stances in which such entries shall be made, the custody and dis-
posal thereof, and all other matters relating thereto shall be such as 
may be prescribed having regard to the provisions of the Conven- 10 
tion. 
356G. {l)A surveyor or any person appointed in this behalf, 
may, at any reasonable time, go on board a ship to which any of 
the provisions of this Part applies, for the purposes of-
(a) ensuring that the prohibitions, restrictio'ns and obliga- 15 
tions imposed by or under this Part are complied with; 
(b) sntisfying himself about the adequacy of the measures 
taken to prevent the escape of oil or oily mixture from the 
ship; 
(c) ascertaining the c:;ircumstances relating to 'an alleged lZO 
discharge of oil or oily mixture from the ship in contravention 
of the provisions of this Part; and 
(d) inspecting the oil record book. 
(2) The surveyor or any such person may, if necessary, make, 
without unduly delaying the ship, a true copy of any entry in the 25 
oil record book of the ship and may reqUire the master of the ship' 
to certify the copy to be a true copy and such copy shall be admis-
sible as evidence of the facts stated therein, 
356H, (1) If, on report from a surveyor or other persons autho-
rised to inspect a vessel u'nder section 356G, the Central Government 30 
is satisfied that any provision of the Convention has been contra-
vened anywhere by a foreign ship, being a ship to which the pro-
visions of the Convention apply, it shall transmit particulars ot the 
alleged contrave'ntion to the Government of the country to which 
~~~~, " 
(2) On receipt of information from the Government of any 
country which has ratified the Convention that an Indian ship has 
contravened any prOvisions of the Convention, the Central Govern-
ment mav if it deems it necessary 80 to do, request such Government . , 
to furnish further details of the alleged contravention, and if satisfied 4D 
that sufficient evidence is available to establish contravention of any 
of the provisions of this Part or rules made thereunder, take appro-
priate action against the owner or master and intimate the reporting 
Government of the action so taken. 

15 of 1908. 
II 
~6 I. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other 
law for the time being in force, in respect of every port in India, 
the powers of the port authority shall include the power to provide 
ioU reqlption facilities. 
5 (2) A port authority providing oil reception facilities or a 
person providi., such facUities by arrangement with the port 
authority, may make charges for the use of the facilities at such 
rates and may impose such conditions in respect of the use thereof 
as may be approved, by inotification in the Official Gazette, by the 
10 Central· Government in respect of the port. 
(3) Where the Central Government is satisfied that there are 
no 0] reception facilities at any port in India or that the facilities 
available at such port are not adequate for enabling ships calling 
at such port to comply with the requirements of the Convention, tbe 
15 . Central Government may, after consultation with the port authnrity 
in charge of such port, direct, by ordeor in writing, such authGrity to 
provide pr arrange for the provision of such oil reception facilities 
as may be specified in the order. 
(4) The Central Government may, by not~fication in 1he Official 
20 Gazette, specify the ports in India having oil reception facilities in 
accordance with the requirements of tbe· Convent!on. 
Exp,tanation.-For the purpose of this section, "port authority" 
means,-
(a) in relation to any major port, the Board of Trustees 
in respect of that port constituted under any law for the time 
being in force; 
(b) in relation to any other port, the Conservator of the 
Port, within the meaning of section 7 of the Indian Ports Act, 
1908. 
PROVISIONS FOR CONTAINMENT OF ACCIDENTAL POLLUTION 
356J. (1) Where the Central Government is satisfied that-
Oil recep-
tion facili-
ties at 
ports in 
India. 
Power 
to giVe 
( ) notice to a oil is ~scaping or is likely to escape from a tanker, a owner, etc., 
35 
ship other than a tanker or any off-shore installation; and of pollut_ 
ing ship. 
(b) the oil so escaped or likely to escape is causing or 
threatens to cause pollution of any part of coasts or coastal 
waters of India, 
it may, for the purpose of minimising the pollution already caused, 
or, for preventing the pollution threatened to be caused, require-
(i) th~ owner, agent, master or charterer of the tanker, 
40 (ii) the owner, agent, master or charterer of the ship other 
than a tanker, 
(iii) the owner, agent, master, charterer or operator of a 
mobile off-shore installation, 
(iv) the owner, operator Jessee or licensee of off-shore 
45 installation of any ot.her type, . 

Powers 
to take 
measures 
tOr pre· 
venting 
Or con-
taining 
oilpollu. 
tUm. 
n 
12 
or all or any of them, by notice served on him or as the case may 
be on them, to take such action in relation to the tanker, ship other 
than a tanker, mobile off-shore installation, or, as the case may be, 
off-shore installation of any other type or its cargo or in relation to 
both, as may be specified in such notice. 5 
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of sub-section (1), the 
notice issued under that sub-section may require the person or 
persons on whom such notice is served to take action relating to 
any or all of the followi'ng matters, namely:-
(a) action for preventing the escape of oil from the tanker, 10 
ship other than a tanker, mobile off-shore installation or off-shore 
installation of any other type; 
(b) action for removing oil from the tanker, ship other than 
a tanker, mobile off-shore installation or off-shore installation of 
any other type in such manner, if any, and to such place, if any, 15 
as may be specified in the notice; 
(c) action for removal of the tanker, ship other than a 
tanker, mobile off-shore installation or off-shore installation of 
any other type to a place, if any, as may be specified in. the 
notice; 20 
(d) action for removal of the oil slicks on the surface of 
the sea in such marr.1er, if 'any, as may be specified in the 
notice; 
(e) action to disperse the aU slicks on the surface of the sea 
in such manner, if any, as may be specified in the notice. 25 
(3) The Central Government may, by any notice issued under 
sub-section (1), prohibit the removal-
(a) of the tanker, ship other than a tanker, mobile off-shore 
installation or off-shore installation of any other type, from a 
place specified in the notice; 30 
(b) from the tankeI', ship oth.er than a tanker, mobile off-
shore installation or off-shore installation of any other type, of 
any C8l'go or stores as may be specified in the notice, 
except with its previous permission and upon such conditions, if any, 
as may be specified in the notice. 35 
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (2), the 
Central Government may, if it is Of the opinion that the pollUtion 
caused or likely to be caused has or may present a grave emer-
gency, proceed to take such measures as may be deemed necessary 
and any measures so taken sh'all be deemed to have been taken under 
section 356K. 40 
3516K. (1) Where any person faUs to tomply, or fails to comply 
in part, with any notke served on him under section 356J, the Central 
Government may, whether or not such penlcm is tonvicted of an 
offence under this Part by reason of his having so failed to comply, 
taUIe sucJt action to be tak.en as it may deem nec:essary for- 45 
(i) carrying out the directives given in the notice issued under 
section 356J; and ;' 

5 
10 
IS 
25 
.13 
(ii) ~ODt8inin. the pollution already aaused or preventing 
the pollution threadeDed to be caused, of coastal waters or, as 
the case may be, of any part of the coast of India by oil escaped or 
threatening to escape from the tank~r, a ship other than a tanker, 
a mobile off-shore installation ot' off-shore installation of any 
other type. 
(2) Subject to the provisions of Part XB, any expenditure or 
liability incurred by the Central Government in, or by reason of 
the exercise of powers under sub-section (1) in relation to any 
tanker, ship other than a tanker, mobile oft-shore installation or 
oft-sbore iastallation of any other type lin respect of which a uotice 
had Hell is&ued under section 356J, or its cargo of oil that had 
escaped or was discharged into the sea, shall be a debt due to the 
Central Government by the per90n or persons on whom the notke. 
was served and may be recovered from that person, or 8S the ease 
may be, fI'om all or aay of thOse penons aDd shall be a charge upon 
aM or any tanker, ship other than a tanker, mobile o8'~ot'e installa-
tion or off-shore installatioll of any other type owned by that person 
or perSODS which may be detained by the Central Govel'nment until 
the amount is paid: 
Provided that provisions of Part XB of this Act shall not apply 
to measures taken in respect of any off-shore installation which is 
not a ship within the meaning of this Act except that in the event 
of pollution damage caused by any . st.fclf off-shore installation the 
person who is liable for the damage may claim exoneration from any 
liability if he proves that such damage-
(a) resulted. from an ,act of war, hostilities, civil war, 
insurrection or a natural phenomenon of an exceptional, inevi-
table and irresistible character; or 
30 (b) was wholly caused by an act or omISSIon done with 
intent to cause that damage by any other -person; or 
(c) was wholly caused by the. negligence or other wrongful 
act of any government or other authority responsible for the 
maintenance of lights or other navigational aids in exercise of 
35 its tunctions in that behalf. 
45 
356L. (1) Where for the purposes of taking any measures under 
sub-section (1) of section 356K, services of any Indian ship become 
necessary for-
(i) lightening or transporting any cargo or eqUipment from 
Or to the polluting ship; or 
(ii) providing any assi!~ce to @:nyoth~ ship or equipment 
engaged in rendering services"uiicfer cla\iser(i), -
the Central Government may, if it deems it neceSiary so to do, direct, 
by an order in writing, the owner of any Indian ship, tug, barge or any 
other equipment to provide such services Or assistance as may be 
specified in that order. 
Power 
of the 
Central 
Govern-
ment to 
,tVe 
direc-
tion. to 
certain 
IhiPil to 
render 
certain 
.ervicet. 

Oil poIlu-
tioa cell. 
Refusal 
Of port 
clear-
ance. 
'4-
(2) The owner of any ship, tug, barge or any other equipment 
wlth respect to which an order under sub.section (1) has b~n 
made shall be entitled to tariff rates of freight and charter hare 
at reasonable rates having regard to current market conditions: 
Provided that where tariff rates of freight are not fixed or 5 
where there is any dispute about reasonable rate of charter hire, 
the freight or, as the case may be, charter hire, shall be paid at 
such rates as may be fixed by the Director-General by an order in 
writing. 
(3) Where in pursuance of the proviso to sub-section (2), the 10 
Director-General makes any order fixing rates of freight or charter 
hire, he shall determine reasonability of such rates of freight or 
charter hire by examining such witnesses, documents and accounts 
as he may deem necessary. 
356M. (1) With efteet from such date as the Central Govern- 15 
ment may, by noti&eation in the Oftleial Gazette, speeify, there shall 
be levied on every ship calDng at any port in India being a sllip 
which carries oil as ca .. o, a cess to be called 0:1 Pollution C~S 
(hereafter in this Part referred to as cess) at such rate not exceed-
ing fifty paise,- 20 
(a) in respect of each tonne of oil imported by a ship into 
India in bulk as a cargo; 
(b) in respect of each tonne of oil shipped from any place 
in India in bulk as a cargo of a ship, 
as the Central Government may, by noti&cation in the Official Gazette, 25 
fix: 
Provided that no cess shall be levied on a ship at amy port it 
the ship produces evidence of having paid such levy at the sanle ur 
any other port in India within a period of three months immediAtely 
preceding its present call at the port. I :~o 
(2) The cess shall be collected by such officers and in sl1t'h 
manner as the Central Government may prescribe in this behalf Rnd 
shall, after deduction of such costs of collection, if any, as the 
Centr"l Government may determine, be paid to such authority as the 
Central Government may specjfy. 35 
(3) The prooeeds of the cess shaU, after due appropriat;on matlc 
by Parliament by law, be utilised for the purpose of providin~ oil 
reeeptio n facilities and equipments and .materials for combating oil 
pollution at various ports in India and for such other like purpnses 
as tbe Central Government may, by notiJicat:on in the Official 40 
Gazette, from time to time specify. 
356N. The officer whose duty it is to grant a port clearance for 
any ship shall not grant the port clearance until the amount of 
cess payable under section 356M has been paid or until security for 
the payment thereof has been given to his satisfaction. 45 

10 
20 
I, 
3560. (1) The Central Government may, having regard to the Pow~ t,c, 
provisions of the Convention, make rules to carry out the purposes of make 
this ' Part. rules. 
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of 
the prov'.isions of su))..section (1), such rules may-
(a) prescribe the specifications of heavy diesel oil for the 
purposes of sub-clause (iii) of clause (j) of section 356B; 
(b) prescribe the equipment to be fitted in Indian ships and 
other requirements to be complied with by those ships for the 
purposes of section 35:6E; , 
(c) prescribe the forms of oil record books for tankers and 
other ships, the manner in which such books shall be maintained, 
the nature of the entries to be made therein, the time 'and 
circumstances in which such entries shall be made. the custody 
and disposal thereof and all other matters relating th,ereto for 
the purposes o'f section 356F; 
(d) prescribe the fees which may be levied for inspection of 
oil monitoring system, oily water separator, oil content metre, crude 
oil washing system, inert gas system or other equipments or con-
trivances carried out on board for prevent~ pollution of tbe 
sea by oil and the manner in which such fees may be col~.ected; 
(e) specify tbe, officers wbo shall collect the cess and the 
manner in which the cess shall be collected. 
12. After section 411 of the principal Act, the following section shall Inser-
25 be inserted, namely: - ti'on of 
3,,) 
45 
"411A. (1) If it appears to the Central Government-
(a) that measures have been taken by or under the law of 
any foreign country for regulating or controlling the terms or 
conditions upon which goods or passengers may be carried by 
sea, or the terms or conditions of contracts or arrangements 
relating to such carriage; and 
(b) that such measures, in so 'far as they apply to things 
done or to be done outside the territorial jurisdiction of that 
country by persons carrying on hlwful bUSiness in India, consti-
tute an infringement of the jurisdiction which belongs to India. 
it may, by an order in writing, direct that this section shall apply 
to those measures either in whole or to such extent as may be speci-
fied in the order. 
(2) Where an order issued under SUb-section (1) is in force in 
relation to any measures, it shall be the duty of every person in 
India who carries on business consisting or comprising of the carriage 
of goods or passengers by sea to give notice to the Central Govern-
ment of any requirement or prohibition imposed or threatened to be 
imposed on him pursuant to such measures so far as this section 
applies to him, including any requirement to submit any contract 
or other document for approval thereunder. 
(3) Where a notice under sub-section (2) is received from any 
person or there are grounds to believe that a notiCE! is likely to be 
new sec-
tion 411 
Powers 
the 
Central 
Govern-
mentto 
protect 
inte-
rests of 
Indian 
ship_ 
ping from 
undue 
foreign 
inter. 
vention. 

Amend-
mentof
section
417'.
Amend-
mentof
section
435.
Inser-
tionof
new
Part
XVA.
Applica-
tionof
Part.
Defini-
tion.
I6
received,theCentralGovernmentmay,by an orderinwriting,
givetosuchpersondirectionsprohibitingcompliancewithanysuch
requirementorprohibitionasitconsidersproperformaintaining
thejurisdictionofIndia.
(4) Any directionsgivenbytheCentralGovernmentunder5
sub-section(3) maybeeithergeneralorspecialandmayprohibit
compliancewithanyrequirementorprohibitioneitherabsolutelyor
insuchcasesorsubjecttosuchconditions,astoconsentorother-
wise,asmaybespecifiedintheorder.
(5) IfitappearstotheCentralGovernmentthatanyperson10
inIndiahasbeenormayberequiredtoproduceorfurnishtoany
court,tribunalorauthorityofa foreigncountryany commercial
documentwhichisnotwithinthe territorialjurisdictionofthat
countryoranycommercialinformationtobecompiledfromdocu-
mentsnotwithintheterritorialjurisdictionofthatcountryandthat15
therequirementconstitutes'orwouldconstituteaninfringementof
thejurisdictionwhichbelongstoIndia,theCentralGovernment
may,byanorderinwriting,givedirectionstothatperson,prohibit-
inghimfromcomplyingwiththerequirementexcepttosuchextent
Or subjecttosuchconditionsasmaybespecifiedintheorder.", 20
13. In section417 oftheprincipalAct,insub-section(1), afterthe
words"sailingvessel",thebracketsandwords"(otherthana sailing
vesselsolelyengagedinfishingforprofit)"shallbeinserted.
14. In section435oftheprincipalAct,forclause(0) ofsub-section
(2), thefollowingclauseshallbesubstituted,namely:- 25
cc(0)thefeeswhichmaybeleviedfortheissueorre-issueof
certificatesofregistry,forthesurveyorinspectionofsailingvessels
beforeissueofsuchcertificates,fortheinspectionofsailingvessels
andforallotherpurposesofthisPartandthemannerinwhichsuch
feesmayherecovered;". 30
15. AfterPartXV oftheprincipalAct,thefollowingPartshallbe
inserted,namely:- I
'PART XVA
FISHING BOATS
435A.Saveasotherwiseprovided,thisPart appliestoevery35
Indianfishingboat.
435B.ForthepurposesofthisPart,"Indianfishingboat"means-
(a)everyfishingvessel,asdefinedinclause(12) ofsection3;
(b)everysailingvessel,whetherornotfittedwithmechani-
calmeansofpropulsion,solelyengagedinfishingforprofit;40
(c) everyboatorcraftofanyothertypeusedsolelyfor
fishingwhichtheCentralGovernmentmay,by notificationin
theOfficialGazette,specifytobeafishingboatforthepurposes
ofthissection,
whichisownedwhollybypersonstoeachofwhomanyofthedes-45
criptionsspeclfledinclause(a) orinelauso(b) orinclause(c)I
asthecasemaybe,ofsection21 appliesorwhichsatisfiessuchother
requirementsastheCentralGovernmentmay,bynotificationinthe
OfficialGazette,specify.


435C.EveryIndianfishingboatshallbe registeredunderthisObllga-
Part: .> I tionto-
. I
register.
5
ProvidedthatanyIndianfishing.boatregisteredatthecom-
mencementofthisPartunderPartV orPartXV ofthisActorany
otherJawforthetimebeinginforceinIndiashallbedeemedtohave
beenregistered'underthisPart:
10
ProvidedfurtherthateveryIndianfishingboatsodeemedto
havebeenregisteredshallbere-registeredunderthisPart within
suchperiodfromthecommencementofthisPart as theCentral
Governmentmay,bynotificationintheOfficialGazette,specify:
Providedalsothatregistrationofnon-mechanisedsailingvessels
willcommenceindifferentportson suchdatesastheCentral
Governmentmay,bynotificationintheOfficialGazette,specify.
~435D.(1) TheportsatwhichregistrationofIndianfishingboats
$hallbemadeshallbesuchportsorplacesinIndiaastheCentral
Governmentmay,bynotificationintheOfficialGazette,declareto
beportsorplacesofregistryunderthisPart.
.(2), The portorplaceatwhichanIndianfishingboatisregis-
teredfurthetimebeingunderthisPart,shallbedeemedtobeher
20 portorplaceofregistryandthe'portorplacetowhichshebelongs.
435E.The CentralGovernmentmay,bynotificationintheOfficial
Gazette,appointanofficertoberegistrarofIndianfishingboatsat
eveorsuchportorplacedeclaredasaportorplaceofr,egistryunder
sub-section(1) ofsection4.35D.
Portof
regis-
try.
Registars
ofIndian
fishing,
boats,
435F.An applicationfortheregistryofanIndianfishingboatApplica-
shallbemade- tionfor
registry.
(a)inthecaseofanIndividual,bythepersonrequiringto
beregisteredasownerorbyhisagent;
.~b)inthecaseofmorethanone.indtvidualrequiringtobe
soregistered,by oneormoreofthepersonssorequiringorby
hisortheiragentOr agents,asthecasemaybe;and
(c) inthecaseofacompanyoracooperativesocietyrequir-
ingtobesoregistered,byitsagents;
.andtheauthorityoftheagentshallbetestifiedinwriting,ifappointed
35 byanindividualunderthehandofthepersonappointinghimand,if
appointedbya companyora cooperativesocietyunderitscommon
seal.
435G. (1) The ownerofeveryIndianfishingboatrequiredto
beregisteredunderthisPartshallmake an applicationin the
prescribedformtoa registrarforthegranttohimofa certificate
ofregistryinrespect'ofthefishing.boat.
(2) The ownerofeveryIndianfishingboatinrespectofwhich
anapplicationundersub-section(1) is made,shallcausethe
tonnageofthefishingboatto be ascertainedin theprescribed
manner. ·,1 'f'I'
Certifi-
cateof
registry.


Parti.cU· 
lararelat-
inlof 
Indian 
fishiBl 
boatls to 
be paint-
ed. 
Change 
Of name 
otlndian 
flshin, 
boat. 
Special 
provision 
for 
Indian 
fishin, 
boate. 
.s 
,<3) The registrar may make such inquiry as he thinks lit with 
respect to the particulars contained in such application and shall 
enter in a register to be kept for the purpose (hereinafter referred 
to as fishing boats register) the following particulars in respect ot 
the Indian fishing boat, namely: - 5 
(a) the name of the fishing boat, the place where she was 
built and the port to which she belongs; 
(b) the rig, type and tonnage of the fishing boatj 
(c) the number assigned to the fishing boatj 
(d) the name, occupation and residence of the owner of the 10 
fishing boat; 
(e) the mortgages, if any, effected by the owner in respect 
of the fishing boat; and 
(1) such other particulars as may be prescribed. 
(4) After the particulars in respect of the Indian fishing· boat f~ 
have been entered in the fishing boats register under suh·section (3), 
the registrar shall grant to the applicant a certificate of registry in 
the prescribed form. 
(5) The owner 01 t!very Indian fishing boat shtdl pay for p.lela 
rertificate of registry a fee according to such scale as may be prel- 20 
cribed by the Central Government havin, r •• ard to the tonDap of 
the fishing boat, but in no case exceedi11& one rupee per ton Of its 
gross tonnage. 
(6) An Indian fishing boat required to be registered under thia 
Part but not so registered may be det~ined by a proper officer until 25 
the owner, skipper, tindal or other person in charge of the fishing 
boat produces a certificate of registry in respect of the fishing boat. 
435H. The owner of every Indian fishing boat so registerea shall, 
before commissioning the fishing boat into service, paint or cause to 
be painted permanently in the prescribed manner on some conapi- 30 
cuous part of the fishing boat, the name by wMch the fishing boat 
has been registered, the num ber assigned to the fishing boat by the 
registrar and the port or place to which she belongs, and shaU take 
all steps to ensure that the fishing boat remains painted a6 required 
by this section. 
435 I. A change shall not be made in the name of aD Indian 
fishing boat registered under this Part except in accordance with 
rules made in this behalf. 
35 
435J. Every Indian fishing boat registered under this Part shall 
corry on board such life saving appliances and fire appUances as are ,0 
.prescribed by rules made under Ilection~ 288, 289 and 457 or under 
any other provision of this Act, subject to such ~emptwns as mal 
be Il*ially granted in reepect of such fts~ boat. , .-

5 
.--.. ---- 19 , ........ '_'. 
4a:;K. (I) No Indian fishing boat shall p.ly or proceed to sea 
unless there is in force in respect of that fishing boat a certificate 
Gf inspection granted under this Part. 
(2) A certificate of insp'ection in rec;pect of an Indian fishing 
boat shall speclfy-
(a) the name and tonnage of the fishing boat; 
(b) the name of skipper, tinda! or other person in charge ot 
the fishing' boat; 
(C) the maximum number of members of crew the fishing 
10 boat is certified to carry; 
(d) the safety equlpments and appliances the fishing boat is 
required to carry or. board; 
(e) such other matters as the Central Government may think 
fit to specify, 
15 and shall oontain a statement to the effect that her hull, rigging, 
equipment and machinery where fitted are in good conditi'on. 
(3) Every certificate of inspection shall be in force from the 
date of issue 'for a period at one year or for streh shorter period as 
may be specified 1herein: 
20 Provided that when an Indian fishing boat is at sea at the time 
go 
35 
-
45 
of expiry of the certificate, the certificate shall continue to be valid 
until her first arrival at a port or place in India. 
435L. (1) Wilefe at any time subsequent to the issue of a certi-
ficate of inspectioll in respect of an Indian fishing boat, the registrar 
has reason to believe that the fiGhing boat is not fit to proceed to 
sea, he may. after giving the owner an opportunity of making a 
representation, cancel slIch certifica.te. 
(2) Where at any time subsequent to the issue of a certificate 
of inspection 'an Indian fishing boat has undergone material altera-
tion or has met with accident or, where the certificate of inspection 
hns been cancelled ~nder S'Ub-section (1) and the application I:;; 
made for the re-ilSsue of such certificate or for the grant of a fresh 
certificate. the registrar may, before re-issuing the certificate or 
issuing a fresh certificate, as the case may be, cause such fishing 
boat to be inspected; and if the authority inspecting the fishing boat 
reports that she is not fit to proceed to sea or that her hull, rig$,ng 
or eqUipment are dcf('ctive such certificate shall not be re-issued or 
i~ued until the fishing boat is, in the opinion of such authority, fit 
to proceed to sea or the defect is rectified to the satisfaction of that 
authority. 
435M. (1) Any surveyor appointed under section 9, any registrar 
of: Indian fishing- boats appointed under section 435E or any other 
oftker appointed by the Central Government in this behalf by noti-
fication in the Official Gazette may at any reasonable time inspect 
any Indian Ming boat for the purpose Cit seeing that she is properly 
provided with safety equipments and appliances in conformity with 
the rules referred to in section 435J. 
(2) If the surveyor, or, as the caSe may be, the registrar or other 
oMcer appoint~d under sub-section (1) find~ that the Indian fisning 
Certift-
cateof 
inspec-
tion. 
Cancella-
tion, re_ 
issue, etc., 
of certifi-
cate of 
inspec-
tion.. 
Inspec_ 
tion of 
safety 
equip-
mente 
and 
appli-
ances. 

Regist-
ration of 
altera-
tion. 
Trans-
fer of 
registry. 
Closure 
of regill-
try. 
ReStric-
tion on 
trans-
fer of 
Indian 
flshiDW 
boata. 
Mort-
gage of 
Indian 
fiahing 
boats. 
80 
boat is not provided with the aforesaid equipments and appliances, he 
shall give to the owner, skipper or tindal or any other person in charge 
of the fishing boat notice in writing pointing out the deficiency and 
also what in his opinion is requisite to remedy the said defieiency. 
(3) No Indian fishing boat served with a notice under sub-sectloD 5 
(2) shall proceed to sea 'Until it obtains a certificate signed by the 
surveyor, registrar or other officer appointed under sub-section (1) 
to the effect that it is properly provided with safety equipment!! and 
appliances in conformity with the aforesaid rules. ' 
435N. When an Indian fishing boat is SO altered as not to 10 
correspond with the particulars relating to her enterea in the certi-
ficate of registry, the owner of such fishing boat shall make a report 
of such alterations to the registrar of the port or place where the fishing 
boat is registeMd, and the registrar shall either cause the alterations 
to be registered, or direct that the fishing boat may be registered 15 
anew, in accordance with such rules as may be made in this behalf. 
4350. The registry of an Indian fishing boat may be transferred 
from one port or place to another port or place in India on the 
application of the owner of the fishing boat, in accordance with such 
rules as may be made in this behalf. ~o 
435P. If an Indian fishing boat is lost, destroyed or renderp.d 
permanently unfit for service, the owner of such fishing boat shall, 
with the least possible delay, report the fact to the registrar of the 
port or place where the fishing boat is registered and also fOrward 
to him certificate of regi~try in respect df the fishing ooat; and there- ~5 
upon the registrar shan have the registry of the fishiilg boat dosed. 
435Q. No person shall transfer or acquire any Indian fishing boat 
registered under this Part or any interest therein without the previ-
ous approval of the Central Government~ and any transaction effect-
ed in contravention of this section shall be void and unenforceable. 30 
435R. (1) Every mortgage of an Indian fishing boat or any 
interest therein effected after the date on which this Part comes into 
force shaH be registered with the registrar. 
(2) Every mortgage of an Indian fishing boat or any interest 
therein effected before the date on which this Part comes into force 35 
shall, if subsisting on that date, be registered with the reglstr~ 
within three months from that date. 
(3) The registrar shan enter every such mortgage in the fishing 
boats register in the order in which it is registered with him. 
(4) If there are more mortgages than one recorded in ft'spect 40 
of the same Indian fishing boat or interest therein, the mortgages 
shall, notwithstanding any express, implied or constructive notice, 
have priority according to the date on which each mortgage ts regis-
tered with the registrar and not according to the date of each mort· 
gage itself: 45 
Provided that nothing contained in thi~ sub-section shall affect 
the relative priorities as they existed immediately before the date 

5 
10 
20 
35 
~""'-." 
II • 
.~;; , . 
on which this Part comes into force as between mortgages of the l8llle 
fishing boat or interest therein effected before such date which are 
registered in aoccordance with the provisions of sub-sectlon (2). 
4358. (1) No person shall use or attempt to use the certificate 
of registry or the certificate of inspection granted in respect ot an 
Indian fishing boat for any purpose other than the lawful operation 
'of that fishing boat. 
(2) No person shall use or attempt to use for the operation of an 
Indian fishing boat, a certificate of registry or a certificate of in.qpec-
tion not granted in respect of that fishing boat. 
(3) No person who has in his possession or under his control 
the certificate of registry or the certificate of inspection of an Indian 
ftshing boat shall refuse or omit without reasonable cause, to deliver 
such certificate on demand to the owner of the fishing boat. 
43ST. (1) Every owner, skipper, tindal or other person in' chuge 
of a mechanised Indian fishing hoat of 25 registered tons and above 
sball maintain or cause to be maintBJined in the prescribed form a 
statement of the crew of the fishing boat containing the following 
particulars with respect to each member thereof, namely:-
(a)- his name; 
(lbr toe wages payable to him; 
(c) the names and addresses of his next-of-kin; 
(d)" ilie date of commencement of his employment; and 
(e) such other particulars as may be prescribed: 
Provided that the Central Government mav. if it is of opinioB 
that at is necessarv or expedient so to do. and for reasons to be re-
corded in writinlt, ex~rnpt. bv e-eneral or special order, any Tnaian 
fishing boat or claS!; of Indian fishing boats from the provisions of this 
su D-section. ' - ......... 
(2) Every change in the crew ot the Indian fishing boat shall be 
entered in the statement under sub-section (1)'. 
(3)' A copy of such statement and of every change entered 
therein shall be communicated as soon as possible to the registrar 
of the port or place of rel!islrv of fh;> InoiAn fishiM boat concerned. 
435U. (1) The Central Government may make rules to carry out 
the provi9lons of this Part. 
(2)" In particular, and without prejudice to t~e generality of the 
fore~oing POWPf, such rules may provide for all or any of the 
followinlt matters. namely:- ' 
40 (a) the form in which applications for certificates of regis-
45 
try shall be made and the particulars which such Applications 
should contain; 
(b) the mannE'r in which tonnage of an Indian fishing boat 
!;hall be R'IcertpineC'1: 
(d t.he form in which fi~hin.!.( boat.s register sh~Il_?~:_~~i.~: 
tafned; 
J'r&ud~ 
I_tUM 
of ctrt1-
ftc, .. Of 
reJ11tr7 
or certf1l. 
cat. 0' iupec-
ticm, etc., 
pfohl-
blWd. 
state.-
ment re-
IatiDito 
crew of 
IDdiaD 
flshiB, 
boat ,~ 
to be 
ma!JL-
ta1ned. 

Appli-
cation 
to 
Indian 
fl8hln, 
boat, 
ot other 
provi-
~on. 
re1&~ 
,.:f.\o 
pl. 
FiJbe'ry 
data .. 1e' 
be fund. 
shed by 
Ini:1ian---
ftsbln. 
boab. 
Power 
to 
exempt. 
I, ... -, 
(d) the forms in which certificates of registl')'l and certi-
ficates o'f inspection may be issued; 
(e') the fees which may be levied for the issue or re-issue 
of eertificates of re,istry or certificates of inspection and for all 
oth&tr purposes of this Part; 
<I> the manner in which the name, number asslped to the 
Indian fishing boat and name of the port or place to which she 
belongs shall be painted; 
5 
(g) the manner in which any change may be made in the 
name of an Indian fishing boatj 10 
(h) any exemption from the requirements relating to car-
riage of safety equipment and appliances by an Indian fishing 
boat that may be specially granted under section 435J in respect 
of such fishing boat: 
(i) the manner in which alterations in Indian fishing boats 15 
shall be reported and applications for the registry of such 
alterations in the certificates of registry of Indian fishing boats 
shall be made, the endorsement of the particulars of altera-
tions on the certificates of registry, the grant of provisional 
certificates in cases where Indian fishing boats are directed to 20 
be registered anew, 'caees in which Indian fishing boats shall be 
registered anew, the period for which provisional certificates 
shall be valid and all other matters ancillary to the registry of 
alterations; 
(j) the manner in which registry of an Indian fishing boat 25 
may be transferred from one port or pla(!e in India to another 
port or place in India; 
(k) the form in which statement of members of crew of an 
Indian fishing boat may be maintained; 
(I) any other matter which has to be or may be prescribed. 30 
435V. The Central Government may, by notification in the 
Ofticial Gazette, direct that any provisions of this Act other than 
those contained in this Part which do not expressly apply to Indian 
fishing boats shall also apply to Indian fishing boats subject to such 
.onditions, exceptions and modifications as may be specified in 35 
the notification. 
435W. The Central Government may. by notification in' the 
Official Gazette, require every Iridian fishing boat or any spedfled 
class uf Indian fishing boats to furnish such fishery data to the nail-
tra}' in such form and at such periodical intervals as may be 40 
specified in that notification, 
435X. Notwithstanding anything conta'ined in this Part, the 
Central Government may, by order in writing, and upon such condi-
tions as it may think fit to impose, exempt any Indian fishing boat 
or class of Indian fishing boats Or skipper, tindal or member of 45 
~rew of such fishing boat -or class of fishing boats from any 

5 
specified requirement contained in or prescribed by any rules made 
in pursuance of any provision of this Part or ftom any other require-
ment of this Act extended to Indian fishing boats or to personnel 
employed on Indian fishing boats by a notification issued under 
.ection -taf)V, if it is satisfied that the requirement is substantially 
complied with or the compliance with the requirement may be 
impracticable or 'unreasonable in the circumstances attending the 
case.', 
16. In section 436 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), in the 
10 Table,-
15 
20 
go 
-35 
45 
(i) against Serial Number 100, in the fourth column, for the words 
"one thousand rupees", the words "five thousand rupees" shall be 
substituted; 
(ii) for Serial Numbers 115B, 115C and 115D and the entries rela-
ting thereto, the following shall be substituted, namely:-
-_.,-------_.- ._-----_.-- - ------
"JI5B~ (a) Ifoiloroily mixture 
is discharged in con-
travention of lub-sec-
tion (1) of sec.tion 
3S6C--
(i) where such discharge 
is made from an 
Indian tanker any-
where into the lea; 
(ii) where such discharge 
is made from a 
foreign tankeJ any-
where within the 
coastal waters of 
India. 
(b) If oil or oily mixture 
js discharged in cOn-
travention of sub-
lection (2) of ~ection 
356C-
(i) where such dischal'ge 
is made by all In-
dian ship 'other than 
a tankeI' anywhere 
into the sea; 
(ii) where sudl discharge 
is made by a fore-
ign ship other than 
a tanker an}'W~re 
within 'the coastal 
wa~J'f"of India. 
3 4 
3560(1) ~ The master of the t3nker shall be 
liable to fine which may extend 
to five lakh rupees. 
3560(1) The master of the, tanker, or jf 
the tanker is unmarmed, the 
person in charge of its o~ration 
shall be liable to fine which may 
extend to five lakh rupeeI. 
356(2) The master of the ship shaH be 
liable to fine which may extend 
to five lakh rupees. 
356C(2) The master, or if the ship iJ 
wunanned, the pewn jn charge 
of its operation shall be liable 
to fine which rna y extend to five 
lakh rupee~, 
Amend-
mentof 
sectlon 
438, 

... 
----.-.--" -------.. --------.-..-.~ .. 
II~Q 
115D 
(c) ,If oil or oily mixture is 
discharged in contra-
vention of liuo-section 
(3) of section 3S6C. 
It an Indian !Ihip is not 
fitted with equip-
ment prescribed undl"r 
section 3S6E. 
(i) If the muter of all In-
dian ta.nker or other 
Indian sltip fails to 
maintain an oil re-
cord b~k &'1 required 
by section 356F or 
contravenes any rult 
m~de under tha t 
section; 2 
(ii) Ir any p~rso.l wilfully 
d':ltroys or mutilates 
or render3 illegib~e 01' 
prevents the ma.king 
of, any entr~' in the 
oil record book or 
makes 01 causes to be 
made a fz.lse entry in 
such book in contra-
vention of any rule 
made under 'section 
356F· 
J 15B {(master ot any ship refuses 
to certify copy of any 
entry in the oil record 
book to be a true copy 
ofsuch entry as required 
under lub-seetion (2) of 
section 3S6G. . 
II SF If any person fails to take 
action a'l reg uired by a 
notice se~d on him 
under sub.section (1) 01' 
section 356J. 
lIsG It owner of au yIn dian ship, 
tug, barge or any other 
equipment fails to com-
ply with any order 
issued under sub-section 
(1) of secnon 356L. 
3 
3jliF 
3S6G(2) 
4 
The master of the off-shore instal-
lation if it be a mobile craft on 
the owner, operator, lessee or 
licensee of an off-shore,in&tal1ation 
of any other type shall be liable 
to fine which may extend to 
five Jakh t'lI)K'C'S. 
5 
Tne owner, ma~cr or agent oitthe 
Indian ship shall be liable to fine 
which may exteud to ten thou. 10 
sand rupees. 
Toe m"ter of tht': Indian tanker 01 
oth:r Indian ship shall be liable 
to fhe waich m'iyextend to five 
thouund rupees. 
The offender shall be liable to 
r>!n~\t1 01 im:>risonment wh ich 
IQOlyextend to six months or fine 
which may extend to ten thou-
sand rupee~ or hoth. 
The master of the ship shall be 
liable to fine which may extend 
to one thousand rupees. 
20 
35 
The offender shall be liable to 
'l'enalty of imprislllUllent which 40 
may extend to six months or fine 
which may extend to ten lakh 
rupees or both· 
Tile offender shall be liable to 45 
penalty of imprisonment which 
may extend to six months or fine 
which may extend to one lakh 
rupees, or both and if the offence 
is a continuing one the offender 50 
.----------------------$-.. -.~j-----~~-------------------

5 
15 
3 
----------------------------------------------------------
shall· be liable to a further fine 
which may e~tend to ten thou-
!WJdrupee.perday{or every day 
during which the offence conti-
nues after conviction," ; 
---------------------------
(;it) after Serial Number 137 and the entries relating thereto, the 
follOWiDg shall be h~serted, namely:-
2 
If aA Indian fishing boat 
required to be reptered 
undu IleCtlon 4-!SOja not 
registered in acoOrdulce 
wich the Provisions of 
that~dion. 
If the owner of an Indian 
fiIbiq boat faih to com-
pl¥ with the pr,ovicioJ11 £If 
section -4-35H. 
The owner shall be liabJe to 
fine which may extend to (ne 
thowand rupees. 
The owner shall be liable to fine 
which may extend to two hund-
r~d rupees. 
.10 137C If provisions ofsection 01-351 4351 
are contraven~d. 
The own~r shall be liable to 
fine which may txt("r.d to two 
hundred rupees. 
go 
35 
J 37D IfJlr~viliu.rul of sectio1l435J 435J 
are contravened. 
1~7E If proviaionsof section 43SK ... 35K 
are COI\tra vened. 
1!l7F If provisions of section 4-35M 
433M are contravf'm"d. 
Theownr-r, skipper, tindal or any 
other person in charge of the 
Jndian fishing bC'at shall be 
liabJe to fine which may r-x-
'end to one thou~and rupe~s 
and in addition to fine which 
may exttJld to fifty l'up~e" fol' 
every day during which the 
offence ('ontinu~s aft~r convic-
tion. 
Th('! owner, skipper, tindal or any 
odler person in charge of the 
Indian fishing boat shall b~ 
liable to fine which may ex-
tend to one thousand J upees 
and in addition to fine which 
may extend to fifty rupees for 
every day during which the 
offence continues after convic-
tion. 
The owner shall be liable to fine 
which may extend to one thou-
land ruj1ees and in addition to 
fine which may ext~nd to fifty 
rupeea for every day during which 
the offence eontinue~ after 
conviction. 

Amend-
menta rela-
ting to 
referen-
Ces to 
Act o1!l6t)!8 
!.6 
--------
2 3 4 
--- _._---_. - -
137G Ifpl'OvWons ofsectio1l435N 43SN The owner shall be liable to~ 
arr conttaven~d. fine which may extend to two 1 
hundred rutees and in addition • 
to fine w ich may extend to 5 twenty rupees for every day 
duriDg which the offence con-
tinue! after conviction. 
137H 11 proviaiona of lIection 43SP 43SP The owner shall be liable to fine 
are contravened. which may extend to two hund- 10 
N'd rupres. 
1371 If any pel'lQll oontravenes 43SQ The offender shall be liable to a 
the provisiODll of section fine which may extend to five 
43SQ· hundred rupees. 
I37J If any person contravenes 4358 The offender shall be liable to 15 the provisions of !!ection imprisonment which u.y ex-
4358. tend to three months or fiDe 
which may extend to two hund-
red rupees, Or both. 
137K If proviaions of section 4351' .SST The owner, skipper, tindal or any 20 are contravened. other penan in charge or the 
Indian fishing boat abaIl be 
liable to fiDe which may ex-
tend to two hundred rupees.". 
17. The amendments directed in the Schedule (being amendments for 25 
substituting for the references in the principal Act to the provisions of, 
and authorities under, the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898, references 
to the corresponng provisions of, and authorities under, the Code ot 
Criminal Procedure. 1973) shall be made in the principal Act. 
5 of 1811. 
~oflm. 

THE SCHEDULE 
(See section 17) 
AMENDMENTS TO THE MERCHANT SHIPPING Ac:rt. 1958 
(44 OF 1958) 
5 1. In section 35 of the principal Act, in sub-section (3), for the words 
"any magistrate of the first class" and "the magistrate", the words "any 
Judicial Magistrate of the first class or any Metropolitan Magistrate, 8S 
the case may be," and "the said Magistrate" shall, respectively, be substi-
tuted. 
10 2. In section 132 of the principal Act, in sub-section (3), for the words 
"a magistrate", the words "a Judicial Mag:Strate of the first class, or a 
Metropolitan Magistrate, as the case may be," shall be substituted. 
15 
3. In section 145 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1) ,-
(a) for the words "any magistrate", the words "any Judicial 
Magistrate of the first class or any Metropolitan Mag:strate, as the 
case may be," shall be substituted; 
(b) for the words "the magistrate" at both the places where 
they occur, the words "such Magistrate" shall be substituted. 
4. In section 146 of the principal Act, in clause (see), for the word 
20 "a magistrate", the words "a Judicial Magistrate of the first class or a 
Metropolitan Magistrate, as the case may be," shall be substituted. 
5. In section 184 of the principal Act, for the words "a magistrate" 
at both the places where they occur, the words "a Judicial Magistrate of 
the first class or a Metropolitan Magistrate, as the case may be," shaH 
115 be substituted. 
6. In section 187 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), for the words 
"a magistrate", the words "a Judicial Magistrate of the first class or a 
Metropolitan Magistrate, as the case may be," shall be substituted. 
7. In section 189 of the principal Act, for the words "a magistrate", 
30 the words "a Judicial Magistrate of the first class Or a Metropolitan 
Magistrate, as the case may be," shall be substituted. 
8. In section 233 of the prinCipal Act, in sub-section (3), for the words 
"nearest magistrate", the words "nearest Judicial Magistrate of the first 
class Or the Metropolitan Magistrate, as the case may be", shall be substl-
35 tuted. 
9. In section 279 of the principal Act, in sub-section (4), for th~ 
words "presidency magistrate or a magistrate of the fiNt class", the 
words "Metropolitan Magistrate or a Judicial Magistrate of the first 
class" shall be substituted. 

10. In section 282 of the principal Act, in clause (8), for the word 
"magistrates", the words "Metropolitan Magistrates or Judicial Magis-
trates of the first class, as the case may be," shall be substituted. 
11. In section 361 of the principal Act, for the words "A magistrate of 
the first class" and "presidency magistrate", the words "A Judicial Magis- 5 
trate of the first class" and "Metropolitan Magistrate" shall, respectively, 
be substituted. ' 
12. In section 372 of the principal Act,-
(a) in sub-section (1), for the words "magistrate of the first 
class" and "presidency magistrate", the words "Judicial Magistrate 10 
of the first class" and "Metropolitan Magistrate" shall, respectively, 
be substituted; 
(b) in sub-section (3), for the word "magistrate", the words 
"Judicial Magistrate of the first class or Metropolitan Magistrate, as 
the case may be," shall be substituted; '5 
(c) in sub·section (4), for the word "magistrate", the words 
"Judicial Magistrate of the first class or Metropolitan Magistrate, 
as the case may be/' shall be substituted. 
13. In section 383 of the principal Act, in sub-section (Z), for the 
words "presidency magistrate, magistrate of the first class", the words 20 
"Metropolitan Magistrate, Judicial Magistrate of the first class" shall be 
substituted. 
14. In section 401 of the principal Act, for the word "magistrate", the 
words "Judicial Magistrate of the first class or Metropolitan Magistrate, 
as the case may be," shall be substituted. 25 
15. In section 402 or the principal Act,-
(4) in sub-section (4), in clause (4), for the word "magistrate", 
the words "Judicial Magistrate of the first class or a Metropolitan 
Magistrate, as the case may be," shall be substituted; 
(b) in sub-section (5), for the words "the magistrate or the High 30 
Court, as the case may be," and "the magistrate", the words "the 
JUdicial Magistrate of the first class or the Metropolitan Magistrate 
or the High Court, as the case may be," and "such magistrate" shall, 
respectively, be substituted; 
(c) in sub-section (6), for the words "a magistrate" and "the 35 
magistrate", wherever they occur, the words "a Judicial Magistrate 
of the first class or a Metropolitan Magistrate" and "such magistrate" 
shall, respectively, be substituted. 
16. In section 439 of the principal Act, for the words "presidency 
magistrate or a magistrate of the first class", the words "MetropoUtan 40 
Magistrate or a Judicial Magistrate of the first class" shall be suhBtituted 
17. In section 440 of the principal Act,-
(4) for the words and figures "section 32 of the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 189S", the words and figures l'sectioD 29 of the Code of 5 of 1888, 
Criminal Procedure, 19'73" shall be substituted; 45 2 of 1974. 

10 
29 
(b) tor the words "presidency magistrate or a magiJtrate. of the 
firtt c1aa.", the words "Metropolitan Magistrate or a Judicial ¥Iii'. 
trate of the first class" shall be substituted. 
18. In section 442 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1),-
(a) for the words "tourt or magistrate", the warde "court or 
Judicial Magistrate of the first class or Metropolitan Magistrate" 
shall be substituted; 
(b) for the words "court, magistrate", the words "court or 
Judicial Magistrate of the first class or Metropolitan Magiatrate" .hall 
be substituted; 
(c) for the words .. , justice or magistrate", the words "or juatice 
or Judicial Magistrate of the first class' or Metropolitan Magistrate" 
shall be substituted; 
(d) for the words "justice, magistrate", the words "justice or 
Judicial Magistrate of the first class or Metropolitan Magistrate" 
.hall be substituted. 
19. In section 445 of the principal Act,-
(a) in sub-section (1), for the words "court, magistrate" ~d 
"a magistrate", the words "court or Judicial Magistrate of the flrIt 
20 class or Metropolitan Magistrate" and "such a magistrate" shall, res-
pectively, be substituted; 
(b) in sub-section (2), for the words "court, magij;trate or other 
officer" and "court, magistrate, officer", the words "court or Judicial 
Magistrate of the first class or Metropolitan Magistrate or other 
25 officer" and "court or Judicial Magistrate of the firat daaa or Metro-
politan Magistrate or officer" shall, reepectively, be substituted. 
20. In section 447 of the principal Act, for the words "A magi$trate", 
the words "A Judicial Magistrate of the first class or a Metropolitan 
Magistrate, a. the ease may be," shall be substituted. . 

" - STAtEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The amendments proposed in this Bill to the Merchant Shipping Act, 
1958, fall, from the point of view of their objects and reasons, into difte-
rent categories. The various categories of amendments and the objects 
and reasons therefor are dealt with in the following paragraphs:-
(1) Establishing a regime of comp,ensation for oil potbution damage 
The International Convention on Civil Liability for Oil Pollution 
Damage, 1969 (CLC) establishes an entirely new regime of compensation 
anl'lliability on the owners of the ship from which polluting oil escaped 
or was discharged. The provisions of the Convention do not cast any 
burden direct or indirect on a contracting State either in its capacity 
as a flag State or a State importing or exporting oil. In order to give 
effect to the substantive provisions of this Convention, a new Part IS 
is being inserted. This will enable India to exercise jurisdiction on 
foreign ships in our coastal waters ('V'idJe clause 10 of the Bill). 
(2) Giving effect to the amendments to the Interna~1 Convention for 
the Prevention of Pollution of Sea by Oil, 1954. 
The International Convention for the Prevention of Pollution of the 
Sea by Oil, 1954, has already been ratified by India and effect to the 
provisions contained in the saici Convention have already been given 
effect to by Part XIA of the Act. For giving effect to the amendments 
to the Convention of 1954, which relate to the ban of discharge of on or 
oily mixture anywhere into the sea except at the instantaneous rate of 
discharge, it is proposed to substitute the existing Part XIA of the Act 
by 0 new Part (vide clause 11 of the Bill). 
(3) Levy of poLlution ces~ 
The amendments prctJosed for controlling deliberate discharge and 
containing accidental escape of oil into the sea put a heavy financial 
responsibility on the Central Government as it has to provide, among 
others, adequate facilities for reception of oil residues at the ports. These 
measures would involve an expenditure which is likely to run into crores 
of ru;>ees. This expenciiture is proposed to be re·imbursed to the 
Government by levying pollution cess on all ships--Indian or foreign-
which carry oil as cargo when they call on Indian ports. It is proposed 
to give an enabling power to the Central Government to levy cess from 
a date to be notified by that Government (vide dause ll-section 356M). 
(4) Investing powers in the Cent1'al Government to protect interests 
of Indian shripping from undue foreign intervention 
Shipping Conferences are not generally subject to any Governmental 
control and it is unusual for States to exercise control over International 
shipping. However, certain maritime countries have adopted a different 
attitude and asked certai,n Indian shift>ping companies to produce docu-
ments and recorns held by them in India. With a view to protecting 
Indian shipping owners from such arbitrary measures of foreign States 
violating the jurisdiction belonging to us, it is proposed to include a 
provision which would enable the Central Government to protect the 
interests of the Indian companies, ms-a·1'is undue intervention by foreign 
countries (t1ide clause 12). 

,. " ....... -~ '. J 
(5) Providing for registra.tion and control of Indian fishing boat" 
ClB defined in new section 435B 
t 
J 
The Bill seeks to insert a new Part XV A to provide for registration 
and control of Indian fishing boats as defined in new section 435B. This 
is being done to give effect to the recommendations of the Fisheries 
Enquiry Committee. Under the proposerl amendment it will be obliga-
tory for every owner of an Indian fishing boat to get the same registered 
at any port or place of registry notified by the Central Government. 
(6) Enhancing the penalties provided in section 436 Of the Act 
It is felt that the penalties at present prescribed [or the contraven-
tion of the provisions of section 313 of the Act do not seem to have acted 
8S a deterrent. It is, therefore, proposed to enhance the adtUtional fine 
prescribed against Serial No. 100 in the Table below section 436(2) from 
RI. 1,000/- to Rs. 5,000/-. Also, penalties for the contravention of 
provisions of Part XIA are being enhanced for major pollution 'offences 
to the extent of Rs. 10 lakhs and for minor pollution offences to the extent 
of Rs. 10 thousand. Penalties for contravention of the provisions of new 
Part 'XV A, relating to fishing boats, which are akin to sailing vessels, are 
also being provided (1,ide clause 16 of the Bill). 
(7) Empowering the Central Government to make ru.Ze.! with respect to 
leVl/ing fees far various se?'Vices rendered by su.rveyors to sMpptng 
industry 
The Central Government provides services of a number of surveyors 
and senior oftlcers to the s~ing industry. With the adoption of new 
International Conventions anrl Protocols by the International Community 
on maritime matters, particularly in the fiel'd of safety of life and property 
at sea, the protection of maritime environment and training and certift-
cation of ship's officers and crew, the workload on the Mercantile 
Marine Department, which is functioning under the Director-General of 
Shipping, has increased considerably. This has resulted in the increase 
of wage bill of technical staff. In order to meet this expenditure in part, 
the Central Government is being given the power to make rules for 
levying fees for the services rendered by the Department to the industry. 
For this purpose it is proposed to amend sections 74. 87, 175, 282, 344 anri 
435 of the Act. 
(8) Amendment of section 2 of the Act to a.pply the Act to all vessels 
. inclu.ding scailing vessels and Indian fishing boats 
The existing section 2 does not clearly show that the Act would .,.,ly 
to all vessels including sailing vessels and Indian fishing boats. In order 
to remove this lacuna, it is proposed to amend section 2. 
(9) InCidentally, this opportunity is availed of to replace the references 
to the Code of Criminal Procetiure. 1898 and the fUnctionaries thereunder 
by references to the Code of Criminal Procedure. 1973 and the functionaries 
thereunder (1,ide clause ] 7 of the Bill-Schedule). 
The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects. 
VEERENDRA PATIL. 
Nzw DELHI; 
The 24th July, 1982. 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Clauses 6, 6, 7~ 8, 9 and 14 f1 the Bill amend sections 7'1, 87; 175; 2U:~ 
and 435 of the Merehant Shlpping Act, 1958, to enable the Central 
Government to levy fees for certain matters ~ified in those provillons. 
AU these provlaions would result in the increase of the wage bill ot the 
tedmical atai! of the Mercantile Marine Department. The Bill thus, 
if 'enacted, would necessitate additional expenditure on the colledion of 
the !laid fees which cannot be possibly estimated at present. 
2. Clause 11 of the Bill propoies to substitute Part XlA of the Act, 
consisting of sections 3SUA'to 356-0. Section 356-1 of the Bill makes a 
provision for providing oil reception facillties at certain ports 
which may be spedf\ed by the Central Government by notifteation 
in the Official Gazette. Section 356K read with section 356L(2) 
of the Bill enables the Central Government to take certain measures 
for preventing or containing oil pollution. Section 356M of the 
BiU enables the Central Government to levy a cess to be called the Oil 
Pollution Cess at such rate not exceeding fifty paise as the Cmtral 
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, fix. The' cess 
shall be collected by such officers and in such manner as the Central 
Government may prescribed· in this behalf. Section 356-0 (2) (d) enables 
the Central Government to levy fees for matters specified therein. 
Clause 15 of the Bill praposes to insert Part XV A in the Act, 
consisting of sections 435A to 435X. Section 435E enables the Central 
Government to appoint Registrars of Indian fishing boats at certain ports 
or places. Section 435G(5) enables the Central Government to levy 
fee for the grant of certificate under that section. Section 4S5U (2) (e) 
enables the Central Government to levy fees for the issue or re-issue ot 
certi~cates of registry or certificates of inspection and for certain other 
purposes of Part XV A Section ~lrW requires every Indian fishing boat 
or any s;,Jecified class of the Indian fishing boats to furnish any luch 
fishery data to the Registrar in such form anci. at such periodical intervals 
as may be specified by notification. 
The above provisions of the Bill would involve some expenditure in 
their implementation. It is, however, 'difficult to estimate the said 
expenditure at this stage. However all the expenditure is proposed to 
be met out. of the fees or, as the cast:: may be, cess collected under the 
aforesaid provisions. 
S. The Bill does not involve any other expenditure, whether of ~ 
recurring or non-Tecurring nature. 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
The Merchant Shipping Act, 1958 is being amended, inter alia, to give 
effect to certain International Conventions, namely, the International 
Convention on Civil Liability for Oil Pollution Damage, 1969 (CLC) and 
amendments to the International Convention for the Pl'evention of 
Pollution of the Sea by Oil, 1954. 
2. The Government through its Mercantile Marine Department 
proviri.es the services of surveyors and senior officers to the .hipping 
iudllstry. With the adoption of new International Conventions and Proto-
cols by the International Community on marine matters, particularly 
in the field of safety of life and property at sea, protection of marine 
environment and training and certification of ship's officers and crew, 
the workload on the Department has increased considerably and the wage 
bill of technica~ staff has consequently increased. In order to recover 
the expenditure in oart, it is proposed to include provisions in the respec-
tive Parts of the Act enabling the Government to make rules for levying 
fees for the services renclered by the Department to the shipping industry. 
Sillie the rule making provisions in respect of various Parts is scattered, 
it Is proposed to amend sections 74, 87, 175, 282, 344 and 435 of the Act. 
A new Part XB is being inserted and section 352R thereof empowers the 
Central Government to charge fee for issue of certain certificates. The 
existing Part XIA is being substituted by a new Part. In the new Part so 
substituted, section 356-0 empowers the Central Government to make 
rules and it includes power to levy fee as has been done in the aforemen-
tioned sections. Similar power is also being given under section 485U 
In the new Part xvA which deals with the registration of Indian fishing 
hoats and other matters connected therewith. 
3. Thus, the matters in respect of which rules may be mane under new 
sections 352R. 356-0, 435U and the amended sections 74, 87, 175, 282, 344 
and 435 are matters of detail or procedure. The delegation of legislative 
power is, therefore, of a normal character. 
33 
'to , .•. ~:.. 

ANNEXURE 
E)(l'RNCTS FROM nu: MERCHANT SHIPPING Ac:r, 1958 
(44 OF 1958) 
• • • • • 
Z. (1) Unl... otherWise expressly provided, the provisions of tilts Act 
1tJG.cb apply to shiPi which are registered in India or which in tetml of ttdI 
Act are required to be so registered shall so apply 1Wlerever the ahtps 
may be. 
Applica-
tion of 
Act. 
(2) Unless otherwise expressly provided, the pr"VisioDIJ of. tbta Act 
which apply to alrlps other than those referred to in sUb-section (1) shall 
10 apply only while any such ship is within India, inc1.udlng the teni-
tonal waters thereof. 
S. In thi. Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
• • • • • 
(31) "Safety Convention" means the Convention for the &fety 
of Life at Sea signed in London on the 17th day of .Tune, 1960, as 
amended from time to time; 
• • • • • 
22. (1) Every indian ship, unless it is a ship which does not ~d 
fttte~ tons net and is employed solely in navigation on the coasts of 
India, shall be registered under this Act. 
(2) No ship required by sub-section (1) to be registered shall be 
reeGgnised as an Indian ship unless she has been registered under this 
Act: ' 
Provided that any ship registered at the commencement of this Act at 
any .port in India under any enadment repealed by this Act, slia1l be 
deemed to have been registered under this Act and shall be recognised 
as an Indian ship. 
(3) A ship required by this Act to be registered may be detained until 
the master of the ship, if so required, produces a certificate of registry in 
r-espect of the ship . 
• • ... ... 
35. (1) ... ... • • • 
(3) Any person refusing or omitting to deliver the certificate as required 
by sub-section (2), may, by order, be summoned by any magistrate of the 
fIrIt class to appear before hlm and to be examined touching such refusal; 
aDd if the person is proved to have absconded so that the order of such 
malfstrate eannot be served on bim, or if he persists in not delivering up 
the certJ1icate, the rna,gistrate shall certify the fact, and the same proceed-
ings may then be taken as in the case of a certificate mislaid lost or . ' destroyed, or as near thereto as circumstances pennit . 
• •• • • • 
Defini-
tions . 
obligation 
to re-
gister. 
Custocly 
and 
use of ~, 
certi-
ftcate. 

PoWet'to 
make 
l'uJ!sin 
rlM~tof 
m.at~ers 
in 1ms 
Part. 
Power to 
make 
rules as 
to grant, 
cancella-
tion or 
suspen lo 
sion of 
certiftcates 
o'f.com-
petency. 
Decision 
ofques-
tions by 
shipping 
masters'. 
Summary 
proceed-
i~tor 
wages. 
ftestric-
tiona on 
suits for 
w,te •. 
Accom-
modat.ion 
for 
aelamen. 
35 
74. (1) • '" '" '" '" 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generaUty of the 
foregoing power, such rules may provide for' all or any 01 the foUowin, 
matters, namely:-
'" * * * '" 
(;) the fees that may be levied under this Part and the manner 
in which such fees shall be collected; 
'" '" '" '" '" 
17. The Central Government may make rules to carry out the pro-
visions of this Part relating to certificates of competency, and may, by 
such rule,,-
• '" * '" '" 
132. (1) '" '" * '" • 
(3) An award made by a shipping master under this section may be 
enforced by a magistrate in the same manner as an order for the pay-
ment of wages made by such magistrate under this Act. 
'" '" '" '" . 
Mode of recovering wages 
145. (1) A seaman or apprentice or a person duly authorised on'his be-
~~ may, u soon as any wages due to him become payable, apply to 
any magistrate exercising jurisdiction in or near the place at which his 
service has terminated or at which he has been discharged, 'or at which 
any person upon whom the claim is made ios or resides, and the magis-
trate shall try the case in a summary way and the orde~ made by the 
magistrate in the matter shall be final. 
(2) An application und~r sub-section (1) may also be made by~y 
officer authorised by the Central Government in this behalf by general 
or special order. 
146. A proceeding for the recovery of wages due to a seaman or 
apprentice shall not be instituted by or on behalf 'of any seaman or 
lpprentice in any civil court except where-
(a) the owner of the ship has been declared insolvent; 
(b) the ship is under arrest or sold by the authority of any court; 
(c) a magistrate refers a claim to the court. 
'" * • '" • 
175. (1) • '" • • • 
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the fore. 
going power, such rules may provide for all or any of the tollowini 
matters, namely:-
'" • '" '" • 
~d such rules may make different proVisions in respect of ~nt 
~es of shipe and in respect of crew acconullodation provideq·. for 
different classes of persons . 
• • • • • 

36 
Provisicm! for the protection of seamen in respect of other matter, 
1M. If a seaman or apprentice states to the master that he ~esires to 
make a complaint to a magistrate or other proper officer agamst the 
master or any of the crew, the master shall,-
(a) if the tihip is then at a place where there is a magist~ate or 
other proper officer, as soon after such statement as the serVIce of 
the "hip will permit, and 
(b) if the ship is r.ot then at such place, as soon after her firat 
arrival at such place as the service of the ship will permit, 
allow the complainant to go ashore or send him a'5hore under proper 
px:otection so that he may be enabled to make the complaint. 
• • • • 
187. (1) Any person who receives or takes into his possession or under 
his control any money or other property of a seaman or apprentice shall 
return the same or pay the value thereof when required by ~e seaman 
or apprentice subject to d~duction of such amounts as may be justly due 
to him from the seaman or apprentice in respect of board ol" 'lodging or 
otherwise. 
(2) Where a magistrate imposes a fine for a contravention of this 
section, he may direct the amount of such money or the value of the 
property subject to such deduction as aforesaid, if any, or me property 
itself to be forthwith paid or delivered to the seaman or apprentice . 
• • • • • 
189. Where a ship has arrived at a port or place in India at the end of 
a voyage and any person, not being in the service of the Government or 
not being duly authorised by law for the purpose, goes on board the ship 
without the permission of the master before the seamen lawfully leave 
the ship at the end of their engagement or are discharged (whichever 
happens last), the master of the ship may take such person into custody 
and deliver hini up forthwith to a police .officer to be taken before a 
magistrate to be dealt with according to the provisions of this Act. 
• • • • • 
Keeping order in passenger ships 
233. (1) • • • • • 
(3) The master or other officer of any such ship and all persons called 
by him to his assistance may, with. out warrant, detain any person who 
C(lDunits any offence under this .section and whose name and address are 
unknown to the master or officer and convey the offender with all con-
venient despatch before the nearest magistrate to be dealt with accord-
ing to law. 
• • • • • • 
~.,.. (1) • • • • • 
Faclli-
ties for 
making 
com-
plaints. 
Sea-
man's 
property 
not to be 
datame- d 
Ship not 
~Ibe, 
boarcfed 'witho\l't 
per-
miNion 
before 
seamen 
leave • 
Of!eMes 
lneon-
nectlon 
with 
passeo-
prlhips. 
(4) If the master, owner or agent objects that the sum spec·ified in the 
~e ilsued under sub-section (3) or any part thereof is not payable by 
btrn, he may, at the time of payment of such sum, give to the pllgri~ 
gtice.r notice of his objection, together with a statement of the grounds 
CompeDSa-
tionfor 
dela7ln 
saWq. 

'" 
POWer to 
make 
rules 
relatlne 
to pili'rim 
ships. 
37 
thereof, and the pilgrim officer shall thereupon either cancel or modify 
the aforesaid notice in accordance with the objection and refund. the sum 
held in deposit under sub-section (3), or refer the objection for decision 
to a presidency magistrate or a magistrate ·of the first class exerciHillg 
jurisdict.on at the port or place at which the sh:p is delayed, whose 
decision on such reference shall be final; and there shall be refunded to 
the master, owner or agent any amount allowed to him by such decision . 
• ... • • ... 
Z82. The Central Government may, subject to the condition of pre-
vious publication, make rules to regulate all or any of the following 
matters, namely:-
... ... ... • • 
(8) the manner in which the dates of sailing shall be advertised 
under section 21)5; the appoIntment of pilgrim officers for,the pur-
poses of that section and sections 279 and 280; the manner irt which 
payment shall be mad~ under section 279 to pilgrims and to the 
pilgrim officer; and the procedure to b~ followed by masters, owners 
or agents and by pilgrim officers and mag'strates in proceedings 
under that section; 
... ... • ... 
344. (1) ... ... ... ... ... 
Power to (2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the fore-
make going power, such rules may prescribe-
rules 
l'eapecfulg 
certificates 
Wlder this 
Part. 
Com-
mence-
ment an4 
applica-
UoD. 
... ... ... • ... 
PART XIA 
PREVENTION OF POLLUnON OF THE SEA BY OIL 
356A. (1) The provisions of this Part shall take effect from IUCh date 
u the Central Government may, by notiftcation in the Oftlcial Gazette, 
appoint, and cW!erent dates may be appointed for different provisions 
III respect ot tankers and shlps other than tankers. 
(2) They shall apply to and in relation to-
(a) tankers of one hundred and fifty tons gross or more; and 
(b) other ships of five hundred tons gross or more. 

38 
a56B. In this Part, unless the context otherwise require5.-
(a) "Convention" means the International Convention for the 
Prevention of pollution of the Sea by Oil. 1954, signed in London on 
the 12th day of May, 1954, as amended from time to time; 
(b) "c:1ischarge", in relation to oil or oily mixture, means any ¢is-
charge or escape howsoever caused; 
(c) "mile" meuns a nautical mile of 1,852 metres; 
(d) "oil" means,-
(i) crude oil, 
(ii) fuel oil, 
(iii) marine diesel oil conforming to such specifications as 
may be prescribed, 
(iv) lubricating oil; 
(e) "oily mixture" means a mixture with an oil content of hund-
red parts or more in a million parts of the m~xture; 
(1) "oil reception faciEties", in relation to a port. means facilities 
for enabling vessels using the port to discharge or depositt oil resi-
dues; 
(g) "prohibited zonE'" means any such sea area as may be speci-
fied in the rules made und~r section 356.1 to be a prohibited zone 
for the purposes of this Part; 
(h) "ship" means any sea-going vessel of any type whatso~veT, 
including floating craft, whether self-propelled or towed by another 
vessel, making a sea voyage; 
(i) "tanker" means a ship in which the greater part of the cargo 
space is constructed or adopted for the carriage 0'£ liquid cargoes in 
bulk and which is not. for the time being, carrying a cargo other 
than oil in that part of its cargo space. 
356C. (l) No oil or oily mixture shall be discharged from an Indian 
tank~r or other ship within any of the prohibited 7;qp.es or from a fQl'eJ~n 
tanl!;er or other ship within the prohibIted zone adjoining the territQrles 
Of India. 
(2) The discharge of oil or oily mixture from an Indian ship, other 
than a tanker or from a foreign ship other than a ·tanker while such 
foreign ship is proceeding to any place or port in India, shall, during 
the period of three years immediately following the commencement of 
this sub-6ection, be made ~~s far as practicable from land: 
Provided that this sub-section shall not apply to a ship which il 
proceeding to a port where oil reception facilities are not available. 
(3) No oil or oily mixture shall be discharg~d anywhere at sea from 
an Indian ship, being' a ship of twenty thousand tons gross tonnage or 
more for which the building contract WelS entered into on or after the 
comins into force of this sub-section: 
Provided that this SUb-section shall not apply in any case where by 
reason of special circumstancCl) it is impracticable or unreasonable to 
retain the oil or oily mi::-:ture in the ship and the master of the ship 
reports, as soon as may b", after such discharge the fact. in the pretlcribed 
form and manner to the Directol'-General. 
Deftnl .. 
tions. 
Prohibi-
ti ...... 
tG dis.. 
char .. 
of oil or 
olly mix-
ture. 

ProhibI-
tion nbt 
tollil y 
incertiin 
cases. ' 
Equip-
ment 
in ships 
to pre-
vent Oil 
pollu-
tion. 
Oil 
record 
book. 
Inspec-
tion and 
control 'Of 
ships to 
Nhich the 
Conven-
tion 
appUes. 
39 
356D. Nothing in section 356C shall apply ~ 
(tJ) the discharge of oil or oily mixture from a ship for the 
purpoee of securing the safety of a ship, preventing damage to a 
ship or cargo or saving life at sea; 
(b) the escape of oil or of oily mixture resulting from a damage 
to a ship or unavoidable leakage, if all reasonable precautions have 
been taken after the occurrence of the damage or discovery of the 
leakage for the purpose of preventing or minimising the escape; 
(c) the discharge of residue arising from t~e purification or 
clarification of fuel oil or lubricating oil when such discharge is 
made as far from land as is practicable; 
(d) the discharge from the bilges of a ship of oily mixture 
during the period of twelve months following the date on which 
this clause comes into force and after the expiration of such period 
of oily mixture containing no oil other than lubricating 0'1 which 
has drained or leaked from the machinery spaces in the ship. 
356E. For the pUrpOSe of preventing or reducing discharges of oil and 
oily mixtures into the sea, the Central Government may make rules 
requiring Indian ships to be fitted with such equipment and to comply 
with such other requiremetit.6 (including requirement for preventing 
the e~cape of fuel oil or heavy diesel oil into bilges) as may be prescribed. 
336F. (1) Every Indian tanker and every other Indian ship which USP.<: 
oil as fuel shall maintain on board the tanker 0r such other ship an oil 
record book. 
(2) The form and manner in which the oil record book shall be main-
tained, the nature of the entries tp be made therein, the time and circum-
stances in which such entries shall be made, the custody and disposal 
thereof and all other matters relating thereto shall be such as may be 
prescribed having regard to the provisions of the Convention. 
356G. (1) A surveyor or any person appointed in this behalf may, at 
any reasonable time, go on board a ship to which any of the provisions 
of this Part apply, for the purposes of-
(a) ensuring that the prohibitions, restrictions and obligations 
imposed by or under this Part are complied with; 
(b) satisfying himself about the adequacy of the measures taken 
to prevent the escape of oil or oily mixture from the ship; 
(c) ascertaining the circumstances relating tt> an alleged dis-
charge of oil or oily mixture from the ship in contravention of the 
provisions of this Part; and 
(d) inspecting the oil record book. 
(2) '!'he surveyor or any such person may, if necessary, make, with-
out unduly delaying the ship, a true copy of any entry in the oil recC't:'d 
book of the ship and may require the master of the ,hip to certify the 
copy to be a true copy and such copy shall be admit:lsible as evidence 
of the facts stated therein. 

38 of 1963. 
1, of 1908. 
40 
3568. (1) If, on report from a surveyor or other person authorise< 
to inspect a vessel under section 356G, the Central Government is 
satisfied that any provision of the Convention has been contravened 
anywhere by a foreign ship being a ship to which the provisions of the 
Convention apply, it shall transmit particulars of the alleged contra· 
vention to the Government of the country to which the ship belongs. 
(2) On receipt of information from the Government of any counti'y 
which has ratified the Convention that an Indian ship has contravened 
Rny provision of the Convention, the Central Government shall investi· 
gate the matter and if sat:sfted that any provision of this Part or any 
rule made thereunder has been contravened., take appropriate action 
against the owner or master and intimate such Government of the action 
so taken. 
356L (1) Notwithstnnding anything contained in any other law for the 
time being in force, in respect of every port in India, the powers of the 
port authOrity shall inclu::le the power to provide oil reception facilities. 
(2) A port authority providing oil reception facilities or a person pro-
viding such facilities by arrangement with the port authority, 
may make charges for the use of the facilities at such rates and may 
impose such conditions in respect of the use thereof as may be approved, 
by notification in the Official Gazette, by the Central Government in 
respect of the port. 
(3) Where the Central Government is satisfied that there are no oil 
reception facilities at any port in India or that the facilities available at 
such port are not adequate for enabling ships calling at such port to 
comply with the requirements of the Convention, the Central Govern-
ment may, after consultation with the port authority in charge of such port, 
direct by order in wrltin~ such authority to provide or arrange for the 
provision of such oil reception facilities as may be specified in the order. 
(4) The Central Government may, by not~fication in the Official Gazette, 
specify the ports in India having oil reception facilities in accordance 
with the requirements of the Convention. 
Explanation.-For the purpose of this section, "p'ort authority" 
means,-
(a) in relation to any major port to which the provisions of the 
Major Port Trusts Act, 1963, 4lPply, the Board of Trustees consti-
tuted in respect of that port under that Act; 
(b) in relation to any other port, the Conservator of the Port, 
within the meaning of section 7 of the Indian Ports Act, 1908. 
356J. (1) The Central Government may, havirig regard to the provi-
sions of the Convention, make rilles to carry out the purposes of this 
Part. 
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the pro 
visions of sub-section (1), such rules may-
(4) prescribe the specificatiolls ~fmarine cUe~1 oil for the pur-
PQ5e$ of dauae (d) of section~; 
Informa-
tion re-
gardin, 
contra-
vention of 
the provi-
sions of 
the Con-
venti'on. 
OUre-
ception 
:faciliti'c1S 
at ports 
in India. 
Power 
to make 
ru1ee. 

(b) specify the areas which shall be d~med to be prohibited 
zones for the purposes of this Part; 
(C) prescribe the form and manner in which the oil record 
book shall be maintained, the nature of the entries to be made there-
in the time and circumstances in which such entries shall be maue, , 
the custody and disposal thereof and all other matters relating 
thereto; and 
(d) prescribe the manner in which investigation may be made 
by the Central Government for the purpose of 6ub-eection (2) of 
section 356H. 
• • • • • 
361. A magistrate of the first class specially- empowered in this behalf 
by the Central Government and a presidency magistrate shall have 
jurisdiction to make formal investigations into shipping casualties under 
this Part. 
III • ... • ... 
372. (1) A magistrate of the first class specially empowered in this 
behalf by the Central Government or a presidency magistrate, may 
remove the master of any ship within his jurisdiction if the removal is 
shown to his satisf8{:tion to be necessary. 
... ... • ... • 
(3) The magistrate may appoint a new master instead of the one 
removed, but where the owner, agent or consignee of the ship is within 
his jurisdiction, such an appointment shall not be made without the 
consent of that owner, agent or consignee. 
(4) The magistrate may also make such order and require such 
security in respect of the costs of the matter as he thinks fit . 
• • • • • 
383. (1) • • • • ... 
(2) The judge shall be a district judge, judge of a court of small causes, 
presidency magistrate, magistrate of the first class or other fit person 
appointed in this behalf by the Central Government either generally or 
for any specified case. 
• • • • III 
491. Where a receiver of wreck suspects or receives information that 
any wreck is secreted or is in the possession of some person Who is not the 
owner thereof or that any wreck is otherwise improperly dealt with, he 
may apply to the nearest magistrate for a search warrant, and that 
magistrate shall have power to grant such warrant and the receiver of 
wreck by virtue thereof may enter any house or other place wherever 
situate and also any vessel and search for, seize and detain any such wreck 
there found. 
Salvage 
402. (1) • • • • • 
(4) Any dispute arising concerning the amount due under this section 
shall be aetermined upon application made by either of the disputing 
parties-
Court em-
powered to 
make 
formal 
investiga-
tion . 
Power of 
court to 
remove 
master and 
appoint 
new 
master. 
Constitu· 
tion. 
of court 
of survey. 
Search 
warrants 
wh'ere 
wreck is 
concealed. 
Salvage 
paya~ 
:fDr 
iaV'irlg 
;We. 
cargo Or 
wredk. 

Certificate 
of 
registry. 
Power to 
make 
rules 
t:elpectlnl 
.allinl 
vellels. 
Penaltiel!l. 
42 
(a) to a magistrate, where the amount claimed does not exceed 
ten thousand rupees; or 
(b) to the High Court, where the amount claimed exceeds ten 
thousand rupees. 
(5) Where there is any dispute as to the persons who are entitled to 
the salvage amount under this section, the magistrate or the High Court, 
as the ease may be, shall decide the dispute and if there are more persons 
than one entitled to such amount, the magistrate or the High Court shall 
apportion the amount thereof among such persons. 
(6) The costs of and incidental to all proceedings before a magistrate 
or the High Court under this section shall be in the discretion of the 
magistrate or the High Court, and the magistrate or the High Court shall 
have full power to determine by whom or out of what property and to 
what extent such costs are to be paid and to give all necessary directions 
for the purpose aforesaid . 
* • • • • 
417. (1) Every sailing vessel shall be registered in accordance with the 
provisions of this section. 
* • • • * 
435. (1) * • • • * 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the 
foregOing power, such rules may provide for all or any' of the foUowin, 
matters, namely:-
• • • • • 
431. (1) • • • • • 
(2) The offences mentioned in the second column of the followiDe 
table .hall be punishable to the extent mentioned in the fourth column 
of the same with reference to aueh of!eneesreapeetively. 
Section of 
this Act to 
Serial OffenC('~ which ~naJtit!s 
No. offence has 
.... --1-----.-... -. ___ . _. ________ ...'"ef~re~ ' ________ _ 
• •• • 
100 If any ship is loaded in contraveJl- 3 J 3 The mastt'r or ownn 
tion ofsertioJ1 3 r 3. shall ~ liable to fir.e 
which may extend to 
ten thowand rupee!' 
and to such additional 
_ fine not exceeding one 

Serial 
No. 
JlsB 
43 
--=S-ectl--:"' o-n-o-f-=-------- --------
Offences 
this Art to 
wllich 
, offence has 
I reference 
Penalties 
----- -----------
• • 
(a) If oil or oily mixture is dis-
charged in contravention ofsu}). 
section (I) of ~ction 356C-
• 
(i) where such discharge is 356C( J) 
from an Indian or a - foreign 
tanker; 
(ll) where such diacharJe. is 356C(1) 
from an Indian ahip not being 
a tanker or a foreign ship not 
being a tanker. 
(b) If oil or oily mixture is dis- 3S6(g) 
charged from an Indian ship 
other than a tanker or from a 
foreignship other than a tanker 
in contravention of sub-section 
(2) of section 3560. 
thousand rupees for 
every inch or fraction 
of an inch by which 
the appropriate 
load lines on each 
side of the ship are 
submerged or would 
have bttn submerged 
if the ship had been 
in salt waters and had 
no list, as the court 
thinks fit .. to impose, 
having regarl: to the 
extent to which the 
earning capacity of 
the ship is or would 
have bttn increased 
by reason of the sub-
mersion: 
Provided that it shall 
be a good defence for 
the master or owner 
to prove that a con-
travention was due 
solely to deviation or 
delay caused solely 
by stress of weather or 
other circumltanee 
which neither the mas-
ter nor the owner Or 
the charterer, if any, 
could have prevented 
or forestallea. 
• • 
Tbe master of the 
tanker shall be liable 
to fine which my 
extend to two thou-
sand rupees. 
The master of the 
ship or, if the ship is 
unmanned, the per-
son in charge of the 
opeation shall be 
liable to fine which 
may extend to one 
thousand rupees. 
The master of the 
ship or, if the ship is 
unm anned, the per-
son in charge of the 
operation shall be 
liable to fine which 
may extend to one 
thousand rupees. 

Juris-
diction 
ofm,agis-
trates. 
Special 
pro- . 
vision 
regarding 
punish-
ment. 
---_._--_._._-------------------
Serial 
No. Oft'ences 
j Section of I I this Act to 
which I Penalties 
offence has i 
__ 1 ____________ r_efi_er_ence __ I-_____ _ 
(c)Jf oil or oily mixture is discharged I 3560(3) The master of the 
from an Indian ship in contravention ship shall be liable 
of suh-section (3) of section 3560. to fine which may 
115e 
lis]) 
I 
II (d) If the master of the ship faUs to make 
. the report referred to in the proviso 
to sub-section (3) of section 3560. 
If an Indian ship is not fitted with 
equipment prescribed under section 
356E . 
I iextend to one thou-
, sand rupees. 
3S6C (3) 
proviso 
The master of the 
ship shall be liable 
to fine which may 
extend to five hundred 
rupee~. 
IThe owner, master or 
'agent shall be liable 
to fine which may 
extend to two thou-
I sand rupees and in 
:addition to a fine 
: which may extend to 
twen ty rupees for 
every day during 
which the offence 
continues after con-
viction. 
356F (I), Fine which may ex-
356F(2) tend to two thou-
aand rupees. 
(0) If the master of an Indian tanker 
or other ship fails to maintain 
an oil record book as required by 
section 356F or contravenes any rule 
I 
[other than a rule referred to in" (II) 
below] made under that section. 
(b) If any person wilfully destroys or 356F Imprisonment which 
mutilates or renders illegible or /may extend to six 
prevents the making of, any entry /months or fine 
in the oil record book or makes or which may extend 
causes to be made a false entry in to five thousand 
such book in contravention of any Irupees or both. 
rule m~de under section __ 3;.::5::..6_F_._--...;. _____ I _____ _ 
• • • • • 
439. No court inferior to that of a presidency magistrate or a magis-
trate of the first class shall try any offence under this Act or any rule 
or regulation thereunder. -
,"Y. Notwithstanding anything contained in section 32 Of the Code of 5 of 1898. 
Criminal Procedure, 189&, it shall be lawful for a presidency magistrate 
or a magistrate of the first clasa to pass any sentence authorised by or 
under this Act on any person convicted of an offence under this Act or 
any rule or regulation thereunder. 
• • • • * 

45 
442. (1) Whenever, in the course of any legal proceeding u~der this 
Act instituted at any place in India before any court or magIStrate or 
before any person authorised by law or by consent of parties. to receive 
evidence, the testimony of any witness is required in relation to the 
subject-matter, and the defendant or the person a.ccused (as .the case 
may be), after being allowed a reasonable opportumty for so domg, does 
not produce the witness before the court, magistrate or person so 
authorised, any deposition previously made by the witness in relation to 
the same subject-matter before any court, justice or magistrate in any 
other place in India or, if elsewhere, before a Marine Board or before 
any Indian consular officer, shall be admissible in evidence:-
(a) if the deposition is authenticated by the signature of the 
presiding officer of the court or of the j\!stice, magistrate or Marine 
Board or consular officer, before whom it is made; 
(b) if the defendant or the person accused had an opportunity by 
hiIIl6elf or his agent of cross-examining the witness; 
(c) if the proceeding is criminal, on proof that the deposition 
was made in the presence of the person accused . 
• • • • • 
445. (1) When an order under this Act for the payment of any wages 
or other sums of money is made by a court, magistrate or other officer 
or authority, and the money is not paid at the time or in the manner 
directed, the sum mentioned in the order with such further sum as may 
be thereby awarded for costs, may be levied by distress and sale of the 
movable property of the person directed to pay the same under a warrant 
to be issued for that purpose by a magistrate. 
(2) Where any court, magistrate or other officer or authority has 
power under this Act to make an order directing payment to be made of 
any seaman's wages, fines or other sums of money, then if the person 
so directed to pay the same is the master, owner or agent of a ship and 
the same is not paid at the time. or in the manner directed by the order, 
the court, magistrate, officer or authority may, in addition to any other 
power it or he may have for the purpose of compelling payment by 
warrant, direct the amount remaining unpaid to be levied by distress 
and sale of the ship and her equipment . 
• • • • • 
. 447. A magistrate imposing a fine under this Act may, if he thinks fit, 
dIrect the whole or any part thereof to be applied in compensating any 
person ~or any detrime~t which he may have sustained by the act or 
default In respect of which the fine is imposed or in or towards payment 
of the expenses of the prosecution. 
• • • • • 
Deposition!' 
to be 
received in 
'evidence 
when wit-
ness cannot 
be pro-
duced. 
Levy,of 
wages, etJc., 
by distress 
ofmov-
able pro-
pertyor 
ship. 
Applica-
tion of 
fines. 

I 
LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Merchant Shipping Act, 1958. 
(Shri Veerendra Patil, 
Minister of Shipping and 
~ 'T,iansport.) 