As INTRODUCED IN Lol[ SAJmA ON' 
• 
BtU No. 103 of 11 .. 
THE PUBLIC LIABILITY INSURANCE BILL. 1990 
Bu.L 
to provide for public liability insurance for the purpose of provicUng 
immediate relief to the persons affected by accident occurring while 
handling any htlzardous substance and for matters connected thf!re-
with or incidental thereto. 
Bm it enaC"".ed by Parliament in the Forty-first Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
1. (1) This Act may be called the Public Liability· IDsuraIIae Act, 
1990. 
5 (2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central ~vemment 
10 
may appoint. 
2. In this Act, unless the con~xt otherwise requires,-
(4) "accident" means an accident OCcurring while handlinR any 
hazardous substance; 
(b) "Collector" means the Collector havin~ jurisdiction over 
the area in which the accident occurs; 
Short title 
and COM. 
meDce-
ment. 
Detlni-
ti01ll. 

Liability 
to 
give 
relief 
in certain 
cases on 
p'rinciple 
of no 
fault. 
lJutyof 
ownel·.to 
take out 
insurance 
policies. 
- ~, 
2 
(c) "handling", in relation to any huardous subs"'.ance, means 
the manufacture, processing, treatment, package, storage, transporta-
tion by vehicle, use, collection, destruction, conversion, offering for 
sale, '::.ransfer or the like of such hazardous substance; 
(d) "hazardous substance" means any substance or preparation S 
which is deiilled as hazardous substance under the Environment 
(Protection) Act, 1986, and e~eeding such quantity as may be speci- 29 of 1986. 
fleel, by notification, by the Central Government; 
(e) "insurance" means insurance against liability under sab-
section (1) of section 3; ~! 10 
(1) "notification" means a notification published in the OJBcial 
Gazette; 
(g), '\)wner" means a p~rson who has control over handling any 
h~ous substance; 
(h) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this IS 
Act; 
(i) "rules" means rules made under this Act; 
(j) "vehicle" means any mode of surface transport other than 
railways. 
3. (1) Where death or injury to any pe~n (other than a workman) 20 
or, damage ~ (arty property has resulted from an accident, the owner 
shall be liable to give such relief as is specified in the Schedule for such 
death, injury or damage, 
(2) In any claims for relief under sub-se::tion (1), (hereinaftel" 
reierred to in this Act as c1 aim for relief) the claimant shall not be 2S 
required ~ plead and establish that the death, injury or damage 
in resrect of which the claim has been made was due 'to any wrongful 
act, neglect or default of any person. 
Explanation.-For the purposes of this section,-
(i) "workman" has the meaning assigned to it in the Workmen's 30 
Compensation Act. 1923; 8 of 1923. 
(ii) "iniurv" include<; permanen~ total or permanent partial dis-
abDlt,. or elc'kneas resulting out of an accident. ., . ;'[ -:-, . 
4. (1) Every owner shall take out, before he starts handling any 
hazardous substance, one or more insurance policies :providing for con· 3S 
tracts of insurance whereby he is insured against liability to give relief 
under sub-section (1) of section 3: 
Provided that any owner handling any hazardous substance imme-
diatelv h~fore the commencement of this Act shall take out RUch insur-
ance policy or llolicies as soon RS mAV be and in any case within a period 40 
ef one year from BUCli commencement. 
(2) Every owner shall get the insurance policy, referred to in sub-
section (1), renewed from time to time before the expiry of the period 

3 
of validity thereof so that the insurance policies may remain in force 
throughout the period during which such handling is continued.· 
(3) The Central Government may, by notiitcation, exempt from the. 
operation of sub-section (1) any owner. namely:-
5 (a) the Central Government; 
(b) any St~te Government; 
(c) any corporation owned or controlled by the Central Gov-
ernment or a State Government; or 
(d) any local authority: 
10 Provided that no such order shall be made in relation to such owner 
unless a fund has been established. and is maintained by that owner in 
accordance with the rules made in this 1:ielialf for meetlng any Dafilllt1 
under sub-section (1) of section 3. 
5. Whenever it comes to the notice of the Collector that an accident Verif\ca-
15 has occurred at any place within his jlirisdiction, he shall verify the tion and 
occurrence of such accident and cause publicity to be given in such publica_ 
manner as he deems fit for inviting appliestions undersub-section (1) Hon of 
of section 6. ' accident byCollec-
tor . 
6. (1) An application for claim for relief may be made-
20 (a) by the person who has sustained the injury; 
. . -... , Applica· 
tion tor 
claim fot 
relief. 
(b) by the owner of the property; 
') " 
(c) where death has resulted from the accident. by all or any 
of the legal representatives of the deceased.; or 
(a) by any agent duly authorised by such person or owner of 
25 such property or all or any of the legal representatives of the deceased, 
as the case may be: 
Provided that where all the legal representatives of the deceased 
have not joined in any such application for relief, the application shall 
be made on behalf of or for the benefit of all the legal representat1ve8 «d 
30 the deceased and the legal representatives who have not so joined shall 
be impleaded as respondents to the application. . 
(2) Every application under sub-section (1) shall be made to the 
Collector and shall be in such form contain such particulars and shall 
be accompanied by such documents as may be prescribed. 
3S .' ·(3) No application for relief shall be entertained unless it is made ~,,~ : 
within five wears .of. the occurrence of the accident. ". r . 
('. 

Award of 7. (1) On receipt of an application under sub-section (1) of aection 
relief. 6, the ColleC"'..or shall, after giving notice of the application to the owner 
and the insurer and after giving the parties (including the insurer) an 
opportunity of being heard, hold an inquiry into the claim or, each of 
the claims, and may make an award determining the amount of J'elief 5 
which appears to him to be just and specifying the person or persons to 
whom such amount of relief shall be paid. 
Provi. 
siOllJ! -to 
othe'r right 
to claim 
compen.. 
aation"r 
deeth. ric. 
(2) The Collector shall arrange to deliver ,copies of the award to 
the parties concerned expeditiously and in any case within a period of 
fitteeu. days from tlte date of the award. 10 
(3) When an award is made under this section., the owner or the 
insurer, as the case may be, who is required to pay any amount in terms 
of such award shall, within thirty days of the date of announcement of 
the award, deposit the entire amount so awarded in such manner as the 
Collector may direct. IS 
'. I ' ~. \., •• " • ~ • • '. • • • • 
(4) In holding any inquiry under sub-se<f.ion (1) ,the Collector may, 
subject to any rules made in this behal'f, follow such summary procedure 
as he thinks fit. 
(5) The Collector shall have all the powers of a Civil Court for the 
purpose of taking evidence on oath and of enforcing the attendance of 20 
witnesses and of compelling the discovery and production of documents 
and material objects and. for such other purposes as may be prescribed; 
and the Collector shall be deemed to be a Civil Court for all the purposes 
of section 195 and Chapter XXVI of the Code of Criminal Procedure. 2 of 1m. 
1973. 2S 
(6) Where the insurer or the owner against whom the award is 
made under sub-section (1) fails to deposit the amount of such award 
within the period specified under sub-section (1), such amount shall be re-
eoverable from the owner, or as the case may be, the insurer as arrears 
of land revenUe or of public demand. 30 
(7) A claim for relief in respect of d~h of, or injury to, any person 
Qr damage to' any property shall be disposed of as expeditiously as possible. , ' , 
&. (1) The ri'gbt to claim relief under sub--section (1) of sectiOn 3 in 
rellpeCt of death of, or injury to, any person or damage to any property 
IthaIl be in. addition to any other right to claim compensation in respect 3S 
thereof under any other law for the time being in force. 
(2) NotWithstanding anything con~n~ in sub-section (1), where 
in respect of death of, or injury to, any person Or damage to any property, 
the owner; liable to give claim for relief, is also liable to pay compensa-
tion under any other law. ~he amount of such compensation shall be 40 
redl1Ced by the amount of relief paid under this Act. 
t. Any person authorised by the Central Government may, for the 
purposes 01 ascertaining whether any requirements of this A~ or of any 
rule or of any direction given under this Act have been complied witb., 
require any owner to submit to that person such information as that 45 

i 
person may reasonably think necessary. 
10. Any person, authorised by the Central Government in this be-
half, shall have a right to enter, at all reasonable times with such assis-
~ce as he considers necessary, any place, premises or vehicle, where 
5 hazardous substance is handled for the purpose of determining whether 
any provisions of this Act or of any rule or of any direction given under 
this Act is being or has been complied w::th and such owner is bound to 
render all assistance to such person. 
11. (1) If a person, authorised by the Central Government in this 
10 behalf, has reason to believe that handling of any hazardous substance is 
taking place in any place, premises or vehicle, in contravention of sub-
section (1) of section 4, he may enter into and search such place, pre-
mises or vehicle for such handling of hazardoUs substance. 
(Z) Where, as a result of any search under sub-section (1) any 
IS handlin'g of hazardous substance has been found in relation to which 
contravention of sub-section (1) of section 4 has taken place, he may 
seize such hazardous substance and other things which. in his opinion. 
will be useful for, or relevant to, any proceeding under this Act: 
Provided that where it is not practicable to seize any such substance 
20 or thing, he may serve on the owner an order tha~ owner shan not re-
move, part with, or otherwise deal with, the hazardous substance and 
such other things except with the previous permiSSion of tha~ person. 
(3) He may, if he has reason to believe 'that it is expedient so to do 
to prevent an accident dispose of 'the hazardous substance seized under 
2S sub-section (2) immediately in such manner as he may deem fit. 
(4) All expenses incurred by him in the disposal of hazardous 
substances under sub-seC""..ion (3) .shall be recoverable from the owner 
as arrears of land revenue or of public demand. 
1!. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law but subject 
30 to the provisions of this Act, the Central Govermn~ may. in exercise 
of its powers and performance of its functions under this Act, issue such 
directions in writing as it may deem fit for the purposes of this Act to 
any owner or any person, officer, authority or agency and such owner, 
person. officer, authority or agency shall be bound to comply with such 
35 directions. 
ExpIanation.-For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that 
~e power to issue di~ons under this section includes the power to 
dfrect-
(4) prohibition or regulation of the handling of any hazardous 
substance; or 
(b) stoppage or regulation of the supply of eleetrfcity, water or 
any other service. 
Power of 
('ntryand 
inspec-
tion. 
Power ot 
search 
and 
aseizu're. 
Power 
to give 
direc-
tions. 

Powe'r 
to make 
applica-
tion to 
courts lOr 
restrain-
ing ow-
ner from 
handling 
hazar-
dous 
sub-
stances. 
Penalty 
for 
confra-
vention 
of sub-
section 
0) or 
sub_ 
section 
(2) of 
sectIon 
4 or failu-
re to com-
ply with 
direction~ 
under scc-
tio-n 12. 
Penalty 
for fail-
ure to 
comply 
with 
dirE'ction 
under 
sectlon 
9 Or 
order 
under 
IK'ction 
11 or 
obstruct. 
ing any 
person in 
dis-
charge 
of his 
functions 
under 
aeetlon. 
100r 11. 
~1 
13. (1) H the Central Government or any person authOriaed by that 
Government in this behalf has reason to believe that any owner baS been 
handling any hazardous substance in contraventian of any of the prov 1,. 
sions of this Act, that Government or, as the case may be, that perIOD • 
may make an application to a Court, not inferior to that of a Metropolitan 5 
Magistrate or a Judicial Magistrate of first-class for restraining sucla 
owner from such handling. 
(2) On receipt of the application under sub-section (1), the Court 
may make such order as it deems fit. 
(3) Where under sub-section (2) the Court makes an order restrain- 10 
ing any owner from handling hazardous substance. it may, in tha't 
order-
(a) direct such person to desist from such handling; 
(b) authorise the Central. Government or, as the case may be, 
the person referred to in sub-section (1). if the direction under IS 
clause (a) is not complied with by the owner to whom such direc-
tion is issued, to implement the direction in such manner as may be 
!JI)ecified by the Court. 
(4) All expenses incurred by the Central Govermnent, or as the case 
may be, the person in implementing the directicns of Court under clause 20 
(b) of sub-section (3), shall be recoverable from the owner as arrears 
of land revenue or of public dern::md. 
14. (1) If any owner contravenes any of the provisions of sub-section 
(1) or sub-section (2) of section 4 or fails to comply with any direction 
issued under section 12. he shall be punishable with imprisonment for 
a term which shall not be less than one year and six months but which lC: 
may ex""..end to six years, or with fine which shall not be less than one 
lakh rupees. or with both. 
(2) Whoever. having already been convicted of an offence under sub-
section (1). is convicted for the second offence or any offence subsequent 30 
to the second offence, he shaU be punishable with imprisonment for a 
term which shall not be less than two years but which may extend to 
seven years and with fine which shall n'Ot be less than one lakh rupees. 
15. If any owner fails to comply with direction issued under section 
9 or fails to comply with order issued under sub-section (2) of seetiO!l 3S 
11, or obstructs any person in discharge of his functions under sedloD 
10 or sub-section (1) or sub-section (3) of section 11, he shall be punish-
able wlth imprisonment which may extend to three months, or with 
fine which may extend to ten thousand rupees, or with both. 

:1 
16. (1) Where any offence under "JUs Act has been committed by a 
,company, every person who, at the time the offence was committed, was 
directly in charge of, and was responsible to, the company for the con-
duct of the business of the company, as well as the company, shall be 
5 deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded 
against and pWlished acC'Ordingly: 
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-sectioll shall render any 
such person liable to any pun.ishment provide~ in this Act, ,if he proves 
that the offence was commit"'..ed without his knowledge or that be exer-
10 cised all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence. 
(2) NotWithstanding anything contained in sl.lb-section (1), where 
3n offence under this Act has been commi~ed by a company and it is 
proved that the oflen<;e has been committed with the consent or conni-
vance of, or is attributable to any neglect on ~e part of, any director, 
15 manager, secretary or other ·offuler of the company, such director, mana-
ger, secretary or other officer shall also be deemed to be guilty of that 
offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly. 
Explanation.-For the purpose$· of this section,--
(a) "company" means any body corporate and includes a firm 
20 or other association of individuals; 
(b) "director", in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm. 
17. Where an offence under this Act has been commit"'..ed by any 
Department of Gove!:nment, the Head ot the Departmpnt shall be' deem-
ed to be guilty o'f the offence and ~hall be liable to be proceeded. agmnst 
25 and punished accordingly: 
Provided ~hat nothing contained in this section shall render such 
Head of the Department liable to any punishment if he proves that the 
offence was coIIlllitted without his knowledge or that he exercised all 
due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence. 
Of!en~ 
by com.. 
panics, 
Offences 
by Gov-
ernment 
Depart-
ments, 
30 18. No court shall take cognizance of any offence undet, this Act ex- Cogniz. 
cept on a complaint made by- ance of 
offences. 
(a) the Central Government or any authority or officer authoris-
ed in this behalf by that Government; or 
(b) any person who has ~ven: notice of not less than sixty days 
35 in the manner prescribed, of the alleged offence alld of his intention 
to make a complaint, to the Central Government or the authority or 
officer authorised as aforesaid. ': 
19. The Central Government may, by notification, delegate, subject to 
such conditions and limitations as may be specified in the notification, 
40 such of its powers and functions under this Act (except the, power under 
section 22) as it may deem necessary or expedient to any person (in-
cluding any officer, authority or other agency). 
20. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie agadnst the 
Government or the person, officer, authority or other agency in respect 
45 of anything which 3s done or intended to be done in good fatth in pur-
suance of this Act or the rules made or orders or directions issued 
thereunder. 
Power to 
delegate. 
Protec-
tion of 
action 
taken in 
good 
f.ith. 

Advisory 
Commit-
tee. 
meet of 
other 
laws. 
Power to 
make 
rules. 
8 
21. (1) The Central Government may, from time to time, constitute 
an Advisory Committee on the matters relating to the insurance polley 
under this Act. 
(2) The Advisory Committee shall consist of-
(a) three officers representing the Central Government; s 
(b) two persons representing the insurers; 
(c) two persons representing the owners; and 
(d) two persons from amongst the experts of insurance or haz-
ardous substances, 
to be appointed by the Central Government. 10 
(2) The Chainnan of the AdviSOry Committee shall be one of the 
members representing the Central Government, nominated in this behalf 
by that Government. 
zz. The provisions of this Act and any rules made thereunder shall 
have effect notwithstandin:g anything inconsistent therewith contained in 15 
any other law. 
23. (1) The Central Government may, by notificatJion, make rules 
for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 
(2) In particular, and without ~ejudice to the generality of the 
foregoing power. such rules may provide for all or'any of the following 29 
matters.. namely:-
(4) estdblishment and maintenance of fund under sub-eection 
(3) of section 4; 
(b) the fonn of application and the particulars to be given 
therein and the documents to accompany such application under 2S 
sub-section (2) of section 6; 
(c) the procedure for holding an inquiry under sub-section (4) 
of section 7; 
(d) the purposes for which the Collector shall have powers of 
a Civil Court under sub-section (5) of section 7; 30 
(e) the manner in which notice of the offence and of the inten-
tion to make a complaint to the Central Government shall be given 
under clause (b) of ~on 18; 
(f) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, 
preSICn~ r 35 
(3) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may 
be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session 
for a total period of thirty days which may be .comprised in one session 
or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the 
session immediately following the session or the successive sessions 40 
aforesaid. both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or 
both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall there-
after have effect only in sUch modified form or be of no effect, as the 
case may be; so. however, that any such modification or annulment shall 
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under 4S 
that rule. 

THE SCHEDULE 
[See section 3(1)] 
. (i) Reimbursement.of medical expeJlies incurred up to a maximum of 
Rs. 12.500 in eac~ case. .' 
s <ii: For taW accidents the relief will be RI\. 25,000 per person in 
addition to redmbursemenll of medical expenses, if any, incurred on the 
victim up to a maximum of Rs. 12,500. 
(iii) For permanent total or permanent partial disability or other in-
jury or sickness, the relief will be (a) reimbursement of medical expens-
10 es incurred, if any. up to a maximum of Rs. 12,500 in each case and 
(b) cash relief on the basis of percen.tage of disablement as certified by 
an authorised physician. The relief for total permanent disability will be 
Rs. 250,000. 
(iv) For loss of wages due to temporary pa~ial disability which re-
t s duoes the earning capadty of the victim, there will be a fixed monthly 
relief no~ exceeding Rs. 1,000 per month up to a maximum of 3 months: 
provided the victim has been hospitalised for a period exceeding 3 days 
and is above 16 years of age. 
(v) Up to Rs. 6,000, depending on the actual damage. for any 
20 damage to private property. 
9 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The growth of hazardous industries, processes and operations in India 
has been accompanied by the growing riskS from acddents, not only to 
the workmen employed in such undertakings, but also innocent mem-
bers of the public who may be in the vicinity. Sucb accidents lead to 
death and injury to human beings and. other living b~ngs and damage 
private and public properties. Very often, the majority of the people af-
fected are from the economically weaker sections and suffer great hard-
ships because of delayed relief and compensation. While workers and 
employees of hazardous installations are protected under separate laws, 
members of the publtc are not assured of any relief except through long 
legal processes. InduS'trial units seldom have the willingness to readily 
compensate the victims of accidents and the only reme~y ·now 
available for the victims is to go through prolonged litigatrlon in a Court 
of Law. Some units may not have the financial resources to provide even 
minimum relief. 
2. It is felt essential, therefore, to provide fOr Mandatory Public 
Liability Insurance for installations handling hazardous substances to 
provide minimum relief to the victims. Such an insurance apart from 
safeguardi.ng the interests of the victims of accidents would also· provide 
cover and enable the industry to discharge its liability to settle large 
claims arising out of major accidents. If the objective of providing im-
mediate relief ~s to be achieved, the mandatory public liability insurance 
should be on the principle of "no fault" liability as it is limited to only 
relief on a limited scale. However, availability of immediate relief would 
not prevent the victims to go to Courts for claiming larger compensation. 
3. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives. 
NEW DELHI; NILAMANI ROUTRAY. 
The 25th Ma.y, 1990. 
10 

MEMORANDUM RroARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 23 empowers the Central Government to make rules for car-
rying out the purposes of the proposed legislation. The matters with 
respect to which rules may be made have been detailed in sub-clause (2) 
and relate mainly-
(i) to the establishment and maintenance of funds by the Central 
Government or the S'Uite Governments and Corporations, etc., for 
giving relief to victims of accidents; 
(ii) to prescribe the form of applica1rion 00 the relief and the do-
cuments to be accompanied by such application; 
(iii) to prescribe the procedure for holding an inquiry by the 
Collector fOr the purpose of making any award of the amount of 
relief; and 
(iv) to prescribe the purposes for which the ColleC""..or has 
powers of a Civil Court. 
2. As the matters with respect to which rules under the aforesaid 
clause are sought to be made are matters of procedure Or detail or mat-
ters with respect to which it is not practicable to make express provision 
in the legislation itself, the delegation of legislative power d8 of normal 
character. 
11 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
to provide for public liability insurance for the purpose of providing 
immediate relief to the persons affected by accident occurring while 
handling any hazardpus substance and for matten eennected there-
with or incidental thereto. 
(Shri Nilamani Routray. Minister of Environment and Forests) 