5

(AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

28 su, 2009

Bill 1४०, 103 of 2000.

THE ABOLITION OF CHILD LABOUR IN HAZARDOUS
EMPLOYMENT BILL, 2000
By
Suma Susi. Kumar Suinve, M.P.
A
BILL

to provide for the abolition of child labour in hazardous employment and for matters
connected therewith.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-first Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—

1. (J) This Act may be called the Abolition of Child Labour in Hazardous Employment
Act, 2000.

(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force immediately.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—

(@ “appropriate Government" means the Central Government or a State
Government, as the case may be;

(b) "child" means a person who has not completed his fifteenth years of age;

(0 “employer” means the person who engages a child in a hazardous job or
employment or who has the ultimate control over the affairs of an establishment
where work, hazardous in nature, is carried out;

Short title,
extent and


2

(व) “hazardous employment” means an employment or a job or occupation in

an enterprise or an establishment or any place where the worker is exposed to hazards
to life or such exposure which results in accident, chronic diseases, grievous hurt,
depravity or degeneration of life including immoral or criminal acts and includes
any other such establishment as specified in the Child Labour (Prohibition and 5

Regulation) Act, 1986.

pena 3. Child labour in any form in a hazardous employment is hereby abolished. |
child labour in

hazardous

employment,

Punishment. 4. Whoever engages a child in any hazardous employment shall be punished with —
imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than five years or with fine : shall
not be less than rupees fifty thousand:

Provided that if such child—
(a) is a girl child; or
(6) is a bonded child; or
(०) is engaged—
( in jobs involving any moral turpitude;
(i) in jobs having direct impact on the morality of the child;
(iit) in flesh trade; or
(iv) in begging activity,
Such employer shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less
than ten years and with fine which shall not be less than one lakh Tupees but which may
extend 10 rupees two lakh in case of an employer in flesh trade.
Punishment in 5. If any police officer responsible for registering cases for violation of provisions of
case of not

अर: आह this Act, refuses to register a case or otherwise aids or abets the commission of. an offence
registering ot

ay under this Act, he shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less
than three years and with fine which shail not be less than twenty-five thousand rupees,

Publication of 6. The appropriate Government shall publish a list of hazardous employments within

list of its jurisdiction immediately.

hazardous

employment.

Act tobe in 7. The provisions of this Act, or the rules made thereunder shall be in addition to,

additiontoand and not in derogation of any other law for the time being in force or any rules, order or any.

Serogaion ot imStructions issued thereunder, enacted for the prohibition and regulation of child labour,

any other law,

Power to make 8. (7) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make

rules.

tules for carrying out the provisions of this Act.

(2) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall be laid, as.
Soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament while it is in session for
total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more.
Successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the
session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification
in the tule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter
have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may

that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the val ty
Previously done under that rule.



STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

Article 24 of the Constitution prohibits the employment of children below 14 years of
age in any factory or mine or engaged in any other hazardous employment. Every child
has a right against exploitation. The very fact that the child is kept away from school and
is made to work for earning bread itself speaks that the child is being exploited. In a
welfare State like ours, it is the duty of the Government to provide education to the
children and ensure that they are not exploited in any manner.

Yet, the fact that with the fast growing population of the country, even 53 years after
the country got Independence, a high percentage of over 35 per cent, continues to live
below the poverty line explains the inevitability of huge work force comprising of children.
The children are sent to work by the parents for earning the livelihood. In most of the
cases the children are forced to work in jobs and employment which are hazardous in
nature, including those involving moral turpitude and sexual abuse. Despite the
constitutional provisions prohibiting employment of children in hazardous jobs, millions
of children continues to work in fireworks and match factories, glass and bangle factories
and carpet factories and mines, etc.

Itis a matter of grave concern that children are forced to beg by their parents, guard-
ians, gang leaders and others. Children are engaged in immoral and illegal activities.
Several children are engaged as carriers of drugs by smugglers and others. Reports of
minor girls finding their way into flesh trade are rampant.

An effort was made in the year 1986 to prohibit and regulate employment of children in
hazardous jobs. However, "hazardous employment” has not been defined till date. An
attempt has been made to define hazardous employment as an employment which is
hazardous not only physical in natisre but also a threat to moral character and even life
of children.

The 1986 Act has failed to provide any deterrent punishment for employment of
children in hazardous jobs and as such the number of child workers in various hazardous
jobs has continued to increase during the last ten years. The definition of what is called
“hazardous-job” is to be provided.

Therefore, it is proposed to make stringent provision not only for employment of
children in hazardous jobs but also in illegal and immoral activities.

Hence this Bill.

New Druin; SUSHIL KUMAR SHINDE
April 13, 2000.


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 8 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the provisions of this Bill. Since the matters for which the rules will be made are matters
of detail only, the delegation of legislative powers is of a normal character.



LOK SABHA

(Shri Sushil Kumar Shinde, M.P.)

MGiP(PLU)MAND—1469LS—23-06-2000,