1
Short title and
commencement.
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
THE DISTRESSED WIDOWS AND SINGLE WOMEN (PROTECTION,
REHABILITATION AND WELFARE) BILL, 2017
By
SHRI NISHIKANT DUBEY, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for the protective measures with need based rehabilitation and welfare to be
undertaken by the Government for the distressed, infirm, neglected, abandoned and
disowned widows and single women by providing financial assistance, pension,
medical care, housing and other facilities through a Welfare Board to such
widows and single women and for matters connected therewith or
 incidental thereto.
Be it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-eighth Year of the Republic of  India as
follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Distressed Widows and Single Women (Protection,
Rehabilitation and Welfare) Act, 2017.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force with immediate effect.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “abandoned and disowned widow” means a widow who has been deserted
or thrown out of household by her relatives to fend for herself and who has no means
to support her and her dependent children, if any;
Bill No. 103 of  2017
Definitions.
5
10

2
(b) “appropriate Government” means in the case of a State the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(c) “Board” means the Distressed Widows and Single Women Welfare Board
established under section 3;
(d) “distressed” in relation to a widow and single woman means any widow or
single woman who lives uncared for and has become inform due to old age or chronic
or incurable disease, physical deformity or mental imbalance and who has no
independent and adequate means of livelihood for her and her dependent children, if
any;
(e) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(f) “single woman” means a female adult who is either unmarried or divorcee or
judicially separated from her spouse; and
(g) “widow” means a legally married women whose husband has died.
3. (1) The Central Government, shall, as soon as may be, but not later than six months
from the commencement of this Act, by notification in the Official Gazette, establish a
Board to be known as the Distressed Widows and Single Women Welfare Board for carrying
out the purposes of this Act.
(2) The Board shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid having perpetual
succession and a common seal, with power to acquire, hold and dispose of property, both
movable and immovable and to contract and shall by the said name sue and be sued.
(3) The headquarter of the Board shall be at Aurangabad in the State of Maharashtra
and the Board shall establish its branches in all other States and Union territories at
conspicuous places as the Board may deem fit and necessary.
(4) The Board shall consist of—
(a) the Union Minister of Women and Child Development who shall be the
chairperson ex-officio;
(b) a Deputy Chairperson, preferably a woman with such qualifications and
experience, as may be prescribed, to be appointed by the Central Government;
(c) one member representing single women with such qualification, as may be
prescribed, to be appointed by the Central Government;
(d) five women Members of Parliament of whom three shall be from the House
of the People and two from the Council of States, to be nominated by the respective
Presiding Officers of each House;
(e) five members representing Union Ministries of Home Affairs, Human
Resource Development, Health and Family Welfare, Finance and Social Justice and
Empowerment;
(f) not more than four members to be appointed by the Central Government in
consultation with the Governments of the States, by rotation in alphabetical order, to
represent the Governments of the States;
(g) three members to be appointed by the Central Government from amongst
the registered non-Governmental Organisations (NGOs) working for the welfare of
distrressed widows or single women, as the case may be.
(5) The salary and allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of the
Deputy Chairperson and members of the Board shall be such as may be prescribed.
(6) The Board shall follow such procedure for holding its meetings and the quorum
for such meetings shall be such, as may be prescribed.
Establishment
of the
Distressed
Widows and
Single
Women
Welfare
Board.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
(7) The Board shall have a Secretariat consisting of a Member Secretary and such
number of officers, and employees may be prescribed.
(8) The salary and allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of service of
Member Secretary, officers and employees shall be such as may be prescribed.
4. (1) Notwithstanding anything contrary contained in any other law for the time being
in force, the Board shall promote and implement such protective and welfare measures as it
thinks appropriate, expedient, and necessary including rehabilitation for the distressed widows
and single women who are in dire need of such measures.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of sub-section (1), the Board
shall,—
(a) maintain district-wise register of the abandoned, disowned and distressed
widows and single women covered under this Act who are to be rehabilitated and are
in need of assistance from the Board with such particulars and details and in such
manner as may be prescribed;
(b) collect and get verified the antecedents of every widow and single woman
covered under this Act to assess her need for assistance in such manner as may be
prescribed;
(c) work out plans and formulate schemes for the overall welfare and rehabilitation
of abandoned, disowned or distressed widows and single women covered under this
Act and implement them in right earnest;
(d) conduct a special survey of the abandoned and disowned widows subsisting
on alms as beggar or chanting bhajans in the temples of Mathura, Vrindavan and other
parts of  the State Uttar Pradesh and other parts of the country or who are languishing
in temples as Devdasis in various parts of the country and formulate appropriate
rehabilitation and reuniting with their families programmes for such widows and single
women in such manner as may be prescribed;
(e) give wide publicity through electronic and print media about the welfare and
rehabilitation measures being undertaken by the Board to enable the widows and
single women covered under this Act to avail them; and
(f) perform such other functions not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act,
as may be assigned to it by the appropriate Government from time to time.
5. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute
a Fund to be known as the National Distressed Widows and Single Women Rehabilitation
and Welfare Fund with an initial corpus of rupees fifty thousand crore for carrying out the
purposes of this Act.
(2) The Fund shall be administered by the Board in such manner as may be prescribed.
(3) The Fund established under sub-section (1) shall consist of all receipts from—
(a) the Central Government and Governments of the States and Union territories
and their institutions and organisations;
(b) body corporates, both public and private sector and Banks and financial
institutions both domestic and foreign; and
(c) individuals, associations and others in the form of contributions or donations.
6. (1) ) On the recommendation of the Board or otherwise, the appropriate Government
shall provide the wodows and single women covered under this Act, the following facilities,
namely:—
(a) monthly subsistence allowance of not less than five thousand rupees if the
widow or the single women, as the case may be, is having any dependent children and
not less than three thousand rupees in case she has no dependent children to support;
Functions of
the Board.
Constitution
of National
Distressed
Widows and
Single women
Rehabilitation
and Welfare
Fund.
Facilities to
be provided
by the
appropriate
Government.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
45
40

4
(b) residential accommodation free of cost wherever necessary;
(c) free medical care with medicines and with indoor and outdoor facilities as
may be required;
(d) free education to the dependent children including higher, medical,
engineering and education in such manner as may be prescribed;
(e) gainful employment as per the physical condition after imparting vocational
training wherever possible;
(f) financial assistance for rehabilitation like self employment wherever
required;
(g) free legal aid in case the widow or single women, as the case may be, has
been thrown out or abandoned  by  her kith and kin; and
(h) such other facilities, as may be necessary for the rehabilitation, welfare,
proper development, regaining her lost status in the family and for maintaining a
respectable life in the society:
Provided that if, a widow or single woman, as the case may be, covered under
this Act either gets married, remarried, gainfully employed or taken back by her
kith and kin in the family, the facilities being provided to her shall be withdrawn by
the appropriate Government.
(2) The costs incurred by the appropriate Government on providing  the facilities
under this Act to the widows and single women covered under this Act shall be defrayed
from the Rehabilitation and Welfare Fund established under section 5.
7. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law, for the time being in force or
in any custom prevelant any widow or single woman covered under this Act shall,—
(a) not be evicted or thrown out of the house of the in-laws or parents, as the
case may be or where such widow or single woman was last residing;
(b) be entitled to inherit the property or her share of jointly owned property from
her in-laws or parents, as the case may be; or
(c) be entitled for maintenance from her in-laws or kith or kin who neglect or
abandon the widow or single woman, as the case may be.
8. ( 1) The appropriate Government shall establish such number of hostels at
conspicuous places in various parts of its territorial jurisdiction as it may deem necessary
for boarding and lodging of abandoned and disowned and distressed widows and single
women covered under this Act with necessary facilities of daily life as may be prescribed.
(2) The appropriate Government shall also provide necessary free medical aid and
medicines and means of entertainment for the residents of the hostels established under
sub-section (1).
9. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law
in this behalf, provide the requisite funds to the State Government, Union territories and the
Board from time to time for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
10. The Board shall prepare an Annual Report in such form and in such manner, as may
be prescribed, of its activities in implementing the provisions of this Act and submit it to the
President of India who shall cause the report to be laid before both the the Houses of
Parliament along with action taken thereon by the Central Government as soon as it is
received.
11. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may, by order published in the Official gazette, make such provisions not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appears to it to be necessary or expedient for
removing the difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made after expiry of a period of three years from
the date of commencement of this Act.
Protective
provisions.
Establishment
of hostels.
Central
Government
to provide
requisite
funds.
Annual report
to the Board.
Power to
remove
difficulty.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50

5
12. The provisions of this Act and rules made thereunder shall have effect
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time
being in force.
13. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other
law for the time being applicable to the widows and single women covered under this Act.
14. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid as soon as may be after it is made before
each House of the State Legislature while it is in session for a total period of thirty days
which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions and if, before
the expiry of the session immediately following the session or successive sessions aforesaid
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that they
should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of
no effect, as the case may be; so however, that any such modification or annulment shall be
without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under such rule.
Act to have
overriding
effect.
Act to
supplement
other laws.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
In our country, world’s second most populous nation, there are millions of unfortunate
and hapless women who lose their husbands during their lifetime and become widows. Their
number is nearly three per cent of the total population of our Nation and more than fifty
per cent of these widows are old, infirm suffering from various diseases, physical deformity
or mental imbalance particularly belonging to poor and middle class families who live uncared
for and neglected by their near and dear ones and most of them are without independent and
adequate means of livelihood and roof over their heads. It is very common that when a
widow does not have any permanent source of income or livelihood she is driven out of her
in-laws home or even from her perental home. Her position becomes more miserable if she
has dependent children to support and bring up. Sometimes the condition of such widows
become miserable and their problems increase manifold due to poverty and other compelling
reasons where they have no other option but to go for begging for survival and many such
widown can be seen begging in the streets and public places. Several women who become
widows in their youth, in particular in rural and far off areas, are not only sexually exploited
by their known ones and many a times forced into prostitution. At some places they are
branded as witches and tortured even by their own kith and kin or others from the community.
In our society even today they are treated as bad women and are not allowed to attend or
appear during auspicious occasions. Many of such widows work as housemaids and take up
other jobs for survival. Large number of abandoned and disowned widows seek refuge in the
temples of Mathura, Vrindavan in Uttar Pradesh and other parts of the country where they
chant bhajans or beg for their survival. Even devadasi system is still prevalent in some parts
of the country. Where hapless old and inform devadasis languish in the temples. Many
widows take shelter in old age homes but their number is lawfully very short. Then there are
quite a large number of single women in our country. Some of them opt for not to marry
because they have to support their families for various reasons such as to educate their
siblings or for supporting families as there are no male bread earners or for the treatment of
ailing parents etc. etc. It is very common that such women are deserted by their siblings once
they get their education and settle in their lives. Since they spend their earnings on others,
they become penniless in their old age, particularly if they where employed in private sector.
Then there are those single women who are either deserted by their husbands or who are
legally separated or divorced from their spouses. Many of them become distressed and their
miseries increase when they have dependent children to support and bring up. They too
need protective umbrella.
Ours is a welfare State. It is the sacred duty of the State to initiate protective and
welfare measures for the abandoned, disowned and distressed widows and single women to
that they can live gracefully in the society. It is therefore imperative to establish an authority
to exclusively take care of such widows and single woman throughout the country.
Hence, this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; NISHIKANT  DUBEY
January 11, 2017
6

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the establishment of the Distressed Widows and
Single Women Welfare Board. Clause 5 provides for the establishment of National Distressed
widows and Single Women Rehabilitation and Welfare Fund with initial corpus of rupee fifty
thousand crore to be provided by the Central Government. Clause 6 provides for financial
assistance and other facilities for widows and single women. Clause 8 provides for
establishment of hostels. Clause 9 makes it mandatory for the Central Government to provide
requisite and adequate funds for carrying out the purposes of this Bill. The Bill, therefore, if
enacted would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. Apart from the
initial corpus of rupee fifty thousand crore, it is estimated that a sum of rupee forty thousand
crore may involve as recurring expenditure per annum.
A non-recurring expenditure of rupee twenty five thousand crore is also likely to be
involved.
7

8
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGA TED LEGISLATION
Clause 14 of the Bill gives power to the Central Government to make rules for carrying
out the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of details only, the delegation
of legislative power is of a normal character.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the protective measures with need based rehabilitation and welfare to be
undertaken by the Government for the distressed, infirm, neglected, abandoned and
disowned widows and single women by providing financial assistance, pension,
medical care, housing and other facilities through a Welfare Board to such
widows and single women and for matters connected therewith or
  incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Nishikant Dubey, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—4572LS(S3)—10-07-2017.