Bill No. 104-F of  2021
ORIGINAL
THE INSOLVENCY AND BANKRUPTCY CODE
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 2021
(AS PASSED BY THE HOUSES OF PARLIAMENT—
LOK SABHA ON 28TH JULY, 2021
RAJYA SABHA ON 3RD AUGUST, 2021)
Assented to on 11th August, 2021
Act No. 26 of  2021

THE INSOLVENCY AND BANKRUPTCY CODE (AMENDMENT)
BILL, 2021
(AS PASSED BY THE HOUSES  OF PARLIAMENT )
A
BILL
 further to amend the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-second Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code (Amendment)
Act, 2021.
(2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 4 th day of April, 2021.
Short title and
commencement.
Bill No. 104-F of 2021

2
Amendment
of section 4.
2.  In the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016 (hereinafter referred to as the
principal Act), in section 4, after the proviso, the following proviso shall be inserted,
namely:—
 "Provided further that the Central Government may, by notification, specify
such minimum amount of default of higher value, which shall not be more than
one crore rupees, for matters relating to the pre-packaged insolvency resolution
process of corporate debtors under Chapter III-A.".
3. In section 5 of the principal Act,—
(i) after clause ( 2), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
'(2A) "base resolution plan" means a resolution plan provided by the
corporate debtor under clause ( c) of sub-section ( 4) of section 54A;';
(ii) in clause ( 5), in sub-clause ( b), after the words "corporate insolvency
resolution process", the words "or the pre-packaged insolvency resolution process,
as the case may be," shall be inserted;
(iii ) in clause ( 11), after the words "corporate insolvency resolution
process", the words "or pre-packaged insolvency resolution process, as the case
may be" shall be inserted;
(iv) in clause ( 15), after the words "process period", the words "or by the
corporate debtor during the pre-packaged insolvency resolution process period,
as the case may be" shall be inserted;
(v) in clause ( 19), after the words "for the purposes of", the words and
figures "Chapter VI and" shall be inserted;
(vi) after clause ( 23), the following clauses shall be inserted, namely:—
'(23A) "preliminary information memorandum" means a memorandum
submitted by the corporate debtor under clause ( b) of sub-section ( 1) of
section 54G;
(23B) "pre-packaged insolvency commencement date" means the date
of admission of an application for initiating the pre-packaged insolvency
resolution process by the Adjudicating Authority under clause ( a) of
sub-section ( 4) of section 54C;
(23C) "pre-packaged insolvency resolution process costs" means—
(a) the amount of any interim finance and the costs incurred in
raising such finance;
(b) the fees payable to any person acting as a resolution
professional and any expenses incurred by him for conducting the
pre-packaged insolvency resolution process during the pre-packaged
insolvency resolution process period, subject to sub-section ( 6) of
section 54F;
(c) any costs incurred by the resolution professional in running
the business of the corporate debtor as a going concern pursuant to
an order under sub-section ( 2) of section 54J;
(d) any costs incurred at the expense of the Government to
facilitate the pre-packaged insolvency resolution process; and
(e) any other costs as may be specified;
(23D) "pre-packaged insolvency resolution process period" means
the period beginning from the pre-packaged insolvency commencement date
Amendment
of section 5.
31 of 2016.

3
and ending on the date on which an order under sub-section ( 1) of
section 54L, or sub-section ( 1) of section 54N, or sub-section ( 2) of
section 54-O, as the case may be, is passed by the Adjudicating Authority;';
(vii ) in clause ( 25 ), after the words, brackets and figures
" of sub-section (2) of section 25", the words, figures and letter "or pursuant to
section 54K, as the case may be" shall be inserted;
(viii ) in clause ( 27), after the words "corporate insolvency resolution
process", the words "or the pre-packaged insolvency resolution process, as the
case may be," shall be inserted.
4. In section 11 of the principal Act,—
(i) in clause ( a), after the words "corporate insolvency resolution process",
the words "or a pre-packaged insolvency resolution process" shall be inserted;
(ii) after clause ( a), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
"(aa) a financial creditor or an operational creditor of a corporate
debtor undergoing a pre-packaged insolvency resolution process; or";
(iii) after clause ( b), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
"(ba) a corporate debtor in respect of whom a resolution plan has
been approved under Chapter III-A, twelve months preceding the date of
making of the application; or".
5. After section 11 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted,
namely:—
"11A. ( 1) Where an application filed under section 54C is pending, the
Adjudicating Authority shall pass an order to admit or reject such application,
before considering any application filed under section 7 or section 9 or section 10
during the pendency of such application under section 54C, in respect of the
same corporate debtor.
(2) Where an application under section 54C is filed within fourteen days of
filing of any application under section 7 or section 9 or section 10, which is
pending, in respect of the same corporate debtor, then, notwithstanding anything
contained in sections 7, 9 and 10, the Adjudicating Authority shall first dispose of
the application under section 54C.
(3) Where an application under section 54C is filed after fourteen days of
the filing of any application under section 7 or section 9 or section 10, in respect
of the same corporate debtor, the Adjudicating Authority shall first dispose of the
application under section 7or section 9 or section 10.
(4) The provisions of this section shall not apply where an application
under section 7 or section 9 or section 10 is filed and pending as on the date of the
commencement of the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code (Amendment) Act, 2021.".
6. In section 33 of the principal Act, in sub-section ( 3), after the words "approved
by the Adjudicating Authority", the words, figures, brackets and letter "under
section 31 or under sub-section ( 1) of section 54L," shall be inserted.
7. In section 34 of the principal Act, in sub-section ( 1), after the words and figures
"under Chapter II", the words, figures and letter "or for the pre-packaged insolvency
resolution process under Chapter III-A" shall be inserted.
Amendment
of section 11.
Insertion of
new section
11A.
Disposal of
applications
under section
54C and under
section 7 or
section 9 or
section 10.
Amendment
of section 33.
Amendment
of section 34.

4
8. After Chapter III of the principal Act, the following Chapter shall be inserted,
namely:—
'CHAPTER III-A
PRE-PACKAGED INSOLVENCY  RESOLUTION  PROCESS
54A.(1) An application for initiating pre-packaged insolvency resolution
process may be made in respect of a corporate debtor classified as a micro, small
or medium enterprise under sub-section ( 1) of section 7 of the Micro, Small and
Medium Enterprises Development Act, 2006.
(2) Without prejudice to sub-section ( 1), an application for initiating
pre-packaged insolvency resolution process may be made in respect of a corporate
debtor, who commits a default referred to in section 4, subject to the following
conditions, that—
(a) it has not undergone pre-packaged insolvency resolution process
or completed corporate insolvency resolution process, as the case may be,
during the period of three years preceding the initiation date;
(b) it is not undergoing a corporate insolvency resolution process;
(c) no order requiring it to be liquidated is passed under section 33;
(d) it is eligible to submit a resolution plan under section 29A;
(e) the financial creditors of the corporate debtor, not being its related
parties, representing such number and in such manner as may be specified,
have proposed the name of the insolvency professional to be appointed as
resolution professional for conducting the pre-packaged insolvency
resolution process of the corporate debtor, and the financial creditors of the
corporate debtor, not being its related parties, representing not less than
sixty-six per cent. in value of the financial debt due to such creditors, have
approved such proposal in such form as may be specified:
 Provided that where a corporate debtor does not have any financial
creditors, not being its related parties, the proposal and approval under this
clause shall be provided by such persons as may be specified;
(f) the majority of the directors or partners of the corporate debtor, as
the case may be, have made a declaration, in such form as may be specified,
stating, inter alia , that—
(i) the corporate debtor shall file an application for initiating
pre-packaged insolvency resolution process within a definite time
period not exceeding ninety days;
(ii) the pre-packaged insolvency resolution process is not being
initiated to defraud any person; and
(iii ) the name of the insolvency professional proposed and
approved to be appointed as resolution professional under clause ( e);
(g) the members of the corporate debtor have passed a special
resolution, or at least three-fourth of the total number of partners, as the
case may be, of the corporate debtor have passed a resolution, approving
the filing of an application for initiating pre-packaged insolvency resolution
process.
(3) The corporate debtor shall obtain an approval from its financial creditors,
not being its related parties, representing not less than sixty-six per cent. in value of
the financial debt due to such creditors, for the filing of an application for initiating
pre-packaged insolvency resolution process, in such form as may be specified:
Corporate
debtors
eligible for
pre-packaged
insolvency
resolution
process.
27 of 2006.
Insertion of
new Chapter
III-A.

5
Provided that where a corporate debtor does not have any financial creditors,
not being its related parties, the approval under this sub-section shall be provided
by such persons as may be specified.
(4) Prior to seeking approval from financial creditors under sub-section ( 3),
the corporate debtor shall provide such financial creditors with—
(a) the declaration referred to in clause ( f) of sub-section ( 2);
(b) the special resolution or resolution referred to in clause ( g) of
sub-section ( 2);
(c) a base resolution plan which conforms to the requirements referred
to in section 54K, and such other conditions as may be specified; and
(d) such other information and documents as may be specified.
54B. ( 1) The insolvency professional, proposed to be appointed as the
resolution professional, shall have the following duties commencing from the
date of the approval under clause ( e) of sub-section ( 2) of section 54A, namely:—
(a) prepare a report in such form as may be specified, confirming
whether the corporate debtor meets the requirements of section 54A, and
the base resolution plan conforms to the requirements referred to in
clause ( c) of sub-section ( 4) of section 54A;
(b) file such reports and other documents, with the Board, as may be
specified; and
(c) perform such other duties as may be specified.
(2) The duties of the insolvency professional under sub-section ( 1) shall
cease, if,—
(a) the corporate debtor fails to file an application for initiating
pre-packaged insolvency resolution process within the time period as
stated under the declaration referred to in clause ( f) of sub-section ( 2) of
section 54A; or
(b) the application for initiating pre-packaged insolvency resolution
process is admitted or rejected by the Adjudicating Authority,
as the case may be.
(3) The fees payable to the insolvency professional in relation to the duties
performed under sub-section ( 1) shall be determined and borne in such manner as
may be specified and such fees shall form part of the pre-packaged insolvency
resolution process costs, if the application for initiation of pre-packaged insolvency
resolution process is admitted.
54C. (1) Where a corporate debtor meets the requirements of section 54A, a
corporate applicant thereof may file an application with the Adjudicating Authority
for initiating pre-packaged insolvency resolution process.
(2) The application under sub-section ( 1) shall be filed in such form,
containing such particulars, in such manner and accompanied with such fee as
may be prescribed.
(3) The corporate applicant shall, along with the application, furnish—
(a) the declaration, special resolution or resolution, as the case may
be, and the approval of financial creditors for initiating pre-packaged
insolvency resolution process in terms of section 54A;
Duties of
insolvency
professional
before
initiation of
pre-packaged
insolvency
resolution
process.
Application
to initiate
pre-packaged
insolvency
resolution
process.

6
(b) the name and written consent, in such form as may be specified, of
the insolvency professional proposed to be appointed as resolution
professional, as approved under clause ( e) of sub-section ( 2) of
section 54A, and his report as referred to in clause ( a) of sub-section ( 1) of
section 54B;
(c) a declaration regarding the existence of any transactions of the
corporate debtor that may be within the scope of provisions in respect of
avoidance of transactions under Chapter III or fraudulent or wrongful trading
under Chapter VI, in such form as may be specified;
(d) information relating to books of account of the corporate debtor
and such other documents relating to such period as may be specified.
(4) The Adjudicating Authority shall, within a period of fourteen days of the
receipt of the application, by an order,—
(a) admit the application, if it is complete; or
(b) reject the application, if it is incomplete:
Provided that the Adjudicating Authority shall, before rejecting an
application, give notice to the applicant to rectify the defect in the application
within seven days from the date of receipt of such notice from the Adjudicating
Authority.
(5) The pre-packaged insolvency resolution process shall commence from
the date of admission of the application under clause ( a) of sub-section ( 4).
54D. (1) The pre-packaged insolvency resolution process shall be completed
within a period of one hundred and twenty days from the pre-packaged insolvency
commencement date.
(2) Without prejudice to sub-section ( 1), the resolution professional shall
submit the resolution plan, as approved by the committee of creditors, to the
Adjudicating Authority under sub-section ( 4) or sub-section ( 12), as the case
may be, of section 54K, within a period of ninety days from the pre-packaged
insolvency commencement date.
(3) Where no resolution plan is approved by the committee of creditors
within the time period referred to in sub-section ( 2), the resolution professional
shall, on the day after the expiry of such time period, file an application with the
Adjudicating Authority for termination of the pre-packaged insolvency resolution
process in such form and manner as may be specified.
54E. (1) The Adjudicating Authority shall, on the pre-packaged insolvency
commencement date, along with the order of admission under section 54C—
(a) declare a moratorium for the purposes referred to in sub-section ( 1)
read  with  sub-section  ( 3)  of  section  14,  which  shall,  mutatis
mutandis  apply, to the proceedings under this Chapter;
(b) appoint a resolution professional—
(i) as named in the application, if no disciplinary proceeding is
pending against him; or
(ii) based on the recommendation made by the Board, if any
disciplinary proceeding is pending against the insolvency professional
named in the application;
(c) cause a public announcement of the initiation of the pre-packaged
insolvency resolution process to be made by the resolution professional, in
such form and manner as may be specified, immediately after his appointment.
Declaration of
moratorium
and public
announcement
during pre-
packaged
insolvency
resolution
process.
Time-limit
for
completion of
pre-packaged
insolvency
resolution
process.

7
(2) The order of moratorium shall have effect from the date of such order till
the date on which the pre-packaged insolvency resolution process period comes
to an end.
54F. ( 1) The resolution professional shall conduct the pre-packaged
insolvency resolution process of a corporate debtor during the pre-packaged
insolvency resolution process period.
(2) The resolution professional shall perform the following duties, namely:—
(a) confirm the list of claims submitted by the corporate debtor under
section 54G, in such manner as may be specified;
(b) inform creditors regarding their claims as confirmed under
clause ( a), in such manner as may be specified;
(c) maintain an updated list of claims, in such manner as may be
specified;
(d) monitor management of the affairs of the corporate debtor;
(e) inform the committee of creditors in the event of breach of any of
the obligations of the Board of Directors or partners, as the case may be, of
the corporate debtor, under the provisions of this Chapter and the rules and
regulations made thereunder;
(f) constitute the committee of creditors and convene and attend all its
meetings;
(g) prepare the information memorandum on the basis of the
preliminary information memorandum submitted under section 54G and any
other relevant information, in such form and manner as may be specified;
(h) file applications for avoidance of transactions under Chapter III or
fraudulent or wrongful trading under Chapter VI, if any; and
(i) such other duties as may be specified.
(3) The resolution professional shall exercise the following powers, namely:—
(a) access all books of account, records and information available
with the corporate debtor;
(b) access the electronic records of the corporate debtor from an
information utility having financial information of the corporate debtor;
(c) access the books of account, records and other relevant documents
of the corporate debtor available with Government authorities, statutory
auditors, accountants and such other persons as may be specified;
(d) attend meetings of members, Board of Directors and committee of
directors, or partners, as the case may be, of the corporate debtor;
(e) appoint accountants, legal or other professionals in such manner
as may be specified;
(f) collect all information relating to the assets, finances and operations
of the corporate debtor for determining the financial position of the corporate
debtor and the existence of any transactions that may be within the scope
of provisions relating to avoidance of transactions under Chapter III or
fraudulent or wrongful trading under Chapter VI, including information
relating to—
(i) business operations for the previous two years from the date
of pre-packaged insolvency commencement date;
Duties and
powers of
resolution
professional
during pre-
packaged
insolvency
resolution
process.

8
(ii) financial and operational payments for the previous two years
from the date of pre-packaged insolvency commencement date;
(iii) list of assets and liabilities as on the initiation date; and
(iv) such other matters as may be specified;
(g) take such other actions in such manner as may be specified.
(4) From the date of appointment of the resolution professional, the financial
institutions maintaining accounts of the corporate debtor shall furnish all
information relating to the corporate debtor available with them to the resolution
professional, as and when required by him.
(5) The personnel of the corporate debtor, its promoters and any other
person associated with the management of the corporate debtor shall extend all
assistance and cooperation to the resolution professional as may be required by
him to perform his duties and exercise his powers, and for such purposes, the
provisions of sub-sections ( 2) and (3) of section 19 shall, mutatis mutandis  apply,
in relation to the proceedings under this Chapter.
(6) The fees of the resolution professional and any expenses incurred by
him for conducting the pre-packaged insolvency resolution process shall be
determined in such manner as may be specified:
Provided that the committee of creditors may impose limits and conditions
on such fees and expenses:
Provided further that the fees and expenses for the period prior to the
constitution of the committee of creditors shall be subject to ratification by it.
(7) The fees and expenses referred to in sub-section ( 6) shall be borne in
such manner as may be specified.
54G. (1) The corporate debtor shall, within two days of the pre-packaged
insolvency commencement date, submit to the resolution professional the
following information, updated as on that date, in such form and manner as may
be specified, namely:—
(a) a list of claims, along with details of the respective creditors, their
security interests and guarantees, if any; and
(b) a preliminary information memorandum containing information
relevant for formulating a resolution plan.
(2) Where any person has sustained any loss or damage as a consequence
of the omission of any material information or inclusion of any misleading
information in the list of claims or the preliminary information memorandum
submitted by the corporate debtor, every person who—
(a) is a promoter or director or partner of the corporate debtor, as the
case may be, at the time of submission of the list of claims or the preliminary
information memorandum by the corporate debtor; or
(b) has authorised the submission of the list of claims or the preliminary
information memorandum by the corporate debtor,
shall, without prejudice to section 77A, be liable to pay compensation to every
person who has sustained such loss or damage.
(3) No person shall be liable under sub-section ( 2), if the list of claims or the
preliminary information memorandum was submitted by the corporate debtor
without his knowledge or consent.
List of claims
and
preliminary
information
memorandum.

9
(4) Subject to section 54E, any person, who sustained any loss or damage
as a consequence of omission of material information or inclusion of any misleading
information in the list of claims or the preliminary information memorandum shall
be entitled to move a court having jurisdiction for seeking compensation for such
loss or damage.
54H. During the pre-packaged insolvency resolution process period,—
(a) the management of the affairs of the corporate debtor shall continue
to vest in the Board of Directors or the partners, as the case may be, of the
corporate debtor, subject to such conditions as may be specified;
(b) the Board of Directors or the partners, as the case may be, of the
corporate debtor, shall make every endeavour to protect and preserve the
value of the property of the corporate debtor, and manage its operations as
a going concern; and
(c) the promoters, members, personnel and partners, as the case may
be, of the corporate debtor, shall exercise and discharge their contractual or
statutory rights and obligations in relation to the corporate debtor, subject
to the provisions of this Chapter and such other conditions and restrictions
as may be prescribed.
54-I. ( 1) The resolution professional shall, within seven days of the
pre-packaged insolvency commencement date, constitute a committee of creditors,
based on the list of claims confirmed under clause ( a) of
sub-section ( 2) of section 54F:
Provided that the composition of the committee of creditors shall be altered
on the basis of the updated list of claims, in such manner as may be specified, and
any such alteration shall not affect the validity of any past decision of the
committee of creditors.
(2) The first meeting of the committee of creditors shall be held within seven
days of the constitution of the committee of creditors.
(3) The provisions of section 21, except sub-section (1) thereof, shall, mutatis
mutandis  apply, in relation to the committee of creditors under this Chapter:
 Provided that for the purposes of this sub-section, references to "resolution
professional" under sub-sections ( 9) and (10) of section 21, shall be construed as
references to "corporate debtor or the resolution professional".
54J.( 1) Where the committee of creditors, at any time during the
pre-packaged insolvency resolution process period, by a vote of not less than
sixty-six per cent. of the voting shares, resolves to vest the management of the
corporate debtor with the resolution professional, the resolution professional
shall make an application for this purpose to the Adjudicating Authority, in such
form and manner as may be specified.
(2) On an application made under sub-section ( 1), if the Adjudicating
Authority is of the opinion that during the pre-packaged insolvency resolution
process—
(a) the affairs of the corporate debtor have been conducted in a
fraudulent manner; or
(b) there has been gross mismanagement of the affairs of the corporate
debtor,
it shall pass an order vesting the management of the corporate debtor with the
resolution professional.
Management
of affairs of
corporate
debtor.
Committee of
creditors.
Vesting
management
of corporate
debtor with
resolution
professional.

10
(3) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in this Chapter, the
provisions of—
(a) sub-sections ( 2) and ( 2A) of section 14;
(b) section 17;
(c) clauses ( e) to (g) of section 18;
(d) sections 19 and 20;
(e) sub-section ( 1) of section 25;
(f) clauses (a) to (c) and clause (k) of sub-section ( 2) of section 25; and
(g) section 28,
shall, mutatis mutandis apply, to the proceedings under this Chapter, from the
date of the order under sub-section ( 2), until the pre-packaged insolvency
resolution process period comes to an end.
54K. (1) The corporate debtor shall submit the base resolution plan, referred
to in clause ( c) of sub-section ( 4) of section 54A, to the resolution professional
within two days of the pre-packaged insolvency commencement date, and the
resolution professional shall present it to the committee of creditors.
(2) The committee of creditors may provide the corporate debtor an
opportunity to revise the base resolution plan prior to its approval under
sub-section ( 4) or invitation of prospective resolution applicants under
sub-section ( 5), as the case may be.
(3) The resolution plans and the base resolution plan, submitted under this
section shall conform to the requirements referred to in sub-sections ( 1) and (2) of
section 30, and the provisions of sub-sections ( 1), (2) and ( 5) of section 30 shall,
mutatis mutandis  apply, to the proceedings under this Chapter.
(4) The committee of creditors may approve the base resolution plan for
submission to the Adjudicating Authority if it does not impair any claims owed by
the corporate debtor to the operational creditors.
(5) Where—
(a) the committee of creditors does not approve the base resolution
plan under sub-section ( 4
); or
(b) the base resolution plan impairs any claims owed by the corporate
debtor to the operational creditors,
the resolution professional shall invite prospective resolution applicants to submit
a resolution plan or plans, to compete with the base resolution plan, in such
manner as may be specified.
(6) The resolution applicants submitting resolution plans pursuant to
invitation under sub-section ( 5), shall fulfil such criteria as may be laid down by
the resolution professional with the approval of the committee of creditors, having
regard to the complexity and scale of operations of the business of the corporate
debtor and such other conditions as may be specified.
(7) The resolution professional shall provide to the resolution applicants,—
(a) the basis for evaluation of resolution plans for the purposes of
sub-section ( 9), as approved by the committee of creditors subject to such
conditions as may be specified; and
Consideration
and approval
of resolution
plan.

11
(b) the relevant information referred to in section 29, which shall,
mutatis mutandis apply, to the proceedings under this Chapter,
in such manner as may be specified.
(8) The resolution professional shall present to the committee of creditors,
for its evaluation, resolution plans which conform to the requirements referred to
in sub-section ( 2) of section 30.
(9) The committee of creditors shall evaluate the resolution plans presented
by the resolution professional and select a resolution plan from amongst them.
(10) Where, on the basis of such criteria as may be laid down by it,
the committee of creditors decides that the resolution plan selected under
sub-section ( 9) is significantly better than the base resolution plan, such resolution
plan may be selected for approval under sub-section ( 12):
 Provided that the criteria laid down by the committee of creditors under this
sub-section shall be subject to such conditions as may be specified.
(11) Where the resolution plan selected under sub-section ( 9) is not
considered for approval or does not fulfil the requirements of sub-section ( 10), it
shall compete with the base resolution plan, in such manner and subject to such
conditions as may be specified, and one of them shall be selected for approval
under sub-section ( 12).
(12) The resolution plan selected for approval under sub-section ( 10) or
sub-section ( 11), as the case may be, may be approved by the committee of
creditors for submission to the Adjudicating Authority:
Provided that where the resolution plan selected for approval under
sub-section ( 11) is not approved by the committee of creditors, the resolution
professional shall file an application for termination of the pre-packaged insolvency
resolution process in such form and manner as may be specified.
(13 ) The approval of the resolution plan under sub-section ( 4) or
sub-section ( 12), as the case may be, by the committee of creditors, shall be by a
vote of not less than sixty-six per cent. of the voting shares, after considering its
feasibility and viability, the manner of distribution proposed, taking into account
the order of priority amongst creditors as laid down in sub-section (1) of section 53,
including the priority and value of the security interest of a secured creditor and
such other requirements as may be specified.
(14) While considering the feasibility and viability of a resolution plan,
where the resolution plan submitted by the corporate debtor provides for
impairment of any claims owed by the corporate debtor, the committee of creditors
may require the promoters of the corporate debtor to dilute their shareholding or
voting or control rights in the corporate debtor:
 Provided that where the resolution plan does not provide for such dilution,
the committee of creditors shall, prior to the approval of such resolution plan
under sub-section ( 4) or sub-section ( 12), as the case may be, record reasons for
its approval.
(15) The resolution professional shall submit the resolution plan as approved
by the committee of creditors under sub-section ( 4) or sub-section ( 12), as the
case may be, to the Adjudicating Authority.
Explanation I.—For the removal of doubts, it is hereby clarified that, the
corporate debtor being a resolution applicant under clause ( 25 ) of
section 5, may submit the base resolution plan either individually or jointly with
any other person.

12
Explanation II.—For the purposes of sub-sections ( 4) and ( 14), claims
shall be considered to be impaired where the resolution plan does not provide for
the full payment of the confirmed claims as per the updated list of claims maintained
by the resolution professional.
54L. (1) If the Adjudicating Authority is satisfied that the resolution plan as
approved by the committee of creditors under sub-section ( 4) or sub-section ( 12),
as the case may be of section 54K, subject to the conditions provided therein,
meets the requirements as referred to in sub-section ( 2) of section 30, it shall,
within thirty days of the receipt of such resolution plan, by order, approve the
resolution plan:
 Provided that the Adjudicating Authority shall, before passing an order for
approval of a resolution plan under this sub-section, satisfy itself that the
resolution plan has provisions for its effective implementation.
(2) The order of approval under sub-section ( 1) shall have such effect as
provided under sub-sections ( 1), ( 3) and ( 4) of section 31, which shall, mutatis
mutandis  apply, to the proceedings under this Chapter.
(3) Where the Adjudicating Authority is satisfied that the resolution plan
does not conform to the requirements referred to in sub-section ( 1), it may, within
thirty days of the receipt of such resolution plan, by an order, reject the resolution
plan and pass an order under section 54N.
(4) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in this section,
where the Adjudicating Authority has passed an order under sub-section ( 2) of
section 54J and the resolution plan approved by the committee of creditors under
sub-section ( 4) or sub-section ( 12), as the case may be of section 54K, does not
result in the change in the management or control of the corporate debtor to a
person who was not a promoter or in the management or control of the corporate
debtor, the Adjudicating Authority shall pass an order—
(a) rejecting such resolution plan;
(b) terminating the pre-packaged insolvency resolution process and
passing a liquidation order in respect of the corporate debtor as referred to
in sub-clauses ( i), ( ii ) and ( iii ) of clause ( b) of sub-section ( 1) of
section 33; and
(c) declaring that the pre-packaged insolvency resolution process
costs, if any, shall be included as part of the liquidation costs for the
purposes of liquidation of the corporate debtor.
54M. Any appeal against an order approving the resolution plan under
sub-section ( 1) of section 54L, shall be on the grounds laid down in
sub-section ( 3) of section 61.
54N. ( 1) Where the resolution professional files an application with the
Adjudicating Authority,—
(a) under the proviso to sub-section ( 12) of section 54K; or
(b) under sub-section ( 3) of section 54D,
the Adjudicating Authority shall, within thirty days of the date of such application,
by an order,—
(i) terminate the pre-packaged insolvency resolution process; and
(ii) provide for the manner of continuation of proceedings initiated
Approval of
resolution
plan.
Appeal against
order under
section 54L.
Termination
of pre-
packaged
insolvency
resolution
process.

13
for avoidance of transactions under Chapter III or proceedings initiated
under section 66 and section 67A, if any.
(2) Where the resolution professional, at any time after the pre-packaged
insolvency commencement date, but before the approval of resolution plan under
sub-section ( 4) or sub-section ( 12), as the case may be of section 54K, intimates
the Adjudicating Authority of the decision of the committee of creditors, approved
by a vote of not less than sixty-six per cent. of the voting shares, to terminate the
pre-packaged insolvency resolution process, the Adjudicating Authority shall
pass an order under sub-section ( 1).
(3) Where the Adjudicating Authority passes an order under sub-section ( 1),
the corporate debtor shall bear the pre-packaged insolvency resolution process
costs, if any.
(4) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in this section,
where the Adjudicating Authority has passed an order under sub-section ( 2) of
section 54J and the pre-packaged insolvency resolution process is required to be
terminated under sub-section ( 1), the Adjudicating Authority shall pass an
order—
(a) of liquidation in respect of the corporate debtor as referred to in
sub-clauses ( i), ( ii) and ( iii) of clause ( b) of sub-section ( 1) of section 33;
and
(b) declare that the pre-packaged insolvency resolution process costs,
if any, shall be included as part of the liquidation costs for the purposes of
liquidation of the corporate debtor.
54-O.(1) The committee of creditors, at any time after the pre-packaged
insolvency commencement date but before the approval of resolution plan under
sub-section ( 4) or sub-section ( 12), as the case may be of section 54K, by a vote
of not less than sixty-six per cent. of the voting shares, may resolve to initiate a
corporate insolvency resolution process in respect of the corporate debtor, if
such corporate debtor is eligible for corporate insolvency resolution process
under Chapter II.
(2) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in Chapter II, where
the resolution professional intimates the Adjudicating Authority of the decision
of the committee of creditors under sub-section ( 1), the Adjudicating Authority
shall, within thirty days of the date of such intimation, pass an order to—
(a) terminate the pre-packaged insolvency resolution process and
initiate corporate insolvency resolution process under Chapter II in respect
of the corporate debtor;
(b) appoint the resolution professional referred to in clause ( b) of
sub-section ( 1) of section 54E as the interim resolution professional, subject
to submission of written consent by such resolution professional to the
Adjudicating Authority in such form as may be specified; and
(c) declare that the pre-packaged insolvency resolution process costs,
if any, shall be included as part of insolvency resolution process costs for
the purposes of the corporate insolvency resolution process of the corporate
debtor.
(3) Where the resolution professional fails to submit written consent under
clause ( b) of sub-section ( 2), the Adjudicating Authority shall appoint an interim
resolution professional by making a reference to the Board for recommendation,
in the manner as provided under section 16.
Initiation of
corporate
insolvency
resolution
process.

14
(4) Where  the  Adjudicating  Authority  passes  an  order  under
sub-section ( 2)—
(a) such order shall be deemed to be an order of admission of an
application under section 7 and shall have the same effect;
(b) the corporate insolvency resolution process shall commence from
the date of such order;
(c) the proceedings initiated for avoidance of transactions under
Chapter III or proceedings initiated under section 66 and section 67A, if
any, shall continue during the corporate insolvency resolution process;
(d) for the purposes of sections 43, 46 and 50, references to "insolvency
commencement date" shall mean "pre-packaged insolvency commencement
date"; and
(e) in computing the relevant time or the period for avoidable
transactions, the time-period for the duration of the pre-packaged insolvency
resolution process shall also be included, notwithstanding anything to the
contrary contained in sections 43, 46 and 50.
54P. (1) Save as provided under this Chapter, the provisions of sections 24,
25A, 26, 27, 28, 29A, 32A, 43 to 51, and the provisions of Chapters VI and VII of
this Part shall, mutatis mutandis  apply, to the pre-packaged insolvency resolution
process, subject to the following, namely:—
(a) reference to "members of the suspended Board of Directors or the
partners" under clause ( b) of sub-section ( 3) of section 24 shall be construed
as reference to "members of the Board of Directors or the partners, unless
an order has been passed by the Adjudicating Authority under section
54J";
(b) reference to "clause ( j) of sub-section ( 2) of section 25" under
section 26 shall be construed as reference to "clause ( h) of sub-section ( 2)
of section 54F";
(c) reference to "section 16" under section 27 shall be construed as
reference to "section 54E";
(d) reference to "resolution professional" in sub-sections ( 1) and ( 4)
of section 28 shall be construed as "corporate debtor";
(e) reference to "section 31" under sub-section ( 3) of section 61 shall
be construed as reference to "sub-section ( 1) of section 54L";
(f) reference to "section 14" in sub-sections ( 1) and ( 2) of section 74
shall be construed as reference to "clause ( a) of sub-section ( 1) of
section 54E";
(g) reference to "section 31" in sub-section ( 3) of section 74 shall be
construed as reference to "sub-section ( 1) of section 54L".
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions of this Chapter and unless the context
otherwise requires, where the provisions of Chapters II, III, VI and VII are applied
to the proceedings under this Chapter, references to—
(a) "insolvency commencement date" shall be construed as
references to "pre-packaged insolvency commencement date";
(b) "resolution professional" or "interim resolution professional",
as the case may be, shall be construed as references to the resolution
professional appointed under this Chapter;
(c) "corporate insolvency resolution process" shall be construed
as references to "pre-packaged insolvency resolution process"; and
Application of
provisions of
Chapters II,
III, VI and VII
to this
Chapter.

15
(d) "insolvency resolution process period" shall be construed as
references to "pre-packaged insolvency resolution process period".'.
9. In section 61 of the principal Act, for sub-section ( 4), the following sub-sections
shall be substituted, namely:—
"(4) An appeal against a liquidation order passed under section 33, or
sub-section ( 4) of section 54L, or sub-section ( 4) of section 54N, may be filed on
grounds of material irregularity or fraud committed in relation to such a liquidation
order.
(5) An appeal against an order for initiation of corporate insolvency
resolution process passed under sub-section ( 2) of section 54-O, may be filed on
grounds of material irregularity or fraud committed in relation to such an order.".
10. In section 65 of the principal Act, after sub-section ( 2), the following
sub-section shall be inserted, namely:—
"(3) If any person initiates the pre-packaged insolvency resolution process—
(a) fraudulently or with malicious intent for any purpose other than
for the resolution of insolvency; or
(b) with the intent to defraud any person,
the Adjudicating Authority may impose upon such person a penalty which shall
not be less than one lakh rupees, but may extend to one crore rupees.".
11. After section 67 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted,
namely:—
"67A. On and after the pre-packaged insolvency commencement date, where
an officer of the corporate debtor manages its affairs with the intent to defraud
creditors of the corporate debtor or for any fraudulent purpose, the Adjudicating
Authority may, on an application by the resolution professional, pass an order
imposing upon any such officer, a penalty which shall not be less than one lakh
rupees, but may extend to one crore rupees.".
12. In section 77 of the principal Act, the Explanation  shall be omitted.
13. After section 77 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted,
namely:—
"77A. (1) Where—
(a) a corporate debtor provides any information in the application
under section 54C which is false in material particulars, knowing it to
be false or omits any material fact, knowing it to be material; or
(b) a corporate debtor provides any information in the list of
claims or the preliminary information memorandum submitted under
sub-section ( 1) of section 54G which is false in material particulars,
knowing it to be false or omits any material fact, knowing it to be
material; or
(c) any person who knowingly and wilfully authorised or
permitted the furnishing of such information under sub-clauses ( a)
and (b),
such corporate debtor or person, as the case may be, shall be punishable with
imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than three years, but which may
Amendment
of section 61.
Amendment
of section 65.
Insertion of
new section
67A.
Fraudulent
management
of corporate
debtor during
pre-packaged
insolvency
resolution
process.
Omission of
Explanation
to section 77.
Insertion of
new section
77A.
Punishment
for offences
related to pre-
packaged
insolvency
resolution
process.

16
extend to five years or with fine which shall not be less than one lakh rupees, but
which may extend to one crore rupees, or with both.
(2) If a director or partner of the corporate debtor, as the case may be,
deliberately contravenes the provisions of Chapter III-A, such person shall be
punishable with imprisonment for not less than three years, but which may extend
to five years, or with fine which shall not be less than one lakh rupees, but which
may extend to one crore rupees, or with both.
Explanation. —For the purposes of this section and sections 75, 76 and 77,
an application shall be deemed to be false in material particulars in case the facts
mentioned or omitted in the application, if true, or not omitted from the application,
as the case may be, would have been sufficient to determine the existence of a
default under this Code.".
14. In section 208 of the principal Act,—
(i) after clause ( c), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
"(ca) pre-packaged insolvency resolution process under Chapter III-A
of Part II;";
(ii) after sub-section ( 1), the following sub-section shall be inserted,
namely:—
"(1A) Where the name of the insolvency professional proposed to be
appointed as a resolution professional, is approved under clause ( e) of
sub-section ( 2) of section 54A, it shall be the function of such insolvency
professional to take such actions as may be necessary to perform his
functions and duties prior to the initiation of the pre-packaged insolvency
resolution process under Chapter III-A of Part II.".
15. In section 239 of the principal Act, in sub-section ( 2), after clause ( fc), the
following clauses shall be inserted, namely:—
"(fd) the form, particulars, manner and fee for making application before the
Adjudicating Authority under sub-section ( 2) of section 54C;
(fe) the conditions and restrictions with which the promoters, members,
personnel and partners of the corporate debtor shall exercise and discharge
contractual or statutory rights and obligations under clause ( c) of section 54H;".
16. In section 240 of the principal Act, in sub-section ( 2),—
(i) after clause ( e), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
"(ea) the other costs under sub-clause ( e) of clause ( 23C ) of
section 5;";
(ii) after clause ( zk), the following clauses shall be inserted, namely:—
"(zka) such number of financial creditors and the manner of proposing
the insolvency professional, and the form for approving such insolvency
professional by the financial creditors under clause ( e), the persons who
shall provide approval under the proviso to clause ( e), the form for making
a declaration under clause ( f) of sub-section ( 2) of section 54A;
(zkb) the form for obtaining approval from financial creditors under
sub-section ( 3), and the persons who shall provide approval under the
proviso to sub-section ( 3
) of section 54A;
(zkc ) the other conditions for the base resolution plan under
clause ( c), and such information and documents under clause ( d) of
sub-section ( 4) of section 54A;
Amendment
of section
208.
Amendment
of section
239.
Amendment
of section
240.

17
(zkd) the form in which the report is to be prepared under clause ( a),
such reports and other documents under clause ( b), and such other duties
under clause ( c) of sub-section ( 1), and the manner of determining and
bearing the fees in sub-section ( 3) of section 54B;
(zke ) the form for providing written consent of the insolvency
professional under clause ( b), the form for declaration under clause ( c), the
information relating to books of account and such other documents relating
to such period under clause ( d) of sub-section ( 3) of section 54C;
(zkf) the form and manner for making application for termination of
the pre-packaged insolvency resolution process under sub-section ( 3) of
section 54D;
(zkg) the form and manner of making public announcement under
clause ( c) of sub-section ( 1) of section 54E;
(zkh) the manner of confirming the list of claims under clause ( a), the
manner of informing creditors under clause ( b), the manner of maintaining
an updated list of claims under clause ( c), the form and manner of preparing
the information memorandum under clause ( g), and such other duties under
clause ( i) of sub-section ( 2) of section 54F;
(zki) such other persons under clause ( c), the manner of appointing
accountants, legal or other professionals under clause ( e), such other matters
under sub-clause ( iv) of clause ( f) and the manner of taking other actions
under clause ( g) of sub-section ( 3) of section 54F;
(zkj ) the manner of determination of fees and expenses as
may be incurred by the resolution professional under sub-section ( 6) of
section 54F;
(zkk) the manner of bearing fees and expenses under sub-section ( 7)
of section 54F;
(zkl) the form and manner of list of claims and preliminary information
memorandum under sub-section ( 1) of section 54G;
(zkm) the conditions under clause ( a) of section 54H;
(zkn) the manner of alteration of the composition of the committee of
creditors under the proviso to sub-section ( 1) of section 54-I;
(zko) the form and manner of making application under sub-section ( 1)
of section 54J;
(zkp) the manner of inviting prospective resolution applicants under
sub-section ( 5) of section 54K;
(zkq) the other conditions under sub-section ( 6) of section 54K;
(zkr) the conditions under clause ( a) and the manner of providing the
basis for evaluation of resolution plans and the information referred to in
section 29 under sub-section ( 7) of section 54K;
(zks) the  conditions  under  the  proviso  to  sub-section  ( 10)  of
section 54K;
(zkt) the  manner  and  conditions  under  sub-section  ( 11)  of
section 54K;
(zku) the form and manner of filing application under the proviso to
sub-section ( 12) of section 54K;

18
(zkv) the other requirements under sub-section ( 13) of section 54K;
(zkw) the form for submission of written consent under clause ( b) of
sub-section ( 2) of section 54-O;".
17. In section 240A of the principal Act, in sub-section ( 1), after the words
"corporate insolvency resolution process", the words "or pre-packaged insolvency
resolution process" shall be inserted.
18. (1) The Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code (Amendment) Ordinance, 2021 is
hereby repealed.
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the
said Ordinance shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the provisions of this
Act.
Amendment
of section
240A.
Repeal and
savings.
Ord. 3 of
2021.

A
BILL
 further to amend the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016.
————
(As passed by the Houses of Parliament)
MGIPMRND—751RS—25-08-2021.