Bill No. 104 of 2019
THE PRESS COUNCIL (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2019
By
SHRI GOPAL CHINAYYA SHETTY, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Press Council Act, 1978.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventieth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Press Council (Amendment) Act, 2019.
 (2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In section 14 of the Press Council Act, 1978, in sub-section (1), after the existing
proviso, the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:—
"Provided further that if a journalist is found guilty of distorting the facts or spreading
fake news, his accreditation as journalist shall be cancelled with immediate effect.".
Short title and
commencement.
5
Amendment
of section 14.
37 of 1978.
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Media is a vital part of the Democratic System in India and considered as a fourth pillar
of democracy. The persons associated with journalism are considered very respectable and
intellectual who are expected to bring truth before the society.
There is no doubt that the Press acts as a mediator between the public and the
Government. The Press communicates the Government's activities to the masses and the
public activities and expectations to the Government so that the facts of an incident are
revealed.
Journalism has not achieved the prominent place in democracy on its own but the
society has given it this prominence keeping the importance of responsibilities of journalism
towards social causes. Democracy is empowered if journalism keeps playing its positive role
towards social causes and put forth the right facts/news before the society.
But it has often been observed that there are certain shortcomings in Indian Press
System while playing its role and some journalists have nothing to do with real journalism.
The objective of a meaningful journalism is that it should play an important role between the
administration and the society. It should not mislead the citizens of the country through
yellow journalism, that means, by distorting facts or publishing fake news.
Therefore, the need is to bring an amendment in the Press Council Act, 1978 with a
view to ensure that a Journalist does not involve in distorting the facts or spreading fake
news while reporting or bringing any material before the society.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW D ELHI; GOPAL CHINAYYA SHETTY
June 11, 2019.
2

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT  FROM  THE  PRESS  COUNCIL  ACT,  1978
* * * * *
14.(1) Where, on receipt of a complaint made to it or otherwise, the Council has reason
to believe that a newspaper or news agency has offended against the standards of journalistic
ethics or public taste or that an editor or working journalist has committed any professional
misconduct, the Council may, after giving the newspaper, or news agency, the editor or
journalist concerned an opportunity of being heard, hold an inquiry in such manner as may
be provided by regulations made under this Act and, if it is satisfied that it is necessary so to
do, it may, for reasons to be recorded in writing, warn, admonish or censure the newspaper,
the news agency, the editor or the journalist or disapprove the conduct of the editor or the
journalist, as the case may be:
Provided that the Council may not take cognizance of a complaint if in the opinion of
the Chairman, there is no sufficient ground for holding an inquiry.
* * * * *
Power to
censure.
3

MGIPMRND—591LS(S3)—21-06-2019.
LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Press Council Act, 1978.
————
(Shri Gopal Chinayya Shetty , M.P.)