1
THE PREVENTION OF BEGGING AND REHABILITATION OF
BEGGARS BILL, 2015
By
DR. KIRIT PREMJIBHAI SOLANKI, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for prevention of begging and rehabilitation of beggars in the country and
for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Prevention of Begging and Rehabilitation of Beggars
Act, 2015.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
Short title
and extent.
Bill No.  104 of  2015
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) ‘‘appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases the Central Government;
(b) ‘‘beggar" means any person who indulges in begging at public places or go
from door to door to solicit alms;
(c) ‘‘child" means a boy or girl who is below the age of eighteen years;
(d) ‘‘fund" means the Rehabilitation Fund constituted under section 4; and
(e) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any law for the time being in force, the
Central Government shall, as soon as may be, by notification in Official Gazette, formulate
a national action plan for the prevention of begging and rehabilitation of beggars.
(2) The national action plan referred to in sub-section (1) shall include the following
provisions—
(a) collection of exact and authentic data of the number of beggars in the country;
(b) setting up of Task Forces in every district of the country, in consultation
with the appropriate Government, to identify the persons indulged in begging at
various places and take steps for their rehabilitation;
(c) constitution of an advisory team in association with the stakeholders and the
persons having knowledge and expertise in the field of social welfare and prepare a
rehabilitation action plan on the basis of recommendations made by the advisory
team;
(d) formulation of various welfare schemes for the rehabilitation of beggars
including construction of rehabilitation homes; and
(e) concrete proposals for the prevention of begging.
4. ( 1) The Central Government shall constitute a Rehabilitation Fund for the
rehabilitation of beggars with an initial corpus of rupees one thousand crore.
(2) A rehabilitation home shall function in every district with the aid of the
Rehabilitation Fund.
(3) The Fund shall be used for providing following facilities in the rehabilitation
homes—
(i) free educational facilities to the dependent children of beggars;
(ii) free facilities for vocational training and adult literacy to the beggars;
(iii) employment facilitation center for inmates who have received vocational
training; and
(iv) free medical facilities.
5. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Indian Penal Code, 1860 or any other
law for the time being in force, whoever forces any child into begging shall be punished with
imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than four years but which may extend to
seven years and also with fine which may extend to rupees five lakh.
6. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent
therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force.
7. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
Definitions.
National
action plan
for
prevention of
begging and
rehabilitation
of beggars.
Constitution
of the
Rehabilitation
Fund for
rehabilitation
of beggars.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
Penalty.
Overriding
effect of the
Act.
Power to
make rules.
40
45 of 1860.

3
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
5

4
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Despite all efforts made and welfare measures taken by the Central Government and
State Governments, the practice of begging continues unabated all over the country. This
practice is very much prevalent especially in the metropolitan cities and urban centers. There
are organized gangs who exploit innocent children and force them into begging for gathering
alms for the gang leaders and organizers.
Prevention of begging has to go along with programmes for education, vocational
training and rehabilitation of the children, women and men found engaged in begging. In
addition, some alternative sources of livelihood should be made available to the beggars.
Therefore, it is high time that a law for prevention of begging be brought forward and
other alternative sources of livelihood be made available to these under-privileged people.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; KIRIT PREMJIBHAI SOLANKI
March 3, 2015.

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for a national action plan for prevention of begging and
rehabilitation of beggars. Clause 4 provides for constitution of a Rehabilitation Fund for
rehabilitation of beggars. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the
Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that an annual recurring expenditure of about
rupees five hundred crore is likely to be incurred from the Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees one hundred crore is also likely to be
involved.
5

6
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 7 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for prevention of begging and rehabilitation of beggars in the country and for
matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Dr. Kirit Premjibhai Solanki, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—26LS(S3)—16-04-2015.