8Ul No. 104 of 1962 
THE DEFENCE OF INDIA BILL, 1962 
(As INTRODUCED IN LoK SABRA 
ON 16TH NOVEMBER, 1962) 
-

'!HE DEFENCE OF INDIA BILL, 1962 
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES 
CLAUSES 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
1. Short title, extent, application, duration and s8,ings. 
2. Definitions. 
CHAPI'ER II 
EMUGENCY POWERS 
3. Po~r to make rules. 
4. Special powers to control civilian personnel employed in 
connection with the Armed Forces of the Union. 
5. Enhanced penalties. 
6. Temporary amendments to Acts. 
CHAPTER III 
CML DEFENcE SERVICES 
7. Constitution of Civil Defence Service. 
8. Appointment of mem.bers and officers. 
9. Dismissal of members of Civil Defence Service. 
10. Functions of members of Civil Defence Services. 
11. Penalty. 
12. Power to make rules. 
CHAPTER IV 
SPECIAL TRmUNALS 
13. Constitution of Special Tribunals. 
14. Jurisdiction of Special Tribunals. 
15. Procedure of Special Tribunals. 
16. Exclusion of public from proceedings of Special Tribunals. 
17. Power of Spedal Tribunals. 
18. Sentences of Special Tribunals. 
2029(B)LS-l. 

CLAUSES 
(ii) 
CHAPTER V 
EMPLOYMENT OF TEcHNICAL PERsONNEL IN THE NATIONAL SaVICE 
19. Definitions. 
20. Liability for employment, in national service. 
21. National Service Tribunals. 
22. Notified establishments. 
23. Employment of technical personnel in the national service. 
24. Reinstatement. 
25. RelinquisJunent of employment by, dismissal of, and engage-
ment by ~ablishment of, technical personnel. 
26. Penalties and procedure. 
27. Service of summons, notices, orders, etc. 
28. Power to make rules. 
CHAPTER VI 
REQUISITIONING AND ACQUISITION OF IMMOVABLE PROPERTY 
• 29. RequisitiOning of immovable property. 
30. Payment of compensation. 
31. Power to obtain information and give ,direction. 
32. Power of entry into, and inspection of, property, etc. 
33. Eviction from requisitioned property. 
34. Penalty for contravention of any order regarding requisition-
ing. 
35. Release from requisition. 
36. Acquisition of requisitioned property. 
37. Compensation for acqUisition of Il'equisitioned property. 
38. Power to make rules. 
39. Certain properties requisitioned under previous law to be 
deemed to be requisitioned under this Chapter. 
CHAPTER VII 
SUPPLEMENTAL 
40. Power to delegate. 
41. Rules to be laid before Houses of Parliament. 
42. Jurisdiction of ordinary courts. 

(iii) 
CLAUSES 
43. Effect of Act and rules, etc., Inconsistent with other enact-
ments. 
44. Ordinary avocations of l~ to be Interfered with as little as 
possible. 
45. Savings as to orders. 
46. Chapter m not to apply to measures taken for the protection 
of Armed Forces. 
47. Protection of action taken unciE!!r the Act. 
48. Repeal and saving. 

S 
Hill No. 101 of 196z 
THE DEFENCE OF INDIA BUL, 1962 
(As IImIODUCED IN LoK SABHA) 
A 
BILL 
to provide few special measu.7'eS to ensure the public safety and 
interest, the defence of India and civil defence and few the trial 
of certain offences and few matters connected therewith. 
WHI:REAS the President has declared. by Proclamation under 
clause (1) of artical 352 of the Constitution that a grave emergency 
exists whereby the security of India is threatened by external 
aggression; 
AND WHBRBAS it is expedient to provide for special measures to 
ensure the public safety and interest, the defence of India and 
civil defence and for the trial of certain offences and for matters 
connected therewith; 
BE it, therefore, enacted by Parliament in the Thirteenth Year 
10 of the Republic of India as followa:-
IS 
CHAPTER I 
PRarDmfAJrr 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Defence of India Act, 1962. 
(2) It extends to the whole of India and it applies als()-
(a) to citizens of India outside Indiaj 
\ b) to persons in the service of the Government, wherever 
they may be; 
(c) in respect of the regulation and discipline of the 
naval, military and air forces or any other armed forces of tJ-ot' 
Short title 
extent, app-
lication, du-
ration and 
S8vinp. 

Definitions. 
2 
Union, to members of, and persons attached to, employed with, 
or following, those forces, wherever they may be; 
(d) to; and to persons on, ships and aircraft registered in 
India, wherever they may be. 
(3) It shall remain in force during the period of operation of , 
the Proclamation of Emergency issued. on the 26th October, 1962, 
and for a period of six months thereafter but its expiry under the 
operation of this sub-section shall not affect-
(a) the previous operation of, or anything duly done or 
suffered undet, this Act or any rule made thereunder or any 10 
order made under any such rule, or 
(b) any right, privilege, obligation or liability acquired, 
accrued or incurred under this Act or any rule made there-
under or any order made under any such rule, or 
(c) any penalty, forfeiture or punishment incurred in IS 
respect of any offence under this Act or any contravention of 
any rule made under this Act or bf any order made under any 
such rule, or 
(d) any investigation, legal proceeding or remedy in 
respect of any such right, privilege, obligation. liability, 
penalty, forfeiture or pnnishment as aforesaid; 20 
and any such investigation, legal proceeding or remedy may be 
instituted, continued. or enforced and any BlICh peulty, fOlieiture 
or punishment may be imposed as if this Act had not expired. 
z. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
(a) "civil defence" includes any measures not amounting 
to actual combat, for affording defence against any form of 
hostile attack by a foreign power or for depriving any form of 
hostile attack by a foreign power of its effect either wholly or 
2S 
in part whether such measures are taken before, durJng or after 30 
the time of the attack; 
(b) "Civil Defence Services" mean the services formed 
wholly or mainly to meet the needs of civil defence; 
(c) "enemy" means-
(i) any person or country committing external aggres- 3S 
sion against India; 
(~i) ,any person belonging to a country committing such 
aggretliion; 

3 
(iii) such other country as may be declared by the 
Central Government to be assisting the country committing 
such aggression; 
(iv) any person belonging to such other country; 
5 (d) "enemy territory" means-
(i) any area which is under the sovereignty of, or 
administered by, or for the time being in the occupation 
of, a country referred to in sub-clause (i), or a country 
referred to in sub-clause (iii), of clause (c) of this section; 
10 (ii) any area wlhich the Central Government may, by 
15 
20 
notification in the Official Gazette, specify to be enemy 
terrItory for the purposes of this Act or any rule made 
thereunder; 
(e) "military operations" mean the operations of the 
Armed Forces of the Union; 
(I> "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under 
this Act; 
(g) "Proclamation of Emergency" means the Proclama-
tion issued under clause (1) of article 352 of the Constitution 
on the 26th October, 1962; 
(h) "State Government" in relation to a Union territory 
means the administrator thereof. 
CHAPI'ER II 
EMERGENCY POWERS 
2S 3. (1) The Central Govemment may, by notification in the OIIcial Power to 
Gazette, make such rules as appear to it necessary or expedient /f0l'4 mike rule •. 
securing the defence of India and civil defence, the public safety, the 
maintenance of public order or the efBcient conduct of military opera-
tions,. or for maintaining supplies and services essential to the life of 
30 the community. 
35 
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the powers conferred 
by sub-section (1), the rules may provide for, and may empower any 
authority to make orders providing for, all or any of the following 
matters, namely:-
(1) ensuring the safety and welfare of the Armed Forces of 
the Union, ships and aircrafts, and preventing the prosecution of 
any work Ukely to prejudice the opelnltlons of the Armed Forces 
of the Union; 

4 
(2) prohibiting anything likely to prejudice the training, 
discipline or health of the Armed Forces of the Union; 
(3) preventing any attempt to tamper with the loyalty of 
persons in, or to dissuade (otherwise than with advice given in 
good faith to the person dissuaded for his benefit or that of any S 
member of his family or any of his dependents) persons from 
entering the service of the Government: 
(4) preventing or prohibiting anything likely to assist the 
enemy or to prejudice the successful conduct of military opera-
tions or civil defence. including- II) 
(a) communications with the enemy or agents of the 
enemy; . 
(b) acquisition, possession without lawful authority or 
exCUse and publication of information likely to assist the 
enemy; 
(c) contribution to, participation or assistance in, the 
floating of loans raised by or on behaif of the enemy; 
(d) advance of money to, or contracts or commercial 
dealings with the enemy, enemy subjects or persons residing, 
IS 
carrying on business, Or being, in enemy territory; and z.o 
(e) acts, publications or communications prejudicial to 
civil defence; 
(5) preventing the spreading without lawful authority or 
excuse of false reports or the prosecution of any purpose like'y 
to cause disaffection or alarm, or to prejudice India's relations 2'1 
with foreign powers or to prejudice maintenance of peaceful -
conditions in any area or· part of India, or to promote feelings of . 
ill-will, enmity or hatred between different classes of the people 
of India; 
(6) requiring the publication of news and information; 30 
(7) demanding security from any press used for the purpOSf: 
of printing or publishing any newspaper, news-sheet, book or 
other document containing matters prejudicial to the defence of 
India and civil defence, the public safety, the maintenance of 
public order, the efficient conduct of military operations or thr 3.) 
maintenance of supplies and services essential to the life of the 
community, the forfeiture of .such security and the circumstance~ 
in which and the authority by whom such forfeiture may h .. 
ordered; 

5 
(8)replatiac the conduct of persons in respect of areas the 
control of which is considered necessary or expedient, and the 
removal of persons from such areas; 
(9) requiring any person or class of persona to comply with 
any scheme of defence or civil defence; 
(10) ensuring the wetf of-
(a) ports, deckyanis, lighthotueS, qht-ships eel 
aerodromes; 
(b) railways, tramways, roads, canals and all otlier 
10 means of transport by land or water; 
(c) te~egraphs, post offices, signalling apparatus and all 
other means of communication; 
(d) sources and systems of water-supply, works for the 
supply of water, gas or electricity, and all oth~r works for 
IS public purposes; 
20 
(e) vessels, aircraft, transport vehicles as defined in the 
Motor Vehicles Act, 1939, and rolling stocks of railways and 
tramways; 
(f> warehouses and all other places used or intended to 
be used for storage purposes; 
(g) mines, oil-fields, factories or industrial or commer-
cial undertakings generally, or any mine, oil-field, factory 
or industrial or commercial undertaking in particular; 
(h) laboratories and institutions where seientific or 
technological research or training is conducted or imparted; 
(i) all works and structures being part of, or connected 
with, anything earlier mentioned in this clause; and 
(j) any other place or thiDg used or intended to be used 
for the purposes of Government or a local authority or a 
semi-Government or autonomous organisation, the protec-
tion of which is considered "necessary or expedient for 
securing the defence of India and civil defence, the pubUc 
safety, the public order, or the efficient conduct of mlUtary 
operations, or for maintainbJc supplies and services. essential 
to the life of the community; 
(11) the demo1ition, destructiono or rendering useless In case 
of necessity of any baildiq or other premises or any other pro-
perty; 

• 
(12) prohibiting or regulating traftic, and the use of vessell, 
buoys, lights and signals, in ports and territorial, tidal and inland 
waters; 
(13) the control of lights and sounds; 
(14) the control of persons entering, travelling in or depart- , 
ing from, In~ta; 
(15) notwithstanding anything in any other law for the time 
being in force,-
(i) the apprehension and detention in custody of any 
person whom the authority empowered by the rules to 10 
apprehend or detain, as the case may be, suspects, on grounds 
appearing to that authority to be reasonable, of being of 
hostile origin or of having acted, acting, being about to 
act or being likely to act in a manner prejudicial to the 
defence of India and civil defence, the security of the State, IS 
the public safety or interest, the maintenance of public 
order, India's relations with foreign States, the maintenance 
of peaceful conditions in any part or area of India or the 
efficient conduct or military operations, or with respect to 
whom that authority is satisfied that his apprehension and 20 
detention are necessary for the pUrpose of preventing him 
from acting in any such prejudicial manner, 
(ii) the prohibition of such person from entering or 
residing or remaining in any area, and 
(iii) the compelling of such person to reside and remain 25 
in any area, or to do or abstain from doing anything; 
(16) rest~cting and regulating the charter of foreign 
vessels; 
(17) regulating the structure and equipment of vessels. for 
the purpose of ensuring the safety thereof and of persons there- 30 
in; 
(18) regulating work in dockyards and shipyards in respect 
.of the construction and repairs of vessels: 
(19) prohibiting or regulating the sailings of vessels from 
ports, traffic at aerodromes and the movement of aircraft, and 35 
tra1Bc on railways, tramways and roads, and reserving end re-
quiring to be adapted, for the use of the Government, all or any 
accommodation in vessels, aireraft, railways, tremways or road 
vehicles for the carriage of persons, animals or goods; 

'I 
(20) the impresament of vessels, alreraft, vehld-, and 
animals for transport; 
(21) prohibiting or regulating the use of postal, telegraphic 
or telephonic services, including the taking possession of such 
services, and the delaying, seizing, intercepting or Interruptlng 
of postal articles or telegraphic or telephonic messages; 
(22) regulating the delivery otherwise than by postal or tele-
graphic service of postal articles and telegrams; 
(23) the control of trade or industry for the purpose of 
10 regulating or increasing the supply of, and the obtaining of in-
formation with regard to articles or things of any description 
whatsoever which may be used in connection with the conduct 
of military operations or civil defence or for maintaining supplJea 
and services essential to the life of the community; 
IS (24) the control of generation, supply, distribution, use or 
consumption of electrical energy; 
(25) the control of agriculture (including the cultivation of 
agricultural land and crops to ,be raised therein) for the puI'pOfe 
of increasing the production and supply of foodgrains and other 
20 essential agricultural products; 
(26) the provisiOD, storage and mainteDance of commodities 
and things required for the conduct of miUtary operations or for 
the defence of India aDd civil defence; 
(27) the requisition of services of persons for maintaining 
25 supplies and services essential to the life of the community; 
(28) the provision, eGnstruction, maintenance or alteratiOll 
of bulldinp. premises or other structures or excavations required 
for the conduct of mBitary operations or the defenee of IDdia 
aDd clvU defence; 
30 (29) the protection of property by the performan.ce of such 
fire prevention and other duties as may be allotted: to any person; 
(30) the seeurmg of any building, premisea or other struc-
tures. from being readily recognisable in the event of • hostile 
attack by a foreign power; 
35 (31) ensuring the ownership and control of mines and oil-
fields by the citizens; 
(32) prohibiting, restricting or otherwise regulating the 
bringing into, or taking out of, India of goods or articles of any 
description (including coin, bulllon,baok notes, currency notes, 

8 
·securities and foreign exchange), and bringing into any part or 
place in India of any such goods or articles as aforesaid intended 
to be taken out of India without being removed from the ship, 
aircraft or other conveyance in which they are being carried, 
end applying the provisions of the Sea Customs Act, 1878, and 5 8 of 1878-
in particdlar section 19 thereof to such prohibitions, restrictions 
and regulations; 
(33) controlling the possession, use or disposal of, or dealing 
in, coin, bullion, bank notes, currency notes, securities or foreign 
exchange; 10 
(.94) the control of any road or pathway, waterway, -ferry or 
bridge, river, canal or other source of water-supply; 
(35) the requisitioniDg and aequisition of any movable pro-
perty; and the principles on which and the manner in which 
compensation shall be determined and given in respect of such 15 
nquiaitlonlng oraequisitioll; 
(36) prohibiting or regulating the possession, use or disposal 
of-
(4) explosives, inflammable substances, corrosive and 
other dangerous substances or articles, arms and ammunl- 20 
tions of war; 
(b) vessels; 
(c) wireless telegraphic apparatus; 
(d) aircraft, and 
(e) photognlphic and signalling apparatus and any mealll 25 
of recording Information; 
(37) prohibiting or regulating the brInging into, or taking 
out of, India and the possession, use or tl"llnsmillion of ciphers 
and other secret means of communIcating information; 
(38) prohibiting or regulating the pubUcation of inventlona 30 
and designs; 
(39) prohIbiting or regulating the publication of results of 
research work having a bearing on eftom relating to defence of 
IDcUa or -military operatiODl; 
(40) preventing the disclosure of official secrets; 35 
(41) prohibiting or regulating meetings, assemblies, falra 
and proce'Jsions; 
(42) preventing or controlling any use of uniforms, whether 
oftlcial or otherwise. llags. ofBcial deeDrations like medals, badgell 

s 
10 
IS 
20 
35 
9 
and other insignia and anything similar thereto, where such use 
is calculated to deceive or to prejudice the public safety. the 
maintenance of public order, the defence of India and civil 
defence; 
(43) ensuring the accuracy of any report or declaration 
legally required of any person; 
(44) preventing the unauthorized change of names; 
(45) preventing anything likely to cause misapprehension In 
respect of the identity of any official person, official document 
or official property Or in respect of the identity of any person, 
document or property purporting to be, or resembling, an official 
person, official document or oftlcial property; 
(46) the precautionary measures which the Government or 
any departmeRt thereof or any loeal authority, memhers of 
police forces and fire brigades and members of any other service 
or authority employed primarily for purpoaes other than civil 
defence purposes should be required to take within their res-
peetive jurisdictions or with respect to any persoanel employed. 
by them; 
(47) the seizure and custody or destruction of Injured, un-
claimed or dangerous animals; 
(48) the salvage of damaged buildings and property and dis-
posal of the dead; 
(49) the evacuation of areas and the removal of property or 
a~als therefrom; 
(50) the accommodation in anY' area of persons evacuated 
from another area and the regulation of the conduct of evacuat-
ed persons accommodated In' such area; 
(51) the bHleting of evacuated persons or persons authorised 
to exerclse functions under this Act; 
(52) the instructiioas of members of the public in civil 
defence and their equipment for purposes of civil defence; 
(53) the entry into, and search of, any place reasonably 
suspected of being used for any purpose prejudicial to the public 
safety or interest, to the defence of India and civil defence or to 
the efRcient conduct of military operations, and fol' the seizure 
and d~al of anything found there and reasonably suspected of 
being used for such purpose; 
(54) the p1"oparation of any scheme of defenee servtee or 
any other service connected with the defenre of India and re-
qurlng any person or class of persons to comply with sUch scheme; 

10 
(55) the eviction of unauthorised occupants from such pub-
lic premises [as deftned in the Public Premises (Eviction of Un-
authorised Occupants) Act, 1958] as are, in the opinion of the 3a of z"L 
Central Government, required for the purposes connected with 
the defence of India and civil defence, the public safety or inte- 5 
rest, the efticlent conduct of military operations or the mainte-
nance of supplies and services essential to the life of the commu· 
Dlty. -1 
(3) The rules made under sub-secUon (1) may further-
(i) provide for the arrest and trial of persons contravening 10 
any of the rules or any order issued thereunder; 
(ii) provide that any contravention of, or any attempt to 
eon.travene, or any abetment of, or any attempt to abet, the con-
travention of any of the provisions of the rules or any order 
issued under any such provision, shall be punishable with im- IS 
prisonment for a term which may extend to seven years, or with 
fine, or with both; 
(iii) provide for the seizure, detention and forfeiture of any 
property in respect of which such contravention, attempt or 
abetment as is referred to in clause (ii) has been committed and 20 
for the adjudl"cation of such forfeiture whether by a court or 
by any other authority; • 
(iv) confer powers and impose duties-
(4) upon the Central Government or officers and autho-
rities of the Central Government as respects any matter, 25 
notwithstanding that the matter is one in respect of which 
the State Legislature has power to make laws; and 
(b) upon any State Government or omcers and autho-
rities of any State Government as respects any matter, not-
withstanding that the matter is one in respect of which the 30 
State Legislature has no power to make laws; 
(v) prescribe the duties and powers of public servants and 
other persons as regards preventing the contravention of, or 
securing the observ'8nce of, the rules or any order made there-
under: ~S 
(vi) provide for preventing obstruction and deception of. 
and disobedience to. any person acting. and interference with 
any notice issued, in pursuance of the rules or any order made 
thereunder; 

62, of 1957. 
46 of 1950. 
45 of 1950. 
s 
10 
11 
(w) prohibit attempts by any person to screen trom punisR-
ment any. one, other than the husband or wife of such pe1'lOn, 
contravenmg any of the rules or any order made thereunder; 
(viU) empower or direct any authority to take such action 
as may be speclfi.ed in the rules or as may seem necessaty to such 
authority for the purpose of ensuring the public safety Otl' in-
terest or the defence of Indi'a and clvil defence; 
(iz) provide for charging fees in respect of the grant or 
issue of a licence, permit, certi1icate or other document for the 
purposes of the rules. 
4. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official special 
Gazette, direct by general or special order that any persons who power. to!1 
not being members of the Armed Forces of the Union are attach~::J:! 
to, or employed with, or following those Forces, shall be subject to penonnel 
IS naval, military or air force law, and thereupon such persons shall be r::s:!:r.ctd 
subject to discipline and liable to punishment fat offences under n~cthiohn • WIt t e the Navy Act, 1957, the Army Act, 1950 and the Air Force Act, Armed 
1950, as the case may be, as if they were included in such class of ::.coru-nk: 
persons subject to any of those Acts as may be specified in the n. 
20 notification or in the, absence thereof, by an officer empowered by the 
Central Goverllment in this behalf. 
5. (1) If any person with intent to wage war against India or Bnhanced 
to assist any country committing external aggression against Indla, penaltie .. 
contravenes any provision of the rules made under section 3 or any 
25 order issued under any such rule, he shall be punishable with death 
or imprisonment for life, or imprisonment for a term which may 
extend to ten years and shall also be liable to fine. 
(2) If any person,-
(4) contravenes any such provision of, or any such rule or 
order made under the Aircraft Act, 1934 as may be notifieci in 
this behalf by the Central Government, or 
(b) in any area notified in this behalf by a State Govern-
ment, contravenes any such provision of, or any such rule made 
under, the Arms Act, 1959, the Indian Explosives Act, 1884, the 
Explosive Substances Act, 1908, or the Inftamm·able Substances 
Act, 1952, as may be notified in this behalf by the State Gov-
ernment, 
he shall, notwithstanding anything contained in any of the aforesaid 
Acts or rules made thereunder, be punishable with imprisonment for 
40 a term which may extend to five years, or, if his intention is to 
3.<;ist any country committing external aggression against India, or, 

Temporary 
amendment_ 
to Act .. 
t* 
to wage war agaiDst India, with death, imprisonment for We ot 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to ten years and shall 
in either case also be liable to fine. 
(3) For the purposes of this section, any persco. who attempts to 
contravene, or abets or attempts to abet, or does any act preparatory S 
to, a contravention of any provision of any law, rule or order shall 
be deemed to have contravened. that provision. 
6. During the continuance in force of this Act,-
(1) the Indian Official Secrets Act, 1923 shall have effect 19 of 1923. 
as if-
(II) in sub-section (1) of section 5 thereof, after the words 
10 
"in his possession or control", the words "any information 
likely to assist the enemy as defined in the Defence of India 
Act, 1962, or" had been inserted; and after the words "in 
such a ,Place," the words "or which relates to or is used in, a IS 
protected area as defined in the rules made under the Defence 
of India Act, 1962, or relates to anything in such area," had 
been 'inserted,; 
(b) for sub-section (4) of section 5 thereof, the follow-
ing sub-section had been substituted, namely:-
20 
"(4) A person guilty of an offence under this sec-
tion shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term 
which may extend to five years, or if such offence is 
committed with intent to assist any country committing 
external aggression against India or to wage war against 25 
India, with death or imprisonment for life or imprison-
ment for a term which may extend to ten years and 
shall in either case also be liable to fine."; 
(c) after clause (II) of section 12 thereof, the follOWing 
clause had been inserted, namely:-
"(00) an offence under section 5 shall be a r.ogniz- 30 
able and non-btailable offence;"; 
(2) the Aircraft Act, 1934 shall have effect as 1£- 22 of 19!4-
(II) at the end of clause (r) of sub-section (2) of sec-
tion 5, the following words had been inserted, namely:- 35 
"including the taking of steps necessary to secure 
compliance with, or to prevent contravention of, the 
rules regulating such matters, or, where any such rule bas 
been contravened, to· rectify, or to enable proceedinSI to 
be taken in reapect of, ncb contravtlltioo."i 40 

.. of 1936. 
5 
10 
11 
(b) in clause (b) of sub-section (1) of section 8, for the 
words, brackets, letters and figures "clause (h) or clause (i) 
of sub-section (2) of section 5", the words, brackets, letters 
and figures "clause (d), (e), (h), (i), (k) or (l) of sub-
section (2) of section 5, or the commission of an offence 
punishable under section 11," had been substituted; 
(c) in section 11, after the words "in the air", the words 
"or in such a manner as to interfere with any of the Armed 
Forces of the Union or any ships or aircraft" had been 
Inserted; 
(d) in section 13, for the words, brackets, le~rs and 
figures "clause (i) of sub-section (2) of section 5" the words, 
brackets, letters and figures "clause (c), (d), (e), (h), 
(i), (;), or (k) of sub-section (2) of section 5 or punishable 
under section 11" had been substituted; and 
(e) section 14 had been omitted; 
(3) the Payment of Wa~ Act, 1936, shall have effect as if 
after clause (i) of sub-section (2) of section 7 thereof, the 
following clause had been inserted, namely:-
"(ii) deductions made with the written authorisation 
of-
(i) the employed person; or 
(ii) the president or secretary of the registerect 
trade union of which the employed person is a member 
2S on such conditions as may be presc;ribed, 
far contribution to the National Defence Fund or to any 
Defence Savings Scheme approved by the State Govern-
ment;"; 
(4) the Motor Vehicles Act, 1939 (in this clause referred to 
as the "said Act") shall have effect subject to the following provi-
. sions, namely:-
(a) the State Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, authorise, subject to such conditions if any, 
as it may think fit to impose, any person- . 
3S (i) also to perform such functions of the State Gov-
ernment under Chapter IV (hi this clause referred to u 
the ·'said Chapter") of the said Act, other than the 
maldng of niles as may be specified in the notificatIonj 
and 
2029 (B) LS--3. 

14 
(ii) to perfonn to the exclusion of the State Trans-
port Authority or Regional Transport Authority, as the: 
ease may be, such functions of the State Transport 
Authority or any Regional Transport Authority under 
the said Chapter as may be specified in the notification; S 
and the expression "proper authority" in this clause shall, 
in relation to the performance of any such function as alore-
said, be construed in 9ceordance with the previsions of such 
notification, if any, relating to that function; 
(b) notwithstanding anything to the contrary in section 10 
. 58 or section 62 of the said Act. the proper authority may 
grant a permit or a temporary permit under the said Chapter 
to be effective for any specified period not exceeding five 
years; 
(c) the State Government may, by general or special 15 
order, in writing, provide that the proper authority,- -
(i) in deciding to grant or refuse to grant a permit 
under the said Chapter, shall not be bound to take into 
consideration representations made by any persons other 
than the applicant for the permit or to follow the proce- 20 
dure laid down in section 57 of the said Act, and may 
take 1n1o consideration an application for a stage carriage 
permit or a public carrier's permit which has not com-
plied with the provisions of su1>section (2) of that sec-
tion; 2S 
(ii) In fixing the maximum and minimum fares or 
freights for stage carriages and public carriers, shall not 
be bound to give the representatives of the interests 
affected an opportunity of being heard or to follow the 
procedure laid down in section 43 of the said Act, or 30 
where such action is taken for the purpose of preventing 
the charge of exceS$ fares or freights, to have regard to 
any of the considerations set forth in clauses (a) to (d) 
of sub-section (1) of that section; 
(d) without prejudice to the prOvisions of section 60 of 3S 
the said Act, the proper authority may, if in its opinion the 
public interest 80 requires, cancel, or modffy the conditions 
of. or IUlpend for such perloc! as it thinks fit, any permit or 
counter-aigDature under the said Chapter which Is valid in' 
its juriadicUon;_ __ ___ _ 40 
(e) the State Government may, by general or spedal 
order in writing, exoempt from' all or any of the provisions of 
the said Chapter any transport vehicle used or requiTed for 

5 
10 
1& 
USe in connection wlth any work or purpose declared by the 
State Government in the order to be a work or purpose con· 
nected wi th the defence of India. the conduct of military 
operations or civil defence; 
<f) if the State Government by general or special order 
in writing so directs, the previsions of sub-section (2) of 
section 38 of the said Act shall have effect in relation to any· 
controlled motor vehiclES specified in the order as if the 
words "not being in any case more than two years or less 
than six months" had been omitted. 
ExpZanation.-In this clause "controlled motor vehicle" 
means any mOitor vehicle declared by the Govenunent to be 
a control~ed motor vehicle by order made in this behalf. 
CHAPTER III 
15 ClVlL DllI'Ufc& SERVICES 
7. (1) The State Government may constitute for any area within. Con.~tioa 
the State a body of persons to be called the Civil Defence Service and ~e~~!' : 
may appoint a person (hereinafter called the Director) to command Service. 
such body. 
20 (2) Subject to any orders which the Central Government may 
make in this behalf, any member of a Civil Defence Service of any 
State may at any time be required to discharge functions in relation 
to civil defence in any other State and shall while so discharging such 
functions be deemed to be a member of a Civil Defence Service of 
2S that other State and be vested with the powers, functions and prl. 
vil~ges and be subject to the liabilities of a member of a Civil 
Defence Service of that other State. 
~. (1) Any authority authorised in this behalf by the State Gov .. Appointment 
emmen.t may appoint as members of a Civil Defence Service so many :!r:::::. 
30 persons who are ftt and willin~ to serve as such as it Is authorised by 
the- State Govermaeat to appoint, and the Director may appoint any 
such member to any office or command in the Service. 
(2) Every person so appointed to ,be a member of a Civil Defence 
Service shall be given a certificate of membership in such fonn as may 
35 be prescribed. 
t. The Director or any other authority authorised in this behalf Dismislal of 
by the State Government may, by order in writing, dismiss sum- :r~~fIl'I 
marlly from a Civil Defence SeTVice any member thereof if, in the Defence 
opinion of the Director or such other authority, he fails to discharge Service. 
40 satisfactorily, or is guilty of misconduct in the discharge of, his duties 
as such Jnember, or his continued presence In the Service Is otherwise 
UAdesirab1e. 

Fcnalty. 
Power to 
make 
MCL 
itt 
10. (1) The members of a Civil Defence Service shall perlomi 
such functions in relation to the carrying out of measures for civil 
defence as may be assigned to them by rules made under this Act 
or by any other law for the time being in force. 
(2) The Director or any person authorised in this behalf by the S 
Director or by the State Government may by order at any time call 
out a member of a Civil Defence Service for training or to discharge 
any such functions as aforesaid. 
11. If any member of a Civil Defence Service on being called out 
by an order under sub-section (2) of section 10 neglects or refuses 10 
wit~out sufficient excuse to obey such order or to discharge his func-
tions as a member of the Civil Defence Service or to obey any lawful 
order Or direction given to him for the performance of his duties, he 
shall, on conviction by a competent court, be punishable with fine 
which may extend to five hundred rupees. IS 
12. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, make rules for carrying out the purposes of this 
Chapter. 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the 
foregoing powers, such rules may- 20 
(a) prescribe the duties of members of Civil Defence Services 
and regulate the manner in which they may be called out for 
service; 
(b) regulate the organisation, appOintment, conditions of 
service, discipline, accoutrement, and clothing of members of any 25 
or all of the Civil Defence Services; 
(c) prescribe the form of certificates of membership of any 
or all of the Civil Defence Servicesj . 
(d) provide that a contravention of, or an attempt to con-
travane, and any abetment of or attempt to abet the contzaven- 30 
tion of, any of the provisions of the rules or of any order issued 
under any such provision shall be punishable with imprisonment 
for a term which may extend to seven years, or with fine, or with 
both; 
(e) provide for tire arrest and trial of persons contravening, 3S 
or reasonably suspected of contravening, any of the provisions of 
the rules or of any order issued under any such provision; 
(f) provide for the seizure, detention and forfeiture of any 
property in respect of which such contravention, attempt or 
abetment as is referred to in clause (d) has been committed; 40 

17 
(g) prescribe the duties and powers of public servants and 
other persons as regards preventing the contravention of, or secur_ 
ing the observance of, t.he rules or of any order issued thereunder; 
(h) provide for preventing the obstruction and deception of, 
5 and disobedience to, any person acting, and interference with any 
notice issued, in pursuance of the rules or of any order issued 
thereunder; 
(i) prohibit attempts to screen from punishment any person 
contravening any of the rules. 
10 CHAPTER IV 
SPECIAL TRIBUNALS 
13. (1) Tht'! State Government may, for the whole or any part of <}ogati~OD 
the State, constitute one or more Special Tribunals which or each of ~ri~ •• 
which shall consist of three members appointed by that Government. 
IS (2) No person shall be appointed as a member of a Special Tri-
bunal unless he-
(a) is qualified under clause (2) of article 217 of the ConstI-
tution for appointment as a Judge of a High Court; or 
,011898. 20 
(b) has exercised th'e powers under the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1898 (hereafter in this Chapter referred to as th9 
Code) of anyone or more of the following, namely:-
25 
(i) Sessions Judge, Additional Sessions Judge, Chief 
Presidency Magistrate, Additional Chief Presidency Magis-
rate, 
(ii) District Magistrate, Additional District Magistrate. 
14. During the period during which the Proclamation of Emer- Juriadit;t0ln 
gency is in operation, the State Government may, by general or special *,r~:.r!. 
order, direct that a Special Tribunal shall try any offence-
(a) under any rule made under section 3, or 
JO (b) punishable with death, imprisonment for life or impri-
ment for a term which may extend to seven years, 
triable by any court having jurisdiction within. the local limits of the 
jurisdiction of the Special Tribunal and may in any such order direct 
the transfer to the Special Tribunal of any particular case frem any 
35 other Special Tribunal or any other criminal court not being a High 
Court. '. 1 

Prcc:edurc 
of Special 
Tribunal •. 
18 
15. (1) A Special Tribunal may take cognizanee of offences with-
out the 'accused being committed to it 'for trial. 
(2) Save in cases of trials of offences punishable with death or 
imprisonment for life, it shall not be necessary in any trial for it Spe-
cial Tribunal to take down the evidence at length in writing, but the 5 
Special 'l"l-ibunal shall cause a memorandum of the substance of what 
each witness deposes, to be taken down, and such memorandum shall 
be signed by a member of the Special Tribunal and shall form part 
of the record.. 
(3) A Special Tribunal shall not be bound to .adjourn any trial for 10 
any purpose unless such adjournment is, in its opinion, necessary in 
the interests of justice. 
(4) A Special Tribunal shall not, merely by reason of a change in 
its members, be bound to recall and to re-hear any witness who has 
given evidence, and it may act on the evidence already recorded by 15 
or produced. before it. 
(5) After an accused person has once appeared before it, a Special 
Tribunal may try him in his absence if, in its opinion, his absence has 
been brought about by the accused himself for the purpose of im-
peding the course of justice, or if the behaviour of the accused in 20 
court has been such as, in the opinion of the Special Tribunal, to 
impede the course of justice. 
(6) In the event of any difference of opinion among the members 
of a Special Tribunal, the opinion of the majority shall prevail. 
(7) The State Government may, by notification in the Oftlcial 25 
Gazette, make rules providing for-
(i) the times and places at which Special Tribunals may sit; 
and 
(ii) the procedure to be adopted in the event of any member 
of a Special Tribunal being prevented from attending throughout 30 
the tri.al of any accused person. 
(8) A Special Tribunal shall, in all matters in respect to which no 
procedure has been prescribed by this Act or by rules made there-
under, follow the procedure prescribed by the Code for the trial 
of warrant cases by Magistrates. 3S 
ExClusion 16. In addition, and without prejudice, to any powers which a 
• of publiC Special Tribunal may possess by virtue of any law for the time being 
from pro- . bl' f di if Cecjings in force to order the excluslon of the pu lC rom any procee ngs, 
of. Special at any stage in the course of a trial of any person before a Special TrlbUDIII. 

19 
Tribunal, application is made by the prosecution, on the ground that 
the publication of any evidence to be given or of any statement to be 
made in the course of the trial would be prejudicial to the safety of 
the State, that all or any portion of the public shall be excluded 
S during any part of the hearing, the Special Tribunal may make an 
order to that effect, but the passing of the sentence shall in any case 
take place in public. 
17. A Special Tribunal shall have all the powers conferred by the Power or 
Code on a Court of Session exercising original jurisdiction. ~~~~:~als. 
10 18. (1) A Special Tribunal may pass any sentence authorised by SentenCe •. 
I of SpeCial 
aw. Tdbt:nal •• 
(2) A person sentenced by a Special Tribunal-
(a) to death or imprisonment for life, or 
(b) to imprisonment for a term extending to ten years under 
IS section 5 of this Act or under sub-section (4) of seCtion 5 of 
19 of 1923. the Indian Official Secrets Act, 1923, as amended by section 6 of 
this Act, 
shall have a right of appeal to the High Court within whose juris-
diction the sentence has been passed, but.save 86 aforesaid and not-
20 Withstanding the provisions of the Code, or of any other law for 
the time being in force, or of anything having the force of law by 
whatsoever authority made or done, there shall be no appeal from 
any order or sentence of a Special Tribunal, and no court shall 
have authority to revise such order or sentence, or to transfer any 
25 case from a Special Tribunal, or to make any order under section 
491 of the Code, or have any jurisdiction of any kind in respe.:'t of 
any proceedings of a Special Tribunal. 
(J) The powers conferred upon the appropriate Government by 
Chapter XXIX of the Code shall apply in respect of a person 
30 sentenced by a Special Tribunal. 
. 
3S 
CHAPTER V 
EMPLOYMENT OF TECHNICAL PERSONNEL IN THE NATIONAL SERVlCI: 
19. In this Chapter, unless the context otherwise requires,-
(a) Uemployment in the national service" means employ-
ment in a notified establishment in pursuance of an order passed 
under section 23; 
(b) "employer" means any person who employs technical 
personnel to do any work in an establishment and includes any 
Definitio'1s. 

person entrusted with the supervision and control of te~hnica1 
personnel in such an establishment; 
(c) "establishment" means-
(i) any office, or 
(ii) any place where any industry, trade, business or 5 
occupation is carried on; and includes any technical institu-
tion or training centre established, selected or approved by 
the Central Government; 
(d) "National Service Tribunal" means a Tribunal constitut-
ed under section 21; 10 
(e) "notified establishment" means any Government estab-
lishment and any establishment declared by notification under 
sub-section (1) of se:-tion 22 to be engaged in ~ork of national 
importance; 
(f) "notified occupation" means any occupation which the IS 
Central Government may, by rules made under this Chapter, 
specify as a notified occupation for the purposes of this Chapter; 
(g) "technical personnel" means all persons who possess 
knowledge of or skilr in one or more of the notified occupations, 
whether or not they are employed in any establishment, and 20 
includes such persons or class of persons undergoing training in 
any of those occupations in any establishment as may be declar-
ed by the Central Government by notification in the Official 
Gazette to be technical personnel for the purposes of this Chapter. 
Liability for ZO. All technical personnel, being citizens of India and not being 2S 
«;mploYD?-cnt1 members of the Armed Forces of the Union or members of any 
In natlonll 
service. Reserve of any such Force who are liable, under the terms of their 
National 
43eT vice 
TribuT\p}s. 
Notified 
estab1i!llt-
menta. 
service in such Reserve, to be called up for service at any time and 
not only on partial or general mobilisation, shall be liable under this 
Chapter to undertake employment in the natlonal service. 30 
21. (1) The Central Government shall constitute, for sueh areas 
and in luch places as it thlaks 8t, National Service TrIbunals to 
exercise the functions assigned to suc' tribuuls by or under thI. 
Chapter. 
(2) The composition, powers and pl'IOCedure of National Servic~ 35 
Tribunals shaD be such as may be prescribed. 
22. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Oftl-
cial Gazette, declare any establishment, which is engaged in work 
which, in the opinion of the Central Government, Is likely to aasist 

the defence of India and civil defence, the eftlc1ent conduct of mili-
tary operations, or the maintenance or increase of supplies and servi-
ces essential to the life of the community, to be an establishment 
engaged in work of national importance and thereupon such estab-
5 lishment shall be a notified establishment and while making such 
declaration, the Central Government may require that establishment 
to make such provisions as may be specified in the notification in 
regard to the terms of service and coriditions of work of its employees. 
(2) Every notified establishment shall be eligible to apply to a 
10 National Service Tribunal or to the Central Government for techni-
cal personnel and having so applied, shall take into its employment 
such technical personnel within such period and on such tel'lDl and 
conditions as may be prescribed. 
23. (1) Subject .to any rules made in this behalf mder thia Chap- BlI1ple ment 
IS ter, the Central Government may require a National Service Tribu- of tec:CICIl 
nal to repor.t what teclinical personnel, whether employed in an r::s'!t~~~r!i 
establishment or not, is available within its jurisdiction for employ- ser.loo. 
ment in the national service and m:.iy by order in writing,-
(a)" require the employer in any establishment by which such 
20 teclmical personnel is employed to release such personnel as may 
be specified in the order, for employment in the national service; 
(b) direct any technical personnel to undertake such employ-
ment in the national service as may be specified in the order; 
(c) direct that any technical personnel engaged in any estab-
lishment under conditions not amounting to employment in the 
national service shall, for the purposes of sub-section (8), be 
deemed to have been taken into employment in the national 
service; and 
(d) require any notified establishment, notwithstanding that 
it has not made any application under section 22, to take into 
its employment such technical personnel within such period as 
may be specified in the order. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything in sub-section (1), a National 
Service Tribunal may-
35 (a) exercise the powers conferred on the Central.Govern-
ment by clauses (a) and (b) of sub-section (1); 
(b) require by order any employer to give training in his 
establishment to persons for qualifying them as technical 
personnel; 
2029 (B)LS-4. 

Rein.tat~­
meot. 
te) <Urect by order technical personnel to present themaelVlti 
at such place and tlme as may be lij)eCified in the order for inter-
view or inquiry, and if so required, for submission to a test of 
their technical skill. 
(3) Any order made by the Central Government under sub-sec- 5 
tic;m (1) and by a National Service Tribunal under sub-section (2) 
Ihall be complied with within such period or on such date as may 
be'specified in thi6 behalf in the order. 
(4) ,The Central Government or, as the case may be, a National 
Service Tribunal, may, by order in writing, transfer technical per- 10 
lODllel from one form or place of employment in the national service 
to another; and the employer and the personnel concerned shall 
comply with such order. 
,V') N:o pel:SOn included in the definition of technical personnel, 
whO "h~s' been directed tl) undertake employment in the national IS 
~ce "9rt transferred from one form or place of employment to 
~oiher under the foregoing prOVisions, shall be disch8l"ged from or 
leave 'his ~mployment in such service unless the emJ?loyer or person 
concerned has previously obtained the permission of the Central 
Government or, as the case may be, of the National Service Tribunal. 20 
(6) Any person included in the definition of technical personnel 
who is required to undertake employment in the national service or 
~errecl from one form or place of employment to another under 
the foregoing provisions of this section, may be required by the 
Central Government, or, as the case may be, the National Service 2S 
'1'd~urial concerned, to submit himself tt. be examined by such medi-
cal authority as may be prescribed. ' 
(7) An appeal shall lie to the Central Government against any 
order passed by a National Service Tribunal under this section and 
the d~ision of the Central Government shall be finaL 30 
(8) The terms of service of technical personnel taken into employ-
ment in the national service shall be such as may be prescribed: 
Provided that any rights which such technical personnel may 
have under the provident or superannuation fund or other scheme 
relating to gratuity, bonus or other benefit for the adv8.Iltage of 35 
,e~ployees maintained by the establishment from which they are 
released shall be preserved. 
U. (J)Every person who was employed in his fOIlJler employ-
ment otherwise than in a probationary or temporary capacity and 
whose employment in the national se~ice has not befm ~ated 40 

by dJsmissal for serious misconduct shall, on his release from such 
employment in the national service, be entitled to be reinstated in 
hiS former employment, in accordance with such conditions as may 
~ prescribed: 
5 Provided that in determining such conditions regard shall be had 
to the additional skill and experience acquired by him in the course 
of his emplolment in the national service. 
(2) The Central Government may Ity rules mad~ in this behaU 
provide for the appointment of Technical Personnel (Reinstatement) 
10 Tribunals to deal with such matters in relation to reinstatement of 
persOns releaed from employment in the natioaal .. viae _"'IRQ be 
pntKriW. 
15. (1) Subject to any rules made in this behalf, a National Ser- Relinqwoflh-ment 
vice Tribunal may require any establishment (including. a' notified employment 
IS establishment) to post before a specified date and to keep postedl on ~l' disml::J 
its premises notices intimating that- ertg.gement 
by establish-
(a) no person included within the definition of technical me~t. or, 
personnel who is employed in the establishment shall at any time ~~n:r~l. 
af.ter the posting of the notice, leave his employment without 
20 the previous permission in writing of the National Service 
Tribunal; 
(b) if the National Service Tribunal refuses such permis-
sion, that tribunal may lay down, subject to the prescribed 
conditions, the terms of service on which the employer- shall 
continue to retain him in employment; 
(c) if any such person leaves his employment without the 
previous permission in writing of the Tribunal as aforesaid he 
may be d~rected by the Tribunal to return to his employment. 
(2) After notices referred to in sub-section (1) have been posted 
30 on the premises of any establishment (including a notified establish-
ment), no employer in the establishment shall engage, discharge or 
dismiss any person included in the definition of technical personnel 
except in accordance with rules made in this behalf. 
28. (1) Whoever coniravenes any order of the Central Govern- Penalties 
35 m~nt or. o~ a National Ser.vice Tribunal made under sectio~ 23 or ~~~ure. prn-
wllfully fads to comply WIth any summon6, requirement, dIrection 
or order issued or made by the Central Government or by a National 
Service Tribunal under any other provision of this Chapter shall be 
punishable with imprisonment for a term not exceeding six months, 
,,0 or with fine not exceeding one thousand rupees, or with both. 

~ ... , 
(2) No court shall take cognIizance of any offence punishable 
UJlCler sub-section (1) except with the previous sanction in writing~-
(4) in the case of contravention of any order or any wilful 
failure to comply with any summons, requirement or'direction 
of the Central Government," of the Central Government; S 
(b) in the case of contravention of any order or' any wilful 
failure to comply with any summons, requirement'ior direction 
of a National Service Tribunal, of the National Service 
Tribunal. 
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal 10 
Procedu:n!, 1898, an offence punishable under sub-section (1) shall , of IIeR. 
be cognizable. 
(4) No court inferior to a Presidency ~gistrate or a Magistrate 
of the First Class shall try any offence punishable under sub-
section (1). IS 
Service 27. Any summons, notice, requirement, direction or order issued. 
~~n::nona, made or given to any person under this Chnpter may be served 
onler" etc. by being sent by post addressed to that pel',"on at his last known 
residence. 
Power to 28. (1) The Central Government may. by notification in the ~o 
m au rules. Official Gazette, make rules for carrying out the. purposes of this 
Chapter. 
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, 
such rules may prescribe-
(4) the occupations which shall be notifled occupations for 2S 
the purposes of this Chapter; 
(b) the composition, powers and procedure of National 
Service Tribunals; 
(c) the technical personnel, which ~y be taken into the 
employment of any notified establishment under sub-section 30 
(2) of section 22 and the period within which and the terms and 
eonditiOll$ on which such . personnel shall be so taken; 
(d) the medical authority before whom any person may 
be l'equired to submit himself for examination under sub- 35 
~ion (I)) of section 23: 
. (e) the terms of service of techni,cal personnel taken into 
employment in the national aerv1cej 

(t) the conditions in accordance with which persons 
released from employment in the national service may be 
. reinstated in their former employment; 
• (g) the appointment of Technical Personnel (Reinstate-
S ment) Trihunals and the matters in relation to reinstatement 
which such Tribunals may be required to deal with; 
(h) the provisions relating to engagement, discharge or 
dismissal of persons by any employer in any establishment on 
the premises of which notices have been posted under sub-
10 section (1) of section 25: 
(i) any other matter which may be prescribed or which is 
to be provided for by rules. 
(3) Any rule maoo under this Chapter may ,provide that a 
contravention of the rule shall be punishable with imprisonment 
I!5 for a term not exceeding six months, or with fine not exceeding one 
thousand rupees, or with both. 
CHAPTER VI 
REQUISITIONING AND ACQUISITION OF IMMOVABLE PROPERTY 
29. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law ~eq~isj-
20 for the time being in force, if in the opinion of the Central Govern- f~~~~ableor 
ment or the State Government it is necessary or expedient so to do propertY. 
for securing the defence of Innia, civil defence, public safety, 
maintenan<;e of public order or efficient conduct of military opera-
tions, or for maintaining supplies and services essential to the life 
25 of the community, that Government may by order in writing requi-
sition any immovable property and may make such further orders 
as appear to that Government to be necp.ssary or expedil'nt ~n 
connection with the requisitioning: 
Provided that no property or part thereof which is exclusively 
30 used by the public for religious worship shall be requisitioned. 
(2) The requisition shall be effected by an order in writing 
addressed to the person deemed by the Central Government or the 
~tate Government, as the case may be, to be the oWner or person 
in possession of the property, and such order shall be servedfn the 
3S prescribed manner on the person to whom it is addressed. 
(3) Whenever any property is requisitioned under sflh-s£>Ction 
(1), the period of such r'!!quisition shall not extend beyond the 
period for which such property is required for any of the purposes 
mentioned in that sub-lection. .. . 

Payment 
()( cmt-
pensa,io""l. 
}Jower 10 
obtain 
informa-
tion and 
give direc-
tion. 
30. Whenever in pursuance of section Z9 the CeIltral Govena-
ment or the State Government, as the ease may be, requisitiolls any 
immovable property. there shall be paid to the person interested 
compensation the amount of which shall be d~termined by 'takin,. 
into consideration the following, namely:- S 
(i) the rent payable in respect of the property or if no rent 
is payable, the rent payable in respect of similar property in the 
locality; 
(ii) if in consequence of the requisition of the property the 
person interested is compelled to change his residence Or places 10 
of business, the reasonable expenses (if any) incidental to 
such eh."ge: 
. Provided that where any person interested being aggrieved 
by the amount of compensation so determiDeti makes an appli-
cation within the prescribed time to the Central Govemment 15 
or the State Government, as the cale may be, for referring the 
matter to an arbitrator, the amoant of compeD"saticm to be' paid 
shall be such as the arbitrator appointed in this behalf by the 
Central Government or the State Government, as the case may 
be, may determine: 20 
Provided further that where there is any dispute as to the 
title to receive the compensation. or as to the apPortionment of the 
amount of compensation, i" shall be referred to an arbitrator 
appointed in this behalf by the Central Government or the State 
Government, as the case may be, for determination, and shall be 25 
deterniined in accordance with the decision of such arbitrator. 
ExpZanation.-In this section, the expression "person interested" 
means the person who was in actual possession of the property re-
quisitioned under section 29 immediately before the requisition, or 
where no person was in such actual possession, the owner of such 30 
property. 
31. The Central Government or the State Government, as the case 
may be, may, with a view to requisitioning any property under section 
29 or determining the compensation payable under sectioti 30, by 
order- 35 
(a) require any person to furnish to the authority meritloned 
therein such information in his possession relating to any pro-
perty as may be specified; 
·(b) direct that the owner, occupier or the person in posses-
sion of the property shall not, without the permission of Govern- 40 
menl, dispose of it or where it is a building, structurally alter it 
t.ill the expiry of such period as may be speelfted in th~ order. 

32. Any person authorised in this behalf by the Central Govern- Power. of 
ment or the State Government, as the case may be, may enter into :~~y i::" 
any inunovable property and inspect such property for the purpose of pection of, 
determining whether, and if so in what manner, an order under section ~~:.perty, 
S 29 should be made in relation to such property or with a view to . 
securiJlg compliance with any order made under that section. 
33. (1) Any person remaining in possession of any requisitioned Eviction 
property in contravention of any order made under section 29 may ~r:i:tiODerr 
be summarily evicted from the property by any officer empowered property. 
loin this behalf by the Central Government or the State Government, 
as the case may be. 
(2) Any officer so empowered may, after giving to any woman 
not ~ppeapng in public reasonable warning and facility .to withdraw, 
remove or open any lock or bolt or break open any door of any 
IS building or do any other act necessary for effecting such eviction. 
34. If any person contravents any order made under section 29 ~cn8lty • ,or COll-
or section 31, he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term traven-
which may extend to one year, or with fine, or with both. ~~; of order 
regarding 
requisi-
tioning. 
35. (1) Where any property requisitioned under section 29 is Rele~~ f~OID 
:ao to be released from such requisition, the Government by which or requIsItion. 
under whose authority the property was requiSitioned or any person 
generally or specially authorised by it in this behalf may, after such 
inquiry, if any, as it or he may in any case, consider necessary to 
make or cause to be Inade, specify by order in writing the person to 
2S whom possession of the property shall be given. 
(2) The delivery of possession of the property to the person 
specified in the order under sub-section (1) shall be a full discharge 
of the Government from all liabilities in respect of the property, 
but shall not prejudice by any rights in respect of the property which 
30 any other person may be entitled by due process of law to enforce 
against the person to whom possession of the property is delivered. 
36. (1) Any immovable property which has been requisitioned Acquisi-
under section 29 may, in the manner hereinafter provided, be acquired tion .of 
in the circumstances and by the Government specified below, ~i::::t 
namely:- prop~rty. 
35 ~ 
(a) where any works have, during the period of requisition, 
been constructed on, in or over the property wholly or partly 
at the expense of any Government, the property may be acquired 

by that Government if it decides that the value of or the right 
to use, such works shall, by means of the acquisition of the pr~ 
perty, be preserved or secured for the purposes of any Govern-
ment~ or 
(b) where the cost to any Government of restoring the 5 
property to its condition at the1time of its requisition as aforesaid 
would, in the determination of that Government, be excessive 
having regard to the value of the property at that time, the 
property may be acquired by that Government. 
(2) When any Government as aforesaid decides to acquire any JO 
:immovable property, it shall serve on the owner thereof or where 
the owner is not readily traceable or the ownership is in dispute, by 
publishing in the Official Gazette, a notice stating that the Govern-
ment has decided to acquire it in pursuance of this section. 
(3) Where a notire of acquisition is served on the owner of the 15 
. property or is publis~ in the Official Gazette under sub-section (2), 
then, at the beginning of the day on which the notice is so served 
or published, the property shall vest in the Government free from 
any mortgage, pledge, lien or other similar encumbrances and the 
period of requisition thereof shall come to an end. 20 
(4) Any decision or determination of a Government under sub-
section (1) shall be final, and shall not be called in question in any 
court. 
(5) For the purposes of this section, "works" includes every 
description of buildings, structures and improvements of the pr~ 25 
perty. 
Com pen· 37. (1) The compensation payable for the acquisition of any pro-
sation fot nAtty under section 36 shall be-acquisi.- ...-
tion of re· 
qui~itioned 
property. 
(a) the price which the requisitioned property would have 
fetched in the Opt.'n market if it had remained in the same con.- 30 
dit.ion as it was at the time of requisitioning and been sold on 
the date of acquisition, or 
(b) twice the price which the requisitioned property would 
have fetched in the open market if it had been sold on the date 
of the requisition, whichever is less. 35 
(2) Where the owner of any property acquired Wider section 36 
is aggrieved by the amount of compensation determined in aecor· 
dance with sub-sed ion (1), he may make an application within the 
prescribed time to the Central Government or the State Government, 
as the case may be, for referring the matter to an arbitrator appoint- 40 

29 
ed in this behalf by the Central Government or the State Govern-
ment, and the amount of compensation to be paid shall be such as 
may be determined by the arbitrator in accordance with sub-section 
(1). ~ I 
5 (3) Where there is any dispute as to the title to receive the com-
~~tion or as to the apportionment of the amount of compensa-
tIon, It shall be referred to an arbitrator appointed in this behalf by 
the Central Government or the State Government, as the case may 
be, for determination, and his decision thereon shall be final. 
10 38. (1) The Central Government or the State Government as the p , Ower to 
case may be, may by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules make ruIn. 
for carrying out the purposes of this Chapter. 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the 
foregoing powers, such rules may prescribe-
15 (a) the procedure to be followed in arbitration proceedings 
under this Chapter; 
(b) the period within which the owner of any property or 
any other person interested in the amount of compensation may 
apply to the Government concerned. for referring the matter to 
20 an arbitrator; 
(e) the principles to be followed in apportioning the costs 
of proceedings before the arbitrator; 
(d) the method of payment of compensation; 
(e) the manner of service of notices and orders; 
25 (f) any other matter which has to be, or may be, prescribed. 
39. Any property referred to in SUlb-section (2) of section 24 of Certain 
30 of 195Z. the Requ~sitkm.ing and Acquisition of Immovable Property Act, 1952, ~~C:ca 
which continued, immediately before the commencement of that tio~cd under 
Act, to be subject to requisition under the Requisitioned Land l:v~. be 
'
of 1947.1 30 (Continuance of Powers) Act, 1947, and has not, immediately before deemed to 
.. the commencement of this Act, been released from requisitioning :nc~qUi.i­
'., shall, notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the under thie 
f . . d t d d f rt Chapter. time being in orce or In any JU gmen, ecree or or er 0 any cou , 
be deemed to be the property requisitioned under sub-section (1) of 
35 section 29 if such property is, in the opinion of the Central Govem-
! ment, now required for any of the purposes sPecified in that sub-
( section: 
Provided that-
(a) all agreements or awards for the payment of compen-
40 satiOll In respect of any such property for any period of requisi-
tiOD before the commellCement of this Act and In force Imme-
l diately before such commencement, shan continue to be in force 
2029 (B)LS-5. 

Power 
dele,ate. 
to 
30 
ud shan apply to the payment of compellSation ill respect of 
that property for any period after such commencement. , 
(b) anything done or any action taken (including any orders, 
notifications or rules made or issued) under the Requisitioning 
and Acquisition of Immova'ble Property Act, 1952, or" under the 5 
Requisitioned Land. (Continuance of Powers) Act, 1947, and con-
tinued' under the first-mentioned Act, shall, in so far as it is 
not inconsistent with the provisions of this Chapter or any rules 
0:- orders made thereunder, be deemed to have been done or 
taken under this Chapter. 10 
CHAPTER VII 
SUPPLEMENTAL 
40. (1) The Central" Government may, by order, direct that any 
power or duty which by this Act or by any rule made under this Act 
is conferred or imposed upon the Central Government shall, in such 15 
circumstances and under such conditions, if any, as may be specified 
in the direction, be exercised or discharged also-
(a) by any officer or authority subordinate to the Central 
Government, or"' 
(b) whether or not the power or duty relates to a matter 20 
with respect to which a State Legislature has power to make 
laws, by any State Government or by any officer or authority 
subordinate to such Government, or 
....,.." (c) by any other authority. 
(2) The State Government may, by order, direct that any. power 25 
or duty wlhich by this Act or by any rule made under this Act is con-
ferred or imposed on the Shte Government or which, being by this 
Act or any such rule conferred or imposed on the Central Govern-
ment, has been directed under sub-section (1) to be exercised or dis-
charged by the State Government, shall, in such circumstances and ~o 
under such conditions, if any, as may be specified in the direction, 
be exercised or discharged by any officer or authority not being (ex-
cept in the case of a Union territory) an officer or authority subordi-
nate to the Central Government. 
Rules to be "41. Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may 3S 
IRaid berorer be after it is made, before each House of Parliament while it is in 
ouaes 0 1 lod f th ". h b d . Parliament. session for a tota per 0 irty days WhlC may" e comprise 10 
one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if before the 
expiry of the session in which it is so laid or the successive sessions 
3 or 19:13. 
17 of 1947. 

31 
aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule_ 
or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall 
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, 
as the case may be; so however that any such modification or annul-
S ment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything pre-
viously done under that rule. 
42. (1) Except as may be provided in this Act or in any rule Iurisdic-
made thereunder or in any order made under any such rule by the tiod~ of 
ot" mary 
Central Government or the State Government or by an officer not courts. 
10 below the rank of Collector empowered under sub-section (1) or 
sub-section (2) of section 40 to make such order, the ordinary crimi-
nal and civil courts shall continue to exercise jurisdiction. 
(2) For the removal of doubts, it is ~ereby declared that any 
provision in any such rule or order as aforesaid to the effect that the 
IS decision of any authority not being a court shall be final or conclusive 
shall be a sufficient excepting provision within the meaning of sub-
section (1). , 
43. The provisions of this Act or any rule made thereunder or any Effect of Ac 
order made under any such rule shall have effect notwithstanding and .rules,t 
. . h . h t' d' ct t th etc., mcon-20 anything mconslstent t erewit con arne many ena men 0 er sistent with 
than this Act or in any instrument having effect by virtue of any other en-'. actments. enactment other than thiS Act. 
M. Any authority or person acting in pursuance of this Act shall Ordinary 
interfere with the ordinary avocations of life and the enjoyment of avoca-
1· I b t 'th th f' g tions of 2S property as Itt e as may e consonan WI e purpose 0 ensurrn life to be 
the public safety and interest and the defence of India and civil inter-fered defence. with as 
little as 
possible. 
45. (1) No order made in exercise of any po~r conferred by or Savings as 
under this Act shall be called in question in any court. to orders. 
30 (2) Where an order purports to have been made and signed by 
any authority in 'exercise of any power conferred by or under this 
Act, a court shall, within the meaning of the Indian Evidence Act, 
I of 18 72 ; 1872, presume that such order was so made by that autoority. 
46. Unless otherwise expressly provided in any rules or orders Ch 
made under Chapter III, nothing contained in that Chapter or any II Iar:~~ to 
35 such rules or orders shall apply to the Armed Forces of the Union. apply to 
or to any measures taken by any of the authorities in control of the ~e:urel for 
Armed Forces for the purpose of securing the defence or safety of tthcte·o PtO-f . . . . e I n 0 
such forces or for the protection of any naval, milItary or atl' force Armed 
. st 11 t' Forces. 40 m a a Ions. 

JtrotectiOn 
of action 
taken 
under the 
Act. 
,~. (1) No suit, prosecution or other legai proceeding shall lie 
against any person for anything which is in good faith done or in-
tended to be done in pursuance of this Act or any rules made there-
under or any orders issued under any such rule. 
(2) Save as otherwise expressly provided under this Act, no suit 5 
or other legal proceeding shall lie against the Government for any 
damage caused or likely to be caused by anything in good faith done 
or intended to be done in pursuance of this Act or any rule made 
thereunder or any order issued under any such rule. 
Repeal aDd U. (1) The Defence of India Ordinance, 1962, and the Defence ~f 104 of 196z. 
UYlDI. India (Amendment) Ordinance, 1962, are hereby repealed. 60fl96z. 
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, any rules made, anything done 
or any action taken under the Defence of India Ordinance, 1962, as 4 of J96z. 
amended by the Defence of India (Amendment) Ordinance, 1962 6 of J96z. 
shall be deemed to have been made, done or taken under this Act as 15 
if this Act had commenced on the 26th October, 1962. 

STATEM:ENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Bill seeks to replace with a few changes the Defence of India 
Ordinance, 1962 [as amended by the Defence of India (Amendment) 
Ordinance, 1962] promulgated by the President on the issue of the 
Proclamation of Emergency on the 26th October, 1962. The principal 
changes introduced in the Bill relate to employment of technical 
personnel in the national service and a few additional matters in 
sub-clause (2) of clause 3. 
LAL BAHADUR. 
NEW DELHI; 
The 11th November, 1962. 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Items (1), (8), (10), (11), (20), (26), (27), (28), (30). 
(35), (46), (48), (50), (51), (52), and (54) of sub-clause (2) 
of clause 3, and also clauses 7 (1), 8 (1), 13 (1), 21, 24 (2), 30, 37 (1). 
and sub-clause (a) of the proviso to clause .39 are likely t'O involve ex-
penditure. Measures indicated in other items of sub-clause (2) of 
clause 3 being mostly of a preventIve or regulatory nature may not 
involve extra expenditure unless it becomes necessary to enforce 
them on a wide scale. The quantum of expenditure involved will 
lergely depend on the nature and size of measures that may have to 
be taken, from time to time, to meet the emergency. It is, therefore. 
not possible to assess the magnitude of the expenditure with any 
degree of accuracy, nor is it possible to indicate how much of this 
would be met from. the Consolidated Fund of India. 
H 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clauses 3, 12, 28 and 38 of the Bill confer rule-making powers on 
the Central Government. Clause. 38 confers such powers also on 
the State Governments. The delegation of powers under clause 38 
is for regulating procedural matters and is normal in character. The 
other provisions, particularly clause 3, confer" somewhat wide rule-
making powers on the Central Government. To deal with the pre-
sent emergency, the Central Government should have sufficient 
powers to take such action as may be necessary or expedient and 
clothe itself with adequate legal authority to take such measures. 
The delegation of powers under clauses 3, 12 and 28 is thus normal in 
character during a period of emergency. 

ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS FROM THE INDIAN OFFICIAL SECRETS ACT, 1923 
(19 of 1923) 
• • • • • 
\Vron8f~ 5. (1) If any person having in his possession or control any 
communI- t ffi' I d cation, etc., secre 0 CIa CO e or pass word or any sketch, plan, model, article, 
of. wor- note, document or information which relates to or is used in a 
matton. h'b't d I I pro lIe p ace or re ates to anything in such a place, or which 
has been made or obtained in contravention of this Act, or which 
has been entrusted in confidence to him by any person holding 
office under Government, or which he has obtained or to which 
he has had access owing to his position as a person who holds or 
has held office under Government, or as a person who holds or has 
held a contract made on behalf of Government, or as a person who 
is or has been employed under a person who holds or has held 
such an office or contract-
(a) wilfully communicates the code or pass word, sketch, 
plan, model, article, note, document or information to any 
person other than a person to whom he is authorised to com-
municate it, or a Court of Justice or a person to whom it is, in 
the interests of the State, his duty to communicate it; or 
(b) uses the information in his possession for the benefit 
of any foreign power or in any other manner prejudicial to 
the sefety of the State; or 
(c) retains the sketch, plan, model, article, note or docu-
ment in his possession or control when he has no right to 
retain it, or when it is contrary to his duty to retain it, or 
wilfully fails to comply with all directions issued by lawful 
authority with regard to the return or disposal thereof; or 
Cd) fails to take reasonable care of, or so conducts himself 
as to endanger the safety of, the sketch, plan, model, article, 
note, document, secret official code or pass word or informa-
tion; 
he shall be guilty of an offence under this section, 
• • • • • 

37 
(4) A person guilty of an offence under this section shall be 
Punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to two 
years, or with fine, or with both . 
• • • • • • 
S of 1898. lZ. Notwithstanding anything in the Code of Criminal Proce- Power to 
dure, 1898,- arrest. 
(a) an offence punishable under section 3 or under section 
3 read with section 9 with imprisonment for a term which may 
extend to fourteen years shall be a cognizable and non-bailable 
offence; 
(b) an offence under clause (a) of sub-section (1) of section 
6 shall be a cognizable and bailable offence; and 
(c) every other offence under this Act shall be a non-
cognizable and bailable offence, in respect of which a warrant 
of arrest shall ordinarily issue in the first instance . 
• • • • • 
EXTRACTS FROM THE AIRCRAFT ACT. 1934 (22 OF 1934) 
• • • • • 
5. 
• • • • • 
Power of 
Centra 
Govern-
ment to 
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing 
such rules may provide for-
power. make rule •. 
• • • • • 
(r) any matter subsidiary or incidental to the matters 
referred to in this sub-section. 
• • • • • 
8. (1) Any authority authorised in this behalf by the Central Power to detain Government may detain any aircraft, if in the opinion of such aircraft. 
authority-
2029(B)LS--6. 
Ca) having regard to the nature of an intended Bight, the 
flight of such aircraft would involve danger to persons in thE' 
aircraft or to any other persons or property; or 
(b) such detention is necessary to secure compliance with 
any of the provisions of this Act or the rules applicable to 
8uch aircraft; or such detention is necessary to prevent a 
contravention of any rule made under clause (h) or clause (i) 
of sub-section (2) of section 5. 
• • • • • 

ena~ ty for 11. Whoever wilfully, flies any aircraft in such a manner as to :~ ng ~~s:s cause danger to any person or to any property on land or water or danger. in the air shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine, which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both . 
• • • • • 
Power of 13. Where any person is convicted of an offence punishable Court to d order for- un er sub-section (1) of section 10 or under any rule made under f eiture. clause (i) of sub-section (2) of section 5, the Court by which he is convicted may direct that the aircraft or article Or substance, as the case may be, in respect of which the offence has been com-mitted, shall be forfeited to Government . 
... • • • ... 
Rules to be 14. Any power to make rules conferred by this Act is subject to made after the condition of the rules being made after previous publication for publica-
( ion. a period of not less than three months . 
Deductions 
which may 
be made 
from wages. 
• • • • • 
EXTRACTS FROM THE PAYMENT OF W AGES ACT, 1936 (4 m' 1936) . 
• • • • 
7. (I) 
... • • ... 
. (2) Deductions from the wages of an employed person shall be, made only in accordance with the provisions of this .~ct, and may be of the follo~ing kinds only, namely:-
(a) fines; 
(b) deductions for absence from duty; 
(c) deductions for damage to or loss of goods expressly entrusted to the employed person for custody, or for lOBS of money for which hI2 is required to account, where such damage or loss is directly attributable to his neglect or default; 
(d) deductions for house-accommodation supplied by the employer or by Government or any housing board set up under any law for the time being in force (whether the G:overnment or the Boord is the employer or not) or any other authority engaged in the business of subsidising house-accommodation which may be specifled in this behalf by the State Government 
by notification in the Oftlcial Gazette; 

19 of 1925. 
II of 1922. 
39 
(e) deductions for such amenities and services supplied by 
the employer as the State Government may, by general or 
special order, authorize; 
Explanation.-The word "services" in this sub-clause does not 
include the supply of tools and raw materials required for the pur-
poses of employment. 
(1) deductions for recovery of advances or for adjustment 
of over-payments of wages; 
(g) deductions of income-tax payable by the employed 
person; 
(h) deductions required to be made by order of a Court or 
other authority competent to make such order; 
(i) deductions for subscriptions to, and for repayment of 
advances from any provident fund ·to which the Provident Funds 
Act, 1925, applies or any recognized provident fund as 'defined 
in section 58A of the Indian Income-tax Act, 1922, or any pro-
vident fund approved in this behalf by the State Government, 
during the continuance of su~h approval; 
(j) deductions for payments to co-operative societies 
approved by the State Government or to a scheme of insurance 
maintained by the Indian Post Office; and 
(k) deductions, made with the written authorisation of the 
person employed for payment of any. premium on his life in-
surance policy to the Life InsUrance Corporation of India estab-
lished under the Life Insurance Corporation Act, 1956, or for 
the purchase of securities of the Government of India or of any 
Stute Government or for being deposited in any Post Office 
Savings Bank in furtherance of any savings scheme of any such 
Government. 
• • • • • 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
to provide for special m~asures to ensure the public safety 
and interest, the defence of India and civil defence and for 
the trial of certain offences and for matters connected there-
witb. . 
The President bas, in pursuance of clause (3) of article 117 of 
the Constitution of India, recommended to Lok Sabha the 
consideration of the Bill. 
M.N. KAUL, 
Secretary. 
(Shri La[ Bahadur'"Shastri, 
Minister of Home Affairs.) 