7 of 1941. 
As INTROI)l}(.'YJ> IN I..oK SA-BHA ON 
Bill No. 104 of L969 
THE FOREIGN EXCHANGE REGULATION 
(AMENDMENT)~iii:~.1969 
A 
Bll..L 
furthe.,. to amend the Foreign Exchange ReguLation Act, 1947. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twentieth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
1. This Act may be called the Foreign Exchange Regulation (Amend- Short 
ment) Act, 1969. title. 
2. In section 12 of the Foreign Exchange Regulation Act, 1947 (here- Amend-
S inafter leferred to as the principal Act). for sub-section (1), the follow- ment 01 
ing sub-section shall be substituted, namely: _ section 12. 
"(1) The Central Government may. by notification in the Offi-
cial Gazette, prohibit the taking or sending out by land, sea or air 
10 (hereafter in this section referred to as export) of all goods or of 
any goods or class of goods specified in the notification from India 
directly or indirectly to any place so specified unless the exporter 
furnishes to the prescribed authority a declaration in the prescribed 

Amend-
mentof 
section 
23A. 
Repeal 
and 
savini· 
2 
form supported by such evidence as may be prescribed or 80 speci-
fied and true in ,all material particulars which, among others, IIhall 
include the amount representing-
(i) the full export value of the goods; or 
(ii) if the full export value of the goods is not ascertainable at 5 
the time of export, the value which the exporter, having regaTd 
to the prevailing market conditions, expects to receive on the 
sale of the goods in the course of international trade, 
and affirms in the said declaration that the full export value of the 
goods (whether ascertainable at the time of export or not) haa been, 10 
or will within the prescribed period be, paid in the prescribed 
manner.". 
3. In section 23A of the principal Act, for the words, brackets and 
figures "the restrictions imposed by sub-sections (1) and (2) of section 
8", the words, brackets and figures "the restrictions imposed by or under 15 
sub-sections (1) and (2) of section 8" shall be SUbstituted. 
4. (1) The Foreign Exchange Regulation (Amendment) Ordinance, 
1969 is hereby repealed. 
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken 
under the principal Act, as amended by the said Ordinance, shall be 20 
deemed to have been done or taken under the principal Act as amended 
by this Act as if this Act had come into force on the 13th day of Novem-
ber, 1969. 
9 of 1969. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Sub-section (1) of section 12 of the Foreign Exchange Re~lation 
Ac~ ~947 empowers the Central Government to issue a notification pro-
~bItrnr tlie export from India of any goods or class of goods specified 
In. the notification to any place unless a declaratioll ~orf:ed by !iUth 
e~dence as ~a.y be prescribed, is furnished by the exporter to the pres. 
crlbed authorItIes that the amount representing the full export value of 
the g~ods has been or will, within the prescribed period, be paid in the 
prescrIbed manner. Accordingly, some notifications have been issued 
imposing a general prohibition with certain exceptions. The requisite 
rules relating to the declarations have also been framed. Section 23A 
of the Act provides that a'ny restriction imposed by sub-section (1) of 
section 12 ot the Act, shall be deemed to have been imposed unde~ sec. 
t10n 11 of the Customs Act, 1962 and all the proviSions of the said Cus-
toms Act shall have effect accordingly. On this basis, officers of Cus-
toms were detainIng goods intended for export wherein the full export 
value had not been correctly stated in the declaration. 
2. All along the view held by officers of Customs supported by cer-
tain decisions of the High Courts has been that the Act and the notifica-
tion imposed upon the exporter an obUgation to specify in the declara .. 
tion the true full export value of the goods and that in the event of his 
fallure to make a true declaration, the prohibition of export imposed by 
the notiftcation would operate. It was thus assumed that if the exporter 
tan. to make a correct declaration of the full export value, it was open 
to the Customs Authorities to seize the goods in respect of which such 
an erroneous declaration has been made and to take steps for the confls-
cation of the goods and the imposition of a penalty. 
3. However, in the case of Union of India Vs. Rai BahaduT Shree Ram 
Durga Prasad. (Private) Limited, the Supreme Court held that the dec-
laration required by section 12(1) of the Act is only to the effect that 
the amount representing the full export value of the goods has been 
or will, within the prescribed period, be paid in the prescribed manner. 
In the case of mis.declaration of the full export value, it was held by the 
Court that it was not open to the Customs Authorities to take any adion 
against the goods, though the exporter would be liable to be proceeded 
against under section 23 of the Act for making a false declaration. An 
attempt was made to persuade the Supreme Court to reconsider this 
decision but in a recent judgment in the case of McLeod and CO. VB. 
Union of India the CdUrt declined to reconsider its earlier decision in 
this regard. 
4. With a view to preventing under-invoicing, it was necessary to 
amend the Act so ae to restore to the Customs Authorities powers which 
they were believed to possess prior to the aforesaid judgment of the 
Supreme Court. As Parliament was not in session, and the checking of 
under-tnvoieing called for immediate action, the Foreign Exchange Regu· 
13 

4 
lation (Amendment) Ordinance, 1969 (9 of 1969) was promulgated by 
the President on the 13th November, 1969, amending sectioJll 12 and 23A 
of the Foreign Exchange Regulation Act, 1947 auitably. 
~. Th~ present Bill seeks to replace the aforesaid Ordinance by an Aet 
of Parliament. 
NEW DELlUj P. C. SEmI. 
The 26th November, 1969. 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 2 of the Bill seeks to substitute a new sub-section for sub-
section (1) of section 12 of the Foreign Exchange Regulation Act, 1947, 
and empowers the Central Government to regulate, by notification, the 
export of all goods or of any 'goods or class of goods to be specified in 
the notification. The goods will be specified with due regard to the 
objects (If. the Act, in particular, the regulation of dealings in foreign 
exchange. The declaration which the exporter has to furnish under the 
sub-section has to be in the form prescribed by the rules made under the 
Act which will be laid before Parliament. The delegation of legislative 
pclwer 11 thus of a normal character. 
5 

Payment 
for ex-
ported 
goods. 
Applica-
tion ot 
Customs 
Act, 1962. 
ANNBXUJ4E 
EXTRACTS FROM THE FOREIGN ExCHANGE RzoVLATION 4.C!', 
1947 ('1 or 1947) 
• • • • • 
12. (1) The Central Government ~ay, by notificaiion in tIt. Oftlclal 
Gazette, prohibit the taking or lending out by land, sea or ,air (here-
after in this section referred to i6 export) of any 100M 'Or ela. ofCO<Jds 
specified in the notification from India directly QI" indirectly to any place 
so specified unless a declaration supported by such evidence as may be 
prescribed or $0 specified,'is furnished ~ the eacporter -tathepresc:ribed 
authority that the amount representing the full ex.port~ val~'.t ~e ~ 
has been, or will within the prescribed period be, paid in the prescribed 
manner . 
• • • • • 
23A. Without prejudice to the provisions of section 23 or to any other 
provision contained in this Act, the restrictions imposed by sub-sections 
(1) and (2) of section 8, sub-section (1) of section 12 and clause (4) of 
SUb-section (1) of section 13 shali be deemed to have been imposed 
under section 11 of the Customs Act, 1962, and all the provisions of that 
Act shall have effect accordingly. 
• • • • • 
6 
5101198% . 

LOK sA)}lA 
A 
BILL 
funher to amend the Foreign Exchange Regulation Act, 1947. 
(Shrl Prakashchand B. Sethi, Minister of State in the MI1Iistry of Plnance.) 