1
Short title and
commencement.
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
THE INDIAN PENAL CODE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2017
By
SHRI MAHEISH GIRRI, M.P .
A
BILL
further to amend the Indian Penal Code, 1860.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-eighth Year of the Republic of  India as
follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Indian Penal Code (Amendment) Act, 2017.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In section 326A of the Indian Penal Code, 1860, for the first and second provisos, the
following proviso shall be substituted, namely:—
"Provided that the fine imposed under this section shall not be less than rupees
ten lakh, which shall be paid to the victim, and such fine shall be in addition to the
amount of fine required to meet the total medical expenses of the treatment of the
victim.".
Bill No. 104 of  2017
Amendment
of section
326A.
5
10

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Criminal Law (Amendment) Bill was passed by the Government in the year 2013.
One of the purpose of this amendment was to amend section 326A of the Indian Penal Code
(IPC). But the provision for fine was not specifically mentioned in this section.
The acid attacks permanently disfigure the body of the victim and also creates severe
physical and psychological impact on them, the effects of which are lifelong. Some attack
have also resulted in slow and painful deaths. The National Commission for Women had
proposed a Bill "Prevention of Offences (by Acids) Act" in 2008, which had asked for
specific provisions for compensation to the victims of acid attacks. Since treatment required
for recovery of these victims are extremely costly and not all families of the victims can afford
it, therefore, the compensation should be appropriate to the physical and mental agony that
the victim suffer. These recuperative surgeries have different stages to recover the face of
the person and the operations too cost the victim lakhs of rupees. The victim also go through
significant trauma, both physical as well as psychological. Hence their rehabilitation is
extremely challenging, especially without adequate financial support.
The physical as well as emotional damage caused to the victim cannot be compensated
entirely with any amount of money. As the incident leaves permanent marks on the body and
also no surgery can completely bring back original face and other parts of the body, but,
adequate amount of compensation can at least help them to bring themselves back to the
regular routine of life. Furthermore, strict provision for fine would act as a strong deterrent
and it may prevent such incidents in future.
The Bill, therefore, seeks to amend the Indian Penal Code, 1860 with a view to provide
for compensation of minimum rupees ten lakhs in addition to the expenses of medical treatment
of the victims.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; MAHEISH GIRRI
November 21, 2016.
2

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860
45 OF 1860
******
326A. Whoever causes permanent or partial damage or deformity to, or burns or maims
or disfigures or disables, any part or parts of the body of a person or causes grievous hurt by
throwing acid on or by administering acid to that person, or by using any other means with
the intention of causing or with the knowledge that he is likely to cause such injury or hurt,
shall be punished when convicted with imprisonment of either description for a term that
shall not be less than ten years, but which may extend to imprisonment for life, and with fine:
Provided that such fine shall be just and reasonable to meet the medical expenses of
the treatment of the victim:
Provided further that any fine imposed under this section shall be paid to the victim.
******
3

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Indian Penal Code, 1860.
————
(Shri Maheish Girri, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—4139LS(S3)—10-07-2017.