Bill No. 104-F of 2024 
THE READJUSTMENT OF REPRESENTATION 
OF SCHEDULED TRIBES IN ASSEMBLY 
CONSTITUENCIES OF THE STATE OF 
GOA BILL, 2025
(AS PASSED BY THE HOUSES OF PARLIAMENT— 
LOK SABHA ON 5TH AUGUST, 2025        
RAJYA SABHA ON 11TH AUGUST, 2025)

37 of 1948. 
Bill No. 104-F of 2024
THE READJUSTMENT OF REPRESENTATION OF SCHEDULED 
TRIBES IN ASSEMBLY CONSTITUENCIES OF THE STATE OF 
GOA BILL, 2025
(AS PASSED BY THE HOUSES OF PARLIAMENT)
A 
BILL 
for enabling reservation of seats in accordance with article 332 of the Constitution 
for effective democratic participation of members of Scheduled Tribes and to 
provide for the readjustment of seats in the Legislative Assembly of the State 
of Goa, in so far as such readjustment is necessitated by inclusion of certain 
communities in the list of the Scheduled Tribes in the State of Goa and for 
matters connected therewith or incidental thereto. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-sixth Year of the Republic of
India as follows:— 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Readjustment of Representation of
Scheduled Tribes in Assembly Constituencies of the State of Goa Act, 2025.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(
a) “Census Commissioner” means the Census Commissioner appointed
under sub-section (1) of section 4 of the Census Act, 1948; 
Short title and 
commencement. 
Definitions. 

2 
Estimation of 
population of 
Scheduled 
Tribes. 
Readjustment of 
seats by 
Commission. 
(b) “Commission” means the Election Commission referred to in
article 324 of the Constitution; 
(c) “Delimitation Act” means the Delimitation Act, 2002;
(d) “Delimitation Order” means the Delimitation of Parliamentary and
Assembly Constituencies Order, 2008; 
(e) “last census” means the census held in India in 2001;
(f) “Scheduled Tribes Orders” means the Constitution (Scheduled
Tribes) Order, 1950, and the Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) (Union 
Territories) Order, 1951, as amended from time to time, made by the President 
under article 342 of the Constitution; 
(g) “State” means the State of Goa.
3. (1) As soon as may be after the commencement of this Act, the population
as at the last census of the Scheduled Tribes in the State shall be asce rtained or 
estimated by the Census Commissioner. 
(2) Where by reason of the amendments made in the Scheduled Tribes
Orders after the last census and up to the date of commencement of this Act, the 
population of the Scheduled Tribes as at the last census is  varied in the State, the 
Census Commissioner shall ascertain or estimate as on the date of such 
commencement, the population of the Scheduled Tribes so varied, and also 
ascertain or estimate the proportion of such population of the Scheduled Tribes to 
the total population of the State.  
(3) The population figures ascertained or estimated under sub-section (2) shall
be notified by the Census Commissioner in the Gazette of India. 
(4) The population figures so notified shall be taken to be the relevant
population figures and shall replace any figures previously published as ascertained 
or estimated at the last census; and the figures so notified shall be final and shall not 
be called in question in any court. 
4. ( 1) After the population figures have been notified for the State under
section 3, the Commission shall make such amendments as may be necessary in the 
Delimitation Order, having regard to the provisions of articles 170 and 332 of the 
Constitution, of section 8 of the Delimitation Act, and of this Act, for the purpose 
of giving proper representation to the Scheduled Tribes of the State, and the Second 
Schedule to the Representation of the People Act, 1950 shall be deemed to have 
been amended accordingly. 
(2) In making any amendments in the Deli mitation Order under
sub-section (1), the Commission shall, as far as may be necessary, have regard to 
the provisions of clause (d) of sub-section (1) of section 9 of the Delimitation Act. 
(3) The Commission shall—
(a) publish its proposals for the amendments in the Gazette of India and
the Official Gazette of the State and also in such other manner as it thinks fit; 
(b) specify a date on or after which such proposals will be further
considered by it; 
(c) consider all objections and s uggestions which may have been
received by it before the date so specified and for such consideration hold one 
or more public sittings at such place or places in the State as it thinks fit; and 
(d) thereafter make necessary amendments in the Delimitation Order.
33 of 2002. 
C. O. 19. 
C. O. 32. 
43 of 1950. 

3 
5 of 1908. 
46 of 2023. 
43 of 1950. 
5. (1) In the discharge of its functions under this Act, the Commission shall
determine its own procedure and shall have all the powers of a civil court under the 
Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, while trying a suit, in respect of the following 
matters, namely:— 
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of witnesses;
(b) requiring the production of any document; and
(c) requisitioning any public record from any court or office.
(2) The Commission shall have the power to require any person to furnish any
information on such points or matters as, in the opinion of the Commission, may be 
useful for, or relevant to, any matter under the consideration of the Commission. 
(3) The Commission shall be deemed to be a civil court for the purposes of
sections 384 and 385 of the Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023. 
(4) For the purposes of enforcing the attendance of witnesses, the local limits
of the jurisdiction of the Commission shall be the limits of the territory of India. 
6. ( 1) The Commission shall cause the amendmen ts made by it in the
Delimitation Order to be published in the Gazette of India and in the Official Gazette 
of the State. 
(2) Upon publication in the Gazette of India, every such amendment shall have
the force of law and shall not be called in question in any court. 
(3) As soon as may be after such publication in the Gazette of India, every
such amendment shall be laid before the House of the People and the Legislative 
Assembly of the State. 
(4) Subject to any law that may govern readjustment and subject to  the
provisions of sub-section (5), the readjustment of seats in the Legislative Assembly 
of the State necessitated by any amendments made by the Commission in the 
Delimitation Order and provided for in that Order as so amended shall apply in 
relation to e very election to the Assembly, held after the publication of such 
amendments in the Gazette of India and shall so apply in supersession of the 
provisions relating to representation as provided in the Representation of the  
People Act, 1950. 
(5) Nothing in the foregoing sub-sections shall affect the representation in the
Legislative Assembly of the State until the dissolution of the Assembly, existing on 
the date of publication in the Gazette of India of the amendments in the Delimitation 
Order made by the Commission. 
7. (1) The Commission may, from time to time, by notification in the Gazette
of India and in the Official Gazette of the State,— 
(a) correct any printing mistake in the Delimitation Order as amended
under this Act, or any error occurring therein from any inadvertent slip or 
omission; and 
(b) where the boundaries or the name of any district or any territorial
division mentioned in the said Order are or is altered, make such amendments 
as appear to it to be necessary or expedient for bringing the Order up-to-date. 
(2) Every notification under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after
it is issued, before the House of the People and the Legislative Assembly of the 
State. 
Procedure and 
powers of 
Commission. 
Publication of 
amendments and 
their dates of 
operation. 
Certain other 
powers of 
Commission. 

4 
Power to remove 
difficulties. 
8. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the
Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such 
provisions, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appear to it to be 
necessary or expedient for removing the difficulty: 
Provided that no order shall be made under  this section after the expiry of a 
period of two years from the commencement of this Act. 
(2) Every order made under sub -section (1) shall be laid, as soon as may be
after it is made, before each House of Parliament. 
  
   
—————

8 
A  
BILL 
for enabling reservation of seats in accordance with article 332 of the Constitution 
for effective democratic participation of members of Scheduled Tribes and 
to provide for the readjustment of seats i n the Legislative Assembly of the 
State of Goa, in so far as such readjustment is necessitated by inclusion of 
certain communities in the list of the Scheduled Tribes in the State of Goa 
and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto. 
———— 
(As passed by the Houses of Parliament)
RS-P&PS—GB(E)―033―27.08.2025