1
THE HANDLOOM WEAVERS (WELFARE) BILL, 2011
By
SHRI P.L. PUNIA, M.P .
A
BILL
to provide for protection and welfare measures for handloom weavers and workers and
for matters connected therewith.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-second Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Handloom Weavers (Protection and Welfare) Act,
2011.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force at once.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
Bill No. 104 of 2011
Short title,
extent and
commence-
ment.
Definitions.
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
(b) "Authority" means the National Handloom Weavers Welfare Authority set
up under section 3;
(c) "Fund” means the Handloom Weavers Welfare Fund established under
section 5;
(d) "handloom" means any loom used for production of  cloth other than the
powerloom as defined in clause (g) of section 2 of the Factories Act, 1948;
(e) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(f) "weaver" means a person engaged in the production of cloth on a handloom
and includes a person who owns, works or operates on a handloom for the production
of cloth; and
(g) "worker" means a handloom worker engaged by a weaver and who earns
wages on daily or any other basis by working on handloom.
3. (1) The Central Government shall, as soon as may be, by notification in the Official
Gazette, set up an Authority to be known as the National Handloom Weavers Welfare
Authority for the purposes of this Act.
(2) The Authority shall consist of the following members who shall be appointed by
the Central Government, namely:—
(a) a Chairperson  having adequate knowledge and professional experience in
handloom sector;
(b) a Deputy Chairperson with such qualification, as may be prescribed;
(c) five members of Parliament, of whom three shall be from Lok Sabha and two
shall be from Rajya Sabha, to be nominated by the Presiding Officers of the respective
Houses;
(d) three members to represent handloom cooperatives;
(e) three members to represent the handloom weavers;
(f) four members to represent the Union Ministries of Finance, Planning, Labour
and Employment and Textiles; and
(g) four members to be nominated by the Government of the States to be rotated
amongst them in alphabetical order.
(3) The Authority shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid, having perpetual
succession and common seal, with power to acquire, hold and dispose of property both
movable and immovable and to contract and shall, by the said name, sue or be sued.
(4) The term of Office of the Chairperson, Deputy Chairperson and members of the
Authority and the procedure to be followed in the discharge of the functions of the Authority
shall be such as may be prescribed.
(5) The salary and allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of the
service of the Chairman and members of the Authority shall be such as may be prescribed.
(6) The Headquarter of the Authority shall be at New Delhi.
(7) The Authority may establish its offices at such other places, as it may deem
necessary for carrying out the purposes of  this Act.
(8) The Authority shall have a secretariat with such Officers and members of staff
and with such terms and conditions of services as may be prescribed.
4. (1) The Authority shall take steps in coordination with the State Governments for
the overall welfare of weavers including, removal of poverty and indebtedness, raising the
Central
Government to
set up National
Handloom
Weavers
Welfare
Authority.
Functions of
the Authority.
63 of 1948.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
Establishment
of Handloom
Weavers
Welfare Fund.
standard of living, modernizing the looms and making easy availability of raw materials at
affordable prices and marketing of handloom cloth.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provision, the Authority shall,—
(a) formulate and implement welfare policy for the handloom weavers and
workers;
(b) maintain a District-wise register of handlooms, handloom weavers and
workers with such particulars and in such manner as may be prescribed;
(c) regulate the service conditions of workers in such manner as may be
prescribed;
(d) fix minimum wages for handloom workers from time to time;
(e) ensure modernization of old handlooms;
(f) encourage and provide all necessary assistance to handloom weavers
cooperatives;
(g) organise exhibitions, melas and such other activities to promote handloom
sector in different parts of the country;
(h) make suitable arrangements for purchase of handloom cloth by Government
agencies on cash and carry basis;
(i) encourage export of handloom cloth and handloom garments; and
(j) perform such other functions as may be assigned to it by the Central
Government from time to time.
5. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, establish
a Fund to be called the Handloom Weavers Welfare Fund.
(2) The Central Government and the State Governments shall contribute to the Fund
in such ratio as may be prescribed.
(3) There shall also be credited to the Fund such other sums as may be received by
way of donations, contributions, assistance or otherwise from individuals, weavers and
workers or body corporate, financial institutions, firms or partnership.
(4) The Fund shall be utilized for the following purposes:—
(a) providing interest free consumption loans to handloom weavers and workers;
(b) making ex-gratia payments at  prescribed rates to each of the bereaved
families of handloom weavers who die in harness;
(c) providing loans at nominal rate of interest for purchasing cotton yarn and
other necessary raw materials to the handloom weavers;
(d) providing insurance cover to all handlooms, handloom weavers and workers;
(e) providing healthcare facilities to the handloom weavers and workers and
their dependent family members;
(f) providing educational facilities and vocational training to the wards of weavers
and workers; and
(g) such other welfare measures as may be prescribed by the Central Government
from time to time.
6. (1) It shall be the duty of the Central Government to ensure regular supply of yarn
to the handloom weavers at affordable and subsidized rates.
Central
Government
to ensure
regular supply
of yarn.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

4
(2) It shall be compulsory for all Ministries, Departments, subordinate Offices under
the appropriate Government and Public Sector Enterprises to purchase their entire cloth
requirements exclusively from the primary handloom weavers.
(3) The appropriate Government shall take steps to minimize the export of cotton and
cotton yarn.
7. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law
in this behalf, pay to the Authority such sums as it may consider necessary for the efficient
functioning of the Authority.
8. (1) The Authority shall prepare, in such form and manner, as may be prescribed, an
annual report giving a true and full account of its activities during the previous year and
submit it to the Central Government.
(2) The Central Government shall cause to be laid before each House of the Parliament
the report submitted to it under sub-section (1).
9. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appear to it to be necessary or expedient for
removing the difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of the period of two years
from the date of the commencement to this Act.
(2) Every order made under this section shall, as soon as may be, after it is made, be laid
before each House of the Parliament.
10. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other
law for the time being in force regulating any of the matters dealt with in this Act.
11. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Central
Government
to provide
Funds.
Annual
Report.
Power to
remove
difficulties.
Act not in
derogation of
any other law
for time being
in force.
Power to
make rules..
5
10
15
20
25
30

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
There are lakhs  of handloom units in which millions of weavers and workers weave
cloth to earn their livelihood across the country. These handlooms units are mainly located
in the States of Andhra Pradesh, Tamil Nadu, Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, Madhya Pradesh and
Maharashtra. In fact, handloom units are located in every part of our country. For most of the
weavers, it is their family profession which passes on from one generation to the next
generation. For these weavers and workers, handloom is the only source of their livelihood.
Handloom cloth is very popular not only in the country but also abroad.
But unfortunately, handloom sector is not doing very well and it is on the verge of
collapse and extinction. The foremost reason for this is non-availability of cotton yarn at
affordable prices. This situation is leading to closure of the handloom units. One of the
primary reasons of costly cotton yarn is the export of cotton and cotton yarn which is
resulting in scarcity  of yarn in the country. Other reasons are high cost of handloom cloth
compared to synthetic and other cloth, non-purchase of handloom products by the
Government and its organizations, and non-availability of loans at low interest rate from
banks and other financial institutions to handloom weavers for purchasing of raw material
and other necessary items. Handloom sector has been consistently ignored by the successive
Governments at the Centre as well as in the States. As a result, the powerloom sector and
cloth mills have overpowered and eclipsed the interests of handloom sector. In a way, it is
likely that the handloom sector may vanish in near future, if no concrete or remedial measures
is taken to save this sector.
The most disturbing and sad part is that most of the handloom weavers are in debt.
They are committing suicides because of their indebtedness and poverty. Thousands of
debt trapped and helpless weavers have already committed suicide in different parts of the
country. Reports of starvation deaths of handloom weavers have also come to light, which is
a blot on our society. As such remedial measures have to be taken urgently so that handloom
weavers and handloom sector could be saved from extinction. It has, therefore, been proposed
to set up of a National Handloom Weavers Authority to take steps for welfare and overall
development of weavers and workers engaged in handloom sector and for promotion of
handloom sector in the country.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; P.L. PUNIA
November 9, 2011.
5

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill seeks to constitute the National Handloom Weavers Welfare
Authority. Clause 4 provides for certain steps to be taken by the Authority for welfare of
handloom weavers and workers. Clause 5 provides for the establishment of Handloom
Weavers Welfare Fund. Clause 6 provides that the Central Government shall ensure supply
of yarn to handloom weavers at subsidized rates. Clause 7 provides that the Central
Government shall provide funds to the Authority.
The Bill, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidate Fund of India. It is
estimated that a sum of rupees six thousand crore may involve as recurring expenditure
per annum.
A non-recurring expenditure of rupees four hundred crore is also likely to be incurred.
6

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 11 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.
7

GMGIPMRND—2653LS—(S3)—29.11.2011.
LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for protection and welfare measures for handloom weavers and workers and for
matters connected therewith.
————
(Shri P.L. Punia, M.P.)