1
THE MENTALLY RETARDED CHILDREN (WELFARE) BILL, 2016
By
DR. RAMESH POKHRIYAL ‘NISHANK’, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for certain measures to be undertaken by the Union and the State
Governments for the welfare of mentally retarded children and for
matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Mentally Retarded Children (Welfare) Act, 2016.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Bill No.  104 of 2016
5
AS  INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
Definitions. 2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(i) “appropriate Government” means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(ii) “child” means a boy or a girl who is below the age of twenty years;
(iii) “Committee” means the Residential Schools Management Committee
constituted by the appropriate Government under section 6;
(iv) “mentally retarded child” means a child with a condition of arrest or
incomplete development of mind which is specially characterized by sub-normality of
intelligence;
(v) “residential school” means an institution or home which is run by private or
Government aid for the education and protection of mentally retarded children; and
(vi) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. The appropriate Government shall from time to time hold, within its jurisdiction,
a census for collecting all relevant data relating to mentally retarded children.
4. The appropriate Government shall,—
(i) establish residential school for mentally retarded children in every district;
(ii) ensure yoga training for mentally retarded children in residential schools
and also parents meeting and their counselling once every month;
(iii) provide food, adequate care, protection, lodging and boarding, books,
stationery items and uniform free of cost;
(iv) provide transportation facilities to the mentally retarded children to enable
them to attend school;
(v) provide concession to mentally retarded children with their parents or
caretaker in journey by bus, rail and air;
(vi) provide job oriented professional education and training for self-
employment to mentally retarded children after they complete their school education
according to their capability; and
(vii) pay subsistence allowance or financial assistance to such mentally retarded
children as are not able to earn livelihood.
5. The appropriate Government shall provide such monthly allowance to the
economically poor guardian or caretaker of mentally retarded child for his livelihood,
health care and treatment, as may be prescribed.
6. (1) The appropriate Government shall set up a local Committee in every district to
be known as the Residential Schools Management Committee to look into issues relating
to admissions and management of residential schools.
(2) The Committee shall consist of—
(a) the District Magistrate who shall be the Chairperson ex-officio; and
(b) not more than five members, of whom at least two members shall be women,
from amongst the persons living in that district and have knowledge in the field of
child welfare, to be nominated by the Chairperson.
(3) The appropriate Government shall provide to the Committee such number of
officers and staff as may be necessary for the efficient functioning of the Committee.
Census for
mentally
retarded
children.
Setting up of
residential
schools and
providing
education and
employment
to mentally
retarded
children.
Monthly
allowance to
the guardian or
caretaker of
the mentally
retarded
children.
Residential
Schools
Management
Committee.
5
10
15
15 20
25
30
35
40

3
7. There shall be set up at least one clinic in every Government hospital for mentally
retarded persons where such persons shall be provided medical treatment including
physiotherapy, occupational therapy and psychological treatment and other healthcare
facilities free of cost in such manner as may be prescribed.
8. (1) The appropriate Government shall appoint—
(i) well trained teachers who have experience of teaching mentally retarded
children and addressing their special needs; and
(ii) such number of administrative personnel for better management of
residential schools as it may be deem necessary.
(2) The salary and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of service of
the teachers and non-teaching staff of residential schools shall be such as may be
prescribed.
9. The appropriate Government shall—
(i) create awareness amongst masses through mass media about special care
of mentally retarded children; and
(ii) create appropriate mechanism for redressal of grievances of mentally
retarded children in respect of violation of provisions of this Act.
10. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament, by
law, in this behalf, provide adequate funds to the State Governments for carrying out the
purposes of this Act.
11. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent
therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force.
12. (1) The appropriate Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make
rules for carrying out the purposes of the Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act by the Central Government shall be laid, as soon as
may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total
period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or
both the Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect
only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously
done under that rule.
(3) Every rule made by the State Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as
may be after it is made, before the State legislature.
Clinic for
mentally
retarded
persons.
Facilities to
be provided
in residential
schools.
Provision of
public
awareness.
Power to
make rules.
Central
Government
to provide
funds.
Overriding
effect of the
Act.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35

4
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The number of mentally retarded children is continuously increasing in the country.
They become mentally and physically dependent due to mental retardation. The families of
mentally retarded children are forced to live in difficulty because of non-availability of scientific
knowledge for the upbringing, care and livelihood of mentally retarded children in the country.
The mentally retarded children and their families bear this torture without any fault of theirs.
The families are forced to bear the unbearable cost of care and health services for mentally
retarded children. Several guardians disown these children considering them as burden on
the family and leave them alone on bus stands, railway stations, temples and masjids for
begging. Anti-social elements take advantage of this situation. Several welfare institutions
for the mentally retarded children in the country are facing difficulty in keeping them under
their protection after their having attained eighteen years of age. They need more protection
and support at this point of their age. Therefore, the Government should come forward for
welfare of mentally retarded children and take care of their life term livelihood. The provisions
of financial assistance to the parents, guardians or caretakers will help them to bring these
mentally retarded children in social mainstream and setting up of residential schools will help
in addressing their special needs. The Government should take sole responsibility of mentally
retarded children and provide protection to them in order to remove their dependence on
social institutions in view of their plight. The provision for affording an opportunity to
mentally retarded children to live with pride is expected to be made by the Government.
Therefore, it is extremely necessary to provide for welfare measures of mentally retarded
children in the country.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; RAMESH POKHRIYAL ‘NISHANK’
March 11, 2016.

5
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides that a child census may be conducted to collect all
relevant data of mentally retarded children. Clause 4 provides for setting up of residential
schools to impart education and training to mentally retarded children. Clause 5 provides for
monthly allowance to the guardian/caretakers of the mentally retarded children. Clause 6
provides for setting up of a Residential School Management Committee in every district.
Clause 8 provides for appointment of teachers and non-teaching staff alongwith all basic
facilities in residential schools. Clause 9 provides that the appropriate Government shall
create awareness amongst mass and set up appropriate fora for redressal of parents or
caretakers of mentally retarded children. Clause 10 provides for payment of adequate funds
to the States for carrying out the purposes of the Act. The expenditure relating to States shall
be borne out of the Consolidated Funds of the respective States. However, the expenditure
in respect of Union territories shall be borne out of the Consolidated Fund of India. The Bill,
therefore, if enacted, is likely to involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It
is estimated that a sum of rupees nine hundred crore will be involved as recurring expenditure
per annum from the Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees fifty crore is also likely to be involved.

6
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 12 of the Bill empowers the appropriate Government to make rules for carrying
out the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for certain measures to be undertaken by the Union and the State
Governments for the welfare of mentally retarded children and for matters
connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Dr. Ramesh Pokhriyal ‘Nishank’, M.P. )
GMGIPMRND—5330LS(S3)—25-04-2016.