10K SABRA 
OORR I GENnA. 
to 
THE DEIHl MUNICIPAL CORPORATION (SECOND A.MENDMENT) BILL, 1983 
(To be/As introduced in Lok sabha) 
1. Page 1, line 14,-
t.:cl: "section (2)" ~ "sut- section (2)" 
2. Page 3, line 22,-
~ "or at" ,~ "for at" 
3. Pa ge 3, line 25',-
!g.I, "kno we Id ge " ~ "lmo wled ge " 
4. Page 5, line 33,-
!a.t. "\tlElrding" ~ "awarding" 
5. page 6,_ 
against line 15, in the nargin,-
!cJ: "41\ or 1860" ~ "45 or 1860" 
~. Page ." line 22,-
!ex. "O~ notice nade" ~ "nade or notice issued" 
NEW DElliI; 
August 24, 19'83 
Bhadra 2, 1905 (Saka) 

BlII No. 1M ef 1_ 
THE DELHI MUNICIPAL CORPORATION (SECOND AMENDMENT) 
Bn.L, 1983 
• BILL 
further to amend the Delhi Municipal 'Corp01"Cltion Act, 19S'1. 
Bz it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty,..fourth Year of the RepubUc 
of India as follows:-
1. (1) This Act may be called the Delhi M'lUliclpaI Corporation ~c.t 
(Second Amendment) Act, 1983. Cd 
5 (2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government 
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint and different date. 
may be appointed for different provisions of this Act. . 
lief 1.,7. Z. In section 2 of the Delhi Municipa~ Corporation Act, 1957 (bere-
inafter referred to as the principal Act), .after claUSe (1), the follow-
10 ing clause shall be inserted, namely:-
15 
'(lA) "Appellate Tribunal" means an Appellate Tribunal eon-
stituted under section 347A;'. 
3. In section 343 of the principal Aet,- .-uallld-
~~~01 (fL) in set'tion (2), for the words "the coW't of the district secUoIa 
judge of Delhi", the words "the Appellate Tribunal" shall be lIubstt- 341. 
tuted; 
(b) in suu-section (3) ,.-
(i) in the opE-ning portion, for the words "the court of the 
district judge may", the words, brackets, ftgurl;!s and letter "the' 
2() Appellate Tribunal may, subject to the provisions of sub-section 
(3) of section 347C," shaH be substituted; . 

Amen4-
meutGl 
-=tIaa 
341. 
m.rtIon 
ot ... 
.actIoII 
MiA.: 
Power to_ 
UDl.ut:'llll-
riMI4 
(ii) in the proviso. for the worda "the court of the di.triet 
judge unless security, sufficient in the opinion of the coun", the 
words "the Appellate Tribunal unless security, suftlcient in the 
opinion of the said Tribunal" shall b. substituted; 
(c) in sub-section (4), for the words "Save as provided in this J5 
section, no court", the words "No court" shall be substituted; 
(d) in sub-section (5), for the words "Every order made by 
the court of the district judge on appeal flnd subject only to such 
order", the words, figures and letter "Subject to an order made by 
the Administrator on appeal under section 347D, every order made 10 
by the Appellate Tribunal on appeal under this section, and subject 
to the orders of the Arlministrator and the Appellate Tribunal on 
appeal" shall be substituted; 
(e) in sub-section (6)-
(i) for the words "has been confirmed on appeal, whether 15 
with or without variation", the words "has been confirmed on 
appeal, whether with or without variation. by the Appellate 
Tribunal in a case where no appeal has been preferred against 
the order of the Appellate Tribunal. and by the Administrator 
in a case where an appeal has been preferred against the order gO 
of the Appellate Tribunal" shall be substituted; 
(ii) for the words "the court of the district judge'., the words 
"the AppeJJate Tribunal or the Administrator" shall be substi-
tuted. 
4.· In !lection 344 of the principal Act,-
(a) in sub-section (2), after the words "from the premises", 
the words "or to seize any construction material, tool, machinery, 
scaffolding or other things used in the erection of any building or 
execution of any work" shan be inserted; 
(b) after su.b-section (2), the follOWing SUb-section shall be 30 
inserted, namely:-
"(2A) Any of the things caused to he seized by the Commis-
sioner under sub-section (2) 'Shall be djRposed of by him in the 
manner specified in section 326.". 
S. In section 345 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1); for the 35 
words "within three months after the compJetion thereof, by a written 
notice", the words "after tlu; completion thereof, by a written notice of 
not less than seven days" shall be substituted. 
6. After section 345 of the principal Act thp. following l'Ieetion shall 
be inserted, namely: - 40 
"345A. (1) It shall be lawful for the Commissioner, at any 'time, 
before or after making an order of demolition under st-etion 343 
or of the stoppage of the erection of any building or execution of 
any work under section 343 or under section 344, tomak~ an order 
CGIIP 
\rQatlaM. ,. 
_ direc.ting .the sealing of sllch erection or work or of the prem1ses 4S 
tn whi.ch such erection or work is being carried on or ha., been com-
. .. pleted in the manner prescribed by rules, for the purpose of carryiug 
out the proviSions of this Act, or for preventing any dispute as to the 
aature and extent of such erection or work. 

3 
(2) Where any erection or work or any premises in which any 
erection or work is being carried on, has or have been sealed, the 
Commissioner may, for the purpose of demolishing such erection 
or work in acc0!'dance with the provisions of this Act, order INCh 
5 seal to be removed. 
(3) No person shall remove such seal except-
(a) umler an order made by the Commissioner under au}).: 
section (2); or 
(b) under an order of an Appellate Tribunal or the Adlnuu.-
1 u trator, made in an appeal under this Act.". 
:20 
35 
7. After section 347 of the principal Act, the following sectiolll shall 
be inserted, namely:-
"347A. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in 
the Official Gazette, constitute one or more Appellate Tribunals with 
headquarters nt Delhi, for deciding ap'peals preferred under section 
343 or section :H i n. 
(.:!) An Al'l,ellate Tribunal shall consist of one person to be 
appointed by the Central Government on such terms and conditions 
of service as may be prescribed by rules. ., .' 
(3) A person shall not be qualified for appointment as the pre-
siding officer or an Appellate Tribunal unless he is, or has been, a 
district judge or an additional district judee or has, or at least ten 
years, held a judicial office in India. 
" (4) The Central Government may, if it so thinks tit, appoint 
one or more persons having special knoweldge of, or experience in, 
the matters involved in such appeals, to act as assessors to advise 
the Appellate Tribunal in the proceedings before it, but no advice 
of the assessors shall be binding on the Appellate 'l'ribunal 
(5) The Central Government shall, by notification in the OfIieial 
Gazette, cIIe6. die terri~aI ~ widaiD wbicll aD ApreeIfe 
TribWlal shall ('xercise its jurisdiction, and where different Appel-
late Tribunals have jurisdiction over tile same krritorW II1II.., till 
Central GoverbUlcn t shall also provide for the distribution and allo· 
cation of work to be performed by such Tribunals. 
(6) For the purpose of enabling it to discharge its funetions 
under this Act, c\'ery Appellate Tribunal shall have a Registrar and 
sa other staft on such tenns and ~ of senic:e .• may be 
prescribed by rules: _ 
Provided tbat the Registrar lind staff may be employed jointly 
for all or any number of such Tribunals in accordance with th_ 
rules. _ 
Inaertion 
ofwew 
leCtions 
347A to 
347E, 
Appel. 
late 
Tribunal. 

Ap~ 
qaJD8t 
certaIa 
orders 
or 
no&e. 
WaUld. 
UDder 
bAct. 
., 
4 
347B. (1) Any persoll aggrieved by any of thtl following ordera 
made or notices issued under Uus Act, may prefer an appeal aaainat 
such order or notice to the Appellate Tribunal, na.mely:-
<el) an order according or disallowing sanction to a lay-out 
plan under lection 313; 5 
(b) an order directing the alteration or demolition of any 
street under section 314; 
(c) a notice under sub-section (1) of section 315; 
(d) a noti'!e under sub-section (2) of section 317; 
(e) an order directing the disposal of things removed under 10 
Chapter XV or seized under section 344, or an order rejecting 
the claim of any person for the balance of the proceeds of Pl. 
of the things 110 disposed of; 
<f) an order sanctioning or refusing to sanction the erection 
ot any building or the execution of any work under section 336; 15 
(g) an order Withholding sanction under the provilO to 
lub-iection (1) of section 337; 
(h) an order cancelling a sanction under section 338; 
(i) an order requiring the rounding off, splaying or cutting 
off the height of a building intended to be erected, or for the 20 
acqUisition of any portion of a site, under section 339; 
(1) an order diaoallowing the erection of any building or the 
execution of auy work under section 340; 
(k) an ord~r requiring the stoppage of any erection or work 
under aectiQu 344; Sl5 
(1) an order requiring the alteration of any building or work 
under section 345; 
(m) an order directing the sealing of lmauthorised eonstruc-
tions under section 345A; 
(n) an order refusing to grant permission under sub-section 30 
(2) of section 346; 
(0) an order granting or refusing permission under section 
347; 
(p) any such other order or notice relating to or arising out 
of planned development under the proviaions of this Act as may 3' 
be prescribed by rules. 
(2) An appeal under this section shall be filed within thirty 
days from the date of the order or notice appealed against: 
Provided that the Appellate Tribunal may entertain an appeal 
after the expiry of the said period of thirty days if it is satisfied that 
there was sufficient cause for not filing it within that perioa 49 
(3) An appeal to the Appellate Tribunal shall be made in 
w.eb :form and shall be accompanied by a copy of the order or 

5 
10 
20 
25 
35 
40 
45 
8 
notice appealed against and by such fees a... may be pre8<!nbed by 
rule&. 
847C. (1) The Appellate Tribunal may, after giving the parties 
to the appeal, an opportunity of being heard, pass such orders 
thereon as it thinks fit, confirming, modifying or annulling the 
order or notice appealed against or may refer the case back to 
the authority or officer against whose order or notice the .appeal 
is filed, for a fresh order or notice, after taking additional evidence, 
if necessary, or such othEfr action as the Appellate Tribunal may 
specify. 
(2) The Appellate Tribunal shall send a copy of every order 
passed by it to the parties to the appeal. 
(3) No Appel1ate Tribunal shall, in any appeal pending be-
fore it in respect of any OT'der or notice under this Act, make an 
interim order (whether by way of injunction or stay) against the 
Corpt'ration or against any officer or servant of the Corporation acting 
or purporting to a,ct in his official capacity, unless an opportunity 
is given to the Corporation or its officer or servant to be heard in 
the matter: 
Provided that the Appellate Tribunal may without giving an 
opportunity as aforesaid make an interim order as an exceptiona]' 
measure if it is satisfied for reasons to be recorded by it in writing 
that it is necessary so to do for preventing any loss being caused to 
the person filing the appeal which cannot be adequately compensated 
in money: 
Provided further that every such interim order shall, if it is 
not vacated earlier cease to have effect on the expiry () f a period 
of fourteen days from the date on which it is made unless before 
the expiry of that period, the Appellate Tribunal confirms or 
modifies that order after giving to the Corporation or its officer or 
servant an opportunity of being heard.' 
(4) Subject to rules that may be made by the Central Govern-
ment in this behalf, the warding of damages in and the costs of, 
and incidental to, any appeal before an Appellate Tribunal, shall be 
in its discretion and it shall have full power to determine by and 
to whom and to what extent and subject to what conditions, if 
any, such damages or costs are to be paid and to give, in its order 
disposing of an appeal, necessary c/irpctions for the purposes 
aforeeaid. 
(5) An order of the Appellate Tribunal made under this sec-
tion may be executed or caused to be executed by it on the appli-
cation of the person in whose favour the order has been made. 
(6) In hearing and deCiding an appeal or in the execution of 
an order, an Appellate Tribunal shall follow such procedure 8e 
may be p~scribed by rules. 
(7) Every Appellate Tribunal, shall, in addition to the powers 
conferred on it under this Act, have the same powers u are v.ted 
Proce-
dureof 
theAp. 
pellate 
Tribunal. 

ApPeal 
~ 
order. 
ofAp-
pellat. 
Trlb1olllll1. 
Bar of 
jurisdJc. 
tion Of 
Courte. 
8 
in • Civil Court while trying a suit under the Code of Civil Pro-
cedute. 1908, in respect of the following mattera, namely:-
(0) summoning and enforcing the attendance of penons 
and examining them on oath; 
(b) requiring the discovery and inSpection of documents; 5 
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits; 
(d) requisitioning any public record or copies thereof 
:from any court or ofticej 
(e) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses 
or documents; and 10 
(j) any other matter which may be prescribed by rulesj 
and every proceeding of an Appellate Tribunal in hearing or decid-
ing an appeal or in connection with the execution of its order, 
8hall be deemed to be a judicial proceeding within the meaning of 
50tl* 
sections 193 and 228, and for the purpose of section 196, of the Indian 1546 of 1860. 
Penal Code, and every Appellate Tribunal shall be deemed to be 
a Civil Court for. the purposes of section 195 and Chapter XXVI of 
the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973. 2 of 1I~74. 
347D. (1) An appeal shall lie to the Administrator against an 
order of the Appellate Tribunal, made in an appeal under section 110 
343 or section 347B, confirmin g, modifying or annulling an order 
or notice made under this Act. 
(2) The provisions of sub-s~ctions (2) and (3) of section 347B 
and section 347C and the rules made thereunder, shall, so far as 
may be, apply to the filing and disposal of an appeal under this section 115 
as they apply to the filing and disposal of an appeal under those 
sections. 
(3) An order of the Administrator on an appeal under this 
section, and subject only to such order, an order of the Appellate 
Tribunal under section 347B, and subject to such orders of the Ad- 30 
ministrator or an Appellate Tribunal, an order or notice of an 
authority appealable under this Act, shall be fintU. 
347E. (1) After the commencement of section 7 of the Delhi 
Municipal Corporation (Second Amendment) Act, 1983, no court shall 
entertain any suit, application or other proceedings in respect of 3~ 
any order or notice appe.alable under section 343 or section M7B 
and no such order or notice shall be called in question otherwise 
than by preferring an appeal under those sections. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), 
every suit, application or other proceeding pending in any court 40 
immediately before the commencement of section 7 of the Delhi 
Municipal Corporation (Second Amendment) Act, 1983, in respect 
of any order or notice appealable under section 343 or section 347B, 
shall continue to be dealt with and disposed of by that court as if 
the said section had not been brou&ht into force.... 45 

, 
8. In section 452 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), for the 
wordt "refer the calle for determination to the court of lb.! dis.!rict 
judge of Delhi.", the following shali be substituted, namely:--
"refer the case for determination-
5 (a) to the Appellate Tribunal, if such demand relates to 
the expenses incurred in taking necessary action cir steps for 
the completion of any act or work required to be done or exe-
cuted in the event of non-compliance with any notice, order-
or requisition under sections 317, 325, 343, 344 and 345; 
10 (b) to the court of the district judge of Delhi, in any 
15 
laO 
other cue.". 
t. In section 456 C'f the principnl Act,-
(a) in SUb-section (1), for the words "to the court of the dis-
trict judge of Delhi", the words and figures u; if ~llch notice, order 
or requisition is issued under section 317 or section 325 or section 
343 or section 344 or section 345 or section 347. to tlJe Appellate Tri-
bunal or. if such notice, order or requisition is iSS'..1ed under any 
other provision of this Act, to the court of the distdct judge of 
Delhi" shall be substituted; 
(b) in sub-section (2), for the words '''l1le court", the words 
"The Appellate Tribunal or the court, as the case may be" shall be 
substituted. 
10. Section 461 of the principal Act shall be re-numbered U lub-
INtCtion (1) thereof, and after sub-section (1) as so re-numbered, the 
85 following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:-
"(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), 
whoever contravenes the provisions of sub-section (1) of section 
317 or sub-section (1) of section 320 or sub-section (1) of section 321 
or sub-section (1) of section 325 or section 339, in relation to any 
30 street which is a public street, shal] be punishable with simple im-
prisonment which may extend to six months or with flne which may 
extend to flve thousand rupees or with both.". 
Amead-
mental. 
aect101l 
458. 
Amed-
men\of 
MCtlon 
481. 
11. After section 466 of the principal Act, the following section shall 1nMr-
't of 11'l4. 35 
be inserted, namely: - tlon Of 
new 
eect10n 
U4e6A. The Code of Criminal Procedure, 1m, shall apply to,-
(a) an offence under sub-section (5) of section 313 or sec-
tion 332 or sub-section (1) of Rectfon 333 or sub-section (1) of 
section 334 or section 343 or section 344 or section 345 or section 
3047; 
0688A. 
Certal'D 
o1!encee 
to be 
copila-
ole. 
40 (b) an offence under sub-seetion (1) of section 317 or sub-
45 
~ection (1) of section 320 or sub-section (1) of section 321 or 
sub-section (1) of section 325 or section 339 in rptation to IUly 
street which is a public street, 
as if it were -a cognizable -offence-
(n for the- purposes of jTJV(>sti~ation of such offence: and 

Substitu-
tion of 
new 
section 
for 
section 
487 
PrOleCU-
tiona. 
blend-
mentol 
'l'weLf'th 
~hedulf!. 
8 
(ii) for the purpose~; of all matters other than-
(1) matters referred to in section ~ of that Cod, and 
(2) arrest of a person, l'xC'ept on the complaint of, or 
upon information received from, such ofRcer of the Corpo-
ration, not being below the rank of a Deputy COmmissioner, .5 
as may be appointed by the Administrator: 
Provided that no offence of the contravention of any condition 
subject to which sanction was accorded for the erection of any 
buIlding or the execution of any work shall be cognizable, if such 
contravention relates to any deviation from any plan of such erec- 10 
tion or execution sanctioned by the Commissioner which is tom-
poundable on payment of an amount under the bye-laws relatiDl 
to 'building'J made under this Act.". 
12. For section 467 of the principal Act, the following section shall be 
substituted, namely:- 15 
"467. Save as otherwile provided in this Act, no court "hall 
proceed to the trial of any of!ence,-
(a) under sub-section (5) of section 313 or section 332 or 
sub-section (I) of section 333 or sub-section (I) of section 334 
or section 343 or section 344 or section 345 or section 347, except 110 
on the complaint of, or upon information received from, luch 
officer of the Cn~oration. not beinp, below the rank of a Deputy 
Commissioner, as may be aopointed by the Administrator; 
(7)) under sub-section (1) of section 317 or sub-section (1) 
of section 320 or sub-section (1) of section 321 or sub-section (1) 115 
of section 325 or st!clion 339. if any such offence was committed 
in relation to any street which is a public street, except on the 
complaint of, Or upon information received from, !'Iuch officer of 
the Corporation. not beinl! below the rank of a Deputy Com-
missioner. as may be appointed bv the Administrator; 30 
(c) other than those sPecified in clauses (a) and (b), except 
on the complaint of, or upon information received from, any of 
the fo1lowing appropriate municipal authorities. that is to say. 
the Commissioner, the General Manager (Electriclty) or a 
person authorised by any of them by a general or .pecial 35 
order in this behalf.". 
13. Tn the Twelfth Scnedule to the principal Act.-
(a) against section 313, sub-section (5). in 1:h~ third column. fo~ 
the letterCl and fisrurps "R!':. 500". t.hp words "'RffTorous fmorisonmcmt 
which may extend to three yel'trs" shall be substituted, and th~ e:rlst. 40 
ing entt'y in the fourth column shall be omitted: 
(b) against section 332, in the third column. for th,. letters an~ 
figure!! "lb. 1.000", the won:ls. letter"! and fl~\Jre~ "S;''l1n~ imprison-
ment which mavextenYl to six months or with fine which mRV e~· 
tend to lls. 5.000 or w;t,h hoth" ~hall b .. !'luhstitnte;'. pTlif +"9 ~~i!"Hn" 45 
entr~ in the fom'th ct'lll1mn !o1'lall be om'tted: 

5 
10 
20 
9 
(c) against section 333, sub-section (1), in the third column, for 
the letters and figures "Rs. 100", the words, letters and figures 
"Simple imprisonment which may extend to six months, or with fine 
which may extend to Rs. 5,000 or with both" shall be substituted; 
(d) against section 334, sub-section (1), in the third column, for 
the letters and figures "Rs. 100", the words, letters and figures 
"Simple imprisonment which may extend to six months, or with 
fine which may extend io Rs. 5,000 or with both" shall be substituted; 
(e) against section 343, in the third column, for the letters and 
figures "Ra. 1,000", the words, letters and figures ."Simple imprison-
ment which may extend to six months, or with fine which may ex-
tend to Rs. 5,000 or with both" shall be suDstituted. and the existing 
entry in the fourth column shall be omitted; 
(f) against section 344, in the third column, for the letters and 
figures "Bs. 1,000", the words, letters and figures "Simple imprison-
ment which may extend to six months or with ftne which may ex-
tend to Rs. 5,000 or with both" shall be substituted; 
(g) against section 345, in the third column, for the letters and 
figures fiRs. 500", the words, letters and figures "Simple imprison-
ment which may extend to six months or with fine which may ex-
tend to Rs. 5,000 'or with Doth" shall be substituted; 
(h) against section 347, in the third column, for the letters and 
figures "Rs. 500", the words, letters and figures "Simple imprison-
ment which may extend to six months or with fine which may ex-
tend to Rs; 5,000 or with both" shall'be substituted, and tlie existing 
entry in the fourth column shall be omitted. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The problem of encroachment On public lands and unauthorised con· 
structions in Delhi and the need for taking timely and effective action in 
such cases, had been engaging the attention of the Government for some 
time. It was suggested in many quarters that it is necessary to strengthen 
the law to make encroachment on public lands and unauthorised construc-
tions cognizable offences. The Estimatc'~ Committee of Parliament had 
also made similar recommendations. 
2. In recent years, growth of unauth :lrised colonies, encroachment on 
public streets, unauthorised construction" on public and private lands and 
conversion of residential constructions 'nto commercial complexes have 
assumed alarming proportions. Owing to substantial increase in the 
population of Delhi, there had been a nor 'r scramble for occupying vacant 
lands unauthorisedly and to develop th(. n into colonies. 
3. The local authorities in Delhi inclu(;ng the Delhi Municipal Corpora-
tion have not been able to effectively prevent these activities because of 
persons taking recourse to legal proceedings and obtaining ex parte stay 
from civil courts. These stay orders remain operative for years till -tire 
final settlement of legal proceedings with the result that it becomes 
necessary in most cases for the local authorities to regularise these un-
authorised colonies and difficult to demolish these encroachments or 
unauthorised constructions. Further, prosecutions for such unauthorised 
con'Structions have also not proved effective because of imposition of 
meagre fines by courts. In order, therefore, to enable the Delhi MunicipaJ 
Corporation to effectively curb these activities, it is proposed to amend 
the Delhi Municipal Corporation Act, 1957. 
4. The Bill, the':"efore, provides, among other things, for the following 
changes in the Act, namely:-
(i) At present the Commissioner, Municipal Corporation of DelhI 
has power to make orders in cases where the erection of any building 
or execution of any work has been commenced or is being carried 
on or has been completed without or contrary to the sanction given 
by the Co~ration to demolish or stop the erection of such building 
or execution of such work. It is proposed to give the Commissioner 
the power to seal such unauthorised erection or work or of the 
premises in which such erection or work is being carried on or has 
been completed. Such seal can be :removed only by the Commi'Ssioner 
for the purpose of demolition of such erection or work or in pursuance 
of an order made by the Appellate Tribunal or the Administrator 
of the Union territory of Delhi in an appeal made under the pro-
visions of the Act; 
(ii) It is proposed to provide for appeals against certain notices 
issued or orders made under the provisions of the Act to an Appel-
late Tribunal. It is also propO'Sea to provide for the constitution of 
I!"\"=O;:Ij;:.:t ~.~ ':'P'.;;,lf-•.. ~' ..• ~ y .• -"'-~ ., . ,1 ""·'··r ~ t .~ •• --.- ..• p. 
t.,;·~.t"~.""""",;:,~.~·· ~~-!f':! _~_~7;;~.. 1ft. .J!. .. .... !... ~ . ....... ~ ..•.. 

II 
the Appellate Tribunal or Tribunals for the purpose of hearing such 
appeals. Further appeal against the erders of the Appellate 
Tribunal would lie to the Administrator of the Union territory of 
Delhi. The orders made by the Appellate Tribunal or the Adminis-
trator of the Union territory of Delhi on such appeals will be final 
and no civil court shall have any jurisdiction to entertain any pra. 
ceedings in respect of notices issued Or orders made under the Act 
for which appeals shall lie to the Appellate Tribunal. Provision 
has also' been made in the Act regarding the procedure to be follow-
ed by the Appellate Tribunals in respect of hearing appeals under 
the Act which will include a 'Specific provision that the Appellate 
Tribunal cannot give ex pa'/"lte stay of any notices issued or orders 
made by the Commissioner; 
(iii) It is proposed to change the penalty of fine now specified 
for certain offences under the Act to include imprisonment also and 
to make some of the offences cognizable; 
(iv) Opportunity i'S being availed of to make certain other 
changes of a consequential and minOr nature. 
5. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects. 
NEW Dam; 
1'he 17th August, 1983. P. VENKATASUBBAIAH. 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Clause 7 of the Bill seeks to insert a new section 347A in the Delhi 
Municipal Corporation Act, 1957, which provides for the constitution of 
,one or more Appellate Tribunals for deciding appeals against notices 
issued or orders passed under the Act. Sub-section (6) of that section 
provides for the appointment of a Registrar and such other staff for the 
Tribunals on such terms and conditions of service as may be prescribed 
by rules made under the Act. By the provisions included in the Delhi 
Development (Amendment) Bill, 1983 and the Punjab Municipal (New 
Delhi Amendment) Bill, 1983, the Appellate Tribunal or Appellate Tri-
bunals constituted under the Act would also be deemed to be the Appe-
llate Tribunal or Appellate Tribunals for deciding appeais under the pro-
visions of the Delhi Development Act, 1957 and the Punjab Municipal 
Act, 1911 in its application to New Delhi. It is proposed to set up only two 
Tribunals in the first instance to hear appeals preferred. under all the 
three Acts. It is estimated that the appointment and functioning of the 
two Tribunals would involve an annual expenditure of Rs. 2,24,000/-. 
The said expenditure would, however, be met by the fees proposed to 
be specified by rules made under the three Acts for preferring appeals 
under the Acts. 
2. The Bill will not involve any other expenditure, either recurring 
or non-recurring. 
II . ...... 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 6 of the Bill seeks to insert a new section 345A which em· 
powers the Commissioner to make an order direcUng the sealing of 
any erection or work Or of the premises in which 'Such erection or work 
is being carried on in the manner prescribed by rules made under the 
Act. 
2. Clause 7 ~f the Bill seeks to insert a new section 347A in the Act 
which provides for the constitution of one or more Appellate Tribunals 
for deciding appeals preferred under the provisions of the Act. Sub-
section (2) of the said section 347A provides that the Appellate Tribunal 
shaH consist of one person to be appointed by the Central Government 
on such terms and conditions of service as may be prescribed by rules. 
Sub-section (6) of the new sectlon 347A provides that every Appellate 
Tribunal shall have a Registrar and such other staff on such turms and 
conditions ~f service as may be prescribed by rules made under the Act. 
3. New section 347B also proposed to be inserted in the Act by clause 
7 of the Bill provides for prescribing by rules made under the Act such 
other order or notice relating to or arising out of planned development 
under the provisions of the Act against which an appeal shall lie to the 
Appellate Tribunal. Sub-section (3) of this new section 347B provides 
that an appeal to the Appellate Tribunal shall be made in such fonn and 
shall be accompanied by such fees as may be prescribed by rules. 
4. Sub-section (4) of the new section 347C also proposed to be inserted 
in the Act by clause 7 of the Bill empowers the Appellate Tribunal to 
award damages in and the costs of, and incidental to, any appeal before 
it in its discretion subject to such rules as may be made by the Central 
Government under the Act. Sub-section (6) of the new section 347C 
states that the Appellate Tribunal shall, in hearing and deciding an appeal 
or the exeC".Ition of an order, follow such procedure as may be prescribed 
by rules. Under clause (f) of sub-section (7) of the said section 347C, 
the Appellate Tribunal shall have additional powers in respect of such 
matters as may be prescribed by rules. 
5. The matters in respect of which the Central Government may make 
rules under the above provisions relate to matters of procedure and 
administrative detail. The delegation of legislative power is, therefore, 
nonnal in character. 

Defini-
tions. 
Order of 
demoli-
tion 
and 
stoppage 
of 
buildings 
and 
works in 
certain 
cases 
and 
appeal. 
Order 
of 
stoppale 
ofbuiId-
inpor 
works 
ineertain 
C8le8. 
• ANNEXURE 
ExTRACTS FROM THE DELHI MUNICIPAL CORPORATION ACT, 1957 
(66 OF 1957) 
* * • • • 
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
• • • • 
343. (1) • • • • • 
(2) Any person aggrieved by an order of the Commissioner made 
under sub-section (1) may prefer an appeal against the order to the 
court of the district judge of Delhi within the period specified in the 
order for the 'demolition of. the erection or work to which it relates. 
(3) Where an appeal is preferred under sub":'5ection (2) against an 
order of demolition, the court of the district judge may stay the enforce-
ment of that order on such terms, if any, ami for such period, as it may 
think fit: 
Provided that where the erection of any building or execution of any 
work has not been completed at the time of the making of the order of 
demolition, no order staying the enforcement of the order of demolition 
shall be made by the court of the district judge unless security, sufficient 
in the opinion of the court, bas been given by the appellant for not pro-
ceeding with such erection or work pending the disposal of the appeal. 
(4) Save as provi'ded in this section, no court shall entertain any 
suit, application or other proceeding for injunction or other relief against 
the Commissioner to restrain him from taking any action or making any 
order in pursuance of the provisions of this section. 
(5) Every order made by the court of the district judge on appeal 
and subject only to such order, the order of demolition made by the 
Commissioner shall be final and conclusive. 
(6) Where no appeal has been preferred against an order of demoli-
tion made by the Commissioner under sub-section (1) or where an order 
of demolition made by the Commiasioner under that sub-section has 
been confirmed on appeal, whether with or without variation, the pe1'lOn 
against whom ,the order has been made shall comply with the order 
within the periOd specifted ther~ or as the case may be, within the 
. period, if any, fixed by the court ot the district judge OD appeal an'd OD 
the failure of the person to comply ·wtth the order witbin such period, 
the Commissioner may himself cause the erection or the work to which 
the order relates to be demolished and the expenses of such demolition 
shall be :recoverable from such person as an arrear of tax under this Act. 
344. (1) • • • • • 
(2) If an order made by the Commissioner lUlder section 343 or under 
sub-section (1) of this section directing any person to stop the erecti&n 
of any building or execution of any work is not complied with the Com-
missioner may require any poliCe oft\aer to remove such pers~n and aU 

" 15 
_ his assistants and wormen from the premises within such time as may 
be specified in the requisition and such police officer shall comply with 
the requisition accordingly. 
• • • • • 
345. (1) The CommissioDier may at any time during the erection of 
any building or execution of any work or at any ttme within three 
months after the completion thereof,. by a written notice, specify any 
matter in respect of which such erection or execution is without or con-
trary to the sanction referred to in section 336 or Is in contravention of 
any condition of such sanction or any of the provisions of this Act or 
any bye-law made thereunder and require the person who gave the notice 
under section 333 or section 334 or the owner of such buil~ing or work 
elther-
(a) to make such alterations as may be, specified-- in tEe said 
notice with the objeCt of bringing the building or work in conformity 
with the said sanction, condition or provisions, or 
(b) to show cauSe why such alterations should not De made, 
within a period stated in the notice. 
• • • • • 
452. (1) If, when the Commissioner demands payment of any expens-
es referred to in section 446, his right to demand the same or the amount 
ot the demand is disputed within ten days after such demand, the Com-
missioner shall refer the case for determination to the court of the dis-
trict judge of Delhi. -
• • • • • 
456. (1) The owner of any land or building may, if he is prevented 
by the occupier thereof from complying with any provision of this Act 
or any bye-law made thereunder or with any notice, order or requisition 
issued under such provision, apply to the court of the dtstrict judge of 
Delhi; and where such application is made within any time that may be 
fixed for the compliance with 'such provision or notice, order or requisi.-
tion, the owner shall not be liable for his failure to comply with the pro-
vision, or notice, order or requisition within the time SO fixed. 
(2) The court, on receipt of such application, may make a written 
order requiring the occupier of the land or building to afford all reason-
able facilities to the own~r for complying with the said provision or 
notice, order or requisition and may also, if it thinks fit direct that the 
costs of such application and order be paid by the occupier. 
* • • .. • 
Power 
of Com-
mimioner 
·to require 
alteration 
afwork. 
Reference 
to the 
court or 
the dis-
t.lict 
judge in 
certabl 
cases. 
Right of 
owner to 
apply to 
the court 
of the 
district 
judge in 
case of 
obstruc-
tion by 
occupier. 
: 1 
4.67. Save as otherwise provided in this Act, no court shall proceed Prosecu-
to the trial of any offence made punishable by or under this Act except tiona. 
on the complaint of, or upon infonnation received from, any of the 
following appropriate municipal authorities, that is to say, the Commis-
sioner. the General Manager (Electricity), the General Manager (Trans-
port) or a person authorised by any of them by a,generel or special order 
~~ ~9i~ bo}}alf· .. 
• • • • • 

,. 
• 
S~t!on, lub-seCtion, clau.e 
or proviso 
16 
THE TWELFTH SCHEDULE 
(See section 461) 
PENALTIES 
• • 
SUbject 
• 
------ ---.- .. _--_._-_ ...... ---_ ... _-
• • • 
S!C ton 313. sub-Section (5} Utilising. !Ceiling Or 01:. ~rwil(' ~a1ing with 
any land or I.lyingou"a private strectothr.r-
wise than in conforr.lity with orqr.rlof tbe 
Standing Conunittc<!. 
• • • • 
Sec: ion 33lZ Erection of.l building without the sanction 
ortlle C ,mrnilliioUl r. 
S 'ceion 333, lub-,,"clion (1) F.1ilure to Jtivc notice 
n building. 
fintention to e~ct 
S'ct,on 334. sub-lection (1) Failure to give notice orintention to 
additiona, etc., to buildings. 
make 
• • • • 
Section 343 Failure to d-:m,>lisb building, e~ctcd without 
sanction or erection ofbulldinga in 
travention of order. 
con-
Section 3-tt Erection of buildi I1ffI in contravention of con-
ditiOlll of sanction, etc. 
Section 345 Failure to carry out alteratiolll 
• • • • 
Section 347 Non-compliance with restrictions on Uller of 
buildings. 
• • • • ---
• 
Fine ori",-
prilO~nt 
w!&ichm'\Y 
be imposrd 
• 
Rs.5OO 
• 
R •. 1,000 
R.I. 100 
RI.loo 
• 
lU.I,OOO 
Rs.l,ooo 
RI·500 
• 
Ri·5OO 
• 
Daily 
fine 
which 
maybe 
impaled 
Rs.Q5 
Rs·SO 
RI. a5 
RI.25 
-_. 

LOK SABRA 
A 
Bn.L 
further to amend the Delhi Municipal Corporation Act, 1857 
fShrt P. Ven.k4taBubb4i4h, 
Miftbter of State 'n the 
Mintstrv oJ Home Atfolr.,} 