Bill No. 104-F of 2026 
THE JAN VISHWAS (AMENDMENT OF 
PROVISIONS) BILL, 2026
(AS PASSED BY THE HOUSES OF PARLIAMENT— 
LOK SABHA ON 1ST APRIL, 2026 
RAJYA SABHA ON  2ND APRIL, 2026 ) 

THE JAN VISHWAS (AMENDMENT OF PROVISIONS) BILL, 2026
(AS PASSED BY THE HOUSES OF PARLIAMENT)
A 
BILL 
to amend certain enactments for decriminalising and rationalising offences to 
further enhance trust-based governance for ease of living and doing business. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-seventh Year of the Republic of 
India as follows:— 
1. ( 1) This Act may be called the Jan Vishwas (Amendment of Provisions)
Act, 2026. 
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint; and different dates may be appointed 
for amendments relating to different enactments mentioned in the Schedule. 
Short title and 
commencement. 
Bill No. 104-F of 2026

2 
Amendment of 
certain 
enactments. 
Revision of fines 
and penalties. 
Savings. 
Power to remove 
difficulties. 
2. The enactments mentioned in column (4) of the Schedule are hereby
amended to the extent and in the manner mentioned in column (5) thereof. 
3. The fines and penalties provided under various provisions in the enactments
mentioned in the Schedule shall be increased by ten per cent. of the minimum 
amount of fine or penalty, as the case may be, prescribed therefor, after the expiry 
of every three years from the date of commencement of this Act: 
Provided that notwithstanding anything contained in this section, if any 
enactment mentioned in the Schedule provides the manner of revision of fines and 
penalties therein, only the said provision shall be applicable for increase of fines and 
penalties for provisions of such enactment. 
4. The amendment or repeal by this Act of any enactment shall not affect any
other enactment in which the amended or repealed enactment has been applied, 
incorporated or referred to;  
and this Act shall not affect the validity, invalidity, effect or consequences of 
anything already done or suffered, or any right, title, obligation or liability already 
acquired, accrued or incurred or any remedy or proceeding in respect thereof, or any 
release or discharge of, or from any debt, penalty, obligation, liabilit y, claim or 
demand, or any indemnity already granted, or the proof of any past act or thing; 
nor shall this Act affect any principle or rule of law, or established jurisdiction, 
form or course of pleading, practice or procedure, or existing usage, custom, 
privilege, restriction, exemption, office or appointment, despite the fact that the 
same respectively may have been in any manner affirmed, or recognised or derived 
by, in or from any enactment hereby amended or repealed; 
nor shall the amendment or repeal by this Act of any enactment revive or 
restore any jurisdiction, office, custom, liability, right, title, privilege, restriction, 
exemption, usage, practice, procedure or other matter or thing not now existing or 
in force. 
5. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of different
enactments mentioned in the Schedule as amended by this Act, the Central 
Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, 
not inconsistent with the provision s of the enactments as amended by this Act, as 
appear to it to be necessary or expedient for removing the difficulty: 
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of a period of two 
years from the date of commencement of this Act. 
(2) Every order made under sub-section (1) shall, as soon as may be after it is
made, be laid before each House of Parliament. 

3 
THE SCHEDULE 
(See section 2) 
Sl. 
No. 
Year No. Short title Amendments 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
1. 1870 7 The Court-
fees Act, 
1870 
(A) In section 34, for sub -section (3), the following
sub-section shall be substituted, namely:–– 
“(3) Any person appointed to sell stamps, who,–– 
(a) with fraudulent intent, disobeys any rule made
under this section, or sells or offers for sale any stamp 
without being duly appointed, shall be punished with 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to six 
months, or with fine which may extend to ten 
thousand rupees, or with both; 
(b) without any fraudulent intent, contravenes any
rule made under this section, shall be liable to penalty 
not exceeding ten thousand rupees.”. 
(B) After section 34, the following  sections shall be
inserted, namely:–– 
“34A.  Adjudication of penalties. ––(1) For the 
purpose of adjudicating penalties under clause ( b) of 
sub-section (3) of section 34, the Administrator of the 
Union territory concerned may appoint an officer not 
below the rank of Deputy Commissioner or Deputy 
Collector or any officer equivalent in rank as an 
adjudicating officer for holding an inquiry and imposing 
penalties: 
Provided that the Administrator of the Union territory 
concerned may appoint as many adjudicating officers as 
may be required. 
(2) The adjudicating officer may summon and
enforce the attendance of any person acquainted with the 
facts and circumstances of the case to give evidence or 
to produce any document, which in the opinion of the 
adjudicating officer may be useful for, or relevant to, the 
subject-matter of the inquiry, and if, on such inquiry, is 
satisfied that the person concerned has contravened any 
rule made under sub-section (1) of section 34, he may 
impose penalty as deemed fit, subject to th e amount 
mentioned under clause (b) of sub-section (3) of the said 
section:  
Provided that no such penalty shall be imposed 
without giving the person concerned a reasonable 
opportunity of being heard. 
34B. Appeal.––(1) Whoever aggrieved by an order of 
the adjudicating officer under section 34A may, within 
thirty days from the date of receipt of such order, prefer 
an appeal to the Commissioner or Collector of the 
Division or before any officer equivalent in rank 
designated as such by the Administrator of the Union 
territory concerned as an appellate authority. 

4 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
(2) An appeal may be admitted after the expiry of the
period of thirty days, if the appellant satisfies the 
appellate authority that he had sufficient cause for not 
preferring the appeal within that period.  
(3) The appellate authority may, after giving the
parties to the appeal an opportunity of being heard, pass 
such order as he may think fit. 
(4) An appeal under sub-section (1) shall be disposed
of within sixty days from the date of filing. 
(5) If penalty imposed by the adjudicating officer
under sub-section (1) of section 34A or by an order of 
the appellate authority under sub -section (3) of this 
section, as the case may be, is not deposited, the amount 
shall be recovered as an arrear of land revenue.”. 
2. 1871 1 The Cattle-
trespass Act, 
1871 
(A) For section 3, the following section shall be
substituted, namely:— 
‘3. Definitions. —In this Act, unless the context 
otherwise requires,–– 
(a) “adjudicating officer” means the 
Sub-Divisional Magistrate or any other Executive 
Magistrate authorised by the State Government or the 
Union territory administration, as the case may be;  
(b) “appellate authority” means the District
Magistrate or the Additional District Magistrate 
authorised by the State Government or the Union 
territory administration, as the case may be;  
(c) “cattle” includes also camels, buffaloes,
horses, mares, geldings, ponies, colts, fillies, 
mules, asses, pigs, rams, ewes, sheep, lambs, 
goats and kids;  
(d) “local authority” means Municipal
Corporation, Municipal Council, Municipality, 
Cantonment Board, Notified Area Committee, 
Gram Panchayat or any other authority for the 
time being vested by law with the control 
and administration of any matters within a 
specified local area; and 
(e) “officer of police” also includes
village-watchman.’. 
(B) In section 6, for the words, “the Indian Penal Code
(45 of 1860)”, the words, brackets and figures 
“clause (28) of section 2 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 
2023 (45 of 2023)” shall be substituted. 
(C) In section 8, in clause (a), for the word “animals”,
the word “cattle” shall be substituted. 

5 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
(D) For section 12, the following section shall be
substituted, namely:–– 
“12. Penalties for cattle impounded.—(1) For every 
head of cattle impounded as aforesaid, the 
pound-keepers shall impose penalty in accordance with 
the scale for the time being prescribed by the State 
Government in this behalf by notification in the Official 
Gazette and different scales may be prescribed for 
different local areas. 
(2) All penalties so imposed shall be deposited with
the Magistrate of the District through such officer as the 
State Government may direct. 
(3) A list showing the penalties and the rates of
charge for feeding and watering cattle shall be posted in 
a conspicuous place on or near to every pound.”. 
(E) In section 13,––
(i) in the marginal heading, for the word “fines”, the
word “penalties” shall be substituted; 
(ii) for the words “payment of the fines”, the words
“payment of penalties imposed” shall be substituted. 
(F) In section 15,––
(i) for the words “appear and refuse to pay the said
fines and expenses”, the words “appears and refuses to 
pay the said penalties and expenses” shall be substituted; 
(ii) for the words “deposit of the fines”, the words
“deposit of the penalties imposed” shall be substituted. 
(G) In section 16,––
(i) in the marginal heading, for the word “fines”, the
word “penalties” shall be substituted; 
(ii) for the words “deposit the said fines”, the words
“deposit the said penalties imposed” shall be substituted; 
(iii) for the words “Deduction of fines and expenses”,
the words “Deduction of penalties and expenses” shall 
be substituted; 
(iv) for the words “fines leviable”, the words
“penalties imposed” shall be substituted; 
(v) in clause ( c), for the word “fines”, the word
“penalties” shall be substituted. 
(H) In section 17,––
(i) in the marginal heading, for the word “fines”, the
word “penalties” shall be substituted;
(ii) for the words “the fines so deducted”, the words
“the penalties so deducted” shall be substituted. 

6 
 (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
    (I) In section 22,–– 
(i) for the words “one hundred rupees”, the words 
“five thousand rupees” shall be substituted; 
(ii) for the words “together with all fines paid”, the 
words “together with all penalties paid” shall be 
substituted; 
(iii) for the words “the fines and expenses leviable”, 
the words “the penalties imposed and expenses 
incurred” shall be substituted. 
(J) In section 23, for the words “compensation, fines and 
expenses”, the words “compensation, penalties and 
expenses” shall be substituted. 
(K) In section 24, for the words “on conviction before a 
Magistrate, be punished with imprisonment for a period not 
exceeding six months, or with fine not exceeding five 
hundred rupees, or with both”, the words “on being found 
in default by the adjudicating officer, be liable to penalty of 
not exceeding five thousand rupees” shall be substituted. 
(L) In section 25,–– 
(i) for the words “Any fine imposed under the next 
following section or for the offence of mischief”, the 
words “Any penalty imposed under the next following 
section or for mischief” shall be substituted; 
(ii) for the words “the person convicted of the 
offence”, the words “the person found liable” shall be 
substituted. 
(M) For section 26, the following section shall  be 
substituted, namely:–– 
“26. Penalty for damage caused to land or crops or 
public roads by pigs and cattle. ––(1) Any owner or 
keeper of pigs who, through neglect or otherwise, 
damages or causes or permits to be damaged any land, 
or any crop or produce of land, or any public road, by 
allowing such pigs to trespass thereon, shall, on being 
found in default by the adjudicating officer be liable to 
penalty not exceeding one thousand rupees. 
(2) Any owner or keeper of cattle who, through 
neglect or otherwise, damages or causes or permits to be 
damaged any land or any crop or produce of land or any 
public road, by allowing such cattle to trespass thereon, 
shall, on being found in default by the adjudicating 
officer be liable to penalty not exceeding five thousand 
rupees.”. 
(N) In section 27, for the words “be punished, on 
conviction before a Magistrate, with fine not exceeding 
fifty rupees. Such fines”, the words “on being found in 
default by the adjudicating officer, be liable to penalty, not 
exceeding five thousand rupees and such penalty” shall be 
substituted. 
 
 

7 
 (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
    (O) After section 27, the following sections shall be 
inserted, namely:–– 
“27A.  Adjudication of penalties.––For the purpose 
of adjudicating penalties under the provisions of this Act 
and the rules made thereunder, the State Government or 
the Union territory administration, may authorise the 
Sub-Divisional Magistrate or any other Executive 
Magistrate, as the case may be, having jurisdiction, as an 
adjudicating officer for holding an inquiry and imposing 
penalties in such manner as may be prescribed by the 
Central Government: 
Provided that no such penalty shall be imposed 
without giving the person concerned a reasonable 
opportunity of being heard. 
27B. Appeal.––(1) Whoever aggrieved by an order 
of the adjudicating officer under section 27A may, 
within thirty days from the date of receipt of the such 
order, prefer an appeal to the District Magistrate or the 
Additional District Magistrate specially authorised in 
this behalf by the State Government or the Union 
territory administration as an appellate authority, in such 
form and manner as may be prescribed by the Central 
Government. 
(2) An appeal may be admitted to after the expiry of 
the period of thirty days, if the appellant satisfies the 
appellate authority that he had sufficient cause for not 
preferring the appeal within that period.  
(3) The appellate authority may, after giving the 
parties to the appeal an opportunity of being heard, pass 
such order as he may think fit. 
(4) An appeal under sub-section (1) shall be disposed 
of within sixty days from the date of filing. 
27C. Imprisonment for non-payment of penalty.––
Where any person fails to pay the penalty imposed under 
the provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder 
within ninety days of such imposition, he shall be 
punishable with imprisonment for a term which may 
extend to three months or with fine which may extend to 
twice the amount of the penalty, or with both.”. 
(P) For section 28, the following section shall be 
substituted, namely:–– 
“28. Remittance of penalty. ––(1) Where an 
adjudicating officer imposes a penalty under the 
provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder, the 
amount of said penalty realised shall be credited to the 
fund of the Animal Welfare Board of India constituted 
under the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals                      
Act, 1960 (59 of 1960).  
 
 
 

8 
 (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
    (2) The Board referred to in sub -section (1) shall 
utilise the amount realised through penalty under                               
sub-section ( 1) for the implementation of the 
provisions of the Act and the rules made thereunder 
in such manner as may be prescribed by th e Central 
Government.”. 
(Q) In CHAPTER VII, for the Chapter heading “SUITS 
FOR COMPENSATION”, the heading “A PPLICATION FOR 
COMPENSATION” shall be substituted. 
(R) In section 29,–– 
(i) in the marginal heading, for the words “sue for 
compensation”, the words “apply for compensation” 
shall be substituted; 
(ii) for the words “suing for compensation in any 
competent Court”, the words “making an application 
for compensation to the adjudicating officer” shall be 
substituted. 
(S) In section 30,–– 
(i) for the words “convicting Magistrate”, the 
words “adjudicating officer” shall be substituted; 
(ii) for the words “such suit”, the words “such 
complaint” shall be substituted. 
(T) After section 31, the following section shall be 
inserted, namely:–– 
“32. Power of Central Government to make        
rules.––(1) The Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, make rules not 
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, to carry 
out the provisions of this Act. 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the 
generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, 
namely:— 
(a) the manner of holding an inquiry and 
imposing penalties under section 27A; 
(b) the form and manner of appeal under                                
sub-section (1) of section 27B; and  
(c) the manner of utilisation of penalty amount 
under sub-section (2) of section 28. 
(3) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as 
soon as may be after it is made, before each House of 
Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of 
thirty days which may be comprised in one session or 
in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the 
expiry of the session immediately following               
the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both  
 
 

9 
 (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
    Houses agree in making any modification in said 
rules or both Houses agree that the rules should not 
be made, the rules shall thereafter have effect only in 
such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may 
be; so, however, any such modification or annulment 
shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything 
previously done under that rule.”. 
3. 1882 15 The 
Presidency 
Small Cause 
Courts Act, 
1882 
(A) In section 68, for the words “shall, on conviction 
before a Presidency Magistrate, be liable to be punished 
with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees and 
with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three 
months, in addition to any other liability  he may have 
incurred by his proceedings”, the words “shall be liable 
to such penalty as may be imposed by the adjudicating 
officer” shall be substituted. 
(B) In section 87,— 
(i) in the marginal heading, for the words 
“Imprisonment or committal of person”, the words 
“Penalty for” shall be substituted; 
(ii) for the words, figures and brackets                                         
“the Court may sentence him to simple imprisonment, 
or commit him to the custody of an officer of the 
Court, for any term not exceeding seven days, unless 
in the meantime such person consents to answer such 
questions or to produce such document, as the case 
may be, after which, in the event of his persisting in 
his refusal, he may be dealt with according to the 
provisions of section 480 or section 482 of                                  
the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 (5 of 1898)”, 
the words “he shall be liable to penalty as may be 
imposed by the adjudicating officer” shall be 
substituted. 
(C) After section 87, the fo llowing sections shall be 
inserted, namely:— 
“87A. Adjudication of penalties.––For the purpose 
of adjudication of penalties under sections 68 and 87, 
the State Government, may designate the Deputy 
Registrar appointed under section 13 of this Act, to be 
the adjudicating officer, for holding an inquiry and 
imposing penalties in the manner as may be provided 
by rules by the High Court: 
Provided that the State Government may appoint 
as many adjudicating officers as may be required: 
Provided further that no such  penalty shall be 
imposed without giving the person concerned a 
reasonable opportunity of being heard. 
 
 
 

10 
 (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
    87B. Appeal. ––(1) Any person aggrieved by an 
order of the adjudicating officer under section 87A 
may, within thirty days from the date of receipt of 
such order, prefer an appeal to such officer, at least 
one rank higher than the adjudicating officer, as may 
be appointed by the State Government as an appellate 
authority, in such form and manner as may be 
provided by rules by the High Court. 
(2) The appellate authority may admit an appeal 
after the expiry of the said period of thirty days, if the 
appellant satisfies the Appellate authority that he had 
sufficient cause for not preferring the appeal within 
that period. 
(3) The appellate authority may, after giving the 
parties to the appeal an opportunity of being heard, 
pass such an order as he may deem fit. 
(4) An appeal under sub -section ( 1) shall be 
disposed of within sixty days from the date of filing. 
(5) If penalty imposed by the adjudicating officer 
under section 87A or by an  order of the appellate 
authority under this section is not deposited, the 
amount shall be recovered as an arrear of land 
revenue.”. 
87C. Amount of penalty. —Notwithstanding 
anything con tained in this Act, the quantum of 
penalty or fine shall be such amount as the State 
Government concerned may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, determine from time to time, having 
regard to the pecuniary jurisdiction and local 
requirements of the Court. 
Explanation.––For the purposes of this section, 
“State Government concerned” means the 
Government of the States of Maharashtra, Tamil 
Nadu and West Bengal, within whose respective 
jurisdictions the Act is in force; and such 
determination shall be con sistent with the 
amendments and adaptations made by the respective 
State Acts.”. 
(D) Section 88 shall be omitted. 
(E) Section 95 shall be omitted. 
(F) After section 97, the following section shall be 
inserted, namely:— 
“98. Power of the High Court to make rules.––(1) 
The High Courts may make rules not inconsistent 
with the provisions of this Act to carry out the 
provisions of this Act. 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the 
generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of  the following matters, 
namely:— 
 
 

11 
 (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
    (a) the manner of holding inquiry and imposing 
penalties under section 87A; and 
(b) the form and manner of appeal under                      
sub-section (1) of section 87B.”. 
4. 1898 9 The        
Live-stock 
Importation 
Act, 1898 
(A) After section 3A, the following section shall be 
inserted, namely:— 
“3B. Laying of notification before both Houses of 
Parliament.—All notifications issued under this Act 
shall be laid before both Houses of Parliament as soon 
as may be after they are issued.” . 
(B) Section 4 shall be omitted. 
5. 1903 7 The Works 
of Defence 
Act, 1903 
For section 36, the following section s shall be 
substituted, namely:— 
“36. Punishments.—(1) Whoever wilfully— 
(a) obstructs any person in doing any of the acts 
authorised by section 4, section 6 or section 8; or 
(b) destroys, damages, alters or otherwise 
interferes with the ground level or any work 
done under section 6, 
shall be liable to penalty which may extend to                   
two thousand and five hundred rupees, and in case 
of continuing contravention, with an                        
additional penalty of two hundred and fifty rupees 
for every day after the first during which the 
contravention continues; and any  expenses 
incurred in removing the effects of this 
contravention may be recovered from him in the 
manner provided by the law for the time being in 
force for the recovery of penalty. 
(2) Whoever obstructs any person authorised under 
section 4, section 6, or  section 8, by using or 
threatening to use force, or by any act of physical 
interference that prevents such officer from 
exercising any lawful power or performing any lawful 
duty under this Act, or contravenes any of the 
provisions of section 7 or any cond ition prescribed 
thereunder, shall be punishable with imprisonment of 
either description for a term which may extend to one 
month, or with fine which may extend to two 
thousand and five hundred rupees, and in case of 
continuing offence, with an additional fine of two 
hundred and fifty rupees for every day after the first 
during which the contravention continues; and any 
expenses incurred in removing the effects of his 
offence may be recovered from him in the manner 
provided by the law for the time being in force for the 
recovery of fines. 
 
 

12 
 (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
    Explanation.––For the purposes of this section, 
obstruction shall not include any act or omission 
arising from physical or mental incapacity, 
unintentional conduct, or circumstances beyond the 
person’s control.”. 
36A. Adjudication of penalties.––For the purpose 
of adjudicating penalties under sub -section ( 1) of 
section 36, the Central Government shall appoint an 
officer not below the rank of  Commanding Officer as 
an adjudicating officer for holding an inquiry and 
imposing penalties in such manner as may be 
prescribed: 
Provided that no such penalty shall be imposed 
without giving the person concerned a reasonable 
opportunity of being heard. 
36B. Appeal.––(1) Any person aggrieved by an order 
of the adjudicating officer under section 36A may, 
within thirty days from the date of receipt of such order, 
prefer an appeal to such officer, not below the rank of 
General Officer Commanding-in-Chief or equivalent or 
head of the organisation, as may be appointed by the 
Central Government as an appellate authority, in such 
form and manner as may be prescribed. 
(2) An appeal may be admitted after the expiry of the 
period of thirty days if the appellant satisfies the 
appellate authority that he had sufficient cause for not 
preferring the appeal within that period. 
(3) The appellate authority may, after giving the 
parties to the appeal an opportunity of being heard, pass 
such order as he may think fit. 
(4) An appeal under sub-section (1) shall be disposed 
of within sixty days from the date of filing. 
(5) In the event of non-payment of amount of penalty 
imposed under section 36A or under this section within 
a period of fifteen days from date of receipt of such 
order, the appellant shall be liable to be punished with a 
fine which may extend to twice the penalty imposed.”. 
6. 1925 39 The Indian 
Succession 
Act, 1925 
(A) In section 296, in sub -section (2), for the words 
“one thousand rupees, or with imprisonment for a term 
which may extend to three months, or with both”, the 
words “ten thousand rupees” shall be substituted. 
(B) In section 389, in sub -section (2), for the words 
“one thousand rupees, or with imprisonment for a term 
which may extend to three months or with both”, the 
words “ten thousand rupees” shall be substituted. 
 
 

13 
 (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
7. 1934 2 The Reserve 
Bank of 
India Act, 
1934 
(A) In section 58B,–– 
(i) in the marginal heading, for the word 
“Penalties”, the word “Offences” shall be substituted; 
(ii) sub-section (4AA) shall be omitted. 
(B) In section 58G, in the marginal heading, for the 
word “fine”, the word “penalties” shall be substituted.  
8. 1940 23 The Drugs 
and 
Cosmetics 
Act, 1940 
(A) In section 27A, in clause (ii), for the words “shall 
be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may 
extend to one year or with fine which may extend to 
twenty thousand rupees, or with both”, the words “shall 
be liable to penalty of one lakh rupees or three times the 
value of the cosmetics confiscated, whichever is higher” 
shall be substituted. 
(B) In section 28A, for the words “punishable with 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year 
or with fine which shall not be less than twenty thousand 
rupees or with both”, the words “liable to penalty which 
shall not be less than three lakh rupees but which may 
extend to five lakh rupees” shall be substituted. 
(C) Section 29 shall be omitted. 
(D) In section 30, sub -sections (1A) and (2) shall be 
omitted. 
(E) After section 30, the following section shall be 
inserted, namely:–– 
“30A. Adjudication of penalties. ––(1) For the 
purpose of adjudicating of penalties under this Act,  the 
Central Government  or the State Government, as the 
case may be, may appoint an officer not below the rank 
of Deputy Drugs Controller or Assistant Drugs 
Controller, as the case may be, or an officer equivalent 
in rank in the State Government, as an adjudicating 
officer, for holding an inquiry and imposing penalties 
in such manner as may be prescribed: 
Provided that the Central Government or the State 
Government, as the case may be, may appoint as 
many adjudicating officers as may be required: 
Provided further that no such penalty shall be 
imposed without giving the person concerned a 
reasonable opportunity of being heard. 
(2) Whoever aggrieved by an order of the 
adjudicating officer under sub-section (1) may, within 
thirty days from the date of receipt of such order, 
prefer an appeal to such officer at least one rank 
higher than the adju dicating officer as an appellate 
authority as may be appointed by the Central 
Government, or as the case may be, the State 
Government, in such form and manner as may be 
prescribed. 
 
 
 

14 
 (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
    (3) An appeal may be admitted after the expiry of 
the said period of thirty days if the appellant satisfies 
the appellate authority that he had sufficient cause for 
not preferring the appeal within that period.  
(4) The appellate authority may, after giving the 
parties to the appeal an opportunity of being heard, 
pass such an order as he may deem fit. 
(5) An appeal under sub -section ( 2) shall                           
be disposed of within sixty days from the date of 
filing. 
(6) If penalty imposed by the adjud icating officer 
under sub-section (1) or by an order of the appellate 
authority under sub-section (4), as the case may be, is 
not deposited, the amount shall be recovered as an 
arrear of land revenue.”. 
(F) In section 32B, in sub -section (1), for the words, 
brackets, figures and letters “clause ( ii) of section 27A, 
section 28 and section 28A”, the word and figures 
“section 28” shall be substituted. 
(G) In section 33, in sub-section (2), after clause (o), 
the following clauses shall be inserted, namely:— 
“(oa) the manner of holding an inquiry and 
imposing penalties under sub -section ( 1) of                      
section 30A; 
(ob) the form and manner of preferring appeal to 
the appellate authority against the order of 
adjudicating officer under sub -section ( 2) of                
section 30A.”. 
(H) In section 33-I, for sub-section (2), the following 
sub-section shall be substituted, namely:–– 
“(2)(a) Contravenes any other provisions of this 
Chapter except section 24 as applied by section 33H 
or any rule made under this Chapter shall be 
punishable with imprisonment for a term which may 
extend to six months and with fine which shall not be 
less than ten thousand rupees; 
(b) contravenes section 24 as applied by                    
section 33H, shall be punishable with fine which shall 
not be less than thirty thousand rupees.”. 
(I) In section 33J, for clause (c), the following clause 
shall be substituted, namely:–– 
“(c)(i) under clause ( a) of sub -section ( 2) of                           
section 33-I is again convict ed of an offence under 
that sub -section, shall be punishable with 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to one 
year and with fine which shall not be less than twenty 
thousand rupees or three times the value of the drugs 
confiscated, whichever is higher; 
 
 

15 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
(ii) under clause (b) of sub-section  (2)  of 
section 33-I is again convicted of an offence under 
that sub-section, shall be punishable with fine which 
shall not  be less  than  fifty thousand rupees or  six 
times the value of the drugs confiscated, whichever 
is higher.”. 
(J) In 
section 36AB , i n sub-section (1), t he word,
figures and letter “section 28A,” shall be omitted. 
(K) In section 36AC, in sub-section (1),––
(i) the word, figures and letter “section 28A,” the
occurring at both the places, shall be omitted; 
(ii) for the words, brackets and figures
“sub-sections (1) and (2) of section 30” occurring at 
both the places, the words, brackets and figures 
“sub-section (1) of section 30” shall be substituted. 
9. 1948 8 The 
Pharmacy 
Act, 1948 
(A) In section 26A, in sub-section (4), for the words,
figures and brackets “section 21 of the Indian Penal 
Code (45 of 1860)”, the words, brackets and figures 
“clause (28) of section 2 of the of the Bharatiya Nyaya 
Sanhita, 2023 (45 of 2023)” shall be substituted. 
(B) In section 43,––
(i) in sub-section (1), for the words “be punishable
with fine which may extend to fifty rupees”, the 
words “be liable to penalty which may extend to five 
thousand rupees” shall be substituted; 
(ii) for sub-section (2), the following sub-sections
shall be substituted, namely:— 
“(2) The penalty referred to in sub-section (1) 
shall be paid  within ten days from  the date on 
which the person’s name was removed from the 
register.  
(3) If any person fails to pay the penalty within 
the period prescribed in sub-section (2) and fails to 
surrender the certificate of registration; he shall be 
liable to a further penalty of one thousand rupees 
for every day during which the contravention 
continues.”. 
(C) In section 43A, in sub -section (1), for the word,
figures and letter “section 26A”, the words, figures and 
letter “sections 26A and 43,” shall be substituted.   
10. 1948 9 The Dock 
Workers 
(Regulation 
of 
Employment) 
Act, 1948 
(A) In section 3, for sub -section ( 3), the following
sub-section shall be substituted, namely:— 
“(3) A scheme may further provide that 
contravention of any provision thereof shall be 
subject to a penalty, which shall not exceed,–– 
(a) five thousand rupees in respect of first
contravention; and 

16 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
(b) ten thousand rupees in respect of second and
subsequent contravention.”. 
(B) After section 3, the following section shall be
inserted, namely:— 
“3A. Authority for imposing penalty, appeal and 
procedure thereof.—(1) The Deputy Chairman, 
Calcutta Dock Labour Board, shall be the 
adjudicating authority for the purpose holding an 
inquiry and imposing penalty for contravention of a 
scheme in accordance with sub-section (3) of 
section 3, in such manner as may be prescribed by 
rules: 
Provided that no such penalty shall be imposed 
without giving the person concerned a reasonable 
opportunity of being heard. 
(2) Any person aggrieved by an order of the 
adjudicating officer under sub-section (1), may, 
within thirty days from the date of receipt of such 
order, prefer an appeal to the Chairman, Calcutta 
Dock Labour Board, who shall be the appellate 
authority, in such form and manner as may be 
prescribed by rules.  
(3) An appeal may be admitted after the expiry 
of the said period of thirty days if the appellant 
satisfies the appellate authority that he had       
sufficient cause for not preferring the appeal within 
that period. 
(4) The appellate authority may, after giving the 
parties to the appeal an opportunity of being heard, 
pass such an order as he may deem fit. 
(5) An appeal under sub-s ection (2) shall be 
disposed of within sixty days from the date of filing. 
(6) If penalty imposed by the adjudicating officer 
under sub-section (1) or by an order of the appellate 
authority under sub-section (4), as the case may be, is 
not deposited, the amount shall be recovered as an 
arrear of land revenue.”. 
(C) Sections 7 and 7A shall be omitted.
(D) In section 8, in sub -section (2), after clause ( g),
the following clauses shall be inserted, namely:— 
“(ga) the manner  of holding  an inquiry  and 
imposing penalties  under  sub-section  ( 1) of 
section 3A; 
(gb) the form and manner of preferring appeal to 
the appellate authority against  the order of 
adjudicating officer under sub-section (2) 
of section 3A.”. 

17 
 (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
11. 1948 14 The 
Damodar 
Valley 
Corporation 
Act, 1948 
(A) Sections 18 and 19 shall be omitted. 
(B) For section 53, the following section shall be 
substituted, namely:–– 
“53. Punishment .—(1) Whoever contravenes the 
provisions of section 17 of this Act or any rule made 
thereunder shall be punishable with a fine which may 
extend up to ten lakh rupees in respect of each offence 
and in the case of a continuing failure, with an 
additional fine which shall not be less than one 
thousand rupees but may extend to fifty thousand 
rupees for every day during which the failure 
continues after conviction of the first such offence. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the 
Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023                  
(46 of 2023), any competent court may accept a sum 
of ten lakh rupees for compounding of the offence 
from any person who committed or who is reasonably 
suspected of having committed an offence under             
sub-section (1). 
(3) On payment of the sum of money in accordance 
with sub -section ( 2), no proceedings shall be 
instituted or continued against such a person in any 
criminal court. 
(4) The acceptance of the sum of money by a 
competent court for compounding an offence in 
accordance with sub-section (2) shall be deemed to be 
an amount of an acquittal within the meaning of 
section 337 of the Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha 
Sanhita, 2023 (46 of 2023). 
(5) The Compounding of an offence under                          
sub-section ( 2) shall be allowed only once fo r any 
person.”. 
(C) In section 56, for the words, figures and brackets 
“section 21 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860)”, the 
words, brackets and figures “clause (28) of section 2 of 
the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 (45 of 2023)” shall 
be substituted. 
12. 1948 46 The Coal 
Mines 
Provident 
Fund and 
Miscellaneous 
Provisions 
Act, 1948 
(A) For section 9, the following sections shall be 
substituted, namely:–– 
“9. Penalty.––(1) If any person contravenes or fails 
to comply with any provision of this Act or of any 
scheme framed thereunder, he shall be liable to  
penalty which shall not be less than five thousand 
rupees but which may extend to fifty thousand rupees.  
(2) Where any person continues contravention 
under sub -section ( 1), he shall be liable to an 
additional penalty of ten thousand rupees for every 
day during which such contravention continues 
subject to a maximum of ten lakh rupees. 
 
 

18 
 (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
    9A. Adjudication of penalties.––For the purpose of 
adjudicating penalties under section 9, the Central 
Government, may appoint an officer not below the 
rank of Joint Secretary to the Government of India or 
a Secretary to the State Government as an 
adjudicating officer for holding an inquiry and 
imposing penalties in such manner as may be 
prescribed: 
Provided that the Central Government or the State 
Government, as the case may be, may appoint as 
many adjudicating officers as may be required: 
Provided furt her that no such penalty shall be 
imposed without giving the person concerned a 
reasonable opportunity of being heard. 
9B. Appeal. ––(1) Any person aggrieved by an 
order of the adjudicating officer under section 9A 
may, within thirty days from the date of receipt of 
such order, prefer an appeal to such officer, at least 
one rank higher than the adjudicating officer, as may 
be appointed by the Central Government, as an 
appellate authority, in such form and manner as may 
be prescribed. 
(2) The appellate autho rity may admit an appeal 
after the expiry of the said period of thirty days, if the 
appellant satisfies the appellate authority that he had 
sufficient cause for not preferring the appeal within 
that period.  
(3) The appellate authority may, after giving th e 
parties to the appeal an opportunity of being heard, 
pass such an order as he may deem fit. 
(4) An appeal under sub -section ( 1) shall be 
disposed of within sixty days from the date of filing. 
(5) If penalty imposed by the adjudicating officer 
under secti on 9A or by an order of the appellate 
authority under this section, as the case may be, is not 
deposited, the amount shall be recovered as an arrear 
of land revenue.”. 
(B) After section 11D, the following section shall be 
inserted, namely:–– 
“11E. Power of  Central Government to make 
rules.––(1) The Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for 
carrying out the provisions of this Act. 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice  to the 
generality of the foregoing power, such rul es may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, 
namely:— 
(a) the manner of holding an inquiry and 
imposing penalties under section 9A; 
 
 

19 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
(b) the form and manner of preferring appeal to
the appellate authority against the order of 
adjudicating officer under sub -section ( 1) of 
section 9B. 
(3) Every rule made under this section shall be laid,
as soon as may be after it is made, before each House 
of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period 
of thirty days which may be comprised in one session 
or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before 
the expiry of the session immediately following the 
session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both 
Houses agree in making any modification in the ru le 
or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, 
the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such 
modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; 
so, however, that any such modification or annulment 
shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything 
previously done under that rule.”. 
13. 1948 61 The Central 
Silk Board 
Act, 1948 
(A) In section 13, in sub -section ( 2), after
clause ( xvc), the following clauses shall be inserted, 
namely:–– 
“(xvca) the manner of holding  an inquiry and 
imposing penalties under sub -section ( 1) of 
section 14B; 
(xvcb) the form and manner of preferring appeal to 
the appellate authority against the order of 
adjudicating officer under sub -section ( 2) of 
section 14B;”. 
(B) In section 14, in sub-section (1),––
(i) clause (b) shall be omitted;
(ii) in the long line, for the words “punishable with
imprisonment for a term which ma y extend to one 
year, or with fine which may extend to one thousand 
rupees, or with both”, the words “warned at the first 
instance, and in case of continuing or repeated 
contraventions, he shall be liable to penalty of not less 
than twenty-five thousand rupees but may extend to 
one lakh rupees” shall be substituted. 
(C) For section 14A, the following section s shall be
substituted, namely:–– 
“14A. Penalty for Contravention of section 8C or 
8E.––If any person contravenes the provisions of 
section 8C  or 8E of  this Act or regulations made 
thereunder or any notification relating to silk-worm 
seed, he shall be liable  to penalty of  not  less  than 
twenty-five thousand rupees but may extend to one 
lakh rupees, and in addition to such  penalty,  the 
competent authority may suspend  or cancel the 
registration granted for the production of silk-worm 
seeds. 

20 
 (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
    14B. Adjudication of penalties. ––(1) For the 
purpose of adjudicating penalties under clauses ( a) 
and ( c) of sub -section ( 1) of section 14, and                  
section 14A, an officer not below the rank of Director 
to the Government of India or equivalent in rank as 
may be appointed by the Central Government shall be 
the adjudicating officer for holding an inquiry and 
imposing penalties in such manner as may be 
prescribed: 
Provided that no such penalty shall be imposed 
without giving the person concerned a reasonable 
opportunity of being heard. 
(2) Whoever is aggrieved by an order of the 
adjudicating officer under sub -section ( 1) may,     
within thirty days from the date of receipt of                        
such order, prefer an appeal to the appellate                 
authority who shall be an officer  not below the rank 
of Joint Secretary to the Government of India or 
equivalent in rank as may be appointed by the Central 
Government, in such form and manner as may be 
prescribed. 
(3) An appeal may be admitted after the expiry of 
the period of thirty days  if the appellant satisfies the 
appellate authority that he had sufficient cause for not 
preferring the appeal within that period. 
(4) The appellate authority may, after giving the 
parties to the appeal an opportunity of being heard, 
pass such order as he may think fit. 
(5) An appeal under sub -section ( 2) shall be 
disposed of within sixty days from the date of filing. 
(6) If penalty imposed by the adjudicating officer 
under sub-section (1) or by an order of the appellate 
authority under sub-section (4), as the case may be, is 
not deposited, the amount shall be recovered as an 
arrear of land revenue.”. 
14. 1950 64 The Road 
Transport 
Corporations 
Act, 1950 
In section 46, for the words “shall be punishable                  
with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees,                
and when the breach is a continuing one, with a                   
further fine not exceeding twenty rupees for every day 
after the date of the first conviction during which                    
the offender is proved to have persisted in the offence”,  
the words “shall be liable to penalty which may extend 
to five hundred rupees and when the breach is a 
continuing one with a further penalty not exceeding 
twenty rupees for every day after the fi rst                 
contravention, during which the breach continues” shall 
be substituted. 
 
 

21 
 (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
15. 1952 30 The 
Requisitioning 
and 
Acquisition of 
Immovable 
Property            
Act, 1952 
(A) In section 20, for the words “punishable with 
fine”, the words “liable to penalty” shall be substituted.  
(B) After section 20, the following sections shall be 
inserted, namely:— 
“20A. Adjudication of penalties.––For the purpose 
of adjudicating penalties under section 20, the Central 
Government shall, appoint an officer at least one rank 
higher than the competent authority as an 
adjudicating officer for holding an inquiry and 
imposing penalties in such manner as ma y be 
prescribed: 
Provided that the Central Government may appoint 
as many adjudicating officers as may be required: 
Provided further that no such penalty shall be 
imposed without giving the person concerned a 
reasonable opportunity of being heard. 
20B. App eal.––(1) Any person aggrieved by an 
order of the adjudicating officer under section 20A 
may, within thirty days from the date of receipt of 
such order, prefer an appeal to such officer, at least 
one rank higher than the adjudicating officer, as may 
be app ointed by the Central Government as an  
appellate authority, in such form and manner as may 
be prescribed. 
(2) An appeal may be admitted after the expiry of 
the said period of thirty days, if the appellant satisfies 
the appellate authority that he had sufficient cause for 
not preferring the appeal within that period.  
(3) The appellate authority may, after giving the 
parties to the appeal an opportunity of being heard, 
pass such an order as he may deem fit. 
(4) An appeal under sub -section ( 1) shall be 
disposed of within sixty days from the date of filing. 
(5) If penalty imposed by the adjudicating officer 
under section 20A or  by an  order of the appellate 
authority under this section, as the case may be, is not 
deposited, the amount shall be recovered as an arrear 
of land revenue.”. 
(C) In section 21, for the words, figures and brackets 
“section 21 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860)”, the 
words, brackets and figures “clause (28) of section 2 of 
the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 (45 of 2023)” shall 
be substituted. 
(D) In section 22, in sub-section (2), after clause (e), 
the following clauses shall be inserted, namely:–– 
“(ea) the manner of holding an inquiry and 
imposing penalties under section 20A; 
(eb) the form and manner of preferring appeal to the 
appellate authority against the order of adjudicating 
officer under sub-section (1) of section 20B;”. 
 
 

22 
 (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
16. 1952 62 The Reserve 
and Auxiliary 
Air Forces 
Act, 1952 
(A) In section 30,––  
(i) in sub -section ( 1), for the words “punishable 
with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees”, 
the words “liable to penalty which may extend to ten 
thousand rupees” shall be substituted; 
(ii) in sub -section (2), for the words “punishable 
with imprisonment which may extend to six months, 
or with fine which may extend to one thousand 
rupees, or with both”, the words “liable to penalty 
which may extend to one lakh rupees” shall be 
substituted. 
(B) After section 30, the following section shall be 
inserted, namely:–– 
“30A. Adjudication of pen alties.––(1) For the 
purpose of adjudicating penalties under section 30, 
the Central Government, may appoint an officer not 
below the rank of Wing Commander as an  
adjudicating officer for holding an inquiry and 
imposing penalties in such manner as may be 
prescribed: 
Provided that the Central Government may     
appoint as many adjudicating officers as may be 
required: 
Provided further that no such penalty shall be 
imposed without giving the person concerned a 
reasonable opportunity of being heard. 
(2) Any per son aggrieved by an order of the 
adjudicating officer under sub-section (1) may, within 
thirty days from the date of receipt of such order, 
prefer an appeal to such officer, at least one rank 
higher than the adjudicating officer, as may be 
appointed by the Central Government as an appellate 
authority, in such form and manner as may be 
prescribed.   
(3) An appeal may be admitted after the expiry of 
the period of thirty days if the appellant satisfies the 
appellate authority that he had sufficient cause for not 
preferring the appeal within that period. 
(4) The appellate authority may, after giving the 
parties to the appeal an opportunity of being heard, 
pass such order as he may think fit. 
(5) An appeal under sub -section ( 2) shall be 
disposed of within sixty days from the date                         
of filing. 
(6) If penalty imposed by the adjudicating officer 
under sub-section (1) or by an order of the appellate 
authority under sub-section (4), as the case may be, is 
not d eposited, the amount shall be recovered as an 
arrear of land revenue.”. 
 
 

23 
 (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
    (C) In section 34,–– 
(i) in sub -section ( 2), after clause ( m), the 
following clauses shall be inserted, namely:— 
“(ma) the manner of holding an inquiry and 
imposing penalties under sub -section ( 1) of               
section 30A; 
(mb) the form and manner of preferring appeal 
to the appellate authority against the order of 
adjudicating officer under sub -section ( 2) of 
section 30A;”; 
(ii) sub-section (3) shall be omitted. 
17. 1953 29 The Tea Act, 
1953 
(A) In section 37, for the words “punishable with fine 
which may extend to one thousand rupees”, the words 
“warned at the first instance, and in case of subsequent 
contraventions, he shall be liable to penalty which may 
extend to one lakh rupees” shall be substituted. 
(B) In section 42A, in sub-section (1),–– 
(i) for the words, brackets and figures                        
“sub-section (1) of section 41”, the words, figures and 
brackets “section 37, sub -section (1) of section 41” 
shall be substituted; 
(ii) after the words “an adjudicating officer for”, the 
words “issuing warning letter or” shall be inserted. 
18. 1953 45 The Coir 
Industry Act, 
1953 
Sections 20, 21 and 22 shall be omitted. 
19. 1954 27 The Delivery 
of Books and 
Newspapers 
(Public 
Libraries) Act, 
1954 
(A) For section 5, the following sections shall be 
substituted, namely:–– 
“5. Penalties. —(1) Any publisher, including a 
publishing house, a publishing agency or individual, 
who contravenes any provision of this Act or of any 
rule made thereunder, shall be given an opportunity 
to fulfil the conditions of the Act or to remedy the 
contravention within thirty days on the service of a 
notice informing them of the contravention. 
(2) If on the expiry of thirty days from the date of 
service of the notice, the contravention persists— 
(a) the registration of the publisher with the 
National Agency for International Standard Book 
Number shall be suspended for a period of one year 
or up to t he day the books are submitted to the 
designated libraries by the publisher, whichever is 
earlier; 
(b) the publisher shall be debarred from 
receiving an International Standard Book Number 
for a period of one year or up to the day the books 
are submitted to  the designated libraries by the 
publisher, whichever is earlier.  
 
 

24 
 (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
    (3) If the contravention persists, suspension of 
registration, and debarment, the publisher’s 
registration with National Agency for International 
Standard Book Number shall be permanently 
cancelled and the publisher shall be permanently 
debarred from receiving an International Standard 
Book Number. 
5A. Adjudication of penalties.––For the purpose of 
adjudicating penalties under section 5, the Central  
Government shall appoint the Head of the Library as  
an adjudicating officer for holding an inquiry and 
imposing penalties in such manner as may be 
prescribed: 
Provided that the Central Government may appoint 
such other adjudicating officers as it may con sider 
necessary: 
Provided further that no such penalty shall be 
imposed without giving the person concerned a 
reasonable opportunity of being heard. 
5B. Appeal. ––(1) Any person aggrieved by an 
order of the adjudicating officer under section 5A 
may, within a period of thirty days from the date of 
receipt of such order, prefer an appeal to such officer, 
at least one rank higher than the adjudicating officer, 
as may be appointed by the Central Government as an 
appellate authority, in such form and manner as ma y 
be prescribed.   
(2) An appeal may be admitted after the expiry of 
the period of thirty days if the appellant satisfies the 
appellate authority that he had sufficient cause for not 
preferring the appeal within that period. 
(3) The appellate authority may, after giving the 
parties to the appeal an opportunity of being heard, 
pass such order as he may think fit. 
(4) An appeal under sub -section ( 1) shall be 
disposed of within sixty days from the date of filing.”. 
(B) Section 6 shall be omitted.   
20. 1956 31 The Life 
Insurance 
Corporation 
Act, 1956 
(A) In section 4D,—  
(i) in sub-section (2), for the words “on a director 
or employee”, the words “on any person” shall be 
substituted; 
(ii) in sub-section (4), for the words “A director or 
employee aggrieved by any order”, the words “Any 
person aggrieved by an order” shall be substituted; 
(iii) in sub -section ( 5), for the words “Where a 
director or employee of the Corporation”, the words 
“Where any person” shall be substituted. 
 
 

25 
 (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
    (B) In section 40, for the words “punishable with 
imprisonment which may extent to one year, or with fine 
which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both”, 
the words “liable to penalty which may extend to fifty 
lakh rupees or the value of the property, whichever is 
higher, in respect of each contravention, and if he 
continues such contravention, to a further penalty which 
may extend to fifty thousand rupees for every day during 
which the contravention continues” shall be substituted. 
21. 1956 48 The National 
Highways 
Act, 1956 
For section 8B, the following section shall be 
substituted, namely:— 
“8B. Penalty for mischief by injury to national 
highway.––(1) Whoever commits mischief by doing 
any act which renders or which he knows to be likely 
to render any national highway in sub -section (1) of 
section 8A impassable or less safe for travelling or 
conveying property, shall be liable to penalty which 
shall not be less than ten lakh rupees, but may extend 
to one crore rupees. 
(2) The Highway Administration or officer 
authorised by such Administration under the Control 
of National Highway s (Land and Traffic) Act, 2002 
(13 of 2003) shall have the power to impose and 
recover the penalty under sub -section ( 1), together 
with such exp enses and additional charges as 
prescribed in the Control of National Highway (Land 
and Traffic) Act, 2002, in the same manner as 
prescribed in section 26 of the said Act.”. 
22. 1956 96 The Slum 
Areas 
(Improvement 
and 
Clearance) 
Act, 1956 
(A) In section 32,–– 
(i) in sub -section ( 1), for the words “punishable 
with imprisonment for a term which may extend to 
three months, or with fine which may extend to one 
thousand rupees, or with both”, the words “liable to 
penalty, which may extend to ten thousand rupees for 
each failure and in case of continuing failure, with an 
additional penalty of one thousand rupees for every 
day during which such failure continues after 
contravention of the first such notice, order or 
direction subject to a maximum of  one lakh rupees” 
shall be substituted; 
(ii) in sub -section (2), for the words “punishable 
with imprisonment which may extend to three 
months, or with fine which may extend to one 
thousand rupees, or with both”, the words “liable to 
penalty, which may extend to ten thousand rupees for 
each failure and in case of continuing failure, with an 
additional penalty of one thousand rupees for every 
day during which such failure continues after 
contravention of the first such restriction or condition, 
subject to a maximum of one lakh rupees” shall be 
substituted;  
 
 

26 
 (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
    (iii) after sub -section ( 2), the following proviso 
shall be inserted, namely:––  
“Provided that in cases where such 
contravention directly results in significant harm to 
public health or human life, the offender shall be 
punishable with imprisonment which may extend 
to three months, or with fine or with both.”; 
(iv) in sub -section (3), for the words “or molests 
such person after such entry shall be punishable with 
fine which may extend to one thousand rupees”, the 
words “shall be liable to penalty which may extend to 
ten thousand rupees” shall be substituted; 
(v) after sub -section ( 3), the following                      
sub-section shall be inserted, namely:— 
“(3A) Where an y person intentionally obstructs a 
person authorised under this Act, by using                       
or threatening to use force, or by any act                    
of physical interference that prevents such officer  
from exercising any lawful power or perform ing 
any lawful duty under this Act, shall be punishable 
with imprisonment of either description for a term 
which may extend to three months, or with fine 
which may extend to two thousand and five 
hundred rupees, or with both. 
Explanation.––For the purposes of this section, 
obstruction shall not include any act or omission 
arising from physical or mental incapacity, 
unintentional conduct, or circumstances beyond 
the person’s control.”. 
(B) After section 32, the following section shall be 
inserted, namely:— 
“32A.  Adjudication of penalties. ––(1) For the 
purpose of adjudicating penalties under sub -sections 
(1), (2) and (3) of section 32, the Administrator may 
appoint an officer as an adjudicating officer for 
holding an inquiry and imposing penalties in such 
manner as may be prescribed: 
Provided that the Administrator concerned may 
appoint as many adjudicating officers as may be 
required: 
Provided further that no such penalty shall be 
imposed without giving the person concerned a 
reasonable opportunity of being heard. 
(2) Whoever, aggrieved by an order of the 
adjudicating officer under sub-section (1) may, within 
thirty days from the date of receipt of such order, 
prefer an appeal to an officer one rank higher than the 
adjudicating officer to be appointed as an appellate 
authority by the Administrator, in such form and 
manner as may be prescribed. 
 
 

27 
 (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
    (3) An appeal may be admitted after the expiry of 
the period of thirty days, if the appellant satisfies the 
appellate authority that he had sufficient cause for not 
preferring the appeal within that period.  
(4) The appellate authority may, after giving the 
parties to the appeal an opportunity of being heard, 
pass such order as he may think fit. 
(5) An appeal under sub -section ( 2) shall be 
disposed of within sixty days from the date of filing. 
(6) If penalty imposed by the adjudicating officer 
under sub-section (1) or by an order of the appellate 
authority under sub-section (4), as the case may be, is 
not deposited, the amount shall be recovered as an 
arrear of land revenue.”. 
(C) In section 38, for the words, figures and brackets 
“section 21 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860)”, the 
words, brackets and figures “clause (28) of section 2 of 
the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 (45 of 2023)” shall 
be substituted. 
(D) In section 40, in sub -section ( 2), after                         
clause (eeeeee), the following clauses shall be inserted, 
namely:–– 
“(eeeeeea) the manner of holding an inquiry and 
imposing penalties under sub -section ( 1) of                              
section 32A; 
(eeeeeeb) the form and manner of preferring 
appeal to the appellate autho rity against the order of 
adjudicating officer under sub -section ( 2) of                       
section 32A;”. 
23. 1957 14 The Copyright 
Act, 1957 
Section 67 shall be omitted. 
24. 1957 20 The Coal 
Bearing Areas 
(Acquisition 
and 
Development) 
Act, 1957 
In section 23,–– 
(i) in the marginal heading, for the word 
“Penalties”, the word “Punishments” shall be 
substituted; 
(ii) the words “or wilfully obstructs the lawful 
exercise of any other power conferred by or under this 
Act, or fails to comply with any or der made or 
direction given under this Act” shall be omitted; 
(iii) for the words “one thousand rupees”, the 
words “one lakh rupees” shall be substituted. 
25. 1957 61 The Delhi 
Development 
Act, 1957 
(A) In section 29,— 
 
 

28 
 (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
    (i) in the marginal heading, for the word 
“penalties”, the word “punishments” shall be 
substituted; 
(ii) for sub-section (1), the following sub -section 
shall be substituted, namely:— 
“(1) Any person who whether at their own 
instance or at the instance of any other person or 
any body (including a department of Government) 
undertakes or carries out development of any land 
in contravention of the master plan or zonal 
development plan or without the permission, 
approval or sanction referred to in section 12 or in 
contravention of any condition subject to which 
such permission, approval or sanction has been 
granted, shall be— 
(a) punishable with imprisonment of either 
description for a term which may extend to 
three years, if such development relates to 
utilising, selling or otherwise dealing with any 
land with a view to the setting up of a colony 
without a lay out plan; 
(b) liable to penalty which may extend to 
fifty thousand rupees in any case, other than 
those referred to in clause (a).”; 
(iii) in sub-section (2), for the words “punishable 
with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees 
and in the case of a continuing offence, with further 
fine which may extend to two hundred and fifty 
rupees for every day during which such offence 
continues after conviction for the first commission of 
the offence”, the words “liable to penalty which may 
extend to fifty thousand rupees and in case of a 
continuing contravention, with further penalty which 
may extend to two thousand and five hundred rupees 
for every day during which such contravention 
continues after the order imposing penalty has been 
passed and confirmed for the first contravention” 
shall be substituted; 
(iv) for sub-section (3), the following sub-sections 
shall be substituted, namely:— 
“(3) Any person who obs tructs the entry of a 
person authorised under section 28 into or upon 
any land or building shall for the first 
contravention be liable to penalty which may 
extend to ten thousand rupees and for any second 
or subsequent contravention, to the punishment 
provided under section 221 of the Bharatiya Nyaya 
Sanhita, 2023 (45 of 2023). 
 
 

29 
 (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
    (4) Any person who assaults any person 
authorised under section 28 to enter into or upon 
any land or building, after such entry, shall                       
be punishable with imprisonment for a                           
term which may extend to six months, or with fine 
which may extend to ten thousand rupees, or with 
both.”. 
(B) In section 31, in sub -section (5), for the words 
“punishable with fine which may extend to two hundred 
rupees for every day during which the non -compliance 
continues after the service of the order”, the words 
“liable to penalty which may extend to two thousand 
rupees for every day during which the non -compliance 
continues after the service of the order” shall be 
substituted. 
(C) After section 31A, the following section shall be 
inserted, namely:— 
“31AA. Adjudication of penalties. —(1) For the 
purpose of adjudicating penalties under section 29 
and sub -section ( 5) of section 31, the Central 
Government, shall appoint an officer not below the 
rank of Deputy Secretary to the Government of India 
as an adjudicating officer for holding an inquiry and 
imposing penalties in such manner as may be 
prescribed: 
Provided that the Central Government may     
appoint as many adjudicating officers as may be 
required: 
Provided further that no such penalty shall be 
imposed without giving the person concerned a 
reasonable opportunity of being heard. 
(2) Any pe rson aggrieved by an order of the 
adjudicating officer under sub-section (1) may, within 
thirty days from the date of receipt of such order, 
prefer an appeal to such officer, at least one rank 
higher than the adjudicating officer, as may be 
appointed by th e Central Government to be the 
appellate authority, in such form and manner as may 
be prescribed.   
(3) An appeal may be admitted after the expiry of 
the period of thirty days if the appellant satisfies the 
appellate authority that he had sufficient cause for not 
preferring the appeal within that period.  
(4) The appellate authority may, after giving the 
parties to the appeal an opportunity of being heard, 
pass such order as he may think fit. 
(5) An appeal under sub -section ( 2) shall be 
disposed of within sixty days from the date of filing. 
 
 

30 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
(6) If penalty imposed by the adjudicating officer 
under sub-section (1) or by an order of the appellate 
authority under sub-section (4), as the case may be, 
is not deposited, the amount shall be recovered as an 
arrear of land revenue.”. 
(D) In section 34A,––
(i) in the opening portion, for the words, brackets
and figures “The Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 
(2 of 1974) shall apply to an offence under 
sub-section (1) of section 29”, the words, brackets, 
figures and letter “The Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha 
Sanhita, 2023 (46 of 2023) shall apply to an offence 
under sub-clause (a) of sub-section (1) of section 29” 
shall be substituted; 
(ii) in sub -clause ( 1), for the words and figures
“section 42 of that Code”, the words and figures 
“section 39 of that Sanhita” shall be substituted. 
(E) In section 47, for the words, figures and brackets
“section 21 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860)”, the 
words, brackets and figures “clause (28) of section 2 of 
the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 (45 of 2023)” shall 
be substituted. 
(F) In section 49,—
(i) in sub -section ( 1), the words, brackets and
figure “other than an offence referred to in 
sub-section (2)” shall be omitted; 
(ii) sub-section (2) shall be omitted.
(G) In section 56, in sub-section (2), after clause (ja),
the following clause shall be inserted, namely:–– 
“(jaa) the manner of holding an inquiry and 
imposing penalties under  sub-section ( 1) of  
section 31AA; 
(jab) the form and manner of preferring appeal to 
the appellate authority against the order of 
adjudicating officer under sub -section ( 2) of 
section 31AA;”. 
26. 1957 66 The Delhi 
Municipal 
Corporation 
Act, 1957 
(A) In section 123D,—
(i) after clause ( a), the following proviso shall be
inserted, namely:— 
“Provided that no such assessment for an 
assessment year shall be made after the lapse of 
seven years from the close of that assessment 
year;”; 
(ii) for clauses ( b) and ( c), the following clause
shall be substituted, namely:— 

31 
 (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
    “(b) revise any assessment where the 
information furnished in the return of                                 
self-assessment is found to be incorrect or reopen 
any assessment where it has been detected that 
there is wilful suppression of information; and”; 
(iii) in clause (d), for brackets and letter “(d)”, the 
brackets and letter “(c)” shall be substituted. 
(B) For section 152A, the following section shall be 
substituted, namely:–– 
“152A. Punishment for wilful default in payment 
of property tax, furnishing wrong information in 
return of assessment, etc. —Whoever wilfully makes 
default in the payment of, or wilfully attempts in any 
manner whatsoever to evade, any tax, including 
amount of interest due and penalty levied under this 
Act, or furnishes any wrong information in the return 
of assessment, or wilfully fails to furnish in due time 
the return of property tax , or does not furnish 
information as asked for under any provision of this 
Act, he shall, without prejudice to any other penal 
provision under this Act to which he may be subject, 
be liable for penalty equal to fifty per cent. of the 
amount of tax so evaded or sought to be evaded: 
Provided that the penalties so imposed shall be in 
addition to, and not in derogation of, any liability in 
respect of the payment of tax which the defaulter may 
have incurred.”. 
(C) In section 153, in sub-section (1), for the proviso, 
the following provisos shall be substituted, namely:— 
“Provided that such bill shall be presented in 
respect of a property tax due in respect of a property 
after carrying out physical survey or collection of 
relevant data in respect of that property i f it is being 
assessed for the first time: 
Provided further that no such bill shall be 
necessary in the case of— 
(a) property tax payable on self -assessment of 
vacant land or covered space in any building; 
(b) a tax on vehicles and animals; and  
(c) a theatre-tax.”. 
(D) In section 305, sub -sections (3), (4), (5), (6) and 
(7) shall be omitted. 
(E) In section 309, sub-section (2) shall be omitted. 
(F) Section 310 shall be omitted. 
(G) In section 317, in sub -section (1), for the words 
and figures “Except as provided in section 318, no 
person”, the words “No person” shall be substituted. 
 
 

32 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
(H) Section 318 shall be omitted.
(I) Section 330 shall be omitted.
(J) In section 336,—
(i) in sub-section (1), the words and figures “or the
provisions of section 340”, shall be omitted; 
(ii) in sub -section (3), the words and figures “or
under section 340” shall be omitted. 
(K) Section 340 shall be omitted.
(L) In section 343,––
(i) in section ( 5), for the word “Administrator”
occurring at bot h the places, the words “District 
Judge” shall be substituted; 
  (ii) in section (6), for the word “Administrat or” 
occurring at both the places, the words “District Judge” 
shall be substituted; 
(M) In section 345A, in sub-section (3), in 
clause (b), for the word “Administrator”, the words 
“District Judge” shall be substituted. 
(N) In section 347B, in sub-section (1), clause (j) shall 
be omitted. 
(O) In section 347D,––
(i) in sub -section ( 1), for the word 
“Administrator”, the words “District Judge” shall be 
substituted; 
(ii) for sub -section (3), the following sub -section
shall be substituted, namely:— 
“(3) An appeal against the order of the District 
Judge shall lie to the High Court of Delhi.”. 
(P) In section 351, the words and figures “and
section 355” shall be omitted. 
(Q) Section 355 shall be omitted.
(R) In section 357, sub-section (3) shall be omitted.
(S) Sections 360 and 361 shall be omitted.
(T) Sections 364 shall be omitted.
(U) Sections 369 and 370 shall be omitted.
(V) Sections 373 and 374 shall be omitted.
(W) Sections 377 and 378 shall be omitted.
(X) Section 380 shall be omitted.
(Y) Section 382 shall be omitted.
(Z) Section 385 shall be omitted.
(ZA) Section 387 shall be omitted. 

33 
 (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
    (ZB) Section 396 shall be omitted. 
(ZC) Sections 400, 401 and 402 shall be omitted. 
(ZD) Sections 409, 410 and 411 shall be omitted. 
(ZE) Section 414 shall be omitted. 
(ZF) In section 437,— 
(i) in the marginal heading, the words “or 
molestation” shall be omitted; 
(ii) the words “or molest” shall be omitted. 
(ZG) For section 461, the following section shall be 
substituted, namely:–– 
“461. Penalty for certain violations.––Whoever— 
(a) contravenes any provision of any of the 
sections, sub-sections, clauses, provisos or other 
provisions of this Act mentioned in column (1) of 
the Twelfth Schedule; or 
(b) fails to comply with any order or direction 
lawfully given to him or any requisition l awfully 
made upon him under any of the said sections,                     
sub-sections, clauses, provisos or other provisions, 
shall be  punishable with penalty specified in that 
behalf in column (3) of the Twelfth Schedule: 
Provided that before invoking se ction 353,     
section 354, sub-sections (1) and (2) of section 357, 
sub-sections ( 4) and ( 5) of section 399, and sub -
section (5) of section 430, for the first contravention 
of the said sections, a warning notice shall be issued 
to the offender.”. 
(ZH) Section 465 shall be omitted. 
(Z-I) Section 466A shall be omitted. 
(ZJ) After section 468, the following sections shall be 
inserted, namely:–– 
“468A. Adjudication of penalties. ––(1) The 
Commissioner may authorise an officer not below the 
rank of Assistant Commissioner as an adjudicating 
officer for holding an inquiry and imposing penalties 
specified under the Twelfth Schedule, in such manner 
as may be prescribed, after giving the parties a 
reasonable opportunity of being heard. 
(2) The adjudicating officer may summon and 
enforce the attendance of noticee, or, as the case may 
be, any person acquainted with the facts and 
circumstances of the case, to give evidence or to 
produce any document, which in the opinion of the 
adjudicating officer may be useful for, or relevant to, 
the subject matter of the inquiry and if, on                 
such inquiry, adjudicating officer is satisfied that the  
 
 

34 
 (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
    person concerned has contravened the provisions of 
this Act, may , by an order, impose the penalty as 
specified under the Twelfth Schedule. 
468B. Appeal. ––(1) The Commissioner may 
authorise an officer not less than one rank above the 
adjudicating officer to act as an appellate authority. 
(2) Whosoever aggrieved by an order of the 
adjudicating officer under section 468A may prefer 
an appeal to the appellate authority, within thirty days 
from the date of receipt of the order.  
(3) The appellate authority may summon and 
enforce the attendance of any person acquainted with 
the facts and circumstances of the case to give 
evidence or to produce any document. 
(4) The appellate authority may, after giving the 
parties to the appeal an opportunity of being heard, 
pass such order as it thinks fit, eithe r confirming or 
modifying or setting aside the order appealed against. 
(5) The appellate authority shall dispose of the 
appeal within sixty days from the date of filing of 
such appeal. 
(6) The amount of penalty imposed under                           
this Act, if not paid, may be recovered as an arrear                 
of tax.”. 
(ZK) In section 474, in sub-section (1), after the words 
“Any police officer may”, the words “, on a complaint 
made by an officer not below the rank of Deputy 
Commissioner as may be au thorised as such by the 
Administrator,” shall be inserted. 
(ZL) For section 475, the following section shall be 
substituted, namely:— 
“475. Duties of police officers. —It shall be                       
the duty of all police officers to assist all                   
municipal officers and other municipal employees                
in the exercise of their lawful authority under                          
this Act or any rule, regulation or bye -law made 
thereunder.”. 
(ZM) For section 482, the following section shall be 
substituted, namely:–– 
“482. Penalty for breaches of bye-laws.—(1) Any                   
bye-law made under this Act may provide that a 
contravention thereof shall be liable to penalty which 
may extend to five hundred rupees. 
(2) Any such bye -law may al so provide that a 
person contravening the same shall be required to 
remedy so far as lies in his power, the mischief, if any, 
caused by such contravention.”. 
 
 

35 
 (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
    (ZN) For the Twelfth Schedule, the following 
Schedule shall be substituted, namely:–– 
“THE TWELFTH SCHEDULE 
(See section 461) 
PENALTIES 
Explanation.—The entries in the second column of 
the Table below under the heading “Subject” are not 
intended as definitions of the offences prescribed in the 
provisions mentioned in the first column of the said 
Table or even as abstracts of those provisions, but are 
inserted merely as reference to the subject thereof. 
 
Section,      
sub-section, 
clause or 
proviso 
Subject Penalty             
(in 
Rupees) 
(1) (2) (3) 
Section 129 Failure to give 
notice of erection of 
new building, etc. 
500/- 
Section 143 Prohibition of 
advertisement without 
permission. 
5000/- 
Section 314, 
sub-section 
(1), clauses 
(a) and (b) 
Failure to comply 
with requisition to 
show cause for 
alteration of street or 
for appearance before 
the Commissioner. 
200/- 
Section 315, 
sub-section 
(1) 
Failure to comply 
with requisition on 
owner of private street 
or owner of adjoining 
land or building to  
level, etc., such street. 
100/- 
Section 317, 
sub-section 
(1) 
Prohibition of 
projections upon 
streets, etc. 
5000/- 
Section 317, 
sub-section 
(2) 
Failure to comply 
with requisition to 
remove projections 
from streets. 
5000/- 
Section 320, 
sub-section 
(1) 
Erection, etc., of 
structures of fixtures 
which cause obstruction 
in streets. 
5000/- 
 
 

36 
 (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
    
 
(1) (2) (3) 
Section 321 Deposit, etc., of 
things in streets. 
500/- 
Section 323, 
sub-sections 
(1) and (2) 
Tethering of 
animals and milking            
of cattle in public 
streets. 
1000/- 
Section 327, 
sub-section 
(2) 
Name of street and 
number of house not to 
be destroyed or 
defaced, etc. 
1000/- 
Section 328, 
sub-section 
(1) 
Failure to comply 
with requisition to  
repair, protect or 
enclose a dangerous 
place. 
1000/- 
Section 346, 
sub-sections 
(1) and (2) 
Non-compliance 
with provision as to 
completion 
certificates, occupation 
or use, etc., without 
permission. 
1000/- 
Section 348,  
sub-sections 
(1) and (2) 
Failure to comply 
with requisition to 
remove structures 
which are in ruins or 
likely to fall. 
1000/- 
Section 349, 
sub-section 
(1) 
Failure to comply 
with requisition to 
vacate buildings in 
dangerous condition, 
etc. 
1000/- 
Section 353 Failure to provide 
for collection, removal 
and deposit of refuse 
and provision of 
receptacles. 
500/- 
Section 354 Failure to collect 
and remove filth and 
polluted matter. 
500/- 
Section 356 Failure to comply 
with requisition for 
removal of rubbish, 
etc., from premise s 
used as market, etc. 
1000/- 
 
 

37 
 (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
    
 
(1) (2) (3) 
Section 357, 
sub-section 
(1) 
Keeping rubbish 
and filth for more than 
twenty-four hours, etc. 
100/- 
Section 357, 
sub-section 
(2) 
Allowing filth to 
flow in streets. 
200/- 
Section 362 Failure to provide 
latrines for premises 
used by large number 
of people and to keep 
them clean and in 
proper order. 
500/- 
Section 363 Failure to comply 
with requisition to 
provide latrines for 
market, cattle shed, 
cart stand, etc., and to 
keep them clean and in 
proper order. 
500/- 
Section 366 Failure to comply 
with requisition to 
improve buildings 
unfit for human 
habitation. 
5000/- 
Section 381 Disposal of infected 
articles without 
disinfection. 
500/- 
Section 383 Sale of food or drink 
in contravention of 
restriction or 
prohibition of the 
Commissioner. 
500/- 
Section 384 Removal or use of 
water from wells and 
tanks in contravention 
of prohibition of 
Commissioner. 
500/- 
Section 386 Removal of 
infectious corpses in 
contravention of the 
provisions of the 
section. 
500/- 
Section 391, 
sub-section 
(1) 
Failure to comply 
with requisition to 
close a burning or 
burial ground. 
1000/- 
 
 

38 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
(1) (2) (3) 
Section 391, 
sub-section 
(2) 
Burning or burial of 
corpses in a burning or 
burial ground after it 
has been closed. 
1000/- 
Section 392 Removal of corpses 
by other than 
prescribed routes. 
500/- 
Section 393, 
sub-section 
(1), clause 
(b) 
Failure to give 
notice for removal of 
carcasses of dead 
animals. 
100/- 
Section 397, 
sub-sections 
(1), (2) and 
(3) 
Commission of 
nuisances. 
500/- 
Section 398 Failure to comply 
with requisition for 
removal or abatement 
of nuisance. 
1000/- 
Section 399, 
sub-section 
(4) 
Dogs not to be at 
large in a street without 
being secured by a 
chain lead. 
1000/- 
Section 399, 
sub-section 
(5) 
Ferocious dogs at 
large without being 
muzzled, etc. 
1000/- 
Section 403 Failure to comply 
with requisition to 
render buildings, wells, 
etc., safe. 
1000/- 
Section 404 Failure to comply 
with requisition to 
enclose land used for 
improper purposes. 
500/- 
Section 406, 
sub-section 
(1) 
Sale in municipal 
markets without 
permission. 
200/- 
Section 407, 
sub-sections 
(1) and (2)
Use of places as 
private markets without 
a licence and use of 
places other than a 
municipal slaughter 
house as slaughter 
houses. 
500/- 

39 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
(1) (2) (3) 
Section 407, 
sub-section 
(2), proviso 
(a) 
Non-compliance 
with conditions 
imposed by 
Commissioner. 
200/- 
Section 415 200/- 
Section 416 5000/- 
Section 417 1000/- 
Section 418, 
sub-section 
(3) 
200/- 
Section 419, 
sub-section 
(5) 
500/- 
Section 420 200/- 
Section 421 1000/- 
Section 422 
 Carrying on 
butcher’s, fish-monger’s 
or poulterer’s trade 
without licence etc. 
Establishment of 
factory, etc., without 
permission. 
Certain things not to 
be kept  and certain 
trades and operations 
not to  be carried  on 
without a licence. 
Keeping, 
abandonment or 
tethering of animals, 
etc. 
Use of premises in 
contravention of 
declaration. 
Hawking articles for 
sale without a licence, 
etc. 
Keeping a lodging 
house, eating house, 
tea shop, etc.,  without 
licence or contrary to 
licence. 
Keeping open 
theatre, circus or other 
place of public 
amusement without 
licence or contrary to 
terms of licence. 
1000/- 
Section 430, 
sub-section 
(5) 
Failure to produce 
licence or written 
permission. 
100/- 
Section 437 Obstruction in 
execution of work. 
500/- 
Section 444, 
sub-section 
(4) 
Failure to comply 
with requisition to state 
the name and address 
of owners of premises. 
200/- 

40 
 (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
    
 
(1) (2) (3) 
Section 495 Obstruction of 
Mayor or any 
municipal authority, 
etc. 
500/- 
Section 496 Removal of any 
mark set up for 
indicating level, etc. 
200/- 
Section 497 Removal etc., of 
notice exhibited by or 
under orders of the 
Corporation, 
Commissioner, etc. 
100/- 
Section 498 Unlawful removal 
of earth, sand or other 
material or deposit of 
any matter or making 
of any encroachment 
from any land vested in  
the Corporation. 
500/-”. 
27. 1957 67 The Mines 
and Minerals 
(Development 
and 
Regulation) 
Act, 1957 
(A) In section 21,— 
(i) for sub-section (2), the following sub -sections 
shall be substituted, namely:— 
“(2) Whoever contravenes the provisions of the 
rules made under section 23C shall be punishable 
with imprisonment for a term which may extend to 
two years or with fine which may extend to five 
lakh rupees, or with both, and in the case of a 
continuing contravention, with additional fine 
which may extend to fifty thousand rupees for 
every day during which such contravention 
continues after conviction for the first such 
contravention. 
(2A) Where any person fails to pay the penalty 
or the additional penalty, as the case may be, 
imposed under the provisions of section  25B or 
section 25C within ninety days of such imposition, 
he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a 
term which may extend to two years, or with fine 
which may extend to twice the amount of the 
penalty or additional penalty so imposed or with 
both.”; 
(ii) in sub -section (6), for the words  and figures 
“Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974)”, the 
words and figures “Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha 
Sanhita, 2023 (46 of 2023)” shall be substituted. 
 
 

41 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
(B) After section 25, the following sections shall be 
inserted, namely:–– 
“25A. Penalty.––(1) Whoever contravenes the 
provisions of the rules made under the Act, other than 
those rules made under section 23C, or the terms and 
conditions of mineral concession granted under this 
Act shall be liable to a penalty which may extend to 
fifty lakh rupees. 
(2) Where any person continues contravention  
made under sub-section (1), even after direction 
of the adjudicating officer appointed under 
section 25B regarding such contravention, he shall be 
liable to additional penalty of fifty thousand rupees 
for every day during which such contravention 
continues. 
25B. Adjudication of penalties. ––
(1) For the 
purposes of adjudication of penalties under 
section 25A,  for contravention of the rules relating to 
mining plan, mine closure plan, submission of reports 
to Indian Bureau of Mines or other authority 
subordinate to the Central Government and other 
functions of Central Government or an authority or 
officer subordinate to such Government, 
the Central Government shall  appoint an officer not 
below the rank of Deputy Secretary to the 
Government of India as an adjudicating officer, for 
holding an inquiry and imposing penalties in the 
manner, as may be prescribed by the Central 
Government: 
Provided that the Central Government may appoint 
as many adjudicating officers as may be required. 
(2) The State Government, for the purpose of 
determining the penalties under section 25A, other 
than those covered under sub-section (1), shall 
appoint an officer not below the rank of Joint 
Secretary to the State Government to be the 
adjudicating officer, for holding an inquiry and 
imposing penalties in the manner, as may be 
prescribed by the Central Government: 
Provided that the State Government may  
appoint as many adjudicating officers as may be 
required: 
Provided further that no such penalty shall be 
imposed without giving the person concerned a 
reasonable opportunity of being heard. 

42 
 (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
    25C. Appeal. ––(1) Whoever aggrieved by the 
order passed by the adjudicating officer under    
section 25B may, within thirty days from the date of 
receipt of order, prefer an appeal to an officer not 
below the rank of Joint Secretary to the Government 
of India, who shall be appointed by the Central 
Government as an appellate authority, in such form 
and manner as may be prescribed. 
(2) An appeal may be admitted after the expiry of 
the period of thirty days if the appellant satisfies the 
appellate authority that he had sufficient cause for not 
preferring the appeal within that period.  
(3) The appellate authority may, after giving                    
the parties to the appeal an opportunity of being 
heard, pass such an order as it thinks fit,                
confirming, modifying or setting aside the order 
appealed against. 
(4) Where an appeal is preferred against any order 
of the adj udicating officer under sub -section ( 1), it 
shall not be entertained by the appellate authority 
unless the person has deposited with the said 
authority ten per cent. of the amount of the penalty 
imposed by the adjudicating officer. 
(5) An appeal under this section shall be disposed 
of within sixty days from the date of filing. 
25D. Power of Central Government to make rules 
in respect of adjudication and appeal. ––(1) The 
Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, make rules for regulati ng the 
adjudication of penalty and appeal and for purposes 
connected therewith. 
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the 
foregoing power, such rules may provide for all or 
any of the following matters, namely:— 
(a) the manner of holding an inquiry an d 
imposing penalties under sub-sections (1) and (2) 
of section 25B; and  
(b) the form and manner of preferring appeal to 
the appellate authority against the order of 
adjudicating officer under sub -section ( 1) of 
section 25C.”. 
28. 1960 24 The Delhi 
Land 
Holdings 
(Ceiling) Act, 
1960 
(A) In section 23,— 
(i) in sub -section ( 1), for the words “shall be 
punishable with imprisonment for a term which may 
extend to six months and with fine which may extend 
to one thousand rupees”, the words “shall be liable to 
penalty which may extend to ten thousand rupees” 
shall be substituted; 
 
 

43 
 (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
    (ii) in sub -section (2), for the words “punishable 
with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees”, 
the words “liable to penalty which may extend to ten 
thousand rupees” shall be substituted. 
(B) After section 23, the following sections shall be 
inserted, namely:–– 
“23A. Adjudication of penalties .––(1) For the 
purpose of adjudicating penalties under section 23, 
the State Government may appoin t an officer not 
below the rank of Sub -Divisional Magistrate 
(Revenue Assistant) to be the adjudicating officer for 
holding an inquiry and imposing penalties in such 
manner as may be prescribed:  
Provided that the State Government may appoint 
as many adjudicating officers as may be required: 
Provided further that no such penalty shall be 
imposed without giving the person concerned a 
reasonable opportunity of being heard. 
(2) Whoever is aggrieved by an order passed by the 
adjudicating officer under sub-section (1) may, within 
thirty days from the date of receipt of such order, 
prefer an appeal to an officer not below the rank of 
Additional District Magistrate or Deputy 
Commissioner (Revenue), as may be appointed by the 
State Government as an appellat e authority, in such 
form and manner as may be prescribed. 
(3) The appellate authority may admit an appeal 
after the expiry of the said period of thirty days, if the 
appellant satisfies the appellate authority that he had 
sufficient cause for not preferrin g the appeal within 
that period.  
(4) The appellate authority may, after giving the 
parties to the appeal an opportunity of being heard, 
pass such an order as he may think fit. 
(5) An appeal under sub -section ( 2) shall be 
disposed of within sixty days from the date of filing. 
(6) If a penalty imposed by the adjudicating officer 
under sub-section (1) or by an order of the appellate 
authority under sub-section (4), as the case may be, is 
not deposited, the amount shall be recovered as an 
arrear of land revenue.”. 
(C) In section 27, in sub -section (2), after clause ( l), 
the following clauses shall be inserted, namely:–– 
“(la) the manner of holding an inquiry and imposing 
penalties under sub-section (1) of section 23A; 
(lb) the form and manner of preferring appeal to the 
appellate authority against the order of adjudicating 
officer under sub-section (2) of section 23A.”. 
 
 

44 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
29. 1961 52 The 
Apprentices 
Act, 1961 
(A) In section 2,––
(i) after clause (aaa), the following clause shall be
inserted, namely:–– 
‘(aaaa) “advisory” means a written notice 
issued directing the employer or establishment or 
any other person to comply with the provisions of 
this Act or the rules made thereunder within a 
specified period, without imposing any penalty in 
such format as may be prescribed;’; 
(ii) after clause ( q), the following clause shall be
inserted, namely:–– 
‘(qa) “warning” means a written notice issued 
cautioning the employer or establishment or any 
other person that  continued or repeated 
non-compliance with the provisions of this Act or 
the rules made thereunder in such manner and 
format as may be prescribed;’. 
(B) For section 30, the following section shall be
substituted, namely:–– 
“30. Offences and penalties for contravention of 
provisions of the Act or rules made thereunder. ––(1) 
If any employer or any other person–– 
(a) contravenes the provisions of this Act a nd
rules relating to the number of apprentices which 
he is required to engage; or 
(b) required to furnish any information or
return–– 
(i) refuses or neglects to furnish such
information or return; or 
(ii) furnishes or causes to be furnished any
information or return which is false and which 
he either knows or believes to be false or does 
not believe to be true; or 
(iii) refuses to answer or gives a false answer
to any question necessary for obtaining any 
information required to be furnished by him; or 
(c) refuses or wilfully neglects to afford the
Central or the State Apprenticeship Adviser or 
such other person, not below the rank of an 
Assistant Apprenticeship Adviser, as may be 
authorised by the Central or the State 
Apprenticeship Adviser in wri ting in this behalf 
any reasonable facility for making any entry, 
inspection, examination or inquiry authorised by 
or under this Act; or 
(d) requires an apprentice to work overtime
without the approval of the Apprenticeship 
Adviser; or 

45 
 (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
    (e) employs an apprentice on any work which is 
not connected with his training; or 
(f) makes payment to an apprentice on the basis 
of piece-work; or 
(g) requires an apprentice to take part in any 
output bonus or incentive scheme; or 
(h) engages as an apprentice a person who is not 
qualified for being so engaged; or 
(i) fails to carry out the terms and conditions of 
a contract of apprenticeship, 
shall be liable for the first contravention with an 
advisory to be complied within thirty days;  for the 
second contravention, be liable to warning to be 
complied within fifteen days; and for every 
subsequent contravention, be liable to penalty of not 
less than one thousand rupees but which may extend 
to five thousand rupees. 
(2) The provisions of this section shall not apply to 
any establishment or industry which the Central 
Government may, by order exempt with effect from 
such date as may be mentioned therein.”. 
(C) In section 31, for the words and figures “for which 
no punishment is provided in sec tion 30, he shall be 
punishable with fine which shall not be less than one 
thousand rupees but may extend to three thousand 
rupees”, the words and figures “or of any rules made 
thereunder for which no penalty is provided in                     
section 30, he shall be liable for the first contravention 
with  an advisory to be complied within thirty days; for 
the second contravention, be liable to warning to be 
complied within fifteen days; and for every subsequent 
contravention, be liable to pen alty of not less than one 
thousand rupees but which may extend to five thousand 
rupees” shall be substituted. 
(D) After section 31, the following section shall be 
inserted, namely:–– 
“31A. Adjudication of penalties. ––(1) For the 
purpose of adjudicating pen alties under this Act,                   
the appropriate Government may, by an order 
published in the Official Gazette, appoint one                          
or more adjudicating officers, not below the                            
rank of Assistant Apprentic eship Adviser, as an 
adjudicating officer for holding an inquiry and 
imposing penalties in such manner as may be 
prescribed: 
Provided that no such penalty shall be imposed 
without giving the person concerned a reasonable 
opportunity of being heard. 
 
 

46 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
(2) Whoever is aggrieved by an order of the
adjudicating officer under sub -section ( 1) may, 
within thirty days from the date of receipt of such 
order, prefer an appeal to the appellate authority who 
shall be an officer not below the rank of Deputy 
Apprenticeship Adviser, appointed by the appropriate 
Government, in such form and manner as may be 
prescribed. 
(3) An appeal may be admitted after the expiry of
the period of thirty days if the appellant satisfies the 
appellate authority that he had sufficient cause for not 
preferring the appeal within that period.  
(4) The appellate authority may, after giving the
parties to the appeal an opportunity of being heard, 
pass such order as he may think fit. 
(5) An appeal under sub -section ( 2) shall be
disposed of within sixty days from the date of filing. 
(6) If a penalty imposed by the adjudicating officer
under sub-section (1) or by an order of the appellate 
authority under sub-section (4), as the case may be, is 
not deposited, the amo unt shall be recovered as an 
arrear of land revenue.”. 
(E) In section 37, sub-section (2) shall be omitted.
30. 1962 50 The 
Petroleum and 
Minerals 
Pipelines 
(Acquisition 
of Right of 
User in Land) 
Act, 1962 
(A) In section 15,—
(i) in the marginal heading, for the word “Penalty”,
the word “Punishments” shall be substituted; 
(ii) for sub -section (1), the following sub -section
shall be substituted, namely:— 
“(1) Whoever wilfully obstructs any person in 
doing any of the acts authorised by section 4 or 
section 7 or section 8 or wilfully fills up, destroys, 
damages or displaces any trench or  mark made 
under section 4 or wilfully does any act prohibited 
under section 9, shall,— 
(a) for the first contravention, be liable to
penalty which may extend to one lakh rupees; 
(b) for the second or any subsequent
contraventions, be punishable with imprisonment 
for a term which may extend to three months, or 
with fine which may extend to one lakh rupees, or 
with both.”; 
(iii) in sub -section ( 2), for the words “ten
years”, the words “three years” shall be 
substituted; 
(iv) in sub-section (4), for the words “ten years
but may extend to imprisonment for life or death”, 
the words “five years but ma y extend to 
imprisonment for life” shall be substituted. 

47 
 (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
    (B) After section 15, the following sections shall be 
inserted, namely:— 
“15A. Adjudication of penalties. ––(1) For the 
purpose of adjudication of penalties under clause (a) 
of sub -section ( 1) of section 15, the Central 
Government shall appoint an officer not below the 
rank of Joint Secretary to the Government of India as 
an adjudicating officer for holding an inquiry and 
imposing penalties in such manner as may be 
prescribed: 
Provided that no such penalty shall be imposed 
without giving the person concerned a reasonable 
opportunity of being heard. 
15B. Appeal.—(1) Every appeal against the order 
of the adjudicating authority under this section shall 
lie with the Appe llate Tribunal referred to in                       
section 30 of the Petroleum and Natural Gas 
Regulatory Board Act, 2006 (19 of 2006) and the 
provisions contained in sections 33, 34, 35 and 36 of 
that Act, shall, mutatis mutandis apply, in relation to 
every such appeal. 
(2) The provisions contained in section 37 of the 
Petroleum and Natural Gas Regulatory Board Act, 
2006 (19 of 2006) shall mutatis mutandis apply, in 
relation to every appeal against the order of the 
Appellate Tribunal referred to in sub-section (1).”. 
(C) In section 17, in sub-section (2), after clause (b), 
the following clause shall be inserted, namely:–– 
“(c) the manner of holding an inquiry and imposing 
penalties under sub-section (1) of section 15A;”. 
31. 1963 41 The Textiles 
Committee 
Act, 1963 
(A) In section 17, in sub-section (2),––  
(i) in the long line, for the words “conviction, be 
punishable”, the words “contravention, be” shall be 
substituted; 
(ii) for clauses ( i) and ( ii), the following clauses 
shall be substituted, namely:— 
“(i) warned at the first instance;  
(ii) liable to penalty which may extend to 
twenty-five lakh rupees in case of continuing or 
repeated contravention.”. 
(B) After section 17, the following section shall be 
inserted, namely:–– 
“17A. Adjudication of penalties.––(1) For the 
purpose of adjudicating penalties under clauses ( i) 
and (ii) of sub -section (2) of section 17, the Central 
Government shall appoint an officer not below the 
rank of Director to the Government of India as an 
adjudicating officer for holding an inquiry and 
imposing penalties in such manner as may be 
prescribed: 
 
 

48 
 (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
    Provided that no such penalty shall be imposed 
without giving the person concerned a reasonable 
opportunity of being heard. 
(2) Whoever is aggrieved by an order of the 
adjudicating officer under sub-section (1) may, within 
thirty days from the date of receipt of such order, 
prefer an appeal to an officer not below the rank of 
Joint Secretary to the Government of In dia as an 
appellate authority who shall be appointed by the 
Central Government, in such form and manner as may 
be prescribed. 
(3) An appeal may be admitted after the expiry of 
the period of thirty days if the appellant satisfies the 
appellate authority that he had sufficient cause for not 
preferring the appeal within that period. 
(4) The appellate authority may, after giving the 
parties to the appeal an opportunity of being heard, 
pass such order as he may think fit. 
(5) An appeal under sub-section ( 2) shall be 
disposed of within sixty days from the date of filing. 
(6) If a penalty imposed by the adjudicating officer 
under sub-section (1) or by an order of the appellate 
authority under sub-section (4), as the case may be, is 
not deposited, the amount shall be recovered as an 
arrear of land revenue.”. 
(C) In section 18,— 
(i) in sub -section ( 1), after the words “punished 
accordingly”, the words, brackets and figures “as per 
the provisions specified under clauses ( i) and ( ii) of 
sub-section (2) of section 17” shall be inserted; 
(ii) in sub -section (2), after the words “punished 
accordingly”, the words, brackets and figures “as per 
the provisions specified under clauses ( i) and ( ii) of    
sub-section (2) of section 17” shall be inserted.  
(D) Sections 19 and 20 shall be omitted. 
(E) In section 22, in sub -section (2), after clause (e), 
the following clauses shall be inserted, namely:— 
“(ea) the manner of holding an inquiry and imposing 
penalties under sub-section (1) of section 17A; 
(eb) the form and manner of preferring appeal to the 
appellate authority against the order of adjudicating 
officer under sub-section (2) of section 17A;”. 
32. 1963 45 The 
Administrators- 
General Act, 
1963 
In section 34, in sub -section ( 2), for the words 
“imprisonment which may extend to three months, or 
with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or 
with both”, the words “fine which may extend to ten 
thousand rupees” shall be substituted. 
 
 
 

49 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
33. 1966 4 The 
Seamen’s 
Provident 
Fund Act, 
1966 
(A) In section 16,––
(i) in sub -section ( 1), for the words “one year”,
the words “six months” shall be substituted; 
(ii) in sub-section (2), for the words “shall be 
punishable with imprisonment for a term which may 
extend to six months, or with fine which may extend 
to one thousand rupees, or with both”, the words 
“shall be liable to penalty which may extend to one 
lakh rupees” shall be substituted; 
(iii) in sub-section (3), for the words “be 
punishable with imprisonment which may extend to 
three months, or with fine which may extend to one 
thousand rupees, or with both”, the words “be liable 
to penalty which may extend to one lakh rupees” 
shall be substituted; 
(iv) in sub-section (4), for the words “cognizance  
of any offence punishable under this Act or under 
the Scheme except on a report in writing”, the 
words, brackets and figure “cognizance of an 
offence punishable under sub-section (1) of this 
section except on a report in writing” shall be 
substituted; 
(v) after sub-section (4), the following sub-section 
shall be inserted, namely:––
 
“(5) The offence under sub -section (1) of this 
section may be compounded for the first 
contravention by an officer authorised by the 
Central Government by notification in this behalf.”. 
(B) After section 16, the following section shall be
inserted, namely:— 
“16A. Adjudication of penalties. —(1) For the 
purpose of adjudicating penalties under 
sub-sections ( 2) and ( 3) of section 16, the Central 
Government shall appoint the Seamen ’s Provident 
Fund Commissioner as an adjudicating officer for 
holding an inquiry and imposing penalties in such 
manner as may be prescribed: 
Provided that no such penalty shall be imposed 
without giving the person concerned a reasonable 
opportunity of being heard. 
(2) Whoever is aggrieved by an order of the
adjudicating officer under sub -section ( 1) may , 
within thirty days from the date of receipt of such 
order, prefer an appeal to an officer not below the 
rank of Director, Directorate General of Shipping, 
appointed by the Central Government as an appellate 
authority, in such form and manner as may be 
prescribed. 

50 
 (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
    (3) An appeal may be admitted after the expiry 
of the period of thirty days if the appellant satisfies 
the appellate authority that he had sufficient cause 
for not preferring the appeal within that period.  
(4) The appellate authority may, after giving the 
parties to the appeal an opportunity of being heard, 
pass such an order as he may think fit.  
(5) An appeal under sub -section ( 2) shall be 
disposed of within sixty days from the date of 
filing. 
(6) If a penalty imposed by the adjudicating 
officer under sub -section ( 1) or by an order of the 
appellate authority under sub -section ( 4), as the 
case may be, is not deposited, the amount shall be 
recovered as an arrear of land revenue. ”. 
(C) After section 24, the following section shall be 
inserted, namely: — 
“24A. Power of Central Government to make 
rules.—(1) The Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for 
carrying out the provisions of this Act.  
(2) In p articular, and without prejudice to the 
generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, 
namely:— 
(a) the manner of holding an inquiry and 
imposing penalties under sub -section ( 1) of 
section 16A; 
(b) the form and manner of preferring an 
appeal to the appellate authority against the 
order of adjudicating officer under sub -section 
(2) of section 16A. 
(3) Every rule made under this section shall be 
laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each 
House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a 
total period of thirty days which may be comprised 
in one session or in two or more successive 
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session 
immediately following the session or the successive 
sessions aforesa id, both Houses agree in making 
any modification in the rule or both Houses agree 
that the rule should not be made, the rule shall 
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or 
be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, 
that any such modifica tion or annulment shall be 
without prejudice to the validity of anything 
previously done under that rule.”.  
 
 

51 
 (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
34. 1968 27 The Civil 
Defence Act, 
1968 
(A) In section 11,–– 
(i) in sub -section ( 1), for the words “shall be 
punishable with fine which may extend to five 
hundred rupees, and where such neglect or refusal is 
a continuing one, with a further fine which may 
extend to fifty rupees”, the words “shall be liable to 
penalty which may extend to  five hundred rupees, 
and where such neglect or refusal is a continuing one, 
with a further penalty which may extend to fifty 
rupees” shall be substituted;  
(ii) in sub -section ( 2), for the words “shall be 
punishable with fine which may extend to five 
hundred rupees, and where such negligence or failure 
is a continuing one, with a further fine which may 
extend to fifty rupees”, the words “shall be liable to 
penalty which may extend to five hundred rupees, 
and where such negligence or failure is a continuing  
one, with a further penalty which may extend to fifty 
rupees” shall be substituted. 
(B) After section 11, the following section shall be 
inserted, namely:–– 
“11A. Adjudication of penalties. ––(1) For the 
purpose of adjudicating penalties under sub-sections (1) 
and ( 2) of section 11, the State Government may 
appoint the Controller of Civil Defence as an 
adjudicating officer for holding an inquiry and 
imposing penalties in such manner as may be 
prescribed:  
Provided that the State Government may appoint as 
many adjudicating officers as may be required: 
Provided further that no such penalty shall be 
imposed without giving the person concerned a 
reasonable opportunity of being heard. 
(2) Any person aggrieved by an order of the 
adjudicating officer under sub -section ( 1), ma y, 
within thirty days from the date of receipt of such 
order, prefer an appeal to such officer, at least one 
rank higher than the adjudicating officer, as may be 
appointed by the State Government as an  appellate 
authority, in such form and manner as may be  
prescribed. 
(3) An appeal may be admitted after the expiry of 
the period of thirty days if the appellant satisfies the 
appellate authority that he had sufficient cause for not 
preferring the appeal within that period. 
(4) The appellate authority may, afte r giving the 
parties to the appeal an opportunity of being heard, 
pass such order as he may think fit. 
 
 

52 
 (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
    (5) An appeal under sub -section ( 2) shall be 
disposed of within sixty days from the date of filing.  
(6) If a penalty imposed by the adjudicating 
officer under sub -section ( 1) or by an order of the 
appellate authority under sub-section (4), as the case 
may be, is not deposited, the amount shall be 
recovered as an arrear of land revenue.”. 
(C) After section 19, the following section shall be 
inserted, namely:–– 
“19A. Power of Central Government to make 
rules.—(1) The Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette,  make rules for 
carrying out the provisions of this Act. 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the 
generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, 
namely:— 
“(a) the manner of holding an inquiry and 
imposing penalties under sub -section ( 1) of 
section 11A; 
(b) the form and manner of preferring appeal 
to the appellate authority against the order of 
adjudicating officer under sub -section ( 2) of 
section 11A.”. 
35. 1970 39 The Patents 
Act, 1970 
(A) In CHAPTER XX, for the Chapter heading 
“PENALTIES”, the heading “PUNISHMENTS” shall be 
substituted. 
(B) After section 118, the following proviso shall be 
inserted, namely:–– 
“Provided that in the case of contravention of 
section 39, if in the opinion of the C entral 
Government the invention was not relevant for 
defence purpose or atomic energy at the time of such 
contravention, the provisions contained in this 
section shall not apply.”. 
(C) Section 119 shall be omitted. 
36. 1971 40 The Public 
Premises 
(Eviction of 
Unauthorised 
Occupants) 
Act, 1971 
(A) For section 11, the following section shall be 
substituted, namely:–– 
“11. Offences and contraventions. ––(1) If any 
person unlawfully occupies any public premises, 
including land, other than public premises providing 
residential accommodation, he shall be punishable 
with simple imprisonment for a term which may 
extend to six months, or with fine which shall be 
five per cent. of the land value for every year of 
occupation, or with both.  
 
 

53 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
(2) If any person unlawfully occupies any public
premises providing residential accommodation, such 
person shall be liable to penalty of forty times the 
rate of licence fee for that residential 
accommodation for the first month and shall 
increase in telescopic method from second month 
onwards at the rate of ten per cent. per month: 
Provided that a person who, having been lawfully in 
occupation of  any public premises or residential 
accommodation by virtue of any authority (whether by 
way of grant, allotment or by any other mode 
whatsoever) continues to be in occupation of such 
premises after such authority has ceased to be valid, 
shall not be guilt y of the offence or contravention 
referred to in sub-section (1) or under this sub-section. 
(3) If any person who has been evicted from any
public premises under this Act, including land but 
other than public premises providing residential 
accommodation, a gain occupies the premises 
without authority for such occupation, he shall be 
punishable with imprisonment for a term which may 
extend to one year, or with fine which may extend to 
five thousand rupees, or with both. 
(4) If any person who has been evicted from any
public premises for residential accommodation 
under this Act, again occupies the premises without 
authority for such occupation, he shall be liable to 
penalty of fifty times the rate of licence fee for that 
residential accommodation for the first month and 
shall increase in telescopic method from second 
month onwards at the rate of ten per cent. per month. 
(5) Any magistrate convicting a person under
sub-section (3) may make an order for evicting that 
person summarily and he shall be liable to suc h 
eviction without prejudice to any other action that 
may be taken against him under this Act.”. 
(B) In section 11A,––
(i) in the opening portion, for the words  and
figures “The Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 
1974) shall apply to an offence under section 11”, 
the words and figures “The Bharatiya Nagarik 
Suraksha Sanhita, 2023 (46 of 2023), shall apply  
to offences under sub-sections (1) and (3) of 
section 11” shall be substituted; 
(ii) in clause (ii), in sub-clause (1), for the words 
and figures “section 42 of the Code”, the words and 
figures “section 39 of the Sanhita” shall be 
substituted. 
(C) After section 11A, the following section shall be
inserted, namely:–– 

54 
 (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
    “11B. Adjudication of penalties. —(1) For the 
purpose of adjudicating penalties under sub-sections (2) 
and (4) of section 11, the Central Government shall 
appoint an officer at least one rank higher than the 
Estate Officer as an adjudicating officer for holding 
an inquiry and imposing penalties in such manner as 
may be prescribed:  
Provided that the Central Government may appoint 
as many adjudicating officers as may be required: 
Provided further that no such penalty shall be 
imposed without giving the person concerned a 
reasonable opportunity of being heard. 
(2) Any person aggrieved by an order of the 
adjudicating officer under sub-section (1) may, within 
thirty days from the date of receipt of such order, prefer 
an appeal to such officer, at least one rank higher than 
the adjudicating officer, as may be appointed by the 
Central Government as an appellate authority, in such 
form and manner as may be prescribed.   
(3) The appellate authority may admit an appeal 
after the expiry of the said period of thirty days, if 
the appellant satisfies the appellate authority that he 
had sufficient cause for not preferring the appeal 
within that period.  
(4) The appellate authority may, after giving the 
parties to the appeal an opportunity of being heard, 
pass such an order as he may deem fit. 
(5) An appeal under sub -section ( 2) shall be 
disposed of within sixty days from the date of filing. 
(6) If a penalty imposed by the adjudicating 
officer under sub -section ( 1) or by an order of the 
appellate authority under sub-section (4), as the case 
may be, is not deposited, the amount shall be 
recovered as an arrear of land revenue.”. 
(D) In section 18, in sub -section (2), after          
clause ( ea), the following clauses shall be inserted, 
namely:— 
“(eb) the manner of holding an inquiry and imposing 
penalties under sub-section (1) of section 11B; 
(ec) the form and manner of preferring appeal to the 
appellate authority against the order of adjudicating 
officer under sub-section (2) of section 11B;”. 
37. 1972 13 The Marine 
Products 
Export 
Development 
Authority Act, 
1972 
(A) In section 20, in sub -section (3), for the words 
“not less than”, the word “of” shall be substituted. 
(B) For section 24, the following section shall be 
substituted, namely:–– 
 
 

55 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
“24. Penalty for failure to produce books and 
records.—Any person who, having control over or 
custody of any account book or other record, fails to 
produce such book or record when required to do so 
by or under this Act, shall be liable to penalty which 
may extend to ten thousand rupees.”. 
(C) In section 25A, in sub-section (1),—
(i) after the words “penalties under”, the words and
figures “section 11, section 12,” shall be inserted; 
(ii) the words, brackets and letter “clause ( b) of”
shall be omitted. 
(D) After section 25A, the following section shall be
inserted, namely:— 
“25B. Officers and employees of Authority to be 
public servants. —All officers and other employees 
of the Authority, when acting or purporting to act in 
pursuance of any of the provisions of this Act, shall 
be deemed to be public servants within the meaning  
of clause ( 28) of section 2 of the Bharatiya Nyaya 
Sanhita, 2023 (45 of 2023).”. 
(E) Section 27 shall be omitted.
38. 1972 57 The General 
Insurance 
Business 
(Nationalisation) 
Act, 1972 
(A) In section 30, for the words “punishable with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year, 
or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, 
or with both”, the words “liable to  penalty which may 
extend to fifty lakh rupees or the value of the property, 
whichever is higher, in respect of each contravention, 
and if he persists in such contravention, to a further 
penalty which may extend to fifty thousand rupees for 
every day during which the contravention continues” 
shall be substituted. 
(B) After section 30, 
the following section shall be 
inserted, namely:— 
“30A. Adjudication of penalties. —(1) For the 
purpose of adjudicating penalties under section 30, 
the Central Government shall appoint an officer not 
below the rank of Joint Secretary to the Government 
of India as an adjudicating officer  for holding an 
inquiry and imposing penalties in such manner as 
may be prescribed: 
Provided that the Central Government may appoint 
as many adjudicating officers as may be required: 
Provided further that no such penalty shall be 
imposed without giving the  person concerned a 
reasonable opportunity of being heard.  

56 
 (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
    (2) Any person aggrieved by an order of the 
adjudicating officer under sub-section (1) may, within 
thirty days from the date of receipt of such order, prefer 
an appeal to such officer, at least one rank higher than 
the adjudicating officer, as may be appointed by the 
Central Government as an appellate authority, in such 
form and manner as may be prescribed.  
(3) The appellate authority may admit an appeal 
after the expiry of the said period of thirty days, if the 
appellant satisfies the appellate authority that he had 
sufficient cause for not preferring the appeal within 
that period. 
(4) The appellate authority may, after giving the 
parties to the appeal an opportunity of being heard, 
pass such an order as he may deem fit. 
(5) An appeal under sub -section ( 2) shall be 
disposed of within sixty days from the date of filing. 
(6) If a penalty imposed by the adjudicating 
officer under sub -section ( 1) or by an order of the 
appellate authority under sub-section (4), as the case 
may be, is not deposited, the amount shall be 
recovered as an arrear of land revenue.”. 
(C) In section 39, in sub -section (2), after clause (e), 
the following clauses shall be inserted, namely:— 
“(ea) the manner of holding an inquiry and imposing 
penalties under sub-section (1) of section 30A; 
(eb) the form and manner of preferring appeal to the 
appellate authority against the order of adjudicating 
officer under sub-section (2) of section 30A;”. 
39. 1972 78 The 
Richardson 
and Cruddas 
Limited 
(Acquisition 
and Transfer 
of 
Undertaking) 
Act, 1972 
(A) In section 24,–– 
(i) in sub -section ( 1), in the long line, for the 
words “shall be punishable with imprisonment for a 
term which may extend to three years, or with fine 
which may extend to ten thousand rupees, or with 
both”, the words “shall be liable to penalty which 
may extend to two lakh rupees” shall be substituted; 
(ii) for the proviso, the following proviso shall be 
substituted, namely:— 
“Provided that the adjudicating officer holding 
an inquiry under clause ( a), (b) or (c) may, at the 
time of imposing penalties on the person found 
liable, order him to deliver up or refund, within a 
period to be fixed by the adjudicating officer, any 
property or money wrongfully withheld or 
wrongfully obtained or any document wilfully 
withheld or not furnished.”; 
(iii) sub-section (2) shall be omitted. 
 
 

57 
 (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
    (B) After section 24, the following section shall be 
inserted, namely:— 
“24A. Adjudication of penalties. —(1) For the 
purpose of adjudicating penalties under sub-section (1) 
of section 24, the Central Government shall appoint an 
officer not below the rank of Deputy Secretary to the 
Government of India, as an adjudicating officer for 
holding an inquiry and imposing  penalties in such 
manner as may be prescribed: 
Provided that the Central Government may appoint 
as many adjudicating officers as may be required: 
Provided further that no such penalty shall be 
imposed without giving the person concerned a 
reasonable opportunity of being heard. 
(2) Whoever is aggrieved by an order of the 
adjudicating officer under sub -section ( 1) may, 
within thirty days from the date of receipt of such 
order, prefer an appeal to such officer not below the 
rank of Joint Secretary to the Government of India, 
as may be appointed by the Central Go vernment as 
an appellate authority, in such form and manner as 
may be prescribed.  
(3) The appellate authority may admit an appeal 
after the expiry of the said period of thirty days, if 
the appellant satisfies the appellate authority that he 
had sufficient cause for not preferring the appeal 
within that period. 
(4) The appellate authority may, after giving the 
parties to the appeal an opportunity of being heard, 
pass such an order as he may deem fit. 
(5) An appeal under sub -section ( 2) shall be 
disposed of within sixty days from the date of filing. 
(6) If a penalty imposed by the adjudicating 
officer under sub -section ( 1) or by an order of the 
appellate authority under sub-section (4), as the case 
may be, is not deposited, the amount shall be 
recovered as an arrear of land revenue.”. 
(C) Sections 25 and 26 shall be omitted. 
(D) In section 31, in sub-section (2), after clause (b), 
the following clauses shall be inserted, namely:–– 
“(ba) the manner of holding an inquiry and imposing 
penalties under sub-section (1) of section 24A; 
(bb) the form and manner of preferring appeal to the 
appellate authority against the order of adjudicating 
officer under sub-section (2) of section 24A;”. 
 
 

58 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
40. 1974 47 The Oil 
Industry 
(Development) 
Act, 1974 
(A) In section 23,––
(i) in the marginal heading, for the word “Penalties”,
the word “Punishments” shall be substituted; 
(ii) in clause (a), after the words “or does not 
believe to be true”, the words “shall be liable to 
penalty which may extend to five crore rupees” shall 
be inserted; 
  (iii) in clause (b), for the words “punishable with
imprisonment which may extend to one year, or 
with fine which may extend to five thousand 
rupees, or with both”, the words and figures 
“deemed to have committed an offence under 
section 221 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023  
(45 of 2023)” shall be substituted. 
 
“23A. Certain persons to be public servants.—
Member, officer or any other employee of the Board 
empowered by  the Central Government, while 
exercising any power or performing any duty under 
this Act, shall be deemed to be a public servant within 
the meaning of  clause (28) of section 2 of  the 
Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 (45 of 2023).”. 
(C) For section 24, the following sections shall be
substituted, namely:–– 
“24. Adjudication of penalties.––For the purpose of 
adjudicating penalties under clause (a) of section 23, the 
Central Government shall appoint an officer not below 
the rank of Joint Secretary to the Government of India as 
an adjudicating officer for holding an inquiry and 
imposing penalties in such manner as may be prescribed: 
Provided that no such penalty shall be imposed 
without giving the person concerned a reasonable 
opportunity of being heard. 
24A. Appeal.––(1) Every appeal against the order 
of the adjudicating officer under section 24, shall lie 
with the Appellate Tribunal referred to in section 30 
of the Petroleum and Natural Gas Re gulatory Board 
Act, 2006 (19 of 2006) and the provisions contained 
in sections 33, 34, 35 and 36 of that Act, shall, mutatis 
mutandis apply, in relation to every such appeal.  
(2) The provisions contained in section 37 of the
Petroleum and Natural Gas Regu latory Board Act, 
2006 (19 of 2006) shall mutatis mutandis apply, in 
relation to every appeal against the order of the 
Appellate Tribunal referred to in sub-section (1).”. 
(D) For section 25, the following section shall be
substituted, namely:–– 
      (B) After section 23, the following section shall be  
inserted, namely:—

59 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
‘25. Offence or contravention by companies. ––(1) 
Where an offence or a contravention under this Act has 
been committed by a company, every person who, at the 
time the offence or the contravention was committed, 
was in charge of, and was responsible to, the company 
for the conduct of the business of the company as well as 
the company shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence 
or liable for the contravention and shall be liable to be 
proceeded against and punished accordingly:  
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section 
shall render any such person liable to any punishment 
or penalty, if he proves that the offence or the 
contravention was committed without his knowledge 
or that he exercised all due diligence to prevent the 
commission of such offence or the contravention. 
(2) Notwithstanding anyth ing contained in
sub-section (1), where an offence or a contravention 
under this Act has been committed by a company and it 
is proved that the offence or the contravention has been 
committed with the consent or connivance of, or is 
attributable to any neglect on the part of, any director, 
manager, secretary or other officer of the company, 
such director, manager, secretary or other officer shall 
also be deemed to be guilty of that offence or liable for 
that contravention and shall be liable to be proceeded 
against and punished accordingly. 
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section— 
(a) “company” means any body  corporate and
includes a firm or other association of individuals; and  
(b) “director”, in relation to a firm, means a
partner in the firm.’. 
(E) In section 31, in sub -section (2), after clause (o),
the following clause shall be inserted, namely:–– 
“(oa) the manner of holding an inquiry and 
imposing penalties under section 24;”. 
41. 1978 34 The Delhi 
Police Act, 
1978 
(A) In section 59, in sub-section (2),––
(i) in clause ( c), the words, brackets and figures
“sub-section (1) of section 108” shall be omitted; 
(ii) in clause ( e), the words and figures “section
101, section 102 or” shall be omitted. 
(B) For section 85, the following section shall be
substituted, namely:–– 
“85. Causing obstruction and annoyance by 
performances, etc.––No person shall, in contravention 
of any regulation made by the Commissioner of Police, 
exhibit any mimetic, musical or other performances of  

60 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
such a nature as may attract crowds, whereby any 
obstruction to passengers or annoyance to the residents 
in the vicinity may be occasioned.”. 
(C) Sections 88, 89 and 90 shall be omitted.
(D) Section 95 shall be omitted.
(E) For section 97, the following section shall be
“97. Penalties for offences under sections 80 to 87 
and sections 91 to 94 or section 96.—Any person who 
contravenes any of the provisions of sections 80 to 87, 
sections 91 to 94 or section 96 shall, on conviction, be 
punished with fine which may extend to one hundred 
rupees, or, in default of payment of such fine, with 
imprisonment for a term not exceeding eight days.”. 
(F) Sections 98 and 99 shall be omitted.
(G) Sections 101, 102 and 103 shall be omitted.
(H) In section 104, for the words  and figures
“mentioned in section 410 of the Indian Penal Code (45 
of 1860) or by any offence punishable under 
section 417, section 418, section 419 or section 420 of 
the said Code”, the words  and figures “mentioned in 
section 317 of the  Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 (45 
of 2023) or by any offence punishable under 
section 318 or section 319 of the said Sanhita” shall be 
substituted. 
(I) In section 105, for the words  and figures
“meaning of section 410 of the Indian Penal Code ( 45 
of 1860) or property in respect of which any offence 
punishable under section 417, section 418, section 419 
or section 420 of the said Code”, the words  and figures  
“meaning of section 317 of the Bharatiya Nyaya 
Sanhita, 2023 (45 of 2023) or by any offe nce 
punishable under section 318 or section 319 of the said 
Sanhita” shall be substituted.  
(J) Section 106 shall be omitted.
(K) Section 108 shall be omitted.
(L) In section 110,—
(i) in the marginal heading, for the word “Penalty”,
the word “Punishment” shall be substituted; 
(ii) for clause ( b), the following clauses shall be
substituted, namely:— 
“(b) if the regulation was made under clause (i), 
(j), sub -clause (ii) of clause ( s) or clause ( v) of 
sub-section (1) of section 28, with imprisonment for 
a term which may extend to eight days, or with fine 
which may extend to fifty rupees, or with both; 
substituted, namely:–– 

61 
 (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
    (ba) if the regulation was made under        
clause ( d), ( h), or sub -clause (i) of clause ( s) of                       
sub-section ( 1) of section 28, with fine which 
may extend to two hundred and fifty rupees;”. 
(M) Section 112 shall be omitted.  
(N) In section 122, in clause (b), sub-clauses (iii) and 
(iv) shall be omitted. 
42. 1980 70 The Hind 
Cycles Limited 
and Sen-Raleigh 
Limited 
(Nationalisation) 
Act, 1980 
(A) In section 27, in the long line, for the words “shall 
be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may 
extend to two years, or with fine which may extend to ten 
thousand rupees, or with both”, the words “shall be liable 
to penalty which may extend to one lakh and twenty-five 
thousand rupees” shall be substituted. 
    (B) After section 27, the following section shall be 
inserted, namely:— 
“27A. Adjudication of penalties. —(1) For the 
purpose of adjudicating penalties under section 27, 
the Central Government shall appoint an officer not 
below the rank of Deputy Secretary to  the 
Government of India as an adjudicating officer for 
holding an inquiry and imposing penalties in such 
manner as may be prescribed: 
Provided that the Central Government may 
appoint as many adjudicating officers as may be 
required: 
Provided further that no such penalty shall be 
imposed without giving the person concerned a 
reasonable opportunity of being heard. 
(2) Whoever is aggrieved by an order of the 
adjudicating officer under sub -section ( 1) may, 
within thirty days from the receipt of such order, 
prefer an appeal to such officer not below the rank of 
Joint Secretary to the Government of India, as may 
be appointed by the Central Government as an 
appellate authority, in such form and manner as may 
be prescribed.  
(3) The appellate authority may admit an appeal 
after the expiry of the said period of thirty days, if 
the appellant satisfies the appellate authority that he 
had sufficient cause for not preferring the appeal 
within that period. 
(4) The appellate authority may, after giving the 
parties to the appeal an opportunity of being heard, 
pass such an order as he may deem fit. 
(5) An appeal under sub -section ( 2) shall be 
disposed of within sixty days from the date of filing. 
 
 

62 
 (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
    (6) If penalty imposed by the adjudicating officer 
under sub-section (1) or by an order of the appellate 
authority under sub -section (4), as the case may be, 
is not deposited, the amount shall be recovered as an 
arrear of land revenue.”. 
(C) Section 28 shall be omitted. 
(D) In section 31, in sub-section (2), after clause (c), 
the following clauses shall be inserted, namely:–– 
“(ca) the manner of holding an inquiry and imposing 
penalties under sub-section (1) of section 27A; 
(cb) the form and manner of preferring appeal to the 
appellate authority against the order of adjudicating 
officer under sub-section (2) of section 27A;”. 
43. 1981 31 The Dalmia 
Dadri Cement 
Limited 
(Acquisition 
and Transfer 
of 
Undertakings) 
Act, 1981 
(A) In section 28, in the long line, for the words 
“shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term 
which may extend to two years, or with fine which may 
extend to ten thousand rupees, or with both”, the words 
“shall be liable to penalty which may extend to  one 
lakh and twenty -five thousand rupees” shall be 
substituted.  
(B) After section 28, the following section shall be 
inserted, namely:—  
“28A. Adjudication of penalties. —(1) For the 
purpose of adjudicating penalties under section 28, 
the Central Governme nt shall appoint an officer not 
below the rank of Deputy Secretary to the 
Government of India as an adjudicating officer for 
holding an inquiry and imposing penalties in such 
manner as may be prescribed: 
Provided that the Central Government may 
appoint as many adjudicating officers as may be 
required: 
Provided further that no such penalty shall be 
imposed without giving the person concerned a 
reasonable opportunity of being heard. 
(2) Whoever is aggrieved by an order of the 
adjudicating officer under sub-section (1) may, within 
thirty days from the receipt of such order, prefer an 
appeal to such officer not below the rank of Joint 
Secretary to the Government of India, as may be 
appointed by the Central Government as an appellate 
authority, in such form and m anner as may be 
prescribed.  
(3) The appellate authority may admit an appeal 
after the expiry of the said period of thirty days, if 
the appellant satisfies the appellate authority that he 
had sufficient cause for not preferring the appeal 
within that period. 
 
 

63 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
(4) The appellate authority may, after giving the
parties to the appeal an opportunity of being heard, 
pass such an order as he may deem fit. 
(5) An appeal under sub -section ( 2) shall be
disposed of within sixty days from the date of filing. 
(6) If penalty imposed by the adjudicating officer
under sub-section (1) or by an order of the appellate 
authority under sub -section (4), as the case may be, 
is not deposited, the amount shall be recovered as an 
arrear of land revenue.”. 
(C) Section 29 shall be omitted.
(D) In section 30, in sub-section (2), after clause (c),
the following clauses shall be inserted, namely:–– 
“(ca) the manner of holding an inquiry and 
imposing penalties under sub -section ( 1) of 
section 28A; 
(cb) the form and manner of preferring appeal to 
the appellate authority against the order of 
adjudicating officer under sub -section ( 2) of 
section 28A.”. 
44. 1981 29 The British 
India 
Corporation 
Limited 
(Acquisition of 
Shares) Act, 
1981 
Sections 17, 18 and 19 shall be omitted. 
45. 1981 42 The 
Maritime Zones 
of India 
(Regulation of 
Fishing by 
Foreign 
Vessels) Act, 
1981 
(A) Sections 11 and 12 shall be omitted.
(B) In section 13, in sub -section (1), the words and
figures “or section 11 or section 12” shall be omitted. 
(C) In section 15, in the long line, for the words “with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year or 
with fine not exceeding rupees fifty thousand or with 
both”, the words “with fine not exceeding rupees 
thirty-five lakh for vessels of less than twenty-four meters 
overall length and rupees seventy-five lakh for vessels of 
twenty-four me tres or more overall length” shall be 
substituted. 
46. 1984 17 The Inchek 
Tyres Limited 
and the 
National 
Rubber 
Manufacturers 
Limited 
(Nationalisation) 
Act, 1984 
(A) In section 27, in the long line, for the words
“shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term 
which may extend to two years, or with fine which may 
extend to ten thousand rupees, or with both”, the words 
“shall be liable to penalty which may extend to  one 
lakh rupees” shall be substituted.  
(B) After section 27, the following section shall be
inserted, namely:— 

64 
 (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
    “27A. Adjudication of penalties. —(1) For the 
purpose of adjudicating penalties under section 27, 
the Central Government shall appoint an officer not 
below the rank of Deputy Secretary to the 
Government of India , as an adjudicating officer for 
holding an inquiry and imposing penalties in such 
manner as may be prescribed: 
Provided that the Central Government may appoint as 
many adjudicating officers as may be required: 
Provided further that no such penalty shall be  
imposed without giving the person concerned a 
reasonable opportunity of being heard. 
(2) Whoever is aggrieved by an order of the 
adjudicating officer under sub-section (1) may, within 
thirty days from the receipt of such order, prefer an appeal 
to such officer not below the rank of Joint Secretary to the 
Government of India, as may be appointed by the Central 
Government as an appellate authority, in such form and 
manner as may be prescribed.  
(3) The appellate authority may admit an appeal 
after the expiry  of the said period of thirty days, if 
the appellant satisfies the appellate authority that he 
had sufficient cause for not preferring the appeal 
within that period. 
(4) The appellate authority may, after giving the 
parties to the appeal an opportunity of being heard, 
pass such an order as he may deem fit. 
(5) An appeal under sub -section ( 2) shall be 
disposed of within sixty days from the date of filing. 
(6) If penalty imposed by the adjudicating officer 
under sub-section (1) or by an order of the appellate 
authority under sub -section (4), as the case may be, 
is not deposited, the amount shall be recovered as an 
arrear of land revenue.”. 
(C) Section 28 shall be omitted. 
(D) In section 31, in sub-section (2), after clause (c), 
the following clauses shall be inserted, namely:–– 
“(ca) the manner of holding an inquiry and imposing 
penalties under sub-section (1) of section 27A;  
(cb) the form and manner of preferring appeal to the 
appellate authority against the order of adjudic ating 
officer under sub-section (2) of section 27A;”. 
47. 1985 10 The Calcutta 
Metro Railway 
(Operation and 
Maintenance) 
Temporary 
Provisions Act, 
1985 
(A) For section 9, the following section shall be 
substituted, namely:— 
“9. Smoking.—(1) No person shall smoke in any 
compartment or carriage of the metro railway or in 
any underground metro railway station.   
 
 

65 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
(2) Any person who contravenes the provisions of
sub-section ( 1) shall be liable to penalty of two 
thousand rupees and forfeiture of his pass or ticket, 
and may also be removed from the compartment by 
any metro railway servant.  
(3) If the person refuses to pay th e penalty
mentioned in sub -section ( 2), he shall be produced 
before the competent court wherein, he shall be 
punishable with a fine which may extend up to five 
thousand rupees:  
Provided that in the absence of special and 
adequate reasons to the contrary t o be mentioned in 
the judgment of the court, such punishment shall not 
be less than a fine of two thousand rupees.”. 
(B) For section 10, the following section shall be
substituted, namely:— 
“10. Drunkenness or nuisance upon the metro 
railway.—(1) If any person is in a state of 
intoxication and there conducts himself in such a 
manner as to cause annoyance to any person, he 
shall be removed from the metro railway by any 
metro railway servant an d shall, in addition to the 
forfeiture of his pass or ticket, be punishable with 
simple imprisonment for a term which may extend 
to twenty-four hours, or with fine which may extend 
to one thousand rupees, or with both. 
(2) If any person,––
(a) commits any nuisance or act of indecency
or uses abusive or obscene language; or 
(b) wilfully or without excuse interferes with
any amenity provided by the metro railway 
administration so as to affect the comfortable 
travel of any passenger, 
he shall be punishable with fine which may extend to 
two hundred and fifty rupees and shall also be liable 
to forfeiture of the fare which he may have paid or 
any pass or ticket which he may have obtained or 
purchased, or be removed from such carriage or 
part by any metro railway official authorised by 
the metro railway administration in this behalf.  
(3) If any metro railway official is in a state of 
intoxication 
while on duty,  where the  improper 
performance of the duty would be likely to endanger 
the 
safety of any passenger travelling  or being upon 
the metro  railway, he shall  be punishable  with 
imprisonment for a term  which may extend to  one 
year, or with fine, or with both.”. 
(C) In section 13,––

66 
 (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
    (i) for sub-section (1), the following sub -sections 
shall be substituted, namely:— 
“(1) If any person enters upon or into any part 
of a metro railway without lawful authority, he 
shall be liable to a penalty of five hundred rupees. 
(1A) If the person refuses to pay the penalty 
mentioned in sub-section (1), the violator shall be 
produced before the competent court, wherein he 
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term 
which may extend up to three months, or with 
fine which may extend up to five thousand 
rupees, or with both:  
Provided that in the absence of special and 
adequate reasons to the contrary to be mentioned in 
the judgment of the court, such punishment shall not 
be less than imprisonment for one month or a fine of 
two thousand rupees.  
(1B) If any person having lawful ly or 
unlawfully entered upon or into any part of metro 
railway misuses such property and refuses to 
leave, he shall be punishable with imprisonment 
for a term which may extend to three months, or 
with fine which may extend to five thousand 
rupees, or with both: 
Provided that in the absence of special and 
adequate reasons to the contrary to be mentioned in 
the judgment of the court, such punishment shall not 
be less than a fine of five hundred rupees.  
(1C) Any person referred to in sub -sections 
(1A) and ( 1B) may be removed from the metro 
railway by any metro railway servant or by any 
other person whom such metro railway servant 
may call to his aid.”. 
(D) After section 17, the following section shall be 
inserted, namely:— 
“17A. Adjudication of penalties.—(1) For the 
purpose of adjudicating penalties under sub-section (3) 
of section 9 and sub -section (1) of section 13 of this 
Act, the metro railway administration  shall appoint 
an officer of or above the rank of Assistant                    
Sub-Inspector in Railway Protection Force or 
officers not below the rank of Group ‘C’ in 
commercial, operating or vigilance Department of 
metro railway as an adjudicating officer for holding 
an inquiry and imposing penalties in such manner as 
may be specified: 
Provided that the metro railway administration may 
appoint as many adjudicating officers as may be 
required: 
 
 

67 
 (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
    Provided further that no such penalty shall be 
imposed without giving the person concerned a 
reasonable opportunity of being heard. 
(2) Any person aggrieved by an order of the 
adjudicating officer under sub -section ( 1) may, 
within thirty days from the date of receipt of such 
order, prefer an appeal to an officer at least one rank 
higher than the adjudicating  officer, as may be 
appointed by the metro railway administration as an 
appellate authority, in such form and manner as may 
be specified.   
(3) An appeal may be admitted after the expiry of 
the period of thirty days if the appellant satisfies the 
appellate authority that he had sufficient cause for 
not preferring the appeal within that period.  
(4) The appellate authority may, after giving the 
parties to the appeal an opportunity of being heard, 
pass such order as he may think fit. 
(5) An appeal under sub -section ( 2) shall be 
disposed of within sixty days from the date of filing. 
(6) If penalty imposed by the adjudicating officer 
under sub-section (1) or by an order of the appellate 
authority under sub -section (4), as the case may be, 
is not deposited, the amount shall be recovered as an 
arrear of land revenue.”. 
(E) After section 22, the following section shall be 
inserted, namely:— 
“22A. Power of metro railway administration to 
make regulations.––(1) The  metro railway 
administration may, with the previous approval of 
the Central Government, make regulations not 
inconsistent with this Act and the rules made 
thereunder, to provide for all matters for which 
provisions are necessary or expedient for the 
purpose of giving effect to the provisions of this Act. 
(2) Every regulation made by a metro railway 
administration under this Act shall be laid, as soon as 
may be after it is made, before each House of 
Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of 
thirty days which may be comprised in one session or 
in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the 
expiry of the session immediately following the session 
or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree 
in making any modification in the  regulation or both 
Houses agree that the  regulation should not be made, 
the  regulation shall thereafter have effect only in such 
modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; 
so, however, that any such modification or annulment 
shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything 
previously done under that  regulation.”. 
 
 

68 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
48. 1985 22 The 
Handlooms 
(Reservation 
of Articles for 
Production) 
Act, 1985 
(A) In section 10, for clause (a), the following clause
shall be substituted, namely:–– 
“(a) shall be punishable with imprisonment for a 
term which may extend to three months or with a fine 
of not less than ten thousand rupees but may extend up 
to twenty-five thousand rupees per loom by which the 
said article or class of articles is produced, or with both 
and in the case of a continuing or repeated 
contravention, with an additional fine of one thousand 
rupees per loom per day which may extend up to five 
thousand rupees per loom per day during which period 
such contravention continues or repeated after 
conviction for the first such contravention;”. 
(B) In section 11, for the words “punishable with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to three 
months, or with fine which may extend to five thousand 
rupees, or with both”, the words “punishable with fine 
of not less than ten thousand rupees but may extend to 
twenty-five thousand rupees” shall be substituted. 
49. 1985 82 The Inland 
Waterways 
Authority of 
India Act, 
1985 
(A) In section 34, in sub-section (2), after clause (h),
the following clauses shall be inserted, namely:–– 
“(ha) the  manner of holding an inquiry  and 
imposing penalties under  sub-section  ( 1) of 
section 35A; 
(hb) the form and manner of preferring appeal to 
the appellate authority against the order 
of adjudicating officer under sub-section (2) of  
section 35A; and”. 
(B) In section 35, i n sub-section ( 3), for the words
“punishable with fine which may extend to five 
hundred rupees and in the case of con tinuing 
contravention with an additional fine which may extend 
to twenty rupees during which such contravention 
continues after conviction for the first such 
contravention”, the words “liable to penalty which may 
extend to five hundred rupees and in case of continuing 
contravention with an additional penalty which may 
extend to five hundred rupees during which such 
contravention continues after imposition of penalty for 
the first such contravention” shall be substituted. 
(C) After section 35, the following section shall be
inserted, namely:— 
“35A. Adjudication of penalties. ––(1) For the 
purpose of adjudicating penalties under sub-section (3) 
of section 35, the Authority shall appoint an officer 
not below the rank of Deputy Director or an officer 
equivalent in rank to the Under Secretary to the 
Government of India as an  adjudicating officer for 
holding an inquiry and imposing penalties in suc h 
manner as may be prescribed:  

69 
 (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
    Provided that no such penalty shall be imposed 
without giving the person concerned a reasonable 
opportunity of being heard. 
(2) Whoever is aggrieved by an order of the 
adjudicating officer under sub -section ( 1) may, 
within thirty days from the receipt of such order, 
prefer an appeal to such officer not below the rank of 
Director or an officer equivalent in rank to the 
Deputy Secretary to the Government of India, as 
may be appointed b y the Central Government as an 
appellate authority, in such form and manner as may 
be prescribed.  
(3) An appeal may be admitted after the expiry of 
the period of thirty days if the appellant satisfies the 
appellate authority that he had sufficient cause f or 
not preferring the appeal within that period.  
(4) The appellate authority may, after giving the 
parties to the appeal an opportunity of being heard, 
pass such an order as he may think fit. 
(5) An appeal under sub -section ( 2) shall be 
disposed of within sixty days from the date of filing. 
(6) If penalty imposed by the adjudicating officer 
under sub-section (1) or by an order of the appellate 
authority under sub -section (4), as the case may be, 
is not deposited, the amount shall be recovered as an 
arrear of land revenue.”. 
50. 1986 2 The 
Agricultural 
and Processed 
Food Products 
Export 
Development 
Authority Act, 
1985 
(A) In section 19, in sub -section (3), for the words 
“punishable with imprisonment for a term which may 
extend to one year, or with fine, or with both”, the words 
“liable to penalty of not less than ten thousand rupees and 
not exceeding twice the value of goods, in respect of 
which such order has been made” shall be substituted. 
(B) For section 22, the following section shall be 
substituted, namely:–– 
“22. Penalty for making false reports. —Any 
person who, being required by or under this Act,–– 
(i) fails to furnish any return shall be liable–– 
(a) for the first contravention with a 
warning;  
(b) for any subsequent contravention, to 
penalty of not less than ten thousand rupees 
but which may extend to fifty thousand rupees; 
(ii) furnishes a return containing any particular 
which is false and which he knows to be false or 
does not believe to be true, shall be liable to 
penalty of not less than ten thousand rupees but 
which may extend to one lakh rupees.”. 
 
 

70 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
(C) Section 23 shall be omitted.
(D) For section 24, the following section shall be
substituted, namely:–– 
“24. Other penalties. —Whoever contravenes or 
attempts to contravene or abets the contravention of 
the provisions of this Act or of any rules made 
hereunder other than the provisions, t he punishment 
for the contravention whereof has been provided for 
in sections 19 and 22 shall be liable,— 
(a) for the first contravention with a warning;
(b) for any subsequent contravention to penalty
of not less  than ten thousand rupees, and not 
exceeding an amount equivalent  to  the  value  of 
goods, in respect of which such contravention has 
been made; and 
(c) in case of  a continuing  contravention,  a 
penalty of one thousand  rupees  for every day 
during which such contravention continues, 
provided that  the total  quantum of  penalty  for  a 
continuing contravention shall not exceed twice 
the value of goods, in respect of which such order 
has been made.”. 
(E) After section 25, the following section shall be
inserted, namely:–– 
“25A. Adjudication of penalties. —(1) For the 
purpose of adjudging penalties under this Act, the 
Chairman shall appoint the Secretary to the 
Authority or any other officer equivalent to the rank 
of Secretary authorised by the Central Government, 
as the case may be, as an adjudicating officer  for 
holding an inquiry and imposing penalty in such 
manner as may be prescribed:  
Provided that no such penalty shall be imposed 
without giving the person concerned a reasonable 
opportunity of being heard. 
(2) Whoever is aggrieved by an order of the
adjudicating officer under sub -section ( 1) may, 
within thirty days from the date of receipt of such 
order, prefer an appeal to the Chairman who shall be 
an appellate authority, in such form and manner as 
may be prescribed. 
(3) An appeal may be admitted after the expiry of
the period of thirty days if the appellant satisfies the 
appellate authority that he had sufficient cause for 
not preferring the appeal within that period. 
(4) The appellate authority may, after giving the
parties to the appeal an opportunity of being heard, 
pass such order as he may think fit. 

71 
 (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
    (5) An appeal under sub -section ( 2) shall be 
disposed of within sixty days from the date of filing. 
(6) If penalty imposed by the adjudicating officer 
under sub-section (1) or by an order of the appellate 
authority under sub -section (4), as the case may be, 
is not deposited, the amount shall be recovered as an 
arrear of land revenue.”. 
(F) Section 26 shall be omitted. 
(G) After section 26 as so omitted, the following 
section shall be inserted, namely:–– 
“26A. Officers and employees of Authority to be 
public servants. —All officers and other employees 
of the Authority, when acting or purporting to act in 
pursuance of any of  the provisions of this Act, shall 
be deemed to be public servants within the meaning 
of clause ( 28) of section 2 of the Bharatiya Nyaya 
Sanhita, 2023 (45 of 2023).”. 
(H) In section 32, in sub -section ( 2), after                   
clause ( m), the following clauses shall be inserted, 
namely:— 
“(ma) the manner of holding inquiry and imposing 
penalties under sub-section (1) of section 25A; 
(mb) the form and manner of preferring appeal to 
the Chairman against the order of adjudicating 
officer under sub-section (2) of section 25A;”. 
51. 1988 59 The Motor 
Vehicles Act, 
1988 
(A) In section 8, sub-section (8) shall be omitted. 
(B) In section 9, sub-section (9) shall be omitted. 
(C) In section 12, sub-section (4) shall be omitted. 
(D) In section 14, in sub-section ( 2), after                     
clause ( iv), the following proviso shall be inserted, 
namely:–– 
“Provided that every driving licence shall, 
notwithstanding its expiry under this sub -section, 
continue to be effective for a period of thirty days f rom 
the date of such expiry.”. 
(E) In section 15,–– 
(i) in sub -section (1), for the word “expiry”, the 
word “renewal” shall be substituted; 
(ii) for the first proviso , the following proviso 
shall be substituted, namely:–– 
“Provided that in any case where the application 
for the renewal of a licence is made within a period 
of one year prior to date of its expiry, the driving 
licence shall be renewed with effect from the date of 
its expiry:”. 
 
 

72 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
(F) In section 20, in sub-section (2),––
(i) the words, brackets, letter and figures “clause (c)
of sub-section (1) of section 132,” shall be omitted; 
(ii) the words, brackets, letter and figures  
“clause (c) of sub-section (1) of section 132 or” shall 
be omitted.  
(G) In section 40, for t he words “whose
jurisdiction”, the word “which” shall be substituted. 
(H) In section 55, in sub -section (1), for the words
“fourteen days”, the words “thirty days” shall be 
substituted. 
(I) In section 65, in sub-section (2), in clause (k), the
words, brackets and figures “sub -section ( 13) of  
section 41 or” shall be omitted. 
(J) In section 75,––
(i) in the marginal heading, after the words
“motor cabs”, the words “and motor cycles” shall be 
inserted; 
(ii) in sub -section ( 2), in clause ( g), after the
words “motor cabs”, the words “and motor cycles” 
shall be inserted. 
(K) In section 84, in clause ( f), for the words and
figures “Chapters X, XI and XII”, the words and 
figures “Chapters XI and XII” shall be substituted. 
(L) In section 96, in sub-section (2), clause (xii) shall
be omitted. 
(M) In section 157, in sub -section (2), for the words
“fourteen days”, the words “thirty days” shall be 
substituted. 
(N) In section 161, in sub -section (4), in clause ( b),
for the words “punishab le with imprisonment which 
may extend to two years, or with fine which shall not 
be less than twenty -five thousand rupees but may 
extend to five lakh rupees or with  both”, the words 
“liable to penalty which shall not be less than one lakh 
rupees but which may extend to five lakh rupees” shall 
be substituted. 
(O) In section 163, after sub -section ( 2), the
following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:–– 
“(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in        
sub-section ( 1), ex gratia  payments awarded or 
received in respect of the death of, or grievous hurt, 
to any person, shall not be liable to be refunded to 
the Motor Vehicle Accident Fund constituted under 
section 164B.”. 

73 
 (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
    (P) In section 164, after sub-section ( 3), the 
following sub -section and Explanation shall be 
inserted, namely:— 
‘(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in               
sub-section ( 3), ex gratia  payments received in 
respect of death or grievous hurt due to an accident 
arising out of the use of motor vehicle, shall not be 
liable to be reduced from the amount of 
compensation payable under this section. 
Explanation.––For the purposes of section 163 
and this section, the expression “grievous hurt” shall 
be as referred to in section 11 6 of the Bharatiya 
Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 (45 of 2023).’. 
(Q) In section 166, after sub -section ( 3), the 
following proviso shall be inserted, namely:— 
“Provided that the Claims Tribunal may entertain 
an application for compensation after the expiry of 
the said period of six months from the date of 
occurrence of the accident, but within a further 
period not exceeding twelve months, if it is satisfied 
that the applicant was prevented by sufficient cause 
from making an application within such period.”. 
(R) In section 167, the words and figure “without 
prejudice to the provisions of Chapter X” shall be omitted. 
(S) In section 168, after sub-section (3), the following 
sub-section and proviso shall be inserted, namely:–– 
“(4) The application for compensation made 
under section 166 shall be dealt with by the Claims 
Tribunal as expeditiously as possible and endeavour 
shall be made by it to dispose of the a pplication 
within a period of twelve months from the date of 
receipt of the application: 
Provided that where any such application could not 
be disposed of within the said period of twelve months, 
the Claims Tribunal shall record its reasons in writing 
for not disposing of the application within that period.”. 
(T) For sections 177 and 177A, the following 
sections shall be substituted, namely:–– 
“177. General provision for punishment of 
offences.—Whoever contravenes any provision of 
this Act or of any rule, r egulation or notification 
made thereunder shall, if no fine or penalty is 
provided for the offence,  for the first contravention 
be issued a warning recorded in such manner as may 
be prescribed by the Central Government, and for 
any second or subsequent contravention with penalty  
which shall not be less than five hundred rupees, but 
may extend to one thousand and five hundred 
rupees. 
 
 

74 
 (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
    177A. Penalty for contravention of regulations 
under section 118. —(1) Whoever contravenes the 
regulations made under section 118 shall, for the 
first contravention be issued a warning recorded in 
such manner as may be prescribed by the Central 
Government, and for any second or subsequent 
contravention with penalty which shall not be  less 
than five hundred rupees, but may extend to one 
thousand rupees. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in                         
sub-section ( 1), if any contravention of regulations 
made under section 118 is also an offence punishable 
with penalty or fine under any other provision of this 
Act, the penalty or fine imposed only under such other 
provision shall be applicable.”. 
(U) In section 178,––  
(i) for the words “punishable with fine” wherever 
they occur, the words “liable for a penalty” shall be 
substituted; 
(ii) in sub-section (3), after the words “driver of a 
contract carriage”, the words “while being on duty” 
shall be inserted. 
(V) In section 179,–– 
(i) in sub-section (1), for the words “punishable with 
fine”, the words “liable to penalty” shall be substituted; 
(ii) in sub-section (2), for the words “provided for 
the offence, be punishable with imprisonment for a 
term which may extend to one month, or with fine 
which may extend to two thousand rupees, or with 
both”, the words “provided for the contravention, be 
liable to penalty which shall not be less than five 
hundred rupees but which may extend to two 
thousand rupees” shall be substituted. 
(W) In section 182, in sub -section (2), for the words 
“punishable with imprisonment for  term which may 
extend to one month, or with fine which may extend to 
ten thousand rupees or with both”, the words “liable to 
penalty of ten thousand rupees” shall be substituted. 
(X) In section 182B,–– 
(i) in the marginal heading, for the word 
“Punishment”, the word “Penalty” shall be 
substituted; 
(ii) for the words “punishable with fine”, the 
words “liable for a penalty” shall be substituted. 
(Y) In section 186,–– 
(i) for the words “punishable for the first offence 
with fine”, the words “liable  for the first 
contravention with penalty” shall be substituted; 
 
 

75 
 (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
    (ii) for the words “subsequent offence with fine”, 
the words “subsequent contravention with penalty” 
shall be substituted. 
(Z) In section 190, for sub-sections (1) and ( 2), the 
following sub-sections shall be substituted, namely:— 
“(1) Any person who drives or causes or allows to be 
driven in any public place a motor vehicle or trailer 
while the vehicle or trailer has any defect, which such 
person knows of or could have discovered by the 
exercise of ordinary care and which is calculated to 
render the driving of the vehicle a source of danger to 
persons and vehicles using such place, shall be liable for 
penalty of five thousand rupees or, if as a result of such 
defect an accident is caused causing bodily injury or 
damage to property, with imprisonment for a term which 
may extend to six months, or with fine of five thousand 
rupees, or with both; and for a subsequent offence shall 
be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may 
extend to one year, or with a fine of ten thousand rupees, 
for bodily injury or damage to property.  
(2) Any person who drives or causes or allows to 
be driven, in any public place a motor vehicle, which 
violates the standards prescribed,–– 
(i) in relation to road safety or control of                       
air-pollution, shall be liable for the first 
contravention with penalty which may extend to 
ten thousand rupees and he shall be disqualified for 
holding licence for a period of three months and 
for any second or subsequent offence with 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to six 
months or with fi ne which may extend to ten 
thousand rupees, or with both; or 
(ii) in relation to noise pollution, shall for the 
first contravention be issued a warning recorded 
in such manner as may be prescribed by the 
Central Government, and for any second or 
subsequent contravention with penalty which may 
extend to ten thousand rupees.”. 
(ZA) In section 192, in sub-section (1), for the words 
“punishable for the first offence with a fine which may 
extend”, the words “liable for the first offence with a 
penalty which may extend” shall be substituted. 
(ZB) In section 192A, in sub -section ( 1), for the 
words “punishable for the first offence with 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to six 
months or a fine of ten thousand rupees, or with both 
and for any subsequent offenc e with imprisonment 
which may extend to one year but shall not be less than 
six months or with fine of ten thousand rupees or with 
both”, the words “liable to penalty of ten thousand 
rupees and for any subsequent contravention with  
penalty of twenty thousand rupees” shall be substituted.  
 
 

76 
 (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
    (ZC) In section 192B,–– 
(i) in sub -section ( 1), for the words “punishable 
with fine”, the words “liable for a penalty” shall be 
substituted; 
(ii) in sub -section (2), for the words “punishable 
with fine”, the words “liable for a penalty” shall be 
substituted. 
(ZD) In section 193,–– 
(i) in sub -section (1), for the words “for the first 
offence with fine”, the words “for the first offence 
with penalty” shall be substituted; 
(ii) in sub-section (2), for the words “punishable 
with fine”, the words “liable for a penalty” shall be 
substituted; 
(iii) in sub -section (3), for the words “punishable 
with fine of five thousand rupees” , the words “liable 
for penalty which shall not be less tha n fifty 
thousand rupees but may extend to one lakh rupees” 
shall be substituted. 
(ZE) In section 194,–– 
(i) in sub-section (1),–– 
(a) for the words “punishable with fine”, the 
words “liable to penalty” shall be substituted; 
(b) for the words “additional amount”, the 
words “additional penalty” shall be substituted;  
(ii) in sub-section (1A), for the words “punishable 
with a fine”, the words “liable to penalty” shall be 
substituted; 
(iii) in sub -section (2), for the words “punish able 
with fine”, the words “liable to penalty” shall be 
substituted. 
(ZF) In section 194A, for the words “punishable 
with a fine”, the words “liable for a penalty” shall be 
substituted. 
(ZG) In section 194B, for the words “punishable 
with a fine” at both t he places where they occur, the 
words “liable for a penalty” shall be substituted. 
(ZH) In section 194C, for the words “punishable 
with a fine”, the words “liable for a penalty” shall be 
substituted. 
(Z-I) In section 194D, for the words “punishable 
with a fine”, the words “liable for a penalty” shall be 
substituted. 
 
 

77 
 (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
    (ZJ) In section 194E, for the words “shall be 
punishable with imprisonment for a term which may 
extend to six months, or with a fine of ten thousand 
rupees or with both”, the words “shall be liable for 
penalty of ten thousand rupees for first offence and 
shall be punishable for any second or subsequent 
offence with imprisonment for a term which may 
extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to 
ten thousand rupees or with both” shall be substituted. 
(ZK) For section 194F, the following section shall be 
substituted, namely:— 
“194F. Use of horns and silence zones. —
Whoever— 
(a) while driving a motor vehicle— 
(i) sounds the horn needlessly or 
continuously or more than necessary to ensure 
safety; or 
(ii) sounds the horn in an area with a traffic 
sign prohibiting the use of a horn; or 
(b) drives a motor vehicle which makes use of 
a cut -out by which exhaust gases are released 
other than through the silencer,  
shall for the first contravention be issued a warning 
recorded in such manner as may be prescribed by the 
Central Government, and for any second or 
subsequent contravention shall be liable to penalty 
which shall not be less than one thousand rupees, but 
may extend to two thousand rupees.”.  
(ZL) In section 196, for the words “punishable for 
the first offence with imprisonment which may 
extend to three months, or with fine of two thousand 
rupees, or with both, and for a subsequent offence 
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term 
which may extend to three months, or with fine of 
four thousand rupees, or with both”, the words, 
brackets and figures “liable for the first 
contravention with penalty of three times the base 
premium for such vehi cle specified under                           
sub-section ( 2) of section 147 or five thousand 
rupees, whichever is higher, and for a subsequent 
contravention shall be liable to penalty of five times 
the base premium for such vehicle as specified under                     
sub-section ( 2) of section 147 or ten                  
thousand rupees, whichever is higher” shall be 
substituted.  
 
 

78 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
(ZM) For section 198, the following section shall be 
substituted, namely:— 
“198. Unauthorised interference with  vehicle.—
Whoever otherwise than with lawful authority or 
reasonable excuse, without prejudice to any liability 
under the provisions of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 
2023 (45 of 2023),— 
(a) enters or mounts any stationary motor
vehicle shall be liable to penalty of one thousand 
rupees; 
(b) tampers with the brake or any part of the
mechanism of a motor vehicle shall be punishable 
with a fine of ten thousand rupees.”. 
(ZN) In section 198A,— 
(a) in sub-section (1), after the words “the Central 
Government”, the words, figures and letters “under 
section 210C for National Highways or by the State 
Government under section 210D for roads other than 
National Highways, as the case may be” shall be 
inserted; 
(b) for sub-section ( 2), the following sub-section 
shall be substituted, namely:— 
“(2) Where the failure on the part of the 
designated authority, contractor, consultant or 
concessionaire responsible under sub -section ( 1) 
to comply with standards for road design, 
construction and maintenance, results in death or 
disability, such authority or contractor or 
concessionaire shall be liable to penalty which 
may extend to fifty lakh rupees and the same,— 
(i) for national highways, shall be paid to
the Fund constituted under section 164B; and 
(ii) for roads other than national highways,
shall be paid to the State Government in such 
manner as may be prescribed by such 
Government.”; 
(c) In sub -section ( 3), in c lause ( g), after the
words “the Central Government”, the words “or the 
State Government, as the case may be” shall be 
inserted. 
(ZO) In section 199B,–– 
(i) in the marginal heading, after the words
“Revision of fines”, the words “and penalties” shall 
be inserted; 
(ii) for the words “The fines”, the words “The
fines and penalties” shall be substituted. 

79 
 (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
    (ZP) In section 200, in sub-section (1), for the portion 
beginning with the words and figures “punishable under 
section 177” and ending with the word and figures 
“section 201”, the following shall be substituted, 
namely:— 
“punishable under section 180, section 181,                          
sub-section ( 1) of  section 182, sub -section ( 1) or                      
sub-section (3) or sub -section ( 4) of section 182A,                   
sub-section ( 1) of section 183, clause ( c) of the 
Explanation to section 184,  section 189, second or 
subsequent offence under clause (i) of sub-section (2) 
of section 190, second or subsequent offence under 
section 192, sub-section (3) of section 192B,  second 
or subsequent offence under section 194E, and 
clause (b) of section 198.”.  
(ZQ) In section 210A,— 
(i) in the marginal heading, after the words “to 
increase”, the words “fines or” shall be inserted; 
(ii) for the words “to be applied to each fine under 
this Act and such modified fine”, the words “to be 
applied to each fine or penalty under this Act and 
such modified fine or penalty” shall be substituted.  
(ZR) In section 210C, after clause ( b), the following 
clause shall be inserted, namely:–– 
“(ba) the manner in which warning for 
contraventions shall be recorded under this Chapter;”. 
(ZS) In section 212, in sub -section ( 4), for the      
words, brackets and figures “sub -section ( 1) of              
section 163”, the words, brackets and figures                  
“sub-section (3) of section 161” shall be substituted. 
52. 1989 24 The 
Railways Act, 
1989 
(A) In section 60, in sub -section (3), for the words 
“shall be punishable with fine which shall not exceed five 
hundred rupees”, the words “shall be liable to penalty 
which shall not exceed two thousand rupees, and in the 
event of non-payment of the penalty, the person so failing 
shall be produced before a competent court having 
jurisdiction which may impose a fine which may extend to 
two thousand rupees” shall be substituted. 
(B) In section 87, in sub-section (3), for the words “shall 
be punishable with fine which may extend to one 
hundred and fifty rupees”, the words “shall be liable to 
penalty which shall not exceed two thousand rupees, and 
in the event of non-payment of the penalty, the person so 
failing shall be produced before a competent court having 
jurisdiction which may impose a fine which may extend to 
two thousand rupees” shall be substituted. 
 
 

80 
 (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
    (C) For section 137, the following section shall be 
substituted, namely:— 
“137. Fraudulently travelling or attempting to 
travel without proper pass or ticket. — (1) If any 
person, with intent to defraud a railway 
administration,—  
(a) enters or remains in any carriage on a 
railway or travels in a train in contravention of 
section 55; or  
(b) uses or attempts to use a single pass or a 
single ticket which has already been used on a 
previous journey, or in the case of a return ticket, 
a half thereof which has already been so used, 
he shall be liable to pay the fare for the distance 
which he has travelled, or where there is any doubt 
as to the station from which he started, the fare from 
the station from which the train originally started, or 
if the tickets of p assengers travelling in the train 
have been examined since the original starting of the 
train, the fare from the place where the tickets were 
so examined or, in case of their having                             
been examined more than once, were last               
examined: 
Provided that he shall also pay the excess charges 
equal to the due charges mentioned herein, subject to 
a minimum of five hundred rupees or the charges 
notified by the Central Government. 
(2) If any passenger liable to pay the excess 
charge and the fare mentioned in sub -section ( 1), 
fails or refuses to pay the same on a demand being 
made under this section, the authori sed railway 
servant may apply to the competent court, for the 
recovery of the sum payable, and the court if 
satisfied that the sum is payable shall order it to be 
so recovered, and may order that the person liable 
for the payment shall in default of payment be 
punishable with imprisonment for a term which may 
extend to six months, or with fine which may extend 
to five hundred rupees, or with both.”. 
(D) In section 138,— 
(i) in sub -section ( 3), for the words “or two 
hundred and fifty rupees”, the words “or five 
hundred rupees or the charges notified by the Central 
Government” shall be substituted; 
 
 

81 
 (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
    (ii) in sub-section (4),––  
(a) for the words “any Metropolitan Magistrate 
or a Judicial Magistrate of the first or second 
class,” the words “the competent court having 
jurisdiction” shall be substituted;  
(b) for the words “and the Magistrate if 
satisfied”, the words “and the court if s atisfied” 
shall be substituted. 
(E) For section 142, the following section shall be 
substituted, namely:— 
“142. Penalty for travelling on transferred 
tickets.— (1) If any person is found travelling in a 
train on the authority of a ticket booked for travel of 
some other person and on which he is not authorised 
to undertake journey in the train, the ticket shall be 
forfeited and he shall also be liable to pay the fare 
mentioned on the ticket: 
Provided that he shall pay the excess charges 
equal to the fare mentioned on the ticket subject to a 
minimum of five hundred rupees or the charges 
notified by the Central Government.  
(2) If any passenger liable to pay the excess 
charge and the fare mentioned in sub -section ( 1), 
fails or refuses to pay the same on a demand being 
made therefor under this section, the authorised 
railway servant may apply to the competent court for 
the recovery of the sum payable, and the court if 
satisfied that the sum is payable shall order it to be 
so recovered, and may order that t he person liable 
for the payment shall, in default of payment, suffer 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to six 
months, or with fine which may extend to two 
thousand rupees, or with both.”. 
(F) For section 144, the following section shall be 
substituted, namely:— 
“144. Prohibition on hawking, etc., and 
begging.— (1) If any person canvasses for any 
custom or hawks or exposes for sale any article 
whatsoever in any railway carriage or upon any part 
of a railway, except under and in accordance with 
the terms and conditions of a license granted by the 
railway administration in this behalf, he shall be 
liable to penalty of two thousand rupees. 
(2) If he fails or refuses to pay the penalty, he 
shall be produced before the competent court having 
jurisdiction and shall, on conviction, be punishable 
with imprisonment for a term which may extend to 
three months, or with fine which may extend to five 
thousand rupees, or with both: 
 
 

82 
 (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
    Provided that in the absence of special and 
adequate reasons to the contrary to be mentioned in 
the judgment of the court, such punishment shall not 
be less than imprisonment for one month or a fine of 
two thousand rupees. 
(3) If any person who has been ordered to pay a 
penalty under sub -section (1) is subsequently found 
to have contravened the same provision for the 
fourth or any subsequent time, he shall be 
punishable with imprisonment for a term which may 
extend to one year and with fine which may extend 
to five thousand rupees: 
Provided that in t he absence of special and 
adequate reasons to the contrary to be mentioned in 
the judgment of the court, such punishment shall not 
be less than imprisonment for three months and a 
fine of two thousand rupees. 
(4) No person shall be permitted to beg in any 
railway carriage or upon any part of the railway. 
(5) Any person referred to in sub -section ( 1),          
sub-section ( 2), sub -section ( 3) or sub -section ( 4) 
may be removed from the railway carriage or any 
part of the railway or railway station, as the cas e 
may be, by any railway servant authori sed in this 
behalf or by any other person whom such railway 
servant may call to his aid. 
Explanation.––For reckoning of the count of 
offence, if the person commits this act in any part of 
the Indian Railways it will be reckoned for the count 
of this offence.”. 
(G) For section 145, the following section shall be 
substituted, namely:—  
‘145. Drunkenness or nuisance. — (1) If any 
person in any railway carriage or upon any part of a 
railway is in a state of intoxication and conducts 
himself in such a manner as to cause annoyance to 
any person, he shall be removed from the railway by 
any railway servant and shall, in addition to the 
forfeiture of his pass or ticket, be punishable with 
simple imprisonment for a  term which may extend 
to twenty-four hours, or with fine which may extend 
to one thousand rupees, or with both or with 
community service. 
(2) If any person in any railway carriage or upon 
any part of a railway,–– 
(a) commits any nuisance or act of indecen cy 
or uses abusive or obscene language; or 
 
 

83 
 (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
    (b) wilfully or without excuse interferes with 
any amenity provided by the railway 
administration so as to affect the comfortable 
travel of any passenger, 
he shall be removed from the railway by any railway 
servant and shall, in addition to the forfeiture of his 
pass or ticket, be punishable with fine of one 
thousand rupees and if he continues the nuisance, 
having been enjoined by a railway servant who has 
lawful authority to issue such injunction not to 
repeat or continue such nuisance, shall be punished 
with simple imprisonment for a term which may 
extend to six months or with fine which may extend 
to five thousand rupees or with both. 
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, 
“nuisance” shall have the same meaning as defined 
in section 270 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 
(45 of 2023).’. 
(H) In section 146, for the words “term which may 
extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to  
one thousand rupees”, the words “term which may 
extend to three months, or with fine which may extend 
to two thousand and five hundred rupees” shall be 
substituted.  
(I) For section 147, the following section shall be 
substituted, namely:— 
‘147. Trespass and refusal to desist from 
trespass.— (1) If any person enters upon or into any 
part of a passenger area, without lawful authority 
and refuses to leave he shall be liable to a penalty of 
five hundred rupees: 
Provided if the person lawfully en tered upon the 
passenger area, misuses the passenger area and 
refuses to leave he shall be punishable as per        
sub-section (3).  
(2) If such person refuses to pay the penalty, he 
shall be produced before the competent court having 
jurisdiction, and sh all on conviction be punishable 
with imprisonment for a term which may extend up 
to three months or with fine which may extend up to 
five thousand rupees or with both: 
Provided that in the absence of special and 
adequate reasons to the contrary to be menti oned in 
the judgment of the court, such punishment shall not 
be less than imprisonment for one month or a fine of 
two thousand rupees.  
 
 

84 
 (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
    (3) If any person enters upon or into any part of a 
railway, other than passenger area, without lawful 
authority or having lawfully entered upon or into 
such part misuses such property and refuses to leave, 
he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term  
which may extend to three months, or with fine 
which may extend to five thousand rupees, or with 
both: 
Provided that in the absence of special and 
adequate reasons to the contrary to be mentioned in 
the judgment of the court, such punishment shall not 
be less than a fine of two thousand rupees.  
(4) Any person referred to in sub -section ( 1),         
sub-section (2) and sub section ( 3) may be removed 
from the railway by any railway servant or by any 
other person whom such railway servant may call to 
his aid. 
Explanation.—For the purposes of this  
section,— 
(a) “passenger area ” shall have the same 
meaning as defined in clause ( cb) of                                      
sub-section ( 1) of section 2 of the Railway 
Protection Force Act, 1957 (23 of 1957); 
(b) “railway” shall have the same meaning as 
defined in clause (31) of section 2 of this Act.’.  
(J) In section 155,— 
(i) in sub-section (1), for the words “he shall also 
be punishable with fine which may extend to five 
hundred rupees”, the words “he shall be liable to 
penalty of two thousand rupees” shall be substituted; 
(ii) in sub-section (2), for the words “punishable 
with fine which may extend to two hundred rupees”, 
the words “liable to penalty of one thousand rupees” 
shall be substituted; 
(iii) after sub -section ( 2), the following                        
sub-section shall be inserted, namely:— 
“(3) If any passenger who is found liable for a 
contravention of sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) 
refuses to pay the penalty, the v iolator shall be 
produced before the competent court wherein, he 
shall be punishable with fine which may extend to 
three thousand rupees:  
Provided that in the absence of special and 
adequate reasons to the contrary to be mentioned 
in the judgment of the c ourt, such punishment 
shall not be less than a fine of two thousand 
rupees.”. 
 
 

85 
 (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
    (K) Section 158 shall be omitted. 
(L) For section 159, the following section shall be 
substituted, namely:— 
“159. Disobedience of drivers or conductors of 
vehicles to directions of railway servant, etc.— (1) If 
any driver or conductor of any vehicle, while on the 
premises of a railway, halts  or parks such vehicle 
other than at a designated place or drives against one 
way traffic or dangerously or in a manner which 
may obstruct free flow of traffic or disobeys the 
reasonable directions of any railway servant or 
police officer, he shall be liab le to penalty of five 
hundred rupees.  
(2) If any driver or conductor found to be liable to 
penalty under sub-section (1) and refuses to pay the 
penalty, shall be produced before the competent 
court having jurisdiction, shall be punishable with 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to one 
month, or with fine which may extend to one 
thousand rupees, or with both: 
Provided that in the absence of special and 
adequate reasons to the contrary to be mentioned in 
the judgment of the court, such punishment shall not 
be less than imprisonment for fifteen days or a fine 
of five hundred rupees.”. 
(M) For section 162, the following section shall be 
substituted, namely:— 
“162. Entering carriage or other place reserved for 
females.—(1) If a male person knowi ng or having 
reason to believe that a carriage, compartment, berth or 
seat in a train or room or other place is reserved by a 
railway administration for the exclusive use of females, 
without lawful excuse,— 
(a) enters such carriage, compartment, room or 
other place, or having entered such carriage, 
compartment, room or place, remains therein; or 
(b) occupies any such berth or seat having 
been required by any railway servant to vacate it,  
he shall, in addition to being liable to forfeiture of 
his pass or ti cket, liable to pay penalty of two 
thousand and five hundred rupees and may also be 
removed by any railway servant. 
(2) If a person found to be liable to penalty under 
sub-section (1) and refuses to pay the penalty, shall be 
produced before the competent c ourt having 
jurisdiction, and shall on conviction be punishable with 
a fine which may extend up to five thousand rupees: 
 
 

86 
 (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
    Provided that in the absence of special and adequate 
reasons to the contrary to be mentioned in the judgment 
of the court, such punishment shall not be less than a 
fine of two thousand and five hundred rupees: 
Provided further that notwithstanding anything 
contained in this Act, no proceeding under this 
section shall be initiated against any transgender 
person, as defined in clause ( k) of section 2 of the 
Transgender Persons (Protection of Rights) Act, 
2019 (40 of 2019).”. 
(N) In section 163, for the words “be punishable with 
fine which may extend to five hundred rupees for every 
quintal or part thereof of such goods”, the words “be liable 
to penalty which shall be equal to the amount as notified 
by the Central Government” shall be substituted. 
(O) For section 165, the following section shall be 
substituted, namely:— 
“165. Unlawfully bringing offensive goods on a 
railway.— (1) If any person, in contravention of 
section 67, takes with him any offensive goods or 
entrusts such goods for carriage to th e Railway 
administration, he shall be liable for removal of such 
goods from Railways and also to penalty amounting 
to any loss, injury or damage which may be caused 
by reason of bringing such goods on the Railway, 
but shall not be less than ten thousand rupees.  
(2) If any person liable to remove such goods 
from Railways and pay a penalty under                           
sub-section (1), fails or refuses to do so on a demand 
being made therefor under this section, the 
authorised railway servant may apply to the 
competent court having jurisdiction, for the recovery 
of the sum payable, and the court if satisfied that the 
sum is payable shall order it to be so recovered, and 
may order that the person liable for the payment 
shall in default of payment suffer imprisonment for a 
term which may extend to one year, or with fine 
which may not be less than ten thousand rupees, or 
with both.”. 
(P) In section 166,–– 
(i) in the long line, for the words “he shall be 
punishable with imprisonment for a term which may 
extend to one month, or with fine which may extend 
to five hundred rupees, or with both.”, the words “he 
shall be liable for the first contravention with 
penalty of two thousand rupees, for any second or 
subsequent offence, he shall be punishable with 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to one 
month, or with fine of five thousand rupees, or  with 
both:” shall be substituted; 
 
 

87 
 (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
    (ii) after the long line, the following provisos 
shall be inserted, namely:— 
“Provided that in the absence of special and 
adequate reasons to the contrary to be mentioned 
in the judgment of the court, such punishment 
shall not be less than a fine of two thousand 
rupees:  
Provided further that if the person refuses to 
pay the penalt y, he shall be produced before the 
competent court and shall be punishable with a 
fine which may extend up to five thousand 
rupees.”. 
(Q) In section 167,—  
(i) in sub -section ( 3), for the words “punishable 
with fine which may extend to one hundred rupees.”, 
the words “liable to penalty of two thousand rupees 
in addition to being liable to forfeiture of his pass or 
ticket and shall also be removed by any railway 
servant and if he refuses to pay the penalty, he shall 
be produced before the competent c ourt having 
jurisdiction, shall be punishable with fine which may 
extend to five thousand rupees:” shall be substituted; 
(ii) after sub -section ( 3), the following proviso 
shall be inserted, namely:— 
“Provided that in the absence of special and 
adequate reasons to the contrary to be mentioned in 
the judgment of the court, such punishment shall not 
be less than a fine of two thousand rupees.”. 
(R) In section 172, the words “, he shall be 
punishable with fine which may extend to five hundred 
rupees” shall be omitted. 
(S) Section 176 shall be omitted. 
(T) In section 179, in sub -section (2), for the words 
and figures “sections 137 to 139, 141 to 147, 153 to 
157, 159 to 167 and 172 to 176”, the words and figures 
“sections 137 to 139, 141 to 147, 153 to 157, 159 to 
162, 164 to 167 and 172 to 175” shall be substituted. 
53. 1994 44 The New 
Delhi 
Municipal 
Council Act, 
1994 
(A) In section 2,— 
(i) after clause ( 1), the following clause shall be 
inserted, namely:–– 
‘(1A) “annual value” means the annual value 
of any vacant land or covered space of any 
building determined under section 64F;’; 
(ii) after clause (25), the following clause shall be 
inserted, namely:–– 
‘(25A) “Municipal Valuation Committee” 
means the Municipal Valuation Committee 
constituted under section 64A;’; 
 
 

88 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
(iii) after clause ( 39), the following clause shall
be inserted, namely:–– 
‘(39A) “public utilities” include water -supply, 
electric supply and lighting, sewerage and 
drainage, solid waste management, energy and 
telecommunication services, gas distribution 
system and public transport system, whether 
managed by Government or otherwise;’; 
(iv) after clause (54), the following clause shall be
inserted, namely:–– 
‘(54A) “vacant land” means the land within a 
premises excluding the occupied by the plinth of 
any building erected thereon;’. 
(B) For section 61, the following section shall be
substituted, namely:–– 
“61. Components of property tax. —Save as 
otherwise provided in this Act, the property tax shall 
be levied on lands and buildings in New Delhi and 
shall consist of the following, namely:–– 
(a) a building tax; and
(b) a vacant land tax.”.
(C) After section 61, the following sections shall be
inserted, namely:–– 
‘61A. Building tax.—For any building,  the 
building tax shall be equal to the rate of building tax 
as may be specified  by the  Council  under 
section 61D multiplied by the annual value of 
the covered space of building determined under  
sub-section (1) of section 64F or section 64G. 
61B. Rebate for certain categories. —In the  case 
of any self-occupied  residential  building,  singly 
owned by such persons as may be specified by the 
bye-laws, the  Council  may specify a rebate  on the 
building tax not exceeding thirty per cent. of the tax 
due on the covered space of such building up to one 
hundred square metres of the covered space: 
Provided that  such rebate  shall  not be available 
for more than  one residential  building  within  the 
jurisdiction of the New Delhi. 
61C. Vacant  land tax.—The vacant land  tax in 
respect of any premises shall be equal to the rate of 
vacant land tax as may be specified by the Council 
under section 61E multiplied by the annual value of 
the vacant land determined under sub-section (3) of 
section 64F: 

89 
 (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
    Provided that where there is any construction on 
the land and the area of plinth of such building is in 
excess of such percentage of the area of the plot as 
may be provided in the bye -laws, no vacant land tax 
shall be levied. 
61D. Rate of building tax. —Save as otherwise 
provided in this Act, the base rate of property tax on 
buildings in New Delhi shall be between a minimum 
of ten per cent. and a maximum of twenty per cent. 
of the annual values of such buildings as may be 
specified by the Council from time to time: 
Provided that the Council may, at any time, 
specify fixed rates between the minimum and the 
maximum rates of tax as aforesaid for different areas 
or for different groups of buildings in such areas: 
Provided further tha t the Council may also 
introduce graduated rates of tax within the minimum 
and the maximum rates of tax as aforesaid on the 
basis of straight line system or any other system as 
may be specified by the Council.  
Explanation.—For the purpose s of this section  
and section 61E, “Straight line system” means the 
system in which the rate of tax is equivalent to the 
annual value of a property ( X) divided by the 
minimum annual value ( X1) and Y being added to 
the quotient so arrived, Y being the difference 
between the maximum rate of tax and the quotient of  
maximum (X2) and minimum (X1) annual values. 
61E. Rate of vacant land tax. —Save as otherwise 
provided in this Act, the rate of tax on vacant lands 
in New Delhi shall be between a minimum of ten per 
cent. and a maxi mum of twenty per cent. of the 
annual value of such lands as may be specified by 
the Council from time to time: 
Provided that the Council may, at any time, 
specify fixed rates between the minimum and the 
maximum rates of tax as aforesaid for different areas 
or for different groups of vacant lands in such area: 
Provided further that the Council may also 
introduce graduated rates of tax within the minimum 
and the maximum rates of tax as aforesaid on the 
basis of straight line system or any other  system as 
may be specified by the Council.’. 
(D) In section 62, in sub -section (1), in clause ( a), 
for the Explanation, the following Explanation shall be 
substituted, namely:–– 
‘Explanation.––“charitable purpose” includes 
medical relief to, or education of, the poor;’. 
 
 

90 
 (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
    (E) For section 63, the following section shall be 
substituted, namely:–– 
“63. Unit of assessment.—(1) Every building and 
every vacant land shall be assessed as a single unit: 
Provided that where portions of any building or 
vacant land are separately owned so as to be entirely 
independent and capable of separate enjoyment, 
notwithstanding the fact that the access to such separate 
portions is made through a common passage or a 
common stair case, as the case may be, such separately 
owned portions may be assessed separately. 
(2) All buildings, to the extent they are contiguous 
or are within the same cartilage or are on the same 
foundation and are owned by the same owner or                  
co-owners as an undivided property, shall be treated as 
one unit for the purpose of assessment under this Act:  
Provided that if any such building is sub -divided 
into separate shares which are not entirely 
independent and capable of separate enjoyment, the 
Chairperson may, on application from the owners or 
the co -owners, apportion the valuation and 
assessment of suc h building among the co -owners 
according to the value of their respective shares, 
treating the entire building as a single unit.  
(3) Each residential unit with its percentage of the 
undivided interest in the common areas and facilities, 
constructed or purchased and owned by, or under the 
control of, any housing co-operative society registered 
under any law regulating the co-operative housing for 
the time being in force, shall be assessed separately.  
(4) Each apartment and its percentage of the 
undivided interest in the common areas and facilities 
in a building within the meaning of any law 
regulating apartment ownership for the time being in 
force, shall be assessed separately.  
(5) If the ownership of any vacant land or building or 
any portion thereof is sub-divided into separate shares, 
or if more than one adjoining vacant land or building or 
portion thereof comes under one ownership by 
amalgamation, the Chairperson may, on an application 
from the owner or the co-owners, as the case may be, 
separate, or amalgamate, as the case may be, such vacant 
land or building or portion thereof so as to ensure 
conformity with the provisions of this section. 
(6) Notwithstanding any assessment made in 
respect of any vacant lands or buildings before the 
date of commenceme nt of the Jan Vishwas  
(Amendment of Provisions) Act, 2026, the 
Chairperson may, on his own or otherwise, 
amalgamate, or separate, or continue to assess, such 
vacant lands or buildings or portions thereof so as to 
ensure conformity with the provisions of this section.  
 
 

91 
 (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
    (7) The Chairperson shall, upon an application made 
in this behalf by an owner, lessee, sub -lessee, or 
occupier of any vacant land or building and upon 
payment of such fee as may be provided in the                   
bye-laws, furnish to such owner, lessee, sub-lessee,  or 
occupier, as the case may be, information regarding the 
apportionment of the property tax on such vacant land 
or building among the several occupiers of such vacant 
land or building for the current period of assessment or 
for any preceding period of assessment: 
Provided that nothing in this sub -section shall 
prevent the Council from recovering the arrear dues 
on account of property tax from any such person, 
jointly or severally.”. 
(F) After section 64, the following sections shall be 
inserted, namely:–– 
‘64A. Constitution of Municipal Valuation 
Committee.—(1) The Council shall as soon as may be 
after the commencement of the Jan Vishwas  
(Amendment of Provisions) Act, 2026, and thereafter 
at the expiration of every third year, constitute a 
Municipal Committee by a public notice issued in such 
form and manner as may be specified by bye-laws. 
(2) The Municipal Valuation Committee shall 
consist of—  
(a) the Chairperson; and 
(b) such other members, being not less than two 
and not more than six, as the Council may 
determine.  
(3) The Chairperson and the other members of the 
Municipal Valuation Committee shall be appointed 
by the Council and the qualifications and experience 
requisite for their appointment, the manner of 
selection, and other terms and conditions of service 
including salaries and allowances, tenure of office 
shall be such as the Council may be rules determine. 
(4) The salaries and allowances of the Chairperson and 
other members shall be paid from the Municipal Fund. 
(5) The functions of the Municipal Valuation 
Committee shall be— 
(a) to make recommendations to the Council on 
matters relating to classification of vacant lands and 
buildings in any area of New Delhi into areas and 
groups of lands and buildings and fixation of base 
value per unit area of vacant land or per unit area of 
covered space of building and factors for increase or 
decrease, or for no increase or decrease, thereof;  
(b) to consider objections under section 64D, 
and to make recommendation thereon; and  
 
 

92 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
(c) to perform such other functions as the
Council may require. 
64B. Classification of vacant lands and buildings 
into areas and groups and specification of base unit 
area values therefor. —(1) The Municipal Valuation 
Committee shall recommend the classification of the 
vacant lands and buildings in any area of New Delhi  
into areas and groups of lands and buildings after 
taking into account all or any of the following 
parameters, namely:— 
(a) settlement pattern such as plotted housing,
group housing, colony with flats only, urban 
village, unauthorised colony, resettlement colony, 
rural village and non-residential areas;  
(b) availability of civic and social 
infrastructure; 
(c) access to roads;
(d) access to district centres, local shopping
centres, convenience shopping centres, and other 
markets;  
(e) land prices as may, from time to time, be 
notified by the  Government or  the  Delhi 
Development Authority; 
(f) use-wise category of any building including 
residential building, business building, mercantile 
building, building for  recreation and sports 
purposes, industrial building, hazardous building 
and public  purpose  building including 
educational, medical and such other institutional 
building and farmhouse, as may be specified by 
the Council; 
(g) in the case of buildings used for business, 
mercantile, recreation and sports, industrial, 
hazardous, storage or farmhouse purposes, the 
location of such buildings adjacent to such categories 
of streets, as may, subject to the provisions of  
sub-section (2), be specified by the Council; 
(h) the types of buildings which may be 
classified as pucca, semi-pucca or katcha, as may 
be specified by the Council;  
(i) the age-wise grouping of buildings as may 
be specified by the Council; and 
(j) such other parameters as may be considered 
relevant by the Municipal Valuation Committee. 

93 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
(2) The Municipal Valuation Committee shall
recommend, group-wise,–– 
(a) the base unit area value of any
owner-occupied vacant land, or any wholly 
owner-occupied building of pucca structure, 
constructed in the year 2025 or thereafter, and put 
to exclusive residential use; and 
(b) the factor for increasing or decreasing, or for
not increasing or decreasing, the base unit area 
values specified in clause (a), separately in respect 
of any or each of the parameters o f type of area,  
use, age, type of structure and occupancy status of the 
vacant land or building, as the case may be, subject to 
a lower limit of zero point five and an upper limit of 
ten point zero. 
64C. Notification of  classification of  vacant lands 
a
nd buildings into areas and groups and specification of 
base unit area values thereof and factors for increase or 
decrease.—(1) The Council shall, having regard to the 
r
ecommendations of the  Municipal Valuation 
Committee, declare its intention to  classify  vacant 
lands and buildings in New Delhi area into such areas 
a
nd groups of lands and buildings as the Council may, 
by public notice, specify, and shall also specify in such 
public 
notice the base value it proposes to specify per 
unit area of vacant land and per unit area of covered 
s
pace of building within each such group and also the 
f
actors for  increasing  or decreasing,  or  for  not 
increasing or decreasing, the base unit area values of 
v
acant lands and buildings referred to in clause (b) of 
sub-section (2) of section 64B.  
(2) The Council  shall, on receipt  of  any
r
epresentation from any group in any area affected by 
such classification of lands or buildings into any group 
or specification of the base unit area values of vacant 
lands or covered space of buildings within such groups, 
and the 
factors for increasing or decreasing, or for not 
inc
reasing or  decreasing, such  unit  area  values  of 
vacant lands or covered space of buildings, refer such 
representation to the Municipal Valuation Committee 
for reconsideration, and the decision of the Municipal 
Valuation Committee  thereon shall,  subject to  the 
provisions of section 64K, be binding on the Council. 
64D. 
Objection to  classification of vacant lands 
and buildings into areas and  groups and fixation of 
b
ase unit  area  values  and  factors for  increasing 
or decreasing  such  base unit area values. —(1) If 
a
ny owner or occupier of any vacant land or building in 
any area in respect of which a public notice has been 
issued under  section  64C  has any  objection to  the 
manner of classification of any group or groups, or  the  

94 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
base value per unit area of vacant land or the base value 
per unit area of covered space of building in any group, 
or the factors as specified in clause (b) of sub-section 
(2) of section 64B, he may submit to such officer of the
Council as may be authorised by the Council in this
behalf his objection in such form, and containing such
particulars, as may be prescribed, within thirty days
from the date of publication of such public notice, and
such objection shall be considered by t he Municipal
Valuation Committee, after giving the person
submitting the objection an opportunity of being heard.
(2) The procedure for hearing and disposal of
objections shall be such, as may be prescribed. 
(3) On the expiry of a period of thirty days fro m
the date of publication of the public notice under      
section 64C and after considering the 
recommendation of the Municipal Valuation 
Committee on the objections, if any, in accordance 
with the provisions of this section the Council shall, 
by public notice, specify group -wise the base unit 
area value of vacant land and the base unit area 
value of covered space of building and the factors 
referred to in clause ( b) of sub -section ( 2) of 
section 64B: 
Provided that the Council shall not alter the unit 
area values recommended by the Municipal 
Valuation Committee without the approval of the 
Government. 
64E. Final base unit area values of vacant land and 
of covered space of building. —(1) Subject to the 
provisions of section 115, the base unit area value of 
vacant land and the base unit area value of covered 
space of building in any group, as may be specified 
under sub-section (3) of section 64D, shall be final. 
(2) The Council shall publish the final base unit area
value of vacant land and the final base unit area value of 
covered space of building as aforesaid and the factors 
used for increasing or decreasing, or for not increasing or 
decreasing, the final base unit area values as aforesaid 
and shall make them available for inspection by any 
person free of charge and copies thereof also made 
available to any person on payment of cost. 
64F. Determination of annual value of covered 
space of building and of vacant land. —(1) The 
annual value of any covered space of building in any 
area shall be the amount arrived at by multiplying 
the total area of such covered space of building by 
the final base unit area value of such covered space 
and the relevant factors as referred to in clause (b) of 
sub-section (2) of section 64B.  

95 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
Explanation.—For the  purposes of  this  Act 
“covered space”, in relation to a building, shall mean 
the total floor area in all the floor thereof, including 
the thickness of walls, and shall include the spaces 
of covered verandah and courtyard, gangway, 
garage, common service area, stilt  parking  area, 
staircase, and  balcony including any area  projected 
beyond the plot boundary and such  other  space,  as 
may be prescribed. 
(2) The Council may require the total area of the 
covered space of building as aforesaid to be certified 
by an architect  registered under the Architects Act, 
1972 (20 of 1972), or any licensed architect, subject 
to such conditions as may be specified by the 
Council by a resolution in this behalf. 
(3) The annual value of any vacant land in any area 
shall be the amount arrived at by multiplying the total 
area of such vacant land by  the final base unit area 
value of such land and the relevant factors as referred 
to in clause (b) of sub-section (2) of section 64B. 
(4) If, in the case of any vacant land or covered 
space of building or any portion thereof is subject to 
different final base unit  area  values or is not self-
occupied, the annual value of each such portion shall 
be computed separately, and the sum of such annual 
values shall be the annual value for such vacant land 
or covered space of building, as the case may be. 
64G. 
Determination of annual value of building 
where land is exempted from property tax. —Where 
any vacant land is exempted from property tax under 
any law for the time being in force, the annual value of 
any building erected on such land, which is in existence 
for more  
than one  year and  is  not  entitled to  any 
exemption from such tax under this Act or any other 
law for the time being in force, shall be determined in 
accordance with the provisions of this Act. 
64H. Transitory provisions.—(1) Notwithstanding  
anything contained in this Act, as amended by the 
Jan Vishwas (Amendment of Provisions) Act, 2026, 
a tax on vacant land or covered space of building 
or both, levied under this Act immediately 
before the commencement of  the Jan Vishwas 
(Amendment of Provisions) Act, 2026, shall, on the 
commencement of the Jan Vishwas (Amendment of 
Provisions) Act, 2026, be deemed to be the tax on 
such vacant land or covered space of building or 
both, levied under this Act as amended by the Jan 
Vishwas (Amendment of Provisions) Act, 2026, and 
shall continue to be in force until such tax is 
revised in accordance with the provisions of this 
Act, as amended by the Jan Vishwas 
(Amendment of Provisions) Act, 2026. 

96 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in
sub-section ( 1), where assessment has not been 
finalised in respect of a vacant land or covered space 
of a building or both, on the date of the 
commencement of the Jan Vishwas (Amendment of 
Provisions) Act, 2026, the assessee may have such 
land or building or both, as the case may be, 
assessed on the basis of the annual value. 
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in this
Act or any other law for the time being in force, or 
in any judgment, any assessee, from whom tax dues 
are pending at the time of the commencement of the       
Jan Vishwas (Amendment of Provisions) Act, 2026 
may seek assessment on the basis of annual value for 
the period to which the dues pertain to: 
Provided that the benefit of any such scheme shall 
only be applicable to those assessees who apply to 
be so assessed within a period of six months of the 
declaration of final classification of areas and base 
unit area values of the property: 
Provided further that t he assessee shall have to 
pay the dues as assessed under this Act as amended 
by the Jan Vishwas (Amendment of Provisions) Act, 
2026, within a period of one year of the demand 
notice being served on him.  
64-I. Validity of base unit area values of vacant land 
and covered space of building. —The base unit area 
value of vacant land and the base unit area value of 
covered space of building in respect of a specified group 
in an area shall remain in force for a period of three 
years: 
Provided that till the revisio n of such base unit 
area values is completed, the existing base unit area 
values shall continue to be in force. 
64J. Indexation of unit area value. —If, for any 
reason, the base unit area value of any vacant land, or 
the base unit area value of any covered space of 
building, in any group in any area has not been 
revised on the completion of a period of three years 
from the date on which such base unit area values 
were last determined, it shall be lawful for the 
Council to increase or decrease the bas e unit area 
values according to the changes in the consumer price 
index of urban non -manual workers or such other 
suitable index as the Council may determine till such 
revision is made by the Municipal Valuation 
Committee, and to realise the amount of property tax 
for such covered space of building or vacant land on 
the basis of the revised base unit area values. 

97 
 (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
    64K. Hardship and Anomaly Committee.—(1) The 
Council shall, on the commencement of the  Jan 
Vishwas (Amendment of Provisions) Act, 2026, appoint, 
for such period, not exceeding one year, as the Council 
may think fit, a Hardship and Anomaly Committee with 
a view to considering the cases of hards hips or 
anomalies, if any, in respect of property tax imposed 
under the provisions of this Act as amended by the Jan 
Vishwas (Amendment of Provisions) Act, 2026. 
(2) The Hardship and Anomaly Committee shall 
consist of a professional from areas of finance, 
taxation, law or municipal management, as the 
Chairperson and four other members of whom one 
shall be a member of the Council to be nominated by 
the Council, one shall be the Chairperson of the 
Municipal Valuation Committee and one member 
shall be nominated from among the members of the 
Municipal Valuation Committee and one shall be the 
Secretary of the Council. 
(3) The Hardship and Anomaly Committee shall 
make recommendations to the Council on the 
petitions received from any group of affected 
persons regar ding any hardship or anomaly arising 
out of the property tax imposed, and the decision of 
the Council on such recommendation shall be final. 
(4) The procedure for the functioning of the 
Hardship and Anomaly Committee shall be such, as 
may be specified by the Council.’. 
(G) In section 65,— 
(i) in sub -section ( 1), after the proviso, the 
following proviso shall be inserted, namely:–– 
“Provided further that the Council may levy 
and collect service charges from properties of the 
Union of India at the rate of seventy-five per cent. 
of property tax leviable, for rendering municipal 
services.”; 
(ii) after sub -section ( 2), the following                            
sub-section shall be inserted, namely:–– 
“(3) Property owned by a Government company 
incorporated under the Companies Act, 2013 (18 of 
2013), or a society formed under the Societies 
Registration Act, 1860 (21 of 1860), functioning 
under the administrative control of the Central 
Government or any State Government, or any 
Union territory or a statutory or autonomous 
corporation constituted by an Act of Parliament or 
by an Act of any State Legislature, which has a 
corporate personality of its own, shall not be 
deemed to be the property of the Union.”. 
(H) For section 66, the following section shall be 
substituted, namely:–– 
 
 

98 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
‘66. Incidence of property taxes.—(1) The 
property tax  on any land  or building  shall  be 
primarily leviable upon the owner thereof. 
(2) The liability of the several owners of any land 
or building constituting a single unit of assessment, 
which is, or purports to be, severally owned in parts 
including flats or rooms, for payment of property tax 
or any instalment thereof, payable 
 during the period 
of such ownership, shall be joint and several: 
Provided that the Chairperson may apportion the 
amount of property tax on  such land  or  building 
among several co-owners: 
Provided further  that in any case  where the 
Chairperson is, for reasons to be recorded in writing, 
satisfied that the owner is not traceable, the occupier 
of 
such land or building for the time being shall be 
liable for payment of the property tax and shall also 
be ent
itled to the rebate, if admissible. 
(3) In the case of  any land  or building which  is 
not self-occupied  and where  the  owner is 
cons
trained by any law, order of the Government or 
or
der of a court  from recovering  the  tax  due,  such 
tax shall  be recovered  from the occupier  or 
occupiers, as the case may be: 
Provided that the owner shall continue to pay such 
amount of tax as he was liable to pay before the date of 
coming into force of the Jan Vishwas (Amendment of 
Provisions) Act, 2026 and only the balance amount, if 
any, shall be recovered from the occupier. 
(4) The property tax on any land or building, 
which is the property of the Council and the 
possession of which has been delivered under 
any agreement or licensing arrangement, shall 
be leviable upon the transferee or the licensee, as 
the case may be. 
(5) If any land has been let to a tenant or lessee 
for a term exceeding one year and such tenant has 
built upon such land, the property tax assessed in 
respect of such land and the building erected thereon 
shall be payable by such tenant or lessee, whether 
the land and the building are in the occupation of 
such tenant or lessee or a sub-tenant or sub-lessee of 
such tenant or lessee, as the case may be. 
Explanation.
—For the purposes of this 
section, “tenant” shall include any person deriving 
title to the land or the building erected upon such 
land, from the tenant, whether by operation of law or 
by transfer inter vivos.’.
“property tax and the penalty”, the words “and any 
other sum recoverable as arrears of property tax” shall 
be inserted. 
(I) Section 67 shall be omitted.
(J) In section 69, in the Explanation, after the wo rds

99 
 
 (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
    (K) After section 69, the following sections shall be 
inserted, namely:–– 
“69A. Submission of returns. —(1) The 
Chairperson shall, with a view to determining the 
annual values of vacant land and covered space of 
building in any area and the person primarily liable 
for the payment of property tax, by public notice, or 
by notice, in writing, require the owner and the 
occupier of such vacant land or covered space of 
building or any portion thereof, including such owner 
or the person computing the tax due under the 
provisions of section 69B, to furnish a return in such 
form, as may be specified by the bye-laws and within 
such time, not being less than thirty days from the 
date of publication of such notice, as may be specified 
therein, containing the following particulars, 
namely:— 
(a) the name of the owner and the occupier; 
(b) the number of the area, the name of the area, 
and the number and the sub -number of the 
premises of such vacant land or covered space of 
building, as the case may be; 
(c) whether the building is pucca, semi-pucca or 
katcha; 
(d) year of completion of construction of the 
building, or year or years of part construction 
thereof, as the case may be; 
(e) the use with reference to the provisions of 
clause ( f) of sub -section ( 1) of section 64B to 
which such vacant land or covered space of 
building is put or intended to be put; 
(f) the area of the vacant land and the covered 
space of the building with break -up of the area 
under various uses; 
(g) whether who lly owner-occupied or wholly 
tenanted, or partly owner -occupied and partly 
tenanted, and the areas thereof; and 
(h) such other particulars as may be specified by 
the bye-laws. 
(2) Every owner and every occupier as aforesaid 
shall be bound to comply with su ch notice and to 
furnish a return with a declaration that the statement 
made therein is correct to the best of knowledge and 
belief of such owner and occupier. 
(3) Whoever omits to comply with such 
requisition, shall in addition to any penalty to which 
he may be liable, be precluded from objecting to any 
assessment made by the Chairperson in respect of 
such land or building. 
 
 

100 
 
 (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
    (4) The Chairperson or any person subordinate to 
him and duly authorised by him in this behalf, in 
writing, or any licensed architect, may, with or 
without giving any previous notice to the owner or the 
occupier of any land or building, enter upon, and 
make any inspection or survey, and take measurement 
of such land or building with a view to verifying the 
statement made in the return for such land or building 
or for collecting the particulars referred to in             
sub-section (1) in respect of such land or building: 
Provided that no such entry shall be made except 
between the hours of sunrise and sunset. 
69B. Self-assessment and submission of return.—
(1) After the date of commencement of the Jan 
Vishwas (Amendment of Provisions) Act, 2026, any 
owner of any vacant land or covered space of building 
or any other person liable to pay the property tax or 
any occupier in the absence of such owner or person, 
shall file a return of self-assessment within sixty days 
from such commencement. 
(2) Such owner or other person or occupier, as the 
case may be, shall, thereafter, file the annual return 
only in those cases where there is a change in the 
position as compared to the previous return, within a 
period of three months after the end of the financial 
year in which the change in position has occurred. 
(3) Any owner of any covered space of building or 
vacant land or any other person liable to pay the 
property tax, or any occupier in the absence of such 
owner or person shall compute the tax due under 
section 61A or section 61C, as the case may be, and 
pay the same in equated quarterly instalment by the 
30th day of June, 30th day of September, 31st day of 
December and 31st day of March of the financial year 
for which the tax is to be paid and in the event of tax 
being paid in one lump sum for the said financial year 
by the 30th day of June, rebate of such percentage not 
exceeding fifteen per cent., as may be notified by the 
Council, of the total tax amount due shall be allowed. 
(4) Any owner of any vacant land or covered space 
of building or any other person liable to pay the 
property tax or any occupier in the absence of such 
owner or person, who computes such property tax 
under this section, shall, on such computation pay the 
property tax on such vacant land or covered space of 
building, as the case may be, together with interest, if 
any, payable under the provisions of this Act on— 
(a) any new building or existing building which 
has not been assessed; or 
(b) any existing building which has been 
redeveloped or substantiall y altered or improved 
after the last assessment, but has not been 
subjected to revision of assessment consequent 
upon such redevelopment or alteration or 
improvement as the case may be. 
 
 

101 
 
 (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
    (5) Such owner or person, as the case may be, shall 
furnish to the Chairperson a return of self-assessment in 
such form, and in such manner, as may be specified in 
the bye-laws and every such return shall be accompanied 
by proof of payment of property tax and interest, if any. 
(6) In the case of any new building for which an 
occupancy certificate has been granted, or which has 
been occupied, after the date of commencement of the 
Jan Vishwas (Amendment of Provisions) Act, 2026, 
such payment shall be made, and such return shall be 
furnished, within a period of thirty days of the expiry of 
the quarter in which such occupancy certificate is granted 
or such building is occupied, whichever is earlier. 
Explanation.—For the removal of doubts, it is 
hereby declared that the occupancy certificate may be 
provisional or final and may be for the whole or any 
part of the building and occupancy may be of the 
whole or any part of the building. 
(7) After the determination of the annual value of 
vacant land or covered space of building under 
section 64F or section 64G or revision thereof under 
section 69C has been made, any amount paid on self-
assessment under this section shall be deemed to have 
been paid on account of such determination under this 
Act as amended by the Jan Vishwas (Amendment of 
Provisions) Act, 2026. 
(8) If any owner or other person as aforesaid, liable 
to pay the property tax under this Act, fails to pay the 
same together with interest thereo n, if any, in 
accordance with the provisions of this section, he shall, 
without prejudice to any other action to which he may 
be subject, be deemed to be a defaulter in respect of such 
property tax, or interest, or both, remaining unpaid, and 
all the provisions of this Act applicable to such defaulter 
shall apply to him accordingly. 
(9) If, after the assessment of the annual value of any 
land or covered space, of building is finally made under 
this Act, the payment on self -assessment under this 
section is found to be less than that of the amount payable 
by the assessee, the assessee shall pay the difference 
within a period of two months from the date of final 
assessment, failing which recovery shall be made in 
accordance with the provisions of this Act, but, after the 
final assessment, if it is found that the assessee has paid 
excess amount, such excess amount shall be refunded: 
Provided that in any case where the amount of tax 
determined in the final assessment is more than the 
amount of tax paid under self -assessment, and the 
difference in the amount of tax is, in the opinion of 
the Chairperson, the result of wilful suppression of 
facts as defined in the bye-laws, the Chairperson may 
levy a penalty not exceeding thirty per cent. of such 
difference in the tax besides the interest thereon: 
 
 

102 
 
 (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
    Provided further that the levy of such penalty shall 
be in addition to any other punishment provided for 
under this Act: 
Provided also that the procedure for sending of 
notice, hearing of objection and determination of tax 
and penalties shall be such as may be specified in the 
bye-laws. 
(10) Where no notice is sent by the Chairperson 
under section 69C within a period of twelve months 
after the year to which such self-assessment relates, 
such self-assessment shall be regarded as assessment 
made under this Act: 
Provided that in any case, where there has been 
wilful suppression of facts, penalty up to thirty per 
cent. of the tax due may be imposed: 
Provided further that the procedure for sending of 
notice, hearing of objection and determination of tax 
and penalties shall be such as may be specified in the 
bye-laws. 
69C. Revision of assessment.—(1) The Chairperson 
may cause any revision to be made at any time in the 
annual value of any vacant land or covered space of 
building or any portion thereof in the following cases, 
namely:–– 
(i) where the nature of use changes; or 
(ii) where the nature of occupancy changes; or 
(iii) where a new building is erected or an 
existing building is redeveloped or substantially 
altered or improved during the period the annual 
value remains in force; or 
(iv) where, on an application made, in writing, 
by the owner or the per son liable to pay the 
property tax, it is established that during the period 
the annual value is in force, such value has been 
reduced by reason of any substantial demolition or 
has suffered depreciation on account of any 
accident or any calamity proved to the satisfaction 
of the Chairperson to have been beyond the control 
of such owner or person; or 
(v) where any vacant land or covered space of 
building or portion thereof is acquired by purchase 
or otherwise by the Central Government or the 
Government or the Council; or  
(vi) where any vacant land or covered space of 
building or portion thereof is sold or otherwise 
transferred to the Central Government or the 
Government or the Council; or 
(vii) where, upon the acquisition or transfer of a 
part of any vacant  land or covered space of 
building, a residual portion remains; or 
(viii) where it becomes necessary so to do for 
any other reason to be recorded in writing. 
 
 

103 
 
 (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
    (2) Before making any revision of the annual value 
under sub-section (1), the Chairperson shall give any 
owner, person or occupier as the case may be, 
affected by such revision, notice of not less than thirty 
days that he proposes to make the revision and 
consider any objections which may be made by such 
owner, person or occupier. 
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in            
sub-section (1), where the annual value of any vacant 
land or covered space of building— 
(i) has not, for any reason, been determined 
under this Act, the annual value of such vacant 
land or covered space of building, as the case may 
be, may be determined by the Chairperson at any 
time during the currency of the period of 
assessment in respect of such vacant land or 
covered space of building under section 64F or 
section 64G, as the case may be; or 
(ii) has been cancelled on the ground of 
irregularity, the annual value of such vacant land 
or covered space of building, as the case may be, 
may be determined by the Chairperson at any time 
after such cancellation and such annual value  of 
such vacant land or covered space of  building, as 
the case may be, shall remain in force until a fresh 
valuation or revision is made. 
(4) Any revision of annual value of any vacant land 
or covered space of building or any portion thereof 
under this section shall be made with reference to the 
group into which such vacant land or covered space 
of building or part thereof is classified under               
section 64B, and the annual value fixed per unit area 
of such vacant land or covered space of building for 
that group shall be applicable. 
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in the 
foregoing provisions of this section, no revision of the 
annual value of any vacant land or covered space of 
building under this section shall be made without 
giving the owner or the occupier of such vacant land 
or covered space of building a reasonable opportunity 
of being heard. 
(6) Where any revision of annua l value of any 
vacant land or covered space of building is made 
under this section, the order of such revision shall be 
communicated to the owner or the occupier of such 
vacant land or covered space of building within a 
period of ten days from the date of the order. 
(7) An appeal shall lie against an order under                     
sub-section ( 6) to an officer appointed by the 
Government, if preferred by the owner, person or the 
occupier of such vacant land or covered space of 
building within forty-five days from the date of the 
receipt of the order. 
 
 

104 
 
 (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
    69D. Power of Chairperson regarding 
assessment.—The Chairperson may, at any time— 
(a) make, suo motu, an assessment in any case 
where a return on the basis of self-assessment has 
not been filed; 
(b) revise any assessment where the information 
furnished in the return of self-assessment is found 
to be incorrect; 
(c) reopen any assessment even after the period of 
one year and not exceeding seven years in any case 
where it has been detected that there is wilful 
suppression of information or misclassification or 
misrepresentation or collusion or fraud or forgery in 
respect of assessment or any connection thereof; 
(d) impose a penalty not exceeding thirty per 
cent. of the difference in tax arising from non -
filing of a return in time, giving wrong information 
or misclassification or misrepresentation or 
collusion or fraud or forgery  in respect of 
assessment or any connection thereof; and 
(e) suo motu examine or review any assessment 
made under this Act for the purposes of satisfying 
himself as to the legality or propriety of such 
decision or order,  
he may order or direct such assessing authority to 
reassess the order or decision on such points as may be 
specified by him in the order.”. 
(L) For section 70, the following section shall be 
substituted, namely:–– 
“70. Assessment list.—(1) The Council shall maintain 
a Municipal Assessment Book, also known as 
assessment list, in such form, and in such manner, as may 
be specified in the bye-laws and shall make it available 
for inspection, free of charge, through electronic media 
or otherwise as may be specified by the bye-laws: 
Provided that the Municipal Assessment Book 
shall not be kept pending for any case for which any 
objection or appeal has been filed:  
Provided further that subject to such alterations as 
may be made thereafter in the assessment list under 
this Act, the ent ries in the assessment list shall be 
accepted as conclusive evidence for the purpose of 
assessing any tax levied under this Act, of the annual 
value of all lands and buildings to which such entries 
respectively relate. 
(2) The Chairperson may, at any time,  amend the 
Municipal Assessment Book for such reasons as may 
be specified in the bye-laws: 
Provided that no such amendment shall be made 
without giving any person affected a reasonable 
opportunity of being heard.”. 
 
 

105 
 
 (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
    (M) Sections 71 and 72 shall be omitted. 
(N) After section 72 as so omitted, the following 
section shall be inserted, namely:–– 
“72A. Assignment of property identification  code.—
(1) The Council shall cause to be maintained a register 
wherein the property identification code numbers by 
which any premises or part thereof shall be known, shall 
be recorded in respect of each such premises in the 
municipal area and such numbers shall be fixed in such 
manner as may be specified in the bye-laws. 
(2) When the property identification code numbers in 
respect of premises in any area of the Council have been 
determined, the Chairperson shall notify the same in 
such manner as may be specified in the bye-laws. 
(3) After the property identification code numbers 
in respect of premises in any area have been notified 
under sub-section (2), any person required under this 
Act or any other law to make any application to the 
Council for permission, licence or for payment of any 
tax or for payment of any dues for any service and for 
such other purposes as may be prescribed, shall at the 
time of making such application, mention in the 
application, the property identification code number 
determined under sub-section (1).”. 
(O) Section 73 shall be omitted. 
(P) Sections 77, 78, 79 and 80 shall be omitted. 
(Q) Section 88 shall be omitted. 
(R) For section 98, the following sections shall be 
substituted, namely:— 
“98. Time and manner of payment of taxes. —(1) 
Save as otherwise provided in this Act, any tax levied 
under this Act shall be payable on such dates, in such 
number of instalments and in such manner as may be 
determined by the bye-laws made in this behalf: 
Provided that if, on the commencement of the      
Jan Vishwas  (Amendment of Provisions)                                      
Act, 2026, there is any increase in the amount of 
property tax which was being paid or was payable 
immediately before such commencement of the       
Jan Vishwas (Amendment of Provisions) Act, 2026, 
the difference in the amount of property tax in excess 
of fifty per cent. above the tax being paid or being 
payable, shall be given effect to by stages covering a 
period of three years by dividing the amount of such 
increase in the property tax by three, the quotient 
being added to the amount of property tax which was 
payable immediately before the date of commencement 
of the Jan Vishwas (Amendment of Provisions) Act, 
2026, and to the amount of property tax which shall 
be payable respectively in each of the remaining two 
successive years after such addition. 
 
 

106 
 
 (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
    (2) Where any person liable for the payment of 
property tax under this Act has failed to pay–– 
(a) such tax by the date as specified in              
sub-section (3) of section 69B; or 
(b) the arrear of tax, interest and penalty, if any, 
and any other sum in the nature of tax up to the 
31st March of the preceding financial year, 
he shall be liable to pay simple interest at the rate of 
one and a half per cent. for every month or part of the 
month comprising the period from the expiry of the 
due date, till the amount is actually paid. 
98A. Punishment for wilful default in payment of 
property tax, furnishing wrong information in return 
of assessment, etc.—Whoever wilfully makes default 
in the payment of, or wilfully attempts in any manner 
whatsoever to evade, any tax, including amount of 
interest due and penalty levied under this Act, or 
furnishes any wrong information in the return of 
assessment, or wilfully fails to furnish in due time the 
return of property tax, or does not furnish information 
as asked for under any provision of this Act, he shall, 
without prejudice to any other penal provision under 
this Act to which he may be subject, be liable for 
penalty equal to fifty per cent. of the amount of tax so 
evaded or sought to be evaded: 
Provided that the penalties so imposed shall be in 
addition to, and not in derogation of, any liability in 
respect of the payment of tax which the defaulter may 
have incurred.”. 
(S) In section 99, in sub-section (1), in the proviso,– 
(i) in clause (a), at the end, the word “and” shall be 
inserted;  
(ii) in clause ( b), at the end, the word “and” shall 
be omitted; 
(iii) clause (c) shall be omitted. 
(T) In section 101, in sub-section (2),–– 
(i) for the word “twenty”, the word “thirty” shall 
be substituted; 
(ii) for the words, brackets and figures “the amount 
of the tax and the notice fee, payable under                
sub-section ( 2) of section 100”, the words “the 
amount of tax, notice fee and any interest that the 
defaulter may be liable to pay” shall be substituted. 
(U) After section 102, the following section shall be 
inserted, namely:— 
 
 

107 
 
 (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
    “102A. Recovery of property tax. —If, after the 
date of commencement of the Jan Vishwas  
(Amendment of Provisions) Act, 2026, any owner of 
any vacant land or covered space of building or any 
other person liable to pay the property tax or any 
occupier, in the absence of any such owner or person, 
does not file a return of self -assessment within a 
period of sixty days of the commencement of  the Jan 
Vishwas (Amendment of Provisions) Act, 2026, or if 
the person liable for the payment of property tax does 
not pay the amount due within the due date, such sum 
together with all costs and penalty may be recovered 
under a warrant, issued in the form set forth in the 
Seventh Schedule, by distress and sale of the movable 
property, or the attachment and sealing and sale of the 
immovable property, of the defaulter: 
Provided that the Chairperson shall not recover 
any sum the liability for which has been remitted on 
appeal under the provisions of this Act.”. 
(V) Sections 110 to 114 shall be omitted. 
(W) In section 116, in clau se ( a), the words and 
figures “or, as the case may be, within thirty days of the 
date on which an amendment is finally made under 
section 72” shall be omitted. 
(X) Section 125 shall be omitted. 
(Y) Sections 152 and 153 shall be omitted. 
(Z) Section 176 shall be omitted. 
(ZA) Sections 179 ,180 and 181 shall be omitted. 
(ZB) In section 193, sub-section (6) shall be omitted.  
(ZC) In section 209, sub-sections (3), (4), (5), (6) and 
(7) shall be omitted.  
(ZD) In section 213, sub-section (2) shall be omitted. 
(ZE) Section 214 shall be omitted. 
(ZF) In section 221, for the words and figures “Except 
as provided in section 222, no”, the word “No” shall be 
substituted. 
(ZG) Section 222 shall be omitted. 
(ZH) Section 234 shall be omitted. 
(Z-I) Section 241,— 
(i) in sub-section (1), the words and figures “or the 
provisions of section 245” shall be omitted; 
(ii) in sub -section (3), the words and figures “or 
under section 245” shall be omitted. 
 
 

108 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
(ZJ) Section 245 shall be omitted. 
(ZK) In section 254, in sub-section (1), clause (j) shall 
be omitted. 
(ZL) After section 254, the following section shall be 
inserted, namely:–– 
“254A. Appeals against penalties.–– (1) Any person 
on whom penalty has been imposed other than a penalty 
imposed under the proviso to sub-section (9) of section 
69B and clause (d) of section 69D under any of the 
provisions of this Act or any bye-laws or rules made 
thereunder may file an appeal to the appellate authority 
who shall be an officer designated by the Chairperson 
and who shall be not less than one rank above the 
officer who has imposed the said penalty. 
(2) Every appeal under sub-section (1) shall be 
filed within thirty days from the date of receipt of 
notice of the penalty, in such form and manner as 
may be specified by the bye-laws made by the 
Council. 
(3) The appellate authority may, after giving the 
appellant an opportunity of being heard, pass such 
summary order confirming, modifying or setting 
aside the penalty.  
(4) The appellate authority shall dispose of the 
appeal within a period of sixty days from the date of 
its filing. 
(5) The amount of penalty imposed under this Act, 
if not paid, may be recovered as an arrear of tax.”. 
(ZM) In section 265, sub-section (3) shall be omitted. 
(ZN) In section 267, sub-section (3) shall be omitted. 
(ZO) Sections 271 and 272 shall be omitted. 
(ZP) Section 275 shall be omitted. 
(ZQ) Sections 280 and 281 shall be omitted. 
(ZR) Sections 284 and 285 shall be omitted. 
(ZS) Sections 288 and 289 shall be omitted. 
(ZT) Section 291 shall be omitted. 
(ZU) Section 293 shall be omitted. 
(ZV) Section 296 shall be omitted. 
(ZW) Sections 298 and 299 shall be omitted. 
(ZX) For section 304, the following section shall be 
substituted, namely:–– 
“304. Disposal of dead animals.—Whenever any 
animal in the charge of any person dies, the person in 
charge thereof shall within a period of twenty -four 
hours convey the carcass to a place provided or 
appointed under section 263 for the final disposal of 
the carcasses of dead animals.”. 

109 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
(ZY) Section 307 shall be omitted. 
(ZZ) Sections 311, 312 and 313 shall be omitted. 
(ZZA) Sections 320, 321 and 322 shall be omitted. 
(ZZB) Section 324 shall be omitted. 
(ZZC) In section 346,–– 
(i) in the marginal heading, the words “or
molestation” shall be omitted; 
“(1A) The service of notices, summons and 
other documents referred to in sub-section (1) may 
be made by delivering or transmitting a copy 
thereof by speed post with registration and proof of 
delivery, addressed to the defendant or his agent 
empowered to accept the service or by speed post 
or by such courier services as are approved by 
the High Court or by any other means of 
transmission of documents (including fax 
message or electronic mail service) as may be 
provided by rules made by the High Court.”.   
“369. Penalties for certain offences. —(1) 
Whoever— 
(a) contravenes any provision of any  of the
sections, sub -sections, clauses, provisos or other 
provisions of this Act mentioned in column (1) of 
the Table in the Tenth Schedule; or  
(b) fails to comply with any order or direction
lawfully given to him or any requisition lawfully 
made upon hi m under any of the said sections, 
sub-sections, clauses, provisos or other provisions, 
shall be liable to penalty as specified in that behalf in 
column (3) of the said Table.  
(2) Any member, referred to in clauses (b) and (d)
of sub-section ( 1) of section 4, who knowingly 
acquires, directly or indirectly, any share or interest 
in any contract made with, or any work done for the 
Council, shall be deemed to have committed the 
offence made punishable under section 202 of the 
Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 (45 of 2023).”. 
(ii) the words “or molest” shall be omitted.
(ZZD) I n secti on 353, after sub-secti on (1), the 
following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:–– 
(ZZE) In section 363, for the words “rates or rent”, 
the words “rates, rents or penalty imposed under this 
Act” shall be substituted. 
(ZZF) For section 369, the following section shall be 
substituted, namely:–– 

110 
 
 (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
    (ZZG) For section 370, the following section 
shall be substituted, namely: –– 
“370. Provision for remedial action or            
warning notice. ––Notwithstanding anything 
contained in this Act or any rules made or                     
bye-laws framed thereunder, a remedial action or 
warning notice to the offender in the first instance 
of violation may be issued before imposition of 
penalty for the offences as mentioned in the 
Eleventh Sch edule: 
Provided that in such cases, on commission of 
the same offence by the same offender, or in case 
of failure to comply with the directions contained 
in the remedial action or warning notice within the 
stipulated time, penalty as prescribed in the Tent h 
Schedule shall be imposed without further notice:  
Provided further that the Central Government 
may, by notification, amend, modify, add the 
offences for which a remedial action or warning 
notice to the offender in the first instance may be 
issued before imposition of penalty.”.  
(ZZH) Section 372 shall be omitted.  
(ZZ-I) For section 382, the following section shall 
be substituted, namely: –– 
“382. Duties of police officer. –– It shall be the 
duty of all police officers, to assist the Chairperson, 
municipal officers and other municipal employees, 
or any other officer authorised by the Chairperson, 
in discharge of their duties and functions under  this 
Act or any rule, regulation or bye -law made 
thereunder and to assist them in the exercise             
of their lawful authority for prevention of 
commission of any contravention under this Act or 
otherwise.”.  
(ZZJ) For section 390, the following sect ion shall 
be substituted, namely: –– 
“390. Penalty for breaches of bye -laws.— (1) 
Any bye-law made under this Act may provide that 
a contravention thereof shall be liable to penalty 
which may extend to five hundred rupees.  
(2) Any such bye -law may also pro vide that a 
person contravening the same shall be required to 
remedy so far as lies in his power, the mischief, if 
any, caused by such contravention.”.  
(ZZK) The Fourth Schedule shall be omitted.  
 
 
 

111 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
(ZZL) For the Tenth Schedule, the following 
Schedules shall be substituted, namely: –– 
‘THE TENTH SCHEDULE 
[See section 369( 1)] 
PENALTIES 
Explanation.–– The entries in the second column 
of the following Table below under the heading 
“subject” are not intended as definitions of the 
offences prescribed in the provisions mentioned in the 
first column of the Table or even as abstracts of those 
provisions, but are inserted merely as reference to 
subject thereof:— 
Section, 
sub-section, 
clause or 
proviso 
Subject Penalty 
(in 
Rupees) 
(1) (2) (3) 
Section 75 Failure to give notice 
of erection of new 
building, etc. 
500/- 
Section 89 Prohibition of 
advertisement without 
permission. 
5000/- 
Section 148 Use for non-domestic 
purposes of water 
supplied for domestic 
purposes. 
1000/- 
Section 164 Waste or misuse of 
water. 
500/- 
Section 173 Injury to, or 
interference with free 
flow of contents of 
municipal drain or 
drains communicating 
with municipal drain. 
1000/- 
Section 174, 
sub-section (2) 
Private drain not to be 
connected with 
municipal drain without 
notice. 
1000/- 
Section 175 Non-compliance with 
requisition for drainage 
of undrained premises. 
500/- 
Section 177 Non-compliance with 
requisition of 
maintenance of drainage 
works for any group or 
block of premises. 
500/- 

112 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
(1) (2) (3) 
Section 178 500/- 
Section 183 1000/- 
Section 193, 
sub-section (1) 
500/- 
Section 193, 
sub-section (2) 
  Non-compliance with 
directions to close or 
limit the use of private 
drains in certain cases. 
 Connection with 
municipal water works or 
drains without written 
permission. 
Execution of work by 
a person other than 
a licensed plumber. 
Failure to 
furnish when required, 
name of licensed 
plumber employed. 
500/- 
Section 193, 
sub-section (8) 
Licensed plumbers 
not to contravene 
bye-laws or execute 
work carelessly or 
negligently, etc. 
500/- 
Section 194 Prohibition of wilful 
or neglectful acts 
relating to water or 
sewage works. 
500/- 
Section 218, 
sub-section 
(1), clauses 
(a) and (b)
Failure to comply 
with requisition to show 
cause for alteration of 
street or for a 
appearance before the 
Chairperson. 
200/- 
Section 219, 
sub-section 
(1) 
Failure to comply 
with requisition on 
owner of private street 
or owner of adjoining 
land or building to level, 
etc., such street. 
100/- 
Section 221, 
sub-section 
(1) 
Prohibition of 
projections upon streets, 
etc. 
5000/- 
Section 221, 
sub-section 
(2) 
Failure to comply 
with requisition to 
remove projections from 
streets. 
5000/- 
Section 224, 
sub-section 
(1) 
Erection, etc., of 
structures of fixtures 
which cause obstruction 
in streets. 
5000/- 
Section 225 Deposit, etc., of 
things in streets. 
500/- 

113 
 
 (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
    (1) (2) (3) 
Section 227, 
sub-sections 
(1) and (2) 
Tethering of animals 
and milking of cattle in 
public streets. 
1000/- 
Section 231, 
sub-section 
(2) 
Name of street and 
number of house not to 
be destroyed or defaced, 
etc. 
1000/- 
Section 232, 
sub-section 
(1) 
Failure to comply 
with requisition to 
repair, protect or enclose 
a dangerous place. 
1000/- 
Section 251, 
sub-sections 
(1) and (2) 
Non-compliance with 
provision as to 
completion certificates, 
occupation or use, etc., 
without permission. 
1000/- 
Section 258, 
sub-sections 
(1) and (2) 
Failure to comply 
with requisition to 
remove structures which 
are in ruins or l ikely to 
fall. 
1000/- 
Section 259, 
sub-section 
(1) 
Failure to comply 
with requisition to vacate 
buildings in dangerous 
conditions, etc. 
1000/- 
Section 264 Failure to provide for 
collection, removal and 
deposit of refuse and 
provision of receptacles. 
500/- 
Section 265, 
sub-section (1) 
Failure to collect and 
remove filth and 
polluted matter. 
500/- 
Section 266 Failure to comply 
with requisition for 
removal of rubbish, etc., 
from premises used as 
market, etc. 
1000/- 
Section 267, 
sub-section (1) 
Keeping rubbish and 
filth for more than 
twenty-four hours, etc. 
100/- 
Section 267, 
sub-section (2) 
Allowing filth to flow 
in streets. 
200/- 
Section 273 Failure to provide 
latrines for premises 
used by large number of 
people and to keep them 
clean and in proper 
order. 
500/- 
  
 

114 
 
 (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
    (1) (2) (3) 
Section 274 Failure to comply 
with requisition to 
provide latrines for 
market, cattle shed, cart 
stand, etc., and to keep 
them clean and in proper 
order. 
500/- 
Section 277 Failure to comply 
with requisition to 
improve buildings unfit 
for human habitation 
5000/- 
Section 292 Disposal of infected 
articles without 
disinfection. 
500/- 
Section 294 Sale of food or drink 
contravention restriction 
prohibition Chairperson. 
500/- 
Section 295 Removal or use of 
water from wells and 
tanks in contravention of 
prohibition of 
Chairperson. 
500/- 
Section 297 Removal of 
infectious corpses in 
contravention of the 
provisions. 
500/- 
Section 302, 
sub-section 
(1) 
Failure to comply 
with requisition to close 
a burning or burial 
ground. 
1000/- 
Section 302, 
sub-section 
(2) 
Burning or burial of 
corpses in a burning or 
burial ground after it has 
been closed. 
1000/- 
Section 303 Removal of corpses 
by other than prescribed 
routes. 
500/- 
Section 304, 
clause (b) 
Failure to convey the 
carcass of a dead animal 
to a place provided or 
appointed for disposal 
within twenty-four hours. 
100/- 
Section 308, 
sub-sections 
(1), (2) and (3) 
Commission of 
nuisances. 
500/- 
Section 309 Failure to comply 
with requisition for 
removal or abatement of 
nuisance. 
1000/- 
  
 

115 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
(1) (2) (3) 
Section 310, 
sub-section 
(4) 
1000/- 
Section 310, 
sub-section 
(5) 
1000/- 
Section 314 1000/- 
Section 315 500/- 
Section 317, 
sub-section 
(1) 
200/- 
Section 318, 
sub-sections 
(1) and (2)
Dogs not to be at 
large in a street without 
being secured by a 
chain lead. 
Ferocious dogs at 
large without being 
muzzled, etc. 
Failure to  comply 
with requisition to 
render buildings, wells, 
etc., safe. 
Failure to  comply 
with requisition to 
enclose land  used for 
improper purposes. 
Sale in municipal 
markets without 
permission. 
Use of places as 
private markets without 
a licence  and use of 
places other  than a 
municipal slaughter 
house as slaughter 
houses. 
500/- 
Section 318, 
sub-section 
(2), proviso 
(a) 
Non-compliance with 
conditions imposed by 
Chairperson. 
200/- 
Section 325 Carrying on 
butcher’s, fishmonger’s 
or pouluters trade 
without licence, etc. 
200/- 
Section 326 Establishment of 
factory, etc., without 
permission. 
5000/- 
Section 327 Certain things not to 
be kept and certain 
trades and operations 
not to be carried on 
without a licence. 
1000/- 
Section 328, 
sub-section 
(3) 
Keeping, 
abandonment or 
tethering of animals, etc. 
200/- 

116 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
(1) (2) (3) 
Section 329, 
sub-section 
(5) 
Use of premises in 
contravention of 
declaration. 
500/- 
Section 330 Hawking articles for 
sale without a licen ce, 
etc. 
200/- 
Section 331 Keeping a lodging 
house, eating house, tea 
shop, etc., without  
licence or contrary to 
licence. 
1000/- 
Section 332 Keeping open theatre, 
circus or other place of 
public amusement 
without licence or 
contrary to terms of 
licence. 
1000/- 
Section 339, 
sub-section 
(5) 
Failure to produce  
licence or written 
permission. 
100/- 
Section 346 Obstruction in 
execution of work. 
500/- 
Section 353, 
sub-section 
(4) 
Failure to comply 
with requisition to state 
the name and address of 
owner of premises. 
200/- 
Section 404 Obstruction of 
Chairperson or a 
member, etc. 
500/- 
Section 405 Removal of any mark 
set up for indicating 
level, etc. 
200/- 
Section 406 Removal, etc., of 
notice exhibited by or 
under orders of the 
Council, Chairperson, 
etc. 
100/- 
Section 407 Unlawful removal of 
earth, sand or other 
material or deposit of 
any matter or making of 
any encroachment from 
any land vested in the 
Council. 
500/- 

117 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
THE ELEVENTH SCHEDULE 
(See section 370) 
Table 
Section, 
sub-section, 
clause or 
proviso 
(1) 
148 
227 sub-
sections (1) 
and (2) 
264 
265 sub-
section (1) 
267 sub-
section (1) 
267 sub-
section (2) 
310 sub-
section (4) 
310 sub-
section (5) 
317 sub-
section (1) 
328 sub-
section (3) 
330 
339 sub-
section (5) 
Subject 
(2) 
Use for non-domesti c purposes of 
water supplied for domestic purposes 
Tethering of animals and milking 
of cattle in public streets 
Failure to provide for collection, 
removal and deposit  of refuse  and 
provision of receptacles 
Failure to collect and remove filth 
and polluted matter 
Keeping rubbish and filth for more 
than twenty-four hours, etc. 
Allowing filth to flow in streets 
Dogs not to be at lar ge in a street 
without being secured by a chain lead 
Ferocious d ogs at lar ge without 
being muzzled, etc. 
Sale in municipal markets without 
permission 
Keeping, abandonment or tethering 
of animals, etc. 
Hawking articles for sale without a 
licence, etc. 
Failure to produce licence or 
written permission,’.
54. 1997 17 The Lalit 
Kala 
Akadami 
(Taking Over 
of 
Management) 
Act, 1997 
Sections 8 and 9 shall be omitted. 

118 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
55. 2002 60 The Metro 
Railways 
(Operation 
and 
Maintenance) 
Act, 2002 
(A) In section 2, in sub-section (1),––
(i) after clause ( b), the following clause shall be
inserted, namely:—
‘(ba) “demonstration” means a public display
of group  opinion  or feelings  involving  protest, 
rallies, marches, gathering or  procession,  sit-ins, 
picketing, etc., which may 
cause disruption in 
metro operation and inconvenience to public;’;
(ii) after clause (s), the following clause shall be
inserted, namely:—
‘(t) “ticket” means any authority to travel 
which includes ticket, token, smart card, multi -
modal transport card or  any other travel 
instrument authorised by metro rail 
administration in this behalf. ’. 
(B) In section 10, for the words, figures and brackets
“section 21 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860)”, the 
words, brackets and figures “clause ( 28) of section 2 of 
the 
Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 (45 of 2023)” shall 
be substituted. 
(C) In CHAPTER  XI,  for the  Chapter  heading
“O
FFENCE AND  PENALTIES”, the heading 
“OFFENCES AND CONTRAVENTIONS ” shall be 
substituted. 
(D) In section 59, in sub-section  (1), for the words
“punis
hable with fine  which  may extend  to  five 
hundred rupees”, the words “liable to penalty which 
may extend to two thousand and five hundred rupees ” 
shall be substituted. 
(E) In section 60, in sub-section (1), for the words
“punishable with fine which may extend  to  five 
hundred rupees”, the words “liable to penalty which 
may extend to two thousand and five hundred rupees”
shall be substituted. 
(F) In 
section 62, in sub-section (3), for the words
“punishable with imprisonment for a term which may 
extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to 
one thousand rupees, or with both”, the words “liable 
to penalty which may extend to ten thousand rupees” 
shall be substituted. 
(G) In section 64,––
(i) in sub -section ( 1), for the words “punishable
with imprison ment for a term which may extend to 
three months, or with fine which may extend to two 
hundred and fifty rupees, or with both”, the words 
“liable to penalty which may extend to five thousand 
rupees” shall be substituted;  

119 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
(ii) in sub-section (2), for the words “fine which
may extend to five hundred rupees, or with both”, the 
words “fine which may extend to twenty thousand 
rupees” shall be substituted. 
(H) In section 71, for the words “punishable with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to six 
months”, the words “liable to penalty which may extend 
to twenty thousand rupees” shall be substituted. 
(I) In section 72, for the words “punishable with 
imprisonment which may extend to two months or with 
fine up to two hundred and fifty rupees, or with both”, 
the words “liable to penalty which may extend to 
twenty thousand rupees” shall be substituted. 
(J) In section 73, for the words “punishable with fine 
which may extend to five hundred rupees, and in default 
of payment of fine, he shall be punishable with 
imprisonment which may extend to six months: 
Provided that, in the absence of special and 
adequate reasons to the contrary to be mentioned in the 
judgment of the court, such fine shall not be less than 
one hundred rupees”, the words “liable to penalty which 
may extend to five thousand rupees” shall be 
substituted. 
(K) In section 75, for the words “punishable for a 
term which may extend to three months, or fine which 
may extend to five hundred rupees, or with both”, the 
words “liabl e to penalty which may extend to twenty-
five thousand rupees” shall be substituted. 
(L) In section 76, the words “with imprisonment for 
life or” shall be omitted. 
(M) After section 79, 
the following sections shall be 
inserted, namely:— 
“79A. Adjudication of  penalties.— (1) For the 
purpose of adjudicating penalties under sections 59, 
60, 62, 63, sub-section (1) of section 64, sections 70, 
71, 72, 73 and 75, the Metro Railway Administration 
may appoint an officer managing the functioning of 
metro station as an adjudicating officer for holding an 
inquiry and imposing penalties in such manner as 
may be specified: 
Provided that the Metro Railway Administration 
may appoint as many adjudicating officers as may be 
required. 
(2) Whoever is aggrieved by an  order of the
adjudicating officer under sub-section (1) may, within 
thirty days from the receipt of such order, prefer an 
appeal to such officer at least one rank higher than the 
adjudicating officer as may be appointed by the Metro 
Railway Administration as an appellate authority, in 
such form and manner as may be specified. 

120 
 
 (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
    (3) An appeal may be admitted after the expiry of 
the period of thirty days if the appellant satisfies the 
appellate authority that he had sufficient cause for not 
preferring the appeal within that period.  
(4) Where an appeal is preferred against any order 
of the adjudicating officer under sub -section ( 1), it 
shall not be entertained by the appellate authority 
unless the person has deposited the amount of the 
penalty imposed by the adjudicating officer. 
(5) The appellate authority may, after giving the 
parties to the appeal an opportunity of being heard, 
pass such an order as he may think fit. 
(6) An appeal under sub -section ( 2) shall be 
disposed of within sixty days from the date of filing. 
79B. Consequence of failure to pay penalty.— (1) 
Where any person fa ils to pay the penalty imposed 
under section 79A within such period as may be 
prescribed, such failure shall constitute an offence 
and such person shall be punishable in accordance 
with the provisions of this section.  
(2) Where the failure to pay penalty relates to a 
contravention under sub-section (1) of section 59 or 
sub-section ( 1) of section 60, the person shall, on 
conviction, be punishable with fine which may extend 
to five thousand rupees. 
(3) Where the failure to pay penalty relates to a 
contravention under sub-section (3) of section 62, the 
person shall, on conviction, be punishable with fine 
which may extend to twenty thousand rupees or with 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to six 
months, or with both. 
(4) Where the failure to pay penalty relates to a 
contravention under section 63, the person shall, on 
conviction, be punishable with fine which may extend 
to ten thousand rupees.  
(5) Where the failure to pay penalty relates to a 
contravention under sub-section (1) of section 64, the 
person shall, on conviction, be punishable with fine 
which may extend to ten thousand rupees  or with 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to three 
months, or with both. 
(6) Where the failure to pay penalty relates to a 
contravention under section 70, the person shall, on 
conviction, be punishable with fine which may extend 
to fifteen thousand rupees. 
(7) Where the failure to pay penalty relates to a 
contravention under section 71 or section 72, the 
person shall, on conviction, be punishable with fine 
which may extend to thirty thousand rupees. 
(8) Where the failure to pay penalty relates to a 
contravention of section 73, the person shall, on 
conviction, be punishable with fine which may extend 
to ten thousand rupees: 
 
 

121 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
Provided that  in the absence  of special  and 
adequate reasons to the contrary to be mentioned in 
the judgment of the court, such fine shall not be less 
than one thousand rupees. 
(9) Where the failure to pay penalty relates to a 
contravention of  section 75, the  person shall,  on 
conviction, be punishable with fine which may extend 
to fifty thousand rupees.”. 
(N) In section 82, in sub-section (1), for the words and
figures “offence mentioned in sections 59, 61, sections 
65 to 68, 71 to 79”, the words and figures “offences 
mentioned in sections 59, 61, 65, 66, 67, 68, 74, 76, 77, 
78, and 79” shall be substituted. 
(O) After section 85, the following section shall be
inserted, namely:— 
“85A. Compounding of certain offences. ––(1) 
Any offence punishable with imprisonment for a term 
less than four years under this Act may, either before 
or after the institution of proceedings, be 
compounded by the metro railway administration, for 
such amount as the Central Government, may by 
notification, specify in this behalf. 
(2) Where an offence has been compounded under
sub-section ( 1), the offender if in custody shall be 
discharged and no further proceeding shall be taken 
against him in respect of such offence. 
(3) No offence shall be compoundable if the
offender, by reason of a previous conviction, is liable 
to an enhanced punishment or punishment of a 
different kind for such offence.”. 
(P) In section 90, for the words, figures and brackets
“section 21 of the Indian Penal Code 
(45 of 1860)”, the words, brackets and figures  “clause 
(28) of section 2 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023
(45 of 2023)” shall be substituted.
56. 2003 13 The Control 
of National 
Highways 
(Land and 
Traffic) Act, 
2002 
(A) In section 27,––
(i) in sub-section (1), for the word “fine”, the word
“penalty” shall be substituted; 
(ii) in sub-section (2), for the word “fine” occurring 
at both places, the word “penalty” shall be substituted. 
(B) In section 37, in sub-section (4), for the words “fine
imposed by the Highway Administration which shall not 
be less than five hundred rupees”, the word s “penalty 
imposed by the Highway Administration which shall not 
be less than two thousand rupees” shall be substituted. 
(C) In section 38, in sub-section (4), for the word “fine”
wherever it occurs, the word “penalty” shall be 
substituted.  
(D) In section 39,––

122 
 
 (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
    (i) in sub -section ( 1), for the words “shall be 
punishable with imprisonment for a term which may 
extend to one year, or with fine which shall not be less 
than one thousand rupees per square metre of so 
occupied highway land but which shall not exceed 
two times the cost of suc h highway land, or with 
both”, the words “shall be liable to penalty imposed 
by the Highway Administration which shall not be 
less than five thousand rupees per square metre of the 
land  unauthorisedly occupied by him but which may 
extend to the cost of such land” shall be substituted;  
(ii) in sub -section (2), for the words “Any court, 
convicting a person ”, the words “The Highway 
Administration, imposing liability on a person” shall 
be substituted;  
(iii) sub-section (3) shall be omitted. 
57. 2003 17 The Offshore 
Areas Mineral 
(Development 
and 
Regulation) 
Act, 2002 
(A) In section 23,— 
(i) in sub-section (1), clause (b) shall be omitted;  
(ii) in sub-section (1), in the Explanation, for the 
words, brackets and letters “clauses ( a) and (b)”, the 
word, brackets and letter “clause ( a)” shall be 
substituted; 
(iii) for sub -sections ( 3) and ( 4), the following   
sub-sections shall be substituted, namely:— 
“(3) Whoever contravenes the provisions of the 
rules made under clause (pa) of sub-section (2) of 
section 35 shall be punishable with imprisonment 
for a term which may extend to two years or wi th 
fine which shall not be less than fifty lakh rupees, 
which may extend to one crore rupees, or with 
both, and in the case of a continuing contravention, 
with additional fine which may extend to five lakh 
rupees for every day during which such 
contravention continues after conviction for the 
first such contravention. 
(4) Where any person fails to pay the penalty or 
the additional penalty, as the case may be, imposed 
under the provisions of section 28 within ninety 
days of such imposition, he shall be punis hable 
with imprisonment for a term which may extend to 
two years, or with fine which may extend to twice 
the amount of the penalty or additional penalty so 
imposed or with both.”. 
(B) For Chapter V, the following Chapter shall be 
substituted, namely:— 
“CHAPTER V 
PENALTY AND ADJUDICATION 
28. Penalty and adjudication.––(1) Whoever,— 
(a) contravenes any provision of this Act, other 
than those covered under sub-sections (1), (2) and (3) 
of section 23; 
 
 

123 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
(b) contravenes the provisions of the rules made 
under this  Act [except  rules  made  under 
clause (pa) of sub-section (2) of section 35]; 
(c) contravenes the terms and conditions of the 
operating right granted to him; or 
(d) fails to  furnish the  required data,  or 
information, or document under sub-section (2) of 
section 5 in the manner provided therein, 
shall be liable to penalty which shall not be less than ten 
lakh rupees but which may extend to one crore rupees. 
(2) Where any person continues contravention
under sub -section ( 1), even after direction of 
adjudicating officer appointed under sub -section (3) 
regarding such contravention, he shall be liable to 
additional penalty of one lakh rupees for every day 
during which such contravention continues. 
(3) For the purpose of adjudication of penalties under
sub-section (1), the Central Government shall appoint an 
officer not below the rank of Deputy Secretary to the 
Government of India to be the adjudicating officer, for 
holding an inquiry and imposing the penalty in the 
manner as may be prescribed: 
Provided that the Central Government may appoint 
as many adjudicating officers as may be required: 
Provided further that no such penalty shall be 
imposed without giving the person concerned a 
reasonable opportunity of being heard.”. 
(C) In section 34,—
(i) in sub -section (1), for the words “the Central
Government”, the words “an officer not below the 
rank of Joint Secretary to the Government of India, 
appointed by the Central Government as an appellate 
authority” shall be substituted; 
(ii) in sub -sections ( 2) and ( 3), for the words
“Central Government” occurring at both the places, 
the words “appellate authority” shall be substituted. 
(D) In section 35, in sub-section (2),––
(i) for clause ( m), the  following clause shall be
substituted, namely:— 
“(m) the manner of holding an inquiry and 
imposing penalty under sub-section (3) of section 28;”; 
(ii) clauses (n) and (o) shall be omitted.
58. 2003 36 The 
Electricity 
Act, 2003 
(A) For section 139, the following section shall be
substituted, namely:— 
“139. Negligently breaking or damaging works.—(1) 
Whoever, negligently breaks, injures, throws down or 
damages any material connected with the supply of 
electricity, shall be liable to  penalty not less than five 
thousand rupees but which may extend to one lakh 
rupees, to be imposed by an officer duly authorised by 
the Appropriate Government. 

124 
 
 (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
    (2) Where a person imposed penalty under           
sub-section ( 1) is again found guilty under that        
sub-section, such person shall, for the second or 
subsequent offence, be punished with fine not less 
than five thousand rupees but which may extend to 
one lakh rupees.”. 
(B) In section 140, for the words “which may extend 
to ten thousand rupees”, the words “which shall not be 
less than five thousand rupees but may extend to one 
lakh rupees” shall be substituted. 
(C) Section 141 shall be omitted. 
(D) In section 142,–– 
(i) for the marginal heading, the following 
marginal heading shall be substituted, namely:— 
“Penalty by Appropriate Commission for non -
compliance of order or direction.”; 
(ii) for the words “or any direction issued by the 
Commission”, the words “or any order or direction 
issued under the Act” shall be substituted; 
(iii) for the words “which shall not exceed one lakh 
rupees”, the words “shall not be less than ten thousand 
rupees but may extend to five lakh rupees” shall be 
substituted; 
(iv) for the words “may extend to six thousand 
rupees”, the words “shall not be less than one 
thousand rupees but may extend to ten thousand 
rupees” shall be substituted. 
(E) In section 146,–– 
(i) for the words “imprisonment for a term which may 
extend to three months or with fine which may extend to 
one lakh rupees, or with both”, the words “fine which 
shall not be less than ten thousand rupees but which may 
extend to ten lakh rupees” shall be substituted; 
(ii) for the words “which may extend to five 
thousand rupees”, the words “which shall not be less 
than one thousand rupees but which may extend to 
fifty thousand rupees” shall be substituted. 
(F) In section 152,–– 
(a) for sub -section (1), the following sub -section 
shall be substituted, namely:–– 
“(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the 
Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023            
(46 of 2023), the Appropriate Government or any 
officer authorised by it in this behalf sh all accept 
from any consumer or person who committed or 
who is reasonably suspected of having committed 
an offence under sections 135, 138 and 140 of this 
Act, a sum of money by way of compounding of 
the offence as specified in the Table below: 
 
 

125 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
Table 
Sl. 
No 
Section Rate at which the sum of 
money for compounding 
to be collected 
(1) (2) (3) 
1. 135. Theft of
Electricity
Per Kilowatt 
(KW)/Horse Power (HP) 
or part thereof for Low 
Tension (LT) supply and 
per Kilo Volt Ampere 
(KVA) of contracted 
demand for High Tension 
(HT) 
(i) Industrial
Service 
Twenty thousand 
rupees 
(ii) 
Commercial 
Service 
Ten thousand rupees 
(iii) 
Agricultural 
Service 
Two thousand rupees 
(iv) Other
Services 
Four thousand rupees 
Ten thousand rupees 2. 138.
Interference
with 
meters or
works of
licensee
3. 140. Penalty
for
 intentionally
injuring works
Ten thousand rupees:
Provided that the Appropriate Government may, 
by notification in the Official Gazette, amend the 
rates specified in the Table above.”; 
(b) in sub -section ( 3) for the words  and figures
“section 300 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 
(2 of 1974)”, the words  and figures “section 278 of 
the Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023 (46 of 
2023)” shall be substituted. 
59. 2005 29 The Private 
Security 
Agencies 
(Regulation) 
Act, 2005 
(A) Section 12 shall be omitted.
(B) In section 20, sub-section (2) shall be omitted.

126 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
60. 2005 53 The Disaster 
Management 
Act, 2005 
(A) In section 51, for the words “imprisonment for a
term which may extend to one year or with fine, or with 
both, and if such obstruction or refusal to comply with 
directions results in loss of lives or imminent danger 
thereof, shall on conviction be punish able with 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to two 
years”, the words “imprisonment for a term which may 
extend to six months or with fine, or with both, and if 
such obstruction or refusal to comply with directions 
results in loss of lives or imminent danger thereof, shall 
on conviction be punishable with imprisonment 
for a term which may extend to one year” shall be 
substituted. 
(B) In section 52, for the words “two years”, the
words “six months” shall be substituted. 
(C) In section 53, for the words “two years”, the
words “one year” shall be substituted. 
61. 2006 19 The 
Petroleum and 
Natural Gas 
Regulatory 
Board      
Act, 2006 
Section 44 shall be omitted. 
62. 2006 34 The Food 
Safety and 
Standards 
Act, 2006 
(A) In section 38, in sub-section (5), for the words and
figures “Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974)”, 
the words  and figures “Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha 
Sanhita, 2023 (46 of 2023)” shall be substituted. 
(B) In section 39, in the proviso, for the words “guilty
of an offence under this Act and shall be punishable with 
fine”, the words “liable to penalty” shall be substituted. 
(C) In section 41, in sub-section (2), for the words and
figures “Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974)”, 
the words  and figures “Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha 
Sanhita, 2023 (46 of 2023)” shall be substituted. 
(D) In section 60, for the words “six months”, the
words “three months” shall be substituted. 
(E) In section 62, for the words “resists, obstructs, or
attempts to obstruct, impersonate, threaten, intimidate or 
assault”, the words “impersonates, threatens, intimidates 
or assaults” shall be substituted. 
(F) In section 68, in sub-section (3),––
(i) in sub -clause ( a), for the words  and figures
“sections 193 and 228 of the Indian Penal Code  
(45 of 1860)”, the words and figures “sections 229 
and 267 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 
(45 of 2023)” shall be substituted;  

127 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
(ii) in sub -clause ( b) for the words  and figures
“sections 345 and 346 of the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974)”, the words  and figures 
“sections 384 and 385 of the Bharatiya Nagarik 
Suraksha Sanhita, 2023 (46 of 2023)” shall be 
substituted. 
(G) In section 71, in sub-section (3), for the words and
figures “sections 193 and 228, and for the purposes of 
section 196 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860), it shall 
be deemed to be a civil court for all the purposes of section 
195 and Chapter XXVI of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 
1973 (2 of 1974)”, the words and figures “sections 229 and 
267, and for the purposes of section 233 of the Bharatiya 
Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 (45 of 2023), it shall be deemed to be 
a civil court for all the purposes of section 215 and Chapter 
XXVIII of the Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023 
(46 of 2023)” shall be substituted. 
(H) In section 73,––
(i) for the words  and figures “Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974)”, the words  and figures 
“Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023 (46 of 
2023)” shall be substituted; 
(ii) for the words, figures and brackets “provisions 
of sections 262 to 265 (both inclusive)” , the words, 
figures and brackets “provisions of sections 285 to 
288 (both inclusive)” shall be substituted. 
(I) In section 74, in sub-section (1), for the words and
figures “Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974)”, 
the words  and figures “Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha 
Sanhita, 2023 (46 of 2023)” shall be substituted. 
(J) In section 75, for the words and figures “Code of
Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 19 74)”, the words  and 
figures “Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023 (46 
of 2023)” shall be substituted. 
(K) In section 78, for the words  and figures
“notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section (3) 
of section 319 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 
(2 of 1974)”, the words, figures and brackets 
“notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section (3) 
of section 385 of the Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha 
Sanhita, 2023 (46 of 2023)” shall be substituted. 
(L) In section 79, for the words  and figures “section
29 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973    
(2 of 1974)”, the words  and figures “section 23 of the 
Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023 (46 of 2023)” 
shall be substituted. 
(M) In section 87, for the words  and figures “section
21 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860)”, the words, 
brackets and figures “clause ( 28) of section 2 of the 
Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 (45 of 2023)” shall be 
substituted. 

128 
 
 (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
63. 2006 41 The 
Cantonments 
Act, 2006 
(A) In section 49,––  
(i) in sub-section (1), in clause ( b), the words “or 
toll whereby the said tax or toll respectively” shall be 
omitted; 
(ii) sub-section (3) shall be omitted. 
(B) In section 81, in sub -section (6), for the words 
“punishable with fine”, the words “liable to penalty” 
shall be substituted. 
(C) In section 82, in sub -section (2), for the words 
“punishable with fine which may extend to five thousand 
rupees”, the words “liable to penalty which may extend 
to five thousand rupees” shall be substituted.  
(D) In section 88, in sub-section (2),— 
(i) for the words “punishable with fine”, the words 
“liable to penalty” shall be substituted;   
(ii) the word “sum” shall be omitted. 
(E) In Chapter V, sub -heading “Octroi, terminal tax 
and toll” shall be omitted. 
(F) Sections 90, 91 and 92 shall be omitted. 
(G) In section 116, in sub -section (2), for the words 
“punishable with fine”, the words “liable to penalty” 
shall be substituted.  
(H) In section 143, in sub -section (2), for the words 
“punishable with fine which may extend to two thousand 
five hundred rupees, and, in the case of a continuing  
offence, to an additional fine which may extend to two 
hundred fifty rupees for every day after the first during 
which the failure has continued”, the words “liable to 
penalty which may extend to two thousand and five 
hundred rupees and, in the case of continuing default, to 
an additional penalty which may extend to two hundred 
and fifty rupees for each day after the first during which 
the default continues” shall be substituted.  
(I) In section 145, in sub -section (2), for the words 
“punishable with fine which may extend to five thousand 
rupees, and, in the case of a continuing offence, with an 
additional fine which may extend to two hundred fifty 
rupees for each day after the first during which the 
offence continues”, the words “liable to penalty which 
may extend to five thousand rupees and, in the case of 
continuing default, to an additional penalty which may 
extend to two hundred and fifty rupees for each day after 
the first during which the default continues” shall be 
substituted.  
(J) In section 155, in sub-section (4),— 
(i) in sub -clause ( b), for the words “shall be 
punishable with fine which may extend to one 
thousand rupees”, the words “shall be liable to 
penalty which may extend to two thousand rupees” 
shall be substituted; 
 
 

129 
 
 (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
    (ii) in the proviso, for the words “no person shall 
be punishable”, the words “no person shall be liable” 
shall be substituted. 
(K) In section 166, for the words and figures “which 
he is required to make by section 164 or section 165 shall 
be punishable with fine which may extend to one 
thousand rupees.”, the words and figures “required 
under section 164 or section  165 shall be liable to 
penalty which may extend to one thousand rupees” shall 
be substituted.   
(L) In section 174, in the long lin e, for the words 
“punishable with fine”, the words “liable to penalty” 
shall be substituted.  
(M) In section 197, in clause ( b), for the words 
“punishable with fine”, the words “liable to penalty” 
shall be substituted.  
(N) In section 244, for sub-section (2), the following 
sub-section shall be substituted, namely:— 
“(2) Any person who contravenes the provisions of 
sub-section (1) shall be liable to penalty which may 
extend to one lakh rupees for the first contravention, and 
for any second and subsequent offence, he shall on 
conviction be punishable with fine which may extend to 
two lakh rupees and in the case of continuing 
contravention with an additional fine of twenty thousand 
rupees for every day during which the contravention 
continues, after the date it comes to the notice.”. 
(O) In section 247, in the long line, for the words 
“punishable with fine which may extend to fifty 
thousand rupees and the cost of sealing the illegal 
construction and its demolition.”, the words “liable to  
penalty which may extend to fifty thousand rupees for 
the first contravention, and for any second and 
subsequent offence, he shall on conviction be punishable 
with fine which may extend to one lakh rupees and the 
cost of sealing the illegal constructions and its 
demolition” shall be substituted. 
(P) In section 259, in sub -section (2), for the words 
“punishable with fine”, the words “liable to penalty” 
shall be substituted.   
(Q) For section 263, the following section shall be 
substituted, namely:— 
“263. Digging of p ublic land.—Any person who, 
without the written permission of the Chief Executive 
Officer, digs up the surface of any open space in the 
cantonment that is not private property, shall be          
liable to penalty which may  extend to two        
thousand and five hundred rupees and, in the case of 
a continuing default, to an additional penalty which 
may extend to five hundred rupees for every                
day, after the first, during which the default 
continues.”. 
 
 

130 
 
 (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
    (R) In section 269, for sub-section (3), the following 
sub-section shall be substituted, namely:—  
“(3) Any person who omits to comply with any 
condition imposed by the Chief Executive Officer 
under clause ( a) of sub -section (2) shall be liable to 
penalty which m ay extend to five thousand rupees 
and, in the case of a continuing default, to an 
additional penalty which may extend to one thousand 
rupees for every day, after the first, during which the 
default continues.”. 
(S) In section 271, in sub -section (1), for t he words 
“by or under this Act, without obtaining licence therefor, 
or while the licence therefor is suspended, or after the 
same has been cancelled, shall be punishable with fine 
which may extend to five thousand rupees and, in the 
case of a continuing of fence, with an additional fine 
which may extend to five hundred rupees for every day 
after the first during which the offence is continued”, the 
words “under this Act, without obtaining such licence, 
or while the licence is suspended, or after it has been 
cancelled, shall be liable to penalty which may extend to 
five thousand rupees and, in the case of a continuing 
default, to an additional penalty which may extend to 
five hundred rupees for every day after the first during 
which the default continues” shall be substituted.  
(T) For section 272, the following section shall be 
substituted, namely:—  
“272. Penalty for using unlicensed market or 
slaughter-house.—Any person who, knowing that 
any market or slaughter-house has been opened to the 
public without a licence when such licence is required 
under this Act, or that the licence granted therefor is 
suspended or has been cancelled, sells or exposes for 
sale any article in such market, or slaughters any 
animal in such slaughter -house, shall be liable to 
penalty which may extend to five thousand rupees 
and, in the case of a continuing default, to an 
additional penalty which may extend to five hundred 
rupees for every day after the first during which the 
default continues.”. 
(U) In section 276, in sub -section (3), for the words 
“punishable with fine”, the words “liable to penalty” 
shall be substituted.   
(V) For sections 281 and 282, the following sections 
shall be substituted, namely:— 
“281. Carrying on trade, etc., without licence or in 
contravention of section 280. —Any person who 
carries on any trade, calling, or occupation for which 
a licence is required, without obtaining such licence, 
or while the licence is suspended, or after it has been 
cancelled; and any person who, after receiving a 
notice under section 280, uses or allows to be used   
 
 

131 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
any building or place in contravention thereof, shall 
be liable to penalty which may extend to five 
thousand rupees and, in the case of a continuing 
default, to an additional penalty which may extend to 
five hundred rupees for every day after the first during 
which the default continues. 
282. Feeding animals on dirt, etc. —Any person
who feeds, or allows to be fed, on filthy or deleterious 
substances any animal kept for the purpose of 
supplying milk to, or intended to be used as food for, 
the inhabitants of a cantonment, or who allows such 
an animal to graze in any place where grazing has 
been prohibited for sanitary reasons by public notice 
issued by the Board, shall be liable to penalty which 
may extend to one thousand rupees.”. 
(W) In section 283, in sub -section (4), for the words
“punishable with fine”, the words “liable to penalty” 
shall be substituted.   
(X) In section 284, in sub -section (3), for the words
“punishable with fine”, the words “liable to penalty” 
shall be substituted.   
(Y) In section 289,—
(i) in sub-section (1), in the long line, for the words
“punishable with fine”, the words “liable to penalty” 
shall be substituted; 
(ii) in sub-section (2), for the words “punishable  
with fine which may extend to two hundred-fifty 
rupees”, the words “liable to penalty which may 
extend to five hundred rupees” shall be substituted; 
(iii) in sub-section (3), for the words “punishable  
with fine”, the words “liable to penalty” shall be 
substituted.  
(Z) In section 290,—
(i) in sub-section (5), in the long line, for the words
“punishable with fine”, the words “liable to penalty” 
shall be substituted; 
(ii) in su b-section ( 6), in the long line, for the
words “punishable with fine”, the words “liable to 
penalty” shall be substituted.  
(ZA) In section 291, in clause ( b), for the words 
“punishable with fine”, the words “liable to penalty” 
shall be substituted.  
(ZB) In section 295, in sub-section (2), for the words 
“punishable with fine which may extend to five thousand 
rupees, and, in the case of a continuing offence, with an 
additional fine which may extend to two thousand rupees 
for each day after the first durin g which the offence 
continues”, the words “liable to penalty which may extend 
to five thousand rupees and, in the case of a continuing 

132 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
default, to an additional penalty which may extend to 
two thousand rupees for every day after the first during 
which the default continues” shall be substituted. 
(ZC) For section 296, the following section shall be 
substituted, namely:— 
“296. Discharging fire-works, fire-arms, etc.—(1) 
Whoever in a cantonment discharges any fire -arm, 
detonates or blasts in such manner as to cause or to be 
likely to cause danger to any person passing by or 
dwelling or working in the neighbourhood, or risk of 
injury to property, shall be punishable with fine which 
may extend to ten thousand rupees. 
(2) Whoever engages in any game or carries on
work such as quarrying, timber cutting or building 
operations, or lets off fire -balloons or fire -works, in 
such manner as to cause or to be likely to cause 
danger to any person passing by or dwelling or 
working in t he neighbourhood, or risk of injury to 
property, shall be liable to penalty which may extend 
to two thousand and five hundred rupees.”.  
(ZD) For section 313, the following section shall be 
substituted, namely:— 
“313. Penalty for obstruction.— Whoever 
obstructs any person acting on behalf of the Board, 
who is not a public servant within the meaning of 
clause (28) of section  2 of the  Bharatiya  Nyaya 
Sanhita,  2023 (45 of 2023) or  any  person  with 
whom the Board has  lawfully contracted,  in  the 
execution  of his duty or of anything which  he  is 
empowered  or required to  do  by  virtue  or  in 
consequence of any of the provisions of this Act or 
any 
rule, bye-law or order made thereunder,  or in 
fulfilment of his contract, as the case may be, shall 
be liable to penalty which may extend to five 
thousand rupees.”. 
(ZE) For section 333, the following section s shall be 
substituted, namely:— 
“333. General penalty.—Whoever, in any case in 
which a penalty is not expressly provided by this Act, 
fails to comply with any notice, order or requisition 
issued under any provision thereof, or otherwise 
contravenes any of the provisions of this Act, shall be 
liable penalty whi ch may extend to five thousand 
rupees, and, in the case of a continuing failure or 
contravention, to an additional penalty which may 
extend to five hundred rupees for every day after the 
first during which the failure or contravention 
continues.  

133 
 
 (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
    333A. Adjudication of penalties.—(1) Any penalty 
under sections 81, 82, 88, 116, 143, 145, 155, 166, 
174, 197, 244, 247, 259, 263, 269, 271, 272, 276, 281, 
282, 283, 284, 289, 290, 291, 295, 313, 333 and                       
sub-section ( 2) of section 296 of this Act or any      
bye-laws made thereunder, shall be imposed by an 
order issued by the Chief Executive Officer: 
Provided that no such penalty shall be imposed 
without giving the person concerned a reasonable 
opportunity of being heard. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in any 
other law for the time being in force, for the purposes 
of this Act, and for any bye -laws made or amended 
under this Act as amended by the Jan Vishwas  
(Amendment of Provisions) Act, 202 6, the word 
penalty, unless the context otherwise requires, shall 
mean a cost of civil nature imposed by                        
Chief Executive Officer, for commission or non -
commission of an act prohibited or prescribed by this 
Act and it shall not be considered a conviction, and 
the imposition of a fixed penalty shall not be 
considered criminal proceedings. 
(3) Where there is no fine or imprisonment 
prescribed against a contravention in this Act, the 
same shall be treate d as a civil offence, and no 
criminal proceedings under this Act shall be initiated 
in the first instance against the said contravention: 
Provided that nothing contained herein shall 
preclude or adversely affect the right of the Chief 
Executive Officer to initiate a criminal proceeding 
against the offender under any other law for the time 
being in force in case the penalty is not paid with in 
time by the offender. 
(4) Every penalty imposed shall be paid within 
thirty days of the notice issued by the Chief Executive 
Officer and whoever fails to pay the penalty within 
the time prescribed or does not file an appeal against 
such penalty, shall, in addition to any other liability 
under any law for the time being in force, also be 
liable to be punished with a fine  may extend up to 
twice the amount of the penalty imposed.  
(5) Any person aggrieved by an order of the 
adjudicating officer under sub-section (1) may, prefer 
an appeal to the President Cantonment Board as an 
appellate authority. 
(6) Every appeal under sub -section ( 5) shall be 
filed within thirty days from the date of receipt of the 
notice of the penalty. 
(7) The appellate authority may, after giving the 
appellant an opportunity of being heard, pass such 
summary order confirming, modifying or setting aside 
the penalty. 
 
 

134 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
(8) The appellate authority shall dispose of the
appeal within a period of sixty days from the date of 
its filing. 
(9) In the event of non-payment of penalty amount
upheld by the appellate authority within a period of 
fifteen days of receipt of the order of the appellate 
authority, the notice shall be liable to be punished 
with a fine which may extend to twice the penalty 
imposed.”. 
(ZF) In section 348, in clause (3), for the word 
“, tolls” shall be omitted.  
(ZG) In section 349, for sub-section (1), the following 
sub-section shall be substituted, namely:— 
“(1) Any bye-law made by a Board under this Act 
may provide that any person who contravenes such 
bye-laws shall be liable to penalty,—  
(a) which may extend to five thousand rupees; or
(b) which may extend to five thousand rupees
and, in the case of a continuing contravention, to 
an additional penalty which may extend to five 
hundred rupees for every day after the first during 
which such contravention continues; or  
(c) which may extend to  one hundred fifty
rupees for every day during which the 
contravention continues after the receipt of a 
notice from the Board or Chief Executive Officer 
by the person contravening the bye -law requiring 
such person to discontinue such contravention.”. 
64. 2007 41 The Carriage 
by Road Act, 
2007 
In section 18, in sub-section (1), for the words and 
figures “section 3, section 13, or a notification issued 
under section 14”, the words and figures “section 13 
or a notification issued under section 14, or carr ies 
goods of dangerous or hazardous nature while being 
in contravention of section 3,” shall be substituted. 
65. 2009 27 The 
Prevention 
and Control of 
Infectious and 
Contagious 
Diseases in 
Animals Act, 
2009 
(A) In section 2,—
(i) for clause ( a), the following clauses shall be
substituted, namely:— 
‘(a) “adjudicating officer ” means the 
Sub-Divisional Magistrate or any other Executive 
Magistrate appointed by the State Government or the 
Union territory administration under 
section 34A; 
(aa) “animal” means,— 
(i) cattle, buffalo, sheep, goat, yak, Mithun,
elephant; 

135 
 
 (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
    (ii) dog, cat, pig, horse, camel, ass, mule, 
poultry, bees; 
(iii) fish, molluse, crustacean, amphibian; 
and 
(iv) any other animal or bird as the Central 
Government may, by notification, specify; 
(ab) “appellate authority ” means the District 
Magistrate or the Additional District Magistrate 
appointed by the State Government or the Union 
territory administration under section 34B;’; 
(ii) after clause (g), the following clause shall 
be inserted, namely:— 
‘(ga) “disease ” or “scheduled disease ” 
means any disease specified in the 
Schedule;’; 
(iii) for clause (k), the following clauses shall 
be substituted, namely:— 
‘(k) “local authority ” means the 
Municipal Corporation, Municipal Council, 
Municipality, Cantonment Board, Notified  
Area Committee, Gram Panchayat or any 
other authority for the time being vested by 
law with the control and administration of 
any matters within a specified local area; 
(ka) “notification” means notification 
published in the Official Gazette and the 
expression “notify” or “notified” shall be 
construed accordingly;’; 
(iv) for clauses ( o), ( p), ( q) and ( r), the 
following clauses shall be substituted, 
namely:— 
‘(o) “registered veterinary practitioner ” 
means a person having a Bachelor ’s Degree 
in Veterinary Science or Veterinary Science 
and Animal Husbandry from a recognised 
University and registered with the Veterinary 
Council of India or the State Vete rinary 
Council;  
(oa) “State Government ” means the 
Government of a State or the Union territory 
administration;  
(ob) “University” shall have the meaning 
assigned to it in clause (f) of section 2 of the 
University Grants Commission Act, 1956           
(3 of 1956); 
 
 

136 
 
 (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
    (p) “Veterinarian” means a person having 
a Bachelor’s Degree in Veterinary Science or 
Veterinary Science and Animal Husbandry 
from a recognised University and registered 
with the Veterinary Council of India or the 
State Veterinary Council and appointed as 
such by the State Government or the Union 
territory administration under clause ( a) of 
section 3; 
(q) “Veterinary Officer” means a pe rson 
having a Bachelor ’s Degree in Veterinary 
Science or Veterinary Science and Animal 
Husbandry from a recognised University and 
registered with the Veterinary Council of 
India or the State Veterinary Council and 
appointed as such by the State Government 
or the Union territory administration under 
clause (b) of section 3; 
(r) “Village Officer” means the livestock 
supervisor, by whatever name called, or any 
other officer designated or authorised as 
such, by notification, by the Central 
Government or the State Government.’. 
(B) In section 4,— 
(i) in sub-section (1), for the words “Every owner, 
or any other person, non-governmental organisation, 
public bodies or the village panchayat, in -charge of 
any animal”, the words “Every owner, any other 
person, non -governmental organisation or local 
authority, in -charge of any animal,” shall be 
substituted; 
(ii) in sub -section ( 3), for the words “report the 
matter to the Veterinary Officer”, the words “report 
the matter to the Veterinary Officer, State 
Government and Central Government in such form 
and manner as may be prescribed by the Central 
Government” shall be substituted. 
(C) In section 5, for sub -section ( 3), the following 
sub-section shall be substituted, namely:— 
“(3) The Village Officer shall ensure that all 
infected animals are segregated and kept in a place 
away from other healthy animals.”. 
(D) In section 6,— 
(i) in sub-section (3), for the words “public notice”, 
the word “notification” shall be substituted; 
(ii) in sub-section (4), for the word “obligatory”, 
the word “mandatory” shall be substituted; 
(iii) after sub-section (6), the following sub-section 
shall be inserted, namely:— 
 
 

137 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
“(7) The Director shall submit a report to the 
State Government and the Central Government 
regarding vaccinated animals and such other facts, 
in such form, manner and within such time, as may 
be prescribed by the Central Government.”. 
(E) In section 7, in sub-section (3), in clause (b), after
the words “certificate of vaccination”, the words “issued 
by the Veterinarian, Veterinary Officer or registered 
veterinary practitioner” shall be inserted. 
(F) In section 8, after sub -section (3), the following
sub-section shall be inserted, namely:— 
“(4) The Director shall submit a report to the State 
Government and the Central Government regarding 
marking and issuing certifi cates in respect of 
vaccinated animals in such form and manner as may 
be prescribed by the Central Government.”. 
(G) In section 13, the words “or attempt to bring” and
the words “known to be” shall be omitted. 
(H) In section 26,—
(i) for the words “dispose it of”, the words “dispose
of it” shall be substituted; 
(ii) after the words “as may be prescribed”, the
words “by the Central Government” shall be inserted. 
(I) In section 27, in sub -section (2), after the words
“as may be prescribed”, t he words “by t he Central 
Government” shall be inserted. 
(J) In section 29, in  sub-section (3), for the words, 
figures and brackets  “in the manner provided by the 
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974) for the 
recovery of fines imposed by a Court”,  the words, 
figures and  l etter  “in the manner provided in 
section 34A” shall be substituted. 
(K) In section  30, in  the  opening  portion,  for the 
words “All Municipal, Panchayat or Village Officers 
and all  officers of  the rural and  dairy  development, 
revenue, agriculture,”, the words “Any Village Officer, 
Registered practitioners,  Veterinarian  or  Veterinary 
Officer of the” shall be substituted. 
(L) For sections 32 and 33, the following sections 
shall be substituted, namely:— 
“32. Penalty for contravention and obstruction in 
duty.––Any person who contravenes any  provision of 
this Act, the rules,  orders and notifications  made or 
i
ssued thereunder or obstructs the Competent Officer in 
performing his duties,  shall be liable  to  penalty  not 
exceeding ten thousand  rupees and  in  the  case  of a 
continuing contravention, to an additional penalty which 
may extend to five thousand rupees for every day during 
which such contravention is continues. 

138 
 
 (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
    33. Penalty for placing animal carcass in open 
place and in water source.––(1) No person shall,–– 
(a) place or cause to be placed the carcass of any 
animal or any part thereof, in any river, canal, tank, 
pond, well, stream, lake, spring, ocean, or any 
other water source; or 
(b) dispose of or permit the carcass of any such 
animal to remain in any open place in a manner 
likely to cause spread of infection or 
environmental contamination. 
(2) Any person who contravenes the provisions of 
sub-section ( 1) shall be liable to penalty not 
exceeding ten thousand rupees. 
(3) Where such contravention results in 
contamination of any water source referred to in     
sub-section (1) or spread of disease to other animals, 
the adjudicating authority may make an order for,–– 
(a) the recovery of charges for carcass disposal, 
disinfection and cleaning of water source or place, 
as the case may be, from the person adjudicated 
upon; and 
(b) the temporary suspension or cancellation of 
any livestock handling or trade licence held by the 
person adjudicated upon, for a period no t 
exceeding six months. 
(4) The provisions of this section shall be in 
addition to, and not in derogation of, the provisions of 
sections 271 and 272 of the Bharatiya Nyaya         
Sanhita, 2023 (45 of 2023). 
33A. Adjudication of penalties.–– For the purpose 
of adjudication of penalties under the provisions of 
this Act and the rules made thereunder, the State 
Government or the Union territory administration, as 
the case may be, shall authorise the Sub -Divisional 
Magistrate or any other Executive Magist rate, as the 
case may be, having jurisdiction, as an adjudicating 
officer for holding an inquiry and imposing penalty, 
in the manner as may be prescribed by the Central 
Government: 
Provided that no such penalty shall be imposed 
without giving the person co ncerned a reasonable 
opportunity of being heard. 
33B. Appeal.–– (1) Whoever aggrieved by the order, 
passed by the adjudicating officer under section 33A 
may, within thirty days from the date of receipt of order, 
prefer an appeal to the District Magistrate or the 
Additional District Magistrate specially authorised in 
this behalf by the State Government or the Union 
territory administration, as the case may be, as an 
appellate authority, in such form and manner as may be 
prescribed by the Central Government. 
 
 

139 
 
 (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
    (2) An appeal may be admitted after the expiry of 
the period of thirty days if the appellant satisfies the 
appellate authority that he had sufficient cause for 
not preferring the appeal within that period.  
(3) The appellate authority may, after giving the 
parties to the appeal an opportunity of being heard, 
pass such order as he may think fit.  
(4) An appeal under sub -section ( 1) shall be 
disposed of within sixty days from the date of filing.  
33C. Imprisonment for no n-payment of      
penalty.––Where any person fails to pay the penalty 
imposed under the provisions of this Act and the 
rules made thereunder within ninety days of such 
imposition, he shall be punishable with 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to thre e 
months or with fine which may extend to twice the 
amount of the penalty, or with both.  
33D. Remittance of penalty. ––(1) Where an 
adjudicating officer imposes a penalty under the 
provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder, 
the amount of the said  penalty realised shall be 
credited to the Fund of the Animal Welfare Board of 
India constituted under the Prevention of Cruelty to 
Animals Act, 1960 (59 of 1960).  
(2) The Board shall utilise the amount realised 
through penalty for the implementation of th e 
provision of the Act and the rules made thereunder 
in such manner as may be prescribed by the Central 
Government.”. 
(M) In section 39, for the words “statistics on 
scheduled diseases, and vaccination”, the words 
“'statistics on scheduled diseases, vaccin ation, animal 
breeding or any other matter related to health” shall be 
substituted. 
(N) In section 42, in sub -section (2),— 
(i) after clause ( a), the following clauses shall be 
inserted, namely: — 
“(aa) the form, manner and time of reporting 
the matter to t he Veterinary Officer, State 
Government and Central Government under sub -
section (3) of section 4; 
(ab) the form, manner and time of submission 
of report to the State Government and the Central 
Government regarding vaccinated animals under 
sub-section (7) of section 6;  
 
 

140 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
(ac) the form and manner of submission of 
report to the State Government and the Central 
Government regarding marking and issuing 
certificate for vaccinated animals under 
sub-section (4) of section 8;”; 
(ii) after clause (c), the following clauses shall be
inserted, namely:— 
“(ca) the manner of recovery of cost regarding 
measures under sub-section (3) of section 29; 
(cb) the manner of holding an inquiry and imposing 
penalties under section 33A; 
(cc) the form and manner of preferring appeal 
to the appellate authority  against  the order of 
adjudicating officer under sub-section (1) of 
section 33B;”. 
(O) For the Schedule, the following Schedule shall be
substituted, namely:— 
“THE SCHEDULE 
[See clause (ga) of section 2 and section 38] 
(a) Multiple species diseases
1. Anthrax.
2. Aujeszky’s disease.
3. Bluetongue.
4. Brucellosis.
5. Crimean Congo haemorrhagic fever.
6. Echinococcosis/hydatidosis/granulosis/
multiloculosis.  
7. Epizootice heamorrhagic disease virus.
8. Foot and mouth disease.
9. Heartwater.
10. Japanese encephalitis.
11. Leishmaniasis
12. Leptospirosis.
13. Mycobacterium tuberculosis complex.
14. New world screwworm (Cochliomyia
hominivorax). 
15. Nipah Virus infection.
16. Old world screwworm  
(Chrysomyabezziana).  
17. Paratuberculosis.

141 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
18. Q fever.
19. Rabies.
20. Rift Valley fever.
21. Rinderpest.
22. Trichinellosis.
23. Trypnosomiasis
24. Tularemia.
25. Vesicular stomatitis.
26. West Nile fever.
(b) Bovine diseases
1. Bovine anaplasmosis.
2. Bovine babesiosis.
3. Bovine genital campylobacteriosis.
4. Bovine spongiform encephalopathy.
5. Bovine viral diarrhoea.
6. Contagious bovine pleuropneumonia.
7. Enzootic bovine leucosis.
8. Haemorrhagic septicaemia.
9. Infectious bovine rhinotracheitis/infectious
pustular vulvovaginitis.
10. Lumpy skin disease.
11. Malignant catarrhal fever.
12. Mycoplasmosis
13. Theileriosis.
14. Trichomonosis.
(c) Sheep and goat diseases
1. Caprine arthritis/encephalitis.
2. Contagious agalactia.
3. Contagious caprine pleuropneumonia.
4. Enzootic abortion of ewes (ovine
chlamydiosis).
5. Maedi-visna.
6. Nairobi sheep disease.
7. Ovine epididymitis (Brucella ovis).
8. Peste des petits ruminants.
9. Salmonellosis (S. abortusovis).
10. Scrapie.
11. Sheep pox and goat pox.

142 
 
 (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
    12. Theileriosis. 
(d) Equine diseases 
1. African horse sickness. 
2. Contagious equine metritis. 
3. Dourine. 
4. Equine encephalomyelitis (Eastern). 
5. Equine encephalomyelitis (Westem). 
6. Equine infectious anaemia. 
7. Equine Influenza. 
8. Equine piroplasmosis. 
9. Equine rhinopneumonitis. 
10. Equine viral arteritis. 
11. Glanders. 
12. Surra (Trypanosoma evansi). 
13. Venezuelan equine encephalomyelitis. 
(e) Swine diseases 
1. African swine fever. 
2. Classical swine fever. 
3. Nipah virus encephalitis. 
4. Porcine cysticercosis. 
5. Porcine reproductive and respiratory syndrome. 
6. Swine vesicular disease. 
7. Transmissible gastroenteritis. 
(f) Avian diseases 
1. Avian chlamydiosis. 
2. Avian infectious bronchitis. 
3. Avian infectious laryngotracheitis. 
4. Avian mycoplasmosis (M. gallisepticum). 
5. Avian mycoplasmosis (M. synoviae). 
6. Duck virus hepatitis. 
7. Fowl cholera. 
8. Fowl typhoid. 
9. Highly pathogenic avian influenza and low 
pathogenic avian influenza in poultry. 
10. Infectious bursal disease (Gumboro disease). 
11. Marek’s disease. 
12. Newcastle disease. 
 
 

143 
 
 (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
    13. Pullorum disease. 
14. Turkey rhinotracheitis. 
(g) Lagomorph diseases 
1. Myxomatosis. 
2. Rabbit haemorrhagic disease. 
(h) Bee diseases 
1. Acarapisosis of honey bees. 
2. American foulbrood of honey bees. 
3. European foulbrood of honey bees. 
4. Small hive bettle infestation (Aethina tumida). 
5. Tropilaelaps infestation of honey bees. 
6. Varroosis of honey bees. 
(i) Fish diseases 
1. Epizootic haematopoietic necrosis. 
2. Infectious haematopoietic necrosis. 
3. Spring viraemia of carp (SVC). 
4. Viral haemorrhagic septicaemia (VHS). 
5. Epizootic ulcerative syndrome (EUS). 
6. Red seabream iridoviral disease (RSID). 
7. Koi herpesvirus disease (KHV). 
8. Grouper iridoviral disease. 
9. Viral encephalopathy and retinopathy. 
10. Enteric septicaemia of catfish. 
11. Infection with Aeromonas hydrophila. 
12. lnfection with Edwardsiella tarda. 
13. Infection with Vibrio anguillarum. 
14. Infection with Flavobacterium columnare. 
15. Infection with Streptococus iniae in Tilapia. 
16. Infectious pancreatic necrosis (cold water). 
17. Infection with Myxobolus spp. 
18. Infection with Ichthyophthirius multifilis. 
19. Infection with Saprolegnia parasitica. 
20. Infestation with Argulus spp. 
21. Infestation with Dactylogyrus spp. 
22. Infestation with Lernaea spp. 
23. Infestation with Caligus spp. 
 
 

144 
 
 (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
    (j) Mollusc diseases 
1. Infection with Bonamia exitiosa. 
2. Infection with Perkinsus olseni. 
3. lnfection with abalone herpesvirus. 
4. Infection with Xenohaliotis californiensis. 
5. Infection with Marteilioides chungmuensis. 
6. Acute viral necrosis (in scallops). 
7. Akoya oyster disease. 
8. Infection with Bomania ostreae. 
9. Infection with Marteilia regringens. 
10. Infection with Perkinsus marinus. 
11. Infection with ostreid herpes virus. 
(k) Crustacean diseases 
1. Taura syndrome (TS). 
2. White spot disease (WSD). 
3. Yellowhead disease (YHD). 
4. Infectious hypodermal and haematopoietic 
necrosis (IHHN). 
5. Infectious myonecrosis (IMN). 
6. White tail disease (MrNV). 
7. Necrotising hepatopancreatitis (NHP). 
8. Milky haemolymph disease of spiny lobster 
(Panulirus spp.). 
9. Monodon slow growth syndrome. 
10. Acute hepatopancreatic necrosis syndrome 
(AHPNS). 
11. Hepatopancreatic parvovirus. 
12. Monodon baculovirus. 
13. Loose shell syndrome. 
14. Soft shell syndrome. 
15. Gaffkemia. 
(l) Amphibian disease 
1. Infection with Ranavirus. 
2. Infection with Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis.  
(m) Other diseases 
1. Camel pox. 
2. Leishmaniosis. 
3. Middle East respiratory syndrome 
coronavirus.”. 
 
 
 

145 
 (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
66. 2010 1 The Legal 
Metrology 
Act, 2009 
(A) In section 2, after clause (e), the following clause 
shall be inserted, namely:–– 
‘(ea) “improvement notice” means an improvement 
notice issued under this Act;’. 
(B) In section 15, after sub-section (4), the following 
sub-sections shall be inserted, namely:— 
“(5) Any inspection, search or seizure carried out 
by a legal metrology officer under this section in 
pursuance of a general or special order, instruction or 
written authorisatio n issued by the Director or 
Controller of Legal Metrology shall be deemed to 
have been made under a lawful warrant. 
(6) If the Director, Controller or legal metrology 
officer has reasonable ground for believing that any 
person has failed to comply with any  provision of the 
Act or rules or directions issued, wherever applicable, he 
may, by a improvement notice served on that person,–– 
(i) state the grounds for believing that the person 
has failed to comply with the provisions of Act or 
rules or directions issued; 
(ii) specify the matters which constitute the 
person’s failure so to comply; 
(iii) specify the measures which, in the opinion of 
the said Authority, the person must take, in order to 
secure compliance; and 
(iv) require the person to take those measur es, 
within a reasonable period, as may be specified in the 
said notice. 
(7) If the person fails to comply with an improvement 
notice issued under sub-section ( 6), his registration or 
approval, as the case may be, shall be suspended or 
revoked: 
Provided that the authorised officer may, after giving 
the person an opportunity of being heard, suspend or 
revoke the registration or approval  granted, as the case 
may be, for reasons to be recorded in writing.”. 
(C) In section 23,–– 
(i) in the marginal heading, for the word “licence”, 
the word “registration certificate” shall be 
substituted; 
(ii) in sub -section ( 1), for the word “licence” at 
both the places where they occur, the word 
“registration certificate” shall be substituted; 
(iii) in sub-section (2), for the word “licence”, the 
words “registration certificate” shall be substituted. 
 
 

146 
 (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
    (D) In section 25, for the words “shall be punished 
with fine which may extend to one lakh rupees and for 
the second offence with fine which may extend to two 
lakh rupees and for the third and subsequent offence, 
with fine which may extend to five lakh rupee s”, the 
words “shall be warned with an improvement notice and 
for the second offence shall be liable to penalty which 
may extend to one lakh rupees and for the            
subsequent offences the fine shall be not less than two 
lakhs rupees but may extend to five lakh rupees” shall be 
substituted. 
(E) In section 26, for the words “second and  
subsequent offence”, the words “second offence with 
fine which may extend to one lakh rupees and for the 
third or subsequent offence” shall be substituted. 
(F) In section 27, in the long line, for the words “shall 
be punished with a fine which may extend to one lakh 
rupees and for the second offence with fine which may 
extend to two lakh rupees and for the third and 
subsequent offence, with fine which may extend to four 
lakh rupees”, the words “shall be warned with an 
improvement notice and for the second offence shall be 
liable to penalty which may extend to one lakh rupees 
and for the subsequent offences the fine shall be not less 
than two lakh rupees but may extend to four lakh rupees” 
shall be substituted. 
(G) In section 28, for the words “shall be punished with 
fine which may extend to fifty thousand rupees and for the 
second offence with fine which may extend to one lakh 
rupees and for the third and subsequent offence with fine 
which may extend to two lakh rupees”, the words “shall 
be warned with an improvement notice and for the second 
offence shall be liable to penalty which may extend to 
fifty thousand rupees and for the subsequent offences the 
fine shall be not less than one lakh rupees but may extend 
to two lakh rupees” shall be substituted. 
(H) In section 29, for the words “shall be punished 
with fine which may extend to fifty thousand rupees, for 
the second offence with fine which may extend to one 
lakh rupees and for the third and subsequent offence with 
a fine which may extend to two lakh rupees”, the words 
“shall be warned with an improvement notice and for the 
second offence shall be liable to penalty which may 
extend to fifty thousand rupees and for the        
subsequent offences the fine shall be not less than one 
lakh rupees but may extend to two lakh rupees” shall be 
substituted. 
(I) In section 30, in the long line,  for the words 
“second or subsequent offence”, the words “second 
offence with fine which may extend to twenty thousand 
rupees and for the third or subsequent offence” shall be 
substituted. 
 
 

147 
 (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
    (J) In section 31, for the words “shall be punished 
with fine which may extend to twenty -five thousand 
rupees and for the second offence with fine which may 
extend to fifty thousand rupees and for the third and 
subsequent offence, with fine which may extend to one 
lakh rupees”, the words “shall be warned with an 
improvement notice and for the second offence shall be 
liable to penalty which may extend to twenty -five 
thousand rupees and for the subsequent offences the fine 
shall not be fifty thousand rupees but may extend to one 
lakh rupees” shall be substituted. 
(K) In section 32, for the words “shall be punished with 
fine which may extend to twenty thousand rupees and for 
the second or subsequent offence with imprisonment for a 
term which may extend to one year and also with fine”, the 
words “shall be warned  with an improvement  notice and 
for the second offence shall be liable to penalty which may 
extend to five lakh  rupees and  for  the  subsequent offences 
the fine shall not be less than ten lakh rupees but may 
extend to twenty  lakh  rupees” shall be substituted. 
(L) In section 34, for the words “shall be punished 
with fine which may extend to twenty -five thousand 
rupees and for the second offence with fine which may 
extend to fifty thousand rupees and for the third and 
subsequent offence, with fine which may extend to one 
lakh rupees”, the words “shall  be  warned with an 
improvement notice and for the second offence shall be 
liable to penalty which  may  extend  to twenty -five 
thousand rupees and  for  the  subsequent  offences  the  
fine  shall  not be   less than fifty thousand rupees but 
may extend to one  lakh  rupees”  shall be substituted.  
(M) In section 35, for the words “shall be punished 
with fine which may extend to twenty -five thousand 
rupees and for the second offence with fine which may 
extend to fifty thousand rupees and for the third and 
subsequent offence, with fine which may extend to one 
lakh rupees”, the words “shall  be  warned with an 
improvement notice and for the second offence shall be 
liable to penalty which  may  extend  to twenty -five 
thousand rupees and  for  the  subsequent  offences  the  
fine  shall  not be   less than fifty thousand rupees but 
may extend to one  lakh  rupees”  shall be substituted. 
(N) In section 36,–– 
(i) for sub -section ( 1), the following sub -section 
shall be substituted, namely:— 
‘(1) Whoever manufactures, packs, imports, 
sells, distributes, delivers or otherwise transfers, 
offers, exposes or possesses for sale, or causes to 
be sold, distributed, delivered or otherwise 
transferred, offered, exposed for sale, including  
through digital modes of sale such as e-commerce 
platforms, online market places or any other digital  
 
 

148 
 (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
    or electronic means including electronic service 
providers facilitating such sales, any pre-packaged 
commodity which does not conform to the 
declarations on the package as provided in this 
Act, shall be warned with an improvement notice 
and for the second offence shall be liable to penalty 
which may extend to five lakh rupees and for the 
subsequent offences the fine shall not be less than 
twenty-five lakh rupees but may extend to fifty 
lakh rupees. 
Explanation.–– For the purposes of this sub -section, 
the expressions “e -commerce” and “electronic service 
provider” shall have the same meaning as assigned to 
them in clauses ( 16) and ( 17) of section 2 of the 
Consumer Protection Act, 2019 (35 of 2019).’; 
(ii) in sub -section ( 2), for the words “shall  be  
punished  with  fine  which  shall  not  be  less  than  ten  
thousand  rupees  but  which  may  extend  to  fifty  
thousand  rupees  and  for  the  second  and  subsequent  
offence,  with  fine  which  may  extend  to  one  la kh  
rupees  or  with  imprisonment  for  a  term  which  may  
extend  to  one  year  or  with  both”, the words “shall be 
punished with fine which shall not be less than ten 
thousand rupees but which may extend to one lakh 
rupees and for the second offence  with fine which may 
extend to five lakh rupees and for the third or subsequent 
offence, with fine which may extend to fifty lakh rupees 
or with imprisonment for a term which may extend to 
one year or with both” shall be substituted.  
(O) In section 37, in  sub-section (1), for the words 
“shall be punished with fine which may extend to one 
lakh rupees”, the words “shall be liable to penalty which 
may extend to one lakh rupees” shall be substituted. 
(P) In section 38, for the words “shall be punished 
with fine which may extend to twenty -five thousand 
rupees and for the second or subsequent offence, with 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to six 
months, or with fine, or with both”, the words “shall be  
warned with an improvement notice and for the seco nd 
offence shall be liable to penalty which may extend  to 
twenty-five thousand rupees and  for the subsequent  
offences the  fine shall  not be less than two lakh rupees 
but may extend to five  lakh  rupees” shall be substituted. 
(Q) In section 39, for th e words “shall be punished 
with fine, which may extend to fifty thousand rupees and 
for the second or subsequent offence, with imprisonment 
for a term which may extend to one year and also with 
fine”, the words “shall  be  warned with an improvement 
notice and for the second offence shall be liable to 
penalty which may extend to fifty thousand rupees and  
for the subsequent offences the fine shall  not be less than 
two lakh rupees but may extend to five lakh rupees” shall 
be substituted. 
 
 

149 
 (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
    (R) In section 40, for the words “with imprisonment 
for a term which may extend to two years and for the 
second or subsequent offence, with imprisonment for a 
term which may extend to five years”, the words “in 
accordance with the provisions of the Bharatiya Nyaya 
Sanhita, 2023 (45 of 2023) shall be substituted.”.  
(S) In section 41,–– 
(i) in sub -section ( 1), for the words “shall                           
be punished with fine which may extend to five 
thousand rupees and for the second or subsequent 
offence with imprisonment for a term which may 
extend to six months and also with fine”, the words 
“shall  be  warned with an improvement notice and 
for the second offence shall be liable to penalty which  
may extend to five thousand r upees and for the  
subsequent offences the fine shall not be less than two 
lakh rupees but may extend to five  lakh  rupees” shall 
be substituted; 
(ii) in sub -section ( 2), for the words “shall be 
punished with fine which may extend to five thousand 
rupees and for the second or subsequent offence, with 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to one 
year and also with fine”, the words “shall  be  warned 
with an improvement notice and for the second 
offence shall be liable to penalty which may  extend  
to five thousand rupees and for  the subsequent  
offences  the fine shall not be less than two lakh 
rupees but may extend to five lakh rupees” shall be 
substituted. 
(T) In section 45,––  
(i) for the word “licence” wherever it occurs, the 
word “registration” shall be substituted; 
(ii) for the words “shall be punished with fine 
which may extend to twenty thousand rupees and for 
the second or subsequent offence, with imprisonment 
for a term which may extend to one year, or with fine, 
or with both”, the words “shall  be  warned with an 
improvement notice and for the second offence shall 
be liable to penalty which  may  extend  to twenty 
thousand rupees and  for  the  subsequent  offences  
the  fine  shall  not be less than two lakh rupees but 
may extend to five  lakh  rupees” shall be substituted. 
(U) In section 46,–– 
(i) for the word “licence” wherever it occurs, the 
word “registration” shall be substituted; 
(ii) for the words “shall be punished with fine which 
may extend to five thousand rupees and for the second 
or subsequent offence, with imprisonment for a term 
which may extend to one year, or with fine, or with 
both”, the words “shall be warned with an improvement 
 
 

150 
 
 (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
    notice and for the second offence shall be liable to 
penalty which may extend to five thousand rupees 
and for the subsequent offences the fine shall not be 
less than two lakh rupees but may extend to five lakh 
rupees” shall be substituted. 
(V) In section 47,–– 
(i) for the word “licence”, occurring at both the 
places, the words “registration certificate” shall be 
substituted; 
(ii) for the words “shall be punished with fine 
which may extend to twenty thousand rupees, or with 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to one 
year or with both”, the words “s hall be warned with 
an improvement notice and for the second offence 
shall be liable to penalty which may extend to      
twenty thousand rupees and for the subsequent 
offences the fine shall not be less than two lakh rupees 
but may extend to five lakh rupees” shall be 
substituted. 
(W) For section 48, the following section shall be 
substituted, namely:–– 
“48. Compounding of offences.––(1) Any offence 
punishable under section s 25 to 39, s ection 41, 
sections 45 to 47, any rule made under sub-section (3) 
of section 52 or any rule made under sub -section (3) 
of section 53 may, either before or after the   
institution of the prosecution, be                      
compounded, on payment for credit                                     
to the Government of such sum as may                            
be prescribed. 
(2) The Director or legal metrology officer as may 
be specially authorised by him in this behalf, may 
compound offences punishable under sect ions 25                  
to 39, section 41, or any rule made under                                
sub-section (3) of section 52. 
(3) The Controller or legal metrology officer 
specially authorised by him, may compound   
offences punishable under section s 25 to 31,            
sections 33 to 37, section 41, sections 45 to 47,                    
and any rule made under sub -section ( 3) of             
section 53: 
Provided that such sum shall not, in any case, 
exceed the maximum amount of the fine, which may 
be imposed under this Act for the offence so 
compounded. 
 
 

151 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
(4) Where an offence has been compounded under
sub-section (1), no proceeding or further proceeding, 
as the case may be, shall be taken against the offender 
in respect of the offence so compounded. 
(5) No offence under this Act shall be compounded
except as provided by this section. 
(6) No court shall take cognizance of an offence
punishable under this Act except upon a complaint, in 
writing, made by— 
(i) the Director;
(ii) the Controller;
(iii) any officer authorised by them.
(7) If the person do es not compound the offence,
shall be tried by the Magistrate in accordance with the 
procedure laid down in the Bharatiya Nagarik 
Suraksha Sanhita, 2023 (46 of 2023). 
(8) Where the offender fails to pay the fine imposed
by the Magistrate, such fine and costs of prosecution 
shall be recoverable as provided under the Bharatiya 
Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023 (46 of 2023): 
Provided that in case of failure to pay the fine, such 
fine shall be recoverable in accordance with the 
provisions of the Bharatiya Nagarik Su raksha 
Sanhita, 2023  (46 of 2023) , and any order of the 
Magistrate shall be deemed executable as a decree for 
recovery of money.”. 
(X) In section 50, in sub -section ( 1), in clause ( c),
after the words “the Central Government”, the words “or 
any officer not below the rank of Joint Secretary 
specially authorised in this behalf by that Government” 
shall be inserted. 
(Y) In section 52, in sub -section (3), for the words
“shall be punishable with fine which may extend to five 
thousand rupees ”, the word s “shall liable to penalty 
which may extend to five lakh rupees and 
suspension, or as the case may be, revocation” shall be 
substituted. 
(Z) In section 53,––
(i) in sub -section (2), in clause ( c), for the word
“licence”, the words “registration certificate” shall be 
substituted; 
(ii) in sub-section (3), for the words “shall be 
punishable with fine which may extend to five 
thousand rupees”, the words “shall liable to penalty 
which may extend to one lakh rupees and     
suspension, or as the case may be, revocation” shall 
be substituted. 

152 
 (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
67. 2010 23 The Clinical 
Establishments 
(Registration 
and 
Regulation) 
Act, 2010 
(A) In section 40, for the words  “punishable for the 
first offence with fine which may extend to ten thousand 
rupees, for any second offence with fine which may 
extend to fifty thousand rupees and for any subsequent 
offence with fine which may extend to five lakh rupees”, 
the words “liable for the first contravention to penalty 
which may extend to ten thousand rupees, for any second 
contravention to penalty which may extend to fifty 
thousand rupees, and for any subsequent contravention 
with penalty which may extend to five lakh rupees” shall 
be substituted. 
(B) In section 41, in sub -section (3), for the words, 
brackets and figures “under sub-sections (1) and (2)”, the 
words, figures and brackets “under section 40,              
sub-sections (1) and (2) of section 41 and section 43 and 
sub-sections ( 1) and ( 2) of section 44” shall be 
substituted. 
(C) In section 43, for the words “punishable with 
fine”, the words “liable to penalty” shall be 
substituted.  
(D) For section 44, the following section shall be 
substituted, namely:–– 
‘44. Contravention by companies. ––(1) Where a 
person committing contravention of any of the 
provisions of this Act or of any rule made thereunder 
is a company, every person who, at the time the 
contravention was committed, was in charge of, and 
was responsible to the company for the conduct of the 
business o f the company, as well as the company, 
shall be deemed to be guilty for the contravention and 
shall be liable for the first contravention to a penalty 
may extend to ten thousand rupees, for any second 
contravention to a penalty which may extend to fifty 
thousand rupees and for any subsequent 
contravention with penalty which may extend to five 
lakh rupees: 
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section 
shall render any such person liable to any penalty if 
he proves that the contravention was committed 
without his knowledge or that he had exercised all due 
diligence to prevent the commission of such 
contravention. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in                    
sub-section (1), where a contravention of any of the 
provisions of this Act or of any rule made thereunder 
has been committed by a company and it is proved 
that the contravention has taken place with the 
consent or connivance of, or is attributable to any 
neglect on the part of, any director, manager, 
secretary or other officer of the c ompany, such 
director, manager, secretary or other officer shall also  
 
 

153 
 (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
    be deemed to be guilty of that contravention and 
shall be liable to penalty which may extend to ten 
thousand rupees for the first contravention, penalty 
which may extend to fifty thousand rupees for the 
second contravention and penalty which may extend 
to five lakh rupees for any subsequent contravention. 
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section,— 
(a) “company” means a body corporate and 
includes a firm or other association of 
individuals; and 
(b) “director”, in relation to a firm, means a 
partner in the firm.’. 
(E) In section 46, for the word “fine” wherever it 
occurs, the word “penalty” shall be substituted.   
68. 2013 23 The 
Pension Fund 
Regulatory 
and 
Development 
Authority 
Act, 2013 
(A) In section 16, in sub-section (7), in the long line, 
for the words “punishable with imprisonment for a term 
which may extend to one year, or with fine, which may 
extend to twenty-five crore rupees, or with both, and also 
with a further fine which may extend to ten lakh rupees 
for every day after the first day during which the failure 
or refusal continues”, the words “liable to penalty which 
may extend to twenty-five crore rupees, and also with a 
further penalty which may extend to ten lakh rupees, for 
every day after the first day during which the failure or 
refusal continues” shall be substituted.  
(B) In section 30, for the word and figures                                
“section 28” wherever they occur, the words, 
brackets and figures “sub -section (7) of section 16 
or section 28” shall be substituted. 
69. 2015 11 The Coal 
Mines 
(Special 
Provisions) 
Act, 2015 
(A) For sections 23 and 24, the following sections 
shall be substituted, namely:–– 
“23. Punishment for certain offences and                            
non-compliances.––(1) If any person,— 
(a) obstructs or causes any impediment in 
taking possession or in the management and 
operation of the Schedule I coal mines by the 
Central Government or the designated      
custodian; or 
(b) destroys or misuses any mine infrastructure 
or coal stock; or 
(c) retains any property of such coal mine or 
removes or destroys it,  
he and any officer -in-default of the company shall 
be punishable with imprisonment for a term which 
may extend to two years, or with fine of one lakh 
rupees, and in the case of continuing failure, with 
fine of two lakh rupees for every day during which 
the offence continues or with both, depending upon 
the nature of the offence. 
 
 

154 
 (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
    (2) If any person fails to deliver to the designated 
custodian any books of account, registers or any other 
document in his custody relating to Schedule I coal 
mines and coal mining operations in respect of the 
management of which the designated custodian has 
been appointed he and any officer -in-default of the 
company shall be liable to penalty which may extend 
to one lakh rupees, and in the case of continuing 
failure, with penalty of which may extend to two lakh 
rupees for every day during which the failure 
continues: 
Provided that for a subsequent contravention, or 
for a contravention continuing beyond thirty days, he 
and any officer -in-default of the company shall, on 
conviction before a competent court, in addition to the 
penalty, be punishable with a fine of five lakh rupees 
or with imprisonment for a term which may extend to 
two years or with both. 
24. Penalty for failure to comply with directions of 
Central Government.— If any person fails to comply, 
without reasonable cause, with any of the directions 
given by the Central Government or nominated 
authority or the designated custodian in the exercise 
of its powers provided in this Act or as may be 
prescribed, he shall be liable to penalty which may 
extend to one lakh rupees and in the case of 
continuing failure with penalty which may ex tend to 
two lakh rupees for everyday during which the failure 
continues. 
24A. Adjudication of penalties. ––(1) For the 
purpose of adjudication of penalties under                            
sub-section ( 2) of section 23 and section 24,  the 
Central Government  shall appoint the nominated 
authority to be the adjudication authority for holding 
an inquiry and imposing penalties in such form and 
manner as may be prescribed: 
Provided that no such penalty shall be imposed 
without giving the person concerned a reasona ble 
opportunity of being heard. 
24B. Appeal.––(1) The Tribunal constituted under 
the Coal Bearing Areas (Acquisition and 
Development) Act, 1957 (20 of 1957) shall be 
authorised to act as an appellate authority. 
(2) Any person aggrieved by an order passed b y 
the adjudicating officer under section 24A, may 
prefer an appeal within thirty days from the date of 
receipt of the order before the Tribunal constituted 
under sub-section (1) of section 27. 
(3) The Tribunal may admit an appeal after the 
expiry of the said period of thirty days, if the appellant 
satisfies the appellate authority that he had sufficient 
cause for not preferring the appeal within that period.  
 
 

155 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
(4) The amount of penalty imposed under
section 24A or this section, if not paid, may be 
recovered as an arrear of land revenue.”. 
(B) In section 31, in sub -section (2), after clause (x),
the following clause shall be inserted, namely:— 
“(xa) the manner of holding an inquiry and imposing 
penalties under sub-section (1) of section 24A;”. 
70. 2016 16 The Real 
Estate 
(Regulation 
and 
Development) 
Act, 2016 
For section 68, the following section shall be 
substituted, namely:––  
“68. Penalty for failure to comply with orders of 
Appellate Tribunal by allottee.—If any allottee, who 
fails to comply with, or contravenes any of the orders 
or directions of the Appell ate Tribunal, as the case 
may be, he shall be liable to penalty, which may 
extend up to ten per cent. of the plot, apartment or 
building cost, as the case may be.”. 
71. 2019 49 The 
Recycling of 
Ships Act, 
2019 
(A) In section 31,—
(i) in the marginal heading, for the word “Penalty”,
the word “Punishment” shall be substituted; 
(ii) in sub-section (1), for the word “instals”, the
word “installs” shall be substituted; 
(iii) sub-section (2) shall be omitted;
(iv) for sub-section (6), the following sub-section
shall be substituted, namely:–– 
“(6) Whoever fails to respond within 
twenty-four hours of issuance of third notice for 
taking remedial action for oil spill under        
sub-section (2) of section 22, shall be punishable 
with i mprisonment which may extend to three 
months or with fine which may extend to ten lakh 
rupees or with both.”. 
(B) For section 32, the following section s shall be
substituted, namely:–– 
“32. Penalty for contravention of provisions of this 
Act or rules or regulations.––(1) Whoever 
contravenes the provisions of section 12 shall be 
liable to penalty which may extend to ten lakh rupees. 
(2) Whoever fails to respond to the notice issued
for taking remedial action for oil spill under 
sub-section ( 2) of section 22 shall be liable to a 
penalty, which may extend to–– 
(i) five lakh rupees, in case of no response
within twelve hours of issuance of first notice; and 
(ii) ten lakh rupees, in case of no response within
twenty-four hours of issuance of second notice. 

156 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
(3) Whoever contravenes any of the provisions of 
this Act or any rules  or regulations made thereunder, 
for which no specific punishment or penalty has been 
provided in this Act, shall be liable  to penalty which 
may extend to two lakh rupees. 
32A. Adjudication of  penalties. ––(1) For the 
purpose of adjudicating penalties under section 32, the 
Central Government shall appoint an officer not below 
the rank  
 of Deputy  Secretary  to the Government  of 
I
ndia as an adjudicating officer for holding an inquiry 
and imposing  penalties in such manner as  may  be 
prescribed:  
Provided that the Central Government may appoint 
as many adjudicating officers as may be required: 
Provided further  that  no  such penalty  shall  be 
i
mposed without  giving the person  concerned a 
reasonable opportunity of being heard. 
(2) Whoever is aggrieved by the order of the 
adjudicating officer under sub-section (1), may within 
thirty days from the date of receipt of such order, prefer 
an appeal to an officer at least one rank higher than the 
adjudicating 
officer who shall be  appointed by the 
Central Government as an appellate authority, in such 
form and manner as may be prescribed.  
(3
) The appellate authority may admit an appeal  
after the expiry of the said period of thirty days, if the 
appellant satisfies the appellate authority that he had 
suf
ficient cause for not preferring the appeal within that 
per
iod.  
(4) The appellate  authority  may,  after giving  the 
par
ties to the appeal an opportunity of being heard, pass 
such an order as he may deem fit. 
(5) An appeal under sub-secti on ( 2) shall be 
disposed of within sixty days from the date of filing. 
(6) If penalty imposed by the adjudicating officer under
sub-section (1) or by an order of the appellate authority 
under sub-section (4), as the case may be, is not deposited, 
the amount shall be recovered as an arrear of land 
revenue.”.  
(C) For section 35, the following section shall be
substituted, namely:— 
“35. Offences to be non -cognizable, bailable, and 
compoundable.—(1) Notwithstanding anything 
contained in the Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha 
Sanhita, 2023 (46 of 2023), every offence under this 
Act shall be non -cognizable, bailable, and 
compoundable. 

157 
 (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
    (2) Any offence punishable under                            
sub-sections (1), (3), (4) and (5) of section 31, may, 
before or after the institution of prosecution, be 
compounded by an officer designated by the Central 
Government by notification in this behalf, on 
payment for credit to the Central Government of such 
sum and in such manner as may be prescribed: 
Provided that such sum shall not, in any case, 
exceed the maximum amount of the fine which may 
be imposed under this Act for the offences so 
compounded:  
Provided further that in case of subsequent 
offence, the same shall not be compounded under 
sub-section (2). 
(3) The officer referred to in sub -section (2) shall 
exercise the powers to compound an offence, subject 
to the direction, control and supervision of the Central 
Government. 
(4) Every application for the compounding of an 
offence shall be made in such form and manner as 
may be prescribed. 
(5) Where any offence is compounded before the 
institution of any prosecution, no prosecution shall be 
instituted against the offender in relation to whom the 
offence is so compounded. 
(6) Where the compounding of  any offence is 
made after the institution of any prosecution, such 
composition shall be brought by the officer referred 
to in sub -section (2), in writing, to the notice of the 
court in which the prosecution is pending and on such 
notice for compounding the offence being given, the 
person against whom the offence is so compounded 
shall be discharged. 
(7) Any person who fails to comply with the order 
of compounding made by the officer referred to in 
sub-section (2), shall be liable to pay a sum equivalent 
to twenty per cent. of the maximum fine provided for 
the offence, in addition to the fine provided for the 
said offence. 
(8) No offence punishable under this Act shall be 
compounded except in accordance with the 
provisions of this section.”. 
(D) In section 42, in sub-section (2), after clause (o), 
the following clauses shall be inserted, namely:— 
“(oa) the manner of holding an inquiry and 
imposing penalties under sub -section ( 1) of         
section 32A; 
 
 

158 
 (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
    (ob) the form and manner of preferring an appeal to 
the appellate authority against the order of adjudicating 
officer under sub-section (2) of section 32A; 
(oc) the sum and manner of compounding under 
sub-section (2) of section 35;  
(od) the form and manner of making an application 
for compounding of an offence under sub-section (4) 
of section 35.”. 
72. 2021 1 The Major 
Port 
Authorities 
Act, 2021 
(A) Chapter VII shall be omitted. 
(B) Section 64 shall be omitted. 
73. 2021 14 The National 
Commission 
for Allied 
and 
Healthcare 
Professions 
Act, 2021 
(A) In section 58, for the words “shall be punishable 
with fine which may extend to fifty thousand rupees and 
in case of a continuing offence with an additional fine 
which may extend to five thousand rupees per day after 
the first day during which the offence continues” the 
words “shall be liable to penalty which may extend to 
fifty thousand rupees and in case of a                          
continuing contravention with an additional                     
penalty which may exten d to five thousand                       
rupees per day after the first day during                                
which the offence contravention continues” shall be 
substituted.  
(B) After section 58, the following section shall be 
inserted, namely:— 
“58A. Adjudication of penalties. ––(1) For the 
purpose of adjudicating penalties under section 58, 
the Chairperson of the State Council shall be the 
adjudicating authority to hold inquiry and        
imposing penalties in such manner as may be 
prescribed:  
Provided that for the States where the State 
Councils have not been established, the       
Chairperson of the Commission shall perform the 
functions of the adjudication authority under              
sub-section ( 1) till such State Councils are          
established:   
Provided further that no such penalty shall be 
imposed without giving the person concerned a 
reasonable opportunity of being heard. 
(2) Whoever is aggrieved by an order of the 
adjudicating authority under sub -section ( 1) except 
the proviso thereof , may, within a period of thirty 
days from the date of receipt of such order,              
prefer an appeal to the Chairperson of the 
Commission, who shall be the appellate             
authority, in such form and manner as may be 
prescribed: 
 
 

159 
 
 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
    Provided that where the Chairperson of the 
Commission has performed the functions of the 
adjudicating authority under the first proviso to        
sub-section (1), the appeal shall lie to the Secretary to 
the Government of India, as may be appointed by the 
Central Government in this behalf. 
(3) The appellate authority may admit an appeal 
after the expiry of the said period of thirty days, if the 
appellant satisfies the appellate authority that he had 
sufficient cause for not preferring the appeal within 
that period.  
(4) The appellate authority may, after giving the 
parties to the appeal an opportunity of being heard, 
pass such an order as he may deem fit. 
(5) An appeal under sub -section ( 2) shall be 
disposed of within sixty days from the date of filing. 
(6) If penalty imposed by the adjudicating officer 
under sub-section (1) or by an order of the appellate 
authority under sub-section (4), as the case may be, is 
not deposited, the amount shall be recovered as an 
arrear of land revenue.”. 
(C) In section 66, in sub-section (2),–– 
(i) in clause ( u), the word “and” occurring at  the 
end, shall be omitted; 
(ii) after clause (u), the following clauses shall be 
inserted, namely:— 
“(ua) the manner of holding an inquiry and 
imposing penalties under sub-section ( 1) of         
section 58A; 
(ub) the form and manner of preferring appeal 
to the appellate authority against the order of 
adjudicating officer under sub -section ( 2) of          
section 58A;” . 
74.  2021 20 The Marine 
Aids to 
Navigation 
Act, 2021 
(A) In section 41,— 
(i) in sub-section (1), for the words “shall be liable 
to imprisonment for a term which may extend up to 
six months or with fine which may extend up to one 
lakh rupees, or with both”, the words “shall be liable 
to penalty which may extend up to one lakh rupees” 
shall be substituted; 
(ii) in sub -section (2), in opening portion, for the 
words “liable for punishment”, the words “liable to 
penalty” shall be substituted. 
 
 

160 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
(B) In section 42, for the words “for fine”, the words
“to penalty” shall be substituted. 
(C) After section 42, the following section shall be
inserted, namely:— 
“42A. Adjudication of penalties.—(1) For the 
purpose of adjudicating penalties under sections 41 
and 42,  the Central  Government shall  appoint  an 
officer not below the rank of Deputy Secretary to the 
Government of India as an adjudicating officer  for 
holding an inquiry  and imposing  penalties in such 
manner as may be prescribed: 
Provided that the Central Government may appoint 
as many adjudicating officers as may be required: 
Provided further  that  no such  penalty  shall be 
imposed without  giving the  person concerned  a 
reasonable opportunity of being heard. 
(2) Whoever is aggrieved by an order of the 
adjudicating officer under sub-section (1) may, within 
thirty days from  the date  of receipt  of  such  order, 
prefer an appeal to the Director General in such form 
and manner as may be prescribed.  
(3) The appellate authority may admit an appeal 
after the expiry of the said period of thirty days, if the 
appellant satisfies the appellate authority that he had 
sufficient cause for not preferring the appeal within 
that period.  
(4) The appellate authority may, after giving the 
parties to the appeal an opportunity of being heard, 
pass such an order as he may deem fit. 
(5) An appeal under sub-secti on (2) shall be 
disposed of within sixty days from the date of filing. 
(6) If penalt y imposed by the adjudicati ng officer
under sub -section ( 1) or by an order of the ap pellate 
authority under sub -section (4), as the case may be, is 
not deposited, the amount shall be recovered as an arrear 
of land revenue.”.  
(D) In section 46, in sub-section (2), after clause (p),
the following clauses shall be inserted, namely:— 
“(pa) the manner of holding an inquiry and imposing 
penalties under sub-section (1) of section 42A; 
(pb) the form and manner of preferring appeal to 
the appellate authority against the order of 
adjudicating officer under sub -section ( 2) of 
section 42A;”. 

161 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
75. 2021 24 The Inland 
Vessels Act, 
2021 
(A) In section 63, for the words “or an offence under
this Chapter”, the words “or an offence or a 
contravention under this Chapter” shall be substituted. 
(B) In Chapter XVI, in the Chapter heading, for the
word “PENALTIES”, the word “PUNISHMENTS” 
shall be substituted; 
(C) For section 87, the following section shall be
substituted, namely:— 
“87. Offences and punishments. —(1) Whoever, 
contravenes any of the provisions of this Act, shall be 
liable to punishment or penalty as specified in the Table 
under sub-sections (2) and (3).  
(2) The offences mentioned in column (3) of the
Table below, shall be punishable to the extent mentioned 
in column (4) of the said Table :— 
Sl. 
No 
Section Offence Punishment 
(1) (2) (3) (4) 
1. 14(1) Owner, 
operator or 
master of any 
mechanically 
propelled inland 
vessel, using 
such vessel, 
without a valid 
certificate of 
survey has acted 
in contravention 
of sub-section (1) 
of section 14. 
Fine 
which may 
extend to ten 
thousand 
rupees for the 
first offence 
and twenty - 
five thousand 
rupees for 
subsequent 
offences. 
2. 18(1) Owner, 
operator or 
master of any 
mechanically 
propelled inland 
vessel 
proceeding on 
any voyage or 
use a 
mechanically 
propelled inland 
vessel required to 
be registered, for 
any service, 
without a valid 
certificate of 
registration and 
in contravention 
of sub-section (1) 
of section 18. 
Fine 
which may 
extend to ten 
thousand 
rupees for the 
first offence 
and fifty 
thousand 
rupees for 
subsequent 
offences. 

162 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
(1) (2) (3) (4) 
3. 30 Owner of any 
mechanically 
propelled inland 
vessel, has acted 
in contravention 
of section 30. 
Fine 
which may 
extend to ten 
thousand 
rupees per 
day or 
imprisonment 
which may 
extend to one 
year, or with 
both. 
4. 34(2) Owner or 
operator on 
whose vessel, 
persons under the 
age of eighteen 
years are 
employed, has 
acted in 
contravention of 
sub-section (2) of 
section 34. 
Fine 
which may 
extend to five 
thousand 
rupees for 
every day of 
non-
compliance 
or 
imprisonment 
not 
exceeding 
six months, 
or with both. 
5. 44 Owner or 
operator or any 
person 
responsible for 
the operation of 
special category 
vessel, which 
does not comply 
with the 
provisions of 
Chapter VII. 
Fine 
which may 
extend to ten 
thousand 
rupees for 
every day of 
non-
compliance 
or 
imprisonment 
extending up 
to six 
months, or 
with both. 
6. 49 and
50 (1)
Owner, 
operator or 
master of any 
mechanically 
propelled vessel 
plying in inland 
waters abstaining 
from proceeding 
to render 
assistance after 
answering to the 
distress signal. 
Fine 
which may 
extend to ten 
thousand 
rupees. 

163 
 (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
    (1) (2) (3) (4) 
7. 51 (2) The owner, 
operator or 
master of any 
mechanically 
propelled inland 
vessel 
proceeding to 
conduct any 
voyage without 
complying with 
the requirements 
of navigation 
aids, life -saving 
appliances, fire 
detection and 
extinguishing 
appliances and 
communication 
appliances as 
specified under 
sub-section (2) of 
section 51. 
Fine 
which may 
extend up to 
fifty 
thousand 
rupees. 
8. 52(2) 
and (3) 
The owner, 
operator or 
master of any 
mechanically 
propelled vessel 
causing pollution 
by discharging or 
dumping of 
pollutants in 
inland waters. 
Fine 
which may 
extend to 
fifty 
thousand 
rupees. 
9. 53(4) The owner, 
operator or 
master of any 
mechanically 
propelled vessel, 
who are required  
under this Act 
to possess a 
valid 
prevention of 
pollution 
certificate, 
plying or using 
the vessel 
without the said 
valid 
certificate.   
Fine 
which may 
extend to 
twenty-five 
thousand 
rupees. 
  
 

164 
 (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
    (1) (2) (3) (4) 
10. 57 Any owner, 
operator or any 
person who 
intentionally 
cause wreck 
within inland 
waters. 
Fine 
amounting to 
fifty 
thousand 
rupees and 
imprisonment 
which may 
extend to 
three years. 
11. 82 Master or 
operator of any 
foreign vessels 
acting in 
contravention of 
sub-section (1) of 
section 82. 
Fine 
which may 
extend to 
fifty 
thousand 
rupees or 
imprisonment 
which may 
extend to one 
year, or with 
both. 
12. 83 Owner, 
operator or 
master of 
mechanically 
propelled inland 
vessel, who does 
not comply with 
the requirement 
of pilotage in 
contravention of 
section 83. 
Fine 
which may 
extend to 
fifty 
thousand 
rupees or 
imprisonment 
which may 
extend to 
three years, 
or with both. 
(3) The contravention specified in column (3) of 
the Table below shall be liable to penalties specified 
in column (4) of the said Table:— 
Table 
Sl. 
No 
Section to 
which 
contravention 
is referred 
Contravention Penalty 
(1) (2) (3) (4) 
1. 8 Any owner, 
operator or 
construction 
yard, found 
guilty of 
construction, 
alteration or 
modification 
of 
mechanically  
Penalty 
which may 
extend to 
ten 
thousand 
rupees for 
every non -
compliance 
found. 
   
 

165 
 (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
    (1) (2) (3) (4) 
  propelled 
inland vessel 
in 
contravention 
of section 8. 
 
2. 19(1) Owner or 
master who 
does not carry 
a valid 
certificate of 
registration or 
not making 
the same 
available for 
inspection, 
has acted in 
contravention 
of sub -section 
(1) of section 
19. 
Penalty 
which may 
extend to 
ten 
thousand 
rupees for 
every non -
compliance 
found. 
3. 24(3) Owner not 
displaying the 
official 
number on the 
conspicuous 
part of a 
vessel has 
acted in 
contravention 
of sub -section 
(3) of section 
24. 
Penalty 
which may 
extend to 
ten 
thousand 
rupees. 
4. 27 Owner, 
operator or 
any person 
responsible 
for the 
operation of 
the vessel, has 
acted in 
contravention 
of section 27. 
Penalty 
which may 
extend to ten 
thousand 
rupees for the 
first 
contravention 
and twenty -
five thousand 
rupees for 
subsequent 
contraventions. 
5. 28(2) Owner, 
operator or 
master of any 
mechanically 
propelled 
inland vessel 
not registering 
the details of  
Penalty 
which may 
extend to ten 
thousand 
rupees for           
the first 
contravention  
  
 

166 
 (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
    (1) (2) (3) (4) 
  alterations that 
are mandated to 
be registered as 
specified in                     
sub-section (2) of 
section 28. 
and twenty-
five 
thousand 
rupees for 
subsequent 
contraventions. 
6. 29 Owner or 
operator of any 
mechanically 
propelled inland 
vessel, who does 
not comply with 
the requirements 
or has acted in 
contravention of 
section 29. 
Penalty 
which may 
extend to five 
hundred 
rupees for 
every day of 
non-
compliance. 
7. 32(1) Owner of any 
mechanically 
propelled inland 
vessel, has acted 
in contravention 
of sub-section (1) 
of section 32. 
Penalty 
which may 
extend to 
five 
thousand 
rupees for 
every day of 
non-
compliance. 
8. 35 Owner or 
operator of any 
mechanically 
propelled inland 
vessel without 
complying with 
the specified 
minimum 
manning scale 
has acted in 
contravention to 
section 35. 
Penalty 
which may 
extend to ten 
thousand 
rupees for 
the first 
contravention 
and twenty -
five 
thousand 
rupees for 
subsequent 
contraventions. 
9. 40(1) 
and (4) 
The holders of 
certificate of 
competency, has 
acted in 
contravention to 
the provisions of 
this Act or not 
surrendered the 
suspended, 
cancelled or 
varied certificate  
Penalty 
which may 
extend to five 
thousand 
rupees per 
day. 
  
 

167 
 (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
    (1) (2) (3) (4) 
  issued under 
non-submission 
of suspended or 
cancelled 
certificates. 
 
10. 47 Owner, 
operator or 
master of any 
mechanically 
propelled vessel 
registered, 
recognised or 
identified under 
this Act, for not 
equipping the 
vessels or 
exhibiting the 
lights and signals 
specified under 
Chapter VIII. 
Penalty 
which may 
extend to ten 
thousand 
rupees for the 
first 
contravention 
and twenty-five 
thousand 
rupees for 
subsequent 
contraventions. 
11. 48 Owner, 
operator or 
master not 
ensuring safe 
navigation or 
causing damage 
due to non 
observance of 
regulations. 
Penalty 
which may 
extend to 
twenty-five 
thousand 
rupees. 
12. 54(2) 
and (5) 
The owner or 
operator of any 
reception facility 
who does not 
comply with the 
standards and 
obligations 
stipulated. 
Penalty 
which may 
extend to fifty 
thousand 
rupees. 
13. 55(4) The owner or 
operator of the 
terminal who 
operates 
without 
complying with 
the notice 
issued under 
sub-section ( 4) 
of section 55. 
Penalty 
which may 
extend to fifty 
thousand 
rupees. 
14. 58(2) Any person 
who is guilty of 
offence 
committed by 
contravention 
of sub -section 
(2) of                      
section 58. 
Penalty 
which may 
extend to ten 
thousand 
rupees. 
  
 

168 
 (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
    (1) (2) (3) (4) 
15. 66 Any owner or 
master plying 
any mechanically 
propelled inland 
vessel without a 
valid insurance 
as provided 
under section 66. 
Penalty 
which may 
extend to ten 
thousand 
rupees and 
detention of 
the vessel till 
certificate of 
insurance is 
procured. 
16. 74(2) The owner, 
operator or 
master of any 
mechanically 
propelled inland 
vessel not 
complying with 
sub-section (2) of 
section 74. 
Penalty 
which may 
extend to ten 
thousand 
rupees. 
17. 79(2) Any person 
who holds a 
certificate issued 
under Chapter VI 
and fails to 
surrender 
suspended or 
cancelled 
certificates. 
Penalty 
which may 
extend to ten 
thousand 
rupees for 
every day of 
non-
submission. 
18. 80 Any person, in 
the capacity of a 
service provider 
or a service user, 
who acts in 
contravention of 
section 80. 
Penalty 
which may 
extend to 
fifty 
thousand 
rupees. 
19. 97 Any person 
employed on 
inland vessel for 
neglect or refusal 
to join or 
desertion of 
vessel in 
violation of his 
obligation as 
provided under 
section 97. 
Forfeiture 
of a sum not 
exceeding 
two days ’ 
pay, and in 
addition for 
every 
twenty-four 
hours of 
absence, 
either a sum 
not 
exceeding 
six days’ pay 
or any 
expenses  
  
 

169 
 (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
    (1) (2) (3) (4) 
   properly 
incurred in 
hiring a 
substitute, 
from his 
wages. 
20. 102 Any person 
found guilty of 
causing 
obstruction or 
has acted in 
contravention of 
section 102. 
Penalty 
which may 
extend to 
fifty 
thousand 
rupees. 
(4) Where the owner or master of any mechanically 
propelled inland vessel is convicted of an offence under 
this Act or any rule made thereunder, committed on 
board, or in relation to that mechanically propelled 
vessel, and is sentenced to pay a fine, the Magistrate who 
passes the sentence may direct the amount of the fine to 
be levied by distress and sale of the mechanically 
propelled vessel, or its appurtenance so much thereof as 
is necessary.  
(5) Where an inland vessel has been used in 
contravention of the  provisions of this Act or the rules 
made thereunder, the details of the offence or 
contravention, the offender or person liable and the 
vessel shall be recorded in such form and manner, as 
may be specified by the Central Government by 
notification.  
(6) T he State Government shall appoint courts not 
inferior to that of a Magistrate of the first class, for the 
purpose of conducting trial of any person who is charged 
of any offence as provided under this Act or the rules 
made thereunder.”. 
(D) After section 8 7, the following sections shall be 
inserted, namely:— 
“87A. Adjudication of penalties. ––(1) For the 
purpose of adjudicating penalties under section 87, 
the State Government shall appoint an officer not 
below the rank of Under  Secretary to the        
Government of India or an officer of an equivalent 
rank in the State Government as an adjudicating 
officer for holding an inquiry and imposing penalties 
in such manner as may be prescribed:  
Provided that the State Government may          
appoint as many adjudicating officers as may be 
required: 
 
 

170 
 
 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
    Provided further that no such penalty shall be 
imposed without giving the person concerned a 
reasonable opportunity of being heard. 
(2) Whoever is aggrieved by an order of the 
adjudicating officer under sub-section (1) may, within 
thirty days from the date of receipt of such order, 
prefer an appeal to such officer at least one rank 
higher than the adjudicating officer appointed by the 
State Government as an appellat e authority, in such 
form and manner as may be prescribed.  
(3) The appellate authority may admit an appeal 
after the expiry of the said period of thirty days, if the 
appellant satisfies the appellate authority that he had 
sufficient cause for not preferring the appeal within 
that period.  
(4) The appellate authority  may, after giving the 
parties to the appeal an opportunity of being heard, 
pass such an order as he may deem fit. 
(5) An appeal under sub -section ( 2) shall be 
disposed of within sixty days from the date of filing. 
(6) If penalty imposed by the adjudicatin g officer 
under sub-section (1) or by an order of the appellate 
authority under sub-section (4), as the case may be, is 
not deposited, the amount shall be recovered as an 
arrear of land revenue.”.  
(E) In section 107, in sub-section (2), after clause (z), 
the following clauses shall be inserted, namely:— 
“(zz) the manner of holding an inquiry and imposing 
penalties under sub-section (1) of section 87A; 
(zzz) the form and manner of preferring an appeal to 
the appellate authority against the order of adjudicating 
officer under sub-section (2) of section 87A;” . 
76. 2022 13 The Indian 
Antarctic 
Act, 2022 
(A) In section 41,— 
(i) in clause ( e), for the words and figures “or 
section 32”, the words, brackets and figures “or                
sub-section (2) of section 32” shall be substituted; 
(ii) after clause ( e), the following clause shall be 
inserted, namely:— 
“(f) any person who obstructs any inspection 
team authorised under section 31 in the lawful 
exercise of any functions of inspection conferred 
by or under this Act in Antarctica, shall be 
punishable with imprisonment for a term which 
may extend to one year, or  with fine which shall 
not be less than five lakh rupees but                      
which may extend to twenty lakh rupees, or with 
both: 
 
 

171 
 (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
    Provided that obstruction shall not include any 
act or omission arising from physical or mental 
incapacity, unintentional conduct, or 
circumstances beyond the control of a person.”. 
(B) In section 44, for the words “punishable with 
fine”, the words “liable to penalty” shall be substituted.  
(C) After section 44, the following section shall be 
inserted, namely:— 
“44A. Adjudication of penalties. —(1) For the 
purpose of adjudicating penalties under section 44, 
the Central Government shall appoint an officer not 
below the rank of Joint Secretary to the Government 
of India as an adjudicating officer for holding an 
inquiry and imposing penalties in such manner as 
may be prescribed:  
Provided that the Central Government may appoint 
as many adjudicating officers as may be required: 
Provided further that no such penalty shall be 
imposed without giving the person concerned a 
reasonable opportunity of being heard. 
(2) Any person aggrieved by an order of the 
adjudicating officer under sub-section (1) may, within 
thirty days from the date of receipt of such order, 
prefer an appeal to such officer, at least one rank 
higher than the adjudicating officer, as may be 
appointed by the Central Government as an appellate 
authority, in such form and manner as may be 
prescribed.  
(3) The appellate authority may admit an appeal 
after the expiry of the said period of thirty days, if the 
appellant satisfies the appellate authority that he had 
sufficient cause for not preferring the appeal within 
that period. 
(4) The appellate authority may, after giving the 
parties to the appeal an opportunity of being heard, 
pass such an order as he may deem fit. 
(5) An appeal under sub -section ( 2) shall be 
disposed of within sixty days from the date of filing. 
(6) If penalty imposed by the adjudicating officer 
under sub-section (1) or by an order of the appellate 
authority under sub-section (4), as the case may be, is 
not deposited, the amount shall be recovered as an 
arrear of land revenue.”. 
(D) In section 55, in sub -section (2), after clause (s), 
the following clauses shall be inserted, namely:— 
“(sa) the manner of holding an inquiry and 
imposing penalties under sub -section ( 1) of         
section 44A; 
 
 

172 
 (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
    (sb) the form and manner of preferring appeal to 
the appellate authority against the order of 
adjudicating officer under sub -section (2) of section 
44A;” . 
77. 2023 18 The Jan 
Vishwas 
(Amendment 
of 
Provisions) 
Act, 2023 
After section 3, the following proviso shall be 
inserted, namely:–– 
“Provided that notwithstanding anything 
contained in this section, if any enactment mentioned 
in the Schedule provides the manner of revision of 
fines and penalties therein, only the said provision 
shall be applicable for increase of fines and penalties 
for provisions of such enactment.”. 
78. 2025 20 The Coastal 
Shipping 
Act, 2025 
(A) In section 16, for the words “punishable with 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to six 
months, or with fine”, the words “liable to penalty” shall 
be substituted. 
(B) In section 18,  in the long line , for the words 
“punishable with imprisonment for a term which may 
extend to six months, or with fine which may extend 
to fifty thousand rupees, or with both”, the words 
“liable to penalty which may extend to two lakh 
rupees” shall be substituted.  
(C) In section 26, in sub-section (1), for the words and 
figures “offence punishable under sections 15 to 20 of 
this Act may”, the words and figures “any offence 
punishable under sections 15, 17, 19 and 20, may” shall 
be substituted.  
(D) In section 30,––  
(i) in s ub-section (1), after the word “under”, the 
words and figures “sections 16, 18 and” shall be 
inserted; 
(ii) in sub-section (5), after the word “under”, the 
words and figures “sections 16, 18 and” shall be 
inserted. 
79. 2025 24 The 
Merchant 
Shipping 
Act, 2025 
(A) In section 281,–– 
(i) in sub -section ( 2), in the Table, after serial       
no. 96 and the entries relating thereto, the following 
serial number and entries shall be inserted, namely:— 
Sl. 
No. 
Contravention Sections Penalties 
(1) (2) (3) (4) 
“97. If a 
seafarer on or 
before being 
engaged 
wilfully and 
General Penalty which 
may extend to 
fifty thousand 
rupees.”; 
  
 

173 
 (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
    (1) (2) (3) (4) 
 fraudulently 
makes a false 
statement of the 
name of his last 
vessel or 
alleged last 
vessel or 
wilfully and 
fraudulently 
makes a false 
statement of his 
own name. 
  
(ii) in sub -section (3), in the Table, serial no. 12 
and the entries relating thereto shall be omitted. 
(B) After section 282, the following section shall be 
inserted, namely:— 
“282A. Compounding for certain offences. ––(1) 
Notwithstanding anything contained in the Bharatiya 
Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023 (46 of 2023), the 
offences under section 38, clause (d) of sub-section (1) 
of section 99 and sub -section ( 1) of section 139, 
which are punishable to the extent of punishment 
specified at Serial Numbers 3, 9 and 15 respectively 
may, before or after the institution of prosecution, be 
compounded by an officer designated by the Cent ral 
Government by notification in this behalf, on 
payment for credit to the Central Government                
of such sum and in such manner as may                                   
be prescribed:  
Provided that such sum shall not, in any case, 
exceed the maximum amount of the fine which may 
be imposed under this Act for the offences so 
compounded: 
Provided further that in case of subsequent 
offence, the same shall not be compounded. 
(2) The officer referred to in sub -section (1) shall 
exercise the powers to compound an offence, subject 
to the direction, control and supervision of the Central 
Government. 
(3) Every application for the compounding of an 
offence shall be made in such form and manner as 
may be prescribed.  
(4) Where any offence is compounded befor e the 
institution of any prosecution, no prosecution shall be 
instituted against the offender in relation to whom the 
offence is so compounded.  
 
 

174 
 (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
    (5) Where the compounding of any offence is 
made after the institution of any prosecution, such 
composition shall be brought by the officer referred 
to in sub -section (1), in writing, to the notice of the 
court in which the prosecution is pending and on such 
notice for compounding the offence being given, the 
person against whom the  offence is so compounded 
shall be discharged. 
(6) Any person who fails to comply with the order 
of compounding made by the officer referred to in 
sub-section (1), shall be liable to pay a sum equivalent 
to twenty per cent. of the maximum fine provided for 
the offence, in addition to the fine provided for the 
said offence. 
(7) No offence punishable under this Act shall be 
compounded except in accordance with the 
provisions of this section.”. 
(C) In section 319, in sub-section (2), after clause (e), 
the following clause shall be inserted, namely:— 
“(ea) the application for the compounding of an 
offence, the form and its manner and the sum payable 
under sub-sections (1) and (3) of section 282A;”. 
80. 2025 27 The Indian 
Ports Act, 
2025 
(A) After section 53, the following section shall be 
inserted, namely:— 
“53A. Compounding of certain offences. —(1) 
Notwithstanding anything contained in the Bharatiya 
Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023 (46 of 2023), the 
offences under sub-section (3) of section 29, section 30 
and section 31, which are punishable to the extent of 
punishment specified in the First Schedule under      
sub-section (2) of section 53 of this Act may, before 
or after the institution of prosecution, be compounded 
by the conservator on payment fo r credit to the 
appropriate Government of such sum and in such 
manner as may be notified by the appropriate 
Government: 
Provided that such sum shall not, in any case, 
exceed the maximum amount of the fine which may 
be imposed under this Act for the offence s so 
compounded:  
Provided further that in case of second and 
subsequent offence, the same shall not be 
compounded. 
(2) The officer referred to in sub -section (1) shall 
exercise the powers to compound an offence, subject 
to the direction, control and super vision of the 
appropriate Government. 
(3) Every application for the compounding of an 
offence shall be made in such form and manner as 
may be notified by the appropriate Government.  
 
 

175 
 (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
    (4) Where any offence is compounded before the 
institution of any prosecution, no prosecution shall be 
instituted against the offender in relation to whom the 
offence is so compounded.  
(5) Where the compounding of any offence is 
made after the institution o f any prosecution, such 
composition shall be brought by the officer referred 
to in sub -section (1), in writing, to the notice of the 
court in which the prosecution is pending and on such 
notice for compounding the offence being given, the 
person against wh om the offence is so compounded 
shall be discharged. 
(6) Any person who fails to comply with an order 
of compounding made by the officer referred to in 
sub-section (1), shall be liable to pay a sum equivalent 
to twenty per cent. of the maximum fine provided for 
the offence, in addition to fine provided for the said 
offence.  
(7) No offence punishable under this Act shall be 
compounded except in accordance with the 
provisions of this section.”. 
(B) For section 54, the following section shall be 
substituted, namely:— 
“54. Authority for imposition of penalty and 
procedure therefor.—(1) The authority for imposing 
the penalty under the Second Schedule with regard to 
contravention listed under sub-section (3) of section 15, 
where the contravention is by port officer, shall be the 
conservator and where the contravention is by the 
port, shall be such officer, as may be notified by the 
State Government.  
(2) For the purpose of imposition of penalty under 
this Chapter, where the conservator is a body of 
persons, the authority for imposition of penalty shall 
mean, one person appointed from amongst such body 
of persons, in such manner as may be prescribed by 
the appropriate Government. 
(3) The authority for imposing the penalty unde r 
the Second Schedule with regard to contraventions 
listed under section 19, section 20, sub-section (1) of 
section 22, section 23, sub -section (1) of section 26, 
sub-section ( 1) of section 32, section 39,                       
sub-section (1) of section 40, section 41, section 43, 
sub-section (2) of section 47, section 49, sub -section 
(1) of section 52, section 57, section 65 shall be the 
conservator. 
(4) The authority for imposing the penalty under 
the Second Schedule with regard to section 36, 
section 37, sub-section (1) of section 38, sub-section  
 
 
 

176 
 (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
    (2) of section 38, sub -section ( 3) of section 38,                    
sub-section ( 1) of section 44, sub -section ( 2) of 
section 44, sub-section (1) of section 66, sub-section (4) 
of section 66, section 67, section 68, sub-section (1) of 
section 69 and sub -section (2) of section 69 shall be 
the concerned principal officer under the Merchant 
Shipping Act, 2025 (24 of 2025). 
(5) Before imposing any penalty specified un der 
the Second Schedule, the parties shall be given an 
opportunity of being heard. 
(6) Every order of imposition of penalty under this 
section shall be in writing.”. 
(C) In section 58, the words “by the conservator” shall 
be omitted. 
(D) For the First Schedule and the Second Schedule, 
the following Schedules shall be substituted, namely:— 
“THE FIRST SCHEDULE 
[See section 53A(1)] 
Punishment for certain offences 
Serial 
No.  
Offences Section to 
which 
offence is 
referred 
Punishment 
(1) (2) (3) (4) 
1. If any port 
commences or 
carries on 
operations in 
contravention 
of section 10 
10 Fine 
which may 
extend to one 
lakh rupees 
and in 
addition, a 
fine which 
may extend  
to ten 
thousand 
rupees for 
every day 
during which 
the offence 
continues 
after 
conviction.  
2. If any master 
of a vessel fails 
to permit warps 
or hawsers to be 
made fast or let 
go of any warps 
or hawsers in 
contravention 
of section 27 
27 Imprison
ment which 
may extend 
to six months 
or fine which 
may extend 
to one lakh 
rupees or 
both. 
  
 

177 
 (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
    (1) (2) (3) (4) 
3. If master 
omits to take 
order to 
extinguish the 
fire or obstructs 
the conservator 
or any person in 
extinguishing 
or attempting to 
extinguish the 
fire, in 
contravention 
of section 28 
28 Imprison
ment which 
may extend 
to six months 
or fine which 
may extend 
to one lakh 
rupees or 
both. 
4. If any person 
does or omits to 
do any act 
relating to 
safety of 
vessels in 
contravention 
of sub -section 
(1) of section 29 
29(1) Imprison
ment which 
may extend 
to six months 
or fine which 
may extend 
to one lakh 
rupees or 
both. 
5. If the master 
of the vessel 
causes or suffer 
any warp or 
hawser attached 
to his vessel to 
be left out in 
any port in 
contravention 
of sub -section 
(2) of section 29 
29(2) Imprison
ment which 
may extend 
to six months 
or fine which 
may extend 
to one lakh 
rupees or 
both. 
6. If any person 
commits any 
act in 
contravention 
of sub -section 
(3) of section 29 
29(3) Imprison
ment which 
may extend 
to six months 
or fine which 
may extend 
to one lakh 
rupees or 
both. 
7. If any 
unauthorised 
person searches 
for lost stores in 
contravention 
of section 30 
30 Imprison
ment which 
may extend 
to six months 
or fine which 
may extend 
to one lakh 
rupees or 
both. 
  
 

178 
 (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
    (1) (2) (3) (4) 
8. If any person 
injures any 
bank or shore in 
contravention 
of section 31 
31 Imprisonm
ent which may 
extend to six 
months or fine 
which may 
extend to one 
lakh rupees or 
both. 
9. If any port 
fails to obtain 
prior clearance in 
contravention of 
section 71 
71 Fine which 
may extend to 
fifty thousand 
rupees. 
THE SECOND SCHEDULE 
[See section 54(3)] 
Penalty for certain contraventions 
Sl. 
No.  
Contravention Section Penalties 
(1) (2) (3) (4) 
1. If any port 
other than 
major port or 
port officer fails 
to comply with 
directions of the 
State Maritime 
Board under 
sub-section ( 3) 
of section 15 
15(3) In case of 
contravention 
by a port 
officer, penalty 
which may 
extend to ten 
thousand 
rupees and in 
addition, 
penalty not 
exceeding one 
thousand 
rupees for every 
day during 
which such 
default 
continues.  
In case of 
contravention 
by port, penalty 
which may 
extend to two 
lakh rupees and 
in addition, 
penalty not 
exceeding 
twenty 
thousand 
rupees for every 
day during 
which such 
default 
continues. 
  
 

179 
 (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
    (1) (2) (3) (4) 
    
2. If any person 
refuses or 
neglects to obey 
any direction of 
the conservator 
issued under 
section 19 
19 Penalty 
which may 
extend to 
twenty 
thousand 
rupees and in 
addition, 
penalty not 
exceeding 
five thousand 
rupees for 
every day 
during which 
such default 
continues. 
3. If any owner 
has without 
lawful excuse 
caused any 
obstruction or 
impediment 
under                    
section 20 
20 Penalty 
which may 
extend to two 
lakh rupees 
and in 
addition, 
penalty not 
exceeding 
twenty 
thousand 
rupees for 
every day 
during which 
such default 
continues. 
4. If any master 
of a vessel or 
any other 
person lifts the 
buoys or 
moorings 
without 
assistance of 
the conservator 
in 
contravention 
of sub -section 
(1) of section 22 
22(1) Penalty 
which may 
extend to one 
lakh rupees. 
5. If the master 
of the vessel, or 
any person in 
possession or 
occupation of 
the building or 
place, without 
lawful excuse,  
23 Penalty 
which may 
extend to ten 
thousand 
rupees for the 
first 
contravention 
and in  
  
 

180 
 (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
    (1) (2) (3) (4) 
 refuses to allow 
the conservator 
or any person to 
board or enter 
such vessel, 
building or 
place in 
contravention 
of section 23 
 addition, 
penalty 
not 
exceeding 
ten 
thousand 
rupees for 
every day 
during 
which 
such 
default 
continues. 
6. If any person 
without lawful 
excuse, 
removes, 
destroys or 
damages any 
property in 
contravention 
of sub-section 
(1) of section 26 
26(1) Penalty 
which 
may 
extend to 
one lakh 
rupees 
and in 
addition, 
expenses 
for any 
loss, 
destruction 
or damage 
suffered 
by the 
port, 
including 
expenses 
of any 
inspection 
or survey 
carried 
out. 
7. If any owner 
or master of a 
vessel enters, 
leaves or moves 
in any port in 
contravention 
of sub -section 
(1) of section 32 
32(1) Penalty 
which 
may 
extend to 
two lakh 
rupees. 
8. If any port 
fails to provide 
adequate 
reception 
facilities in 
contravention of 
section 36  
36 Penalty 
which 
may 
extend to 
two lakh 
rupees. 
  
 

181 
 (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
    (1) (2) (3) (4) 
9. If any port 
fails to comply 
with directions 
of the Central 
Government 
under                  
section 37 
37 Penalty 
which 
may 
extend to 
one lakh 
rupees 
and in 
addition, 
penalty 
which 
may 
extend to 
twenty 
thousand 
rupees for 
every day 
during 
which 
such 
default 
continues. 
10. If any port 
fails to prepare 
a port waste 
reception and 
handling plan in 
contravention 
of sub -section 
(1) of section 38 
38(1) Penalty 
which 
may 
extend to 
one lakh 
rupees. 
11. If any port 
fails to 
implement the 
approved port 
waste reception 
and handling 
plan in 
contravention of 
sub-section ( 2) 
of section 38 
38(2) Penalty 
which 
may 
extend to 
one lakh 
rupees. 
12. If any port 
fails to 
communicate 
any information 
to vessels in 
contravention of 
sub-section ( 3) 
of section 38 
38(3) Penalty 
which 
may 
extend to 
twenty 
thousand 
rupees. 
13. If any 
operator, agent 
or master of a 
vessel fails to 
submit an  
39 Penalty 
which 
may 
extend to 
twenty  
  
 

182 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
(1) (2) (3) (4)
advance waste 
notice in 
contravention 
of section 39 
thousand 
rupees. 
14. If any 
master of a 
vessel fails to 
deliver all its 
vessel-
generated 
waste to a 
reception 
facility in 
contravention 
of sub -section 
(1) of
section 40
40(1) Penalty 
which 
may 
extend to 
one lakh 
rupees. 
15. If the owner
or master of any
vessel fails to
pay the charges
payable or fails
to comply with
the conditions
under
section 41
41 Penalty 
which 
may 
extend to 
twenty 
thousand 
rupees 
and in 
addition, 
penalty 
which 
may 
extend to 
two 
thousand 
rupees for 
every day 
during 
which 
such 
default 
continues. 
16. If any person
fails to upload
information on
the portal in
contravention of
section 43
43 Penalty 
which 
may 
extend to 
ten 
thousand 
rupees. 
17. If any port
fails to repor t
the particulars
of any incident
44(1) Penalty 
which 
may 
extend to 

183 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
(1) (2) (3) (4)
in 
contravention 
of sub -section 
(1) of section 44
one lakh 
rupees. 
18. If any port
fails to comply
with the
directions
issued by the
Central
Government
under
sub-section ( 2)
of section 44
44(2) Penalty 
which 
may 
extend to 
one lakh 
rupees 
and in 
addition, 
penalty 
which 
may 
extend to 
ten 
thousand 
rupees for 
every day 
during 
which 
such 
default 
continues. 
19. If the 
Authority or 
concessionaire 
or person or 
body of persons 
fails to publish 
the port tariff in 
contravention 
of sub -section 
(2) of section 47
47(2) Penalty 
which 
may 
extend to 
fifty 
thousand 
rupees 
and in 
addition, 
penalty 
which 
may 
extend to 
five 
thousand 
rupees for 
every day 
during 
which 
such 
default 
continues. 
20. If any owner,
agent or master
of a vessel fails
to report the
arrival of a
vessel in
contravention
of section 49
49 Penalty 
which 
may 
extend to 
twenty 
thousand 
rupees. 

184 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
(1) (2) (3) (4)
21. If any
master of a
vessel fails to
pay any fees or
other charges
in
contravention
of sub -section
(1) of
section 52
52(1) Penalty 
which 
may 
extend to 
twice the 
amount of 
fees or 
other 
charges 
due, 
subject to 
a 
minimum 
of twenty 
thousand 
rupees. 
22. If any person
fails to furnish
or furnishes
information in
contravention
of section 57
57 Penalty 
which 
may 
extend to 
two lakh 
rupees 
and in 
addition, 
penalty 
which 
may 
extend to 
two 
thousand 
rupees for 
every day 
during 
which 
such 
default 
continues. 
23. If the master
of any vessel
unlawfully
hoists or fails to
hoist any flag in
contravention
of section 65
65 Penalty 
which 
may 
extend to 
twenty 
thousand 
rupees. 

185 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
(1) (2) (3) (4)
24. If any port
fails to prepare
a safety,
security,
disaster
management
and pollution
incident
emergency
preparedness
and response
plan in
contravention
of sub -section
(1) of
section 66
66(1) Penalty 
which 
may 
extend to 
two lakh 
rupees. 
25. If any port
fails to comply
with the
directions
issued by the
conservator in
contravention
of sub -section
(4) of
section 66
66(4) Penalty 
which 
may 
extend to 
two lakh 
rupees. 
26. If any port
fails to report
particulars of
any incident in
contravention
of section 67
67 Penalty 
which 
may 
extend to 
one lakh 
rupees. 
27. If any port
fails to provide
shore based
welfare
services in
contravention
of section 68
68 Penalty 
which 
may 
extend to 
twenty 
thousand 
rupees. 
28. If any port
fails to comply
with directions
of the Central
Government
issued under
sub-section ( 1)
of section 69
69(1) Penalty 
which 
may 
extend to 
fifty 
thousand 
rupees. 

186 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
(1) (2) (3) (4)
29. If any port
fails to develop 
or maintain a 
vessel traffic 
service in 
contravention 
of sub -section 
(2) of section 69
69(2) Penalty 
which 
may 
extend to 
one lakh 
rupees.”. 

A 
BILL 
to amend certain enactments for decriminalising and rationalising offences to 
further enhance trust -based governance for ease of living and doing 
business. 
———— 
(As passed by the Houses of Parliament)
RS-P&PS- GB(E) – 016 – 15.04.2026