1
THE AGRICULTURAL WORKERS WELFARE BILL, 2010
BY
SHRI A.T. NANA PATIL, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for the welfare of agricultural workers and for matters
connected therewith.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-first Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the  Agricultural Workers Welfare Act, 2010.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force at once.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "agricultural workers" means a person who follows one or more of the following
agricultural occupations in the capacity of labourer on hire or in exchange whether in
cash or in kind or partly in cash and partly in kind:—
(i) farming, including the cultivation and tillage of soil;
(ii) dairy farming;
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Definitions.
Bill No. 104 of 2010
TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5
10

2
(iii) pisciculture;
(iv) production, cultivation, growing and harvesting of any horticulture,
floriculture commodity;
(v) raising of livestock, bee-keeping or poultry;
(vi) any practice performed on a farm as incidental to, or in conjunction
with, the farm operations (including any forestry or timbering operations and the
preparation for market and delivery to storage or to market or to carriage for
transportation of farm products); and
(vii) growing fodder or thatching grass or for grazing cattle;
(b) "appropriate Government" means the Central Government or a State
Government, as the case may be;
(c) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. (1) As soon as may be, but not later than one year from the commencement of this
Act, the Central Government shall, in consultation with the State Governments, formulate
a scheme for the Welfare of Agricultural workers.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provision, the scheme shall
provide for the agricultural workers,—
(i) a comprehensive insurance scheme;
(ii) old age pension;
(iii) free health care facilities; and
(iv) payment of compensation in cases of accident during agricultural operations.
4. The appropriate Government shall take steps to implement the schemes formulated
under section 3 in such manner and within such time as may be prescribed.
5. (1) The Central Government shall constitute a Fund to be known as the Agricultural
Workers Welfare Fund to which the Central Government and the State Governments shall
contribute in such ratio as may be prescribed.
(2)  The Fund constituted under sub-section (1) shall be utilized to give effect to the
provisions of this Act.
6. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Formulation
of a scheme
for the welfare
of Agriculture
workers.
Implementation
of the scheme.
Constitution
of Agricultural
Workers
Welfare Fund.
Power to make
rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The economy of our country depends, to a considerable extent, upon agriculture.
More than 65% of the population in the country is directly or indirectly engaged in agriculture.
Lakhs of workers are involved in agricultural operations. But their role as key contributors in
the national economy has never been given due importance. They live in miserable conditions.
They are not even paid the minimum wages which they are entitled to get. They do not have
any access to health care, pension and other such benefits.
The miserable living conditions of the agricultural workers largely go unnoticed as
they are in unorganized sector and they do not have any forum to vent their grievances.
They have been a neglected lot.
Therefore, it is proposed in the Bill to formulate a scheme for the welfare of agricultural
workers.
N
EW DELHI; A.T. NANA PATIL
July 27, 2010
3

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for formulation of a scheme for the welfare of agricultural
workers. Clause 4 provides for implementation of the scheme for the welfare of agricultural
workers. Clause 5 provides for constitution of an Agricultural Workers Welfare Fund. The
Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It
is estimated that a recurring expenditure of about rupees ten thousand crore per annum will
be involved.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees five hundred crore is also likely to be
involved.
4

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLA TION
Clause 6 of the Bill seeks to empower the Central Government to frame rules for carrying
out the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.
5

LLOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the welfare of agricultural workers and for matters
connected therewith.
————
(Shri A.T. Nana Patil, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—3966LS (S5)—18-08-2010.