AS INTRODUCED IN Lok SABHA

Bill No. 104 of 2000
telah

THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2000
By
Suet RaMDas ATHAWALE, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
Br it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-first Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (J) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2000. Short title and
(2) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by a
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.

2, Article 39 of the Constitution shall be renumbered as clause (7) thereof and after Amendment of
the clause as so renumbered, the following clause shall be inserted, namely:— article 39

2) The State shall, with a view to achieving the objectives as enshrined in
Sub-clauses (2) and (c) of clause (1), endeavour to generate employment and provide
necessary facilities for self-employment”,


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

Article 39 of the Constitution of India provides that the State shall direct its policy
to ensure the operation of the economic system does not result in the concentration of
wealth and means of production to the common detriment. This, no doubt, comes under
the Directive Principles of State Policy but the operation of the country’s economic policies
over the years has resulted in concentration of wealth in the so-called “industrial houses”,
big or small, and in groups of families and their kith and kin. The rich are becoming richer
and the vast majority of people are deprived of access to the means of production of
wealth and their living standards remain comparatively low. The employment generation
Schemes are touching only the fringe of the problem of providing gainful means of livelihood
to large sections of people in the country.

It is, therefore, desirable that the Government should undertake constructive
employment generation schemes and provide necessary facilities for self-employment,
The Government should give industrial licences, export and import licences, telephone _
booths for operating telephone services, petrol stations, L.P.G. agencies, ferry transport
Services, etc. to those individuals and members of their families who have not been benefited |
by such projects.

‘The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives. |

New DeLut, |
February 28, 2000 RAMDAS ATHAWALE _



ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
* . * * *
39. The State Shall, in particular, direct its policy towards securing—

(a) that the citizen, men and women equally, have the right to an adequate
means of livelihood;

(b) that the ownership and control of the material resources of the community
are so distributed as best to subserve the common good;

(c) that the operation of the economic system does not result in the concentration
of wealth and means of production to the common detriment;

(@) that there is equal pay for equal work for both men and women;

(०) that the health and strength of workers, men and women, and the tender
age of children are not abused and that citizens are not forced by economic necessity
to enter avocations unsuited to their age or strength;

(0 that children are given opportunities and facilities to develop in a healthy
manner and in conditions of freedom and dignity and that childhood and youth are
protected against exploitation and against moral and material abandonment.

* * * . *

Certain princi
ples of policy
to be followed
by the State.


LOK SABHA

A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.

(Shri Ramdas Athawale, M.P)

MGIP(PLU)MRNO—1466LS—27-06-2000.