As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

॥ 1 VEL 1399

Bill No. 104 of 1999

THE SLUMS AND JHUGGI JHOPRI AREAS CLEARANCE
BILL, 1999
by
Supt Y.S. VIVEKANANDA Reppy, M.P.
A
BILL

provide for clearance of jhuggi jhopri clusters and slum areas and for matters
connected therewith.

Beit enacted by Parliament in the Fiftieth Year of the Republic of India as follows —
1, (7) This Act may be called the Slums and Jhuggi Jhopri Areas Clearance Act,

(2) It extends to Union Territories only.

(3) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by
‘ification in the Official Gazette, appoint.

2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—

(a) “building” includes any structure or erection or any part of a building but
does not include a plant or machinery comprised in a building;

(b) “competent authority” means such officer or authority as the Central
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint as the competent
authority for the purpose of this Act;

Short title,
extent and

Definitions.


Competent
authority to
declare slum

Alternate
accommoda-
tion to
residents of
slum clearance
areas.

Removal of
jhuggi jhopri
areas.

Ban on setting
up of jhuggi
jhopri areas.

Power to make
rules,

2

-(c) “jhuggi jhopri” means a small roughly built house or shelter
of mud, wood or metal having thatched or tin shect roof covering;

(d) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this |

1... (९) “slum” means an area consisting of jhuggi jhopri clusters, badly b
over-crowded houses and buildings; and

(f) “slum clearance” means the clearance of any slum area by,
removal of buildings therefrom.

3. (1) The competent authority may, from time to time by notification in
Gazette, declare any area to be a slum area within the meaning of this Act.

(2) Where the competent authority is satisfied that the most satisfactory
dealing with the conditions in a slum area is demolition of all the buildings an
jhopri clusters in the area, the authority shall by an order notified in the Offici
declare the area to be a clearance area, that is to say, an area to be cleared of all!
and jhuggi jhopri clusters in accordance with the provisions of this Act.

4. (1) All the residents of slum clearance areas shall be ev:
accommodated in alternate houses to be built by the Government.

(2) The houses built under sub-section (1) shall have all necessary basic f

5. As soon as may be after competent authority has declared any slum
clearance area, the Government shall cause such slum area to be cleared of
jhopri clusters and other buildings removed from that area.

6. (1) No person shall be allowed to set up any jhuggi jhopri in any area.

(2) Any jhuggi jhopri set up in violation of the provisions of this Act shall
ished by the competent authority in such manner as may be prescribed.

7. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, m
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

es of people in our country are at present living in slums and jhuggi jhopri clusters
n conditions. There are no basic facilities of potable water, electricity, sanitation
in these areas. However, people have no other option but to live in such
i 10.1 clusters. The problem is more appalling in Metropolitan cities and
‘cities where people migrate in large numbers in search of employment. Poverty
to find shelter in slums and jhuggi jhopri clusters.

is duty of the Government to provide alternate houses with basic facilities to persons
ing in slum areas. The Government should also see that slum areas do not come
se which are already there should be demolished.

Bill seeks to achieve the above objective.

Y.S. VIVEKANANDA REDDY



FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 4 of the Bill provides that the Central Government shall provide |
houses with all basic facilities to those who are living in slum areas. The Bill, if
will involve basic expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is esti
a sum of rupees one thousand five hundred crore will be involved as a recurring
ture per annum.

A sum of rupees four hundred crore will also be involved as a non-
expenditure.



MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

z
purposes of this Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the
‘ion of legislative power is of a normal character.


LOK SABHA.

A
BILL

to provide for clearance of jhuggi jhopri clusters and slum areas and for |
3 connected therewith.

(Shri Y.S. Vivekananda Reddy, M.P.)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—1908LS—25-11-1999.