4011939. 
As INTRODUCED IN LoK SAB~ O~' 
.9 AUG \Sil 
BiD No. 1M of 1_ 
'THE MOTOR VEHICLES (AMENDMENT) BUL, 1,982 
A 
BILL 
further to 4mend the Motor Vehicles Act, 1939. 
BE it coacted by Parliament in the TlUrty-tbirg Year of tho Republic of InQia 
85 follows:-
1. (J) This Act may be called the Motor Vehicles (Amendment) Act, 1982. Short Utle 
, and com-(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Oovernment may, mence-
5 -by noti8cation in the Official 'Gazette, appoint and different dates may be appoint- ment. 
-eel ,for different provisions of this Act. ' 
2. In Boction 7 of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1939 (hereinafter retCrred to as .Amead-
.the p1!inclpal Act) ,- ment ~f 
'10 
(a) in sub-section (2), for the words "and shall cootam .the informa-
tion required by the form", the words "shall contain the information re-
quired by the form and shall be accompanied by three c1e8r copies of a 
recent photograph of the aPl11icant" shall be substituted; 
(b) sub-section (4) shall be omitted, 
3, In section 8 of the principal Act, in sub-section (l), for the words, 
1 ~ brackets and figures "and, in the case of a driving licence to drive as a paid 
employee or to drive a transport vehicle, one of the photographs referred to in 
sub-section (4) of section 7", the words, brackets and figures "and one of the 
pboto~phs referre~ to in sub-section (2) of section 1" shan besubstitutw., 
leCtlon T. 
Amend-
Pl81lt of 
eecUonB, 

r . 
Amend-
ment of 
~tion8h, 
Insertion 
of new 
section 
llA. 
Spec1al 
provlaion 
8a to 
afftxation 
of pboto-
,rapb 
in certain 
easel on 
drivinl 
llcenc ... 
Amend-
mentor 
secUo.n 24. 
Amend-
mentor 
section 38. 
4. In section SA of the principal Act, in sub-section (2) ,-
(a) in the opening portion, for the words and figure "provisioDs of 
section 7", the words, figure and brackets "provisions of section 7 (except 
the provision requiring the application thereunder to be accompanied by 
three clear copies of a recent photograph of the applicant)" shall be subs- 5 
tituted; 
(b) in the proviso, for the words, brackets and figures "sub-sections 
(3) and (ot)", the word, brackets and figure "sub-section (3)" shall be 
substituted. 
5, After section 11 of the principal Act, the following section shall be insert- 10 
cd, namely:-
ellA. (1) Every person whose application for the issue or renewal of 
a driving licence to drive other than as a paid employee or to drive a vehicle 
other than a: transport vehicle is pending before any licensing authority 
immediately before the appointed day. shaU, on or as soon as may be after 15 
the appointed day, forward tlrree clear copies of his recent photograph to 
such licensing authority along with an application in writing for the affix. 
ation ot such photograph on the driving licence. 
(2) A driving licence to drive other than as a paid employee QJ' to 
drive a vehicle other than a transport vehicle, issued or renewed under this flO 
Act before the appointed day shall cease to be effective on the expiry of six 
months from the appointed day, if it does not cease to be effective otherwise 
earlier, unless the holder of such licence makes, before the expiry of the 
said period of six months, an application to any licenSing authority for the 
affixation of hi!! photograph on the driving licence. 
(3) An application under lIub-section (2) shall give 'Particulars relat-
ing to the name of the holder of the driving licence, his temporary and 
permanent adaresses, number and date of issue of the driving licence and 
the name of the licensinl! authority by whom the licence was issued and 
shall be accompanied by the driving licence and three clear oopies of a 30 
recent photograph of the holder. 
(-I) No fee shall be chargeable with respect to any application made 
under this section. 
(S) Where the authority to whom an application is made under sob-
aection (2) in respect of Ii driving licence is not the authority which issued 35 
the driving licence, it shatt intimate the fact of affixation of the photograph 
on the driving licence to the authority which issued the driving licence. 
Explanation.-For the purposes of this section, "appointed day" means. 
the date ot commencement of section S of the Motor Vehicles (Amendment) 
Act, 1982.'. 40 
6. In section 24 ~ the principal Act, in 8ub-section (3), in the proviso, for 
the words "the letters and figures aforesaid shall be shown", the words "the 
figures aforesaid shalt be shown in Arabic numerals and the letters and figures 
. aforesaid shall be shown" shall be substituted. 
7. In section 36 of the principal Act,- ____ .. , 45 
(a) in sub-section (1), for the words "8 State Government may. with 
the approval of the Central Govenpn~t", the words "the Central Oov~rn· 
ment may" shall be substituted; ~ , 

(b) in sub-section (3), in the proviso, for the words u. State 
Government" and for the words "the State Gov"l'DDlCIlt", the worda '"the 
Central Government" shall be substituted. 
8. After section 69A of the principal Act, the following section shaU be Insertion 
5 inserted, namely:- otaew 
aect10D S9B. 
10 
"69B. (1) The Central Government may make rules regulating the Po'" at 
construction, equipment and maintenance of motor vehicles and trailers Centrlil Govern-with respect to any of the following matters, namely:- ment 
(a) the width, height, length and overhang of vehicles and of the ~:ke 
loads carried; 
(b) the size, nature and condition at lyres. 
(2) Rules may be made under sub-section (1) governing the mftters 
mentioned therein either generally in respect of motor vehicles or trailers or 
in respect of motor vehicles or trailers of a particular class or in particular 
15 circumstances .... 
9. In section 70 of the principal Act,- Amend .. 
ment Of 
(Q) in sub-section (1), after the words "and trailers", the words section 70. 
"with respect to all matters other than the matters referred to in clause (a) 
or clause (b) of sub-section (1) of section 69B" shall be inserted; 
20 (b) in sub-section (2), clauses (a) and (e) shall be omitted. 
125 
go 
35 
, 
10. In section 86 of the principal Act,- Amend-
ment of 
(a) for sub-section (1), the following sub-sections shall be section 88. 
substituted, namely:-
,I (1) The driver of a motor vehicle in any public place shall, 
on demand by any police officer in uniform, produce his licence 
for examination: 
Provided that the driver may, if his lic;:ence has been sub .. 
mitted to, or has been seized by, any ofticer or authority under 
this or any other Act, produce in lieu of the licence a receipt or 
other acknowledgment issued by such oftlcer or authority in 
respect thereof and thereafter produce the licence within ten days at 
any police station in India which he specifies to the police officer 
making the demand. 
(IA) The conductor, if any, of a motor \tehicle in any 
public place shall, on demand by any police officer in uniform, 
produce his licence for examination."; 
(b) in sub-section (3),-
"(i) in the opening portion, tor the words "licence or certi-
ficates, as the case may be.", the words, brackets, figures and 
letter "licence referred to in sub-section (IA) or the certifi-
cates referred to in sub.section (2), as the case may be," shall 
be substituted; 

Liabuityt o 
PlY com-
pensation 
in certain 
cues 
on the 
principle 
of no 
fault. 
Provision. 
uto 
other 
rilht to 
claim 
compensa-
tion tor 
death or 
permanent 
disable-
ment. 
.~ 
(i) in the proviso, the words "to a driver driVing as a paid 
employee, or tG the driver of a transport vehicle or" shall be 
omitted. 
11. After Chapter ViI of the principal Act, the following Chapter sball 
be inserted, namely: - 5 
"CHAPTER VIlA 
., .. -... -' 
WMIolTY WITHOUT FAULT IN CERTAIN CASES 
92A. (1) Where the death or permanent disablement of any per-
IOn bas resulted from an accident arising out of the use of a motor 
vehicle or motor Vehicles, the owner of the vehicle shall, or, as the 10 
case may be, the owners of the vehicles shall, jointly and severally, 
be liable to pay compensation in respect of such death or disable-
ment in accordance with the provisions of this section. 
(2) The amount of compensation which shall be payable under 
8ub-section (1) in respect of the death 0'£ any person shall be a fixed 15 
sum of fifteen thousand rupees and the amount of compensation 
payable under that sub-section in respect of the permanent disable-
ment ot any person shall be a fixed sum of seven thousand five hund-
red rupees. 
(.l) In any claim for compensation under sub-section (1), the !20 
claimant shall not be required to plead and establish that the death 
or permanent disablement in respect of wh~ch the claim has been 
made was due to any wrongful act, neglect or default of the owner 
or owners of the vehicle or vehicles concerned or of any other person. 
(4) A claim for compensation under sub-section (1) shall not be 25 
defeated by reason of any wrongful act, neglect or default of the per-
Ion in respect of whose death or permanent disablement the claim 
has been made nor shall the quantum of compensation recoverable 
in respect of such death or permanent disablement be reduced on the 
basts of the share of such person in the responsibility for such death 30 
or pemanent disablement. 
92E. (l) The right to claim compensation under section 92A in 
respect of death or permanent disablement of any person shall be in 
addition to any other right (hereafter in this section referred to as 
the right on the principle of fault) to claim compensation in respect 35 
thereaf under any other provision of this Act or of any other law for 
the time being in force. 
(2) A claim for compensation under section 92A in respect of 
deatli or permanent disablement of any person shall be disposed of 
as dJ1editiOUlily as possible and where compensation is claimed in 40 
respect of such death or permanent disablement Wider section 92A 
and also in l'l1tsuance of any right on the principle of fault, the claim 
for compensation under section 92A shall be disposed of as aforesaid 
in the first place. 
I . 
• I 

5 
10 
20 
8 of 1923. 30 
35 
45 
(J) Not\vithstancling anything contained in sub.section (1), 
where in respect 01 t.b.e aeath or permanent cbSablement 01 any per-
son, the person liable to pay compensatlon uncter sectlon 9~A 16 «USo 
haole to pay compensatlOn m accoraance with the fight on the pnn-
ciple of fault, the person so liable shaU pay the hrst-mentlOnea com-
pensation and-
(II) if the amount of the first-mentioned compensation is less 
than the amount of the second-mentioned compensation, he shall 
be uab.1.e to pay (in addition to the nrst-mentloned compensa. 
tion) only so much of the second-mentioned compensauon as is 
equal to the amount by which it exceeds the nrst-mentioned 
compensation; 
(b) if the amount of the first-mentioned compensation is 
equal to or less than the amount of the second-menlioned com-
pensation, he shall not be liable to pay the second-m.mtioned 
compensatJ.on, 
92C, For the purposes of this Chapter, permanent disablement of 
a person shall be deemed to have resulted from an accident of the 
nature referred to in sub-section (1) of .ection 92A if such person 
has sUffered by reason of the accident any injury or injuties involv-
ing-
(II) permanent privation of the sight of either eye or the hear-
ing of either ear, or privation of any member or joint; or 
(b) destruction or permanent impairing of the poweri of 
any member or jomt; or 
(c) permanent clisfiguration of the head or face, 
92D, The provisions of this Chapter shall also apply in relation 
to any claim for compensation in respect of death or permanent dis-
ablement of any person under the Workmen's Compensation Act, 
1923 resulting from an accident of the nature referred to in sub-sec-
tion (1) of section 92A ,and for this purpose, the said provisions shall, 
with necessary modifications, be deemed to form part of that Act, 
92E, The provisions of this Chapter shall have effect notwith-
StandihQ' anythini ~ontained in any other provision of this Act or of 
any other law for the time being in force.", 
12, In section 93 of the principal Act, after clause (b), the following 
!clause shall be inserted, namely:-
'(ba) "liability" wherever used in relation to the death of or 
bodily injury to any person includes liability in respect thereof 
under section 92Aj', 
13, In section 95 of the principal Act, in Bub-section (~),-
(a) in clause (II), for the words "fifty thousand rupees", the 
words "one lakh and fifty thousand rupees" shall be substituted; 
(b) in clause (b), for sub.clause (Iii), the following sub-clause 
shall be substituted, namely:-
"(ii) in respect of passengers, a limit of fifteen thousand 
rupees for each individual passengerj"; 
Pennanent 
dis-
ablement. 
Applicabi-
lity of 
Chapter 
to certain 
claims 
under 
Act 8 of 
1923. 
Ovel'-
riding 
eft'ect. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 93. 
Amend .. 
ment of 
aection 9S. 

Insertion 
of new 
sections 
l09A, 
l09B and 
109C. 
Special 
provilioDS 
8S to 
compensa. 
tion in 
cases of 
hit and 
run 
motor 
accidents. 
(c) in clause (d), for the words "two thousand", the words "six 
thousand" shall be substituted. 
1'- After section 109 of the principal Act, the following sections shall 
be inserted, namely:-
L-
'109A. (1) For the purposes of this section, section 109B and see- 5 
tion 109C,-
(a) "grievous hurt" shall have the same meaning as in the 
Indian Penal Code; "5 of 1860. 
(b) "hit and run motor accident" means an accident arising 
out of the use of a motor vehicle or motor vehicles the Identity 10 
whereof cannot be ascertained in spite of reasonable efforts for 
the purpose; 
(c) "scheme" means the scheme framed under section lO9C; 
(d) '~Solatium Fund" means the Fund established under sub- ":,1~ 
section (2). 15 
(2) The Central Government may, by notification in the Oftielal 
Gazette, establish a Fund to be known as the Solatium Fund. 
(3) The Solatium Fund shall be utilised for paying, in accordance 
with the provisions of this Act and the scheme, compensation in res-
pect of the death of, or grievous hurt to, persons resulting from hit !lO 
and run motor accidents. 
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in the General In-
surance Business (Nationalisation) Act, 1972 or any other law for the 57 of 1972. 
time being in force or any instrument having the force of law, the 
General Insurance Corporation of India formed under section 9 of the '25 
said Act and the insurance companies for the time being carryi~g on 
general insurance business in India shall make to the Solatium Fund 
such contributions as the Central Government may from time to time 
by order in writing specify, and in addition to such contributions, the 
said Fund shan cOnsist of- ' go 
(a) such sums as. the Central Government may, after due 
&Mtropriation Dlade by Parliament by law in this behalf, pro .. 
vide from time to time; 
(b) such sums as the State Governments may from time to 
time contribute; and 35 
(c) such other sums as may be received (whether by way of 
refund, gift, donation or in any other manner) for being credited 
to the Fund. 
(5) Subject to the provisions of this Act and the scheme, there 40 
shall be paid as compensation out of the Solatium Fund,-
(4) in respect of the death of any person resulting from a hit 
and run motor accident, a fixed sum of five thousand rupees; 
(b) in respect of grievous hurt to any person resulting from 
a hit and run motor accident, a fixed sum of one thousand 45 
rupees:' ., 

10 
35 
45 
., ... ,-" 
Provided that where the sum standing to the credit of the Sola .. 
tium Fund is not adequate for meeting any claim for compensation 
under this section, such claim may be kept pending for payment till 
such time as the sum necessary for meeting it becomes available in 
the Fund. ·.i~T~l 
(6) The provisions ot sUb-section (1) of section llOA shall apply 
for the purpose of making applications for compensation under this 
section as they apply for the purpose of making applications for com-
pensation referred to in that sub-section. 
I09B. (1) The payment of compensation in respect of the death 
of, or grievous hurt to, any person under section I09A shall be sub. 
ject to the condition that if any compensation (hereafter in this sub-
section referred to as the other compensation) or other amount in lieu· 
of or by way of satisfaction of a claim for compensation is awarded 
or paid in respect of such death or grievous hurt under any other 
provision of this Act or any other law or otherwise, so much of the 
other compensation or other amount aforesaid as is equal,to the com. 
pensation paid under section l09A shall be credited to the Solatium 
,"una by way of refund. 
(2) Before awarding compensation in respect of an accident in-
volving the death of, or bodily injury to, any person arising out of 
the use of a motor vehicle or motor vehicles under any provision of 
Ws Act (other than section l09A) or any other law, the tribunal, 
court or other authority awarding such compensation shall verify alii 
to whether in respect of such death or bodily injury compensation 
has already been paid under section l09A or an application for pay-
ment of compensation is pending under that section, and such tribu-
nal, cOurt or other authority shall,-
(a) if compensation has already been paid under section 
I09A, direct the person liable to pay the compensation awarded 
by it to pay into the Solatium Fund so much thereof as is re-
quired to be credited to that Fund in accordance with the pro_ 
visions of sub-section (1); 
(b) if an application for paym~nt of compensation is pend-
ing under section l09A. forward the particulars as to the com-
pensation awarded by it to the authority in which the SCI!attum 
, ' -. - -'--.., Fund vests. ' 
E%'Planatfon.-For the purposes of this sub-section, an APplica-
tion for compenaation under section t09A shalt ~e deemed to be pendfng- I , .., " 
(f)" if such application has been rejected, till the date of the 
rejection of the application, and ' 
(ii) in any other rase. ti11 the date of payment of compen-
sation in pursuance of the application. . 
Refund 
in certain 
case, of 
compen-
sation 
paid under 
section 
l09A. 
lO9C. (1) Th~ Central Government may, by notification in the 
OftIdal Gazette, malt. a scheme specifying th~ authoritv in which 
the Solatium. Fund "hall vest. the mllnner in whkb the Fund shall 
be administered, the form. manner and the tiD'l<e within which 81)pli. 
cations for compensation from the Fund may be made, tbe officers 
or authoritieR to whom sUt!h ano1ieations may be made, the proce-
dure to he fonawed by such officers or auth~rities for considering 
Schemo 
for the 
adminis-
tration 
of the 
Solatium 
Funel. 
"""- I, .•• ,.- ..... ..N" .,. 

Amend.
menta!
section
110.
Amend.
menta!
section
110A.
•
8
and passingorderson suchapplications,and allothermatters con-
nectedwith,or .incidentalto,theadminlstrationQf theFund and
thepayment ofcompensationtherefrom.
(2) A schememade undersub-section(1) may providethat-
(a) a contraventionofany provisionthereofshallbe punish-5
able withimprisonmentforsuchterm as may be specifiedbut
inno caseexceedingthreemonths,orwithfinewhichmay ex-
tendtosuchamount as may be specifiedbutinno caseexceed-
ingfivehundredrupeesorwithboth;
(b') thepowers,functionsordutiesconferredorimposedon 10
any officerorauthorityby suchschememay be delegated,with
thepriorapprovalin writingof theCentralGovernment, by
suchofficerorauthoritytoany otherofficerorauthority;
(,c) any provisionofsuchschememay operatewithretros-
pectiveeffectfroma datenotearlierthan thedateofestablish.•15
ment 0'1 theSolatiumFund:
Providedthatno suchretrospectiveeffectshallbe givenso
as to prejudiciallyaffecttheinterestsof any personwho may
be governedby suchprovision.
~o(3) Every schememade underthissectionshall be laid, as
soonas may be afteritismade, beforeeach House of Parliament,
whileitisinsession,fora totalperiodofthirtydays whichmay be
comprisedin one sessionor in two or more successivesessions,
and if,beforetheexpiryofthesessionimmediatelyfollowingthe25
sessionor the successivesessionsaforesaid.bothHouses agree in
making any modificationintheschemeor bothHousesagree that
theschemeshouldnotbe made, theschemeshallthereafterhave
effectonlyinsuchmodifiedformorbe ofno effect,as thecasemay
be;so,however,thatany suchmodificationor annulment shallbe
withoutprejudicetothevalidityofanythingpreviouslydoneunder30
thatscheme.'.
15. In section110 oftheprincipalAct,insub-section(1), thefollow-
ingExplanation shallbe insertedat theend,namely:-
'Explanation.~For theremovalof doubts,itisherebydeclared
thattheexpression"claimsforcompensationinrespector'accidents35
involvingthedeath of,or bodilyinjuryto,personsarisingoutof
theuseofmotorvehicles"includesclaimsforcompensationunder
section92A.'. ,',' I c t·-::-C-'~·-
16.In sectionllOA oftheprincipalAct,- ,',
(a) in sub-section(2)", thefollowingprovisoshallbe inserted40
at theend,namely:-
"Providedthat where any claimforcompensationunder
section9'2Aismade in such application"theapplicationshall
containa separatestatementto that effectimmediatelybefore
the signatureoftheapplicant."; 45
(b) in sub-section(3), forthewords"compensationunderthis
section",thewords"such compensation"shallbe ~ubstit\.1ted!


9
17.In sectionllOAA oftheprincipal
such compensation",thewords,figures
judicetotheprovisionsofChapterVIlA,
be substituted.
Act,forthewords"may claim
and letter"may, withoutpre-
claimsuchcompensation"shall
I
5 18.In section110B oftheprincipalAct,-
(a) forthewords"holdan inquiryintotheclaimand may make
an award", thewords"hold an inquiryintotheclaimor,as thecase
may be,each of theclaimsand, subjecttotheprovisionsofsection
109B,may make an award" shallbe substituted;
10 (b) thefollowingprovisoshallbe insertedat theend,namely:-
"Providedthat where such applicationmakes a claim for
compensationundersection92A inrespectofthedeathorper-
manent disablementofany person,suchclaimand any other
claim (whethermade insuchapplicationorotherwise)forcom-
15 pensationin respectof such 'deathOr permanentdisablement
shallbe disposedofinaccordancewiththeprovisionsofChapter
VIlA.".
19.In section110CC oftheprincipalAct,fortheword "Chapter", the
word "Act" shallbe substituted.
20 20. In section113A oftheprincipalAct,'forthewords"fivehundred
rupees",thewords"one thousandrupees"shallbe substituted.
21. Aftersection113A oftheprincipalAct,thefollowingsectionshall
be inserted,namely:-
"113B. Whoever drivesa motorvehicleincontraventionofsec-
tion3 orsection4 shallbe punishablewithimprisonmentfora term
whichmay extendtothreemonths,orwithfinewhichmay extend
to'fivehundredrupees/orwithboth.".
22. In section115 oftheprincipalAct"insub-section(1) ,--
(i) forthewords"two hundredrupees",thewords"fourhundred
rupees"shallbe substituted;
(ii) forthewords"fivehundredrupees",thewords"one thou-
sand rupees"shallbe substituted.
23. In section116 oftheprincipalAct,-
35
(a) forthewords"fivehundredrupees",thewords"one thou-
sand rupees"shallbe substituted;
(b) forthewords"one thousandrupees",thewords"two thou-
sand rupees"shallbe substituted.
Amend;
mentor
section
llOAA.
Amend ,
mentor
section
110B.
Amend;
mentor
section
110CC.
Amend-
ment ot
section
113A.
Insertion
of new
section
113B.
Driving.
vehicles
incontra-
vention
of section
3 or
section4.
Amend-
ment of
section
115.
Amend;
ment of
section
116.


Amend-
ment of 
section 
1.20. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 
123. 
Insertion 
of new 
aection 
127B. 
Composi-
tion of 
certain 
offences. 
Amend_ 
ment of 
the First 
Schedule. 
10 
24. In section 120 ot" the principal Act, for the words "three hundred 
rupees", the words "five hundred rupees" shall be substituted. 
25. In section 123 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1) ,- .• , 
(i) for the words c'one thousand rupees", the words "two thou-
sand rupees" shall be substituted; 
(ii) for the words "two thousand rupees", the words "three thou-
sand rupees" shall be substituted. 
26. After section 127 A of the principal Act, the following section shall 
be inserted, namely:-
5 
"127B. (1) Any offence [whether committed before or after the 10 
commencement of sect:on 26 of the Motor Vehicles (Amendment) 
Act, 1982] punishable under section 112, section 113, section 113A. 
section 113B, section 114. sub-sections (1) and (2) of section 
115, section 116, sect:on 118, section 120, section 122, section 
123, section 124, section 125 or section 127 may, either before or after 15 
the institution of the prosecution, be compounded by souch officers 
or authorities and for such amount as the State Government may, 
by notification in the Official Gazette, specify in this behalf. 
(2) Where an offence has been compounded under sub-section 
(1), the offender, if in custody, shall be discharged and no further 20 
proceedings shall be taken against him in respect of such offence.". 
27. In the First Schedule to the principal Act,-
(a) in Form A, in Section I, after item (g), the following shall 
be inserted, namely:-
"1 enclose three copies of a recent photograph."; lZ5 
(b) in Form AA, the brackets, letter and words" (l) three 
copies of a recent photograph." shall be omitted; 
(c) in Form D, for the words "Photograph if necessary". the word 
"Photograph" shall be substituted. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
There has been a rapid development of road transport during the past few 
years and a large increase in the number of motor vehicles on the road. The 
incidence of road accidents by motor vehicles has reached serious proportions. 
During the last three years, the number of road accidents per year on the average 
has been around 1.45 lakhs and of these the number of fatal accidents has been 
around 20,000 per year. The victims of these accidents are generally pedestrians 
belonging to the less affluent sections of society. The provisions of the Act as to 
compensation in respect of accidents can be availed of only in cases of accidents 
which can be proved to have taken place as a result of a wrongful act or negligence 
on the part of the owners or drivers of the vehicles concerned. Having ref"lrd to 
the nature of circumstances in which road accidents take place, in a number 
of cases, it is difficult to secure adequate evidence to prove negligence. Further, 
in what are known as "hit-and-run" accidents, by reason of the identity of the 
vehicle involved in the accident not being known, the persons affected cannot 
prefer any claims for compensation. It is, therefore, considered necessary to 
amend the Act suitably to secure strict enforcement of road safety m~ures and 
also to make, as a measure of social justice, suitable provisions first for compensa-
tion without proof of fault or negligence on the· part of the owner or driver of 
the vehicle and, secondly, for compensation by way of solatium in eases in which 
the identity of the vehicle causing an accident is unknown. A number of sugges-
tions have been received for amendment of the Act from the State Governments, 
Union territory administrations, representative organisations and other persons for 
making the provisions of the Act mare effective. The Law Commission of India, 
in its Fifty-first Report on Compensation for Injuries Caused by Automobiles 
in Hit-and-Run Cases, has made certain suggestions with respect to hit-
and-run cases. The Law Commission has also made a number of suggestions in 
its Eighty-fifth Report on Qaims for Compensation under Chapter VIII of the 
Act. The examination of these suggestions would take some time. The more 
important of these suggestions, which require to be implemented urgently., have 
been identified and it is proposed to give effect to the same through the present 
Bill. 
2. The Bill seeks to give effect to the following proposals:-
(a) A new Chapter VIlA, providing for pllYffient of compensation 
in certain cases of accidents without proof Or fault or negligence on the 
part of the owner or the driver of the motor vehicle is obeing inserted in 
the Act. Under this Chapter, the owner of the vehicle involved in an 
accident will be liable to pay compensation of a fixed sum of Rs. ] 5,000 
in respect of the death of a person and a fixed sum of Rs. 7,500 in res-
pect of permanent disablement of any person. For securing this compen-
sation, it will not be necessary to prove any wrongful act or negligence 
on the part of the owner or the driver of th£ vehicle. Right to claim the 
compensation aforesaid is without prejudice to any right to claim a 
• ,\J .; 
11 

12 
higher compensation on the basis of the wrongful act or negligence of the 
owner or the driver of the vehicle. However, the compensation payable 
• by an owner on the ba~is of wrongful act or negligence on his part would 
be reduced by ~he compensation already pttid b}' him under this Chapter. 
It has also -been provided that the claim for compensation WIder the Chap-
ter should be disposed of as expeditiously as possible. The benetit of the 
provi.ions of the Chapter would also ~ aVl,lilable in ca~ where com-
pensation is claimed in respect of a motor accident under any other law, 
as for example !hc Workmen's Compensation Act, 1923. ILJ!lay also be 
mentioned that the owner of a vehicle will haye to insure himself against 
liability to third parties under this Chapter to the same extent aa he has 
to insure himself against liability to third parties in cases where he is in 
default or negligent (vide clauses 11, 12, 1~, 16, 17, 18 and 19). 
(b) A fascicle of sections is being inserted immediately after section 
109 of the Act to provide for compensation in cases of hit-and-run motor 
accidents. these provisions envisage the establishment of a Solatium 
Fund by the Central Government for the purpose of paying compensation 
in cases of ~t-and-run motor accidents. The Fund will consist of contri-
butions by the General Insurance Corporation and insurance companies 
carrying on general insurance business in India, contributions by the 
Cen.tral Government, State Governments and other sums which may be 
received for being ('redited to i! from any source. Provi'3ion is being made 
for payment of compensation only in cases of death or grievous hurt 
as defined in the Indian Penal Code. The compensation payable in 
respect of death of a person in a hit-and-run motor accident will be a 
fixed sum of Rs. 5,000 while the compensation payable in case of grievous 
,hurt to a person is a fixed sum of Rs 1,000. In the event of ~he identity 
of the mo~or vehicle involved in ,the accident becoming subsequently 
found out and compensa!ion being recovered through the Cairns Trihunal 
or court or other authority in respect of the death of or for grievooo hurt 
to any person for which compensation has been paid from the Solatium 
I-und, the compensation paid from the Solatium... Food will have to be 
refunded to the Fund. Tqe provision is also being made for the making 
of a scheme to provide for the authority in which the Solatium Fund shall 
vest for the administration of the Solatium Fund and for all matters 
I 
connected with payment of compensation from the Solatium Fund 
[vidt" clauses 14 and 18 (a)]. j 
(c) It is proposed to make it comQulsory for every pe~son driving 
a motor vehicle to have his photograph affixed on his licence. Suitable 
provision is also being made for giving sufficient time for existing holders 
of driving licences to have their photographs affixed on their licences 
(vide clauses 2, 3, 4, 5 and 27). 
(d) It i'S proposed to make it compulsory for persons driving motor 
ve!1icles to keep their driving licences in their possession on all occasions 
While driving. This will enable speedy detection of persons driving 
vehicles without licences (vide clause 10). 
(e) With a view to ensuring uniformity in respect of di~play of figures 
in the registration marks of vehicles, it is being provided ' that such 
figures shall be in Arabic numerals (vide clause 6). 

r-~""'"" ", I 
13 .. 
{f) The power to prescribe registered laden weights and safe axle 
weights for transport vehicles, which is at present with the State Govern-
ments, is being transferred to the Central Government with a view to 
securing uniformity (vide clause 7). 
(g) The power to make rules with respect to specifications for COllS-
truction, equipment and maintenance regarding length, width, height, etc., 
size, nature and condition of tyres of vehicles which is at present with 
the State Governments, is being transferred !o the Central Government 
with a view to achieving uniformIty (vide clauses 8 and 9). 
(h) With regard to third p'arty insurance risk, the insurance liability 
is, at present, fixed under the Act with reference to the vehicle as a 
whole. This is proposed to be altered in the case 'of public service. 
v~hicles to provide a limit with reference to the passengers. The limit 
with respt",ct to the insurers' liability to a passenger involved in an acci-
dent in a public service vehicle is being fixed at Rs. 15,000. The e.xis-
ting limits of insurance liabili.y in re'Spect of goods vehicles as also 
damage to property are proposed to be raised (vide clause 13). 
(i) A specific offence is being provided for to cover cases of driv.ing 
of motor vehicles in contravention of sections 3 and 4 of the Act (vide 
clause 21). 
(j) With a view to speedy disposal of cases, provision is being made 
fbr' compounding of certain offences un,der the Act. This provision 
would also apply to pending cases (vide clause 26). 
(k) The punishment by way of fine for offences under sections 
I13A, 115 (l ), 116, 120 and 123 are proposed to be raised (vide clauses 
20 and 22 to 25). 
3. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects. 
NEW DELHI; 
Thl! 6th August, 1982 . SIT ARAM KESRI. 
. . ,1 
PRES10ENT'S RECOMMENDATJON UNDER ARTICLE 117 OF THE 
CONSTITUTION OF INDIA 
[Copy of letter No. TGM(l )/79, dated the 5th August, 1982 from Shri Sitaram 
Kesri, Minister of State in the Ministry or- Shipping and Transpon to the 
Secretary, Lok Sabha.l . 
The President, having been informed of the subject matter of the Bill fuft~er 
to amood the Motor Vehicles Act, 1939 reconnnends, under clause (3) of artIcle 
117 of the Constitution, its consideration by the Lok Sabha. 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Sub-:,.;ection (2) of new section 109A "as proposed to be inserted in the 
principal Act by clause 14 of the Bill provides {or the establishment of a 
Fund to be kno~n as the Solatium Fund andsub-scction (4) (a) of the said 
new section envisages the making by the Central Government of contribu:ions 
to the Fund after due appropriation .made by Parliament by l'aw in that behalf. 
Sub-section (1) of new section ] 09C as proposed to be inserted in the princi-
pal Act by the same clause provides for the making of a scheme by the 
Central Government for specifying inter alia the authority in which the Sola-
tium Fund shall vest and the manner in which the Fund shall be administered. 
The Solatium Fund is being established for the purpose of making provision 
for payment of compensation in respect of the death of, or grievous hurt to, per-
sons resulting from hit-and-run motor accidents, that is to say, accidents 
arising out of the use of a motor vehicle or motor vehicles the identity where-
of cannot be ascertained in spite oT reasonable efforts for the purpose. While 
the major portion of the contribution to the Fund will be from the General 
Insurance Corporation and the companies carrying on general insurance 
business in India, it is estimated that the Central Government may have to 
conti iblJle about fifteen per cent. of the amount required. The exa~t amount 
which will have to be maintained in the Solatium Fund cannot be estimated 
at this stage as that will depend upon the number of hit-and-run accidents 
which may take plaCe and also on the number of persons who may have 
to be compensated from out of the Fund. However, it is estimated that the 
recurring expenditure by way of contributions by the Central Governmcnt to 
the Fuod is likcly to be of the order of Rs. 15 lakhs per year and the ex-
penses of the Central. Government on the administration of the Fund arc likely 
to be about Rs. 5 lakhs per year. There would be sOIlll non-recurring expendi-
ture with regard to the setting up of the office of the authority for administering 
the Fund. This is likely to bc of the order of Rs. 50,000. 
2. The Bill docs not involve any other. expenditure of a recurring or non-
recurring nature. 
14 

.MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 7 of the Dill seeks to amend section 36 of the prindpal Act so as 
to enable the Central Government, having r:egard to the matters mentioned 
therein, to specify, by notification in the Official Gazette, in relation to each 
make and model of a transport vehicle the maKimutOl safe laden weight of 
such vehicle and the maximum safe axle weight of each axle of such vehicle. 
Clause 8 of the Bill seeks to insert a new section 69B in the principal Act so 
as to enable the Central Government to make rules regulating the construc-
tion, equipment and maif'ltenance of motor vehicles and trailers with respect to 
their width, height, length and over-hang of vehicle',> and of the loads carried 
by them, and the size, nature and condition of their tyres. These pOwers at 
present vest in State Governments. With a view to ensuring uniformity, the 
Central Government is proposed to be empowered in this behalf. 
2. Gause 14 of the Bill seeks to insert new sections J09A, 109B and I09C 
in the principal Act. The proposed sections provide for compensation in 
cases of hit-and-run motor accidents, establishment of Solatium Fund for pur-
pose and matters connected therewith. The propc·"ed section I09C empowers 
the Central Government to make a scheme specifying the authority in which 
the Solatium Fund shall vest, the manner in which the Fund shall be adminis-
tered, the form, manner and the time within which app~ications for compensation 
from the Fund may be made. the oflkcrs or authorities to whom such appli-
cations may be made, the procedure to be foHowed by such officers or autho-
rities for considering and passing orders on such applications, and all other 
matters connected with, or incidental to, the administration of the Fund and 
the payment of compensation therefrom.. It also enables the Central Government 
to provide, subject to certain limitation';" punishment for contraventiori of 
any provision of such scheme, for delegation of powers, functions or duties 
conferred or imposed on any officer or authority by such scheme to any other 
officer or authority and also to give restrospective effect to any \iuch scheme, 
but not earlier than the date of establishment of the Solatium Fund and also 
subject to the condition that no such retrospective effect shall be given So as to pre-
judiCially affect the interests of any person who may be governed by such 
provision. Provision has also been made for laying of such scheme before both 
Houses of Parliament. 
3. The delegation of legislative power under the aforementioned provi-
sions relates to matter, of procedure Or detail. The delegation of legislative 
power is, therefore, of a normal character. 
15 

Grant .r 
driving 
licence. 
Form and 
contents 
of driving 
licellc:e. 
Addition$ to 
driving 
licence. 
Jlqistration, 
bow to be 
made. 
S~cialp~o­
ViSIOns In 
regard to 
transport 
vehiclC!l. 
ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS FROM THE MOToR VEHICLES ACT, 1939 
(4 OF 1939) 
• • • • • • 
7. (1) • • • • • 
(.z) Every application under sub-section (1) shall be in Form A as set forth 
in the First Schedule. shall be signed by, or bear the thumb impression of. the 
applicant in two places, and shall contain the information required by tho form. 
• • • • • 
(4) Everv application for a driving lioence to drive as a paid employee and 
everY application for a driving licence to drive a transport vehicle shall be acc()m-
paniod by three clear copies of a recent ph()tograph of the applicant. 
• • * • • 
8. '(1) Every driving licence, except a driving licence issued under section 
]4, shall be in Form D as set f()rth in the First Schedule and shall have affixed 
theroto one of the signatures or thumb impressions given on the form of appli-
cation for the driving licence and. in the case of a driving licence to drive I" a 
paid employee or to drive a transport vehicle, one of the photographs referred to 
in sub-section (4) of section 7. 
• • • • • 
SA. (1) • * • • 
(2) The provisions of section 7 shall apply to an application under this 
section as if the application were for the grant of a licenc, un1er that seJtion to 
~rive the class of motor vehicle which the applicant desires to hie added to his 
licence: 
Provided that the provisions of sub-sections (3) and (4) of that section shall 
not apply where the applicant is the holder of a licence to drive as a paid emp-
loyee OT to drive a transpon vehicle. 
• • • • 
~4. (1) • • • • 
(j) The registering authority shall assign to the vehicle, for display thereon 
in the prescribed. manner, a distinguishing mark (in this Act referred to as the 
regtstration mark) consisting of one of the groups of such of those letters as are 
allotted to the State by the Central Government from time to time by. notifica-
·tion in the Official Gazette, followed by a nuinber containing not more than four 
figures: 
Provided that the letters and figures aforesaid shall be shown-
(a) in the C'dse of transport vehicles, in black on a white gro:.tnd; 
(b) in the case of motor vehicles temporarily registere;;!, in roj, on a yellow 
ground; 
(c) in thc case of motor vehicles in the possession of dealers, in white on 
a red ground; 
(d) ;n other cases, in white on a black ground . 
* • • • • 
36. (1) Having regard to the number, nature and size of the tyres attached 
to the wheels of a transport vehicle, other than a motor cab, and its make and 
model and other relevant considerations, a State Government may, with the ap-
IG 

17 
proval of tho Cen1ral Gov«nment~, by notification in the Official Gazette, specifY 
in relation to each make and mOdel of a transport vehicle the maximum safe 
lad~n weight of such vehiclo and the maximum sde axle weight of each axle of 
such "Vehlcle. 
• • • • • 
(1) 'There shall not be entered in tM certificate.. of registration of any such 
vehicle any laden "oight of the vehicle or a registered axle weight of any of its 
axles different from that specified in the notification under sub-section (1) in re-
lation to the make and mbdel of the vehicle and to the number, nature and size 
.. of tho tyres attached to its wheels: 
Provided that where it appears to·a State (Jovernment that heavier weights 
than those specified in the notification und01' sutHection (1) may be permitted 
in a particular locality for vehicles of a particular type, the State Government 
may, by' order in the . Official Gazette, direct that the provisions of this sub-section 
shall apply with such modific:!tions as may be specified in the order . 
• • • • • 
70. (z) A State Government may make rules regulating the construction, 
equipment and maintenance of motor vehicles and trailers. 
(,) Witt.out prejr<l.ice to 1hegenerality of the foregoing power, rules may 
to made under this section governing any of the folloWing mattei's either generally 
in respect of motor vehicles or trailers or in respect of motor vehicles or trailers 
of a .particular class or in particular circumstances. namely:-
(a) the wi<l.th, height, length and overhang of vehicles and of the loads 
carried ; 
• • • • • 
(c) the size, nature and condition of tyres; 
• • • • • 
U:(l) It.e d.rwer and tho cOIlductor, ifany,.ofa motorvchkls in any public 
place shall, on demand by any police officer in uniform, produce hislioetloe for 
examinati ')n. 
• • • • • 
(3) If the licence or certificates, as the case may be, are not at the time in 
.. thepoBtitssion of the-~rson to wh<m demand'is JDIIdt.; it'mall be·a. SUfficient com-
. pliance ;with this section if' 9IICh per8C)n produces thc;.Hcenoc or certificates within 
. : ten days at Rny poliCl' statj(JJj in lJ1dia Which M specifies to the pdlioe officer or 
authority making the demand: 
Provided that,. except to such extent and with such modifications as may 
be prescri1:ed, the proviSions of this sub-section shall not apply to a driver driving 
as a paid employee •. or to the driver of a transport vehicle or to aQyperaon required 
,to produce the certificate., of resistratioD or the certificato of fitaess .0£ a transport 
vehicle. 
• • • • • 
93. In this Chapter -
• • • • • 
95, (1) • • • • • 
(z) Subject to the proviso to sUb-scotiOl (1). n policy of insurance shall 
. cover any.IiabjJity incurred in respect of anyone a.ccKl",t up to the. following 
. limits. namely:-
(a) where the vehicle is a goods vehicle, a limit of fifty thousand rupees 
in all. including the liabilities, if any. arising under .the . 'Yorkme(l's Com-
pensation Act, 1923, in respect of tho death of. or bodtly uiJury.to,. ernploYete 
Power to 
make rules. 
Duty to 
produce 
licence and 
certificate 
of registra-
tion. 
Definitions . 
, Requil'f'o 
menu of 
policie. and 
limit. of 
liability • 

Claima 
Tribunab. 
APplication 
for compell-
.. don. 
Option re-
garding 
claima for 
compcn .. -
tioll ill 
certain cue.. 
Award of 
the Claim. 
Tribunal. 
(other than the driver), not excooltins six in number, being carrie.:t in tho 
vehicle; . 
(b) whore the vehicle is a vehicle in which passengers are carried for hire 
or reward or by reason of or in pursuance of a contract of emplo),mont,-
• • • • • 
(Ii) in respect of passengers,-
(z) a limit of fift)' thousand rupees in all where the vehiclo is 
registered to carry not more than thirty passengors; 
(2) a limit of seventy-five thousand rupees in all whore tho 
vehicle is reaistered to carry more than thirty but not more than 
sixty passengers; 
(j) a limit of one lakh rupees in all where the vehicle is regis-
tered to carr)' more than sixty passengers; and 
(4) subject to the limits aforesaid, ten thousand rupees for eaoh 
individual passenger where the vehicle is a motor cab, and five thou-
sand rupees for each individual passenger in any other case; 
• • • • • 
(d) irrespective of the class of the vehicle, a limit of rupees two thousand 
in all in respect of damage to any property of a third party. 
• • 41 • • 
110. (1) A State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
constitute one or more Motor Accidents Claims Tribunals (hereinafter referred 
to as Claims Tribunals) for such area as may be specifieJ in th' O()tification for 
the purpose of adjudicating upon claims for comp:nsatioll in rC'>J)Dt of accidents 
involving tho death of, or bodily injury to, persons arising out of the use of motor 
vehicles, or damages to any prop~rty of a thirJ plrt)' so arising, or bath:· 
Provided that where such claim includes a claim for cJmp:n .. ation in res-
pect of damage to property exceeding rupees two thousand, the claimant may, 
at his option, refer the claim to a civil court for adjudication. and where a refer-
ence is so made, the Claims Tribunal shall have no jurisdiction to entertain any 
question relating to such claim. 
• • • • • 
110A. (1) • • * • • 
(2) Ever)' application under sub-soction (1) shall b, mad" to th., Claim, 
Tribunal having jurisdiction over the area in which the accident oxurred, and 
shall be in such form and shall contain such particulars as may be prescribed. 
(~) No application for compensation under this se::tion shall bo entertainei 
unless it is made within six months of the occurrence of the accident: 
Provided that the Claims Tribunal may entertain the application after 
the expiry of tho said period of six months if it is satis6o:l that the applicant was 
prevonted by sufficient cause from making the application in tim, . 
. nOAA. Notwithstanding anything cO:lt~ine::I.in the Workmn'~ COllp,n-
sabon Act, 1923, w,here the death of or boddy IDJury to any porson gIves rise to 
a claim for compensation under this Act and also under the Workmen's Com-
pensation Act, 1923, the person entitled to compensation may claim such CQm~ 
ponsation under either of those Acts but not under both. . 
:1I0B. On ~eoeipt. of an application .f<?r comp):natio:1 mlj, under section 
tlOA, the C]al~ ~n~unal shall, .after gIVIng the plfthn an oppntunity of being 
heard, hold an Inq1l;1ry mto. the claIm and ~y mak~ an awar..i determining the am-
ount of compensation whIch appears to Jt to ~:I Just and sp,cifying tll~ person 
or persons to whom comp)nsatlt>n shall b, p:l1d; and in mlking tho award tho 
Claims Tribuna] shall spocify the amount. ,wb.i.ch shall be pai.d. ~~' th.e. IM.urolC or 
t ; 
8 o( 19113. 

19 
owner or driver of the vehicle involve:! in the accident or by all or any of them, 
as the case may be . 
• • • • • 
llOCC. Where any Court or Claim4J Tribunal alloWS a claim for compen-
sation made under this Chapter, such Court or Tribunal mlY dir~~t thlt inaddi_ 
tion to the amount of componsation simple interest shall also be paid at such 
rate and from such date not earlier than th(') d1te of m'lking th') claim as it may 
specify in this behalf. 
• • • • • 
113A. Whoever, being the owner or person in chargll of a m()tor vehicle, causos, 
or permits, any person who does not satisfy the provisionq of section 3 or section 
4, to drive the vohiclc shall be puni9hable with im,risonm):tt for a term which 
may extend to three months, or with fine which may extend to five hundrej rupeJS, 
or with both. 
• • • • • 
115. (1) Whoever drives a motor vehicle in contravention of section 71 shall 
be pWlishable with fine which may extend to two hundrod rupees, or, if 
hav1l18 boon previously convictod of an offence under this sub·saction is again 
convicted of an offence under this sub-section, with fin" which may extend to 
five hundred ruPCC3. 
• • • • • 
116. Whoever drives a motor vehicle at a speed or in a mlnner which is dan-
pOllS to the public, having regard to aU the circwmtance'l of the case including 
the nature, condition and use of the place where the vohiclo is drivon and the 
amount of traffic which actually is at the thm or which migltt Nlsonably be ex-
pectod to be in the place, shall be punishablo on a first conviction for too off¢nc, 
with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six m'lnths, or with fine which 
may extend to five hundred rupees, and for a subsequont offenc, if committed 
with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine which 
may extend to five hundred rupees, and for a subsequ:mt offmc·:; if committed 
within three years of the commission of a previous similar offence with imprison-
ment for a term which may extend to two years, o~ with fine which may extend 
to one thousand rupoos. or with both . 
• • • • • 
no. Whoever without the writton consent of tha Stato Government plrmits 
or takes part in a raoo or trial of spood betwoon mltor vohicles in any public place 
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one m :>nth, 
or with fine which may extend to three hundred rup~C:!, or with both • 
• • • • • 
123. (1) Whoever drives a motor vehicle or causes or allows a motor voh:cle 
to be used in contravention of the provis:ons of soction 22 or without the permit 
requirod by sub-section (1) of 9Oct:on 42 or in contravention of any condition of 
such permit relating to tho route on which or the area in which or tho purpose 
for which tho vehicle may be used or to the maximum number of passengers and 
maximum weight of lu~gage that may be carried on the vehicle, shall bel punish-
able for a first offence with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees and for 
any second or subsequent offence with imprisonment which may extend to six 
months, or with fine which may extand to two tbusand rup:m, or with both: 
Providod that no Court shall, except for reasons to be stated in writing, im-
pose a fine of less than five hundred rupees for any such second or subsequent 
offence. 
• • • • ! 
Award of 
interest 
where any 
claim is 
allowed. 
Allowing 
unauthorised 
perIODS to 
drive vehi. 
cles. 
Drivina' at 
excessivo 
-peed. 
Driving 
reckleu1y Of 
dangeroud y • 
Raclna'and 
trials of 
lpeed. 
Uaing vehI-
cle without 
regbtradoD 
or permit. 

20 
THE FIRST' seHB 0 UL:B I 
FORMS 
FORM A 
[See section 7(,)] 
Fonn Df applicatlonfor lir:eilce,todr;ve'tl motor pehicle -
I 
Application 
I apply for a licence to enable me to drive *as a plid employ", *p:Jblic s~r­
vice vehicles, *goods vehicles, the vehicles I wish to ddv. b,ing of the followina 
class(es)*-
* • * * • 
*(g) a vehicle of a special typ" (description 'attached) looD8tructed'or , • 
aclaptcd to be driven by me. 
·Strike oul whichever is n91 applicable. 
• • -* 
FORM AA 
(See scctiOll' 8At) -
• • 
Form of application for the addition of anew class of vehicle to a driving' 
licence 
I, Shri/Shrhnati/Kumari ............ , hereby apply for the addition of the 
following class/classes of motor vehicle to the attached licence; 
(a) motor cycles, 
(b) invalid',carriases, 
(c) lipt motor vehicles. 
(d) medium somb vehiclet; 
(e) medium passenger motor vehicles, 
(ei) heavy 800:h vehicles t I 
(eii) heavy passenger motor wbieles, 
(f) road ;1'o11ers, 
(g) a vehicle of a special type (description attached) constructed or adapted 
to be driven by me. 
*1 enclose, 
(a) a medical certificate, 
(b) three capios of a recent photoJl'aph. I" , 
* Required only where the applicant is not entitled to drive.as a paid employee 
or to drive a transport vehicle and now wishes to do so. S~rikeoutifnotapplicablo. 
Dated .. ........ 19 Signature or thumb Impression of applicant 
NOTE.-No fee other than a fee for a test of competence to drive is char,o-
ablo for the addition of a Dew clasa.()f vohicle to a'd.rJvins licence. . 
Certificate of tNt of ability 16 drive-
The applicant has passed/failed in the test spociticd ill.the Third Schedulo 
to the Motor Vehicles Act,.19j9; The test was OOncillotod .on a (here;, enter des-' 
cription of\!ehielc) 
on dato 
• • .-
Signature of' Testing. italMrlly f' ,. j . 
Dupltcatelslgnatur~ or thumb 
Imprualon 01 applicant.' 
• • 

21 
FORM D 
[See flClCtion 8(ln " 
Driving Licence' 
~o ................ . 19 ......... . 
(Namo) .............................•..................................... 
wifo/son/daughter of ..................................................... . 
of (ponDanont addrossr ........................ : ....................... . 
• • • • " " ••• " ••••• II • " ••• " •• " " •••• " ••••••••• " ••••••• " •••• " " " ••••••• " •• " ••• " • 
(tomporary . address)~· .................................................... . 
. " " , .. " .. " . " " " " . " .. " .. " .. " ... " " " " .. " " ...... " " " . " .. " " . " " " .... " . " ..... " ... " 
PhotoJl1lph 
If neceuary 
SlgrJQ~ or thumb impreslion 
is Uccnsod to drivo, throughout India, vohldes of-tho followin, d.oscription. :-
(a) Motor cyclos, 
(b) invalid carriagos, 
(c) lilht motor voblclos, 
(tI) modium goods vohlcl08, 
(e) medium passooaor motor vohicles, 
(el) heavy goods vehicles, 
(ell) boa vy passongor motor vohialos, 
(f) road rollers. 
(g) a motor vohic1o horoundor doscribed :-
." ••• I" •••••••••••• " •••••••••••• 1 ••••••••• II •• II ••••••••• " •••••••• " •••• 
Ho/Sho is also authorised to drlvo as a paJd omplo)W ·a transport vehiclo. 
This liconce is valid from .•....••...•........ to ••................•..... 
[tTo be struck out if inappUcablo]. 
Dated •.••••••..• • 19 •. S/gnIlture ond designation oj 
Licensing Authority. 
Authorisation to drive a tran.Jport vehicle. 
So Ions as thls Ucence is valid and is ronowod from timo to timo tho holdor 
Is authorised to drivo a transport vohiclo. 
DDII4 •••••••••• ..•.• " l' . 
,,1.1 ••••• 1 ••••• I ••••••••••••• 
Signoture and Mslgnation of 
prut:rlbed authority. 

'fhis liCOlX'lO ill horeby renowod up to Signature of Licensing Authority 
tho ....•••.•.•... day of .............. 19 • 
the .•............ day of .............. 19 
the ..•........... day of •............. 19 • 
the ..•.•...•...•. day of .............. 19 • 
the •.....•.•..... day of ....•...•..... 19 
Dato Section and Rule 
• • 
ENDORSEMENTS 
Fino or other 
punishment 
• 
. ......................... . 
.......................... 
• 
Signature of 
Enejoning Authority 
• 

LOK SABRA 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Motor Vehicles Act, 1939 
(Shri Sitaram Kesri. Minister oJ 
State in the Ministry of Shipping 
and Transport.) 