1
Short title and
commencement.
Bill No. 105 of  2016
THE PREVENTION OF CRUELTY TO ANIMALS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2016
By
SHRIMATI POONAM MAHAJAN, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals Act, 1960.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (Amendment) Act,
2016.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In section 11 of the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals Act, 1960 (hereinafter referred
to as the principal Act), in sub-section (1), for the words "he shall be punishable, in the case
of a first offence, with fine which shall not be less than ten rupees but which may extend to
fifty rupees, and in the case of a second or subsequent offence committed within three years
of the previous offence, with fine which shall not be less than twenty-five rupees but which
may extend to one hundred rupees or with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three
months, or with both.", the words "he shall be punishable, in the case of a first offence, with
fine which shall not be less than three thousand rupees but which may extend to five
thousand rupees, and in the case of a second or subsequent offence committed within three
Amendment
of section 11.
59 of 1960.
5
10
15
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
years of the previous offence, with fine which shall not be less than five thousand rupees but
which may extend to ten thousand rupees or with imprisonment for a term which may extend
to six months, or with both." shall be substituted.
3. For section 12 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted,
namely:—
“12. If any person performs upon any cow or other milch animal the operation
called phooka or doom dev or any other operation (including injection of any substance
or oxytocin) to improve lactation which is injurious to the health of the animal or
permits such operation being performed upon any such animal in his possession or
under his control, he shall be punishable with fine which shall not be less than twenty
thousand rupees but which may extend to fifty thousand rupees, or with imprisonment
for a term which may extend to four years, or with both, and the animal on which the
operation was performed shall be forfeited to the Government.”.
4. In section 20 of the principal Act, for the words “which may extend to two hundred
rupees”, the words “which shall not be less than ten thousand rupees but which may extend
to twenty thousand rupees" shall be substituted.
5. In section 26 of the principal Act, for the words "he shall be punishable on conviction
with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees, or with imprisonment which may extend
to three months, or with both”, the words "he shall be punishable on conviction with fine
which shall not be less than twenty thousand rupees but which may extend to fifty thousand
rupees, or with imprisonment which may extend to six months, or with both" shall be
substituted.
6. For section 31 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted,
namely:—
“31. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure,
1973, any offence punishable under this Act shall be a cognizable offence within the
meaning of that Code.”
7. In section 38 of the principal Act, for sub-section (3), the following sub-section shall
be substituted, namely:—
‘‘(3) If any person contravenes, or abets the contravention of, any rules made
under this section, he shall be punishable with fine which shall not be less than ten
thousand rupees but which may extend to fifty thousand rupees, or with imprisonment
for a term which may extend to six months, or with both.’’.
Substitution
of new
section for
section 12.
Penalty of
practising
phooka, doom
dev or use of
oxytocin.
Amendment of
section 20.
Amendment of
section 26.
Substitution of
new section for
section 31.
Cognizability
of offences.
Amendment of
section 38.
2 of 1974.
5
10
15
20
25
30

3
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Prevention of Cruelty to Animals Act, 1960 was enacted to provide for prevention
of infliction of unnecessary pain or suffering on animals. However, the same has not achieved
its purpose owing to lesser penal provisions.
The Act has failed to protect animals for more than decades now. Animal abusers have
continued to take advantage of the obsolete Act and continue to inflict unfathomable amount
of cruelty on animals and remain unpunished.
In Animal Welfare Board of India Vs. A. Nagaraj, dated 07.05.2014, the Hon'ble Supreme
Court observed, inter alia,—
/circle6Parliament is expected to make proper amendment of the Prevention of Cruelty to
Animals Act, 1960 to provide an effective deterrent to achieve the object and
purpose of the Act and for violation of section 11, adequate penalties and
punishments should be imposed.
/circle6Parliament, it is expected, would elevate rights of animals to that of constitutional
rights, as done by many of the countries around the world, so as to protect their
dignity and honour.
Thus, there is an urgent need to amend the penal provisions of the Act in compliance
with the judgment of the Supreme Court and to prevent the unnecessary pain and suffering
to animals and to ensure that the Act is deterrent to animal abusers.
This Bill, therefore, seeks to replace penal provisions of the Prevention of Cruelty to
Animals Act, 1960 with increased penalty. The amended provision will promote the
constitutional duty of compassion.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; POONAM MAHAJAN
March 22, 2016.

4
ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE PREVENTION OF CRUELTY TO ANIMALS ACT, 1960
* * * * *
11. (1) If any person—
(a) beats, kicks, over-rides, over-drives, over-loads, tortures or otherwise treats
any animal so as to subject it to unnecessary pain or suffering or causes, or being the
owner permits, any animal to be so treated; or
* * * * *
(o) promotes or takes part in any shooting match or competition wherein animals
are released from captivity for the purpose of such shooting:
he shall be punishable 19 [in the case of a first offence, with fine which shall not be less than
ten rupees but which may extend to fifty rupees and in the case of a second or subsequent
offence committed within three years of the previous offence, with fine which shall not be
less than twenty-five rupees but which may extend, to one hundred rupees or with
imprisonment for a term which may extend, to three months, or with both.]
* * * * *
12. If any persons upon any cow or other milch animal the operation called practising
phooka or 21 [ doom dev or any other operation (including injection of any or doom dev.
substance) to improve lactation which is injurious to the health of the animal] or permits such
operation being performed upon any such animal in his possession or under his control, he
shall be punishable with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with imprisonment
for a term which may extend to two years, or with both, and the animal on which the operation
was performed shall be forfeited to the Government.
* * * * *
20. If any person—
(a) contravenes any order made by the Committee under section 19; or
(b) commits a breach of any condition imposed by the Committee under that
section:
he shall be punishable with fine which may extend to two hundred rupees, and, when the
contravention or breach of condition has taken place in any institution the person incharge
of the institution shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be punishable
accordingly.
* * * * *
26. If any person—
(a) not being registered under this chapter, exhibits or trains any performing
animal; or
(b) being registered under the Act, exhibits or trains any performing animal with
respect to which or in a manner with respect to which, he is not registered; or
(c) exhibits or trains as a performing animal, any animal which is not to be used
for the purpose by reason of a notification issued under clause (ii) of section 22; or
(d) obstructs or wilfully delays any person or police officer referred to in section 25
in the exercise of powers under this Act as to entry and inspection; or
(e) conceals any animal with a view to avoiding such inspection: or
Treating
animals
cruelly.
Penalty for
practising
phooka or
doom dev .
Penalties.
Offences.

5
(f) being a person registered under this Act, on being duly required in pursuance
of this Act to produce his certificate under this Act, fails without reasonable excuse so
to do; or
(g) applies to be registered under this Act when not entitled to be so registered,
He shall be punishable on conviction with fine which may extend to five hundred
rupees or with imprisonment which may extend to three months, or with both.
* * * * *
31. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898, (5 of
1898) an offence punishable under clause (1) or clause (n) or clause (o) of sub-section (1) of
section 11 or under section 12 shall be a cognizable offence within the meaning of that code.
* * * * *
38. ( 1) * * * *
(3) If any person contravenes, or abets the contravention of, any rules made under this
section, he shall be punishable with fine which may extend to one hundred rupees, or with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to three months, or with both.
* * * * *
Cognizability
of offences.
Power to make
rules.

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals Act, 1960.
————
(Shrimati Poonam Mahajan,  M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—33LS(S3)—25-04-2016.