As introduced in Lok Sabha
                   
                                                       
          
Bill  No. 105 of  2024
THE QUALITY EDUCATION (ENHANCING THROUGH 
INTERNSHIP) BILL, 2024
By
Ms. Praniti Sushilkumar Shinde, M.P.
A
BILL
to enhance the quality of education in professional and technical courses by providing 
mandatory structured internships to the students, providing basic remuneration  
under the internship and establishing a national-level platform for  
internship application and for matters connected therewith. 
Be it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fifth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Quality Education (Enhancing through Internship) 
Act, 2024.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3)  It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the official Gazette, appoint. 
Short title, 
extent and 
commencement.
5

2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of that 
State and in all other cases, the Central Government; 
(b) "company" means any firm, organisation, or business entity legally registered 
under Indian law or any other company registered outside India but operating in India;
(c) "internship" means a period of work experience offered by a company for a limited 
period of time; 
(d)  “Portal" means the National Internship Portal established for managing internship 
applications and placements of the students enrolled in professional courses under section 6;
(e) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
(f) "professional/technical courses" means the courses offered by recognized educational 
institutions that provide specialised training in fields such as engineering, medicine, law, 
management and such other disciplines; and
(g) “student” means a person enrolled in any under-graduate or post-graduate 
professional or technical course.
3. The appropriate Government shall ensure that every registered company shall offer 
internship opportunities to students enrolled in any professional or technical courses based on 
capabilities and to provide remuneration during the internship programme in the company.
4. Every company shall provide minimum internship remuneration to the students 
undergoing internship in the company to compensate for the cost of travel and food for 
internships lasting one month or more based on the cost of living index as may be prescribed.
5.  If a student undergoes internship for six months or more in the same company, he 
may request the company for the offer for employment and company may consider the 
request in good faith and based on the performance of the student and employment needs 
of the company.
6. ( 1) The Central Government shall establish a National Internship Portal to 
facilitate internship applications and placements of the Students.
(2) It shall be the responsibility of the appropriate Government to update the data 
relating to student application and placement State wise and district wise in such manner as 
may be prescribed.
7. ( 1) The portal established under section 6 shall facilitate students to apply and  
select the companies statewise and districtwise where they intend to undertake their 
internship.
(2) The portal shall enable the students to have access to the  available internship 
opportunities based on their preferences, qualifications and availability.
(3) The Companies offering internships shall register on the portal and provide details 
of available positions, duration, remuneration and such other relevant information as may 
be prescribed.
(4) The Companies shall update the list of employment opportunities at least once in 
three months.
2
Definitions.
15
10
5
20
Responsibilities 
of companies 
to provide 
internship 
opportunities. 
Minimum 
Internship 
Remuneration.
Employment 
opportunity to 
the interns.
Establishment 
of the National 
Internship 
Portal.
Portal 
Management and 
Functionality.
25
30
35
40

8.  (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the official gazette, establish 
a monitoring mechanism to ensure compliance with the provisions of this Act in such 
manner as may be prescribed.
(2) The composition of and the funds of the monitory mechanism shall be such as may 
be prescribed.
(3) Any non-compliance by companies of the provisions of the Act shall attract penalties 
as may be prescribed.
9. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by 
law in this behalf, provide adequate funds for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
10. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central 
Government may, by order, published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions not 
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as may appear to be necessary for removing the 
difficulty:
Provided that no order shall be made under this section after the expiry of two years 
from the commencement of this Act. 
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, 
before each House of Parliament.
11. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other 
law for the time being in force regulating any of the matters dealt with in this Act.
12. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules 
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before 
each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days, which may 
be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry 
of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both 
Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the rule 
should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of 
no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be 
without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
3
Monitoring and 
Compliance.
Central 
Government to 
provide funds.
Power to 
remove 
difficulties.
Act not in 
derogation of 
other law.
Power to make 
rules.
15
10
5
20
25

STATEMENT  OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
 Internships plays a crucial role in shaping the career of the students, particularly to those 
enrolled in professional and technical courses. The Internship not only helps the students to 
gain real exposure to the working environment but also helps to develop requisite skills for 
their future avenues. In the Indian perspective, the need is to  enhance the quality of education 
in professional and technical courses by providing students with structured internship 
opportunities. By ensuring that companies offer internships based on their capacity and 
provide basic remuneration, students will gain practical experience and financial support. 
The proposed establishment of a National Internship Portal will streamline the application 
process, making it easier for students to find suitable internships and for companies to find 
qualified interns.
 The Bill aims to bridge the gap between academic learning and professional practice, 
thereby improving employability and career readiness among students enrolled in 
professional and technical course.
 Hence this Bill.
       New Delhi;                               PRANITI SUSHILKUMAR SHINDE
    July 8,  2024.
4

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
 Clause 6 of the Bill provides that the Central Government shall establish a National 
Internship Portal to facilitate internship applications and placements of the Students.  
Clause 8 provides for establishment of a Monitoring mechanism by the Central Government. 
Clause 9 provides for the Central Government to provide adequate funds. The Bill, therefore, 
if enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated 
that a recurring expenditure of about rupees five hundred crore per annum is likely to be 
involved from the Consolidated Fund of India. 
 A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees fifty crore is also likely to be involved.
5

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
 Clause 12 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out 
the provisions of the Act. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of 
legislative power is of a normal character.
6

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to enhance the quality of education in professional and technical courses by providing 
mandatory structured internships to the students, providing basic remuneration  
under the internship and establishing a national-level platform for  
internship application and for matters connected therewith. 
————
(Ms. Praniti Sushilkumar Shinde, M.P.)