OORRI GENnA. 
to 
THE PUBLIC FREt-118m (EVICTION OF UNAUTHORISED OCCUPANTS) 
AMINDHENT BILL, 1983 
(As introduced in 10k ~bha) 
• 
1 • I'a ge l~, line 40,-
a fter "or" insert "of" 
2. Page 5, line 8 from bottom,-
after "availed" insert "of" 
3. Page 8, line 8,-
!Ql: "appeliate" ~ ''appellate'' 
4. page 8,-
against section 15, insert t:ho l'I'IlrginAl hOAninp'" 
"Bar of jurisdiction. " 
) ',-
NEW DSLHI; 
August 25'. 1983 
Bha dra 3. 19f'l 5' C Sa ka) 
" I , 

5 
40 of 1971. 
10 
As INTRODUCED IN LoK SABHA ON 
Bill No. 105 of 1983 
THE PUBLIC PREMISES (EVICTION OF UNAUTHORISED 
OCCUPANTS) AMENDMENT BILL, 1983 
A 
BILL 
fuf1her to amend the Publ~' Premises (EViction of Unauthorised 
Occupantls) Act, 1971 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty-fourth Year of the 
Republic of India as follows:-
1., (1) This Act may be called the Public Premises (Eviction of Short 
Unauthorised Occupants) Amendment Act, 1983. title and 
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government 
may, by notification in the Officiial Gazette, appoint and different dates 
may be appointed for different provisions of this Act. 
2. In section SA of the Public Premises (Eviction of Unauthorised 
Occupants) Act, 1971 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act) ,-
com. 
mence-
ment. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 
(a) in sub-seetlon (1), in clause (a), for the words "other 5A. 
structure or fixture", the words "any movable or immovable struc-
ture or fixture" shall be substituted; 
(b) for sub-seetion (2), the following sub-sections shall be 
substltu1led, namely:-

Amend-
ment of 
section 
5B. 
Inser-
tion of 
new _-
tion 5C. 
Power 
to seal 
unautho-
rised con-
structions. 
2 
(2) Where any building or other immovable structure or 
fixture has been erected, placed or raised on any, public 
premises in contravention of the provisions of sub-section (1), 
the estate officer may serve upon the person erecting such 
building or other structure or fixture, a notice requiring him 5 
either to remove, or to show cause why he shall not remove 
such building or other structure or fixture from the public 
premises within such period, not being less than seven days, as 
he may specify in the notice; and on the omission or refusal 
of such person either to show cause, or to remove such build- JO 
ing or other structure or fixtUre from the public premises, or 
where the cause shown is not, in the opinion of the estate 
officer, sufficient, the ~state officer may by order, remove or 
cause to be removed the building or other structure or fixture 
from the public premises and recover the cost of such removal 15 
from the person aforesaid as an arrear of land revenue. 
(3) Where any movable structure or fixture has been 
erected, placed or raised, or any goods have been displayed or 
spread, Or any cattle or other animal has been brought or kept, 
on any public premises, in contravention of the provisioll8 of 20 
sub-section (1) by any person, the estate officer may, by order, 
remove or cause to be removed without notice, such structure, 
fixture, goods, cattle Or other animal, as the case may be, from 
the public premises and recover the cost of such removal from 
such person as an arrear of land revenue.". 125 
3. In section SB Of the principal Act, in sUh-section (1),-
(a) in the opening paragraph the words brackets and figure u, 
not being less than seven days, or more than fifteen days, from the 
date of publication of the order under sub-section (3)" shall be 
omitted; 
(b), in the proviso, af~r the words "by means of a notice", the 30 
words "of not less than seven days" shall be inserted. 
4. After section SB of the principal Act, the following section shall 
be inserted, namely:- , • 
'"SC. (1) It shall be lawful for the estate officer, at any time, 
before or after making an order of demolition under section 5B, to 35 
make an order directing the sealing of such erection or work or of 
the public premises in which such erection or work has been com.-
menced or is being carried on or has been completed in such manner 
as may be prescribed, for the purpose of carrying out the provisions 
of this Act, or for preventing any dispute as to the Dature and 4-0 
extent of such erection or work. 
(2) Wher~ any erection or work or any premises in which any 
erection or work is being carried on has, or have been sealed, the 
estate. officer may, for t,he purpose of demolishing such erection or 
work m accordance with the provisions of this Act, order Bucll seal 45 
to be removed. "". ' ' , 

2 of 1974. 
3 
(3) No person shall remove such seal except-
(a) under an order made by the estate officer under sub-
section (2) j or 
(b) under an order of the appellate officer made in an 
5 appeal under this Act.". 
10 
5. In section 9 of the principal Act,-
(a) in sub-section (I), after the words, figure and letter "or 
section 5B", the words, figure and letter "or section 5C" shall be 
inserted; 
('b) in sub-section (2),-
(i) in clause (a). the word "and" at the end shall be omitted; 
(ii) in clause (b), the word "and" shall b'i! inserted at the 
end; 
(iili) after clause (b). the following clause shall be inserted, 
15 namely:-
20 
35 
"(c) in the case of an appeal from an order under 
section 5C, within twelve days from the date of such order;". 
&. In section 11 of the principal Act,-
(a) sub-sections (1) and (2) shall be renumbered as sub-
sections (2) and (3) thereof respectively, and before sub-section 
(2) as sO renumbered, the following sub-section shall be inserted, 
namely:-
"(1) If any person unlawfully occupies any public premises, 
he shall be punishable with simple imprisonment for a term 
which may extend to six months, or with fine which. may 
extend to five thousand rupees, or with both: 
Provided that a person who, having been lawfully in occu-
pation of any public premises by virtue of any authority 
(whether by way of grant, allotment or by any other mode 
whatsoever) continues Ito be in occupation of such premises after 
such authority has ceased to be valid, shall not be guilty of 
such offence."; 
(b) in sub-section (2) as so renumbered, for the words one 
thousand rupees", the words "five thousand rupees" shall be substi-
tuted; 
(e) in sub-section (3) as so renumbered, for the word, 
brackets and figure "sub-section (1) It, the word, brackets and figure 
"sub-section (2)" shall be substituted. 
7. Mter section 11 of the principal Act, the following section shall 
40 be inserted, namely:-
"llA. The Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, shall apply to an 
offence under section 11 as if it were a cognizable offence--
(i) for the purposes of investigation of such offence, and 
(ii) for the purposes of matters other than-
(1) matrers referred to in section 42 of that Code, and 
Amend_ 
ment of 
section 9. 
Amend-
ment of 
seetion 
11. 
Inser~io. 
of new 
section 
11A. 
Of!enc;es 
under 
section 11 
to be 
cogniz-
able. 

Amend-
ment of 
section 
13. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 15. 
Amend-
ment of 
lection 18. 
4 
(2) arrest of a person except on the complaint of. or 
upon information received from,-
(a) a Group A officer as may be appointed by the 
Central Government, in the case of an offence in rela-
tion to the public premises specified in sub-clause (1) 5 
of clause (e) of section 2: 
(b) an officer equivalent to the rank of a Group A 
officer of the Central Government or where it is not 
possible to specify an officer of such equivalent rank. 
such executive officer as may be appointed by the 10 
statutory authority in the case of an offence in relation 
to the public premises specified in sub-clause (2) ot 
clause (e) of section 2; 
(c) such Deputy Commissioner, in the case of an 
offence in relation to the public premises belonging to 15 
the Municipal Corporation of Delhi, a'S may be appoint-
ed by the Administrator of the Union territory of 
Delhi; 
(d) the Secretary, New Delhi Municipal Committee 
in the case of an offence in relation to the public 20 
premises belonging to the New Delhi Municipal Com ... 
~~; ~ 
(e) the Secretary of a notified area committee, in 
the case of an offence in relation to the public premises 
belonging to that committee; 25 
(f) such Director, in the case of an offence in rela-
tion to the public premises belonging to the Delhi 
Development Authority, as may be appointed by the 
Administrator of the Union territory of Delhi.", 
8. In section 13 of the principal Act, in sub-section (J A), after the 30 
word, brackets and figure "sub-section (2) ", the words, brackets and 
figure "or sub-section (3) ,. shall be inserted, 
9. In section 15 of the principal Act, after clause (c), the following 
clause shall be inserted, namely:-
"(ce) the sealing of any erection or work or of any public pre- 35 
mises under section SC, or", 
10. In sub-section (2) of section 18 of the principal Act, after clause 
(e), the follOWing clau'se shall be inserted, namely:-
II (ee) the manner in which the sealing of any erection or work 
or any public premises shall be made under sub-section (1 \' o~40 section' 5C;'''. ' . 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Public Premises (Eviction of Unauthorised Occupants) Act, 
1971, provides for the eviction of unauthorised occupants from public 
premises and, for this purpose, the Act provines for appointment of 
estate officers who have been given power, after necessary inquiry, to 
pass orders of eviction of such unauthorised occupants. The estate 
officer has also been given powers to remove, and to order demolition 
of, unauthorised constructions. 
2. Of late cases of unauthorised occupation in public premises 
especially in the Union territory of Delhi, had been on the increase. 
Thele had been suggestions from many quarters to strengthen the pro-
vistbns of this Act by providing for increased penalties and making the 
offences under the Act cognizable. In order, therefore, to enable the 
estate officers to exercise their powers under the Act effectively and 
to remove unauthorised occupants from public premises, it is proposed 
to amend the Act. 
3. The Bill aC<'ordingly provides, among other things, for the follow-
ing changes in the Act, namely:-
(i) Under the existing provisions, the estate officer is required 
to make an order directing the demolition of unauthorised cunstruc-
tion within a period of not less than seven days or more than fifteen 
days to be specified in such order and no such order shall be made 
unle~s the person concerned has been given a show cause notice. 
It is proposed to omit the provision regarding the reference to the 
specific period to be mentioned in the order for demolition and to 
provide only for a period of seven days for the show cause notice. 
(ii) It is proposed to empower the estate officer, at any time 
before or after making an order of demolition of unauthorised 
construction, to make an order to direct the sealing of any unautho-
rised construction. The sealing of such unauthorised construction 
in pursuance of an order made by the estate officer can be removed 
only by him for the p'urpose of demolishing such construction or in 
pursuance of an order made by the appellate officer in any appeal 
made under the provisions of the Act. A proviSion for appeal 
against the order of sealing by the estate officer to the appellate 
officer has also been included. 
(iii) It is proposed to create a new offence of unlawful occupa-
tion of any public premises and to make it punishable with imprison-
ment for six months or with fine up to five thousand rupees. 
Opportunity has· also been availed to increase the penalty by way of 
fine now provided for occupying a public premises by an evicted 
person without authority for such occupation. 
(iv) It is also proposed to make the offences under the Act 
cognizable. 
4. The Bill seeks to achieve the aforesaid objects. 
NEW DELlII; 
The 19th AU{1U8t. 1983. BirrA SINGH. 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 10 of the Bill seeks to insert a new clause (ee) in sub-section 
. (2) of section 18 of the Public Premises (Eviction of Unauthorised 
Occupants) Act, 1971, so as to empower the Central Government to specify 
by rules the manner in which the sealing of any erection or work or of 
any public premises shall be made under sub-section (J) of the new 
section 5C proposed to be inserted in the Act by clause 4 of the Bill. 
2. The matters with respect to which rules may be made by the 
Central Government under the proposed provision are matters of 
procedure or detail. The delegation of legislative power is, therefore, 
normal in character. 
8 

ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS FROM THE PuBuc PREMISJ!S (EvICTION OF UNAtrnlORISED 
OCCUPANTS) ACT, 1971 
(40 OF 1971) 
• • • • • • 
SA. (1) No person shall-
(a) erect or place or raise any building or other structure 
fixure, 
• • • • • • 
or 
on, or against, or in front of, any public premises except in accordance 
with the authority (whether by way of grant or any other mode of 
traImfer) under which he was allowed to occupy such premises; 
(2) Where any building or other structure or fixture has been 
erected or any goods have been displayed Or spread or any cattle or 
other animal has been brought on, any public premises in contraven-
tion of the provisions of sub-section (1), the estate officer may serve 
upon the person erecting such building or other structure or fixture or 
displaying or spreading such goodS' or bringing such cattle or other 
animal on the public premises, a notice requiring him either to remove. 
Or to show cauSe why he shall not remove, such building, other struc-
ture or fixture, or, as the case may be, such goods or cattle or other 
animal from the public premises within such period, not being Jess than 
seven days, as he may specify in the notice; and on the omission or 
refusal of 'Such person either to show cause, or to remove such building 
or other structure or fixture, or, a'S the case may be, such goods or calttle 
or other animal from the public premises, or, where the cause shown 
is not in the opinion of the estate officer, sufficient, the estate officer 
may remove the building Or other structure or fixture, or, as the case 
may be, such goods Or cattle or other animal from the public premises 
and recover the cost of such removal from the person aforesaid as an 
arrear of land revenue. 
58. (1) Where the erection of any building or execution of any 
work has been commenced, or is being carried on or ha!': been completed, 
on any public premises by any person in occupation of such public pr~­
mises under an authority (whether by way of m-ant or any other mode of 
transfer), and such erecti'on of building or execution of work i~ in con-
travention of, or not authorised by, such authority, then. the estate 
officer may, in addition to any other action that may be taken under 
this Act at in accordance with the terms of the authority aforesaid make 
an order, for reasons to be recorded therein, directing that such erec-
tion or work shall be demolished by the person at whose instance the 
erection or work has been commenced, or is being carried on, or has 
been completed. within such period, as may be specified in the order, 
not being less than seven days, 01' more than fifteen days, from the 
date of publication of the order under suh·~~~tiQn (3): 
, 
Power to 
remove 
unautho-
rised 
construc-
tions, etc. 
Order of 
demolition 
of unautho-
rised 
construc-
tion. 

Appeals. 
Offences 
and 
penalty. 
Liability 
of heirs 
and legal 
rew-e-
sentatives. 
Power to 
make 
rules. 
a 
Provided that no order under thios sub-section shall be made unless 
the person concerned has been given, by means of a notice served in 
the prescribed manner, a reasonable opportunity of showing cause why 
such order should not be made. 
• • • • • • 
9. (1) An appeal shan lie from every order of the estate 
officer made in respect of any public premises under section 5 or section 
5B or section 7 to an appeliate officer who shall be the district judge 
5 
of the district in which the public premises are situate or such other 
judicial officer in that district of not less than ten years' standing as the 10 
district judge may designate in this behalf. 
(2) An appeal under sub-section (1) shall be preferred,-
(a) in the case of an appeal from an order under seCtion 5, 
within twelve days from the date of publication of the order 
under sub-section (1) of that section; and 15 
(b) in the case of an appeal from an order under section 5B 
or section 7, within twelve days from the date on which the order 
is communicated to the appellant: 
Provided that the appellate officer may entertain the appeal after 
the expiry of the said period, if he is sCitisfied that the appellant was 20 
prevented by sufficient cause from filing the appeal in time. 
tt. (1) If any person who has been evicted from any public premises 
under this Act again occupies the premises without authority for such 
occupation, he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term 
whiCh may exrend to one year, or with fine which may extend rto one 25 
thousand rupees, or with both. 
(2) Any magistrate convicting a person under sub-section (1) may 
make an order for evicting that person summarily and he shall be liable 
to such eviction without prejudice to any other action that may be 
taken against him under this Act. 30 
• • ... 
13. (1) • ... ... 
... • 
... • 
• 
, 
" ....... , 
(1 A) Where any person from whom any cost of removal of any 
building or other structure or fixture, or, as the case may be, any goods, 
cattle or other animal is to be recovered under 'Sub-section (2) of sec- 35 
tion 5A, or any- expenses of demolition are to be recovered under sub-
section (5) of section 5B, dies before any proceeding is taken for the 
recovery of such cost or during the pendency thereof, the proceeding 
may be taken or, as the case may be, continued against the heirs or 
legal representatives of that person . 
• • • ... • .. 
15. No court shall have jurisdiction to entertain any suit or proceed-
ing in respect of-
18. "(1) • ... ... • ". 
~i" 
. (2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the 45 
foregoing power, such rules may provide for all Or any of the following 
matters, namely:-
• • • • • 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Public.Premises (Eviction of Unauthorised 
OccUP~) Act, 1971 
(Shri Buta Singh. MmistleT of 
Parliamentary A:fJaiTs, 
Sports and WOTks & Housing) 