1
THE CENTRAL UNIVERSITIES (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2012
A
BILL
further to amend the Central Universities Act, 2009.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-third Year of the Republic  of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Central Universities (Amendment) Act, 2012.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. After section 3A of the Central Universities Act, 2009 (hereinafter referred to
as the principal Act), the following section shall be inserted, namely:—
“3B.  (1) The Central University of Bihar established under sub-section
(4) of section 3 shall be known as the Central University of  South Bihar and
its territorial jurisdiction shall be limited to the territory in the south of the
River Ganges in the State of Bihar.
Short title and
commencement.
25 of 2009. Insertion of new
section 3B.
Special provi-
sion with
respect to the
State of Bihar.
REPRINT
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Bill No. 105 of  2012
5
10
ON 26TH NOVEMBER, 2012

2
(2) There shall be established a university, which shall be a body corporate, to
be known as the Central University of North Bihar  having  its territorial jurisdiction
extending to the  territory in the north of the River Ganges in the State of Bihar.
(3) All assets and liabilities of the Central University of Bihar in respect of the
territory in the north of the River Ganges in the State of Bihar shall stand transferred
to be the assets and liabilities of the Central University of North Bihar.
(4) Anything done or any action taken by the Central University of Bihar in
respect of the territory in the north of the River Ganges in the State of Bihar shall be
deemed to have been done or taken by the Central University of North Bihar.
(5) Any suit or legal proceedings instituted or continued by or against the
Central University of Bihar in respect of the territory in the north of the River
Ganges in the State of Bihar shall be deemed to have been instituted or continued by
or against the Central University of North Bihar.”.
3. In the First Schedule to the principal Act, for serial number 1 and the
corresponding entries against it, the following serial numbers and entries shall be
substituted, namely:—
“1. Bihar Central University Territory in the south of the
of South Bihar River Ganges in the State of Bihar
1A. Bihar Central University Territory in the north of the River
of North Bihar Ganges in the State of Bihar”.
Amendment of
the First
Schedule to the
principal Act.
5
10
15
20

STA TEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
The Central Universities Act, 2009 was enacted to establish and incorporate
universities for teaching and research in various States and to provide for matters
connected therewith or incidental thereto. The Act provided, inter alia , for
establishment of a Central University in the State of Bihar by the name of Central
University of Bihar.
2. The Central University of Bihar is functioning from a temporary location at
Birla Institute of Technology Campus, Patna. The Government of Bihar had identified
three sites in Motihari, for permanent location of the Central University of Bihar,
which were not found suitable by the Site Selection Committee. Keeping this in view,
the Central Government explored the possibility of acquiring a portion of an unused
airfield at Panchanpur at Gaya.
3. Meanwhile, Resolutions have been passed by both the Houses of the State
Legislature of Bihar requesting the Central Government to establish the Central
University at Motihari. Several Members of Parliament have also raised the issue for
establishing more than one Central University in the State of Bihar to speed-up the
all-round development of the State.
4. In view of the pressing demand for establishment of one more Central
University in the State of Bihar and to minimise regional imbalances in higher education,
it is proposed to establish one more Central University in the State of Bihar.
Accordingly, the Central Universities (Amendment) Bill, 2012, provides—
(a) for establishment of one more Central University in the State of Bihar
by the name of Central University of North Bihar to be located at Motihari in
the State of Bihar; and
(b) for renaming the existing Central University in the State of Bihar as
the Central University of South Bihar to be located at Gaya in the State of Bihar.
5. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
N
EW DELHI;.
M.M.  PALLAM  RAJU
3

FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill seeks to insert a new section 3B in the Central Universities
Act, 2009, so as to establish a new University as a body corporate to be known as the
Central University of North Bihar having its territorial jurisdiction in the territory in
the north of the River Ganges in the State  of  Bihar and to rename the existing Central
University of Bihar established under sub-section (4) of  section 3 of the said  Act, as
the Central University of  South Bihar with territorial jurisdiction limited to the
territory in the south of the River Ganges in the State of Bihar.
2. In the Eleventh Plan, the Cabinet had approved an expenditure of two
hundred forty crore rupees for the  existing Central University of Bihar. It is proposed
to split the said expenditure of two hundred forty crore rupees between the two
Central Universities equally. The  expenditure would be met from the Consolidated
Fund of India through the budgetary provisions of the Ministry of Human Resource
Development.
4

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT  FROM THE CENTRAL UNIVERSITIES ACT, 2009
(25 OF 2009)
* * * * *
THE  FIRST  SCHEDULE
[See section 3 (4)]
Serial Name of Name of the University Territorial jurisdiction
No. the State
1. Bihar Central University of Bihar Whole of the State of Bihar
* * * * *
5

GMGIPMRND —3492LS—26.11.2012.
LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Central Universities Act, 2009.
—————
(Shri M.M. Pallam Raju, Minister of Human Resource Development)