As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

# ९ ats
है ५ १९ ‘ iw कु

Bill No. 105 of 2005

THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2005
By —
SHRIMATI DAGGUBATI PURANDESWARI, M.P.
A

BILL
further to amend the Constituiion of India.

BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. This Act may be called The Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2005.
2. For article 48A of the Constitution, the following article shall be substituted, namely:—

"48A. The State shall endeavour to protect and improve the environment
so as to ensure a pollution-free environment for its citizens; and to safeguard
the forests and wildlife of the country and constitute such enforcement agencies
as it considers necessary for implementing the provisions of this article.".

Explanation: For the purpose of this article, the expression
"environment" means and includes waier, both surface and underground, air
and land including the surface of the earth, sub-soil and forests (the flora and
the fauna) and the inter-relationship which exists between water, air and land
and human beings, other living creatures, plants, micro-organisms and property
exclusive of mere amenities.",

Short title.

Substitution
of new
article for
article 48A.

Protection
and
improvement
of
environment
and
safeguarding

of forests and

wildlife.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

India is a vast country with a huge population. Although, there is a provision the
Constitution for protection of environment, yet this remains a neglected area. Today,

efforts are to be supplemented by voluntary organisations and individuals.

The environment is polluted blatantly by many agencies and there js Virtually no
check on it. It is the duty of the Government to secure for the citizens a pollution free
environment. It is, therefore, proposed to amend the Constitution to provide for a pollution-
free environment and to constitute enforcement agencies for checking environmental
pollution.

Hence this Bill.

New DELHI: DAGGUBATI PURANDESWARI
July 26, 2005 7


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 2 of the Bill provides for the Constitution of enforcement agencies for
safeguarding forests and wildlife of the country. The Bill, if enacted, will involve expenditure
from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a recurring expenditure of rupees
twenty-five crore will be incurred per annum.

A non-recurring expenditure of rupees ten crore is also likely to be involved.


ANNEXURE

EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

PART -IV | |
DIRECTIVE PRINCIPLES OF STATE POLICY

* * | * * * a *
Protection "48A. The State shall endeavour to protect and improve the environment and to a
one Safeguard the forests and wildlife of the country. , जज
improvement |
of | 7
environment
and
safeguarding
of forests and
wildlife.

* * * of * *



LOK SABHA

A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.

(Shrimati Daggubati Purandeswari, M.P.)

MGIPMRND—2178LS(S1)—12-8-2005.