AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

17 DEC 1999

Bill No. 105_of 1999

THE YOUTH WELFARE BILL, 1999
By
Suri ViLAs Murremwar, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for a comprehensive policy for the development of the youth in the country.
Beit enacted by Parliament in the Fiftieth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—

1. (7) This Act may be called the Youth Welfare Act, 1999, Shorttitle,
‘tent and
(2) It extends to the whole of India. अकाल फ:

(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.


2

Definitions. 2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) ‘appropriate Government’ means in the case of a State, the State Governmet

and in the case of a Union territory, the Union Government;
(b) ‘Youth’ means all persons between twelve and thirty years of age; and

(c) ‘Youth Organisation’ means an organisation of youth which prov
universal membership, without any discrimination on the basis of race, religio
language, caste, creed or sex and the constitution of which provides for its democ a
functioning in respective States or Union territories, as the case may be.

3. The appropriate Government shall provide to the youth—

‘Compulsory
and free
educational (@ compulsory and free education including technical education;
eine (0) materials like books, stationery, uniform, ete. free of cost;
(c) free hostel facilities;
(@ scholarships to deserving students;
(e) free transport facilities;
(P pocket allowance at the rate of rupees one hundred to rupees one hunt
fifty per month according to the age: of the youth, as may be prescribed; and
(g) free access to all libraries and technical institutions.
Sports 4, The appropriate Government shall provide,—
facilities to the
youth. (@ training in sportsto every youth and facilities for participation in sports activ
both inside and outside the country;
(b) representation to youth organisations in sports associations; and
(c) for the welfare of youth, who represent the country in sports, throug
time.
Provision of, 5. The appropriate Government shall provide nutritious meals free of cost to

nutritious meals students in schools, colleges, universities, hostels and technical institutions:
in schools, etc.

Medical care 6. The appropriate Government shall provide medical and health care to the
tothe youth. —_of cost.

‘Training of the 7. The appropriate Government shall evolve a scheme under which yout
youth in trade provided training in modern apprenticeship trades, vocations, etc. in factories and
oration, ete. institutions.

8. The appropriate Government shall appoint expert Committees in ever

Appointment é
od ka consisting of eminent educationists, psychologists to recommend the type of educa
mmittess- training in any vocation that is to be imparted toa youth of the district after he or:
passed the tenth class examination.
Military 9. The Central Government shall provide military training to all the able

training to the youth and those who successfully complete the training shall be given prefe

oe ‘employment in defence services.
Provision of 10. The appropriate Government shalll provide employment to the youth af
Employment.  education/training or unemployment allowance, as may be fixed, by the Central Go

in lieu thereof, till they are provided employment.
by notification in the Official Gazette, mi

Power to make 11. The Central Government may,
wales: for carrying out the purposes of this Act.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

| decades of independence, no clear-cut youth policy has been laid
country so far. The education should be the right of the youth and not a
few and employment should be guaranteed to them. The youth should be
with the production process. The disparities between the rural and urban
eliminated gradually. The youth today is also facing serious health problems,
acy in sports and cultural facilities. The youth belonging to Scheduled
Tribes and other backward classes are still reeling under poverty. There
ing for comprehensive development of the youth and proper utilisation
ies and education. A comprehensive youth policy for their all round
is, therefore, absolutely necessary.

VILAS MUTTEMWAR


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 3 of the Bill provides that the appropriate Government shall p
compulsory and free education and also supply matcrials like books, ationery,
etc., free of cost and pocket allowance to all the youth, It also provides for free
transport facilities and scholarships to youth. Clause 4 provides that the
Government shall provide facilities to youth for their participation in sports a
Clause 5 provides that the appropriate Government shall provide nutritious
cost to all the students in schools, colleges, univers and hostels. Clause 6 p
medical and health care to all the youth by the appropriate Government. Clause 7
that the appropriate Government shall evolve a scheme under which the youtl
given training in factories and vocational institutions. Clause 8 provides for apy
of expert Committees to recommend the type of education that is to be im
youth. Clause 9 provides for military training to physically fit youth, Clause 10

that the appropriate Government shall be responsible for providing employment
youth or unemployment allowance, as may be prescribed, till they are pro

employment.
‘The Bill, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fun 1

in respect of the Union Territories. The State Government will incur the expenditu
Funds in respect of their States supplemented by as

their respective Consolidated
from the Central Government. An annual recurring expenditure of about rupees two

and fifty crore is likely to be incurred.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees four crore is also likely to be


REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

है 11 of the Bill gives power to the Central Government to make rules for
‘out the purposes of the Bill. The rules will relate to matters of detail only and as
he delegation of legislative power is of a normal character.



LOK SABHA.

A

BILL

to provide for a comprehensive policy for the development of the youth in |

(Shri Vilas Muttemwar, M.P.)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—1877LS—24-11-1999.