1
THE RAILWAYS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2010
By
SHRI  A. T. NANA PATIL,  M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Railways Act, 1989.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-first Year of  the Republic of India as follows:—
1. This Act may be called the Railways (Amendment)  Act, 2010.
2. In the Railways Act, 1989, after chapter XIII, the following chapter and section
thereunder shall be inserted, namely:—
“CHAPTER XIIIA
RESPONSIBILITY OF RAILW AY ADMINISTRATION TO INSURE LIFE AND GOODS OF PASSENGERS.
129A. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the railway administration
shall enter into contract with any of the Government owned insurance companies for insurance
of the life of the passengers and the goods owned by them.
(2) For the purpose of sub-section (1), the railway administration shall determine the
rate of premium to be paid by every passenger according to the class by which he travels in
consultation with the insurance companies.
(3) The insurance amount payable to a passenger shall be in addition to any other
payment including the amount of compensation payable under the other provisions of this
Act.”.
Short title.
Insertion of
new chapter
XIIIA.
Bill No. 105 of  2010
TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
24 of 1989.
Insurance of
life and goods
of valid
passengers
travelling in
train.
5
10
15

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Railway accidents are on the increase. Some accidents happen either due to human or
technical error whereas some accidents are the result of terrorist activities. In every accident,
a large number of lives are lost and a number of people are injured also. Under the existing
rules, there is a provision for ex gratia payment and compensation for loss of life or injury.
But the amount of compensation is very less and it takes a number of years to settle a claim.
In many cases, the income and status of the victim is not taken into consideration by the
Tribunal. In many cases, the compensation amount is the same irrespective of the fact
whether the deceased or injured person belonged to high income category or low income
category.
To avoid such a situation, it is proposed to amend the Railways Act to formulate an
insurance scheme to compensate the victims in railway accidents. The Railways can charge
the premium along with the ticket and it may vary the premium rate in accordance with the
class of travel in train. The rate of premium payable by passengers can also be taken into
consideration for providing the insurance cover. Since this would be in addition to
compensation payable under the present dispensation, the victims of train accidents will be
benefited under the scheme.
     The Bill seeks to achieve the above objective.
N
EW DELHI; A.T. NANA  PATIL
July 27, 2010.
2

GMGIPMRND—3965LS(S3)—18-08-2010.
LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Railways Act, 1989.
————
(Shri A. T. Nana Patil, M.P.)