Short title and
commencement.
Bill No. 105 of 2004
THE NATIONAL COMMISSION FOR MINORITIES
(REPEAL) BILL, 2004
A
BILL
to repeal the National Commission for Minorities Act, 1992.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-fifth Year of the Republic of India
as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the National Commission for Minorities (Repeal) Act,
2004.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. The National Commission for Minorities Act, 1992 is hereby repealed and the
National Commission for Minorities constituted under section 3 of the said Act shall stand
dissolved.
Repeal.19 of 1992.
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5

2
3. On the dissolution of the National Commission for Minorities, the person appointed
as the Chairperson and every other person appointed as Member of the National
Commission for Minorities and holding office as such immediately before the
commencement of this Act, shall vacate their respective offices and no such Chairperson
or Member shall be entitled to claim any compensation for the premature termination of
the term of his office.
Consequential
provision.
5

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
A Minorities Commission was set up for the first time in January, 1978, inter alia, to
provide an institutional arrangement for evaluating the safeguards provided in the Constitution
for protection of the minorities, to make recommendations for ensuring implementation of
the safeguards and the laws, etc. Subsequently, in May, 1993, the Central Government
constituted the National Commission for Minorities as a statutory body under the National
Commission for Minorities Act, 1992. With a view to inspire greater confidence of the
Minorities in the effectiveness and working of the Commission, it has been decided to give
constitutional status to the National Commission for Minorities by suitably amending the
Constitution. Accordingly, it is proposed to insert a new article 340A  in the Constitution
vide the Constitution (One Hundred and Third Amendment) Bill, 2004, which has been
introduced in Parliament. It is, therefore, proposed to repeal the National Commission for
Minorities Act, 1992 and dissolve the Commission constituted under the said Act.
2. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects.
N
EW DELHI; MEIRA  KUMAR.
The 16th December, 2004.
3

LOK  SABHA
—————
A
BILL
to repeal the National Commission for Minorities Act, 1992.
—————
(Shrimati Meira Kumar, Minister of Social Justice and Empowerment)
MGIPMRND—3668LS(S-3)—17.12.2004.