1
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2009
By
SHRI SHAILENDRA KUMAR, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixtieth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2009.
2. In Part IV of the Constitution, the existing article 48 shall be re-numbered as
clause (1) of that article, and after clause (1) as so re-numbered, the following clause shall be
inserted, namely:—
‘‘(2)  The state shall take steps to,—
(a)  earmark adequate percentage of Gross Domestic Product for the
agriculture sector to ensure growth of this sector;
(b) declare agriculture as an industry and extend all the facilities and
concessions available to the industries;
(c) make agriculture export oriented and promote export of surplus
agricultural products;
Short title.
Amendment of
article 48.
Bill No.  105 of  2009
TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5
10

2
(d) ensure remunerative prices for all the agriculture produce and extend
compulsory market intervention whenever there is bumper crop of any agriculture
produce including foodgrains, pulses, fruits and vegetables;
(e) provide excellent marketing facilities, cold storages and cheap and
affordable transportation facilities to the farmers for their produce;
(f) ensure that every factory or enterprise using any agricultural produce
as raw material clears all the dues of the farmer in respect of the produce so
purchased from him within a fortnight of such purchase;
(g) ensure that the farmers get timely loans from the banks and financial
institutions for agriculture and other purposes so as to save them from the
clutches of moneylenders;
(h) ensure that farmers get adequate and timely compensation whenever
they are affected by any natural calamity;
(i) ensure that farmers get quality seeds, manure, fertilizers and pesticides
at reasonable prices during the sowing season;
(j) save distressed farmers from taking extreme step of committing suicide
and extend welfare measure for the families of such farmers who have committed
suicide;
(k) extend compulsory crop and livestock insurance cover free of cost to
farmers;
(l) ensure rapid growth of agriculture in drought prone, desert and arid
areas by providing irrigation facilities and implementing watershed programmes;
(m) ensure revival of traditional water storage bodies and implement
schemes of promoting rainwater harvesting technologies;
(n) promote agro-based industries such as dairy and cooperative sectors
in the rural areas;
(o) introduce welfare measures such as health care, old age pension,
disability pension, educational facilities, child care facilities including maternity
services, nutritious meal and such other facilities to the farmers and members of
their families;
(p) provide agricultural workers all such benefits as are available to the
workers in industrial sector;
(q) raise the standard of living of agricultural workers and enhance their
purchasing capacity;
(r) promote the handicrafts, Khadi and Village industries sectors;
(s) introduce agriculture as a subject of study at all levels of education;
and
(t) take such other measures for the promotion of agriculture and welfare
of farmers as the State may deem necessary and expedient to do so.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this article the expression ‘agriculture’
includes horticulture, sericulture, rearing of livestock, poultry, bee keeping, dairying
and such other activities which are related to agriculture.’’
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
India is primarily an agricultural country as more than 70 per cent of its population is,
one way or the other, dependent on agriculture. The agricultural scientists and our farmers
have made the nation self-sufficient in the production of foodgrains through green revolution.
Most of the industrial products in the country are based on agriculture as their raw materials
come from agriculture. But, unfortunately, the lot of farmers as well as of agricultural sector
as a whole is far from satisfactory. There is sharp contrast between the agricultural and the
industrial sectors. The margin of profit in industrial sector is manifold whereas it is nominal
or very meager in agricultural sector.
Though the agricultural sector is the backbone of our economy, the irony is that this
sector has consistently been neglected both at the States and the national level. A tiny
percentage of our GDP is allocated to this sector. As a result even after implementing ten five-
year plans, the agriculture is still dependent on rains as irrigation capability has not been
increased to the desired levels and the poor farmers have to face the brunt of the vagaries of
nature. As such, the development of agriculture, more so in the light of our booming
population, has become very crucial for the nation. The need of the hour is to give the status
of industry to agriculture and extend all the facilities to it which are enjoyed by the industrial
sector. A national welfare policy needs to be implemented for the farmers. The agricultural
workers have to be given a fair deal and equal treatment as per with industrial workers. If we
are able to improve the living standards of our farmers, agricultural workers and artisans, it
will be our national achievement and this is possible only when the agricultural sector gets
its due share at the national level.
In view of the above, the proposed Bill seeks to include a provision in the part relating
to directive principles of State policy of our Constitution seeking to list measures needed to
be taken by the State for the welfare of agriculture and the farmers.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; SHAILENDRA  KUMAR
November  3, 2009.

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
* * * * * * *
48. The State shall endeavour to organise agriculture and  animal husbandry on modern
and scientific lines and shall, in particular, take steps for preserving and improving the
breeds, and prohibiting the slaughter, of cows and calves and other milch and draught cattle.
* * * * * * *
Organisation
of agriculture
and animal
husbandry.
4

GMGIPMRND—4622LS(S5)—25-11-2009.
LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Shri Shailendra Kumar, M.P.)