1
Short title and
commencement.
THE REAL ESTATE (REGULA TION AND DEVELOPMENT)
AMENDMENT BILL, 2018
By
DR. KIRIT PREMJIBHAI SOLANKI, M.P.
A
BILL
to amend the Real Estate (Regulation and Development) Act, 2016
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Real Estate (Regulation and Development) Amendment
Act, 2018.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification,
in the Official Gazette, appoint:
Provided that different dates may be appointed for different provisions of this Act and
any reference in any such provision to the commencement of this Act shall be construed as
a reference to the coming into force of that provision.
2. In section 7 of the Real Estate (Regulation and Development) Act, 2016 (hereinafter
referred to as the principal Act), in sub-section (1), after clause (d), the following clause shall
be inserted, namely:—
“(e) the promoter practices discrimination on the basis of caste, religion, race or
sex in the booking or sale or purchase of any plot, apartment or building, in any real
estate project or part of it.”.
Bill  No. 105 of  2018
Amendment
to section 7.
16 of 2016.
5
10
As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
3. In section 9 of the principal Act, for sub-section (7), the following sub-section shall
be substituted, namely:—
"(7) Where any real estate agent who has been granted registration under this
Act commits breach of any of the conditions thereof or any other terms and conditions
specified under this Act or any rules or regulations made thereunder or is found guilty
of practicing discrimination on the basis of caste, religion, race or sex in the facilitation
of the booking or sale or purchase of any plot, apartment or building in any real estate
project or part of it, or where the Authority is satisfied that such registration has been
secured by the real estate agent through misrepresentation or fraud, the Authority
may, without prejudice to any other provisions under this Act, revoke the registration
or suspend the same for such period as it thinks fit:
Provided that no such revocation or suspension shall be made by the Authority
unless an opportunity of being heard has been given to the real estate agent.".
4. In section 10 of the principal Act, after clause ( d), the following clause shall be
inserted, namely:—
"(da) not practice discrimination on the basis of caste, religion, race or sex, in the
facilitation of the booking or sale or purchase of any plot, apartment or building, in any
real estate project or part of it."
5. In section 22 of the principal Act, for the words "social service, public affairs", the
words "social service, environment, public affairs" shall be substituted.
6. In section 32 of the principal Act,—
(a) for clause (e), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:—
"(e) measures to encourage construction of environmentally sustainable
and affordable housing, with the aim of reducing adverse impact on land, water,
air and forest resources during and post the construction of the real estate
project, promoting standardisation and use of appropriate construction materials,
fixtures, fittings and construction techniques;"; and
(b) after clause (i), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
(ia) measures to address the prevalence and reduce the use of black money,
tax evasion and fraud in the real estate sector and promote digitization of monetary
transactions;".
7. In section 41 of the principal Act, in sub-section (3), for the words  "NITI Aayog",
the words "Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change, NITI Aayog" shall be
substituted.
Amendment
to section 9.
Amendment
to section 10.
Amendment
to section 22.
Amendment
to section 32.
Amendment
to section 41.
5
10
15
20
25
30

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Real Estate (Regulation and Development) Act, 2016 was a historic step to regulate
India's problem-ridden real estate sector by ensuring efficiency, transparency and the
protection of consumer interests. However, certain aspects had remained unaddressed.
There is need to insert certain changes in several sections of the parent Act with a view
to ensuring the prohibition of discrimination on the basis of caste, religion, race or sex in the
booking or sale or purchase of any plot, apartment or building, in any real estate project or
part of it by a promoter or a real estate agent and including the promotion and encouragement
of environmental sustainability while implementing any project as a goal within the Act.
The Bill, therefore, seeks to amend the Real Estate (Regulation and Development) Act,
2016 with a view to include—
(a) technical expertise in the domain of environmental sustainability within the
Real Estate Regulatory Authority;
(b) representatives from the Ministry of Environment, Forests and Climate Change
within the Central Advisory Council; and
(c) measures to address the prevalence and use of black money in the real estate
sector by empowering the Real Estate Regulatory Authority to take action against
such malpractices.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; KIRIT  PREMJIBHAI  SOLANKI
January  5, 2018.
3

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE REAL ESTATE (REGULA TION AND DEVELOPMENT) ACT, 2016
[16 OF 2016]
* * * * *
7. (1) The Authority may, on receipt of a complaint or suo motu in this behalf or on the
recommendation of the competent authority, revoke the registration granted under section 5,
after being satisfied that—
* * * * *
(d) the promoter indulges in any fraudulent practices.
* * * * *
9. (1) * * * * *
* * * * *
(7) Where any real estate agent who has been granted registration under this Act
commits breach of any of the conditions thereof or any other terms and conditions specified
under this Act or any rules or regulations made thereunder, or where the Authority is satisfied
that such registration has been secured by the real estate agent through misrepresentation
or fraud, the Authority may, without prejudice to any other provisions under this Act, revoke
the registration or suspend the same for such period as it thinks fit: Provided that no such
revocation or suspension shall be made by the Authority unless an opportunity of being
heard has been given to the real estate agent.
* * * * *
10. Every real estate agent registered under section 9 shall—
* * * * *
(d) facilitate the possession of all the information and documents, as the allottee,
is entitled to, at the time of booking of any plot, apartment or building, as the case may
be;
* * * * *
22. The Chairperson and other Members of the Authority shall be appointed by the
appropriate Government on the recommendations of a Selection Committee consisting of the
Chief Justice of the High Court or his nominee, the Secretary of the Department dealing with
Housing and the Law Secretary, in such manner as may be prescribed, from amongst persons
having adequate knowledge of and professional experience of at-least twenty years in case
of the Chairperson and fifteen years in the case of the Members in urban development,
housing, real estate development, infrastructure, economics, technical experts from relevant
fields, planning, law, commerce, accountancy, industry, management, social service, public
affairs or administration:
Provided that a person who is, or has been, in the service of the State Government shall
not be appointed as a Chairperson unless such person has held the post of Additional
Secretary to the Central Government or any equivalent post in the Central Government or
State Government:
Provided further that a person who is, or has been, in the service of the State
Government shall not be appointed as a member unless such person has held the post of
Revocation of
registration.
Registration
of real estate
agents.
Functions of
real estate
agents.
Qualifications
of
Chairperson
and Members
of Authority.
4

5
Secretary to the State Government or any equivalent post in the State Government or
Central Government.
* * * * *
32. The Authority shall in order to facilitate the growth and promotion of a healthy,
transparent, efficient and competitive real estate sector make recommendations to the
appropriate Government of the competent authority, as the case may be, on,—
* * * * *
(e) measures to encourage construction of environmentally sustainable and
affordable housing, promoting standardisation and use of appropriate construction
materials, fixtures, fittings and construction techniques;
* * * * *
(i) to render advice to the appropriate Government in matters relating to the
development of real estate sector;
* * * * *
41. (1) * * * * *
(2)* * * * *
(3) The Central Advisory Council shall consist of representatives of the Ministry of
Finance, Ministry of Industry and Commerce, Ministry of Urban Development, Ministry of
Consumer Affairs, Ministry of Corporate Affairs, Ministry of Law and Justice, NITI Aayog,
National Housing Bank, Housing and Urban Development Corporation, five representatives
of State Governments to be selected by rotation, five representatives of the Real Estate
Regulatory Authorities to be selected by rotation, and any other Central Government
department as notified.
* * * * *
Functions of
Authority for
promotion of
real estate
sector.
Establishment
of Central
Advisory
Council.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to amend the Real Estate (Regulation and Development) Act, 2016
————
(Dr. Kirit Premjibhai Solanki, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—290LS(S3)—08-06-2018.