i
: As Qrrropucep ut Lox Samia

२ vb 217

Bill No. 105 of 1992
कल NET

THE COPYRIGGT (SECOND AMENDMENT) EYLL, 1992
a
BILL
further io ament the Copyright Act, 1957.
Be it enacted by Parliament in the Forty-third Year of the

Republic of India as follows:—
4 (1) This Act may be called the Copyright (Second Amendment)

Act, 1992.
5 (2) Tt shall come inte forse on such dale as the Central Govern-
yy notification in the Official Gazette, appoint:

ment may, b

Provided that different dates may be appointed for different provi-
sions of this Act and any — reference in any such provision to the
commencement of this Aci shall be construed as a reference to the

10 coming into force of that provision.
of 1957. 2. In section 2 of the Copyright Act, 1957. (hi
as the principal Act)—

ereinafter referred to

di) in clause (०) ,--
(a) in gub-clause (4), the word “aad”,
15 end, shall be omitted;

oecurring at the

em

Short
title
and
com-
mence-
ment.

Amend-
ment of
section 2,



’, wherever they
~be..substituted; ~~~

i) in clause (@), for sub-clauses—(v)~and- (vi
b-clauses shall bi i

* means -any- work of visual r
ed through a process from which a 20.

cinematograph” shall be construed ag including any work pro-
~~ Gueed--by.any procéss analogous-to- cinematography including
video films

-any ~ .work-—available---for-being-~:see!
njoyed-by: the-public’ directly - “oi गजब 0 २0 77
di other: than-b: wing copies of’ such-work ‘regardless of
whether any member of the pu wally sees, hears or
other

otherwise

F

@ purposes of this
tion through ‘satellite or-gable or any
- ous. communication: to-more>:than.
L 8 “of-residence ‘including residential rooms 61 any—hotel 0
we . shall be deemed to be communication to the publics =" ©

है . fa) “composer”, in relation te a musical work, means the —
ee ~~... person who composes the music regardless of whether he re- 4
: .. cords it in any form of ‘graphical notation; हु



10

15

20

25

30

35

3

milar device

(9) “computer” includes any electronic 07
having information processing capabilities;

(fey “corapuier programme” means है. set of instructions
expressed in words, codes, schemes or in any other form, in के
machine, readable medium, of causing a computer to perform 8
particular task or achieve a particular rasust;

(fd) “copyright secicly” means a society registered under
sub-section (3) of section 332;

(७४) for clause (m), the following clause shall be substituted,
namely:

(को) “infringing copy” means.—

(४) in relation to a literary. dramatic. musical or artis-
f e than in the form

oho

tie work, a reproduction the
of a cinematographic film,

(ii) in relation to a cinematographic film, a copy of
the film made on any medium by any means;

(iii) in relation to a sound recording, any other re-
cording embodying the same sound recording, made by any
means;

(iv) in relation to a programine or performance in
which such a broadcast reproduction right or 8 performer's

right subsists under the provisions of this Act, the sound
recording or a cinematographic film of such programme 0७

performance.

if such reproduction, copy or sound recording is made or im-
ported in contravention of the provisions of this Act;;

(vit) for clause (०), the following clause shall be substituted,
namely:—

(०) “literary work” includes computer programmes, tables
and compilations including computer data bases};

(viii) for clause (p), the following clause shall be substituted,
namely:—
5) “musical work” means a work consisting of music and

includes any graphical notation of such work put does not
include any words or any action intended to be sung, spoken or

performed with the music;’;
se shall be substituted,

(ix) for clanse (ey, the following (|
namely: —
को “performance”, in yelation to performer’s right, means
any visual or accoustic presentation made live by one or more
performers;’;



ea

stearate

a Subatitu-

thon of
नहला new
section for-,
Section 3.

Meaning
of publi-
cation.

section
for
section 6,

mee ~which-such“sounds.-may- be produce:

(2) after clause, (q).- the following-~ clause shall. be inserted,

Ch

ician, dan-
ivering 8
coy} 3

‘(qq) .“perTormer”. includes an_actor, singer, mm
५ agrobat,- jrigglar, snalte eharnier,. 3... person
ure or any other pe wt

_ fat) clause_(x). shall. be on ited;
1 in all, other, provisi
“the word “record”, wherever 10 occurs,
——yevording’ shall be substituied;.-—- a
(ili), after clause (u), the following clause
namely: — -
“(un) “producer”,
recording, means.a persol who, tal
sibility for making the work;
ited:

ns of the principal
the words “sound

shall bé ‘inserted,
. 10

in relation to a cinematogtaph film or sound
‘res {he initiative and respon-

(xiv) clause (w) shall he शा
(xv) for. clatise (x), the following clauses. shall be substituted, 15

namely: — ma
8 (x) “téprography

»means the making of copies of a work, by

8 a recording of sounds from
d regardless of the medium

‘recording is miadé-or the method by which the
[७९९० ; . oe

3.of the principal, Act, the following section shall be

(xx) “sound recordiig” mi

on which sii

$,For..se

cose. Bae

‘work available to the public by isse "of copies 0
the work to the public’.
4. For section 6 of the princi

ipal Act, the following section shall be

बह, TE any question arises.--
— == -(क) -whethe -worle has" been ~published--or, as to the date
- on which a work was published for the purposes of Chapter Vv, or

(b) whether the term of copyright for any work ig shorter 35
f that work

in any other country than that provided in respect o!
under: this Act; ~~ +- ८ 1.
it shall be referred to the Copyright Board constitu
mee whose. decision thergon..shall. be.final: .__ oe _.
Provided that if in the opinion of the Copyright Board, the issue
of copies or communication to the public referred to in section 3 was
of an. insignificant nature, it shall not be deamed ta be publication _

for the purposes of that section ae

ted under section



8
हू. ia section 11 of the principal Act,—

(०) in sub-section (1), fer the word “eight”, the word “courteen”
shall be substituted: i

(b) in sub-section (3), the words “the Supreme Court ot” shail
be omitted.

6. In section 12 of the principal Act,—

(a) after sub-section (2), the follawing proviso shall be inserted,
namely: —

“Provided that, if the Chairrnaan is of opinion that any matter

of imrartanes fe re

od (0 he heart by a larger bench, he may

ig a

refer the matter ta 9 spesial hench cnnsisting of five members.”:

(b) in sub-section (2), for the proviso, the following proviso shall
he sishstitnted, namely: -—

“Provided that whére there is no such majority, the opinion
15 of the Cheirman shall prevail.”;

(९) in sub-section (4), for the words “The Copyright Board”,
the words “The Chairman” shall be stbstituted.

7. For section 14 of the principal Act, the following section shall be
substituted, namely:—

20 44, For the purnoses of this Act. “copvricht” means the ex-
clusive right, subject to the provisions of this Act, to do or authorise
the doing of any of the following acts in respect of a work or any
substantia! part thereof, namely: ¢ i

(a) in the ease af a literary, dramatic or musical work, not
5 being a computer programme,—

@) to reproduce the work in any material form includ-
ing the storing of it in any medium by electronic means;

() to issue copies of the work to the public not being
copies alveady in circulation;

30 (iii) to perform the work in public, or communicate
it ta the public;

(iv) ta make any cinematograph film or sound recording
in respect of the work; . |

(९) tc make ang hranslation of the work:
35 (सं) la make any adaptation of the work;

(का) to do, in relation to a translation or an adaptation
of the work, any of the acts specified in relation 16 the work:
in sub-clauses G) to (7%);

(bd) in the case of a computer procramme,—

40 G) to do any of the acts specified in clause (a);

हा
>

+e
15

Amend-
ment of
section Li,

Amend-
ment of
seetion 12.

Substi-
tution of
new sec-
tion for
section
14,

Mean-
ing of
copy-
right.



RE TE oo

ee 3

(i) to sell or give on hire, or offer for sale or hire, any

copy of the computer programme, regardless of whether
such copy has been sold or given on hire on earlier occa-

sions; i | न

(०) in the case of an-artistie work,--

ee (i) to reproduce the work in any material form includ-
~ing depiction in three dimensions.- of a two dimensional

work or in two dimensions of a three dimensional work;

(i) to communicate the work to the public;

(iit) to issue copies of the work to the public not being 10
copies already in circulation;
(iv) to jnebide the work in any cinematograph Alm

(७) to make any adaptation of the work;

(wi) to do in relation to an adaptation of the work any
of the acts specified in relation to the work in sub-clauses |

(0). to (iv);
(d) in the case of a cinematograph film.—

(i) to make a copy of the film, including a photograph

of any -image forming part thereof;

or offer for sale or hire, any.
whether such copy has heen
asions;

(ii) to sell or give on hire,
copy of the film, regardless of
soid or given on hire on earlier occ:

(प्र) ६0 communicate the film to the public;
(९) in the case of a sound recording,—
other sound recording embodying it;

॥ hire, or offer for sale or hire, any
f whether such copy.

(i) to make any

(i) to sell or give ०

copy of the sound recording regardless ०:

re has been sold or given on hire on earlier occasions;

(id) to communicate the sound recording to the publi

the purposes of this section, a
deemed to 98 a copy already in circulation,

jowin|

Explanation: — For copy which

peen sold once shall be

8. In section 19 of the piineipal Act. Yor sub-section (2), the fol

Amend-

ment sub-sections shall be substituted, namely:—
of section
19.

॥ 0 any work shali identify
and the duration and

“(2) The assignment of copyri
work, and shall specify the rights assigned
ritorial extent of such assignment.
section (1) are not 8906

(3) If the rights assigned under sub-
assigned all his rights Ui

it shall be presumed that the assignor has
this Act:

Provided that if the assignee
within a period of one year

e such EE

does nck exercise any ©!
assigm!

from fle date of the

|
।
'
|



q

~~ the assigument in respect of such rights shall be deemed to have lapsed
after the expiry of the said period.

(4) Lf the period of assignment is not slated, it shall be deemed to
be five years irom the date of assignment.

(5) If the territorial exteni of assignment of the rights is not speci-
fied, it shalt be presumed to ¢xiend within India.

(6) Nothing in sub-section (2), or sub-section (3) er sub-section
(४) or stb-seelion (5) shall be applicable to assignments made before
the coming into foree of the Copyright (Second Amendment) Act,
4992. 7.

9. For section 198 of the principal Act, the following section shall be
substituted, mamely:—

“19A, (/) if an assignee fails to make sufficient exercise of the
rights assigned to him, and such fiilurc is not attributable to any act or
omission of the assignor, then, the Copyright Board may, on receipt of
a complaint from the assignor and after holding such inquiry as it may
deem necessary, revoke such assignment.

(2) If any dispute aviscs with respect to the assignment of any copy-
right, the Copyright Board nay, ou receipt of a complaint from the ag-
grieved party and afice holding such inquiry as it considers necessary,
pass such order as it may deem tit including an order for the recovery
of any royalty payable:

Provided that the Copyright Board जय] nut pass any order under
this sub-section to revoke the assignment unless it is satisfied that the
terms of assignment arc harsh to the assignor in case the assignor is
also the author:

Provided further tii nu order of revocation of assignment under
this-sub-section, sball be made within a period of five years from the
date of such assignment.”.

10. After section 30 of the principal Act, the following section shall be
inserted, namely:—

30

“30A. The pruvisions of sections 19 and 19A shall, with any
necessary adaptations and modifications, apply in relation to a
licence under section 30 as they apply in relation to assignment of
copyright in a work.”.
35 11. For Chapter VIL of the principal Act, the following Chapter shall
be substituted, namely;—

“CHAPTER VII
COPYRIGHT SOCIETIES

33, (1) No person or association of persons shall, after coming into
40 force of the Copyright (Second Amendment) Act, 1992, commence or

Substi-

tution of
Rew sec-
tion for

section

19A,

Disputes
with
respact to
assign-
ment

of copy~
right,

Insertion
of new
section

for section
30 A.

Substitution
of new
Chapter
for
Chapter
VIL.

Copy-
vight



ed
|

8

issuing or granting licences in respect of any,
subsists or in respect of any “olfier rights con.
n_aecordance with the registration

societies carry on, the, .b
tone worl: in which copyrig
~~~ papredby-this, Act except under.

ment है
of fees, granted under sub-section (3):

forming rights society functioning in accord-
tly the provisions .of . section 83 on the date immediately...
४, coming into force ofthe. said Act, shall be deemed to be
oyright ociety for the purposes of this Chapter. हर

" (9) Any association of persons’ Who fulfils आला conditions as”
may be prescribed may apply for permission to do the business
specified in sub-section (1) to the Registrar of Copyrights who shall

submit the application to the Central Government. हा हे

0

ou (8), 108 Central Government may, having vegard to the inte-
rests of the authors and othén owners of rights under this Act, the

— . interest and convenience of the piiblie and in particular of the 18

runes groups. 0f;.P yho, are most likely to seek licences in respect a

of the relevant rights and the ability and professional competence

_ ofthe applicants, register such. association of persons as # copyright

i i ni ftions as may be prescribed: ~

20

Provided | He Central” Government shall not ordinarily
register more. than one copyright society to do business in respect
ame—class of-works. * oe

- The Centzal Govertimient may, if it is satisfied that a Copy: -
right society. is. _being managed it a manner detrimental to the
interests of the owners of rights concerned, cancel the registration
of such society after such inquiry as may be prescribed. -

; - (5) If the-Gentral Goverimébt i of the opinion that_in

terest of the owners of rights concerned, it is necessary 980 todo, 1६

may, by order, suspend the registration of such society — pending

________ inquiry for such period not ‘exceeding one year as may be specified

_— Tin such order-under gub-section.<(4)_.and_that that Government ghall ap:
point an administrator to discharge the functions of the copyrigh'

न society.
पु निकाला minis 94. (1) Subject to such conditions as may be prescribed,— "
orn om ;
eee wy (ay wcopyright society-may- accept from an owner of right
copyright ‘exclusive authorisation to administer any tight in any qork by isst
society. - of licences or collection of licence fees or poth; and :
sucl

(9) an owner of yights shall have the right to withdraw

authorisation without prejudice “to ‘the sight:
under .any contact.

s of the copyright societ

(2) It shall be Competent for a copyright society to enter -into_ag
ment with any foreign society or organisation administering cights corres
ee ponding to rights wader this Aét,” toentrast to such foreign society ©
=~ =-~grgenisation the administration in any foreien country of rights admin
tered by the said copyright sdciéty in India or for administering
India the rights administered in 2 foreign: country by such forell

society .or organisation: -



19

15

25

30

35

45

9
Provided that no such scciety or organisation shall periait any dis-
cximination in tegard to the lerms of ficeace oc the distribution of fees
collected between rights in Indian and other works, -—

(3) Subject to such conditions as may be prescribed, a copyright
society may,— हे

(i) issue licences under section 30 in respect of any rights
under this Act;

(ii) collect fees in pursuance of such licences;

(iii) distribute such fees among owners of rights after

making deductions for its own expenses;

(iv) perform any other functions consistent wiih the provi-
sions of section 35. i |

SHA. (४) Tf the Ceatral Government is of the opinion that a
copyright society for a class of work is generally administering the
rights of the owners of rights in such work throughout India, it shall
appoint that society for the purposes of this section.

(2) The copyright society appointed under sub-section (1) shall
pay remuneration to the owners of rights from the proceeds to be
paid to it under section 5 of the Copyright Cess Act, 1992.

(3) The copyright society shall, subject to such rules as may be
made in this behalf, frame a scheme for determining the quantum
of remuneration payable to individual copyright owners having re-
gard to the number of copies of the work in circulation:

Provided that such schenje shall restrict payment to the owners
of rights whose works have attained a level of circulation which
the copyright society considers reasonable.

35. (1) Every copyright society shall be subject to the collective
control of the owners of rights under this Act whoce rights it ad-
ministers (not being owners of rights under this Act administered
by a foreign society or organisation referred to in sub-section (2) of
section 34) and shall in such manner as may be prescribed,—

(०) obiain the approval of such owners of rights for its
procedures of collection and distribution of fees;

(b) obtain their approval for the utilisation of any amounts
collected as fees for any purpose other than distibution to’ the
owner of rights; and | -

(०) provide to such owners regular, full and detailed infor-
mation concerning all its activities in relation to the adminis-
tration of their rights.

(2) All fees distributed among the owners of rights shall, as far
as may be, be distributed in proportion to the actual use of their
works. हु

36. (1) Every copyright society shall submit to the Registrar of
Copyrights such returns as may be prescribed.

(2) Any officer duly authorised by the Central Government in
this behalf may call for any report and also call for any records of

Pay-
ment of
* remune-
rations
by copy-
right.
society,

Control
over the
copyright
society
by the
owner of
Rights.

Sub-
mission ef
returns
and re-
ports.



re BREE RE SR RR RT REE Be a ETE a a aR ea 2282

18
aw ary copyright society for the purpose of satisfying himself that the
fees collected by the society in respect of rights administered by it
a ate being utilised or distributed in accordance with the provisions
of this Act.

Rights 36A. Nothing in this Chapter shall affect any rights or liabi- 5
and liabi- lities in any work in connection with a performing rights society
lities of which had accrued or were incurred on or before the day prior to
ets the commencement of the Copyright (Second Amendment) Act,
societies, 1992, or any legal proceedings jn respect of any such rights or lia-
bilities pending on that day.”. 10

Amend 12, In Chapter VIII of the principal Act. for the heading
me
me “RIGHTS OF BROADCASTING aAUTUORITIES”, the heading  “Riaurs or

! BROADCASTING ORGANISATION AND OF PERFORMERS” shall be substituted,

/ ti 13. For section 37 of the principal Act, the following section shall be
Substi- . भर
tution of Substituted, namely: — 15
new
section
for
section 37.
Broad- “37. (1) Every broadcasting organisation shall have a special
casting right to be known as “broadcast reproduction right” in respect .of its
reproduc. broadcasts.
tion right,

(2) The broadcast reproduction right shall subsist until twenty-

five years from the beginning of the calendar year next following 2
the year in which the broadcast is made.

(3) During the continuance of a broadcast reproduction right in
relation to any broadcast, any person who, without the license of
the owner of the right does any of the following acts of the broad-
cast or any substantial part thereof,— 25

(a) re-broadcasts the broadcast; or

(8) causes the broadcast to be heard or seen by the pub-
lic on payment of any charges; or

(०) makes any sound recording or visual recording of the
broadcast; or 30.

(0) makes any reproduction of such sound recording or
visual recording where such initial recording was done without
license or, where it was licensed, for any purpose not envisaged
by such license; or

(९) sells or hires to the public, or offers for such sale or 3
hire, any such sound recording or visual recording referred to in
clauses’ (c) or (d),

shall, subject io the provisions of section 39, be deemed to have!
infringed the broadeast reproduction right.”.



— u

4. Por section 38 ef the principal Act, the following seotion shall be
substituted, namely: —

‘38. (1) Where any performer appears or engages in any per-
formance, he shall have a special right to be known as the “perform-
er’s right” in relation to such performance.

(2) The performer’s right shalt subsist until twenty-five
years from the beginning of the calendar year next following the
year in which the performance is made.

(3) During the continuance of a perfermer’s right in relation to
any performance, any person who, without the consent of ihe per-
former, does any of the following acts in respect of the performance
or any substantial part thereof, namely:—

(०) makes a sound recording or visual recording of the
performance; or

{b) reproduces a sound recording or visual recording of the
performance. which sound recording or visual recording was.—~

{i) made without the performer's consent; or

(४) made for purposes different from those for which
the performer gave his consent; or

(ii) made for purposes different from those referred to
in section 39 from a sound recording or visual recording
which was made in accordance with section 39; or

(c) broadcasts the performance except where the broadcast
is made from a sound recording or visual recording other than
one made in accordance with section 39, or is a re-broadcast by
the same broadcasting organisation of an earlier broadcast which
did not infringe the performer’s right; or

(०) communicates the performance to the public otherwise
than by broadcast, except. where such communication to the
public is made from.a sound recording or a visual recording or
a broadcast,

shall, subject to the provisions of section 39, be deemed to have in-
fringed the performer’s right.

(4) Once a performer has consented to the incorporation of
his performance in a cinematograph film, the provisions of sub-
sections (1), (2) and (3) shall have no further application to such per-
formance.’.

Substitas.
tion of
new
section
for
section 33.

Perfor-
mer's
tight,



:
i
i

@ after the words “artistic work” the words “not beltg :
a computer programme,” shall be inserted:. - :



13

(3) for sub-clause (3), the following sub-clause shall be
substituted, namely:— __

“(i) private use, including research”;

(3) after clause (a), the following clause shall be inserted,
namely:—— हु

“(aa) the making of copies of adaptation of a computer pro-
gramme by the lawful possessor of a copy of stich computer pro-
gramme, from such copy

(0) in order to utilise the computer programme for the
purpose for which it was supplied; or

(ii) to make back-up copies purely as a lemporary
protection against loss. destruction or damags in order
only to utilise the computer programme for the purpose
for which it was supplied;”;

(4) in clause (@), the words “or the communication to such an
audience of a cinematograph film or sound recording”, shall be in-
serted at the end;

(5) for clauses (j) and (0, the following clauses shall be ‘sub-
stituted, namely:— + j

“(j) the making of sound recordings in respect of any
literary, dramatic or musical work, if— 1 i

(0) sound recordings of that work have been made by
or with the license or consent of tha owner of the rights in

the work;

(ii) the person making the sound recordings has
given a notice of his jntention to make the sound record-
ings, has provided copies of all. covers or labels with which
the sound recordings are to be sold, and has paid in the
prescribed manner to the owner of rights in the work
royalties in respect of all such sound recordings to be made
by him, at the rate fixed by the Copyright Board in _ this
behalf:

Provided that—

(i) no alterations shall be made which have not been
made previously by or with the consent of the owner of
rights, or which are not reasonably necessary for the
adaptation of the work for the purpose of making the
sound recordings;

(i) the sound recordings shall not be issued in any
form of packaging or with any label which is likely to mis-
lead or confuse the public as to their identity;



he made until theex-

tights: or his duty authorised agent or-repre-—5
wds and books of account. relating

son aecenemoeem COPYTight::-Board: to... the.effect. thi
beer paid in full for any sound

g_the 80!
fter-holding-such. enquiry a8 it
hy der as it may deem ft, 15

premises“ (not: being; 8 20
tablishment) 88 part of the

oo ee erica a eit) as part of the activities: of a-elub-or.similar organisa- _
tion which is not’ established-or_conducted. fon profit;”; 25

ing or pl a pi awing, eng:
‘aph of a work of architecture or the display
30

(z)the-making of an- ephemeral. recording, by P deast- _.
tg-own- facilities: for~its-own broadcast_ 35
~by a broad misation of a-work-which it has the right to

broadcast: ‘and the rétention of such recording: for archival pur-
documentary character;

work or the communication to the- public-of such work or of a *
“LZ sound recording: in: the-cour: bona. fide religious gerem¢
ae or an. official ceremony he! y.

~ -Sfate Government or any local, authority.

: ae lanati ‘or the-purpose of this-clause, religious: ceré~
— . नर -- mony including a. marriage procession’ and other social festivities
gsociated With a marriage

45



“yp

18 ee

4g. After section 524, of the principal Act the following sections shell Inzer~
tion of
= _ ney ¢
sectian3
9438.
कली
Sac.
Repro-
“528, In case of — duction
; . ‘ ef work
(0) the reproduction of a work by means of a, reprographic — subject to
equipment for any of the purposes specified under section 52; or section
344,
(ii) the reproduction of any sound recording or cinemato-
graphic film by means of a tape recorder or video-cassette recorder
or similar equipment for any of the purposes specified in section
52, except the making of sound recordings under clause () of
sub-section (1) of that section,
the reproduction of any work shall be subject © the payment of
remuneration to the owners of rights in such work under the provi-
sions of section 34A.
4a ' Accounts

520. (1) Every copyright society appointed under section 3:
shall maintain proper accounts and other relevant records and prepare ait
an annual statement of accounts, including the income and expenditure ue
and the quantum of remuneration paid to individual owners of rights
out of the payments received from the Central Government under
the Copyright Cess Act, 1992 in such form and in such manner as
may be prescribed by the Central Government in consultation with
the Comptroller and ‘Auditor-General of India.

(2) The accounts of each of the copyright societies in relation te
the payments received from the Central Government shall be audited |
by the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India at such intervals .
ag may be specified by him and any expenditure incurred in connec-
tion with such audic shall be payable by the copyright society to the
Comptroller and Auditor-General,

(3) The Comptroller and Auditor-General of India or any other
person appointed by him in connection with the audit of the accounts
of the copyright society referred to in sub-section (2) shall have the
same rights and privileges and authority in connection with such audit
as the Comptroller and Auditor-General has in connection with
the audit of the Government accounts and, in particular, shall
have the right to demand the production of books, accounts and other
documents and papers and to inspect any of the offices of the copy-
right society for the pwrpose only of stich audit.

(4) The accounts of each of the copyright societies as certified by
the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India or any other person
appointed by him in this behalg together with the audit report thereon
shall be forwarded unnually to the Central Government and that
Government shall cause the same to be laid before each House of
Parliament.”. हि



r regarding. the~ri
oe स्व we BeCHO to:.the-Copyright- Board. who:

or to display it t

deemed to be an infri

(1) in ‘clause (b) ‘the words, figures~and letter “except
tight, conferred by section 53A” shall be inserted at the end;



(2) in the proviso, after the words “Provided thas”, the words

“where the infringement has not been made for gain.in the course __

of trade or business” shall be inserted.

22, In the proviso to section 6338 of the principal Act, after the
5 words “Provided that” the words “where the infringement has not been
made for gain in the course of trade or business” shall be inserted.

25. After section 63A of the principal Act, the following sections shall
be inserted, namely: —

“63B. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Central Ex-
cises and Salt Act, 1944 and the Customs Act, 1962, the non-
payment of cess under the Copyright Cess Act, 1992 shall be deemed

apply.

(2) No court shall take cognizance of an offence under sub-
section (1) except on a complaint made by the copyright society no-
minated under section 34A.

630, Any person who knowingly makes use on a computer of
an infringing copy of a computer programme shal] be punishable with
imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than one month
but which may extend to three years and with fine which shall not
be less than fifty thousand rupees but which may extend to two
lakh rupees; . .

Provided that where the computer programme has not been used
for gain or in the course of trade or business, the court may, for
adequate and special reasons to be mentioned in the judgment,
not impose any sentence of imprisonment and may impose a fine
which may extend to fifty thousand rupees.”.

24, In section 78 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2),—

Gi) after clause (¢), the following clauses shall be inserted,
namely: — हि :

1

“(ca) the conditions for submission of application under —
sub-section (2) of section 33;

(cb) the conditions subject to which a copyright society
shall be registered under sub-section (3) of section 33;

(ec) the inquiry for cancellation of registration under sub-

section (4) of section 33; 1

(cd) the conditions subject to which the copyright society
may accept authorisation under clause (a) of sub-section (1) of
section 34 and the conditions subject to which owners of rights
have right to withdraw such authorisation under clause (b) of
that sub-section; '

to be an offence under this Act and the provisions of section 63 shall ~

Amend-
ment of
section
634.

Anser-
tion of
new
sections
63B
and 830,

Punish-
ment
for non-
payment
of cesg
levied
under
the Copy-
right
Cess
Act.

Know-.
ing use
of in~ ©
fringing
copy of
computer

program- '

me to be
an:
offenée,

Amend-
ment of
section
78.

H
i



8 to be fil copyright soci
der 2 1101५ ८४ ७००७ 3675

1



tae rumen ण

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

Effective copyright, protection promotes and rewards human creati-
जाए and is, in modern society, an indispensable support for intellectual,
cultural and economic activity. Copyright law promotes the creation of
literary, artistic, dramatic and musical works, cinematograph films and
sound recordings by providing certain exclusive rights to their authors
and creators. The law relating to copyright and related rights has been
under comprehensive review of the Government for some time, taking
into account the difficulties expressed by different groups -of copyright
owners and others, the experience gained from the administration of the
existing law and the situation created by various technological develop-
ments that have taken place. .

2. The Copyright Act, 1957 amended and consolidated the lew relat-
ing to copyright in India. It was further amended by the Copyright
(Amendment) Acts of 1983 and 1984 and certain improvements were
effected. By the Copyright (Amendment) Act, 1992 the term of copy-
right was further extended by a period of ten years, Now, it is consider-
ed appropriate to further amend the provisions of the Copyright Act.
1957.

to extend effective copyright protection to the composers of Tndian
music, which is not available to them under the existing law which
presupposes a system cf notation as used in Western music;

to extend protection to all performers by means of a special right, to
be known as the “performer's right", in respect of the making of
sound recordings or visnal recordings of their live performances, and
of certain related acts;

to protect the interests of authors, assignors or licensors in regard to
thé assignment of copyright and the issue of licenses;

to extend more effective protection to owners of copyright and relat-
ed rights in the context of technological developments affecting the
reproduction of works by, inter alia, bringing within the scope of
copyright the. subsequent hire or, sale of copies of cinematograph
films, computer programmes and sound recordings;

to further clarify the law in respect of cable, satellite and other
means of simultaneous communication of works to more than one
household or private place of residence. including the residential
rooms of a hotel or hostel;

to make adequate provision for the special nature of computer pro-
grammes as literary works and for the protection of computer-gene-
rated works | A

19

i
1
i
H
i
:



’ Notes on clauses

Clause 2.-This clause seeks to amend section 2 of the Copyright Act,
1957 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act). .

Sub-clause (i) seeks to amend clause (०) of section 2 of the
principal Act to better ensure full protection of the author’s  ex--
clusive right of authorising arrangements and other alterations of his
works as envisaged by article 19 of the Berne Convention for the Protec-

tion of Literary and Ariistic Works (hereinafter referred to as the
Berne Convention).

Sub-clause (ii) seeks to amend clause (b). The present
term ' “architectural work of art” is difficult to interpret in
some cases and is inconsistent with the general copyright principle that
the aesthetic merit of a protected work is of no account. After replace-
ment of this term by “work of architecture”, which is also the term
used in the Berne Convention, the courts or other authorities will not be
required to consider the aesthetic value of the work but only ‘the ques-
tion whether the work qualifies as an “original work” which is a well:
known concept in copyright law. .

Sub-clause (iii) seeks to amend  sub-clatses (०)... and
(vi) of clause (व), In sub-clause (v) it is now proposed to
define the “author” of a cinematograph filn or a sound recording ‘as
the producer thereof instgad of as the owner of the film or “plate”, as
the case may be. The revised definition proposed is consistent with
common usage and, also, is not tied to any particular technology. A
definition of the term “producer” is also proposed to be inserted sepa-
rately [vide sub-clause (xiii) ]. -

““Sub-clause (iv) seeks to amend clause (f), improving
the present definition of “cinematograph film”.

Sub-clause (v) seeks to amend clause (ff) sub-stituting a more

comprehensive definition of “communication ‘to the public” which
“will remove all uncertainty jn relation to satellite, cable or other
means of simultaneous communication to different households,
etc. Secondly, it will, read with the proposed amendment to sec-
tion 14 in the principal Act (vide clause 7) extend copyright protection to
the public display ‘and exhibition of works in the interests of the authors
of artistic works (subject af course to the exceptions contained in section
52 of the principal Act). Thirdly, it will incorporate the substance of the
definition of “performance” contained in clause (q), enabling the latter
definition to be revised to deal with performances in the context of
performers’ rights (vide clause 14).

21



puter-generated works:
cage
to-be-inserted in section 2,

ical work) means the person who
ecords-it-is- any: form >of

ger कर डक सनक न"

“definition: of:

sto-amend the definition of
stent with the revisqd definition. of “*
- clarify

enjoy copyright protection is. specifically-pe! 4
f the Berne Convention though it will mark a conscious departure from

Britis Tegal~wrad gard-—“Phis=ame! ns is«pro
y



ee AA or

23 a

Sub-clause (aii) proposes substitution of tha work “record” by
__“sound recording” throughout the Act. [For reasons, see note on sub-
clause (aiv)1. .

Sub-clause (xiii) seeks to insert a definition of the term
“producer”, which is to be read with the proposed amendment of i
sub-clauses (v) and (vi) of section 2. हि
|

Sub-clause (viv) proposes deletion of clause. (ww) which defines
“record” and “recording” and is to be read with the proposed introduc-
tion of the term “sound recording’ vide sub-clause (xv) described
below.

Sub-clause (av) seeks to insert defintions of  “repro-
graphy” and “sound recording”. The proposed definition of “repro-
graphy” is necessitated particularly by clause 18 discussed below. The
term “sound recording” is proposed instead of the term “record” occur-
ring at present as the latter term has become outdated through associa-
tion with an obsolescent technology of sound reproduction. The pro-
posed definition af “sound recording” will not be tied to any particular
technology. हु |

defines the term “publication? and should be read with the
revised definition of “communication to the publie” proposed in
sub-clause (v) of clause 2. The present definition of “publication”
“serves a dual purpose, both as providing a principle for determining the
term of copyright under sections 5 and 6, and as one of the rights ccm-
prising copyright under section 14 of the principal Act. The revised
definitions are intended to simplify matters in this regard.

Clause 3.-—Thig clause seeks to amend section 3 which | |
|

_- Clause 4—This clause seeks to amend section 6 to better define the
role of the Copyright Board, viz., to determine the date of first publica-
tion of a work where it arises in connection with any question about the
term of copyright in a work, Secondly, the proviso seeks to simplify the
task of the Copyright Board, not requiring it to ascertain the reasonable
requirements of the public but simply to consider whether the issue of
copies or communication to the public was too insignificant 10. mark
commencement, of the term of copyright.

lause 5.—This clause seeks to amend section 11 by raising the maximum --
membership of the Copyright Board from elght to fourteen (which would.
facilitate creation of benches on a regional basis) and by deleting the
redundant words “a Judge of the Supreme Court” in the possible qualf-
fications of a Chairman of the Copyright Board,

Clause 6-—This clause seeks to amend section 12 to improve the fune-
tioning of the Copyright Board. i

Clause 7.—This clause seeks to amend section 14 consistent with the
other amendments proposed, including the revised definitions of “publi-
cation”, “performance” and “communication to the public”, and in
order to improve and clarify the rights comprising copyright in different
classes of work.”



ee A i A A A i cc ei a a

कह कह PETIT ETT TE Tri oe के]

. Clause 9:—This ‘clause seeks':to substitute-the. existing: provisions: ता
section 19A by clearer.and. more detailed provisions protecting authors



provision for the registration and management of such societies in the
interests both of authors and of other copyright owners for whem tt
weuld be impracticable or uneconomical to licence the use of their work
individually to al} users, or to collect fees from them, and also in the
interests of the general public and particularly of users of rights who
May not conveniently be able to obtain liceNces trom individual authors
or copyright holders; and thus to improve the enforcement of copyright
with benefits both to the holders of rights and to the general public.

Clause 12.—This clause seeks to substitute a new heading in respect
of Chapter VIII to reflect the protection now proposed to be accorded to
pericrmers as well as broadcasting organisations. The term “Broad-
casUug organisatios” is proposed to be subslituted for the term “Broad-
casting authorities” as expressing ihe intention of the statute more
clearly.

Clause 13.—This clause seeks to substilule a new provision fer the
isting provisions of section 37 in the interest of clearity and complete-
The word “broadcast” is used rather than the undefined term “‘pro-
gramme”. Secondly, it is proposed that merely making a broadcast heard

in public (as under the existing provision) should not be infringement

of the broadcast reproduction right to avoid possible harassment of the
general public; instead, causing the broadcas! or any substantial part
thereof to be heard or seen by the public on payment of any charges will
be infringement, Thirdly, it is sought to amplify and clarify the broadcast
reproduction right by specifying that the recording of a broadcast, or
making copies of such recordings of a broadcast, or selling or hiring such
recordings or offering them for sale or hire, will constitute infringement.
This will, however, be subject to appropriate exceptions as proposed in

clause 15.

Clause 14.--This clause seeks to insert new provisions creating a
special right to be known as the performer’s tight which will conform te
the requirements of the Rome Convention for the Protection of Per-
formers, Producers of Phonograms and Broadcasting Organisations
(hereinafter referred to as the Rome Convention). This includes the
right to make a sound recording or visual recording of a performance and
some consequential right in respect of copies of sound recording and
visual recordings, which are sought to be provided in a manner not
conflicting unduly with the copyright in a sound recording
or cinematograph film or with the broadcast reproduction right. The
proposed provisions of sub-section (4) of section 38 are based upon article
19 of the Rome Convention, The performer's right will benefit per-
‘formers as defined under caluse 2 (2) above and will also provide an
additional source of protection those composers of Indian music
who improvise their compositions during public performances.

Clause 15.—This clause seeks to insert provisions in section 39 specify-
ing the cases where the broadeast reproduction right or performer's right
shall not be deemed to be infringed, These proposed provisions are analo.
gous to these contain in section 52 of the principal Act in respect of
copyright.

Clause 16.—This clause seeks to amend section 51. The proposed
substitution of a new provision for sub-clause (ii) of clause (a) of section
51 makes verbal changes necessitated by the proposed.



TTEETETLEL TEEPE कक कक का कक कक Ts

थ्ण
he] ictal ४४2एणा
०४४67 way Fesule
de purchase ‘abroad

eet nae 00007!
(2 9, pecatisa, of a of copyright, ete.); such a person
prevented. from importing his personal copy for his private

edt GlouseciTc-Thig clause seéks:to-nmenthaeption-52:-3f the principal Act,
Sub-clause (7) segs to make the prov: section 52 subject to the

a ew. secon 523: which

. “wor dg
: Bes ooo lent 215 tone :{¢ publ
एणणाणा हि 11:29 Pros ९8; 107 th ni
; de,repnodn tor private
ers; of computer DI

programme to make adaptations for “debug;
» copies? > SPOTS TST TIBET GF 51.०:
premio tlive dotlw हरि “yenmiotied | 43

jab-clause,.(2).- dmen'
ion,

trip ie

clatises 6)
Gf ‘clatise

visions . The-proposed ‘fevision of‘cla
playing6f soundtrea

exclusively for” redi-
larorganisation’ which

above, sipplementing in -
® and (४)



___@phemeral

27

Sub-clause (7) seeks to insert two new clauses (<) and
(2a) in sub-section (1) of section §2 dealing respectively with
cordiugs made by a broadcasting organisation and with
bona fide religious and official ceremonies, which it is inappropriate to
make subj to copyright,

‘Clause ‘18.—This ‘clause seeks to insert new sections 52B and 52C,
which may be read with the proposed insertion of a section
34A. vide clause 11. The intention is to create what in.com-
mon copyright parlance is known as a “non-voluntary licence’ in
respect of reprography and “home taping”, whereby members of the
public remain free to perform the acts contemplated. in section 52 of the
principal Act without obtaining the permission of the owners of copy~

. right, but the latter is entitled to remuneration in the form of an amount
to,be collected on the mantfacture or import of the qauipment used for
such acts. which is distributed through a copyright society to the entitled
copyright owners. Copyright secieties will determine the quantum of
remuneration to individual copyright owners by fixing criteria having
regard to the number of copies of the work in circulation,‘and ‘shall
restrict remuneration to those cépyright’ owners whose | works‘ have
attained reasonable circulation. This method has been resorted to in
several countries because of the ease With which members of the public
can now reproduce works by the means in question. The provisions
will become operative only when the Central Government | is of ‘the
opinion that a copyright society for a class of work is generally admi-
nistering the rights in respect of them throughout India. The Copy-
right Cess Bill, 1972, seeks to provide for the remuneration described
above by means pf a cess.

Clquse 19—This Clause seeks to insert a new section 53A,
giving the authors of original copies of paintings. sculptures
or drawings or of the original manuscripis of literary, dramatic or
musical works the right to a share in the subsequent sales of such
original copies or original manuscripts, which is the right . commonly
known as “droit de suite” and which is contemplated optionally for
member States by article 14 ter of the Berne Convention. Besides. pro-
moting the interests of authors within India, this proposed provision
would also have the effect of obliging those other member States ‘of
the Berne Convention which provide for droit de suite in their own
laws to accord similar rights to Indian authors in respect of sales effected
in their countries.

~=Clause 20.—This clause seeks to amend sub-section (1) of section~57
(concerning author's special rights) in order to limit tha remedies
available to the author in respect of distortion, mutilation, modification
or other acts in respect of his work to cases where such acts would be
prejudicial to his honour or reputation. The present provision in the
principal Act, whereby even distortion, mutilation and modification of
the work ‘which are not prejudicial to the author’s honour or reputation
would violate the author’s special rights, are likely to have anomalous,
unintended consequences and are, incidentally, in excess of the require.
ments of the Berne Convention. It is, therefore, proposed to limit the
author’s special rights in this regard to the actual requirements of the
Berne Convention, Secondly, it is proposed to specify that the author's
special rights shall subsist during the term of copyright. Thirdly, it



PErerory PTELEETETELTIerrErererer rT? Sete lrs SEU कक TL T WT

_ =cqnent-of-the.drottedexsitite: propased..td, be. inserts
It is intendéd:to limit

पु है पान respecti of this new: right:10

ito, section

The proposed new'section 63C will

ary in-view of the practical difficilty of

of computer programmes, whereas : use of.an
orogramme. may. ‘be.proved |. by

the incipal Act
eoks 4nvexcluderfrom rcriminal.liability any infringe-
the’ principal” Act
8 temedi¢g“avail-
aivil remedies-in-view of the-bona
“fide difficulties which may exist in locating-the-author at thg time 0:

the court: to_impose

जता कांप fiilure to pay” ~eopy-

a computer’ prograrinie“an offence.

“gion of tie specific acts~enumerated. in““-section: “हुवे in: respect ofan -

the

68 in

make.



MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 24 of the Bill seeks to insert new clauses in sub-section (2) -
of section 78 of the Copyright Avi, 1957 50 as to enable the Ceatral Gov-
ernment to make rules in respect of certain matiers provided in ‘the
Bill. These matters relate 1o—

G) the conditions for submission of application under section
33;

(Gi). the conditions subject to which a copyright society shail
be registered under section 33;

Gii) the inquiry for cancellation of registration under section
33; :

(iv) the conditions subject to which the copyright society may
accept authorisation under section 34 and the conditions subject. to
which the owners of rights have right to withdraw such authorisa- |
tion under that section;

(v) the conditions subject to which a copyright society may
issue licences, collect fees and distribute such fees amongst own-
ers of rights under section 34; पु

(vi) the manner in which approval of owners of rights regard-
ing collection and distribution of fees. approval for utilisation of
any amount collected as fees and to Provide to such owners infor-
mation concerning activities in relation to the administration of
their rights under section 35; .

(vii) the returns to be filed by copyright societies to the Re-
gistrar of Copyrights under section 36;

(viii) the manner of payment of royalty under section 53;

(ix) the form and the manner in which the copyright society
shall maintain accounts and other relevant records and prepare an-
nual statements of accounts and the manner in which the quantum - -
of remuneration is to be paid to individual owner of rights under
section 520,

2. As the matters with respect to which rules under the aforesaid
clauses are sought to be made are matters of procedure or detail or

29



a a are ee Ae Se a कफ a ae ae ee A Se का इ कक डक का:

winavi ow ANNEXURE 04 25.
Bxrracts rros¢ tae Copyricut Act, 1957 - -
pmecimeapenwcetmnee wer AAP ORLOET)H rea ue

ne ae
‘

bee a oe n>. (ened - ew *
Inter. 2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,
. pretation. -
पु हा (० “adaptition” Meagher 77 77 crosman

* a ह * * हि
erary or dramatic. work, any abridge-..

i hich the
means of
ook, or in

(iv) in relation to a m

‘oft the Wot
aschitectural. work के art”,

“ture having, artistic character or design, om, any model id
~—building of_structure; a
eB oe enn Be क्र a *
=> .(d). “authorimeédns—~ © 1-6 . é a
के * ele का

(७) in relation to a cinematograph film, the owner of th
at the time of its, agmpletiony OAs... ait सातन eu
‘ the ‘owner of the original pla

Explanation. For the purposes of this clause, “video
.. ~ghalbialso.he:.deenied .to..be..work: produced: by: 8 process analogou:

the public की whatever manner, including
satellite;

(a lation”
work, a reproduction thereof otherwise than

a cinematograph film;

~°30



जा
@i) in relation to a cinematograph film, a copy of the film
or a record embodying the recording in any part of the sound
कब्र associated with the film;

(iti) in relation to a record, any such record embodying the
same recording; and

{iv) in relation to a programme in which a broadcast re-

production right subsists under section 37, a record recording the है

programme,

if such reproduction, copy or record is made or imported in con-
travention of the provisions of this Act;

* * + * *

(0) “literary work” includes tables. compilations and compu-
ter programmes, that is to say, programmes recorded on any disc,
tape, perforated media or other information storage device,. which,
if fed into or located in a computer or computer based equipment
is capable or reproducing any information;

(p) “musical work” means any combination of. melody and
harmony or either of them, printed, reduced to writing or otherwise
graphically produced or reproduced;

(q) “performance” includes any mode of visual or acoustic
Presentation, including any such presentation by the exhibition of
a cinematograph film, or by means of breadeast, or by the use of
a rétord, or by any other means and, in relation to a lecture, in-
cludes the delivery of such lecture;

_ (7) “performing rights society” means a society, association or
. other body, whether incorporated or not, which’ carries on business
in India of issuing or granting licences for the performance in
India of any works in which copyright subsists;

* कं * . *

(6) “plate” inchudes any stereotype or other plate, stone, block,
mould, matrix, transfer, negative, duplicating’ equipment or
other device used or intended to be used for printing ‘or reprodt-
cing copies of any work, afd any matrix or other’ appliance ‘by
which records for the acoustic presentation of the work are or are
intended to be made; '

« | 2 * *

{w) “record”’means any disc, tape, perforated roll or other
device in which sounds are embodied so as to be capable of being
reproduced therefrom, other than a sound track associated with
a cinematograph film;

1 54 (४) “recording” means the aggregate of the sounds embodied in
and capable of being reproduced by means of a record;

« * a * @



wi epublicvin, ent, to.satisty th
‘of the public having regard to the nature

{e)}-in the case of a record, “thetissus 0!
ities:

but, does. not, except as other}
_chude-

r-the purposes of section _
anyother. country’

yright Board. shall be a person who

@ The Chairman ef the Cop:
has. been, a Judge Supreme Court
int

on a High Court or है:



33

(3) Tf there is a difference of opinion araong the memibers of the
Copyright Board or any Bench thereof in respect of any matter coming
befere 1६ for decision under this Act, the_opitiion of the majority shall
prevail: oo

Provided that where there is no such majority—

@) if the Chairman was one of the members who heard the
matier, the opinion of the Chairman shall prevail;

(4) if the Chairman wes one of the members who heard the
matter, the matter shall be referred to him for his opinion and
that opinion shall prevail.

(4) The Copyright Board may authorise any of its members to ex-
ereise any of the powers conferred on it by section 74 and any order
made or act done in exercise of those bowers by the member so autho-
rised shail be deemed to be the order or act, es the case may be, of the

Board.
. e श्र कक e

44. (1) For the purposes of this Act, “copyright” means the exclu-
sive right, by virtue of, and subject to the provisions of, this Act.—

(०) in the case of a literary, dramatic or musical work, to do
and authorise the doing of any of the follewing acts, namely;—

(४) to reproduce the work in any material form;

(i) to publish the work;

Gi) to perform the work in public;

(iv) to produce, reproduce, perform or publish any trans-
lation of the work; !

(०) to make any cinematograph film or a record in respect
of the work; है

(vi) to communicate the work by broadcast or to communi-
cate to the public by a loud-speaker or any other similar
instrument the broadcast of the work;

(vii) to make any adaptation of the work;
(viii) to do in relation to a translation or an adaptation

—~"" of the work any of the acts specified in zelation to the work in;

Clauses (i) to (vi); - 7
(0) in the case of an artistic work, to do or authorise the doing
of any of the following acts, namely:—
(7) to reproduce the work in any material form;
(i) to publish the work;
(iit) to include the work in any cinematograph film;
(9) to make any adaptation of the work;

(०) to do in relation to an adaptation of the work any of
the aets ifed. in relation to the work in clauses () to (i);

rye
373

Meaning
of copy-
right,

'



TUTE का कुक Er aaa काट पकाशपपप

4

(०) in, the case of

imematograph film, to do. or, authorise the
, namely. हि :

3 doing of any of

the
() to make
(i) to cause, the film, in
ges, to be seen in publi d, in st
be heard £9 pubic,
(iii) to make any record embodying the
Pi BE the BoM Waele Associ éd with the
-guch sound track; eee eee
(iv) to communicate the film by
a record, to do or authorise the doing ofany
by utilising the -yecord, nemtiely:— # see
same record-

so far 88 it consiats of vigual ima-
0 far as it consists of sounds, to

recording in any
film’ ‘by ‘utilising

proadeast}

(d) in the case of
of the following acts
. @ to make any other record. embodying the

ing;

in the record to be

(४) to cause the recording embodied
“ Heard in publics" | “4 “
i communicate the recording embodied |

the, record

by, bigades os
(2) Any reference in sub-section (7)

relation toa. work or a translation or “an adaptation’ thereof ‘shall in-

clude & réferente’ to-the doing of that act | ii felation to 8 substantial -

part thereof. -=—-y-+e~ नि a

to the doing of any act in

*

* « *
Mode of 19, (7) * * . * * :
assign- . Pa . ie
nent, (2) The assignment-of the copyright in any: -work-shall, among other
4g” indicate clearly the rights “proposed: 16-98 assigned and the size.
of the work. ॥ ae
Disputes 19A. Where any dispute arises with respect to the
_... . swith res- ent. of, i
pet to may, on recell पा Ly
assess after holding such inquiry as it may deem necessa
ment of + tn A है
copyright. 1 may deem fit, including orders by way of givin;
_ owner of the copyright to revoke its assignment if
“7 signment are harsh ‘sini oF 1 the publisher UnaTt the publisher und

eationof.the work or by way of issue of a certil
any royalty due to the) owner.
e

«
CHAPTER Vil

~~ PERFOI

33. (1) Every performing rights society shi
time and in the preseribed manner, prep!
Registrar: of Copyrights, statements of:
it proposes to collect for. ‘the grant of licences
of works in respect

(2) If anys
Registrar. of Copy!
relation to any work i

an ote na eo
‘RIGHTS SOCIETIES

are, publish and fila with
Ii. fees, chaT ges.

¢ which it has authority to gfant such licences.

in. accordance with the provi

fica

7

all, within the preseribe
royalties whiel

2) or.
publi

for performance it



25 SY

no action of other proceeding to enterce any remedy, civil or criminal,
for infringement, Cc} performing rights in that work shall be com.

tenced except with the consent of the Registrar of Copycights,—-——--—

34. Any person having any objections to any fees, charges or royalties
ev ether particulars included in any statement referred to in section 33
may at any time lodge such objections in writing at the Copyright Office,

35. (1) Every objection lodged at the Copyright Office under section 34
shall, as soon as may be, be reierved to the Copyright Beard and the
Copyright Board shall decide Ssueh objection in the manner hereinafter
provided,

(3) The Copyright Board shall, in respect of every such objection, sive
notice thereof to the performing rights society concerned.

(3) The Copyright Board shall, after giving such society and the per-
son who lodged the objection a reasonable opportunity of being heard and
after making such further inquiry as may be prescribed, make such alte.
tations in the statements as it may think fit, and shall transmit the alte-
rations made by it to the Registrar of Copyrights, who shall thereupon,
4S soon as practicable after ihe receipt of such alteration, publish them
in the Official Gazette and furnish the performing rights society comcern-
ed and the person who lodged the objection with a copy thereof,

(4) The fees, charges or royalties as altered by the Copyright Board
shall be the fees, charges or royalties which the performing rights society
concerned may respectively lawfully sue for or collect in respect of the
grant by it of licences for the performance in public of works to which
such fees, charges or royalties relate,

(5) No performing rights society shall have any right of action or any
right to enforce any civil or other remedy for infringement of the per-
forming rights in any work against any person who has tendered or paid
to such society the fees, charges or royalties specified in respect of that
work in a statement published by that society under sub-section (1) of
section 33 or where such statement has been altered by the Copyright
Board under this section in the statement so altered.

(6) Where any person has lodged an objection at the Copyright Uffice
regarding the fees, charges or royalties in respect of any work included
in a statement published under section 33, that petson or any other per-
son, on depositing such fees, charges or. royalties at the Copyright Office.
taay, pending the: final decision of such objection by the Copyright
Board or the High Court, as the case may be, perform thai work without
infringing the copyright therein. i

(7) The fees, charges or royalties deposited at the Copyright Office
under sub.section (6) shall be paid to the performing rights society con-
cerned or to the person who made the deposit, or partly to such society
and partly to such person, in accordance with the final decision on the

objection as aforesaid,

Gojec,
tions
valatuig
to pub.
Hshed
state.
ments,



ELTLELELe TIT TTETS EEE SSE EEE

;
है me 36

“36.;Nothing' in thia Chapter. shall, ba deemed’ to effect—

कु ~-vights: हु cs हु
ae —————~(a)any rights or liabilities in relation-¢o the performing rights

affected. in any work accrued or incurred before the commencement of this

on ६4 wrererrniertbamcannersartemedmmactanteta रतन se

(b) any Teqat Proceedings. in respect of such rights or abilities
pending.at. such commencement

od CHAPTER VII
>> RIGHTS QF BROADCASTING. AUTHORITIES.

Broad- - 3% 6) Where any-prograrnme js, broadeast -by the Government or
cast re: any other broadcasting authority, a special right to be known. as “broad-
ton ue east reproduction right” shall subsist in such programme

right.

(४) The Government or otiier broadcasting authority, as the case
| ~etantentananenvensnerneree “गधे 9० be;-Shall-be-the-owner-of- the-broadcast reproduction right and such
. Tight shall subsist until. twenty-five yeats from the beginning of the

n in h the programime fs flést

i

कमरे ext fo! 8 the

production right im re-

of the right
(i) rebroadcasts the programme in

question or any sub-

record, -

i Provi- sary adaptations and modifications; apply in'‘relation to’ the broadca
reproduction right in any programme as they apply in relation to the

‘programme’ in’ which broadcast reproduc

ig
produc. tion right subsists or any substantial part of such programme, shell
tion take-effect unless the person ‘to- whom. such.licence is granted has al

d-
(4): in- any: literary,. dramatic. or. musical work which is broa
east by that authority; or



37 S97?
(0) In any reeord recording any such work,
° के के * — -»
- ऑि-+--
CHAPTER XL,
INFRINGEMENT Ol COPYRIGHT
31. Copyright in 2 werk shail hé decmed to be infringed— When
(०) when any person, without a licence granted by the owner °°P#-
of the copyright or the Registrar of Copyrights under this Act or in ant in
zontravention of the conditions of a licence so granted or of any के
condition imposed hy a competent authority under this 8०६-- हु
es * e * cy
(8) pevmiis for piodSi any place to be used for the perfor.
mance of the work in publi¢ where such performance consti-
tutes an infringement of the copyright in the work unless he
was not aware and had no reasonable ground for believing that
such performance would be an infringement of copyright, or
(0) when any person-—
(४) makes for sale or hire, or sells or lets for bite, or hy
way of trade displays or offers for sale or hire, or _
(ii) distributes either for the purpose of trade or to such an
extent as to affect prejudicially the owner of the copyright, or .
(iit) by way of trade, exhibits in public, or
(iv) imports into India,
any infringing copies of the work:
Provided that nothing in sub-clause (iv) shall apply to the import
of two copies of any work, other than a cinematograph film or record,
for the private and domestic use of the importer.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, the reproduction to
a literary, dramatic, musical or artistic work in the form of a cinema-
tograph film shall be deemed to be an “infringing copy”.
52. (1) The following acts shall not constitute an infringement of Certain
copyright, namely:— acts
(2) a faiy dealing with a literary, dramatic, musical or artistic tor i" in.
work for the purposes of — fringe-
@) research or private study; गण
श्र e * right.

i) the performance, in the course of the activities of an edu-
cational institution, of a literary, dramatic or musical work by the
staff and students of the institution, or of a cinematograph film or
a record, if the audience is limited to such staff and students, the
parents and guardians of the students and persons directly con-
pected with the activities of the institution;


|

TELE EES PE VEP Ee ETE eee ee S

38

an Gj) the making of records in respect of any Hite:
7 or musieal work,” 1 ¥. vans ramate

(i) records recording that work have previously been made
by, or with the licence or consent of, the owner of the copyright
in the work; and

(ii) the making the records has given the prescrib-
ed notice of his tion to make the records, and has paid in
the prescribed manner to the ownér of the  dopyright in the
work royalties-insrespect of all such records to be midde by him,

~ + ab-the sate fixed: by the Copyright Board’ irr this behalf:

Provided that in making the recordg such person shall not make
any alterations in, or omissions from, the work, unless records re-
cording the work subject to similar alterations and omissions have
‘beer previously made by, or with the lMeenite or consent of, the ow-

ner..of_the copyright..or_unless..such. alierations and. omissions are
~-reasonably’ necessary for the adaptation of the-work to the records
5 in question; -

(*) the causing of a recording embodied in a record to be heard
in public by utilising the record * oan Lo

ह at any yhere persons “ ‘reside, as part of the
amenities provided exclusively’ or mainly for residents therein,
or

(i) as part Of the activities of a club, society or other orga-
~~ nisation which is not established or conducted for profit;

e ad के. हम .

(s) the making or publishing

है painting,-drawing, engraving .
— --. or photograph of an varchitectural या

श्र of art;

a ‘ * * *

. (६0) the making of an object of any description in in three dimensions
~of-an—artistic work in. two..dimensions,—if-the-object would ‘not appear, to
person: who are ‘not experts in relation to. objects of this descrip-

tion, to be a reproduction of the artistic work:

e * * *

3 57, (1) Independent ne author’s copyright, and even after the assigu-
है eet ment either wholly or partially of the said copyright, the author of a work

° shall have the right to claim the authorship. of the work as. well as the right to
restrain, or claim damages in respect of,—

@ any distortion, mutilation or other modification of the said work;

in relation to the said work which would be
prejudicial to his ofons or reputation.



39 abs
34
CHAPTER XIII
a Orvences || | _ _ -
63, Ay person whe knowingly infringes or abets the iniringernent Offence
" of in-
oe fringe-
{a) the copyright in a work, or ment of
copyright
(8) any other right conferred by this Act, or other
है ight:
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shail not be iess किक मन a
than six months but which may extend to three yeats and with fine which by this
shall net be less than fifty thousand rupees but which may extend to two Act.
Jakh rupees:
Provided that the court may, fur adequate and special reasons to be
mentioned in the judgment, impose a sentence of imprisonment for 2 term
of less than six months or a fine of less than fifty thousand rupees.
Explanation.—Consiruction of « building or other structure which
infringes or which, if completed, would infringe the copyright in some
other work shall not be an offence under this section.
63A, Whoever having already been convicted of an cffence under sec- Enhanced
tion 63 is again convicted of uny such offence shall be punishable for the penalty ०
second and for every subsequent offence, with imprisonment for a term ang sub
which shall not be less than one year but which may extend to three sequent |]
years and with fine which shail not be 1९55 than one lakh rupees but which —_ convictions.
may extend to two lakh rupees:
Provided that the court ray, for adequate and special reasons to he
mentioned in the judgment, impose a sentence of imprisonment for a term
+f less than one year or a fine of less than one lakh rupees:
Provided further that for the purposes of this section, no cognizance
shall be taker. of any conviction made before the commencement of the
Copyright (Amendment) Act, 1984.
* * * * co
* * + * *
78. 0) Power
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the tor make
rules,

foregoing power, the Central Government may make rules to provide
for all or any of the following matters, namely:—

* a] 2 * * *



(FREPERT LETTUCE Terre ere errs

‘

LOK SABHA, |