8 of l8SS. 
Bill No. 105 of 1982 
ce. ,c_ 
THE INDIAN POST OFFICE. (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1982 
.A 
BILL 
further to amend the Indian Post Office Act, 1898. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty-third Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
1. (1) This Act may be called the Indian Post Office (Amendment) 
Act, 1982. 
Short 
5 (2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Goverwnent 
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
title and 
commence-
ment. 
2. In section 1 of the Indian Post Office Act, 1898 (hereinafter referred Amend-
to as the principal Act), in sub-section (1), the word "Indian" shall be ment of 
·mitted. :UI section 1. 
10 3. Section 2 of the principal Act shall be re-numbered as sub-section 
(1) of that section,-
Amend-
ment of 
section 2. 
15 
(4) in sub-section (1) as so re-numbered,-
(i-) for clause (4), the following clause shall be substituted, 
namely:-
II (a) the expression "Director General" means the Direc-
tor General of Posts and Telegraphs and includes any other 
offi.cer authorised to exercise the powers of the Director 
General;"; 
(ii) in clause (d), the words "or her Majesty's Government 
or the Government of any Britigh possessiontJ shall be omitted; 

lZ I ~ . 
(iii) in clause (i), after the word "letter", the word ", letter. 
card," shall be inserted; 
(iv) for clause (j), the following clause shall be substituted, 
namely:-
"(j) the expression "Post Master General" includes an 5 
Additional Post Master General or a Director of Postal 
Service or any other officer exercising the powers of the 
Post Master General;"; 
(b) after sub-section (1) as so re-numbered, the following sub-
section shall be inserted, namely:-
"(2) Any reference in this Act to a law which is not in force 
in any area shall, in· relation to that area, be construed as a refer-
ence to the corresponding law, if any, in force in that area.". 
10 
Amend- 4. In clause (c) of section 3 of the principal Act, after the words 
ment of "according to the usual manner of delivering postal articles to the II) 
section 3. addressee", the words "or the placing of a postal article in a post 
box at the post office rented by the addressee" shall be inserted. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 4. 
5. In section 4 of the principal Act,-
(a) in sub-section (1),-
( i) after cIa use (b), the following cIa uses shall be inserted, 20 
namely:-
"(bb) letters conveyed and delivered by the sender 
thereof personally; 
(bob) documents issued by a court of justice or other 
authority entitled to issue the same, or any return or answers 25 
to such documents, sent, conveyed and delivered otherwise 
than by post;"; 
(ii) in clause (c), for the words "either by sea or by land" 
the words "by land, sea or air" shall be substituted; 
(b) in sub-section (2), for the words "postcards", the words go 
"lettercards and postcards" shall be substituted. 
Insertion 6. After section 4 of the principal Act, the following section shall be 
of new inserted, namely:-
section 4A. 
Search "4A. (1) Any officer (being an officer not below the rank of 
and Sub Divisional Inspector of post offices) authorised by the Central 35 
seizure. Government by general or special" order may, if he has reason to 
believe that any package containing letters of the nature referred to 
in sub-section (1) of section 4 is or any such letters are in any 
vehicle or othereonveyance or in any premises and that such letters 
are in the process of being carried in contravention (jf the provisions 40 
of that section, search the said vehicle or other conveyance or pre-
mises and seize such letters. 
(2) The provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 shall, 2 of 1974. 
so far as may be, apply to any search or seizure under this section 
as they apply to any search or seizure made under the authority of 45 
a warrant issued under section 94 of the said Code. 

,-' - .... . ....... 
7. In section 5 of the principal Act, in clause (b), after the words Amend-
''Ports or places in India", the words "and owners of or persons in charge ment of 
of ally aircraft on a flight between places in India" shall be inserted. section .. 
5 
8. In section 9 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2),-
(a) for clause (a), the following clause shall be substituted, 
namely:-
"(a) that it is published in numbers at such intervals as the 
Central Government may by rules prescribe;"; 
(b) after clause (b), the following clause shall be inserted, 
(0 namely:-
"(e) that its transmission by post is otherwise permissible 
under this Act.". 
9. In section 10 of the principal Act,-
Amend-
ment of 
section 9. 
Amend-
ment of 
(a) in S'llb-section (1), for the portion beginning with the words section 10. 
I:) ''Where arrangements are" and ending with the words "such posses-
c;Ion or cO'Untry", the following shall be substituted, namely:-
"Where arrangements are in force with any foreign country 
for the transmission by post of postal articles between India and 
such country,"; 
(b) after sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be in-
serted, namely:-
"(3) The Central Government may also make rules to give 
effect to such arrangements in respect of postal articles other than 
those to which sections 36 and 46 apply.". 
25 10. In section 15 of the principal Act, for the words "or to the Post 
Office of the United Kingdom or of any British poS'Session or foreign coun-
try,", the words "or to the Post Office of any foreign country," shall be 
substituted. 
11. In section 21 of the principal Act, after sub-section (3), the follow-
go fng sub-section shall be inserted, namely:-
35 
45 
" (4) Where, having regard to the exigencies of postal administra-
tion, the Central Government considers it necessary or expedient so 
to do, it may, by order in writing,-
(a) direct that unregistered postal articles, addressed to an 
addressee located in a multi-storeyed buildIng or a building with 
n large compound involving a distance o'f more than one hundred 
metres between the ou.ter gate and t.he building, may be 
delivered only through a letter deposit box installed for the 
purpose on the ground floor or, as the case may be, near the 
gate of such building; 
(b) require the owner or lessee of such building to install, 
or allow any addressee located in such building to install, such 
letter box. 
Explanation.-A singl~ letter deposit box or different letter 
deposit boxes may be installed for aifferent addrel$sees for the 
purposes of this sub-section.". 
Amend· 
ment of 
section 15. 
Amend-
ment at 
section 21. 

Amend- 12. In section 23 of the principal Act, in sUb-section (3), after clause 
ment of (0), the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:-
section 23. 
Substitu-
tion of 
new 
foIection for 
section 26. 
Power to 
intercept 
postal 
articles 
for 
public 
good. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 27. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 
27C. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 34. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 36. 
"Provided that before any such article as is specified in clause 
(a) of section 20 is destroyed, notices in writing shall be sent to 
the sender and the addressee, and the article shall not be destroyed 5 
until the expiry of one month from the date on which the last of 
such notices is sent.'·. 
13. For section 26 of the principal Act, the following section shall be 
Gu?stituted, namely:-
"26. The Central Government or the State Government or any 10 
officer specially authorised in this behalf by the Central or the State 
Government, may, if satisfied that it is necessary or expedient so 
to do in the interests of the public safety or tranquillity, the 
sovereignity and integrity of India, the security of the State, friend-
ly relations with foreign States or public order or for preventing 15 
incitement to the commission df any offence, or on the occurrence 
of any public emergency, by order in wr:ting, direct that any postal 
article or class or description of postal art:c1es in course of trans-
mission by post, shall be intercepted or detained or shall be disposed 
of in such manner as the authority issuing th~ order, may direct.". :lO 
14. In section 27 of the principal Act, in the Explanati01l.,-
(a) for the words "any part of India or of His Majesty's Domi-
nions or foreign country", the words "India or foreign country" 
shall be substituted; and 
(b) for the words "Government of such part or country", the 25 
words "Government of India or of such country" shall be suhstit".lted. 
15. In section 27C of the principal Act,-
(a) for the words. figures and letters "sections 99D to 99F of the 
Code of Crim;nal Procedure, 1898", the words and figures "section 
90 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973" shall be substituted; 
(b) for the figures and letter "99C", the figures "96" shall be 
substituted. 
16. In section 34 of the principal Act, in the proviso, for the words 
"that sum has been received from the addressee", the words "the pottal 
5 of 1898. 
2 of 1974. 
~o 
artic~e bas been delivered to the addressee" sball be substituted. 35 
17. In section 36·0£ the principal Act, in sub-section (1),-
(a) for the words "with the United Kingdom or with any 
British possession or foreign country", the words "with any foreign 
cO'Untry" shall be substituted; 
(b) for the words "o.~d the United Kingdom or such possession 40 
or country", the words "and such country" shall be substituted. 

18. In sub-section (3) of section 37 of the principal Act, for the words 
"be either forwarded, free of further charge,", the words ", subject to 
such further charge as the Central Government may by rule prescribe, 
be either, forwarded" shall be substituted. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 37. 
5 19. In section 39 of the principal Act, in the proviso, in paragraph (a), Amend-
after the word .. "letters", the word ", lett~r-cards", shall be inserted. ment Of 
sectldn 39. 
10 
20. After section 43 of the principal Act, the following section shall 
be inserted, namely:-
"43A. Money orders shall be pa:d at such times and in such 
manner as the Director General may~ from -time to time, appoint.". 
21. In section 46 of the principal Act, for sub-section (1), the follow-
ing sub-section shall be substituted, namely:-
" (1) Where arrangements made with any foreign country are in 
force for the iss'Ue and payment, through the Post Office, of money 
15 orders between India and such country, the Central Government 
may make rules to give effect to such arrangements.". 
20 
30 
35 
22. After section 47 of the principal Act, the following section shall 
be inserted, namely:-
"47A. If any person, without reasonable excuse, the burden of 
proving which shall lie on him, neglects or refuses to pay the value 
0f the value-repayable article delivered to him without recovering 
the val.e of the article, such amount sh'lll be recoverable by an 
officer of the Post Office authorised by the Post Master General in 
this behalf, from the pe!'son so neglecting or refus'ng as if it were 
an arrear of land revenue due from him.". 
23. In section 52 of the principal Act, fOr the words "imprisonment 
for a term which may extend to seven years", the words "imprisonment 
for life or for a term which may extend to ten years" ~hall be 
substituted. 
24. After section 56 of the prinCipal Act, th~ following section shall 
be inserted, namely:-
'56A. If any person,-
(a) commits theft in respect of-
(i) a mail bag, or 
(ii) any postal article in course of transmission by post, 
or 
(iii) any movable property out of a postal article in 
course of transmission by post, or 
Insertion 
of new 
secUon 
43A. 
Time and 
manner 
ot pay-
ment of 
money 
orders. 
Amend-
ment at 
se('tion 46. 
Insertion 
of new 
section 
47A. 
Recovery 
of va)ue-
payable 
article. -
Amend-
ment of 
section 52. 
Insertion 
of new 
section 
S6A. 
Stealing 
mail bag 
or postal 
article. 

Amend-
ment of 
section 58. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 59. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 64. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 67. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 69. 
Insertion 
of new 
section 
72A. 
Trial of 
offences. 
6 
(b) stops a mail with intent to rob or search the mail, 
he shall be punishable with imprisonment for life or for a term 
which may extend to ten years or with fine or with both. 
Explanation.-For the purposes of this section, the expression 
"mail" includes every conveyance by which postal articles are 5 
c3rried, whether it be a ship, aircraft, vehicle, "horse or any other 
conveyance and also a person employed in conveying or delivering 
postal articles.'. 
25. In section 58 of the principal Act,-
(a) in sub-section (1), for the words "with fine which may 10 
e:<tend to fifty rupees for every such letter", the words "with im-
prisonment for a term which may extend to three years or with fine 
or with both" shall be substitut~d; 
(b) ·.;ub-section (2) shall be omitted. 
26. In section 59 of the principal Act,- 15 
(a) for the words "with fine which may extend to flfty rupees 
for every S".1ch letter", the words "with imprisonment for a term 
which may extend to three years or with fine or with both" shall be 
substituted; 
(b) sub-section (2) shall be omitted. 
27. In section 64 of the principal Act, for the words "by this Act", the ~o 
words "by or under this Act" shall be substituted. 
28. In section 67 o'f the principal Act. in the proviso, for the words and 
flgures "the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898", the words and figures 
"the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973" shall be substituted. 
29. In section 69 of the principal Act, for the word "letter", occurring 25 
at both the places, the words "postal article" shall be substituted. 
30. After section 72 of the principal Act, the following section shall be 
inserted, namely:-
"72A. (1) An offence under this Act may be tried by any 
court within the local limits of whose jurisdiction it was committed 30 
or the alleged offender is arrested or is in c'llstody or, where the 
offence is in respect of a mail, mail bag, postal article. or money 
order or any movable property sent by post, within the local limit') 
of whose jurisdiction the mail, m~il bag, postal article, money order 
or movable property passed in the course of transmission ,",y post. 35 
(2) Abetment of 3n offence under this Act may be tried by any 
court by which the offence abetted may be tried. 
(3) Nothing in this section shall affect the jurisdiction of d 
court competent to try an offence under this Act by virtue O'f the 
5 of 1898. 
2 of 1974. 
prOVisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.". 40 20f 1974. 

LOK SABJ-!A 
CORRIGENDA 
to 
THE INDIM~ POST OFFICE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1932 
(To beLAs introduced in Lok Sabha) 
1. Page 1, 1ina 11,-
gfter "section" insert. "and" 
2. P~ge 2, line 30~-
for "for the words" read "for the word" 
-
3. P3~C 3, line 11,-
i9.£ "perrni.ssiable" ~ "permissible" 
4. Paga 5.-
in m~rginal heading to proposed section 47A,-
5. P3gc 5, li~c 21.-
f or "v aluc-repayab le" read ,tva1uo-paya b l,1" 
-
6. Page 6. line 15,-
£f.\er tlln" ~"l~~rt "suh-section (1) of ct 
7. P3ge 10. lines26 and 27,-
12£ "'letters-cards'" re..:..d " f lett.cr-cJrd5 '" 
-
8. Page 11. line 12,-
for "class of" .:edd "class or" 
9. Page 11, line 17.,-
for -
"interest" read "interests" 
10. Page 11, line 32,-
~mi-:' "beon" 
11. Page 11, line Ii fro!1 hottom.-
tOL' It ~rticle" read "articles" 
. - _ .. 

2 
"r~cC"VQr n(", re~d 
-- "recovering" 
l.q,£ "7tt ~ "lOll 
14. Pa~a 11, l~ne 1:,-
16. 
17. Page 17,-
in V-h) marginiill he'ading to section ?7C~-
19. P3;~ 19,-
'!E'JII D~Ld I: 
,. 
,.~ ··d "penol ty" ~. 

5 
10 
15 
20 
1 
31. In section 72 of the principal Act, the figures "58, 59," shall be Amend-
omitted. ment of 
section 72. 
32. Section 73 of the principal Act shall be omitted. Omission 
33. In section 74 of the principal Act,-
of sec-
tlon 73. 
Amend-
ment of 
(a) in sub-section (3), the words "and, on such publication, section 74. 
shall have effect as if enacted by this Act" shall be omitted; 
(b) after sub-section (3), the following' sub-section shall be 
inserted, namely:-
"(4) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon 
as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliarr ent, 
while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which 
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive 
sessions" and if, before the expiry of the session immediately 
following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both 
Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both 
Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall 
thereafter have effect only in such mod:fied form or be of no 
effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modi-
fication or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity 
of anything previously done under that rule.". 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Indian Post Office Act was enacted in 1898. The Law Commission 
has in its Thirty-eighth Report made a number of recommendations for 
the revision of the Act. Thereafter, the matter was further examined 
in detail. This Bill seeks to give effect to such of the recommendations 
made by the Law Commission as have been found acceptable and it also 
seeks to make ceJ;'tain other amendments in the Act for dealing with 
difficulties which have been experienced in the working of the Act. 
2. Section 26 of the Act provides that on the occurrence of any public 
emergency or in the interests of the public safety and tranquility, the 
Central Government or a State Government or any authorised officer 
may, by order in writing, direct that any postal article or class or descrip-
tion of -postal articles in course of transmission by post shall be intercept-
ed or detained or disposed of in such manner as the authority iss.uing the 
order may direct. There has been a demand that the provisions of this 
section should be reviewed. The Law Commission has, in Its Report, 
gone into the matter at great length. It is proposed to amend this sect~on 
so as to clearly bring the provisions thereof within the limits permitted 
by the Constitution (vide clause 13). 
3. The following are the other important amendments which the Bill 
seeks to make in the Act:-
(a) The Bill provides for exemption from the purview of the 
exclusive privilege of the Central Government to convey letters, 
items like strictly personal letters, documents issued by court of 
justice or other authoriti~s entitled to do so and letters concerning 
goods or property sent by any means without any consideration (vide 
clause 5). 
(b) The Bill seeks to empower the Central Government to inspect 
and seize packages containing letters posted in violation of the Act 
and the manner in which such power is to be exercised (vide clause 
6). 
(c) To obviate the difficulty experienced in effecting delivery 
of postal articles to residents of multi-storeyed buildings or buildings 
with large compounds, the Bill seeks to empower the Central Govern-
ment to direct fixing of letter-depoSIt-boxes in such places (vide 
clause 11). 
(d) Under the existing proVisions of the Act, the Government 
accepts liability in respect of sum specified for recovery of delivery 
of value payable articles only when the sum has been received from 
the addressee. The Bill provides for the assumption of liability to 
pay even when such articles are delivered to an addressee without 
recovering the value by mistake. Consequent upon the assumptio~ 
of this llability, the Central Government is proposed to be empowered 
8 

9 
to collect the amount trom the addressee as an arrear of land revenue. 
if the addressee neglects or refuses to pay the same on demand (vide 
clauses 16 and 22). 
(e) The Bill seeks to make the ,punishments provided for in the 
Act more stringent (vide clauses 23, 24, 25 and 26). 
4. It is also proposed to avail of the present opportunity to include in 
the Act a provision for the laying of rules made under the Act before 
Parliament. 
5. The Notes on Clauses explain in detail the various proviaioDl ot the 
Bill. 
NEW 'DELHI; C. M. STEPHEN. 
The 2nd August, 1982. 

~otes on c~, 
Clause 2.-This clause seeks to omit the word 'Indian' from the ex-
pression 'Indian Post Office Act, 1898' to bring it into conformity with 
recent legislative practice. 
Clause 3 (a) (i), (iii) and (iv) .-These sub-clauses seek to define the 
expressions 'Director General' and 'Post Master General' in the light' of 
the changed set up in the Department. They also seek to add the word 
'letter-card' in the expression 'postal article' to make it comprehensive. 
Clauses 3 (a) (ii) , 9, 10, 14, 17 and 21.-These clauses seek to omit the 
references to 'United Kingdom', 'British Possessions', 'Her Majestys', etc., 
from the concerned provisions of the Act as they are no longer relevant. 
Clause 3 (b).-This sub-clause seeks to insert a new sub-section for 
construction of references to a law in the Act which is not in force in any 
area to be construed as a reference to the corresponding law, i1 any, in 
force in that area. 
Clause 4.-This clause seeks to make the definition Of the word 
"delivery" more comprehensive by bringing the delivery of postal articles 
in post boxes in its ambit. 
Clause 5.-This clause enumerates the types of letters exempted from 
the purview of the exclusive privilege given to the Department for con-
veyance of letters. Under this clause, conveyance of strictly personal 
letters, documents issued by a Court of Justice or other authorities 
entitled to issue the same and letters concerning goods or property sent 
by air without any consideration also will be exempted from the exclu-
sive privilege of conveyance of postal articles granted to the Department. 
It is proposed to widen the expression 'letters' so as to include 'letters-
cards' in it. 
Clause 6.-This dause provides for power to search and seize packages 
containing letters posted in violation of the Act and the manner in which 
this power Is to be exercised. 
Clause 7.-This clause seeks to include the owners or persons in charge 
of any aircraft on a fiight between places in India in the list of persons 
expressly forbidden to convey letters. 
Clause B.-This clause enumerates the eligibility criteria which a regis-
tered newspaper should have, to enjoy the concessional postage facility. 
Under this clause, a registered newspaper for the purpose of availing 
concessional postage facility should be published at such intervals as the 
Central Government may by rules prescribe, and should have a bOna fide 
list of subscribers, and should be otherwise eligible for transmission by 
post under this Act. 
Clau.se 11.-This clause seeks to empower the Central Government to 
frame rules making it obligatory on the part of the owner or lessee or 
any addressee located in a multi-storeyed building or building with a 
large compound to fix letter-deposit boxes for delivery of unregistered 
letters on the ground floor or at the gate of the building with a large 
compound, as the case may be. This is to overcome the difficulties ex-
10 

II 
perienced in delivering letters in multi-storeyed buildings or buildings 
with large compounds. 
Clause 12.-This clause deals with the procedure to be observed before 
destroying the articles posted in contraventio.l Of. the Act. Under this 
clause, before destroying any article posted in contravention of the Act, 
noLces in writing are to be sent to the sender and the addressee and the 
az:ticle is to be destroyed only after the expiry of one month from the date 
on which the last' of such notices is sent. 
Clau.se 13.-This clause seeks to amend section 26 of the Act. Under 
this section, the Central Government or a State Government or any 
officer specially authorised for this purpose shall have the powers to 
direct that postal articles or class of description of postal articles in course 
of transmission by post shall be intercepted on the OCCUITence of any 
public emergency or in the interest of the public safety or tranquillity. 
To bring section 26 in line with the constitutional provisions, it is proposed 
to provide that on the occurrence of any public emergency, or in the 
interest of the public safety, or tranquillity, the Central Governm~nt or 
a State Government, or any officer specially authorised in this behalf by 
the Central Government or a State Government may if satisfied that it 
is necessary or expedient to do so in the interests of the sovereignty and 
integrity of India or the security of the State, or friendly relations with 
any foreign State or public order or for preventing incitement to the 
commission of an offence, by order in writing direct that any ,postal 
article in course of transmission by post, shall be intercepted or detained 
or shall be disposed of in such manner as the authority issuing the order 
may direct. 
This clause also seeks to omit sub-section (2) of section 26 so as to 
provide for judicial review of any act:on taken under this section. 
Clauses 15 and 28.- These clauses amend sections 27 (c) and 67 of the 
Act to replace the references to certain sections of the Criminal Procedure 
Code, 1898 by the relevant sections of the Criminal Procedure Code, 1973 
which has since been replaced the earlier Code. 
Clause 16.-Section 34 of the Act provides that the Government shall 
not accept any liability in respect of the sum specified for recovery on 
delivery of value payable article until and unless that sum has been 
received from the -addressee. This clause provides that the Central . 
Government shall assume liability in respect of a case where value pay-
~ble article is delivere9, to an addreSsee without recovering 'the value of 
the article by mistake. ' 
Clause lB.-This clause deals with the manner of disposal of undelivered 
postal articles after detention at a post offi~e for 'a prescribed period. 
This clause seeks to empower the Central Government to frame rules 
under section 37 (3) 'of the Act for levying a further charge for disposa1 
of undelivered article. 
C14u.~e 19.-Section 39 of the Act deals with the final disposal of un-
delivered postal article. Now it is proposed to include letter-cards also 
therein to make it more explicit. 
C14use 20.-This clause seeks to make a general provision with regard 
to the ti~ and manner of ~y,tnent of money orders as similar provisions 
relating to registration and insurance already exist. ' 

12 
GlaUS8 22.-Consequent upon assuming liability for a value payable 
article after its delivery to the addressee without recover.ng the value by 
mistake, it becomes necessary to assume power to recover the amount 
as an arrear of land revenue, if the addressee neglects or refuses to pay 
the same on demand. ' 
Clause 23.-Section 52 of the Act deals with the penalty for theft, 
dishonest misappropriation, secretion, destruction or throwing away of 
postal articles. Under this section, the punishment for such an offence 
is imprisonment for a term which may extend to seven years and shall 
also be punishable with fine. 'rhis clause seeks to make the punishment 
more stringent by extending the imprisonment fur life or for a term which 
may extend to ten years and shall also be punishable with fine. 
Cl4use 24.-This clause is self-explanatory. 
Clause 25.-This clause seeks to make the punishment more stringent 
for offences committed in violation Of the exclusive privilege of convey-
ance conferred on the Government by providing for imprisonment for a 
term which may extend to three years or with fine or with both. 
Clause 26.-This clause also seeks to make the punishment more 
severe for oft'ences committed by ,persons who are expressly forbidden 
from conveying letters under section 5 of the Act. 
Clause 27.--Section 64 of the Act deals with penalty for making false 
declarations. At present, the section requires certain declarations to be 
made in respect of postal articles. Now it is proposed to bring withi.n 
the ambit of this penal provisions declarations which are required to be 
made not only by the Act but also 'by the rules made under the Act. 
Ctause 29.-Section 69 of the Act deals with the penalty for unlaw-
fully diverting letters. The word 'letter' is being replaced by 'postal 
article' to make the section more comprehensive. 
Clau.se 30.-This clause seeks to specify the jurisdict:on of courts for 
trial of offences committed under the Act. 
Clause 31.-With enhancement of punishment provided in sections 58 
and 59 of the Act, the offences punishable under. the aforesaid sections 
would become cognizable. This clause, therefore, seeks to omit the 
references to sections 58 and 59 from section 72 of the Act. 
Cla'U8e 32.-This clause seeks to omit section 73 of the Act which 
empowers the Central Go·,·ernment to make rules relating to management 
of zamindari and other district post, as· this system is not in vogue now. 
Clause 33.-Section 74 Of the Act emoowers the GovernmEmt to make 
rules for carrying out the purposes and the objects of the Act. The Act, 
however, does· not provide for laying the copies of the rules framed there-
under before l)oth Houses of Parliament. This clause seeks to provide 
that rules framed under the Act will be laid before Parliament. This is 
in conformity with recent legislative practice. 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Clause 16 of the Bill proposes to amend section 34 of the Act to provide 
for the assumption by the Central Government of the liability in respect 
of sums specified for recovery of delivery of value payable articles even 
when such articles are delivered to addressees without recovering the 
value by mistake. It is not possible to estimate as to how much of ex-
penditure would be involved on this since it depends upon the number 
of mistakes, if at all they occur, from time to time. Further dause 22 
proposes to insert new section 47A in the Act to provide that though 
the Government would first make the payment, the same would be re-
covered from tho:! concerned addressee as arrear of land revenue if the 
addressee neglects or refuses to pay the same on demand. Hence the 
expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India may, in the final 
analysis, be nil. . I 
2. Apart from the above, there is no other expenditure whether re-
curring or non-recurring. 
13 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 8 of the Bill seeks to amend section 9 (2) of the Act, to empower 
the Central Government - to frame rules for prescribing the number of 
intervals at which any registered newspaper should be published. 
2. Clause 9 of the Bill proposes to insert new'sub-section (3) in section 
7 of the Act so as to empower the Central Government to make rules to 
give effect to the arrangements. which are in force with any foreign 
country for the transmission by post of certain postal articles between 
India and such country. 
3. Clause 11 of the Bill seeks to amend section 21 of the' Act to em-
power the Central Government so as to direct any owner of, or lessee ot' 
any addressee located in, a multy-storeyed building or a building with 
a large compound involving a distance of more than one hundred metres 
between the outer gate and the building, to instal letter deposit boxes 
at or near the gate of such building. 
4. Clause 13 of the Bill proposes to empower the Central or State 
Government or any officer specially authorised in this behalf to direct 
th9t any postal article Or class· or description of postal articles in course 
of transmission by post be intercepted or detained or disposed of in .~uch 
manner as the authority issuing the order may direct. This power will, 
however, be exercised only where it is necessary or expedient so to do 
in the interests of the public safety or tranquillity, the sovereignty and 
integrity of India, the security of the State, friendly relations with 
foreign States or public order or preventing incitement to the commission 
of any offence or the occurrence of any public emergency. 
5. Clause 18 of the Bill seeks to empower the Central Government to 
frame rules under section 37 (3) for levying a further charge for disposal 
of undelivered articles. 
6. Claus':'! 20 of the Bill proposes to insert new section 43A to give 
power to the Director General to prescribe by rules the time at and 
manner in which' money orders should be paid. 
7. Clause 21 of the Bill proposes to substitute' sub-section (1) of section 
46 of the Act by a new sub-section to empower the Central Gowrnm<:?ht 
to make rules to give effect to the arrangements made with any foreign 
country for the issue and payment (through the post office) of money 
orders between India. and such foreign country. However such power. is 
with the Central Government even now under sub-section (1) of section 
46 which is proposed to be substituted. 
8. The matters with respect to which the rules may be made are 
matters of procedure or detail. The delegation of legislative power, is 
therefore, of a normal character, 
14 

ANNEXURE, 
EXTRACTS FROM THE INDIAN POST OFFICE ACTJ 1898 
(6 OF 1'898) 
" .. M 
• • • • • 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Indian Post Office Act, 1898. 
• • • • .. 
2. In this Act unle-as there is anything repugnant in the subject or 
context,-
(a) the expression "Director General" means the Director Gene-
ral of Posts and Telegraphs; 
• .. .. • • 
(d) the expression "mail ship" means a ship employed for 
carrying mails, pursuant to contract or continuing arrangement, by 
. the Central Government or Her Majesty's Government or the Gov-
ernment of any British possession or foreign country; 
.. • .. • • 
(i) the expression ,"postal article" includes a letter, postcard, 
newspaper, book, pattern or sample packet, parcel and every article 
or thing transmissible by post; 
(j) the expression "Post Master General" includes a Deputy 
Foot Master General or other officer exercising the powers of a ·Post 
Master General; and 
.. • • • • 
3. For the purposes of this Act,-
.. • • • 
(c) the delivery of a postal article at the house or office of the 
addressee, or to the addressee or his servant or agent or other person 
considered to. be authorized to receive the article according to the 
usual manner of delivering postal articles to the addreSGee, shall be 
deemed to be delivery to the addressee. 
.. .. • .' • 
4. (1) Wherever within India posts or postal communications arG 
established by the Central Government, the Central Government shall 
have the exclusive privilege of conveying by post, from one place to 
another, all letters except in the following cases, and shall also have 
the exclusive privilege of performing all the incidental services of 
receiving, collecting, sending, despatching and delivering all letters, 
except in the following cases that is to say:-
• • • • • 
15 
-
Shott 
title, 
extent, 
appllcation 
and com-
mence-
ment. 
Definition. 
Meanings 
ot 
"Incourse 
ot trans-
mission by 
post" and 
"delivery". 
Exclusive 
privilege 
ot 
conveyln" 
letters 
reserved 
to the 
Govern-
ment. 

Certain 
persons 
expressly 
forbidden 
to convey 
letters. 
Power to 
make rules 
as to 
registered 
news-
papers. 
Power to 
declare 
rates of 
foreign 
postage. 
Official 
mark to 
evidence of 
amount of 
postage. 
16 
(c) letters sOlely concerning goods or property sent elUter hy 
sea or by land to be delivered with the goode or property which the 
letters concern, without hire, reward or other profit or advantage 
for receiving, carrying or delivering them: 
Provided that nothing in this section shall authorize any person to 
make a collection of letters excepted as aforesaid for the purpose of 
sending them otherwise than by post. 
(2) For the purposes of this section and section 5, the expr~sion 
"letters" includes postcards. 
5. Wherever within India posts or postal communications are estab-
lished by the Central Government, the following persons are exprelSly 
forbidden to collect, carry, tender or deliver letters, or to receive letters 
for the purpose of carrying or deliveriQg them, although they obtain no 
hire, reward or other profit or advantage tor so doing, that is to say:-
'" • • • • 
(b) owners and masters of vessels sailing or passing on any 
river or canal in India, or between any ports or places in India, 
and their servants or agents, except as regards letters solely COD-
cerning goods on board, and except 8S regards postal articles 
received for conveyance under Chapter VIII. 
• • • • • 
9. (1) '" • ., • 
(2) For the purpose of such registration, every publication, consist-
ing wholly or in great part of political or other newa, or of articles 
relating thereto or to other current topics, with or without advertise-
ments, shall be deemed a newspaper, subject to the following conditions, 
namely:-
(a) that it is published in numbers at intervals of not more than 
thirty-one days; and 
(b) that it has a bona fide list of S'Ubscribers. 
• • • • • 
10. (1) Where arrangements are in force with the United Kingdom, 
or with any British possession or foreign country,?ort~ transmission 
by post of postal articles between India and the United Kingdom or such 
possession or country, the Central Government may, in conformity with 
the provisions of such arrangements, declare what postage rates and 
other sums shall be charged in respect of such postal articles, and may 
make rules as to the scale of weight, terms and coiuiitfons subject to 
which the rates so declared shall be charged. 
'" '" • • • 
15. The official mark on a postal article denoting that any postage or 
other sum is due in respect thereof to the Post Office of India or to the 
Post Office of the United Kingdom or of any British possession or foreign 
country, shall be prima faCie evidence that the sum denoted as afore-
said is so due . 
• • • • • 

5 at 1898. 
23. (1) • • • • 
(3) Notwithstanding anything in sub':section (1)-
• • • • • 
(b) any pootal article sent by post in contravention of the 
provisions of section 20 may be disposed Cif in such manner as the 
Central Government may, by rule, direct. 
• • • • • 
2G. (1) On the occurrence of any public emergency, or in the interest 
of the JY.lblic safety or tranquillity, the Central Government, or a State 
Government, or any officer specially authorized in this behalf by the 
Central or the State Government, may, by order in writing, direct that 
any postal article or class or description, of postal articles in course of 
transmission by post shall be intercepted or detained, or shall be disposed 
of in such manner as the authority issuing the order may direct. 
(2) If any doubt arises as to the existence of a public emergenc y, or 
as to whether any act done under sub-sedion (1) was in the interest of 
the public safety or tranquillity, a certificate of the Central Government 
or, al'l the case may be, of the State Government shall be conclusive 
proof on the point. 
27. (1) • • • • • 
Explanation.-For the purposes of this section, the· expression 
"postage stamp" includes any pootage stamp for denoting any rate or 
duty of postage of any part of India or of His Majesty's dominions or 
foreign country and the impression of any stamping machine provided 
or authorized for the like purpose by or under the authority of the 
Government of such part or country. 
• • • • • 
Me. Every application made under the second proviso to sub-section 
(3) o'f section 27B shall be heard and determined in the manner provided 
by sections Q9D to 99F of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898, by a 
Special Bench of the High Court constituted in the manner provided by 
section 99C of that Code. 
• • • • • 
34. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazt!tte, direct that, subject to the other provisions of tlrts Act and to the 
payment of fees at such rates as may be fixed by the -n«nification, a sum 
of money specified in writing at the time of posting-by the sender of a 
postal article shall be recoverable on the delivery thereol from the 
addressee, and that the sum, so recovered, shall be-paid to the !lender: 
Provided that the Central Government shall not incur any Hability 
in respect of the sum specified for recovery unless and until that sum 
has been received from the addressee. 
Explanation.-Postal articles sent in accordance wlth the provisions 
of this section may be described as "value-payable" postal articles. 
• • • • • 
Pdwetio 
deal witb 
postal 
articles 
posted in 
contraven-
tion ot 
Act. 
Power to 
intercept 
postal 
articles for 
publlc 
.000. 
Power to 
deal with 
postal 
articles 
from 
abroad 
bearin, 
fictitioUS 
or 
previous 
-ly used 
stamps. 
procedure 
for 
disposal 
by High 
Court at 
applica-
tions 
tor 
relea.~ ot 
newspaper 
and 
articles So 
detained. 
Transmis-
sion by 
post Of 
value-pay-
able postal 
arttcle.. 

Power to 
give effect 
to arrang. 
menta wi~ 
otber 
countrjes. 
Power to 
mate rules 
.. to diapo-
, II&l of unde-
livered post) 
articles. 
Fioat dis-
poaaI of UD-
delivered 
postal 
articles. 
Power to 
give effect 
to arrange-
ments with 
other 
.aluntries. 
Penalty 
for theft, 
dishonest 
misappro-
priation 
secretion, 
destruc-
tion, Or 
throwing 
away, of 
postal 
articles. 
Penaity 
for 
contraven-
tion of 
section 4. 
36. (1) Where arrangements made with the United Kingdom, or witH 
any British possession or foreign country are in force, for the trans-
mission by post of registered, insured or value-payable postal articles 
between Inciia and the United Kingdom or such possession or country, 
the Central Government may make rules to give' effect to such arrange-
ments. 
• • • ... • 
37. (1) ... • ... • 
(3) Every undelivered postal article, after being detained at a post 
office for the period prescribed by rule under the foregoing prOVisions of 
this section, shall be either forwarcled, free of further charge, to the post 
office at which it was posted, for return to the sender, or sent to the office' 
of the Post Master General. 
• • • ... • 
39. Undelivered postal arti,cles which cannot be disposed of under the 
foregoing provisions, shall be detained in the office of the Post Master 
GenEral for such further period (if any), and shall be dealt with in such 
manner as the Central Government may, by rule direct: 
Provided that-
(a) letters and postcarcls shall be destroyed; 
(b) money or saleable t:Jroperty, not being of a perishable nature, 
found in any undeliver~d postal article, shall be detained for a period 
of one year in the office of the Post Master General, and, if on the 
expiration of that period no person has established his right thereto, 
shall, if money, be credited to the Post Office, and, if saleable pro-
perty, be Eold, the sale-proceeds being credited to the Post Office. 
. ... . .-- . 
46. (1) 'Where arrangements made with the United Kingdom, or 
with any British possession, or foreign country are in force, for the issue 
and payment through the Post Office of money orders between India 
and the United Kingdom or such possession, or country, the Central 
Government may make rules to give effect to such arrangements . 
... • • • 
5Z. Whoever, being an officer of the Post Office commits theft in 
respect of, or dishonestly misapprOt,riates, or, for any purpose whatso-
ever, secrets, destroys or throws away, any postal article in course of 
transmission by post or anything contained therein, shall be punishable 
with imprisonment for a term which may extend to seven years, anli 
shall also be ?unishable with fine. 
... • * ... • 
58. (1) Whoever---
(4) conveys otherwise than by post, a letter within the exclu-
sive privilege conferred on the Central Government by section 4, or 
(b ) performs any service incidental to conveying, otherwise 
than by post, any letter within the exclusive ,privilege aforesaid, or 

5 of 1898. 
19 
(c) sends, or tenders or delivers in order to be sent, otherwise 
than by post, a letter within the exclusive privilege afores~id, or 
(b) makes a collection of letters excepted from the exclusive 
privilege aforesaid for the purpose of sending them otherwise thaJ:l 
by post, 
shall be punishable with fine which may extend to fifty rupees for every 
such letter. 
(2) Whoever, having already been convicterl; of an offence under this 
section, is again convicted thereunder, shall, on every such subsequent 
conviction be punishable with fine which may extend to five hundred 
l1.JIllees. 
59. (1) Whoever in contravention of the provisions of section 5, 
carries, receives, tenders or delivers letters, or collects letters, shaH be 
punishable with fine which may extend to fifty ru.pees for every such 
letter. 
(2) Whoever, having already been convicted of an offenC€ undf!r 
this section, is again convicted thereunder, shall, on every such subse-
quent conviction, be punishable with fine which may extend to five 
hundred rupees. 
• '" '" • '" 
84. Whoever, being required by this Act to make a declaration in 
respect of any postal article to be sent by post or the contents or value 
thereof, makes in his declaration any statement which he knows, or has 
reason to believe, to be false, or does not believe to be true, shall be 
punishable with fine which may extend to two hundred rupees, and, it 
the false 'declaration is mane for the purpose of defrauding the Govern-
ment, with fine which may extend to five hundred roo.ees. 
'" • '" '" '" 
67. Whoever, except under the authority of this Act or of any other 
Act for the time being in force or in obedience to the order in writing 
of the C~ntral Government or the direction of a competent Court, detaim; 
the mails or any p'Ostal article in course of transmission bv post. or on 
any pretence opens a mail bag in course of transmission by post, shall 
be "unishable with fine which may extend to two hundred rupees: 
Provided that nothinJ:! in this section shall prevent the detention of 
an officer of the Post Office carrying the mails or any post.al article in 
course of transmission by post. on a charJ;!e of having c('mmitten an 
offence declared to be cognizable by the Code of Criminal Procedur~, 
1898, or any other law for the time being in force. 
• '" • • • 
89. Whoever, not being an officer of the Post Office, wilfully and 
maliciously, with intent to injure any p£'rson, either opens or causes to 
be opened any letter which ought to have be~n delivered, or does any 
act whereby the due delivery of a letter to any person is n.revDnted or 
impeded. shall be punishable with imprisonment for a terro which may 
ext~nd to six months, or with fine which may extenn to five hundred 
rupees, or with both: 
Penalty 
fer 
contrav.en-
tion. 
of 
section 5. 
Penatly 
for 
making 
false 
declara-
tion 
Penalty 
for de-
taining 
mails or 
opening 
mail 
bag. 
Penalty for 
unlawfully 
diverting 
letters. 

Authority 
for pro-
sccutions 
UDder 
cer\ain 
I«\iona 
of Act. 
Zamin-
dari and 
other. 
district 
posts. 
General 
power to 
make 
rules and 
p.·ovisions 
as to 
rules 
l1nd'~r Act. 
Provided that nothing in this section shall apply to a G}erson who 
does any act to which the section applies, if he is a parent, or in the 
position of a parent or guardian, of the addressee, and the addressee ii 
a minor or a ward. 
• • • • • 
12. No Court shall take cognizance of an offence ,?unishable under 
any of the provisions of sections 51, 53, 54, clauses (a) and (b), 55, 56, 58, 
59, 61, 64, 65, 66 and 67 of this Act, unless upon complaint made by 
orner of, or under authority from, the Director General or a Post Master 
General. 
• • • • • 
73. (1) The Central Government may make rules for the manage-
ment of any zamindari or other district post. 
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the g~nerality of the fore-
going power, such rules may declare what ,?ortions of this Act shall be 
applicable to zamindari and other district posts and to the persons 
employed in connection therewith. 
74. (1) • • • • • 
(3) All rules made by the Central Government under this Act shall 
be published in the Official Gazette and, on such r.:mblication, shall have 
effect as if enacted by this Act. 
• • • • • 

LOK SABBA 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Indian Post Office Act, 1898. 
(Shri C. M. Stephen, Minister of Communications) 