As INTRODUCED IN LoK: SABRA ON 
If 8 AUGf!i) 
Bill No. 185 of 1981. 
THE BURMAH OIL COMPANY [ACQUISITION OF SHARES 
OF OIL INDIA LIMITED AND OF THE UNDERTAKINGS 
IN INDIA OF ASSAM OIL COMPANY LIMITED AND THE 
BURMAH OIL COMPANY (INDIA TRADING) LlMITED] 
BILL, 198r . 
A 
BILL 
to provide in the public interest for the acquisition of the shares of Oil 
India Limited held by "The Burmah Oil Company Limited" and for 
the acquisition a·nd transfer of the right, title and interest of the 
A.ssam Oil Company Limited and "The Burmah Oil Company (India 
Trading) Limited" in relation to their undertakings in India and 
thereby to secure that the ownership and control of crude Qil and gas 
produ.ced by Oil India Limited, and of crude oil, ga.s and petroleum 
products prrIOduced by the undertakings in India of the Assam Oil 
Company Limited and of petroleum products. marketed and distri-
buted by the said undertakings and the undertakings m lndia Of 
"The Burmah Oil Company (India Trading) Limited" are so distri-
buted as best to subserve the CDm'l'lWn good. 
WHEREAS "The Burmah Oil Company Limited" (a foreign company) 
ha~ at present the ownership of, and control over, a significant portion of 
crude oil, gas and petroleum products produced, marketed and distributed 
;n India by reason of the fact that Oil India Limited, wherein it nolds 

ftftyper cent .• of the shares, and one of its subsidiaries, namely, the Assam 
Oil Company Limited are (:arrying on the business of exploration and pro-
duction of crude oil, gas and petroleum products, and the said Assam Oil 
Company Limited is also carrying on through its undertakings in India 
and through the undertakings in India of "The Burmah Oil Company S 
(lLdia Trading) Limited", another of the subsidiaries of "The Burmab 
Oil Company Limited", the business of marketing and distribution of 
petroleum products; 
ANn WHEREAS it is expedient in the public interest that the shares of 
the said Oil India Limited held by "The Burmah Oil Company Limited" 10 
and the undertakings in India of the said Assam Oil Company Limited 
and "The Burmah Oil Company (India Trading) Limited" should be 
acquired; 
AND WHEREAS such acquisition is for giving effect to the policy of the 
State towards securing the principle specified in clause (b) of article 39 15 
of 'the Constitution as the ownership and control of the material resources 
of the community, to wit, crude oil, gas and petroleum products produced 
by the saif\ Oil India Limited and by the undertakings in India of 
the Assam Oil . Company Limited and marketed and distributed by the 
undertakings in India of the said Assam Oil Company Limited and "The lZO 
Burmah Oil Company (India Trading) Limited", would by reason of such 
acquisitibn become vested in the State and thereby so distributed as belt 
to sub serve the common good; 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty-second Year of . the 
Republic of India as follows:- 115 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
ShorUit1e, 1. This 'Act may be called the Burmah Oil Company [Acquisition of 
. Shares of Oil India Limited and of the Undertakings in India of Assam 
Oil Company Limited and the Burmah Oil Company (India Trading) 'lO 
Limited] Act, 1981. 
I)eftni- ;. In this Act, unless the (:ontext otherwise requires,-
tMmI. 
(4) "appointed day" means such date as the Central Govemment 
may, by notification, appoint; 
(b) "Bunnah Oil Company" .means "The Burmah Oil Com.pany 35 
Limited", a company incorpora~d in Scotland and having its regis-
tered office at 48, St. Vincent Street, Glasgow, Scotland; 
(c) "Government company" means a company as deftned in sec-
tion 617 of the Companies Act, 1956; 1 of 1958. 
«(I) "notification" means a notification published in the Ofticial40 
Gazette; 
(e) "Oil India" means the Oil India Limited, being a company as 
defined in the Companies Act, 1956, and having its regi&te~ office 1 of 1958 . 
. at Duliajan, District Dibrugarh; 
(1) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act; 45 
(g) "specified company" means a company Specified in clause (A): . e '.' I 

1 of 1958. 
1 of 195(1. 
5 
JO 
("> "two companies" means,-
(i) the Assam Oil Company Limited, a company incorporated 
in the United Kingdom and having its registered office at' Burmah 
House, Pipers Way, Swindon, Engl~nd; and 
(ii) "The Burmah Oil ,Company (India Trading) Lmuted", a 
company incorporated in Scotland and having its regjstered office 
at 48, St. Vincent Street, Glasgow. Scotland, 
being foreign companies within the meaning of section 591 of the 
Companies Act, 1956; 
(i) words and expressions used herein and not defined but deftned 
in th~ Companies Act, 1956, have the meanings respectively ass~gned 
to them in that Act. . 
CHAPTER II 
ACQUISITION 0,. THE SHARES OF OIL INDIA HELD BY BURMAH OIL COMPANY 
IS 3. (l) On the appointed day, all the shares in the cap~tal Of Oil fndia 
held by Bunnah Oil COmpany shaU, by virtue of this Act, "'nd trans-
ferred to, and vested in, the Central Government. 
(2) All the shares which have vested in the Central Government ~er 
sub-section (1) shall, by force of such vesting, be freed and discharged of 
20 all trusts, liabilities, obligations, mortgages, charges, liens and otber en-
cumbrances affecting them. 
(3) Any dividend payable by Oil India to the shares which. hay. vested 
in th,e Central Government under sub-section (1) in respect of any; period 
beginning fi"Qm the 1st day of January, 1977, shan be payable to the 
2 S Central Government. 
4. _ (1) For the purpose- of enabling Oil India to function as a Gov,rn-
rnent company, the Central Government may, by notift~tiQn, make such 
8.1Mnrlmenta in the memorandwn. and articles of association of that com .. 
pany and such other provisions as it may consider necessary. 
30 (2) Any amendments in the memorandum and articles of association 
of Oil India and any other prOVisions made under sub-section (1) shall 
have- effect notWithstanding anything contained in the Companies Act, 
Transfer 
and vest-
ing at 
certain 
.h-ares of 
Oil India 
in the 
Central 
Govern-
ment. 
Manage-
ment of 
Oil India. 
I of le8. 1956. 
3S 
CHAPTER'III . 
AoQt1ISl'l'ION OI! TIIB UNDERTAKINGS OF THE TWO COMPANIES 
S. OIl the appoiDted day, the right, title and interest of each of the 
two'-eOlllp8llies in relation to- its undertakings in India shall, by virtue- of 
tMs Act, at_d, transferred to, and vested in, the Central Government. 
Transfer 
and vest .. 
ing in the 
Central 
Govern-
ment ot 
the under-
takings 
in India 
of the two 
com-
panies. 

Genera1 
effect of 
vestinI. 
t. (l) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (Z), the undertakinas of 
each specified company shall be deemed to incllolde all assets, rights, 
powers, authorities and privileges and all property, mov'!ble and immov-
able, including any designs, trade marks, trade names, styles of labelling, 
station decor or any distinctive colour schemes, cash balances, reserve 5 
funds, bok debts, investments and all other rights and interests in, or 
alisblg out of, such property as were, immediately before the appointed 
day, in the ownership, possessiOn, power or control of the specified 
company, in relation to 1ts undertakings in India, and all books of 
account, registers, records and all other docu,ments of whatever nature 10 
relating thereto and shall also be deemed to include aU borrowings, 
liabilities (including the liability for the payment of taxes, if any, and for 
the payment of any pension and other pensionary benefits to the persons 
employed in relation to its undertakings in India) and obligations of 
whatever kind of the specified company in relation to its undertakings 15 
in India; 
Provided. that. remittances outside India of any mone~. for the payment 
of pension or other pensionary benefits shall be subject to the rules and 
regulations for the time being in force in relation to such remittances. 
(2) The undertakings in India of ''The Burmah Oil Company (India 20 
Trading) Limited" shall not include the shares held by the said company 
in the Tin Plate Company of India Lirni~d, a companx as defined in the 
Companies Act, 1956, and haVing its registered office at 4, Bankshall 1 ot 1958. 
Street, Calcutta-700001. 
. . (3) The profiti earned, or the losses suffe'1"ed, as the case may be, by 2 5 
each specified company in relation to its undertakings in India from the 
1st day of January, 1977, shall be payable to, or, as the case may be, borne 
by, the Central Government. 
'4) Unless otherwise expressly provided by this Act, all deeds, bonds, 
aereements, powers of attorney, grants of legal representation and other 30 
instruments of whatever nature in relation to the undertakiogs in India 
of a specified company subsisting or having effect immediately Defore 
the appointed day, and to which the specifted company is a party 01'1 
which are in favour of the specified company sball be of as full force 
and effect against or in favour of the Central Government and may be 35 
enforced. or acted as fully and effectively as if ion the place of the speci-
fled company, the Central Government had been a party thereto or as 
if they had been iSSued in favour of the Central Government. 
(5) If, on the appointed r\ay, any Buit, appeal or other proceed~ng of 
whatever nature (including proceeding before any authority) in rela- 40 
tion to the undertakings in India of a specified company which have been 
transferred to, and vested in, the Central Government under sec-
tiQn 5, is pending by or against that specified company, the same shall 
not abate, be discontinued 'or be, in any way, prejudicially affected by 
reason of the transfer of the undertakings in India of the specified 45 
company or of anything contained in this Act but the suit, appeal or 
other proceeding may be continued, pro~uted 'lnd enforced by or 
against the Central Gov~rnment. 
(6) The Promotion Agreement and Supplemental Agreement enter-
ed into on the 14th day of January, 1p58 aDd Ithe 16th day of J'ebl'U8l'J", 0 
1959, respectively, to which the Central Government, the Burmah on 5 

" a 
Company ·Ilhd the Assam Oil Company Limited were parties, and th~ 
Adopting Agreement and the Second Supplemental Agreement entered 
into on the 14th day of March, 1959 and the 27th day of July, 1961, res-
pectively, to which the C~ntral Government, the Burmah Oil Com) my, 
!; the Assam Oil Company Limited an:d Oil India Limited, were parties 
shall be deemed to have been .terminated with effect from the 1st day 
of January, 1977, and accordingly the 'rights, liabUities and obligations 
arising out of such Agreements shall be deemed to have been extinguish-
ed on and from that date: 
10 Provided that clause 12 of the said Second Supplemental Agree-
ment shall, in so far as it relates to the rights, liabilities and obligations 
of Oil India Limited, continue in force up to and inclusive of the financial 
year of that company ending on the 31st day of March, 1982. 
L 
7. (1) Every right or interest in respect of any property in India Special 
'5 (including a right under any lease or under any right of tenancy or provi-
any right under any arrangement to secure any premises for any pur- sions as. 
pose), which a specified company held, immediately before the t~ hertain 
appointed day, shall, notwithstanding anything contained in any other :~d t6inte _ 
law or in any agreement or instrument relating to such right or in- rests 
:20 terest, vest in, and be held by, the Central Government on ami after held by 
that day on the same terms and conditions on which the specified com~ the sped-
pany would hav~ held it, if no negotiations had taken place for fled. com-
the acquisition by the Central Government .)f the undertakings in India ~:;le:h=e­
of the specified company or, as the case may be, if this Act had not ap;'inted 
!:IS been passed. . day. 
(2) If at any time ::lfter the 2nd day of February, 1974 (being the 
date (m which. the Central Government's policy for acquiring iunder-
takings engaged in the production, marketing or distribution of petro-
leum products was made known) and before the appointed r\ay a 
30 specified company surrendered or otherwise relinquished any right 
or interest in respect of any property in India (including a r.ight under 
any lease or under any right of tenancy or a right under any arrange-
ment to secure any premises for any purposes), then, for the purpOses 
3 of this Act, notwithstanding anything oontained in any other law or 
5 in any Ilgreement or instrument relating to such righ~ or interest, the 
Central Government shall, on and after the appointed day, be entitled 
to such right or interest on the same terms and conditions on which 
the specified company would have been entitled to such right or 
40 interest if it had not surrendered or otherwise relinquished such right 
or interest and this Act had not been passed: 
Provided that nothing in this sub-section shall apply to any right or 
interest surrendered or otherwise relinquished by the specified company: 
before the appointed day for sufficient monetary consideration. 
(3) On the expiry of the term of any lease, tenancy or arrangement 
45 referred to in sub-section (1) or sub-section (2), such lease or tenancy 
or arrangement shall, if so desired by the Central Government, be re-. 
newed or continued, so far as may be, on the same terms and conditions 
on which the lease or tenancy or arrangement was originally granted 
50 or entered into. 
8. (1) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that the pro-
d ha Removal visions of sections 5, 6 an 7 s 11 apply to the extent to which any of doubts. 

Power 
of Celt-
tral 
Govern-
ment to 
direct 
vesting 
of the 
under-
takings 
of speci-
fied com-
panies in 
one 
or more 
Govern-
ment 
com-
panies. 
l'aymen\ 
of 
amount 
to 
Burmah 
Oil 
Com-
pany. 
property . appertains to the bustnesa carried on by each specifled 
~ompany in India; and to the rigJlts and powers acquired., and to deb., 
liabilities and obligations incuned, and to c<m.tracts, agreements and 
other instruments made, by the specified company in India, and to 
proceedings relating to those matters pendini, in any court 01" tribUAal S 
or before any other authority, in India. 
(2) If any question arises as to whether any pl'operty appertained, 
imlnQdiately before the appointed day, to any business of a specified 
company in India or whether any rights, powers, debts, liabilities 
or obligations were acquired or incurred or any contract, agreement or 10 
other instrument was made by a specifien company for the pur-
puses of its business in India, or whether any documents relate to those 
purposes, or whether the provisions of section 7 apply in relation to any 
property, the question shall be referred to the Central Government which 
shall, after &iving a reasonable opportunity of being heard to the persons. I S 
interested in the matter, decide it in such manner as it may think fit. 
9. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in sections 6, 6 and 7, 
the Central Government may, subject to such terms and con"ditions as it 
may think fit to impose, direct, by notification, that the right, title and-in-
teTp.st and the liabilities of each specilied cc.mpclny i~ reJattOll to tts SlO 
undertakings in India which have vested in that Government under 
section 5 shall, instead of continuing to vest in the Central Government, 
vest in one or more Government companies either on the date of the 
notification or on such earlier or later date (not being a date earlier 
than the appointed day) as may be specified in the notification. "5 
(2) When the right, title and interest and the liabilities of a speci-
fied company in relation to its undertakings in India vest in one or 
more Government companies under sub-section (1), all the rights ann lia-
bilities of the Central Govenunent in relation to such underta1d.ngs shall, 
on and from the date of such vesting, be deemed to have become the 30 
rights and liabilities, respectively, of the Government company or 
companies. 
(3~ The provisions of sections 5, 6 and 7 shall, so far as may be, ap-
ply in relation to such Government company Or companies as they apply 
in relation to the Central Government and for this purpose references 35 
therein to the "Central Government" shall be construed as references 
to such Government company or companies. 
- " CHAPI'ER IV 
PAYMENT OF AMOUNT 
10. (1) For the tr8Dlfer to, and vesting in, the Central Gover'lmlent 40 
under sediOD 3 of the shares of Oil India, and for the ~sfer to, _d 
vesting in, the Central GovernmeDt UJIAIer seetion 5, of the riPt, title 
and interMt of eaeh· ~peei&ed company in relation to its undertakinp In 
Iadla, there shall be paid by the Central Government an aurepte 
amount of rupees twenty-one crores Il'I1d ftfty·six lakha, free of tax., to 45 
the Burmah Oil Company and such amount shall be allowed to be remit-
ted'. that company in one instalment in pound sterling calculated at 
the rate of exchange in force on the date of such remitt:aDee. 
(2) Where the amount speeifled in sub-section () is not paid on or 
beforetta.·15th day of Oetoher, 1981, it shall eory Ample lntel'f'Alt, flee of So 
Wtes, at.tM· rate of «debt per cent. 1P"'anAum bam that .tate, till the 
date of itl ..,ment. •• 

7 
CHAPl'ER V 
PRoVISIoNS RELATING TO EMPLOYEES 
11. (1) Every whole-time officer or other employee of a specified 
company who was, immedfately - before the appointed day, employed 
5 by that company in connection with its undertakings in India, 
and every whole-time officer or other employee of a specified company 
who was, immediately before the appointed day, temporarily hold-
ing any assignment outside India shall, on the appointed day, 
.become an ,ofticer or other employee, as the case may be, of the 
10 Central Government or the concerned Government company (hereinafter 
referred to as -the successor Government company) in which the right, 
title and interest of the specified company in relation to its undertakings 
in India· have vested under this Act and shall hold office or service under 
the Central Govemment, or the successor Government company, as the 
J 5 case maybe, on the same terms and conditions and with the same 
rights to pensi'on, gratuity and other matters as would have been admis-
sible to him if there had been no such vesting and shall continue to do 
'0 unless and until his employment under the Central Government or 
the successor Government company is duly termi'nated or until his 
20 remunerati<m and conditions of service are duly altered by the Central 
Government or the successor Government company., 
(2). Subject to rules made in this behalf under section -22, every 
whole-time officer or other employee of Oil India who was, immediately 
before the appointed day, employed by it in India, and every 
25 whole-time officer or other employee of on India w:ho was, immediately 
before the appointed day, temporarily holding any assignment outside 
India shall, on and from that day, continue to be an officer or oUler 
employee of on Indfa on the same terms and conditions and with the 
same rights to pension, gratuity and other matters as are admissible to 
30 him immediately before that day and shall contmue to hold such oftlce 
unless and until his employme'nt 'UJlder Oil India is duly terminated 
or -until ,his remuneration and conditions of service -are duly altered by 
Ulat company. 
(3) If any question arises as to whether any person was a whole-time 
35 officer or other employee of a specified company, or as to whether 
any ofticer or other employee was employed wholly or mainly in con-
nection with the ,undertakings of that company in India 
immediately Oelore the appointoo day, or whether any whole-time officer 
or other employee Of a specified company was temporarily hold-
40mg' any 881ignment outslde India; the question shall be referred, within 
a period of two years from the appointed day, to the Central Government 
whicb shall, after giving an opportunity of being heard to the person 
concerned in the matter, decide i't in such manner as it thinks fit and 
such decisIon shall be final. 
45 (4) NotWIthstanding anything contained in tfre Industri'al Disputes 
!lit? Act, 1947, the Payment of Gratuity Act, 1972, or in any other law fOT 
! 1972. the time 'being in force, the transfer of the services of any 'officer or 
otberemployee, \ under sub-section (1), shall not. entitle any such officer 
or otneremployee to any compensation or gratuIty under those Acts or 
81leh other law and no such claim shall be entertained by any court, 50 .' tribunal or other authority. 
Transfer 
of ser-
vice of 
existing 
emplo-
yees of 
the speci-
fied com_ 
panies. 

Provi-
dent, 
super-
annua-
tion, 
welfare 
fund, 
etc. 
meet of 
Act On 
other . 
law •. 
Duty to 
deliver 
possession 
of pro-
perties, 
etc. 
8 
12. (1) Where a provident, superannuation, welfare or other fund 
has been established by a specified company for the beneftt of 
the persons employed by it in connection with its undertakings in India, 
or for the benefit of such persons and persons employed by Oil India, 
the moneys relatable to the employees--
(a) whose services are transferred by or under this Act to the 
Central Government or the successor Government company, or 
as the case may be, continued with Oil India, or 
(b) who are in receipt of pension or other pensionary benefits 
'mmediately before the appointed day, . 10 
shall, out of the moneys standing, on that day, to the credit of such 
provident, superannuation. welfare or other fund, stand transferred to, 
and vested in, the Central Government or the successor Government 
company. or Oil India, as the case may be. free from any trust that may 
have been constituted by the specified company in respect thereof. 15 
(2) The moneys whlch stand transferred, under sub-section (1), to 
the Central Government or the successor Government company or 011 
India shall be dealt with by the Central Government or that company, 
or Oil India, as the case/may be, in such manner as may be prescribed. 
(3) The successor Government company or Oil India, as the case ~o 
may be, shall. as soon as may be after the'8ppointed day, 'constitute, in 
respect of the moneys and other assets which are transferred to, and 
vesten. in, it under this section, one or more trusts having objects . 88 
similar to the objects of the existing trust, as in the circumstances may 
be· practicable; so. 110wever. that the rights and interests of the beneft- 2S 
ciaries of the trust referred to In, sub-secti'on (1) are not, in any way, 
prejudiced or diminisned. 
(4) Where all the monpvs and other assets belon~ng to an existing 
trust are transferred to, and vested in. the Central Government, or the 
succ~ssor Government company or Oil, India under this section, the 30 
trustees of such-trust shall. as from the date of such vesting. stand dis-
charged from the trust except as respects things done of omitted to be 
done before the date of such vesting. 
CHAPl'ER VI 
MISCELLANEOUS 
13. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding any-
thing inconsistent therewith contained in anv. other law for the time 
being in force or in any instrument havinsz effect. by virtue of any law 
other than this Act or iR any decree or order of any court, tribunal or 
35 
other authority. 40 
14. (1) Where any property appertaining to any undertaking fn India 
of a specified company has been transferred to, and vested in, the 
Central Government 01" the successor Government company under this 
Act,-
(4) every person in whose possession, custody or control any 4S 
sucll property may be, shall. on a demand by the Central Govem-
ment or the successor Government company, as the case may be, 
deliver the property to the Cent;al. Government ot thg' successor . . / 
Government company, as the cf!se may be, forthwith; 

• 
9 
(b) &IU' penon who. immediately before such vesting, hal fD 
~ ~ion, ~tody or control any books, documents or other 
papers relating to the undertakings in India of the speci1led. com-
pany, shall be liable to account for the said books, documents and 
5 papen.t,o the Central Government or the successor Government 
company, as the cue may be, and shall deliver them. up to the Cen-
tral G<wemment or that company or to such person as the Central 
GOvemmeJlt or that company may authorise in this behalf. 
(2) Without prejudice to the other, provisions contained in this 
to section. it shall be lawful for the Central Government or the successor 
Government company to take all necessary steps for taking possession 
of·all propieFties, which have been transferred to, and vested in, it under 
'Jthts Act. 
15. (1) Every contraot, other than an Agreement referred to jn sub-
J S section (6) of section 6, entered into by a specified company for 
fJlY ~ce, sale or supply in India, and in force immediately before 
t,he ~p»ointed day, shall, unless terminated under sub-section (2), with-
in a ~ of two years from the appointed day, continue to be of full 
f~rce and ~ect against or in favour of the Central Government or, as 
20 the case may be, the successor Government company. 
«S) The Central Government may, if it is satisfied that any contract· 
reftMnd ,to in sub-section (1) is uncluly onerous or has been entered into 
in bad faith or is detrimental to the interests of that Governmellt or the 
successor Government company, as the case may be, by order in writing, 
85 either terminate such contract or make such alterations or modifications 
,thwein as it may think fit: 
Provided that the Central Government shall not terminate any con-
tract or make any alteration or modification therein except after giving 
to the parties to the contract, a reasonable opportunity of being heard 
30 and except after recording in writing, its reasons for such termination, 
alteration or modification, as the case may be. 
35 
45 
16. Any pe~n who,-
(a) having in his l>O'8e8sion, custody or control any property 
forming part of any undertaking in India of a specified company; or 
~Uy withl101ds such property from the Central Government 
or the. t;uccessor Gov~t company; or 
, (b) ,wrongfully obtains possession of or retains any property 
~~g part of any undertaking in India of a specified company; or 
.Jc) wilfully w~thholds or fails to furnish to the Central Govern-
.~ntor. tbe' succ~ssor P9ver~~t ~ompany or any person specified 
. by theCentfal Goyernment or that company, any books, documents 
or other papers re'!-ating to any undertaking in India of a 
-speeffted company which may be in his posseS$ion, custody or con-
trol; or . 
(d) fails to deliver to the Central Government or the successor 
,Gpv~~Qlel;lt,:co~any, .any assets, books of account, registers or o~ 
. ~~~ts ,In his possession, custody or control relating to any 
undertaking in India of a specifted company; or 
(e) wrongfully ~moves or destroys, any property forming part 
Qf any·· uadePtaJdng in tndi~ of a sVe,cified com~ny shall be punishable 
Contr..AC\t 
to COD_ 
tinue 
unleu 
termlDat-
e;dby 
Central 
Govern-
ment. 
Pen'" ties. 

• 
10 
with imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years, or 
with fine which may extend to ten thousand rupees, or with both. 
Offences 
by com. 
panies. 
17 (1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a 
comp~y, every person who. at the time the offence was commi~ cr: 
in charge of and was responsible to, the company for the co u eo. 
the business 'of the company, as well as thecom.pany, shall be .deem 
to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded agamst and 
s 
punished accordingly: 
Protection 
of action 
taken' in 
good 
faith. 
Cognizance 
of 
offences, 
Indemnity, 
Power to 
remove 
dlfftculties. 
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render any 
such person liable to any punishment, if he proves that the offence WSI 10 
committed without his knowledge or that he had exercised all due 
diligence to prevent the commission of such offence. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), where 
any offence under this Act has been committed by a company and it is 
proved that the offence has been committed with the consent or COIl- 15 
nivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of, any director, 
manager, secretary or other officer of the company, such director, mana-
ger, secretary or other officer shall be deemed to be guilty of that offence 
and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly. 
Explanation.-For the purposes of this section-
(a) "company" means any body corporate and includes a firm 
or other' association of individuals; and 
(b) "director", in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm. 
18. No suit, prose;;ution or other legal proceeding shall lie against 
20 
the Central Government or the successor Government company or any 25 
of its officers or other employees for anything which is in good faith 
done or intended to be done under this Act. 
_ 19. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of· Criminal 
Procedure, 1973, no court shalf take cognizance of any offence against 
this Act except on a complaint, in writing, made by the Central Govern- 30 
ment or any officer authorised in this behalf by that Government. 
20. Every officer of the Central Government and every ofticer or 
other employee of the successor Government company shall be indem .. 
nified by the Central Government or the $uccessor Government com-
pany, as the case may be, against all losses and expenses incurred by 3S 
him in, or in relation to, the discharge ot his duties under this Act excep~ 
such as have been caused by his own wilful act Ql' default. . ~'" " 
21. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this 
Act, the Central Government may, by order, not inconsistent with the 
provisions of this Act, remove the diftlculty: .' 
Pro\'ided that no such order. shall be made ·after the expiry. of .' 
period of. two years from the 'appointed day. 

II 
zz. (1) The Central Government may, by notification, make rules to 
carry out the provisions of this Act. 
(2) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act 
shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of 
S Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which 
may be comprised in o,ne session or· in two or more successive sessions, 
and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the ses-
sion or the·· successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making 
any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should 
10 not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified 
form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such 
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of 
anything previously ~ne under that rule. 
Power to 
make 
rules. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASO:t(S 
The BUl'mah Oil Company Limited, a foreign company, has at present 
the ownership of, and control over, a significant portion of the petroleum 
"Products produced, marketed and distributed in India. The said company 
bolds 50% of the shares of Oil India Limited. an Indian company, 
engaged in the exploration and production of crude oil and gas. On~ of 
the subsidiaries of The Bunnah Oil Company Limited, namely, the Assam 
Oil Company Limited, a company incorporated in England, is engaged. in 
the production of crude oil and gas, refining of crude oil and marketmg 
and cUstribution of petroleum products. Another of its subsidiaries, The 
Burmah Oil Company (India Trading) Limited, a company, incorporated 
in Scotland, was engaged in the marketing of petroleum products up to 
1965 and thereafter its marketing activities were transferred to the Assam· 
Oil Company ami the marketing assets of The Burmah Oil Company (India 
Trading) Limited are now being utilised by the Assam Oil Company 
Limited on a rental basis. 
In implementation of the policy for progressiV'ely securing that the 
ownership and control of the products of the nation's petroleum resources 
are vested in the State and thereby so distributed as best to subserve the 
common good, Government entered into negotiations with The Bunnah 
Oil Company Limited with a view to acquiring 50% of the shares 
of Oil India Limited held by it and the undertakings in India of the Assam 
Oil Company Limited with a view to acquiring 50 per cent of the shares 
Limited. After d,t-tailed negotiations, it was agreed, inter a.lia., that the 
acquisition of the aforementioned shares and undertakings should be 
effected by an Act of Parliament. 
The Bill provides for the following matters, namely:-
(i) Acquisition of all the shares of Oil India held by The Dunnah 
Oil Company Limited and of the undertakings in India of the Assam 
Oil Company and The Bunnah Oil Company (India Trading) Limit-
ed. Although the physical transfer of the aforementioned sbares and 
undertakings shall take place on the date to be notified by the Gov-
ernment when the amount for the acquisition will also be paid, 
the transfer shall be deemed to be effective from 1st January, 1977, 
for the purpose of payment. of dividends on the said shares of Oil 
India to the Central Gcvernment and for the taking over of the 
profits and losses of the undertakings Of the Assam Oil Company 
Limited and The Burmah Oil Company (India Trading) Limited 
by the Central Government. " 
(ii) Empowering the Central Government to direct the vest-" 
ing of the undertakings in India of the Assam Oil Company Limit-
ed and The Burmah Oil Company (India Trading) Umited so 
acquired in a Government company or Government companies by 
notification. 

;:71 
13 
(iii) Transfer of the services of the existing employees of the 
Assam Oil Company Limited and The Burmah Oil Company (India 
Trading) Limited to the Central ~vernment or the said Govern-
ment company or companies. 
(iv) Continuance c'f the contracts entered into by the Assam 
Oil Company Limited and The Burmah Oil Company (India Trad-
ing) Limited for any service, sale or supply in India. 
The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects. 
Ni.'W DELHI; 
The 21st Au.gu.st, 1981 P. C. SETHL 
PRESIDENT'S RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLES 117 AND 2'74 
OF THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA 
[Copy of letter No. JS,(P) /7175-Vol. 18, dated the 22nd AugWtt, 1981 
£rom Shri p.e. Sethi, Minister of Petroleum, Chemicals anci.E.eF~ 
to thE! Secretary, Lok Sa bha] 
The President, having been informed of the subject matter filf tl1e Bill 
to provide for the acqtlisition of the shares of Oil India .Limited beld -by 
the Burmah Oil Company 'r..imited, and for the apquisition and transfer 
of .the .right, title .and ,interest of the Ass~ Oil Company ,Limited, anci. 
.the Bunnab Oil .Company (India Trading) Limited in l'ell\tloJl to their 
undertakings in India and thereby to secure that the ownership. and .con-
trol of cruci.e oil and gas produced by Oil India Limited arv:i of crude oil, 
(gas and petroleumprociucte produced by the undertakings in India of the 
Assam Oil Company Limited. and of the petroleum products marketed 
and rUstributed by the said undertakings and the undertakings in India 
of the Burmah Oil Company (India Trading) LimiteO, recommends under 
articles 117(1) and 274(1) of the Constitution of India, the introduction 
of the Bill in Lok Sabha, and also recommends unner article 117 (3) of 
the Constitution of India, the consideration of the Bill by Lok Sabba. 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Clause 3 of the Bill provicl.es that on the appointed day, all the shares 
in the capital of Oil India Limited held by The Burmah Oil Company 
Limited shall stand transferred to, and vested in, the Central Govern-
ment. These shares shall be freed and discharged of all trusts, liabili-
ties, obligations, mortgages, charges, liens and other encumbrances 
affecting them. Any dividend payable by Oil India Limited in respect 
of any period beginning from the 1st of January, 1977, shall also be 
payable to the Central Government. Clause 5 of the Bill provides that, on 
the appointed day, the right, title and interest of the Assam Oil Com-
pany Limited and The Burmah Oil Company (India Trading) Limited 
in relation to their undertakings in India shall stand transferred to, and 
vested in, the Central Government. The profits earned or the losses 
suffered by each of the aforesaid two companies in! relation to its under-
takings in India from the 1st of January, 1977, shall be payable to, or, as 
the case may be, borne by the Central Government. Clause 10(1) of the 
Bill proVides that for the transfer to, and vesting in, the Central Govern-
ment under section 3 of the shares of Oil tndia, and for the trans-
fer to, and vesting in, the Central Government under section 
5, of the right, title and interest of the Assam Oil Company Limited and 
The Burmah Oil Company (India Trading) Limited in relation to their 
undertakings in India, there shall be paid by the Central Government 
an aggregate amount of Rs. 21.56 crores, free of taxes, to The Burmah 
on Company Limited. Sub-clause (2) of clause 10 of the Bill provides 
that if the said amount is not paid on or before the 15th of Octo~r, 
1981, it will ca'l'TY simple interest at the rate of 8 per cent per annum 
from that date till the date of payment. It is proposed to pay the said 
amount to The Burmah Oil Company Limited, before the 15th of October, 
1981. The Bill would, therefO'l'e, involve a total non-recurring expenditure 
of Rs. 21.56 crores, free of taxes. 
2. The Bill, if enacted, wUl not involve any other recurring or non-
recurring expenditure. 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED L1!XlISLATION 
Clause 22 of the Bill seeks to confer on the Central Government the 
general rule making power for carrying out the provisions of the Bill 
when enacted. The power of making rules would be confined only to 
matters of detail and procedure. 
!!. The delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal 
character. 

LOKSABHA 
/I. 
BILL 
to provide in the public interest for the a::quisition of the shares of Oil 
India Limited held by "The Burmah Oil Company Limited" and for 
the acquisition and transfer of the right, title anrt interest of the 
Assam Oil Company Limited and "The Burmah Oil· Company (India 
Trading) Limited" in r~lation to their undertakings in India and 
thereby to secure that the ownership and control of crude oil anrt 
gas produced by Oil India Limited, and of crude oil, gas and petroleum 
products producen by the undertakings in India of the Assam Oil 
Company Limited and of petroIeum products marketed and distri-
buted by the said undertakings anrt the undertakings in India of "The 
Burmah Oil Company (IncUa Trading) Limited" are so distributed 
as best to subserve the common good. 
(Shri p. C. Sethi, 
Minieter of PetTo~m, 
Chemifcals and Fertilizer •. ) 