8ill No. 105 of 196z 
THE GIFT-TAX (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1962 
(As INTRODUCED IN Lolt SABRA 
ON 16m NOVEMBER, 1962) 

LOK SABHA . 
. ,. 
CORRIGENDA 
to 
THE GIFr-TAX (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1962 
(To be/As introduced in Lok Sabha) 
1. Paee 4, line 2,-
after "and" ~ 
2. Page 11, line 30,-
II ." , 
after " substituted" for 
3. Page 11, line 34,-
" " • ~ " It , 
.iw: "accoopanies" ~ "accompanied" 
4. Page 12, line 3,-
~ter "within" insert "the" 
5. P8€e 13, in the marginal heading to clause 23,-
~ Itsections" read n section lt 

for "ordnarily" ~ "ordinarily" 
7. Page 41, against line 32,-
.i:2!: "45 of 1960" read It 45 of 1860" 
8. Page 43, line 7 from bottom.-
after II rules" .c.mil "1" 
9. Correct line numbers on pages 5, 15 and 19. 
NEW DELHI, 
NO.!HUllb~J5" 1962 
- . Kartika -24-,--1884" TSal<a 1 

18 of 1958. 
11m No. 10$ of 1,6s 
THE GIFT -TAX (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1962 
(As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA) 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Gift-tax Act, 1958. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirteenth Year of the 
Republic of India as follows :-
1. (1) This Act may be called the Gift-tax (Amendment) Act, 1962. Short title 
and COID-
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Govern- menc:ement. 
S ment may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
10 
IS 
2. In section 2 of the Gift-tax Act, 1958 (hereinafter referred to Amendment 
IlS the principal Act),- olll.mora 2. 
(a) for clauses (ii), (iii) and (iv), the following clauses shall 
be substituted, namely:-
• (ii) "Appellate Tribunal" means the Appellate Tribunal 
constituted under section 252 of the Income-tax Act; 
(iii) "assessee" means a person by whom gift-tax or any 
other sum of money is payable under this Act and includes-
(a) every person in respect of whom any proceeciiDl 
under this Act has been taken for the determination of 
gift-tax payable by him or by any other penon or the 
amount of refund due to him or such other -person; 
(b) every person who is deemed to be an uaesaee 
under this Act; 
(c) every person who is deemed to be an assessee in 
default under this Act; 
(iv) "assessment" includes re-assessment; 
(iva) "assessment year" means the period of twelve 
months commencing on the 1st day of April, every year;'; 
2017 (B) LS-l. 

r 
\ 
(b) Ifter clause (v), the following clause shan he ins,erted, 
namely:-
'(va) "charitable purpose" includes relief of the poor, 
education, medical relief, and the advancement of any other 
object of general public utility not involving the carrying on 5 
of any activity for profit;'; 
(c) after clause (vii), the following clause shall be inserted, 
namely:-
.• (vit4) "Director of Inspection" includes an Additional 
Director of Inspection, a Deputy Director of Inspection and 10 
an Assistant Director of Inspection;'; 
(d) for clause (xiv), the following clause shall be substituted, 
namely:-
'(xiv) "Income-tax Act" means the Income-tax Act, 
1961;'; IS 43 of 1961. 
(e) after clause (xvi), the following clauses shall be inserted, 
namely:-
'(xvia) "Inspector of Gift-tax" means an Inspector of 
Income-tax empowered to work as an Inspector of Gift-tax 
under section 11; 20 
(xvib) "legal representative" has the meaning assigned 
to it in clause (11) of section 2 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 
1908;'; 5 of 1908. 
(f) in clause (xx)-
(i) in sub-clause (b), for the words, brackets, letters and 2S 
figures "under sub-clause (a) of clause (11) of section 2 of 
the Income-tax Act or such period determined as the.previous 
year under sub-clause (b) of clause (11) of that section, 
whichever expired last", the words, brackets, letters and 
figures "under sub-clause (a) or sub-clause (b), as the case 30 
may be, of sub-section (1) of section 3 of the Income-tax Act 
or such period determined as the previous year under 
clause (c) of that sub-section, whichever expired last" shall 
be substituted; 
(ii) in sub-clause (c), for the words, brackets and figures 3S 
oic1ause (11) of section 2", the word and figure "section 3" 
shall be substituted. 
Amendment 3. In section 3 of the principal Act, for the words "financial year", 
of .~tiOD 3· the words "assessment year" shall be substituted. 

a 
,. In :-ection 5 of the principal Act,-
(i) in sUb-section (1), in clause (v), for the word, figures and 
letter "section I5B", the word and figures "section 88" shall be 
subst.ituted; 
5 (ii) in the Explanation, in clause (a), for the words "in the 
taxable territories within the meaning of the Income-tax Act", 
the following shall be substituted, namely:-
"within the meaning of section 6 of the Income-tax Act, 
subject to the modification that references in that section to 
10 India shall be construed as referenc~s to the territories to 
which this Act extends". 
IS 
%0 
35 
5. After section 7 of the principal Act, the following section shan Insertion . of new be Inserted, name]y:- section "lA. 
"7A. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 7, Power to 
th C .. f·· th bl transfer e ommlSSloner may, a ter glvmg e assessee a reasona e cases. 
opportunity of being heard in the matter, wherever it is possible 
to do so, and after recording his reasons for doing so, transfer any 
case from one Gift-tax Officer subordinate to him to another also 
subordinate to him, and the Board may similarly transfer any 
case from one Gift-tax Officer to another: 
Provided that nothing in this sub-section shall be deemed to 
require any such opportunity to be given where the transfer is 
from one Gift-tax Officer to another whose offices are situated in 
the same city, locality or place. 
(2) The transfer of a case under sub-section (1) may be 
made at any stage of the proceedings, and shall not render 
necessary the re-issue of any notice already issued by the Gift-tax 
Officer from whom the case is transferred. 
E;rplanation.-In this section the word 'case' in relation to 
any person whose name is specified in any order issued thereunder 
means all proceedings under this Act in respect of any year which 
may be pending on the date of such order, or which may have 
been completed on or before such date, and includes also all 
proceedings under this Act which may be commenced after the 
date of such order in respect of any year.". 
6. After section 9 of the principal Act, the following section shall Insertion 
be inserted namely:- of ~ew , sectlon 9A. 
"9A. (1) The Board may empower as many persons as it Directors 
thinks fit to exercise under this Act the functions of a Director of . 
f 1 t · InspectIOn. o nspec Ion. 

·4 
(2) A Director of Inspection shall be competent to make any 
enquiry under this Act and, for this purpose, shall have all the 
powers that a Gift-tax Officer has under this Act in relation to 
the making of enquiries. 
(3) Without prejudice to the provisions of sUb-section (2), 5 
a Director of Inspection shall exercise such other functions of 
any Gift-tax authority as may be assigned to him by the Board.". 
:U~~ 7. For section 11 of the principal Act, the following sections shall 
aectioD for be substituted, namely:-
IMdion 11. 
Control of 
Gift-tax 
autboritlu 
Amend-
1fteIlt of 
Iedlon 12. 
'11. ACommissioDer of Gift-tax may empower any Inspector 10 
of Income-tax to work as an Inspector of Gift-tax under any 
Gift-tax authority. and when he is so empowered, he shall per-
farm SIlCh functions in the execution of this Act as are assigned 
to him by the said Gift .. tax authority. 
llA. (1) Inspecting Assistant Commissioners shall be sub- IS 
ordinate to the Commissioner within whose jurisdiction they 
perform their functions and also to the Director of Inspection. 
(2) Gift-tax Officers shall be subordinate to the Commis-
sioner and the Inspecting Assistant Commissioner within whose 
"jurisdiction they perform their functions and also to the Director 20 
. of Inspection. 
(3) Inspectors of Gift-tax shall be subordinate to the Gift-tax 
Ofticers or other Gift-tax authority under whom they are 
empowered to work and to any other Gift-tax authority to whom 
the Aid offtcer or other authority is subordinate. 2S 
Explanation.-FOI' the purposes of sub-section (1), "Director 
of Inspection" does not include a Deputy Director of Inspection 
or an Assistant Director of Inspection and for the purposes of 
sub-section (2), "Director of Inspection" does not include an 
Assistant Director of Inspection.'. 30 
S. Section 12 of the principal Act shall be re-numbered as sub-
section (1) thereof and after the sub-section so re-numbered, the 
following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:-
"(2) Every Gift-tax Officer employed in the execution of 
this Act shall observe and follow such instructions as may be 3S 
iuu.ed. to him for his guidance by the Director of Inspection or by 
.. the Commissioner or by the Inspecting Assistant Commissioner 
within whose jurisdiction he performs his functions.", 

5 
t,·InChapter III of the principal Act, after section 12, the following Insertion 
section shall be inserted, namely:- ~!cri~~ 
. . . 12A. 
"12A. The Commissioner of Gift-tax and the Inspecting Power. of 
. Assistant Commissioner of Gift-tax shall be competent to make ~~~~l~f 
S any enquiry under this Act and for this purpose, shall have all Gifdt-tfax an 0 
. the powers that a Gift-tax Ofticer has under this Act in relation Inspecting 
to the making of enquiries " Assist~nt . . CommIS-
sioner of . Gift-taX . to make. enquiries under this Act. 
lJ., In section 13 of the principal Act,- Amend-ment of 
(i) in sub-section (1), after the words "taxable gifts", the section 13. 
ID· . words "or is assessable in respect of the taxable gifts made by 
any other person under this Act" shall be inserted; 
IS 
10 
. (ii) for sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be 
, 8Ub6tituted, namely:-
"(2) In the case of any person who, in the Gift-tax 
Officer's opinion, is assessable under this Act whether in 
respect of the gifts made by him or by any other person 
during the previous year, the Gift-tax Officer may, before 
the end pf the relevant assessment year, serve a notice upon 
him requiring him to furnish within thirty days from the 
date of service of the notice a return of the gifts made by 
him or by such other person during the previous year in the 
prescribed manner and setting forth such other particulars 
as may be prescribed.". 
11, After section 14 of the principal Act, the following section shall Infsertion o new sec-
2S be inserted, namely:- tion 14A. 
"14A. The return made under section 13 or section 14 shall !h~u~n t~Y 
35 
be signed and verified- be signed. 
(a) in the case of an individual, by the individual him-
self; where the individual is absent from India, by the 
individual concerned or by some person duly authorised by 
him in this behalf; and where the individual is mentally 
incapacitated from attending. to his affairs, by his guardian 
or by any other person competent to act on his behalf; 
(b) in the case of a Hindu undivided family, by the 
Karta, and, where the Karta is absent from India or is 
mentally incapacitated from attending to his affairs, by any 
other adult member of such family; 

Amend-
ment of 
section 15. 
8 
(c) in the case of a company, by 'the priacipal oftlcer 
thereof; 
(d) in the case of a firm, by any partner thereof, not 
being a minor; 
(e) in the case of any other association, by any member S 
of the association or the principal officer thereof; and 
(f) in the case of any other person, by that person or by 
some person competent to act on his behalf .... 
12. In section 15 of the principal Act,-
(i) in sub-section (1) ,- 10 
(a) for the words "is complete", the words lIis correct 
and complete" shall be substituted; 
(b) for the words "and determine the amount payable by 
him as gift-tax", the words "and determine the amount of 
gift-tax payable by him or the amount refundable to him on IS 
the basis of such return" shall be substituted; 
(ii) in sub-section (3), after the words "any specified points", 
the words "and after taking into account all relevant material 
which the Gift-tax Officer has gathered" shall be inserted; 
(iii) in sub-section (5), after the words "the Gift-tax Oftlcer", 20 
the words "after taking into account all relevant material which 
he has gathered" shall be inserted. 
Amend- 13. In section 16 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), for clause ment of section 18. (a), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:-
"(a) has reason to believe that by reason of the omission or 25 
failure on the part of the assessee to make a return under 
section 13 of the gifts made by him or any other person in respect 
of which he is assessable under this Act for any assessment year, 
or to disclose fully and truly all material facts necessary for 
assessment of the gifts made by him or such other person for 30 
that year any taxable gift has escaped assessment for that year, 
whether by reason of under-assessment or assessment at too low 
a rate or otherwise; or". 
Substitu- 14. For section 17 of the principal Act, the following section shall 
tion.of new be substituted namel""-sectIon for ' J • 3S section 17. 
Penalty 
for failure 
to furnill~ 
retur ..... · 10 
comply 
with 
notices and 
eonce_l .. 
ment of 
lifts, etc. 
"17. (1) If t.he Gift-tax Officer, Appellate Assistant Com-
missioner, Commissioner or Appellate Tribunal, in the course of 
any proceedings under this Act, is satisfied that any person-
(a) has without reasonable cause failed to furnish the 
return required to be furnished under sub-section (1) of 40 
section 13 or by notice given under sub-section (2) of 
section 13 or section 16 or has, without reasonable cause, failed 

, 
to furnish it within the time allowed and in the mader 
\ 
required by Bub-section (1) of section 13 or by such notice, 
as the case may be, or 
(b) has without reasonable cause failed to comply with 
S a noUce under sub-section (2) or sub-section (4) of section 15; 
or 
10 
IS 
20 
3S 
(c) has concealed the particulars of any gift or deli-
berately furnished inaccurate particulars thereof, he or it 
may, by order in writing, direct that such person shall pay 
by way of penalty-
(i) in the cases referred to in clause (a), in addition 
to the amount of gift-tax payable by him, a sum equal 
to two per cent. of the tax for every month during which 
the default continued, but not exceeding in the aggregate 
fifty per cent. of the tax; 
(ii) in the cases referred to in clause (b), in addition 
to the amount of gift-tax payable by him, a sum which 
shall not be less than ten per cent. but which shall not 
exceed fifty per cent. of the amount of the tax, if any, 
which would have been avoided if the return made by 
such person had been accepted as correct; 
(iii) in the cases referred to in clause (e), in addition 
to any gift-tax payable by him, a sum which shall not 
be less than twenty per cent. but which shall not exceed 
one and half times the amoqnt of the tax, if any, which 
would have been avoided if the return made by such 
person had been accepted as correct. 
(2) No order imposing a penalty under sub-section (1) shail 
be made unless the assessee has been heard or has been given a 
reasonable opportunity of being heard. 
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in clause (iii) ot 
sub-section (1), if in a case falling under clause (e) of that sub-
section, the minimum penalty imposable exceeds a sum of rupees 
one thousand, the Gift-tax Officer shall refer the case to the 
Inspecting Assistant Commissioner who shall, for the purpose, 
have all the powers conferred under this section for the imposition 
of penalty. 
(4) An Appellate Assistant Commissioner, Commissioner or 
the Appellate Tribunal, on making an order under this section 
imposing penalty, shall forthwith send a copy of the same to the 
Gift-tax Officer.". 

". insertion IS,; ,Aftle%: section 19 of the priDcipal Act, the followm, aection shall 
fi~~er9~· be inserted, lWnely:-
Assessment 
of persons 
leaving 
India. 
"19A. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 3, 
when it appears to the Gift-tax Officer that any individual may 
leave India during the current assessment year or shortly after , 
its expiry and that he has no present intention of returning to 
India, the gifts made by such individual during the ,period from 
the expiry of the previous year for that assessment year up to 
the probable date of his departure from India, shall be chargeable 
to gift-tax in that assessment year. 10 
(2) The taxable gifts made in each completed previous year 
or part of any previous year included in such period shall be 
chargeable to gift-tax at the rate or rates specified in the Schedule, 
and separate assessments shall be made in respect of each such 
completed previous year or part of any previous year. 15 
(3) The Gift-tax Officer may estimate the value of the gifts 
made by such individual during such period or any part thereof, 
where it cannot be readily determined in the manner provided 
in this Act. 
(4) For the purpose of making an assessment under sub- 20 
section (1), the Gift-tax Officer may serve a notice upon such 
individual requiring him to furnish, within such time, not being 
less than seven days, as may be specified in the notice, a return 
in the same form and verified.. in the same manner as a return 
under sub-section (2) o~ section 13, giving particulars of the gifts 25 
made by him during each completed previous year comprised in 
the period referred to in sub-section (1) and during any part ot 
the previous year comprised in that period; and the provisions 
of this Act shall, so far as may be, and subject to the provisions 
of this section, apply as if the notice were a notice issued under 30 
sub-section (2) of section 13. 
(5) The gift-tax chargeable under this section shall be in 
addition to the tax, if any, chargeable under any other prOVision 
of this Act. 
(6) Where the provisions of sub-section (1) are applicable, 35 
any notice issued by the Gift-tax Officer under sub-section (2) 
of section 13 or under section 16 in respect of any gift-tax cbarge-
able under any other provisions of this Act may, notwithstanding 
anything contained in sub-section (2) of section 13 or section 18, 
as the case may be, require the furnishing of the return by such 40 
individual within suah period, not being less than seven days, a. 
the Gift-tax Officer may think proper.". 

s 
10 
IS 
• 
16. In Chapter V of the principal Act, after section 21, the follow- Insertion 
. t' h II b . rt d 1 of new IDa sec Ion s a e IDse e , name y: - section 21A. 
"21A. (1) Where a Gift-tax Officer after using all due and Assess-
reasonable diligence cannot find the donor who has made any dment of onee 
taxable gifts, for the purpose of service of notice under sub- when 
section (2) of section 13 or under section 16, the Gift-tax Officer ~~~o~can­
may make an assessment of the value of all such taxable gifts found. 
made by him and determine the gift-tax payable by him and for 
this pu.rPose may, by the issue of the appropriate notice which 
would have had to be served upon the donor, require from the 
donee or donees any accounts, documents or other evidence which 
might, under the provisions of section 15, have been required from 
the donor. 
(2) Where any assessment in respect of the taxable gifts 
made by the donor has been made under sub-section (1), every 
donee shall be liable for the gift-tax so assessed: 
Provided that where the donees are more than one, they shall 
be jointly and severally liable for the amount of the gift-tax so 
assessed: 
20 Provided further that the amount of the gift-tax which may 
25 
be recovered from each donee shall not exceed the value of the 
gift made to him as on the date of the gift. 
(3) The provisions of sections 13, 14 and 16 shall apply to a 
donee as they apply to any person referred to in those sections.". 
17. In section 22 of the principal Act,-
(i) in sub-section (1)-
(a) in clause (a), the word "his" shall be omitted; 
(b) in clause (j)-
(l) for the words, brackets and figures "sub-section 
30 (1) of section 46 of the Income-tax Act", the words, 
brackets and figures "sub-section (1) of section 221 of 
the Income-tax Act" shall be substituted; 
(2) the word "or" shall be added at the end; 
(c) after clause (I), the following clauses ahall be 
3S iDaerteci, namely:-
"(9) objecting to an order of the Gift-tax Ofticer 
under section 34 having the effect of enhancing the 
auessment or reducing a refund or an order refusing to 
allow the claim made by the lUlSe~see under that section; 
or 
2017 (B) LS-2. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 22. 

Amend-
mentof 
.eetion23. 
10 
(h) objecting to any fine imposed. by the Gift-tax 
OfBcer under sUb-aectiOll (2) of .ection 36;"; 
(U) after sub-aection(5), the following sub-aections shall b. 
lDHneci, namely:-
"(5A) In disposing of an appeal, the Appellate Assistant S 
Commissioner may consider and decide any matter arising 
out of the proceediDgs in which the order appealed against 
was passed, nQtwithstanding that such matter \Vas not raised 
before the Appellate Assistant Commissioner by the appel-
lant. 10 
(5B) The order of the Appellate Assistant Commissioner 
disposing of the appeal shall be in writing and -shall state the 
points for determination, the decision thereon and the reaSODa 
for the decieion.". 
18. In section 23 of the principal Act,-
(i) lor sub-section (1), the following sub-section shall be 
substituted, namely:-
"(1) An assessee, objecting to an order passed by the 
Appellate Assistant Commissioner under section 17 or section 
IS 
22 or sub-section (2) of section 36 or to an order passed by 20 
the Inspecting Assistant Commissioner under sub-&ection 
(3) of section 17, may appeal to the Appellate Tribunal within 
sixty days of the date on which the order is cOJlUIlunicated 
to him."; 
(it) after sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be 25 
inserted, namely:-
U(2A) The Gift-tax OfBcer or the assessee, as the case 
may be, on receipt of notice that an appeal against the order 
of the Appellate Assistant Commissioner has been preferred 
under sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) by the other party, 30 
may, notwithstanding that he may not have appealed agains' 
such order or any part thereof, within thirty days of the 
receipt of the potice, file a memorandum of cross objections, 
verified in the prescribed manner, against any part of the 
order of the Appellate Asaistant Comm.iasioner and such 35 
memorandum shall be disposed of by the Appellate Tribunal 
as if it were an appeal presented within the time specifled in 
aub-lection (1) or lub-aection (2)."i 

u 
(iii) for sub-section (3), the folloWing Bub-section shall be 
IUbstituted, namely:-
"(3) The Appellate Tribunal may admit an appeal or 
permit the flling of a memorandum of cross objeetions after 
5 the expiry of the relevant period referred to in sub-section 
(1) or sub-section· (2) or sub-section (2A) if it is satisfled 
that there was sufficient cause for not presenting it within 
that period."; 
(iv) in sub-section (11), for the words, brackets, flgures and 
Il' letter "sub-sections (5), (7) and (8) of section SA of the Income-
tax Act", the words. brackets and flgures "sub-sections (1), (4) 
and (5) of section 255 of the Income-tax Act" shall be substituted. 
t9. In section 24 of the principal Act, to Bub-section (3), the Amend-
following Ezplanation shall be added, namely: - :~n~:~ 
IS "Ezpl/ln/ltion.~In computing the period of limitation for 
purposes of this sub-section, the time taken in giving an opportu-
nity to the assessee to be reheard under the proviso to section 
38 and any period during which any proc~ding under this sec-
tion is stayed by an order or injunction of any court shall be 
20 excluded.". 
!ft. In section 25 of the principal Act, for sub-section (1), the Amend-
following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:- =n~g~. 
"(1) An assessee objecting to an order passed by th~ Com-
missioner under section 17 or to an order of enhancement passed 
2S by him under section 24 may appeal to the Appellate Tribunal 
wfthin sixty days of the date on which the order is communicated 
to him.". 
21. In section 28 of the principal Act,- Amend-
ment 01 (i) for sub-sections (1) and (2), the following sub4erlions section 28. 
30 shall be substituted. namely:-
"(1) The assessee or the Commissioner may, within sixty 
days of the date upon which he is served with notice of an 
order under section 23 or section 23, by application in the 
p~bed fonn, accompanies, where the application is made 
35 by the assessee, by a fee of rupees one hundred require the 
Appellate Tribunal to refer to the High Court any question 
of law arising out of such order and, subject to the other 
provisions contained in this section, the Appellate Tribunal 
~hall, within one hundred and twenty days of the receipt of 
40 such application. draw up a statement of the case and refer 
it to the High Court. 

/ 
Insertion 
of new 
sections 
28A and 
28B. 
Tax to be 
paid not-
withstand-
ing refer-
ence, etc. 
Deftnition 
of High 
Court. 
12 
(2) The Appellate Tribunal may, if it is satisfied that the 
appUcant was prevented by sufficient cause from presenting 
the application within period specified in sub-section (1), 
allow it to be presented within a further period not exceeding 
thirty days."; 5 
(ii) after sub-section (3), the following sub-section shall be 
tnserted, namely:-
"(3A) If, on an application made under this section, the 
Appellate Tribunal is of the opinion that on account of a 
conflict in the decisions of High Courts in respect of any 10 
particular question of law, it is expedient that a reference 
should be made direct to the Supreme Court, the Appellate 
Tribunal may draw up a statement of the case and refer it 
through its President direct to the Supreme Court."; 
(iii) in sub-sections (4), (5) and (6), after the words "High 15 
Court", the words "or the Supreme Court" shall be inserted; 
(iv) for SUb-sections (7), (8) and (9), the following sub-sec-
tion shall be substituted, namely:-
"(7) The cost of any reference to the High Court or 
the Supreme Court which shall not include the fee for making 20 
the reference shall be in the discretion of the Court.". 
22. In Chapter VI of the principal Act, after section 28, the follow-
ing sections shall be inserted, namely:-
'28A. Notwithstanding that a reference has been made to the 
High Court or the Supreme Court or an appeal has been preferred 2S 
to the Supreme Court, tax shall be payable in accordance with 
the assessment made in the case. 
28B. In this Chapter, "High Court" meaD$-
(i) in relation to any State, the High Court of that State: 
(ii) in relation to the Union territories of Delhi and 30 
Himachal Pradesh, the High Court of Punj'ab; 
(m) in relation to the Union territories of Manipur and 
Tripura, the High Court of Assam; 
(iv) in relation to the Union territory of Andaman and 
Nicobar Islands, the High Court at Calcutta; 
(v) in relation to the Union territory of Laccadive, Mint-
coy and Amindivi Islands, the High Court of Ker.la.'. 
35 

5 
10 
IS 
20 
35 
13 
13. For section 29 of the principal Act, the following section shall ~ubstitu­
uon of neW be substituted, namely:- sections 
for 
section 29 
"29. Subject to the provisions of this Act, gift-tax shall be Gift-tax 
payable by the donor but when in the opinion of the Gift-tax :ly:~~~ 
Officer the tax cannot be recovered from the donor, it may be 
recovered from the donee: 
Provided that where the donees are more than one, they shall 
be jointly and severally liable for the amount of tax determined 
to be payable by the donor: 
Provided further that the amount of tax which may be 
recovered from each donee shall not exceed the value of the gift 
made to him as on the date of the gift.". 
M. For sections 31, 32 and 33 of the principal Act, the following Substitu-
sections shall be substituted namely:- tio~ of new , sections tor 
sections 31, 
32 and 33. 
"31. When any tax, interest, penalty, fine or any other sum Notice of 
is payable in consequence of any order passed under this Act, the demand. 
Gift-tax Officer shall serve upon the assessee a notice of demand 
in the prescribed form specifying the sum so payable. 
32. (1) Any amount sp,ecified as payable in a notice of demand Recovery 
under section 31 shall be paid within thirty-five days of the ~~d tax 
service of the notice at the place and to the person mentioned penalties. 
in the notice: 
Provided that, where the Gift-tax Officer has any reason to 
believe that it will be detrimental to revenue if the full period 
of thirty-five days aforesaid is allowed;he may, with the previous 
approval of the Inspecting Assistant Commissioner, direct that 
the sum specified in the notice of demand shall be paid within 
such period being a period less than the period of thirty-five days 
aforesaid, as may be specified by him in the notice of demand. 
(2) If the amount specified in any notice of demand under 
section 31 is not paid within the period limited under sub-section 
(1), the assessee shall be liable to pay simple interest at four 
per cent. per annum from the day commencing after the end of 
the period mentioned in sub-section (1). 
(3) Without prejudice to the provisions contained in sub-
section (2), on an application made by the assessee before the 
expiry of the due date under sub-section (1), the Gift-tax Officer 
may extend the time for payment or allow payment by instal-
ments subject to such conditions as he may think fit to impose 
in the circumstances of the case. 

Mode of 
recoyel')'. 
(4) It "the amount is not ,aid within the time ltmtted under 
sub-seetlon (1) or extended under sub-section (3), as the case 
may be, at the place and to the person mentioned in the said 
notice, the assessee shall be deemed to be in default. 
(5) If, in a case where payment by instalments Is allowed S 
under sub-section (3), the assessee commits default in paying 
anyone of the instalments within the time fixed under that sub-
o section, the assessee shall be deemed to be in default as to the 
whole of the amount then outstanding, and the other instalment 
or inBt8lments shall be deemed to have been due on the same 10 
date as the1nstalmentactually in default. 
(6) 0 Where ,the assessee has 'presented an appeal under section 
22, the Gift-tax Oftlcer may in his discretion and subject to such 
conditions as he may think fit to impose in the circumstances of 
the case, treat the assessee as not being in default in respect of IS 
the amount in dispute in the appeal, even though the time for 
payment has expired as long as such appeal remains undisposed 
of. 
33. The provisions contained in sections 221 to 227, 229, 231 
and 232 of the Income-tax Act and the Second and Third 20 
Schedules to that Act and any rules made thereunder snaIl, so 
far as may be, apply as if the said provisions were provisions of 
this Aet and referred to gift-tax and sums imposed by way of 
penalty, fine and interest under this Act instead of to income-tax 
and II11MS imposed by way of penalty, fine and interest under that 25 
Act and to Gift-tax Oftlcer and Commissioner of Gift-tax instead 
of to Ineome-tax OfBcer and Commissioner of Income-tax. 
J:~ I.-Any reference to sub-section (Z) or sub-
section (6) of section 220 of the Ineome-tax Act in the said 
provisions of 0 that Act or the rules made thereunder shall be 30 
construed as ~eferences to sub-sections (2) and (6) respectively 
of section 32 of this Act. 
!'xpl4natiO'n. I1.-The Tax Recovery Ofticer and the Tax 
Recovery Commissioner referred to in the Income-tax Act or the 
rules made thereunder shall be deemed to be the Tax Recovery 3.5 
Officer and the Tax Recovery Commissioner for the purposes of 
recovery of gift-tax and 'sums imposed by way of 'penalty, fine 
aJld interest under this AA'A.". 

5 
10 
J5 
20 
2S 
30 
11 
ZI. After Chapter VII of the principal Act, the followiniChapter Insertion 
Ihall be maerted namely: - of new , ~tel' 
"CHAPTER VITA 
RuUNDS 
33A (1) Where, as a result of any order passed in appeal or Refunda. 
other proceeding under this Act, refund of any amount becomes 
due to the assessee the Gift-tax Officer shall, except as otherwise 
provided in this Act, refund the amount to the assessee without 
his having to make any claim in that behalf. 
(2) Where an order giving rise to a refund is the IUbject 
matter of an appeal or further proceeding or where any other 
proceeding under this Act is pending, and the Gift-tax Officer is 
of the opinion that·the grant of refund Is likely to adversely 
affect the revenue, the Gift-tax Oftieer may, with the previous 
approval of the Commissioner withhold the refund till ncb time 
as the Commissioner may determine. 
(3) Where a refund is due to the assessee in pursuance of 
an order referred to in sub-section (1) and the Gift-tu Oftlcer 
does not grant the refund within a period of six months from 
the date of such order, the Central Government shall pay to the 
assessee simple interest at four per cent. per annum on the 
amount of refund due from the date immediately following the 
expiry of the period of six months aforesaid to the date on which. 
the refund is· granted. . 
(4) Where a refund is withheld under the provisions of sub-
section (2), the Central Government shall pay interest at the 
aforesaid rate on the amount of refund ultimately determined to 
be due as a result of the appeal or further proceedings for a period 
commencing after the expiry of six months from the date of the 
order referred to in that sub-section to the date the ref\md 11 
granted. 
(5) Where under any of the provisions of this Act, a refund 
is found to be due to any person, the Gift-tax Oftlcer, Appellate 
Assistant Commissioner or COmmiSSioner, as the case may be, 
• 
35 may, in lieu of payment of the refund, set off the amount to be 
refunded or any part of that amount, against the swn, if any, 
remaining payable under this Act by the person to whom the 
refund is due, after giving an intimation in writing to such .perIOn 
of the action proposed to be taken under this 1eC110D.". 

," .. ""'". 18 
Subatitu- 28. For section 34 of the principal Act, the followina section Iha11 
lion of new b b tit ted 1 . lection for e su s u ,name y.-
aection 34. 
Rectifica-
tion of 
miatakea. 
• 
• 
"34. (1) With a view to rectifying any mistake apparent 
from the record-
(a) the Gift-tax Officer may amend any order of assess- 5 
ment or of refund or any other order passed by him; 
(b) the Appellate Assistant Commissioner may amend 
any order passed by him under sub-section (l) of section 17 
or un.der section 22; 
(c) the Inspecting Assistant Commissioner may amend 10 
any order passed by him under sub-section (3) of section 17; 
(d) the Commissioner may amend any order passed by 
him under sub-section (1) of sectio:Q 17 or under section 24; 
(e) the Appellate Tribunal may amend any order passed 
by it under sub-section (1) of section 17 or section 23 or IS 
section 25. 
(2) Subject to other provisions of this section, the authority 
concerned-
(a) may make an amendment under sub-section (1) ot 
its own motion; and 20 
(b) shall make such amendment for rectifying any such 
mistake which has been brought to its notice by the assessee, 
and where the authority concerned is the Appellate Assistant 
Commissioner or the Appellate Tribunal by the Gift-tax 
Officer also. 25 
(3) An amendment, which has the effect of enhancing an 
assessment or reducing a refund or otherwise increasing the 
liability of the assessee, shall not be made under this section 
u,nless the authority concerned has given notice to the assessee 
of its intention so to do and has allowed the assessee a reasonable 30 
opportunity of being heard. 
(4)· Where an amendment is made under this section, an 
order shall be passed in writing by the Gift-tax authority COD-
cerned . 
(5) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (2) of section 33, 35 
where any such amendment has the effect of reducing the 
assessment, the Gift-tax Oftlcer shall make Bay refund which may 
be due to such assessee. 

s 
10 
IS 
20 
s of 1908. 
3S 
(6) Where any such amendment has the effect of enhancing 
the assessment or reducing a refund already made, the Gift-tax 
Officer shall serve on the assessee a notice of demand in the 
prescribed form specifying the sum payable, and such notice of 
demand shall be deemed to be issued under section 31 ami the 
provisions of this Act shall apply accordingly. 
(7) No amendment under this section shall be made after the 
expiry of four years from the date of the order sought to be 
amended.". 
27. In section 35 of the principal Act,- Amend-
mento! 
(i) after sub-section (2), the' following sub-section shall be section 811. 
inserted, namely:-
"(2A) If a person abets or induces in any manner another 
person to make and deliver an account, statement or declara-
tion relating to any gifts chargeable to tax which is false and 
which he either knows to be false or does not believe' to be 
true, he shaU, on conviction before a Magistrate, be puilish-
able with simple imprisonment which may extend to six 
months or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees 
or with both."; 
(ii) for the Explanation, the following ExpZanation shallbe 
substituted, namely:-
"ExpZanation.-For the purposes of this section, 'Magis-
tr:ate' means a Presidency Magistrate or a Magistrate of the 
first class.". 
28. For section 36 of the principal Act, the following section shall Substitu-
be substituted, namely:- tioD of new sec-
ti'onlor 
section 36. 
"36. (1) The Gift-tax Officer, the Appellate Assistant Com- Power 
missioner, the Commissioner and the Appellate Tribunal shall, rdei,arding 
h · A h h scovery, for the purposes of t 1S ct, ave t e same powers as are vested production 
in a Court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, when trying ~~~~etc. 
a suit in respect of the following matters, namely:-
(a) discovery and inspection; 
(b) enforcing the attendance of any person, including 
any officer of a banking company and examining him on oath; 
(c) compelling the production of books of account and 
other documents; and 
(d) issuing commissions. 
2017 (B) LS--3. 

16 
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions ot any other iaw for 
the time being in force, where a person to whom a summons is 
issued either to attend to give evidence or produce books of 
account or other documents at a certain place and time, inten-
tionally omits to attend or produce the books of account or S 
document at the place or time, the authority empowered to issue 
such summons may impose upon him such fine not exceeding five 
hundred rupees as it thinks fit, and fine so levied may be recovered 
in the manner provided in Chapter VII.". 
Amend- 29. To section 38 of the principal Act, the following proviso shall 10 
ment of section 38. be added, namely:-
"Provided that the assessee concerned may demand that 
before the proceeding is so continued the previous proceeding or 
any part thereof be reopened or that before any order of assess-
ment is passed against him, he be reheard.". IS 
~ubstitu- 30. For section 39 of the principal Act, the following section shall bon of new . section for be substituted, namely:-
section 39. 
Computa-
tion of 
period of 
limitation. 
"39. In computing the period of limitation prescribed for an 
appeal or an application under this Act, the day on which the 
order complained of was served and if the assessee was not 20 
furnished with a copy of the order when the notice of the order 
was served upon him, the time requisite for obtaining a copy ot 
such order, shall be excluded.". 
Amend- 31. In section 40 of the principal Act, after sub-section (2), the ment of section 40. following sub-sections shall be inserted, namely: - 2S 
"(3) After a finding of total partition has been recorded by 
the Gift-tax Officer under section 20 in respect of ~y Hindu 
family, notices under this Act in respect of the gifts made by the 
family shall be served on the person who was the last manager 
of the Hindu family, or if such person is dead, then on all sur- 30 
viving 'adults who were members of the Hindu family imme-
diately before the partition. 
(4) Where a firm or other association of persons is dissolved, 
notices under this Act in respect of the gifts made by the firm 
or association may be served on any person who was a partner 3S 
(not being a minor) or member of the association, as the case may 
be, immediately before its dissolution.". 

s 
10 
20 
19 
32. For section 41 of the principal Act, the following section shall Substitu-
be substituted namely' _ tion of new . , . section for 
section 41. 
"41. The provisions of sections 137 and 280 of the Income-tax Prohibi-
Act shall apply to the disclosure of particulars contained in all tl}' on of diSf-c osure 0 
accounts or in relation to statements, documents evidence or informa-
affidavits given, produced or obtained in connecti~n with or in tion. 
the course of any proceedings under this Act, as they apply to or 
in relation to similar particulars under that Act, subject to the 
modification that the reference to any income-tax authority in 
clause (iv) of sub-section (3) of section 137 of that Act shall be 
construed as a reference to any.Gift-tax authority.". 
33. In section 41A of the principal Act, in sub-section (3), after Amend-
clause (t.), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:- ~~~:f 
41A. 
"(ia) in the case of an assessee mentioned in clause (a) of 
sub-section (1) or in clause (b) of sub-section (2), who presented 
an appeal under sub-section (1) of section 23 against the order 
of penalty passed by the Inspecting Assistant Commissioner 
under sub-section (3) of section 17, until the appeal is disposed 
of by the Appellate Tribunal;". 
34. For section 43 of the principal Act, the following section shall ~r~~~ution 
be substituted, namely:'::"-' Be::t~on for 
sect10n 43. 
"43. An assessee who is entitled to or required to attend ~ror!r~ift: 
before any Gift-tax authority or the Appellate Tribunal in con- tax authori-
nection with any proceeding under this Act, except where he is ::h~~i sed 
required under this Act to attend in person, may attend by a repres nta-
person who would be entitled to represent him before any In- tives. 
come-tax authority or the Appellate Tribunal under section 288 
of the Income-tax Act.". . 
35. In section 45 of the principal Act, in clause (e), for the words, Amend-
30 brackets and figures "clause (i) of sub-section (3) of section 4", the meft o~5 
word and figure "section 11" shall be substituted. sec Ion . 
36. In section 46 of the princlJHll Act, for sub-section (4), the Amend-
followinlt sub-section shall be substituted. namely:- me~t of 
"(4) The Central Government shall cause every rule made sectIon 46. 
35 under this Act to be laid as soon as may be after it is made before 
each House of Parliament while it is in session for a total period 
of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two 
successive sessions. and. if, before the exPiry of the session in 
which it is so laid or the session immediately follOWing, both 
Houses agree in making any modifications in the rule or both 
Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall 
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no 
effect, as the case may be, so however that any such modification 
or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of ~y .. 
thing previously done under that rule.". 

20 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Income-tax law has been recodified in the Income-tax Act, 
1961. As the ba~dc pattern of the Gift-tax law is the same as that 
of the Income-tax law, it has become necessary to bring the provisions 
of the Gift-tax Act, 1958 in line with the'scheme of the Income-tax 
Act, 1961. 
It has also been found necessary to introduce certain changes in 
the provisions of the Gift-tax Act to meet the problems which have 
arisen in the working of the Act. The changes which are independent 
of those made as a result of the recodification of the Income .. tax Act, 
1961 are as follows:-
(1) Under the existing law gift-tax assessment proceedings 
can be taken against the donor only, the donee being liable to 
pay the tax after the liability has been determined and the 
amount of tax is found incapable of recovery from the donor. It 
is proposed to make the donee also lia'ble, where the donor cannot 
be found, for the assessment and payment of tax in respect of a 
gift subject to the limitation that the tax payable by the donee 
shall not exceed the value of the gift received by him. 
(2) Under the existing law the donees are liable to pay the 
tax determined as payable by the donor if it cannot be recovered 
from the donor. This liability is subject to the limitation of 
proportionate amount of tax on the value of gift received by the 
donee. It is proposed to amend the existing provision by limit-
ing the liability of the donee to the extent of the value of the gift 
received by him as on the date of the gift. 
(3) The absence of any power with the Commissioner of 
Gift-tax and the Central Board of Revenue to transfer the case 
of a gift-tax assessee without simultaneously transferring his 
income-tax case from one Gift-tax Officer to another has caused 
considerable administrative difficulties. With a view to remov-
ing these difficulties it is proposed to invest these authorities 
with power to transfer a case from one Gift-tax Oftlcer to another. 
The present Bill seeks to secure the above objectives. 
The Notes on Clauses explain in detail the various prOVisions of 
the Bill. 
Nzw DELHI; MORARJI DESAI. 
The 7th November, 1962. 

21 
Notes on Clauses 
Clause 2 (a) .-This clause substitutes the existing clauses (ii), 
(iii) and (iv) of section 2 by new clauses. 
(i) New clause (ii) brings the definition of "Appellate 
Tribunal" in line with the definition of the term in section 2(4) 
of the Income-tax Act, 1961. 
(ii) New clause (iii) corresponds to section 2(iii) of the 
existing Act, but the definition of "assessee" has been made more 
comprehensive on the lines of section 2(7) of the Income-tax Act, 
1961 so as to include all possible categories, e.g., persons who are 
themselves liable to pay tax on gifts made by them, persons 
liable to pay tax on gifts made by other persons and persons 
deemed under certain sections of the Act to be assessees or 
assessees in default. 
(iii) A definition of "assessment" has been inserted on the 
lines of section 2(8) of the Income-tax Act, 1961. 
(iv) It brings the definition of 'assessment year' ilJ. line with 
its definition as given in section 2(9) of the Income-tax Act, 1961. 
Clause 2(b).-A definition of "charitable purpose" has been 
inserted on the lines of section 2(15) of the Income;.tax Act, 1961. 
Clause 2 'c) .-Director of Inspection is not one of the authorities 
under the existing Act. This clause has been inserted to make the 
Director of Inspection an authority under the Act and to clarify that 
the term includes his deputies and assistants also. 
Clause 2(d).-Reference to the "Income-tax Act, 1922" has been 
substituted by reference to the "Income-tax Act. 1961". 
Clause 2(e).-Two new clauses (xvia) and (xvib) have been 
inserted in section 2 of the Act. 
(i) A definition of "Inspector of Gift-tax" has been given as 
he has been made one of the authorities under the Act. 
(Ii) The term "legal representative" has been defined on the 
. lines of section 2 (29) of the Income-tax Act, 1961 as in the exist- . 
ing Act there is no definition of this term although it is used in 
the Act. 
Clause 2 (I) .-In the definition of the term "previous year" refer-
ences to the provisions of the Income-tax Act, 1922 have been 
substituted by references to the corresponding sections of the Income-
tax Act, 1961. 
Clause 3.-Since the term "assessment year" has been defined in 
the Act, the words "every financial year" have been replaced by the 

22 
words "every assessment year" to clarify the intention. This brings 
the provisions in line with section 4 of the Income-tax Act. 1961. 
Clause 4-
Sub-clause (i) .-In section 5 (1) (v) reference to section 15B 
of the Income-tax Act, 1922 has been substituted by reference 
to the corresponding provision of the Income-tax Act, 1961. 
Sub-clause (ii) .-This clause seeks to bring the provisions 
regarding residence in line with the provisions of the Income-
tax Act, 1961, While making allowance for the fact that the Gift-
tax Act does not apply to the whole of India. 
Clause S.-This clause introduces a new section conferring on the 
Central Board of Revenue and the Commissioner power to transfer 
cases from one Gift-tax Officer to another. 
Clause 6.-This clause introduces a new section which authorises 
the Board to empower persons to exercise the functions of a Director 
of Inspection and defines those functions. 
CZause 7.-By this clause a new section 11 has been inserted which 
makes an Inspector of Gift-tax as an authority under the Act. The 
new section 11A substitutes the existing section 11 and is in line with 
section 118 of the Income-tax Act, 1961. 
Clause 8.-This clause introduces a new provision on the lines of 
section 119(2) of the Income-tax Act, 1961 making it obligatory on 
the Gift-tax Officer to follow the instructions issued by the Director 
of Inspection, Commissioner and the Inspecting Assistant Commis-
sioner within whose jurisdiction he performs his functions. 
Clause 9.-This clause introduces a new section conferring on the 
Commissioner and the Inspecting Assistant Commissioner powers 
similar to those conferred under section 135 of the Income-tax Act, 
1961 on like authorities for making enquiries. 
Clause lO.-This clause amends section 13 of the existing Act on 
the lines of section 139 of the Income-tax Act, 1961. It has been made 
clear that the provisions of section 13, apart from applying to a person 
who has made a gift, also apply to a person who is assessable in respect 
of a gift made by any other person. 
Ciause l1.-This clause introduces a new section which is intended 
to state· comprehensively the position as regards the persons who 
should sign and verify returns of gifts in respect of the various kinds 
of assessees. It is modelled on section 140 of the Income-tax Act, 1961. 
Clause 12.-This clause makes certain drafting changes in section 
15 of the Act to bring out that the amount of refund, if any, due to 
the assessee, ts sp~cifled, in the {lsse83ment order passed on the basis 

of a return found to be correct and complete. Sub-sections (3) and 
(5) of section 15 have also been amended to make it clear that the 
Gift-tax Officer shall, in framing an assessment, consider any material 
which he might have gathered independently. These changes bring 
the provisions of the section in line with those of sections 143 and 144 
of the Income-tax Act, 1961. 
Clause 13,-This clause makes a drafting change in section 16(i) 
(a) to clarify that it covers also the case ot an assessee who has to 
file a return in respect of gifts made by another person. It has become 
necessary as a consequence of the amendment made in section 13, 
CLause 14.-This clause replaces the existing section 17 by a new 
section to bring its provisions in line with the corresponding provi-
sions in sections 271 and 274 of the Income-tax Act, 1961. The changes 
made are:-
(i) In the existing Section 17 maximum penalty only is 
specified. The new section lays down both the minimum and the 
maximum penalties for various offences, 
(ii) The existing Section requires that the Gift-tax Officer 
should have previous approval of the Inspecting Assistant Com-
missioner for all penalty orders passed by him. Under the new 
provisions the Inspecting Assistant Commissioner himself will 
pass orders in cases falling under section 17 (1) (c) (deliberate 
concealment of particulars about gifts) where the minimum 
penalty imposable exceeds rupees one thousand. The need for 
obtaining previous approval of the Inspecting Assistant Com-
missioner where penalty order is to be passed by the Gift-tax 
Officer is dispensed with. 
Clause IS.-This clause introduces a new provision in the Act to 
enable the Gift-tax Officer to make assessments in cases where the 
donor is likely to leave India before the commencement of the 
assessment year or shortly after it without any intention of returning 
to India. This follows the corresponding provisions of section 174 ot 
the Income-tax Act, 1961. 
CLause 16.-This clause introduces a new provision which empowers 
the Gift-tax Officer to make an assessment on the donees in a case 
where the donor is not available for assessment. Section 29 of the 
Act provides that the tax may be recovered from the donee if it 
cannot be recovered from the donor but there is no prOvision in the 
Act enabling the Gift-tax Officer to make an assessment on the donee 
if the donor cannot be found. The clause seeks to remove this 
deficiency. The clause also seeks to make the donees jointly and 

24 
severally iiabie for the tax while limiting the liability of a donee to 
the maximum of the value of the gifts received by him. 
Clause 17-
Sub-clause (i) (a) .-By this sub-clause the word 'his' has 
been omitted from section 22 (1) (a) to entitle a donee also to 
file an appeal where an assessment is made on him. 
Sub-clause (i) (b) .-This sub-clause substitutes reference to 
section 46(1) of the Income-tax Act, 1922 by reference to the 
corresponding provisions contained in section 221 (1) of the 
Income-tax Act, 1961. 
Su.b-clause (i) (c) .-This sub-clause provides for additional 
rights of appeal against the Gift-tax Officer's orders rectifying a 
mistake under section 34 baving the effect of enhancing the tax 
or reducing a refund or refusing to admit an assessee's claim 
under the section or against an order impolling fine for non-com-
pliance with summons under section 36. 
Sub-clause (ii) .-This sub-clause seeks to make the existing 
practice a requirement under the law. 
The changes mentioned follow the pattern of sections 246, 250 (6) 
and Explanation to Section 251 of the Income-tax Act, 1961. 
Clause 18.-Sub-clause (i) substitutes sub-section (1) of section 23 
by a new sub-section on the lines of section 253 (1) of the Income-tax 
Act, 1961. It confers on the assessee additional rights of appeal 
against an order passed by the Appellate Assistant Commissioner 
imposing fine under section 36 and against an order passed by the 
Inspecting Assistant Commissioner imposing penalty under section 
17 (3) of the Act. The provision for appeal against orders of the 
Commissioner under section 17 has been incorporated in section 25 
which contains similar provisions. 
Sub-clause (ii) introduces a new prOVlSlon corresponding to 
section 253 (4) of the Income-tax Act, 1961 enabling the assessee or 
the. Gift-tax Officer to file a memorandum of cross objections in an 
appeal filed before the Tribunal by the other party. 
Sub-clause (iii) confers on the Tribunal power to condone delay 
in the filing of a memorandum of cross obiections. This power is 
similar to the existing power of the Tribunal to condone delay in 
filing of appeals, and Is in line with section 253 (5) of the Income-tax 
Act, 1981. 

Sub-clause (iv) substit~tes reference to sub-sections (5), (7) and 
(8) of section 5A of the Income-tax Act, 1922 by references to the 
corresponding provisions in sub-sections (1), (4) and (5) of section 
255 of the Income-tax Act, 1961. 
Clause 19.-This clause introduces a new Explanation which 
provides that in computing the limitation period of two years under 
section 24 (3) the time spent in giving a rehearing to the assessee 
under section 38 or the time for which the proceedings under the 
section are stayed by a court shall be excluded. This provision is 
similar to the Explanation in section 263 of the Income-tax Act, 1961. 
Clause 20.-See notes on clause 18. 
Clause 21.-This sub-clause substitutes existing sub-sections (1) 
and (2) of section 26 by new sub-sections. Following changes have 
been made to'bringthe provisions in line with those of section 256 of 
the Income-tax Act, 1961:-
(a) The time within which an application should be made to 
the Tribunal to refer a question of law to the High Court has 
been reduced from 90 days to 60 days as provided in other direct 
tax laws. 
(b) The Tribunal has been required to dispose of the applica-
tion within 120 days. 
(c) Under the new provision the Tribunal's power to con-
done delay in entertaining a reference application has been res-
tricted to 30 days. 
Sub-clauae (ii) introduces a new provision similar to that con-
tained in section 257 of the Income-tax Act, 1961 enabling the Tribu-
nal to refer a question of law direct to the Supreme Court if there is a 
c:onflict in the decisions of High Courts on that question. 
Sub-clause (iii) applies the procedural provisions of sub-sections 
(4), (5) and (6) of section 26 to direct references to the Supreme 
Court also. 
Sub-clause (iv).-Suh-sections (7) and (8) of section 26 h!lve beer. 
substituted by a new sub-section, modelled on section 260 (2) of the 
Income-tax Act, 1961, to provide that-the cost of a reference to the 
Supreme Court shall be in the discretion of the Court as in the cac;e of 
a reference to the High Court. 
Sub-section (9), having become redundant, has b~n deleted. 
Clause 22.-This clause introduces two new sections, viz., sections 
28A and 28B. The former, based on section 285 of the Income-tax Act, 
2017 (B) ~. 

21 
1961, provides that tax will be payable as per assessment made not-
withstanding that a reference has been made to Courts. The latte.r, 
based on section 269 of the Income-tax Act, 1961, provides for a defini-
tion of High Court in respect of States as well as Union territor.ies. 
dl"ause 23.-'l'his clause substitutes existing section 29 by a new 
section. The new section while providing for the joint and several 
liability of the donees for the payment of tax limJts the liability of a 
donee to the value of the gift 
. Clause 24.- (i) This clause substitutes existing sections 31, 32 and 
33 by new sections. 
In section 31 interest, fine OT any other sum payable under the Act 
has also been mentioned. Reference to time within which the amount 
due is to be paid has been omitted as the time for payment is pro-
posed to be prescribed in section 32. The new section is based on sec-
tion 156 of the Income-tax Act, 1961. 
Section 82 has been redrafted to bring its provisions in line with 
those of section 220 of the Income-tax Act, 1961. The changes made 
are-- " 
(a) for the sake of Simplicity the time limit for payment has 
been specified as 35 days in normal cases. As a measure of safe-
guard, it has been provided that this period may be reduced in 
cases where it will be detrimental to revenue to allow so much 
time; 
(b) it 'has been provided that the assessee shall be liable to 
pay simple interest at 4% per annum from the date of expiry of 
the time specified in the notice of demand; 
(c) a specific prOvision has been made authorising the Gift-
tax Officer to extend the time for payment or allow payments by 
instalments subject to payment of interest at 4% per annum; 
(d) it has been made clear that the power to treat an 
assessee, who has filed an appeal, as being not in default, is con-
fined to the amo~nt in dispute and that the power can be exer-
cised even though the time for payment has expired as long as 
the appeal remains pending. 
(iii) Section 33 has been redrafted to apply the provisions of sec-
tions 221 to 227, 229, 231 and 232 of the Income-tax Act, 1961 and 
Second and Third Schedules to that Act and rules framed under the 
Second Schedule for recovery of any sums due under the Act. Under 
the new section a unifonn procedure for effecting recovery will be 
followed in all the States. 

Clause 25.-This clause introduces a new provision on the lines of 
Chapter XIX of the Income-tax Act, 1961 requiring that if a refund 
becomes due to an assessee in appeal, etc., the Gift-tax Officer will re-
fund the amount without the assessee having to niake a claim for it. 
The Gift-tax Officer has been empowered to withhold refund' or set it 
off against any {llllount due from the assessee in certain circumstances. 
Provision has also been made for payment of interest @ 4% per 
~um. to the assessee if a refund is not granted within the prescribed 
period or withheld in certain circumstances. 
Clause 26.- This clause brings the provisions of section 34 of the 
Act in line with the corresponding provisions of section 154 of the 
Income-tax Act, 1961. 
Clause 27.-This clause introduces a new provision making abet-
ment of evasion an offence punishable with imprisonment and/or fine. 
Under the existing provision presidency ~gistrates, magistrates 
of the first class and magistrates of the second class, if specially 
empowered, can take cognisance of offence under the Act. The clause 
omits specially empowered magistrates of the second class. 
These changes al"e in line with the provisions of sections 278 and 
292 of the Income-tax Act, 1961 in section 35 of the Act. 
Clause 2B.-This clause brings the provisions of section 36 in line 
with the corresponding provisions of section 131 of the Income-tax 
Act, 1961. 
Clause 29.-This clause provides that in the event of one gift-tax 
authority being succeeded by another the assessee may demand that 
before the proceedings are continued he may be heard again. The pro-
vision is the same as in section 129 of the Income-tax Act, 1961. 
CZause 30.-This clause makes only a drafting 'change in section 39 
to bring out its intention more precisely. The new section is similar 
to section 268 of the Income-tax Act, 1961. 
Clause 31.-This clause introduces a new prOvision on the lines of 
section 283 of the Income-tax Act, 1961 prescribing the procedure to be 
adopted for service of notice where a jOint Hindu family is disrupted 
or a firm or other association of persons is dissolved. 
Clause 32.-This clause substitutes a new section for the existing 
section 41 which applies the provisions of sections 137 and 280 of the 
Income-tax Act, 1961 in place of the provisions of section 54 of the 
Income-tax Act, 1922. The prosecution under the new section for 
violating its prohibitory provisions will be sanctioned by the Central 
Government and not by the Commissioner as under the existing pro-
vision. 

Clause 33.-This claUse provides that in a ease where the Inspeeting 
Assistant Commissioner passes order levying pelialty, the name of the 
assessee can be published only after the appeal, if any, is disposed of 
by the Appellate Tribunal. This is in line with section 287 (3) of the 
Income-tax Act, 1961. 
ClaU8es 34 and 35.-These clauses are self-explanatory. 
Clause 36.-This clause proposes to modify theprovlsionsof sub .. 
section (4) of section 46 on the lines of section 296 of the Ineome-;tax 
Act,I96l. 

rrNANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
The officers who administer the Income-tax Act administer the 
Gift-tax Act also. This Bill will, therefore, not involve any addi-
tional expenditure. 

mwrt title1 
extent ana 
commence-
ment 
Definitions. 
A1mE~uR.E 
EXTRACT FROM THE GIFT-TAX ACT, 1958. 
(18 OF 1958) 
• • • 
CHAPTER I 
PRE1..IMINARY 
i. (1) This Act may be called the Gift-tax Act, 1958. 
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and 
Kashmir. 
(3) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 1st day of 
April, 1958. 
z. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
• • • • 
(ii) "Appellate Tribunal" means the Appellate Tribunal 
appointed under section 5A of the Income-tax Act; 
(iii) "assessee' means a person by whom gift-tax or any other 
sum of money is payable under this Act, and includes every per-
s9n in respect of whom any proceeding under this Act has been 
taken for the determination of the gift-tax payable by him; 
(iv) "assessment year" means the year for which tax is 
chargeable under section 3; 
(v) "Board" means the Central Board of Revenue constituted 
under the Central Board of Revenue Act, 1924; 
(vi) "Commissioner" means a person empowered to exercise 
the powers of a Commissioner of Gift-tax under sec~ion 9; 
(vii) "company" means a company as defined in section 3 of 
the Companies Act, 1956, and includes a foreign company within 
the meaning of section 591 of that Act; 
• • • • '" 
(xiv) "Income-tax Act" means the Indian Income-tax Act, 
1922; 
• • • • • 
so 
-4 of 1924. 
1 of 1958. 
11 of 1912 . 

(.l:.l:) "previous year", in relation to any assessment year-
(a) in the case of an assessee having no source of 
income, profits or gains or having a source of income, profits 
or gains in respect of which there is no previous year under 
the Income-tax Act, means the twelve months ending on the 
31st day of Man:h immediately preceding the assessment 
year; 
(b) in the case of an assessee having different previous 
years under the Income-tax Act for different sources of 
income, profits or gains, means that previous year of twelve 
months determined as the previous year under sub-clause (a) 
of clause (11) of section 2 of the Income-tax Act or such 
period determined as the previous year under sub-clause (b) 
of clause (11) of that section, whichever ·expired last;· 
(c) in the case of any other assessee, means the previous 
year as defined in clause (11) of section 2 of the Income-tax 
Act if an assessment were to be made under that Act for 
that year: 
Provided that where a person who has not been assessed 
under this Act for any assessment year makes a gift on a date 
which does not fall within a previous yea·r as defined in. sub-
clause (a) or sub-clause (b) or sub-clause (c), the previous 
year shall be the twelve months ending on the 31st day .of 
March immediately preceding the assessment year: 
Provided further that where an assessment has been' made 
under this Act for any assessment year.in respect of gifts 
made by an assessee durin~ any previous year, the meaning of 
the expression ccprevious year" as then applicable to him shall 
continue to apoly for any subsequent assessment year unless 
the assesse(> is allowed to vary it with the consent of the 
Gift-tax Officer who may, in allowing any such variation, 
impose such conditions as he may think fit; 
• • • • • 
CHAPl'ER II 
CHARGE OF GIFT-TAX AND GIFTS !'lUBJECT TO SUCH CHARGE 
3. Subject to the other provisions contained in this Act, there shall Charge of 
be charged for every financial year commencing on and from the 1st gift-tax. 
day of April, 1958, a tax (hereinafter referred to as gift-tax) in respect 
of the gifts, :f any, made by a person during the previous year (other 

than gifts. made before -the lit day of April. ltD?) at the rate or rates 
specified in the Schedule . 
• • • • • 
~':~~~ 5. (1) Gift-tax shall not be charged under this Act in respect of 
of certain gifts made by any person-Bilts. 
(i) of immovable property situate outside the territories to 
which this Act extends; 
(ii) of movable property situate outside the said territories 
unless the person-
(a) being an individual, is a citizen of India and is ordi-
narily resident in the said territories, or 
(b) not being an individual. is resident in the said 
territories. 
during the 'previous year in which the gift is made; 
(iii) of propertY"in the form of savings certificates iss~ed by 
the Central Government, which that Government, by notificatior.. 
in the Official Gazette, exempts from· gifWax; 
(iv) to the Government or any local authority; 
(v) to any institution or fund established for a charitable 
purpose to which the provisions of section 15B of the Income-tax 
Act apply; 
(vi) for any charitable purpose not falling within rlause 
"(v)-
(a) made at any time before the 1st day of April, 1958; or 
(b) made at any time after that date subject, in respect of 
each such gift, to a maximum of rupees one hundred in value 
and, in respect of such gifts in anyone previous year to the 
same donee, to a maximum of rupees five hundred in value in 
the aggregate; 
(vii) to any relative dependent upon him for sUJ)port and 
maintenance, on the occasion of the marriage of the relative, 
subject to a maximum of rupees ten thousand in value in respect 
of the marriage of each such relative; 
(viii) to his or her spouse, subject to a maximum 'Of rupees 
ODe ,lakh in value in the aggregate in one or more previous years" 

33 
tRe .xpression "spouse" in this clause, where there are more wivea 
than one, meaning all the wives together; 
(i.r) of policies of insurance or annuities to any person (other 
than his wife) who is dependent upon him for support and mainte-
nance, subject to a maximum of rupees ten thousand in value in 
the aggregate in one or more previous years of the benefit. in 
respect of each such donee; 
(x) under a will; 
(xi) in contemplation of death; 
'(xii) for the education of his children, to the extent to which 
the gifts are proved to the satisfaction of the Gift-tax Officer as 
being reasonable having regard to the circumstances of the case; 
(xiii) being an employer, to any employee by way of bonus, 
gratuity or pension or to the dependents of a deceased employee, 
to the extent to which the payment of such bonus, gratuity or 
pension is proved to the satisfaction of the Gift-tax Officer as being 
reasonable having regard to the circumstances of the case and is 
made solely in recognition of the services rendered bv the 
f'mployee; 
(xiv) in the course of carrying on a business, profession or 
vocation, to the extent to which the gift is proved to the satisfae-
tion of the Gift-tax Officer to have been made bona fide for the 
purpose of such business, profession or vocation; 
(xv) to imy person in charge of any such Bhoodan. or Sam-
pattidan movement as the Central Government may, by notiftca-
tion in the Official Gazette, specify; 
·(xvi) out of the sums, if any, guaranteed or assured by the 
Central Government as his privy purse, if the gifts are made tor-
(a) the maintenance of any relatives dependent on him 
for support and maintenance; or 
(b) for the performance of any official ceremonies: 
Provided that such gifts are in accordance with the practice, usage 
or tradition of the family to which the person making the gift belongs. 
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions contained in sub-section 
"(1), gift-tax shall not be charged under this Act in respect of gifts 
madf' by any person during the previous year, subject to a maximum 
of ruppes ten thousand in value. 
(~) Notwithstandin~ anything contained in sub-section (1) or sub-
section (2), where either spouse makes any gifts out of any such gifts 
H17 (B) I.,S...-a. 

34 
received by that spouse as fall within clause (viii) of :mb·section (1), 
the gifts so made shall be deemed to be taxable gifts made by that 
spouse and nothing contained in sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) 
shall apply in relation to any such gifts. 
Explanatwn.-For the purposes of this section,-
(a) an indiVidual shall be deemed to be ordinarily resident 
in the territories to which this Act extends during the previous 
year in which the gift is made if during that year he is regarded 
as a resident but not as not ordnarily resident in the taxable terri-
tories within the meaning of the Income-tax Act; 
(b) a Hindu undivided family, firm or other association of 
persons shall be deemed to be resident in the territories to whieh 
this Act extends during any previous year unless, during that 
year, the control and management of its affairs was situated 
wholly outside t~said territories; 
(e) a company shall be deemed to be resident in the territories 
to which this Act extends during the previous year, if--
(i) it is a company formed and registered under the Com-
panies Act, 1956, or is an existing company within the meaning 1 of 1958. 
of that Act; or 
(ii) during that year, the control and management of that 
company was situated wholly in the said territories; 
(d) "gifts made in contemplation of death" has the same 
meaning as in section 191 of the Indian Succession Act, 1925. 39 of 1925 . 
• • • • " 
CHAPTER III 
GIFT-TAX AUTHORITIES 
• • • • • 
Gift-tax 11. The Gift-tax Officers shall be subordinate to the Commissioner 
~:!~~~rtgi- of Gift-tax and the Inspecting Assistant Commissioner of Gift-tax 
nate ~ the within whose jurisdiction they perform their functions. 
Comrms-
sioner of 
Gift-tax 
and the 
Inspecting 
ASIIistant 
Commis-
sioner of 
Gift-tax. 
Gift-tax 12. All officers and other persons employed in the execution of this 
t~~~~f~~es Act shall observe and follow the orders, instructions and directions of 
orders, etc., the Board: of the 
Board. 

Provided that no orders, instructions or directions shall be given 
by the Board so as to interfere with the discretion of the Appellate 
Assistant Commissioner of Gift-tax in the exercise of his appellate 
functions. 
CHAPTER IV 
ASSESSMENT 
U. (1) Every person who during a previous year has made any Return of 
Laxable gifts shall, before the thirtieth day of June of the correspond- gifts. 
in, auessment year, furnish to the Gif~tax Officer a return in the 
prescribed form and verified in the prescribed manner. 
(2) If the Gift-tax Officer is of opinion that in respect of the gifts 
made by a person during any previous year he is liable to gift-tax 
under this Act, then notwithstanding anything contained in sub-
section (1), he may serve a notice upon such person requiring him 
to furnish within such period, not being less than thirty days, as may 
be specified in the notice, a return in the pre~cribed form and verified 
in the prescribed manner. 
(3) The Gift-tax Officer may in his discretion extend the date for 
the delivery of the return under this section. 
• • • • • 
15. (1) If the Gift-tax Officer is satisfied without requiring the pre- Assessment. 
sence of the assessee or the production by him of any evidence that a 
return made under section 13 or section 14 is complete, he shall assess 
the value of the taxable gifts made by the assessee and determine the 
amount payable by him as gift-tax . 
• • • • III 
(3) The Gift-tax Officer, after hearing such evidence as the person 
may produce and such other evidence as he may reauire on any spe-
cified points 8ha~l, by order in writing, assess the value of taxable 
gifts made by the assessee and determine the amount payable by him 
as gift-tax. 
'" • '" • • 
(5) If any person fails to make a return in response to any notice 
under sub-section (2) of section 13 or fails to comply with the terms 
of any notice issued under SUb-section (2) or sub-section (4), the Gift-
tax Officer shall estimate the value of taxable gifts to the best of his 
judgment and determine the amount payable by the person as gift-
tax. 

Gitteseap-
ingauess-' 
menl 
16. (1) If the Gift-tax Officer-
(a) has reason to believe that by' reason sf omission or failure 
on the part of an assessee to make a return under section 13 for 
any assessment year or to disclose fully and truly all material 
facts necessary for his assessment for that year, any taxable gift 
has escaped assessment for that year, whether by reason of 
under-assessment or assessment at too Iowa rate or otherwise; or 
(b) has, in consequence of any information in his possession, 
reason to believe, notwithstanding that there has been no such 
omission or failure as is referred to in clause (a), that any taxable 
gift has escaped assessment for any year, whether by reason of 
under-assessment or assessment at too low a rate or otherwisej 
he may, in cases falling under clause (a) at any time within eight 
years and in cases falling under clause (b) at any time within four 
years of the end of that assessment year, serve on. the assessee a notice 
containing all or any of the requirements which may be included. in 
a notice under sub-section (2) of section 13, and may proceed to assess 
or re-assess any taxable gift which has escaped assessment, and the 
provisions of this Act shall, so far as may be, apply as if the notice 
hald issued under that sub-section . 
• • • • • 
Penalty for 17. (1) If the Gift-tax Officer, Appellate Assistant Commissioner, 
default and Commissioner or Appellate Tribunal, in the' course of any proceed ina. 
concealment. under this Act, is satisfied that any person-
(a) has without reasonable cause failed to furnish the retura 
which he is required to furnish under sub-section (1) or .ub-
section (2) of section 13, or section 16 or has without reasonable 
cause failed to furnish it within the time allowed and in the 
manner required; or 
(b) has without reasonable cause failed to comply with a 
notice under sub-section (2) or sub-section (4) of section 15; or 
(c) has concealed the particulars of any gift or deliberately 
furnished inaccurate particul'ars thereof; 
he or it may, by order in writing, direct that such person shall pay 
by way of penalty-
(i) in the case referred to in clause (a), in addition to t •• 
amount of gift-tax payable by him,'a sum not exceed ina one uti 
a half times the amount of such tax, and 
(ii) in the case referred to in clause (b) or· clause (c), ia 
addition to the amount of gift-tax payable by him, a sum not ex. 
ceedine one and a half tim ... the amount of the tax, if aay, wlaic& 

would have been avoided if the return made by such person ander 
section 13, section 14, or section 16, as the case may be, had been 
accepted as correct. 
(2) No order shall be made under sub-section (1) unless the person 
concerned has been given a reasonable opportunity of beini 
heard. 
(3) No prosecution for an offence under this Act shall be instituted 
in respect of the same facts in relation to which a penalty has been 
imposed under this section. 
(4) The Gift-tax Officer shall not impose any penalty under tbis 
section without the previous approval of the Inspecting Assistant 
Commissioner of Gift-tax. 
" " " " " 
CHAPI'ER V 
LIABILIn:' TO ASSESSMENT IN SPECIAL CASES 
" " " " " 
CHAPTER VI 
ApPEALS, REVISIONS AND REFERENCES 
ZZ. (1) Any person,-
(0) objecting to the value of his taxable gifts determined ~p~al to 
under this Act· or Apl?ellate , ASSistant 
(b) objecting to the amount of gift-tax determined as pay- ~fo~~iS-
able by him under this Actj or frodm f or ers ° 
(c) denying his liability to be assessed under this Actj or Gomift-tax cera. 
(d) objecting to any penalty imposed by the Gift-tax Officer 
under section 17; or 
(e) objecting to any order of the Gift-tax Officer under sub-
section (2) of secti~n 20; or 
(f) objecting to any penalty imposed by the Gift-tax Officer 
under sub-section (l) of section 46 of the Income-tax Act as 
applied under section 33 for the purposes of gift-taxj 
may appeal to the Appellate Assistant Commissioner against the 
assessment or order, as the case may be .. in the prescribed form and 
verified in the prescribed manner: 
Provided that no appeal shall lie under clause (I) unless the tax 
has been paid before the appeal is filed. 

Appeai 
to the Appellate 
Tribunal. 
Power of 
Commis-
sioner to 
reviac orders 
of subordi-
nate autho-
rities 
13. (1) Any assessee objecting to an order passed py the Appellate 
Assistant Commissioner under section 17 or section 22 or to an 
order passed by the Commissioner under section 17 may appeal to the 
Appellate Tribunal within sixty days of the date on which he is served 
with notice of such order . 
• • • • • 
(2) The Appellate Tribunal may admit an appeal after the expiry 
of sixty days referred to in sub-sections (1) and (2) if-it is satisfied 
that there was sufficient cause for not presenting it within that period . 
• • • • • 
(11) The provisions of sub-sections (5), (7) and (8) of section 5A 
of the Income-tax Act shall apply to the Appellate Tribunal in the dis-
charge of its functions under this Act as they apply to it in the dis-
charge of its functions under the Income-tax Act. 
24. (1) 
• • • • • 
(3) No order shall be made under sub-section (2) after the expiry 
of two years from the date of the order sought to be revised. 
Appeal to 25. (1) Any assessee objecting to an order of enhancement made 
X';pellate by the Commissioner under section 24 may appeal to the Appellate 
~'!"!!len Tribunal within sixty days of the date on which the order is commu-
of enhance· nicated to him. 
mentby 
Commis-
sioner. 
Reference 
to High 
Court. 
• • • • • 
26. (1) Within·ninety days of the date upon which he is served with 
an order under section 23 or section 25, the assessee or the Commis-
sioner may present an application in the prescribed form and where 
the application is by the assessee, accompanied by a fee of rupees one 
hundred, to the Appellate Tribunal requiring the Appellate Tribunal 
to refer to the High Court any question of law arising out of such 
order, and the Appellate Tribunal shall, if in its opinion, a question of 
law arises out of such order, state the case for the opinion of the High 
Court. 
(2) An application under sub-section (1) may be admitted after 
the expiry of the period of ninety days aforesaid if the Appellate Tri-
bunal is satisfied that there was sufficient cause for not presenting it 
within the said period. 
• • • • * 
(4) The statement to the High Court shall set forth the facti, the 
determination of the Appellat~ Tfihunal and the question of law which 

39 
(5) If the High Court is not satisfied that the case as stated is suffi-
cient to enable it to determine the question of law raised thereby, it 
may require the Appellate Tribunal to make such modification therein 
as it may direct. 
(6) The High Court, upon hearing any such case, shall decide the 
question of law raised therein, and in doing so, may, if it thinks fit, 
alter the form of the question of law and shall deliver judgment there-
on COritaining the grounds on which such decision is founded and shall 
send a copy of the judgment under the seal of the Court and the sig-
nature of the Registrar to the Appellate Tribunal and the AppeUate 
Tribunal shall pass such orders as are necessary to dispose of the case 
conformably to such judgment. 
(7) Where the amount of any assessment is reduced as a result of 
any reference to the High Court, the amount, if any, overpaid as gift-
tax shall be refunded with such interest as the Commissioner may 
allow, unless the High Court. on intimation given by the Commis-
sioner within thirty days of the receipt of the result of such reference 
that he intends to ask for leave to appeal to the Supreme Court, makes 
an order authorising the Commissioner to postpone payment of such 
refund until the disposal of the appeal in the Supreme Court. 
(8) The costs of any reference to the High Court shall be in the 
discretion of the Court . 
• of 1908. (9) Section 5 of the Indian Limitation Act. 1908. shall apply to an 
. application to the High Court under this section. 
• • • • • 
CHAPTER VII 
PAYMENT AND RECOVERY OF GIFT-TAX 
29. Gift-tax shan be pavable by the donor but wher~ In the opinion Gift-tax . .. by whom 
of the GIft-tax Officer the tax cannot be recovered from the donor, it payable. 
may be recovered from the donee: 
Provided that the amount of the tax which may be recovered from 
the donee shall not exceed that portion of the gift-tax which is attri-
butable to the value of the gift made to thp. donee hy the donor as at 
the date of the gift . 
• • • • • 
St. When any tax or penalty is due in consequence of any order Notice of 
passed under this Act, the Gift-tax Ofticer shall serve upon the demand. 
assessee or other person liable to pay such tax or penalty a notice of 
demand in the prescribed form specifying the sum so payable and the 
time within which it shall be payable. 

ltecovery 
of tax 
and· penalti •. 
Mode ., 
recovery. 
Rectiftca -
tion of 
mistakes. 
Prosecu-
tion. 
32. (1) Any amount specified as payable in a notice of demand 
issued under section 31 shall be paid within the time, at the place, and 
to the person mentioned in the notice, or if no time is so mentioned, 
then on or before the first day of the second month following the date 
of service of the notice, and any assessee or other person liable to pay 
the amount failing so to pay shall be deemed to be in default. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, where an 
assessee has presented an appea} under section 22, the Gift-tax Otftcer 
may, in his discretion treat the assessee as not being in default as long 
as such appeal is nndisposed of. 
33. The provisions of sub-sections (1), (1A), (2), (3), (4), (5), 
(SA), (6) and (7) of section 46 and section 47 of the Income-tax Act 
shall apply as if the said provisions were provisions of this Act, and 
referred to gift-tax and sums imposed by way of penalty under this 
Act instead of to income-tax and sums imposed by way of penalty 
under that Act, and to Gift-tax Oftlcer and Commissioner of Gift-tax 
instead of to Income-tax Officer and Commissioner of Income-tax. 
CHAPTER VIII 
MISCELLANEOUS 
34. At any time within four years from the date of any order 
passed by him, or it, the Gift-tax Oftlcer, the Appellate Assistant Com-
missioner, the Commissioner and the Appellate Tribunal may, on his, 
or its, own motion rectify any mistake apparent from the record and 
shall,· within a like period rectify any such mistake which has been 
brought to the notice of the Gift-tax Oftlcer, the Appellate ASiistant 
Commissioner, the Commissioner or the Appellate Tribunal, as the 
case may be, by an assessee: 
Provided that no such rectification shall be made which has the 
effect of enhancing the amount of gift-tax determined unless the 
assessee has been given a reasonable opportunity of being heard in 
the matter. 
35. (1) If any person fails without reasonable cause,-
(a) to furnish in due time any return of gifts under this Act; 
(b) to produce, or cause to be produced, on or before the 
date mentioned in any notice under sub-section (2) or sub-section 
(4) of section 15, such accounts, records and documents as are 
referred to in the notice; 
(e) to furnish within the time specified any statement or in-
formation ~hich such person is bound to furnish to the Gift-tax 
Officer under section 37; 
J 

5 of 1908. 
he shall, on conviction before a magistrate, be punishable With fine 
which may extend to rupees ten for every day during which the de-
fault continues. 
(2) If a person makes a statement in a verification in any return 
of gifts furnished under this Act or in a verification mentioned in 
section 22, 23 or 25 which is false, and which he either knows or be-
lieves to be false, or does not believe to be true, he shall on convic-
tion before a magistrate, be p~shable with simple imprisonment 
which may extend to one year, or with fine which may extend to 
rupees one thousand, or with both. 
(3) A person shan not be proceeded against for an offence under 
this section except at the instance of the Commissioner. 
(4) The Commissioner may either before or after the institution 
of proceedings compound any such offence. 
Explanation.-For the purposes of this section "magistrate" means 
a presidency magistrate, a magistrate of the first class or a magistrate 
of the second class specially empowered by the Central Government 
to try offences under this Act. 
36. The Gift-tax Officer, the Appellate Assistant Commissioner, the Power to 
Commissioner and the Appellate Tribunal shall, for the purposes of tak:e . eVldence this Act, have the same powers as are vested In a court under the Code on oath, 
of Civil Procedure, 1908, when trying a suit in respect of the following etc, 
matters, namely:-
(a) enforcing the attendance of any person and examining 
him on oath; 
(b) requiring the discovery and production of documents; 
(c) receiving evidence on afftdavitj 
(d) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses; 
and any proceeding before the Gift-tax Officer, the Appellate Assistant 
Commissioner, the Commissioner or the Appellate Tribunal shall be 
deemed to be a judicial proceeding within the meaning of sections 193 
45 of 1960. and 228 and for the purposes of section 196 of the Indian Penal Code . 
• • • • • 
38. Whenever in respect of any proceeding under this Act any Effect of 
Gift-tax authority ceases to exercise jurisdiction and is succeeded by =:iti~~ 
another who has and exercises such jurisdiction, the authority so on pending 
succeeding may continue the proceeding from the stage at which the f~~~ed­
proceeding was left by his predecessor. 
2017 (B) LS--6. 

Computa-
tion of 
period of 
limitation. 
42 
39. IIi computing the period of limitation, prescribed for an appeal 
under this Act or for an application under section 26, the day on 
which the order complained of was made and the time requisite for 
obtaining a copy of such order shall be excluded . 
• • • • • 
7~~ition 4L (1) Subject to the provisions contained in sub-section (2), the 
~losure of provisions of section 54 of the Income-tax Act shall apply to all 
~nform8- accounts or in relation to statements, documents, evidence or affidavits .. on. given, produced or obtained in connection with or in the course of 
Appearance 
before Gift-
ta:It authori-
tiel by 
autboriied 
representa-
tiVes. 
any proceeding under this Act as they apply to or in relation to 
similar particulars under that Act subject to the mOdification that the 
reference to any "Income-tax authority" in clause (d) of sub-section 
(3) and to the "Commissioner" in sub-section (5) of section 54 of 
that Act shall be construed as a reference to any "Gift-tax authority" 
and to the "Commissioner of Gift-tax", respectively. 
(2) Nothing contained in section 54 of the Income-tax Act shall 
apply to the disclosure of any such particulars as are referred to in 
sub-section (1) to any person acting in the execution of this Act or 
the Income-tax Act, or the Estate Duty Act, 1953, or the Wealth-tax 34 of 1953. 
Act, 1957, or the Expenditure-tax Act, 1957, where it is necessary or ~~ ~~ ~:g~: 
desirable to disclose the same to him for the purposes of this Act or 
any of the other Acts aforesaid. 
• • • • • 
43. Any 'assessee who is entitled to,. or required to attend before-
any Gift-tax authority or the Appellate Tribunal in connection with 
any proceeding or inquiry under this Act, except where he is requir-
ed under this Act, to attend in person, may attend by a person autho-
rised by him in writing in this behalf, being a relative of, or a person 
regularly employed by, the assessee or a legal practitioner or a 
cbartered accountant or any other person having such qualifications 
as may be prescribed. • 
ExpZanation.-For the purposes of this section,-
(a) the expression "a person regularly employed by 'the 
assessee" includes any officer of a scheduled bank with which 
the assessee maintains a current account or has other regular 
dealings; 
(b) "chartered accountant" means a chartered accountant 
as defined in the Chartered Accountants Act, 1949. 38 of 19451 • 
• • • • • 

1 of 1956. 
43 
45. The provisions of this Act shall not apply to gifts made by- Act no~ to apply m 
(a) a Government company as defined in section 617 of the certain 
C . A t 1956 cases. omparues c, ; 
(b) a corporation established by a Central, State or Provin-
cial Act; 
(c) any company (other than a private company as defined 
in section 3 of the Companies Act, 1956): 
Provided that the affairs of the company or the shares in the 
company carrying more than fifty per cent. of the total voting 
power were at no time during the previous Iear controlled or held 
by less than six persons; 
(d) a company which is a subsidiary of and in which more 
than half the nominal value of equity share capital is held by a 
company referred to in clause (c); 
(e) any institution or fund the income whereof is exempt 
from income-tax under clause (i) of sub-section (3) of section 4 
of the Income-tax Act. 
Explanation.-For the purpose of computing the number of 
six persons referred to in the proviso to clause (c), persons who 
are related to one another as husband and wife, brother and sister, 
brothers, sisters or who are lineal descendants or ascendants of 
one another and persons who are nominees of any other person 
together with that other person shall be treated as a single person. • 
46. (1) The Board may, by notification in the Official Gazette, Power 
make rules l for carrying out the purposes of this Act. ~l:U 
• • • • • 
(4) All rules made under this Act shall be laid before each House 
of Parliament as soon as may be after they are made and shall be 
subject to such modifications as Parliament may make during the 
session in which they are so laid or the session immediately followinl . 
• • • • • 

LOK SABRA 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Gift-tax Act, 1958. 
The President has, in pursuance of clauses (1) and (3) of article 
117 of the Constitution of India, recommended to Lot 
Sabha the introduction and consideration of the Bill. 
M. N. KAUL, 
Secretary. 
(Shri Mormji Desai, 
Minister of Finance.) 