    As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
                                                              Bill No. 105 of 2021
THE ELECTRONIC WASTE (MANAGEMENT AND DISPOSAL)
BILL, 2021
By
SHRI JUGAL KISHORE SHARMA, MP
A
BILL
to provide for proper management and disposal of millions of tonnes of electronic
waste being generated by discarded electronic devices like television, personal
computer , floppies, audio-video CD, batteries, cell phones, refrigerators,
air conditioners, electronic toys, telephones, washing machines, electric
switches, etc. by prescribing norms and fixing responsibilities and
duties on manufacturers, recyclers and consumers with regard
to disposal of electronic waste and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-second Year of the Republic
of India as follows:–
1. (1)This Act may be called the Electronic Waste (Management and
Disposal) Act, 2021.
(2)It extends to the whole of India.
(3)It shall come into force at once.
Short title, extent
and
commencement.5

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “appropriate Government” means in the case of a State,
the Government of that State and in all other cases, the
Central Government;
(b) “consumer” means a person using products capable of
generating electronic waste;
(c) “disposal” means disposal of electronic-waste in terms of
the prescribed norm to prevent contamination of soil, ground water,
surface water, ambient air quality and harmful effect on human health;
(d) “electronic-waste” means waste generated from discarded
television, personal computer, floppy, audio-video CD, battery, cell
phone, refrigerator, air conditioner, electronic toys, telephone, washing
machine, electronic switch and such similar electronic products;
(e) “operator” means a person or establishment who owns or
operates a facility for collection, transportation and disposal of
electronic waste;
(f) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(g) “re-cycler” means the person who processes electronic-waste
for transforming it into raw material for producing new product which
may or may not be similar to original product;
(h) “storage” means the temporary containment of electronic
waste in a manner so as to prevent its littering and hazardous effects
on human being;
(i) “transportation” means carrying of electronic waste from
one place to other place hygienically through specially designed
transport vehicle so as to prevent littering and harmful effect on human
being.
3. (1)The appropriate Government shall ensure management and
disposal of all the electronic wastes generated within its territorial jurisdiction
in accordance with compliance criteria and procedure  prescribed under
sub-section (1) of section 4 in such manner as may be prescribed.
(2) The appropriate Government shall provide requisite
infrastructure for collection, storage, transporation and disposal of
electronic waste.
(3)The appropriate Government may after due authorization,
authorize any operator to collect, transport and dispose of the electronic waste
in such manner as may be prescribed.
4. (1)The Central Government may, in consultation with the Central
Pollution Control Board, prescribe the compliance criteria and procedure for
management and disposal of electronic waste.
(2)The Central Pollution Control Board shall monitor the
implementation of the compliance criteria and procedure for management
and disposal of electronic waste prescribed under sub-section (1).
5. It shall be the duty of every manufacturer:—
(i) to ensure that every product offered for sale being released in the
market which is capable of producing electronic waste contains:–
(a) the procedure for its handling and disposal; and
(b) the information about the parts which may or may not be
recycled.
Application
of the Act.
Appropriate
Government to
ensure disposal
of electronic
waste.
Compliance
criteria and
procedure for
disposal of
electronic waste.
Duty of
Manufacturer.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
(ii) to make available collection centres for collection of the hazardous
electronic waste for their proper disposal depending upon the quantum of
the product sold in the market; and
(iii) to create public awareness through advertisements, publications
and other electronic mediums with regard to hazardous substances in their
product which may cause ill effect to human body.
6. It shall be the duty of the consumer to ensure that the electronic-
waste is not disposed of in any other manner except in the manner prescribed
for the purpose.
7. (1)Every re-cycler of the electronic product shall be registered with
the appropriate Government in such manner as may be prescribed.
(2)Every re-cycler shall re-cycle only those parts of an electronic
product which have been permitted by the manufacturer to be re-cycled.
8. Whoever violates the provisions of this Act shall be liable for
imprisonment which may extend to one year and fine which may extend to
five lakh rupees.
9. Where a person committing a contravention of any of the provisions
of this Act is a company, every person who, at the time the contravention
committed, was in charge of, and was responsible to, the company for the
conduct of business of the company as well as the company, shall be guilty of
the contravention and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished
accordingly:
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render any
such person liable to punishment if he proves that the contravention took
place without his knowledge or he exercised all due diligence to prevent such
contravention.
Explanation.— For the purpose of this section:—
(i) “company” means anybody corporate and includes a firm or other
association of individuals; and
(ii) ‘‘director’’, in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.
10.The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything
inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force
on the subject.
11.The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not derogation
of any other law for the time in force.
12.(1)The Central Government may by notification in the Official
Gazette, make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2)Every rule made under this Act by the Central Government shall
be laid before each house of the parliament, as soon as may be after it is
made, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be
comprises in one session or more successive session, and if, before the expiry
of the session immediately following the session or the successive session
aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any such modification in the rule or
both the houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall as the
case may be: so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be
without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under the rule.
Duty of
Consumer.
Registration and
responsibility of
re-cycle.
Penalty.
Offence by
a company.
Act to has
overriding effect.
Act not in
derogation of
any other law.
Power to
make rules.
 5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
All kind of electronic goods have become the household articles today.
Every home has not one but a number of electronic products. Once these
electronic products become obsolete or discarded, they are either thrown in
the garbage or given to Kabariwala. The Kabariwala sells these products
to scrap dealers who dismantle these gadgets and keep what is useful and
rest of it is rendered into garbage which then is thrown in the landfills.
This, of course, is not the proper way of its disposal. In this way millions
of tonnes of electronic waste is generated in various metropolitan cities in
the country. A number of components in these electronic products are
hazardous and should be disposed of in an environment friendly manner.
Many of these products contain components that contain toxic substances
like lead, cadmium, mercury, hexavalent chromium, barium, beryllium and
carcinogenic agents like carbon black and heavy metals. These elements
can cause serious problems to the health of the person handling it and can
also damage the environment if they are not disposed of properly.
In various countries, there are laws for proper disposal of electronic waste
products and the procedure for it is also displayed on the product. There it is
also indicated on the product what can be recycled and what cannot be
recycled. But, in our country disposal of electronic-waste is nobody’s
responsibility. As of now, there is no law or guideline for the disposal of
electronic waste and no account is being taken how much is being generated
and how it is being disposed of. It is, therefore, high time that matter may be
regulated before the situation becomes alarming.
Hence this Bill.
   NEW DELHI;      JUGAL KISHORE SHARMA
March 8, 2021
4

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides that the appropriate Government shall
provide for infrastructure for collection, storage, transportation and disposal
of the electronic waste. The expenditure involved is establishing
infrastructure for handling and disposal of e-waste in respect of Union
territories shall be borne by the Central Government. The Bill, therefore,
if enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India.
It is estimated that a recurring expenditure of about rupees one hundred
crore would be involved from the Consolidated Fund of India per annum.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees one hundred crore is
alsolikely to be involved.
5

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 12 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make
rules for carrying out the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to
matters of detail only, the delegation of legislative power is of normal
character.
6

LOK SABHA
_______
A
BILL
to provide for proper management and disposal of millions of tonnes of electronic
waste being generated by discarded electronic devices like television, personal
computer, floppies, audio-video CD, batteries, cell phones, refrigerators,
air conditioners, electronic toys, telephones, washing machines, electric
switches, etc. by prescribing norms and fixing responsibilities and
duties on manufacturers, re-cyclers and consumers with regard
to disposal of electronic waste and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto
————
(Shri Jugal Kishore Sharma, M.P.)