THE DALIT AND BACKWARD YOUTH WELFARE  BILL, 2011
BY
SHRI P .L. PUNIA, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for the formulation and implementation of a comprehensive national  policy
for ensuring overall development of youth belonging to the Scheduled  Castes,
 the Scheduled Tribes and those from Other Backward Classes and for other
measures to be undertaken for their welfare by the State and for matters
 connected therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-second Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Dalit and Backward Youth Welfare Act, 2011.
(2)  It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force at once.
2.  In  this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “appropriate Government” means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
Bill No. 105 of 2011
Short title,
extent and
commence-
ment.
Definitions.
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5

2
(b) “backward youth” means those youth who belong to those castes which are
declared, by notification in the Official Gazette, as backward by the appropriate
Government from time to time;
(c) “dalit youth” means the youth belonging to the Scheduled Castes and the
Scheduled Tribes;
(d) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act; and
(e) “youth” means  any person who has attained the age of eighteen years but
is not above the age of thirty-five years.
3. (1) The Central Government shall, as soon as may be, formulate a comprehensive
national policy for the overall development and welfare of the dalit and backward youth of
the country.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of sub-section (1), the national
policy referred to therein may provide for,—
(a) free higher education, including education in medical, technical and
information technology fields;
(b) free coaching/training for admission to management courses and also for
competitive examinations conducted by the Union Public Service Commission, Staff
Selection Commission and such other agencies;
(c) free provision of books, stationery and educational gadgets;
(d) provision of scholarship;
(e) free hostel facilities;
(f) free public transport facilities;
(g) unrestricted access to all libraries maintained or under the control of
appropriate Government;
(h) training in sports to every eligible youth covered under this Act and facilities
and appropriate incentives to participate in sports activities, events and tournaments
within and outside the country;
(i) provision for nutritious meals free of cost;
(j) free medical facilities and healthcare;
(k) provision of vocational training;
(l) provision of military training to physically fit youth covered under this Act
and those successfully completing training to be given preference in recruitment in
defence services; and
(m) such other facilities, incentives and welfare measures as the Government
may deem necessary.
4. It shall be the duty of every appropriate Government to implement the provisions of
national policy formulated under section 3.
5. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force,
the Central Government shall provide gainful employment to the youth belonging to dalit
and backward class as per their ability and qualification on completion of their education or
training, as the case may be;
(2) In case the Central Government fails to provide gainful employment under sub-
section (1), the youth shall be paid an unemployment allowance on monthly basis at such
rate as may be prescribed till the time they are provided with gainful employment.
National
Policy for the
overall
development
and welfare of
the dalit and
backward
youth.
Appropriate
Government
to implement
national
policy.
Employment
and unemploy-
ment allow-
ance.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
6. (1) The appropriate Government shall appoint such number of expert committees
in the capital of every State and Union territories and in every district as it may deem
necessary for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) The expert committees appointed under sub-section (1) shall consist of such
members having knowledge in the field of education and psychology as may be prescribed.
(3) The expert committee shall advise the appropriate Government regarding welfare
measures for the dalit and backward youth.
7. The appropriate Government shall,—
(i) establish such number of hostels for dalit and backward youth at conspicuous
places in the country for the youth covered under this Act as it may deem necessary;
(ii) take such steps as may be required for promoting youth cooperatives at
villages and district levels and provide requisite financial assistance and guidance to
such cooperatives for procuring raw materials and marketing of their produce; and
(iii) ensure the availability of requisite credit at concessional rate of interest
from the nationalized Banks and other Financial Institutions to the youth covered
under this Act for setting up of self employment projects.
8. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law
in this behalf, provide requisite funds for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
9. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Constitution of
expert com-
mittees.
Measures for
the welfare of
Dalit and
backward
youth.
Central
Government
to provide
requisite funds.
Power to make
rules.
5
10
15
20
25

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Youth are the backbone of a strong nation and are capable of substantially influencing
polity. In the recent times, youth have transformed some monarchies into republics by
overthrowing rulers in different parts of the world. As such, youth are always at the centre
stage of socio-political activities of every country. Similar is the position in our nation. The
youth are facing a lot of problems relating to education, poverty, nutrition, employment
opportunities, self employment, health, sports, etc. There is no institutional mechanism to
harness the potential of our youth and channelise their energy for the betterment of the
country. The plight of the youth belonging to dalit communities such as the Scheduled
Castes, the Scheduled Tribes and other Backward Classes (OBCs) who have been oppressed
for centuries is even worse. Even today dalit youth have to face social ostracisation though
there is the reservation policy in place which was propounded by the messiah of the dalits,
Babasaheb Dr. B.R. Ambedkar. However, the reservation system has only minimally benefited
the dalits. The dalit youth still require special attention because there is a need to instill a
sense of belonging among the dalit, backward and oppressed youth of the nation by providing
them opportunities for their overall development. The facilities of education and opportunities
for job should be provided to the youth belonging to the dalit and backward class so that
they can contribute to the progress of the country to their full potential. If employment
opportunity is not provided to dalit and backward youth they should be given unemployment
allowance. They have to be linked directly with the production processes by eliminating the
disparities between the rural and urban dalit youth. For this a comprehensive national policy
for the dalit, backward and oppressed youth should be in place to ensure their all round
development which is the need of the hour. The State has to take measures for their welfare
and enable them to fight against the forces of fanaticism, fundamentalism and separatism.
The Bill seeks to achieve above objectives.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; P. L.  PUNIA
November 9, 2011.
4

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for a national policy for overall welfare and development
of the dalit and backward youth. It also provides for certain facilities to be provided to such
youth belonging to dalit and backward communities. Clause 5 provides for employment
opportunities and payment of unemployment allowance by the Central Government. Clause 6
provides for constitution of expert committees for the welfare of dalit and backward youth.
Clause 7 provides for various activities to be undertaken by the appropriate Government for
the welfare of dalit and backward youth. Clause 8 provides for supply of requisite funds by
the Central Government to carry out the provisions of the Bill. The Bill, therefore, if enacted,
will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is not possible, at present, to
quantify the funds that may be involved but it is estimated that a sum of rupees thirty
thousand crore will be involved as recurring expenditure per annum.
A non-recurring expenditure to the tune of rupees twenty thousand crore will be
involved for creating assets and infrastructure.
5

6
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 9 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. The rules will relate to matters of detail only and as such the
delegation of legislative power is of a normal character.

LOK  SABHA
—————
A
BILL
to provide for the formulation and implementation of a comprehensive national  policy for
ensuring overall development of youth belonging to the Scheduled  Castes, the
Scheduled Tribes and those from Other Backward Classes and for other
measures to be undertaken for their welfare by the State and for
matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
—————
(Shri P .L. Punia,, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—2650LS(S3)—29.11.2011.