1
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2015
By
SHRI BHAIRON PRASAD MISHRA, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1.  This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2015.
2. In the Eighth Schedule to the Constitution, existing entries 4 to 22 shall be renumbered
as entries 5 to 23, respectively, and before entry 5 as so renumbered, the following entry shall
be inserted, namely:—
"4. Bundeli.".
Short title.
Bill No. 105 of  2015
Amendment of
the Eighth
Schedule.
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Ours is a multi-lingual country. In the Eighth Schedule to the Constitution of India,
twenty-two languages, being spoken and written by our citizens, have been recognised as
national languages. These languages represent the culture of the particular regions. A person
learns the maximum things only through the medium of his mother tongue. Language is the
light of wisdom. However, it is unfortunate that Bundeli language spoken by crores of people
in Madhya Pradesh and Bundelkhand region of Uttar Pradesh has not yet been included in
the Eighth Schedule to the Constitution. Bundeli language is struggling hard to maintain its
existence and dignity.
The prosperity of a society or a country is distinguished by the literature composed in
its own language. Keeping this viewpoint in mind, if one goes through the history of Bundeli
language, it can be noticed that the epic 'Alhkhand' was written in Bundeli by the great poet
Jagnik. It is believed that with the advent of chandeli period, inception of Bundeli took place.
It means Bundeli language existed in spoken and written form even two thousand years ago.
Ramcharitramanas written by Tulsidas is full of Bundeli words. Stone inscriptions, invoices,
correspondences, certificates and monarchical decrees have also been prepared in Bundeli.
The Bundeli language has its specific contribution in Indian literature, history and in
development of life-style. Besides abundant literature, Bundeli language is also the voice of
expression of our glorious culture.
Bundeli is the mother tongue of a large Bundelkhand region spread over
Madhya Pradesh and Uttar Pradesh. There are about five crore Bundeli speaking people in
Sagar, Jabalpur, Gwalior, Hoshangabad and Bhopal divisions including bordering districts of
Uttar Pradesh covering about 187934 square kilometres area. On 24th February, 2012,
Legislative Assembly of Madhya Pradesh, after passing an unofficial resolution unanimously,
sent a request to the Government of India for including Bundeli language in the Eighth
Schedule.
Therefore, keeping in view the sentiments of the people of Bundelkhand region spread
over a large area, Bundeli language should be accorded the status and honour of national
language by including it in the Eighth Schedule to the Constitution.
With the inclusion of Bundeli language in the Eighth Schedule, the folk dances, folk
songs, folk customs and other cultural heritage along with the Bundeli language can be
saved from getting extinct.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; BHAIRON  PRASAD  MISHRA
March  9, 2015.

3
ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
EIGHTH  SCHEDULE
[Articles 344(1) and 351]
Languages
1. Assamese.
2. Bengali.
3. Bodo.
4. Dogri.
5. Gujarati.
6. Hindi.
7. Kannada.
8. Kashmiri.
9. Konkani.
10. Maithili.
11. Malayalam.
12. Manipuri.
13. Marathi.
14. Nepali.
15. Oriya.
16. Punjabi.
17. Sanskrit.
18. Santhali.
19. Sindhi.
20. Tamil.
21. Telugu.
22. Urdu.
* * * * * *

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Shri Bhairon Prasad Mishra, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—130LS(S3)—16-04-2015.