1
Short title and
commencement.
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
THE INDIAN PENAL CODE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2017
By
SHRI MAHEISH GIRRI, M.P .
A
BILL
further to amend the Indian Penal Code, 1860.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-eighth Year of the Republic of  India as
follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Indian Penal Code (Amendment) Act, 2017.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. For section 272 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 (hereinafter referred to as the Code),
the following section shall be substituted, namely:—
Bill No. 105 of  2017
Substitution
of new
section for
section 272.
45 of 1860.
5

2
"272. Whoever adulterates any article of food or drink, so as to make such article
unsafe for consumption, intending to sell such article as food or drink, or knowing it to
be likely that the same will be sold as food or drink, shall be punished with imprisonment
for a term which may extend to life, or with fine which may extend to ten lakh rupees, or
with both.".
3. In the Code, for section 273, the following section shall be substituted, namely:—
"273. Whoever stores, sells, offer for sale, possesses for sale, causes to be sold
or manufactures for sale, as food or drink, any article which has been adulterated,
misbranded or substituted so as to render it unsafe or injurious to health, shall be
punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to life, or with fine which may
extend to ten lakh rupees, or with both.".
Adulteration
of food or
drink intended
for sale.
Substitution
of new
section for
section 273.
Sale of
adulterated,
misbranded or
substituted
food or drink.
5
10

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 established Food Safety and Standards Authority
of India for laying down science based standards for articles of food and to regulate their
manufacture, storage, distribution, sale and import to ensure availability of safe and wholesome
food for human consumption. Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 also provides for provision
for punishment to offenders involved in manufacturing, possession, procurement, selling
and distribution of adulterated food. Despite these provisions, our country has been
constantly witnessing the problem of adulteration of food. Adulterated food causes severe
danger to health of the consumer. For example "Executive Summary on National Survey on
Milk Adulteration, 2011" released by Food Safety and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI)
itself, reveals that on national level, 68.4 per cent. of milk being sold is adulterated. There
have been several other incidents of adulterated food causing trouble to human lives. In
2014, the Supreme Court observed that Central Government should take steps to make
adulteration laws more stringent to prevent incidents of milk adulteration.
Sections 272 and 273 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 prescribe punishment for
adulteration of food or drink intended for sale and sale of noxious food or drink, respectively.
However, the punishment is not stringent enough to discourage people from getting involved
in such nefarious practices.
The Bill, therefore, seeks to amend the Indian Penal Code, 1860 with a view to provide
for more strict punishment against the practice of food adulteration.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; MAHEISH GIRRI
November 21, 2016.
3

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860
(45 OF 1860)
* * * * * *
272. Whoever adulterated any article of food or drink, so as to make such article
noxious as food or drink, intending to sell such article as food or drink, or knowing it to be
likely that the same will be sold as food or drink, shall be punished with imprisonment of
either description for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend
to one thousand rupees, or with both.
273. Whoever sells or offers or exposes for sale, as food or drink, any article which has
been rendered or has become noxious, or is in a state unfit for food or drink, knowing or
having reason to believe that the same is noxious as food or drink, shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to six months or with fine
which may extend to one thousand rupees or with both.
* * * * * *
4

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Indian Penal Code, 1860.
————
(Shri Maheish Girri, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—4133LS(S3)—10-07-2017.