 
 A S  INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Bill No. 106 of 2021 
 
THE INDIAN EVIDENCE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2021 
 
By 
 
DR. D. RAVIKUMAR, M.P. 
 
A 
 
BILL 
 
further to amend the Indian Evidence Act, 1872.  
 
Be it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-second Year of the Republic of 
India as follows:— 
 
 
 
5 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Indian Evidence (Amendment) Act, 
2021.  
(2) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, 
by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
Short title and 
commencement. 
1 of 1872. 
 
10 
2. After section 114A of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 the following 
section shall be inserted, namely:— 
“114AA. (1) In a prosecution for an offence constituted by, or in any 
proceedings arising out of in connection with, an act alleged to have caused 
injury to a person, if there is evidence that the injury was caused during a 
Insertion of new 
section 114AA. 
Presumption as 
to custodial 
violence.  

2 
 
period when that person was in the custody of any police officer or police 
officers, the court shall presume that the injury was caused by such officer or 
officers having custody of that person during that period. 
(2) The court, in considering whether or not such presumption under 
sub-section (1) is rebutted, shall have regard to all the relevant circumstances, 
including, in particular,  
(a) the period of custody;  
(b) any statement made by the injured or the victim as to how the 
injuries were received, being a statement admissible in evidence;  
(c) the evidence of any medical practitioner who might have examined 
the injured or the victim as the case may be; and  
(d) evidence of any magistrate who might have recorded the victim’s 
statement or attempted to record it. 
Explanation — For the purpose of this section, the term ‘custody’ includes 
custody lawfully obtained and otherwise.”.  
 
 
 
5 
 
 
 
10 
 
 
 
15 
2 

3 
 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Despite thirty six years of the recommendation of the 113th Report of the Law Commission on the 
Injuries in Police Custody, no effort has been made to implement the recommendations that would help deter 
and prevent custodial violence. As a result, incidents of custodial violence have increased and a culture of 
impunity has only been reinforced by the continuation of the status quo.  The people who are victims of 
custodial violence are often the poor and those who are dalit, adivasi or religious minorities.   
 
This Bill attempts to carry out the recommendations of the Law Commission with a few notable 
changes.  Firstly, the proposed amendment to Evidence Act, 1872 for the presumption of custodial violence 
applied only to criminal proceedings. It is proposed herein that such a presumption also applies to civil 
proceedings in case victims or their families desire to bring tort claims against the State or against its officials. 
Secondly, the Law Commission recommended that the term custody required no explanation.  However, it is 
felt that in order for predictability of judicial outcomes, it is necessary that the explanation is added to include 
custody obtained through unlawful means (or means that are declared unlawful post-facto).  
 
Lastly, the Law Commission in its report recommended that the presumption shall be at the discretion 
of the Court. That has been changed to a mandatory presumption, but rebuttable by other evidence. This 
change is again for the consistency and predictability of judicial outcomes.  
 
Hence this Bill. 
 
     NEW DELHI;  D. RAVIKUMAR 
July 5, 2021. 

4 
 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
 
———— 
 
 
 
A 
 
 
BILL 
 
 
further to amend the Indian Evidence Act, 1872  
 
 
 
 
———— 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Dr. D. Ravikumar, M.P.) 
 