Bill No. 106 of 196% 
THE WORKMEN'S COMPENSATION 
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 1962 
(As INTRODUCED IN LoR SABHA 
ON 19TH NOVEMBER~ 1962) 

8 of 1923. 
8111 No. 106 ot 1"2 
THE WORKMEN'S COMPENSATION (AMENDMENT) 
BILL, 1962 
(As INTRODUCED IN LoK SABRA) 
A 
BILL 
/urtheT to amend the Workmen.'s Compensation. Act, 1923. 
BE it enacted. by Parliament in the Thirteenth Year of the Re-
public of India as follows:-
1. (1) This Act may be called the Workmen's 
(Amendment) Act, 1962. 
Compensation Shott tldo 
anel COlD-
me'1CCllleot. 
S (2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Govern-
ment may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
2. In section 2 of the Worlonen's Compensation Act, 1923 (herein- Amendment 
, after referred to as the principal Act), in sub-section (1) ,_ ohcQioo a. 
10 
(i) in clause (g), for the words and figure "in Schedule I", 
the words and figures "in Part II of Schedule Itt shall be substitu-
ted; 
(ii) in clause (I), for the proviso, the following proviso shall 
be substituted, namely:-
"Provided that permanent total disablement shall be 
IS deemed to result from every injury specified In Part I of 
Schedule I or from any combination of injuries specified in 
Part II thereof where the aggregate percentage of the loss of 
earning capacity. as specified in the said Part II against those 
injuries, amounts to one hundred per cent. or more;"; 

2 
(iii) in sub-elause (li) of clause (n), for the words ulodt 
hundred rupees", the words "five hundred rupees" shall be subs-
tituted. 
A.mendment 3. In section 3 of the principal Act,-
0{ uc:tion 3e 
.. -
(i) in sub-section (2), the following provisos shall be insert- 5 
ed at the end, namely:-
"Provided that if it is proved,-
(4) that a workman whilst in the service of one or 
more. employers in any employment specified in Part C 
.of Schedule III has -contracted a disease specified therein 10 
as an occupational disease peculiar to that employment 
during a continuous period which is less than the period 
specified under this sub-section for that employment, 
and 
(b) that the disease has arisen out of and in the IS 
course of the employment; 
the contracting of such disease shall be deemed to be an in-
jury by accident within the meaning of this section: 
Provided further that if it is proved that a workman who 
having served under any emp' oyer in any employment. specified 20 
in Part B of Schedule III or who having served under one or more 
employers in any employment specified in Part C of that Sche-
dule, for a continuous period specified under this sub-section for 
that mnployment and he has after the cessation of such service 
contracted .any disease specified in the said Part B or the said 2.,S 
Part C, as the case may be, as an occupational disease peculiar to 
·the employment and that such disease arose out of the employ-
. men~. the contracting of the disease shall be deemed to be an 
injury by accident within the meaning of this section."; 
.. -(ii)r for sub-section .(2A), the followingsub-sec:tion· shall be 30 
substituted, namely:-
"~2A)' If a wOrkman employed in any employment speci-
fied. in IPart C Of Schedule III· contracts any oceupational 
disease ·peculiar to that employment, the cOntracting whereof 
is deemed to-be an injury by accident within the meaning of 35 
. this section, end such employment was under more than one 
empia,er,aD such employe1"llhall be'liable for the-payment 

of the compensation in such proportion as thd COmmisa1oGer 
may, in the circumstances,. deem just.". 
4. In section 4 of the principal Act; in sub-clause (i) of ~lause (c) Ar4IIJ ..... ~., 
of sub-section (1), for the word and figure "Schedule I", the words of .clion 4-1 
5 and figures "Part II of Schedule I" shall be substituted. 
5. In section 10 of the principal Act, in sub-section(l), after the Amendment 
first proviso, the following provisos shall be inserted, namely:- ohcctioD 10. 
"Provided further that in case of partial disablement due to 
the contracting of any such disease and which does not force the 
10 workman to absent himself from work, the period of two years 
shall be counted from the day the workman gives notice of the 
disablement to his employer: 
Provided further that if a workman who, having been em· 
ployed in an employment for a continuous period, specified under 
IS sub-section (2) of section 3 in 'respect of that employment, ceases 
to be so employed and develops symptoms of an occupational 
disease peculiar to that employment within two years of the 
cessation of employment, the·accident shall be deemed. to have 
occurred on the day on which the sympto.s were first detected.". 
20 6. In sub-section (2) of section 18A of the prindpal Act, for the Amendment 
words "within six months of the date on which the offence is alleged ~~tio~ 
to have been committed', the words "within six months of the date 
on which. the alleged'commission of the offence came to the know-
ledge. of the ,Commissioner" shall be substituted. 
25 7. In the principal Act. in sections 20. and ,21, the word 
wherever it occurs, shall be omitted. 
'1ocal", Amendment 
of sections 
20ao4 :11. 
8. After section 35 of the principal Act, the following section shall Insertion of 
be inserted, namely:- ~r.- lcetlon 
"36. Every rule made under this Act by the Central Govem- Rwea made 
30 ment shall be laid as soon as may be after it is made.before each ~O~~~CDt 
Hous.e of Parliament while it is in session .for. a total period of tOrbe laiel 
hi d hh . . beorc t rty ays w ic may be comprised in one Be8BIOn or in two Parliameltt. 
succesaive sessions,' and if before the expiry of the session in which 
it is so laid or the session immediately follOWing, both Houses 
3S agree in making ~nymodificatlon in the rule or both Houses agree 
that the Tule sliould·l'lotbe made; the rule shall " thereafter have 
effect' only in Bueh modified fotm'1)r 'be 'Of no effeet, as the case 
may be; 80 however that any ~ . modiftCatlOli or; annulment 

Amcnctmenc ofScbeduIe 
IL 
4 
ahallbe without prejudice to the validity of anything previously 
done under that rule." . 
.. In Sc~edule I of the principal Act,-
(i) for the heading "LIST OF IN.JVlllES DEEMED TO RESULT IN 
PERMANENT PARTIAL DISARLEMENT" the following heading shall be 5 
substituted namely:-
"PART I 
LIST OF INJURIES DEEMED TO RESULT IN PERMANENT TOTAL 
DISABLEMENT"; 
(it) after serial No.6 and the entries relating thereto, the 10 
following heading shall be inserted, namely:-
"PART II 
LIST 01' INJ'tJIlIES DEDOD TO RESULT IN PERMANENT PARTIAL 
DISABLEMENT"; 
-(iii) serial Nos. 7 to 54 shall respectively be re-numbered as IS 
serial Nos. 1 to 48. 
10. In Schedule II of the principal Act,-
(i> in clause (ii), after the words "with· any such manufac-
turing process or with the article made", the words "whether or 
not employment in any such work is within such premises or 20 
precincts" shall be inserted; 
(ii) in clause (iii), 
(a) the word "or" occurring at the end shall be omittedj 
(b) the following Explanation shall be inserted, name-
ly:- 25 
"Explanation.-For the purposes of thia clause, per-
sons employed outside such premises or precincts but in 
any work incidental to, or connected with, the work rela-
ting to making, altering, repairing, ornamenting, finish-
ing or otherwise adapting for U&e, transport or sale any 30 
article or part of an article shall be deemed to be em-
ployed within such premises or precinctaj or"i 

5 
10 
15 
(iii) in clause (xviii). after the word "growing", 
"cardamom" shall be inserted. 
11. In Part B of Schedule III of the principal Act,-
the word 
(i) against the entry "Poisoning by lead, its alloys or com-
pounds or its sequelae excluding poisoning by lead tetra-ethyl" 
in the first column, for the wordS "use of lead" in the entry in the 
second column, the words "use of lead are or lead" shall be 
substitutec:t; 
(ii) against the entry "poisoning by phosphorus or its com-
pounds, or its sequelae" in the first column, for the entry in the 
second column, the following entry shall be substituted, name-
ly:-
"Any process involving the liberation of phosphorus or 
use or handling of phosphorus or its preparations or com-
pounds"; 
(iii) against the entry "Poisoning by benzene, or its homolo-
gues their ami do and nitroderivatives or its sequelae" in the 
first column, for the entry in the second column, the following 
entry shall be substituted, namely:-
20 "Any process involving the manufacture, liberation, or 
use of benzene, benzene homologues and their amido and 
nitroderivatives" ; 
(iv) against the entry "Chrome ulceration or its sequelae" in 
the first column, the following words shall be inserted at the end 
2S in the entry in the second column, namely:-
"or the manufacture of bichromate"; 
(v) against the entry "POisoning by halogenated hydrocar-
bons of the aliphatic series and their halogen d'erivatives" in the 
first column, for the word "distillation" in the entry in the second 
30 column, the word "liberation" shall be substituted; 
(vi) after the existing entries the following entries shall be 
inserted, namely:-
ccpoIlODinl by manlanesc A1lY procell Involving thc use of, or 
or a compound of manganclC, or handling of, or cxposure tC' the fum-
3S itt .. ,uelac. cs, dust or vapour oC, manganesc 
or a compound of mangancsc. or a 
labltance containing mangancse. 
Amendment 
of Schedule 
III. 

Substitution 
of Schedule 
IV. 
8 
PolloDlag by Orgaaic phos-
phorus inlec:ticides-he:a:aethyl 
teuaphosphate \HE.TP) Tetra-
ethyl pyrophosphate (TEPP) aDd 
co-diethyl o-p-mtroplaeay1t1do-
phosphate (PARATIUON). 
Ally procell IDvol viag . the Ule or 
hudUng or eKpOSUft to the (umea 
dUlt or vapour cODtaiaiDg aDy of 
the orgaaic pho.phorus iDICed- S 
ddel. 
12. For Schedule IV of the principal Act, the following Schedule 
shall be substituted, .namely:-
SCHEDULE IV 
[See 8f:ction 4] 
COMPENSATION PAYABLE IN CERTAIN CASES 
--
Monthly wages of the workman 
injured 
Amount of compensation Half-monthly payment 
ter- as compensation for tem· 
porary disablement 
Death Permanent 
total 
,Jisablement 
-I 2 3 4 -
More than But not more 
than 
RI. Rs. Rs. Rs. RI. nP. 
0 10 • 1,000 1,400 HaH' hJa monthly Wlllca 
10 13 1,100 I,S40 Do. 
13 18 1,200 1,680 6 so 
18 21 1,260 1,764 7 00 
21 24 1,440 2,016 8 00 
24 27 1,620 2,268 8 so 
27- 30 1,800 2,520 9 so 
30 35 2,100 2,940 9 so 
3S 40 2,400 3,360 10 00 
40 4S 2,700 3,780 13 00 
45 so 3,000 4,200 13 00 
so 60 3,600 S,04o 18 so 
60 70 ·4,200 5,880 18 50 
70 80 4,800 6,720 20 00 
80 100 6,000 8,400 26 00 
100 ISO 7,000 9,800 37 so 
ISO 200 7,000 9,800 S2 so 
200 300 8,000 I1,ZOO 60 co 
300 400 9,000 12,600 7S 00 
400 .. . 10j000 14.000 87 So 
10 
IS 
20 
25 
30 
35 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
-The Workmen's Compensation Act, 1923, -has been amendl!d 
several times; it was last amended in 1959. 
Z. The question of revising the rates of compensation has long 
been under consideration. The present rates of compensation for 
workmen drawing monthly wages up to Rs. 300 were fixed in 1933. 
In 1946 when the wage limit for coverage was increased from Rs. 300 
to Rs. 400, suitable rates of compensation were provided for workmen 
drawing monthly wages more than Rs. 300. The existing rates of 
compensation for death vary from a minimum of Rs. 500 for work-
men in the lowest wage-group to a maximum of Rs. 4,500 for 
workmen in the highest wage-group. For permanent total disable-
ment the rates vary from a minimum of Rs. 700 to a maximum of 
Rs. 6,300. In view of the considerable rise in the cost of living these 
rates require revision and are now proposed to be doubled as 
recommended by the Study Group on Social Security (1958) and the 
Sub-Committee of the Indian Labour Conference (17th Session). 
Compensation for temporary disablement is paid in the shape of 
half-monthly payments for a maximum period of 5 years, the rates 
of payments varying from a minimum of Rs. 5 to a maximum of 
Rs.30. These rates are also proposed to be revised so that they can 
be -brought as near as possible to the 'corresponding rates of disable-
ment benefit admiSSible under the Employees State Insurance Act, 
1948. 
The Sub-Committee of the Indian Labour Conference (17th 
Session) had also recommended that the wage limit for coverage 
should be increased from Rs. 400 to Rs. 500. This is being done and 
suitable rates of compensation are being prescribed for workmen 
drawing monthly wages more than Rs. 400. 
Opportunity is also being taken to make a few minor and 
consequential amendments, which mainly relate to-
(i) clarifying that the first six injuries specified in Schedule 
I to the Act shall be deemed to result in permanent total 
disablement because they result in 100 per cent. loss of earning 
capacity; 
'1 
• 

(ii) enabling a workman to claim compensatio~ 
in-
(0) if he contracts an occupational disease mentioned 
(1) Part C of Schedule III in less than the period 
prescribed; 
(2) Part B or Part C of Schedule III at any time 
other than the prescribed period; 
(b) within two years from the date notice of disable. 
ment is given in case of partial disablement due to an 
occupational disease where he is not forced to absent him· 
self from wOIl'k; 
(c) within two years from the date the symptoms of an 
occupational disease are detected if the symptoms develop 
after leaving employml!nt; 
(d) even if he is employed outside the premises or 
normal place of work but is employed for the purposes of 
the employer's trade or business; 
(iii) launcbing of prosecution within six months from the 
date on WhICh the commission of an offence under section l8A 
comes to the knowledge of the CommiSSioner; 
(iv) modifying the description of certain employments in the 
list of occupational diseases in Schedule III so as to bring them 
in line with I.L.O. Convention No. 42 and adding manganese 
poisoning and follidol poisoning in the list of occupational 
diseases in Part B of Schedule III. 
The Bill seeks to give effect to the above proposals. 
NEW DELHI; 
The 9th November, 1962. G. L. NANDA. 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
The Workmen'. Compensation Act, It28, covers a laTge l1umber 
of persons in Central Government undertakings such as the 
Railways, Posts and Telegraphs, C.P.W.D., etc. Some of the amend-
ments proposed" in the Bill will have the effect of increasing the 
liability of the employers (including the Central Gcwernment) fo.r 
payment of compensation. Clause 2 (iii) of the Bill seeks to increase 
the wage limit for coverage from Rs. 400 to Rs. 500. In clatWe 11, 
it is proposed. to include Manganese Poisoning and Follidol Poisoning 
in the list of occupational diseases in Schedule III to the Act for 
which compensation will be payable. Clause 12 seeks to replace 
Schedule IV to the Act by a revised Schedule with a view to-
(i) doubling the existing rates of compensation for death 
and pennanent total di,ablement, 
(ii) suitably revising the rates of compensation for tempo-
r..,. disablement so that they can be brought as near as possible 
to the corresponding rates of benefit admissible under the 
Employees State Insurance Act, 1948, 
(iii) providing suitable rates of compensation for workmen 
drawiDl monthly wages more than Rs. 400. 
These proposals in so far as they concern the Central Government 
undertakings will thus involve increased expenditure from the 
ConsoltdaW!d Fund of India. As compensation becomes payable only 
in the event ot an employment injury resulting in disablement or 
death, it is not possible to estimate the amount of increased 
expenditure. 

ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS FROM THE WORKMEN'S COMPENSATION ACT, 1923 
(8 OF 1923) 
• • • • • 
Ddlnitiuna. 2. (1) In this Act, unless there is anything repugnant in the 
subject or context,-
• • • • • 
(g) "partial disablement" means, where the disablement is 
of a temporary nature, such disablement as reduces the earning 
capacity of a workman in any employment in which he was 
engaged at the time of the accident resulting in the disablement, 
and, where the disablement is of a permanent nature, such dis-
ablement as reduces his earning capacity in every employment 
which he was capable of undertaking at that time: provided that 
every injury specified in Schedule I shall be deemed to result in 
permanent partial disablement; 
• • • • • 
(1) "total disablement" means such disablement, whether of 
a temporary or permanent nature, as incapacitates a workman for 
all work which he was capable of performing at the time of the 
accident resulting in such disablement: provided that permanent 
total disablement shall be deemed to result from the permanent 
total loss of the sight of both eyes or from any combination of 
injuries specified in Schedule I where the aggregate percentage 
of the loss of earning capacity, as specified in that Schedule against 
those injuries, amounts to one hundred per cent.; 
• • • • • 
~,..., .. --~ - -. (n) "workman" means any person (other than a person whose 
employment is of a casual nature and who is employed otherwise 
than for the purposes of the employer's trade or business) who 
is-
(i) a railway servant as defined in section 3 of the Indian 
Railways Act, 1890, not permanently employed in any adminis- 9 of 1890. 
trative, district or sub-divisional office of a railway and not em-
ployed in any such capacity as is specified in Schedule II, or 
10 

'11 
(ii) employed on monthly wages not exceeding four hundred 
rupees, in any such capacity as is specified in Schedule II, 
3. • • • • • 
• • • • • F.me1oyer'. 
liability fer 
(2) ~f R workman employ:ed in any employment specified in Part ~i,:~en81-, 
A of Schedule In contracts any disease specified therein as an occu· 
pational disease peculiar to that employment, or if a workman, whilst 
in the service 'of an employer in whose service he has been employed 
for a continuous period of not less than six'months (which period 
shall not include a period of service under any other employer in the 
same kind of employment) in any employment specified in Part B of 
Schedule III, contracts any disease specified therein as an occupa· 
tional disease peculiar to that employment, or if a workman whilst in 
the .service of one or more employers in any employment specified 
in Part C of Schedule III for such continuous period as the Central 
Government may specify in fespect of each such employment, con· 
tracts an1'disease specified therein as an occupational disease peculiar 
to that employment, the contracting of the disease shall be deemed to 
be an injury by accident within the meaning of this section and, un· 
less the contrary is proved, the accident shall be deemed to have arisen 
out of, and in the course of, the employment. 
(2A) If any disease specified in Part C of Schedule III as an occu· 
pational disease peculiar to that employment has been contracted by 
any workman during the continuous period specified under sub.section 
(2) in respect of that employment and the workman has during such 
period been employed in such employment under more than one 
employer, all such employers shall be liable for the payment of com-
pensation under this Act Ql such proportion as the Commissioner may, 
in the circumstances, deem just. 
• • • * • 
4. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the amount of com- Amount of compensa· pensation shall be as follows, namely:- tion. 
• • • • • 
(c) Where permanent partial disablement results from the 
lnjury-
(i) in the case of an injury specified in Schedule I, such. 
percentage of the compensation which would have been pay-
able in the case of pennllllent total disablement as is specified 

Notice and 
claim. 
Penalties . 
12 
therein as being the perceQtage of the loss of earning capacity 
caused by that injury, arid 
• • • • • 
10. (1) No claim for compensation shall be entertained by a Com-
missioner unless notice of the accident has been given in the manner 
hereinafter provided as soon as practicable after the happening there-
of and unless the claim is preferred before him within two years. of 
the occurrence of the accident or, in case of death, within two years 
from the date of death: 
Provided that, where the accident is the contracting of a disease 
in respect of which the provisions of sub-section (2) of section 3 are 
applicable, the accident shall be deemed to have occurred on the first 
of the days during which the workman was continuously absent from 
work in consequence of the disablement caused by the disease: 
• • • • • 
18A. (1) Whoever-
• • • • • 
(2) No prosecution under this section shall be instituted except 
by or with the previous sanction of a Commissioner, and no Court 
shall take' cognizance of any offence under this section, unless 
complaint thereof is made within six months of the date on which 
the offence is alleged tc have b~n committed. 
• • • • • 
~f~:mm:t 20. (1) The State Government may, by notification in the Official 
sioners. Gazette, appoint any person to be a Commissioner for Workmen's 
Compensation for such local area as may be specified in the notifica-
tion. 
(2) Where more than one Commissioner has been appointed for 
any local area, the State Government may, by general or special order, 
regulate the distribution of business between them. 
(3) Any Commissioner may, for the purpose of deciding any mat-
ter referred to him for decision under this Act, choose one or more 
persons possessing special knowledge of any matter relevant to the 
matter under inquiry to assist him in holding the inquiry. 
(4) Every Commissioner shall be deemed to be a public servant . . ., 4' of 18.1)0.' 
wlthtn the meamng of the Indian Penal Code. 
Venue C?f 21. (1) Where any matter is under this Act to be done by or before 
~~.a Commissioner, the same shall. subject to the provisions of this Act 
and to any rules made hereunder, be done by or befare a Commis-
sioner for the local area in which the accident took place- whi~h re-
sulted in the injury: 

13 
Provided that, where the workman is the master of a ship or a 
seaman, any such matter may be done by or before a Commissioner 
for the local area in which the owner or agent of the ship resides or 
curia. on busiDess. 
(.2) If a Commissioner is satified that any matter arising out of 
an, pl:OCeedings pending before him can be more conveniently dealt 
witll by any other Commissioner, whether in the same State or not, 
he may, subject to rules made under this Act, order such matter to be 
transferred to such other Commissioner either for report or for dis-
posal, and, if he does so, shall forthwith transmit to such other Com-
missioner all documents relevant, for the .decision of such matter and, 
where the matter is transferred for disposal, shall also transmit in 
the prescribed manner any money remaining in his hands or invest-
ed by, him for the benefit of any party to the proceedings: 
Provided that the Commissioner shall not, where any party to the 
proceedings has appeared before him, make any order of transfer re-
lating, to the distribution among dependants of a lump sum without 
giving such party an opportunity of being heard: 
Provided further that no matter other than a matter relating to 
the actual payment to a workman or the distributidb among depen-
dants of a lump sum shall 'be transferred for disposal under this sub-
section to a Commissioner in the same State save with the previous 
sanction of the State Government or to a Commissioner in another 
State save with the previous sanction of the Sta~ Government of 
that State, unless all the parties to the proceedings agree to the tran-
• " " n~:"'''''1 ... er. ' '!:t :-'~;' 
(3) The Commissioner to whom any matter is so tr:ansferred shall 
subject to rules made under this Act, inquir.e there into and, if the 
matter was. traDsferred for report, return his report thereon or, if the 
matter was transferred for disposal, continue the proceedings as if 
they had originally commenced before him. 
(4) On receipt of a report from a Commissioner to whom any mat-
ter has been transferred for report under sub-section (2), the Com-
missioner by whom it was referred shall decide the matter referred 
in conformity with such report. . 
(5) The State Government may transfer any matter from any 
Cbmmissioner appointed by it to any other Commissioner appointed 
by it. 
• • • • 

63 of J948. 
SCHEDULE I 
[See sections 2(1) and 4] 
LIST OF INJURIES DEEMED TO RESULT IN PERMANENT PARTIAL DISABLEMENT 
Serial 
No. Description of injury 
I Loss of both hands or amp:.Jtation at higher sites. 
• • • 
6 Absolute deafness • 
• 
Amputation cases-upper limbs (either arm) 
7 Amputation through shoulder joint 
• • • • 
SCHEDULE II 
[See section 2 (1) (n)] 
• 
Percentage 
of loss 
of earning 
capacity 
100 
• 
100 
LIST OF PERSONS WHO, SUBJECT TO ~ PROVISIONS OF SECTION 2 (1) (n), 
ARE INCLUDED IN THE DEFINITION OF WORKMEN 
The following persons are workmen within the meaning of section 
2 (1) (n) and sy.bject to the provisions of that section, that is to say, 
any person who is-
• • • • • 
(ii) employed, otherwise than in a clerical capacity, in any 
premises wherein or within the precincts whereof a manufactur-
ing process as defined in clause (k) of section 2 of the Factories 
Act, 1948, is being carried on, or in any kind of work whatsoever 
incidental to or connected with any such manufacturing process 
or with the article made, and steam, water or other mechanical 
power or electrical power is used; or 
(iii) employed for the purpose of making, altering, repairing, 
ornamenting, finishing or otherwise adapting for use, transport or 
sale any article or part of an article in any premises wherein or 
within the precincts whereof twenty or more persons are so 
employed; or 
• • • • • 
(xviii) employed, otherwise than in a clerical capacity, on 
any estate which is maintained for the purpose of growing cin-
chona, coffee, rubber or tea, and on which on anyone day in the 
preceding twelve months twenty-five or more persons have been 
so employed; or 
• • • • • 
14 

SCHEDULE IIi 
(See section 3) 
LIST OF OCCUPATIONAL DISEASES 
Oc:cupational disease Employment 
PART A 
• • • • • 
PAR.T B 
Poisoning by lead, its alloys or compounds 
or its sequelae excluding poisoning by 
lead tetra-ethyl. 
Poisoning by phosphorus or its compounds. 
or its sequelae. 
Any process involving the handq or UIe 
of lead or any of its preparations or om-
pounds except lead tetra-etbyl. 
Any process involvm, the use of phos-
phorus or its preparations or compounds. 
Poisoning by mer<:Ury, its amalgams and An, process involving the use of mercury 
compounds, or its sequelae. or its preparatiODI or compounds. 
Poisoning by benzene, or its homologues, Any p'rocess involving the manufacture 
their amido and nitroderivatives or its distillation or use of benezene, benzol 
sequelae. benezcne homologues and amido and 
nitroderivatives. 
Chrome ulceration or its sequelae Any process involving the use of chromic 
acid or bichromate of ammonium potas-
sium or sodium. or their preparations. 
Poisoning by halogenated hydrocarbons of Any p'roceSI involving the manufacture 
the aliphatic series and their halogen deri- distillation and UIe of hydrocarbons of 
vatives. the aliphatic series and their halogen 
derivatives . 
• • • • • 
SCHEDULE IV 
(See section 3) 
COMPENSATION PAYABLE IN CERTAIN CASES 
-
Amount of compensation 
for-
Monthly wagel of the work- Permanent Half-monthly paYment a 
man injured Death total dis- compensation for tem 
ablement porary disablement 
.... . 
I 2 3 4 
-More than- But not more 
than--
RI. Ra. Rs. Rs. RI. a. 
• 
0 10 SOO 100 Half his monthly wage. 
170 10 IS ,,0 , 0 
IS 18 600 840 6 0 
--
15 

14 
., 
X 2 3 4 
18 21 630 882 7 0 
21 24 720 1,008 II 0 
24 27 810 1,134 I I 
27 30 900 1,260 , 0 
30 3' 1,0,0 1,470 , • 
3S 40 I,zoe 1.680 10 0 
40 4S 1,3,0 1,890 II 
• 
4' ,0 1.,00 2,100 12 II 
,0 60 1,800 2.5 20 I, 0 
60 70 2.100 2,HO 17 I 
70 80 2.400 3.360 20 0 
80 100 3.000 4.200 as 0 
100 200 3.500 4.900 30 0 
200 300 4.000 S.6oo JO 0 
300 4,,00 6.300 30 0 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BnL 
further to amend the Workmen's Compensation 
Act, 1923. 
The President has, in pursuance of clause (3) of 
Article 117 of the Constitution of India, 
recommended to Lok Sabha the consideration 
of the Bill. 
_ M. N. KAUL, 
Secretary. 
(Shri Gulzarilal Nanda, 
Minister of PLanning and 
Lohour and Employment!.). 