Punjab 
Act III 
of 1.lL 
As' INTRODUCED IN I LoK SABHA ON 
Bill No. 186 of 1983 
THE PUNJAB MUNICIPAL (NEW DELHI AMENDMENT) BILL, 1983 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Punjab Municipal Act, 1911, Q8 in force in 
New Delhi. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty-fourth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
1. (1) This Act may be called the Punjab Municipal (New Delhi 
Amendment) Act, 1~83. 
Short 
title 
and 
com-
5 (2) It &hall come into force on s'Uch date as the Central Government mence-
may. by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint and different dates ment. 
may be appointed for different provisions of this Act. 
2.'In section 3 of the Punjab Municipal Act, 1911, as in force in New 
Delhi (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), after clause (1), 
10 the following clause shall be inserted, namely:-
• (lA) "Appellate Tribunal" means an Appellate Tribunal refer-
red to in section 225-A;' . 
. 3. In section 170-E of the principal Act, for the words "shall be liable 
to a fine which may extend to five hundred rupees", the words "shall be 
15 punishable with simple imprisonment which may extend to six months, 
:-. or with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees, or with both" 
shall be substituted. 
Amend-
mentof 
section 3. 
Amend-
mentof 
section 
170-E. 
.-

Amend-
ment of 
section 
172. 
Amend-
ment of 
sectiOD 
173. 
Amend-
ment of 
sections 
174-A, 
175 and 
190. 
Amend_ 
ment of 
section 
192-A. 
2 
4. In section 172 of the principal Act,-
(a) in sub-section (1), for the words "shall be punishable with a 
fine which may extend to fifty rupees", the following shall be 
substituted, namely:-
"Ehall be punishablc,- 5 
(8) if such street is a public street, with simple impri-
sonment which may extend to six months, or with fine 
which may extend to five thousand rupees, or with both; 
and 
(b) in any other case, with fine which may extend to 10 
fifty rupees"; 
(b) in sub-section (2), the provi'So shall be· omitted. 
5. In section 173 of thE' principal Act,-
(a) in sub-section (1), after the word "street", 
occurs, the words "or public p~ace" shall be inserted; 
(b) in sub-section (2) ,--
wherever it 
(i) in the opening portion, for the words "shall be punish-
able with fine which may extend to fifty rupees", the following 
shall be eubstituted, namely:-
"shall be punishable,-
(a) if anv such act is done in relation to a public 
street, with simple imprisonment which may extend to 
six months, or with fine which may extend to five 
thousand rupees, or with both; and 
15 
!Zo 
(b) if any such act is done in relation to a street R5 
other than a public street, or to a public place, with fine 
which may Ilxtend to fifty rupees"; 
(ii) in clause (ii), after the word "street", the words "or 
public place" shall be inserted. 
6. In section 174-A section 175 and clause (e) of sub-section (1) of So 
section 190 of the principal Act, after the word "street", wherever it 
occurs, the words "or public place" shall be inserted. 
7. In section 192-A of the principal Act, for the portion beginning 
with the words "on conviction by a magistrate be liable to fine" and 
ending ~ith ~he words "fifty rupees for every day during which -such 35 
use contmues , the following shall be substituted, namely:-
"be punishable with simple imprisonment which may extend to six 
months, or with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees or 
with both". I 
.. 

3 
8. Section 195 of the principal Act shall be renumbered as sub-section 
(1) thereof, and-
(i) in sUb-section (1) as So renumbered, for the words "delivered 
to the owner within six months from the completion of the build-
5 ing", at both the places where they occur, the words "delivered to 
the owner or occupier of that building" shall be substituted; 
(ii) after S'Ub-section (1) as so renumbered, the follOwing sub-
section shall be inserted, namely:-
"(2) Any person who begins, erects or re-erects any build-
10 ing as described in sub-section (1), shall be punishable with 
simple imprisonment which may extend to six months, or with 
fine which may extend to five thousand rupees, or with both.". 
!Zo 
9. In section 195-A of the principal Act,-
(a) in sub-section (1), for the words and figures ·'to be delivered 
to the owner within six months from the commencement of the 
building, or from the contravention of the terms of any sanction, or 
of any bye-law framed under section 190, as the case may be", the 
words "delivered to the owner or occupier of that 'building" shall 
be substituted; 
(b) for sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be 
substituted, namely:-' 
"(2) Any person failing to comply with the terms of such 
notice shall be punishable with simple imprisonment which may 
extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to five 
thousand rupees, or with both.". 
10. After section 195-A of the prinCipal Act, the following sections 
shall be inserted, namely:-
"195-B. (1) It shall be lawful for the committee, at any time, 
before or after delivering the notice to the owner Or occupier of a 
building under section 195 or section 195-A, to make an order direct-
ing the sealing of 'Such building. in the manner prescribed by rules. 
for the purpose of carrying out the provisions of this Act, or for 
preventing any dispute as to the nature and 'eJ>tent of erection or 
re-erection of such building. 
(2) Where any building has been sealed, the committee may, 
35 for the purpose of altering or demolishing such building, order the 
seal to be removed. 
(3) No person shall remove such seal except-
(a) under an order made by the committee under sub-section 
(2); or 
(b) under an order of the Appellate Trlounal or the 
Administrator of the Union territory of Delhi, made in an appeal 
under this Act. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 
195. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 
195-A. 
Insertion 
of new 
sections 
195-B and 
195-C. 
Power to 
seal un-
authorised 
construc_ 
tions. 

Power to 
seize 
materials, 
etc., used 
in un-
authorised 
construc-
tion. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 
225. 
Insertion 
of new 
sections 
225-A. 
225-B. 
225-C and 
225-D. 
Appellate 
Tribunal. 
Appeals 
to the 
Appellate 
Tribunal. 
4 
195-C. (1) Where any building is begun, erected or re-erected 
as described in section 195, the committee may seize or caUSe to be 
seized any construction material. tool, machinery, scaffolding or 
other things used in such building or in the erection or re-erection 
thereof, and shall, unless the owner or occupier of such building 5 
turns up to take back such things and pays to the oommittee the 
charges for the removal or s~o~'age of such things, be disposed of by 
the committee by public auction or in such other manner and within 
such time as the commIttee thinks fit. 
(2) The charges for the removal nnd storage of the 10 
things sold under sub-section (1) shall be paid out of 
the proceeds of the sale thereof and the balance, if any, shall 
be paid to the owner or occupier .of the building on a claim being 
made therefor within a period of two years from the date of sale, 
and if no such claim is made within the said period, shall be credited 15 
to the municipal fund.". 
11. In section 225 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), clauses (a) 
and (b) shall be omitted. 
12. After section 225 of the principal Act, the following sections shall 
be inserted, namely:-
"225-A. The Appellate Tribunal or Appellate Tribunals constitu-
~o 
ted under section 347A of the Delhi Municipal Corporation Act, 1957 68 of 195'1. 
shall be deemed to be the Appellate Tribunal or Appellate Tribu-
nals for deciding appeals under section 225-B, and the provisions 
of the said section 347 A and 'Section 347C of the Delhi Municipal 
Corporation Act, 1957, and the rules made thereunder shall, with 25 
necessary modifications, apply for the purposes of this Act as they 
apply for the purposes of that Act. 
225-B. (1) Any person aggrieved by any of the following orders 
or notices, may prefer an appeal against such order or notice to the ~o 
Appellate Tribunal, namely:-
(a) an order under section 170-C refusing Or .according 
'Sanction to the proposed street; or 
-
(b) a notke under section 171 requiring a street. to be 
levelled: pave~, metalled, flagged, channelled, drained, cleaned 35 
or prOVIded WIth proper means of lighting, or declaring a street 
to be a public street; or 
(c) a notice under sub-section (2) of section 172 requiring 
removal or alteration of an immoveable encrolchm-ent or im-
moveable ove!'h::mging structure; or 

5 
(d) an order under section 173 re:).uiring removal of a 
moveable encroachment, moveable overhanging structure or any 
other obstruction or encroachment or fOr doing any other act 
thereunder; or 
(e) a l1Jtice under section 174, requiring any building or 
any part thereof to be set back to or towards the regular line 
of a strecl- or nn order for the payment of cf):npensation or an 
order for any building to be set forward for the improvement ot 
the line of a street; or 
10 (f) an order under section 193 sanctioning or refusing to 
sanction erection or l'e-e~'ection of a builuing; or 
(g) an order under section 193-A requiring modification of 
the building under construction; or 
(h) a notice under sub-section (1) of sc:::.tion 195 requiring 
15 alte:ration or demolition of a b'Uilding; Or 
(i) a n::Jticc under ::;edion 195-A requiring build'ng- opera-
tions to be di!'continued; or 
(j) an order under se·etion 195-B requiring sealing of any 
unauthorised construction; or 
20 (k) an order under section 195-C requiring removal or 
seizure or disposal of any construction material, tool, machinery, 
scaffolding or other things; or 
(l) an order refuSing to pay any compensation or to pay 
such compensation as claimed under the provisions of this Act; 
25 or 
(m) any such other order or notice relating to or arising 
o'ut of planned cle'lcIopment under the provisions of this Act as 
mny be p:res::ribed by rules. 
(2) An appeal under this section shall be filed within thirty days 
30 from the date of the order or notice appealed against: 
35 
Prov:c!ed that the Appellate Triblolnal may entertain an appeal 
after the expiry of the said period of thirty days if it is satisfied 
that there 'vvas sufficient cause for not filing it within that period. 
(3) An appeal to the Appellate Tribunal shall be made in such 
form and shall be accompanied by a copy of the order or notice 
appealed against an:! by such fee's as may be prescribed by rules . 
• 
225-C, (1) An appeal shall lie to the Administrator of the Union 
territoi."y of Delhi against an order of the Appellate Tribunal con-
firming, modifying or annulling an order or notice made or issued 
under this Act. 
(2) The proviuions of sub-sections (2) .:Iud P) of section 225-B 
ani the provisions of section 347C of the Delhi Municipal Corpora-
tion Act, 1937, and the rules made thereunder, :-hall, so far as may 
be, apply to -the filing and dh;posal of an appeal under this section 
Appeal 
against 
orders of 
Appellate 
Tribunal. 

Barot 
jurisdic-
tion of 
courts. 
Insertion 
of new 
section 
227-A. 
Certain 
offences 
to be 
collliza-
able. 
6 
as they apply to the ftling and dispO'Sal of an appeal under the aaid 
section 225-B. 
(3) An order of the Administrator on an appeal under this 
section, and subject only to such order, an order of the Appellate 
TriBunal under section 225-B, and subject to such orders of the 5 
Administrator or an Appellate Tribunal, an order Or notice of the 
committee appealable under this Act, 'ShalI be final. 
225-D. (1) After the commencement of section 12 of the Punjab 
Municipal (New Delhi Amendment) Act, 1983, no court shall enter-
tain any suit, application or ot.her proceedings in respe~t of any 10 
order or notice appealable under section 225-B and no such order or 
notice shan be caHed in question otherwise than by preferring an 
appeal under that section. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), 
every suit, application or other proceeding pending in any court 15 
immediately before the commeneement of section 12 of the Punjab 
Municipal (New Delhi Amendment) Act, 1983, in respect of any 
order Or notice appealable under section 225-B shall continue to be 
dealt with and disposed of by that court as if the said section had 
not been brought into force.". 20 
13. In the principal Act, under the heading "Of!ertces and ProsecfL-
tions", and before section 228, the foHowing section shall be inserted, 
namely:-
"227-A. The Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, shall apply to 
an offence under section 170-E, or clause (a) of sub-section (1) of 25 
section 172, or clause (a) of SUb-section (2) of section 173, or section 
192-A, or sub-section (2) of section 195, or sub-section (2) of sec-
tion 195-A as if it were a cognizable offence-
(i) for the purposes of investigation of such offence; and 
(ii) for the purposes of all matters other than- 30 
(1) matters referred to in section 42 of that Code, and 
(2) arrest of a person except on the complaint of, or 
upon information received from, such o,tHcer of the com-
mittee, not being below the rank of the Secretary to the 
committee, as may be appointed by the Administrator of 35 
the pnion territory of Delhi: 
Pro.vi~ed ~hat no offen~e o~ beginning, erecting or re-erecting 
any buddmg In contravenbon of any condition subject to which 
any sanction w~s granted by the committee shall be cognizable, if 
s~ch contravent~(\n relates to any deviation from any plan of erec-
tlo~ or. re-erectIon of that building sanctioned by the committee 40 
WhICh IS compoundable on paY,;ment of an amount under this Act.". 

5 
10 
7 
14. Section 228 of the principal Act shall be re-numbered as sub-
sect.ion (1) thereof, and after sub-section (1) as so re-numbered, the 
following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:-
"(2) No court shall take cognizance of an offence punishable 
under section 170-E or clause (a) or sub-section (1) of section 172, 
or clause (a) of sub-section (2) of section 173, or section 192-A, ar 
sub-section (2) of section 195 or sub-section (2) of section 195-A ex-
cept upon the complaint of, or upon information received from, such 
officer of the committee, not being below the rank of the Secretary 
to the committee, as may be appointed by the Administrator of the 
Union territory of De!hi. ... 
15. In section 240 of the principal Act,-
(a) in sub-section (1), after clause (v), the following clauses 
shall be inserted, namely:-
"(va) the manner in which the sealing of any building 
under sub-section (1) of section 195-B shall be made; .., 
J.vb) the order or notice relating to Or arising out of planned 
development under the provisions of this Act against which an 
appeal shall be preferred to the Appellate Tribunal undu clause 
20 (m) of sub-section (1) of section 225-B; 
(ve) the form in . which an appeal shall be made to the 
Appellate Tribunal under sub-section (3) of section 225-B and 
the fees that shall accompany such appeal;"; 
(b) after sub-section (7), the following sub-section shall be in-
Q5 serted, namely:- "I'" 
" (8) Every rule made under thi-s Act shall be laid, as soon 
as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, 
while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may 
be comprised in one session or in two or more successive 
30 sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately 
following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both 
HoJ,lses agree in making any modification in the rule or both 
ij:ouses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall 
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no 
35 effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modifica-
tion or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of 
anything previously done under that rule.". 
Amend_ 
ment of 
section 
228. 
Amend-
mentol 
section 
240. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The problem of encroachment on public lands and unauthorised 
constructions in Delhi and the need for taking timely and effective 
action in such cases hod been engaging the attention of the Government 
for 'Some time. It was suggested in many quarters that it is necessary 
to strengthen the laws to make encroachment on public lands and un-
authorised constructions cognizable offences. The Estimates Committee 
of Parliament had also made similar recommendations. 
2. In recent years, encroachment on public streets, unauthorised con-
struction on public and private lands and conversion of residential COD-
structions into commercial complexes have assumed alarming propor-
tions. 
3. The local authorities in Delhi including the New Delhi Municipal 
Committee have not been able to effectively prevent these activities 
because of persons taking recourse to legal proceedings and obtaining 
ex parte stay from civil courts. These stay orders remain operative for 
years till the final settlement of legal proceedings with the result that 
it becomes difficult for the local authorities to demolish these encroach-
ments or unauthorised constructions. Further, prosec'UtLons for en-
croachments or unauthorised constructions have also not proved effective 
because ot imposition of meagre fines by courts. In order, therefore, 
to enable the New Delhi Municipal Committee to effectively curb these 
activities, it is proposed to amend the Punjab Municipal Act, 1911 as in 
force in New Delhi. 
4. The Bill, therefore, provides, among other things, for the following 
changes in the Act, namely:-
(i) At present the New Delhi Municipal Committee may, by 
notice delivered to the owner, require a building begun, erected or 
re-erected without sanction to be altered or demolished within the 
period specified in the notice. The Committee has also power to 
require the owner of such building to discontinue the building 
operations. It is proposed to give the Committee the power to seal 
such building. Such seal can be removed only by the Committee 
for the purpose of altering or demolishing such building or in pur-
suance of an order made by the Appellate Tribunal or the Adminis-
trator of the Union territory of Delhi in an appeal made under 
the provisions of the Act; 
(ii) It is proposed to provide for appeals against certain notices 
issued or orders made under the provisions of the Act to an 
A~pellate Tribunal. The Appellate Tribunal or the Appellate 
TrIbunals proposed to be constituted under the provisions of the 
Delhi Municipal Corporation Act, 1957 would be deemed to be the 
Appellate Tribunal or Tribunals, for the purposes of hearing 
appeals under this Act also, A further appeal against the orders of 
the Appellate Tribunal would lie to the Administrator of the Union 
8 

9 
territory of Delhi. The orders made by the Appellate Tribunal or 
the Administrator of the Union teITitory of Delhi, as the case may, 
be, on such appeals will be final and no civil court shall have 
any jurisdiction to entertain any proceedings in respect of 
notices issued or! orders made under the Act for which appeals 
shall lie to the Appellate Tribunal. The proVlSlODS of the 
Delhi Municipal Corporation Act, 1007 and the rules made there-
under regarding the procedure to be followed by the Appellate 
Tribunals in respect of hearing appeals under that ~t are being 
made applicable to the Appellate Tribunal while hearing appeals 
under the Act which will include the prohibition of giving any 
ex paTte stay of notices issued or orders made under the Act; 
(iii) It is proposed to change the penalty of fine now specified 
for certain offences under the Act to include imprisonment also and 
to make some of the offences cognizable; 
(iv) Opportunity is being availed of to make certain other 
ch~ges of a consequential and minor nature. 
5. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects. 
NEW DELHI,' -- . 
The 17th August, 1983. 
P, VENKATASUBBAIAH. 
I 
.J 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Sub-c1ause (a) of clause 15 of the Bill seeks to insert three new 
clauses in sub-section (1) of section 240 of the Punjab Municipal Act, 
1911 as in force in New '.Delhi so as to enable the State Government to 
mak~ rules in respect of certain matters provided in the Bill. These 
matters, inter alia, relate to the manner in which the sealing of Any 
building under sub-section (1) of new section 195--B shall be made, the 
order or notice relating to or arising out of planned development under 
the provisions of the Act against which an appeal shall be made to the 
Appellate Tribunal under clause (m) of sub-section (1) of new sec-
tion 225-B and the form in which an appeal shall be made to the Appel-
late Tribunal under sub-section (3) of the said section 225-B and the 
fep.::; that shall accompany such appeal. 
2. The matters in respect of which rules may be made under ~e new 
provisions are matters of procedure or detail. The delegation of legis-. 
!ative power is, therefore, normal in character. 
10 

ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS FROM TIlE PUNJAB MUNICIPAL ACT, 1911 
(PuNJAB ACT III OF 1911) 
• • • • • 
3. In this Act, unless there is something repugnant in the subject or Deftni. 
context,- tions . 
• '" '" 
170-E. Whoever begins, continues or completes the laying out or 
making oJ. a street without giving the notice required by section 170-A, 
or in contravention of any written directions made under section 17D-C, 
or of any bye-law or provision of this Act, shall be liable to a flne which 
may extend to five hundred rupees . 
• • • • • 
172. (1) Whoever without the written permIssIon of the committee 
makes any immoveable encroachment on or under any street, on, over 
or under any sewer, or watercourse, or erects or re-erects any immove-
able overhanging structure projecting into a street at any point above 
the said ground level. shall be punishable with a fine which may extend 
to fifty rupees. 
(2) Th(' committee may, by notice, require the owner or occupier 
of any buiJding to remove or alter. within a specified time not exceeding 
six weeks, such immoveable encroachment or overhanging structure as 
aforesaid, and no compensation shall be claimable in respect of such 
removal or alteration: 
Provided that if a period of more than three years has elapsed from 
th~ completion of the encroachment or overhanging structure, no prose. 
cution shall lie under sub-section (1); nor shall such encroachment or 
overhanging structure be required to be removed or altered without 
payment of reasonable compensation. 
173. (1) The committee may grant permISSIon in writing, on S'Uch 
conditions as it may deem fit for the safety or convenience of persons 
passing by, or dwelling or working in the neighbourhood, and may 
charge fees for such permission, and may at its discretion withdraw 
~he pennission, to any person to-
(a) place in front of any building any moveable encroachment 
upon the ground level of any public street or over or on any sewer, 
drain or watercourse or any move~ble overhanging structure pro-
jecting into such public street at a point above the said ground level, 
(b) take up or alter the pavement or other materials for the 
fences or posts of any public street, 
II 
Penalty. 
Punish-
ment for 
immove-
able en. 
croach_ 
ment or 
overhang_ 
ing struc-
ture over 
street. 
Power to 
permit 
occupa-
tion of 
public 
street and 
to remove 
obstruc-
tion. 

Special 
provi-
sions 
regarding 
street..-
belong-
ing to 
Govern-
ent. 
ltemcval 
or altera-
tion of 
any bal-
cony, pr0.-
jection or 
structure, 
etc., on 
payment 
ofcompeb. 
satlon. 
12 
(c) deposit or cause to be deposited building materials, goodl 
for sale, or other articles on any public street, or 
(d) make any bole or excavation on, in or under any street, or 
remove materials from beneath any street, so as to cause risk of 
subsidence, or 
(e) erect or set up any fence, post, stall or scaffolding in any 
public street. 
(2) Whoever does any of' the acts mentioned in sub-section (1) 
without the written permission of the committee shall be punishable 
with fine which may extend to fifty rupees and the committee or the 
secretary of the committee or the Medical Officer of Health or any 
person authorised by the committee may-
(i) after reasonable opportunity has been given to the owner 
to remove his material and he has failed to do so, remove or cause 
to be removed by the police, or any other agency, any such move-
able encroachments {)r overhanging structures and' any such 
materials, goods or articles of merchandise and any such fence, post, 
stall or scaffolding, 
(ii) and take measures to restore the street to the condition 
it was in before any such alteration, excavation or damage . 
... ... ... ... 
174-A. Notwithstanding anything contained in sections 172, 173 or 
174, or in clause (u) of section 188, and subject to any general or special 
order that the State Government may make in this behalf if any street 
is vested in the State Government-
(a) the committee, shall not, in respect of such street, grant 
permission to do any act the doing of which without the written 
permission of the committee is punishable under section 172 or 
section 173 or allow any building to be set forward under the pro-
visions of sub-section (2) of section 174, except with the sanction ot 
the State Government which may be given in respect of a class of 
cases generally or in respect of a particular case; 
(b) the committee shall, if so required by the State Govern ... 
ment, exercise the power conferred upon it by sub-section (2) of 
section 172 or sub-section (2) of section 173 or sub-section (1) of 
section 174 or clause (u) of section 188 or any bye-law made in 
exercise of the power conferred by clause (u) of section 188 in res-
pect of any encroachment or overhanging structure on or over 
such ~treet or any materials, goods Or articles of merchandise 
depOSIted on such street, or any fence, post, stall or scaffolding 
erected or set up ~n any such street or in respect of any building 
or part of a bUIlding which projects beyond the regular line of 
such street. 
17~. The committee may, subject to the payment of reasonable com-pensatIon by notice . th .th. '. ,requIre e owner or occupier of any building WI In a perIod of n t I th . t . 0 ess an SIX weeks to be specified in such notice o remove or alter an b 1 . : ' erected with th .y a cony, proJectIon, structure or verandah, 
or encroaching ~nsa~cbon of the. committee, overhanging, projecting into 
therein. y street or Into or on any drain, sewer or aqueduct 
• • • 

"'f,' ,.'~~'''''' 
13 
190. (1) The committee may, and if so required by the State Govern-
ment shall, by bye-laws, regulate in respe~t of the erection or re-erection 
of any building within the municipality or part thereof-
* * * * • 
(e) the line of frontage where the building abuts on a street; 
.* • * * 
191-A. If under the provIsIons of any scheme sanctioned under sec-
tion 192 the erection or re-erection of buildings in a specified area for a 
specified purpose is prohibited, any person who after such scheme is 
sanctioned uses any building for such purpose shall, unless it was used 
for this purpose before the scheme was sanctioned, on conviction by a 
magistrate be liable to fine which may extend to five hundred rupees, 
and if after such conviction he continues to use such building for such 
purpose shall be liable to fine which may extend to fifty rupees for every 
day during which such use continues. 
* * * • * 
195. Should a bui·lding be begun, erected or re-erected-
(a) without sanction as required by section 189(1); or 
(b) without notice as required by section 189(2); ar 
(c) when sanction has been refused, 
the committee may by notice delivered to the owner within six months 
from the completion of the building, require the building to be altered 
or demolished as it may deem necessary within the period specified in 
such notice; and should it be begun or erected-
(d) in contravention of the terms of any sanction granted; or 
(e) when the sanction has lapsed; or 
(I> in contravention of any bye-law made under section 190; 
or, in the case of a building of which the erection has been deemed 
to be sanctioned under section 193 (4), if it contravenes any scheme 
sanctioned under section 192; 
the committee may by notice to be deliVered to the owner within six 
months from the completion of the building require the building to be 
altered in such manner as it may deem necessary, within the period 
specified in Ruch notice: 
Provided that the committee may, instead of requiring the alteration 
or demolition of any such building, accept by way of compensation 
such sum as it may deem reasonable: 
Provided also that the committee shall require a building to be de-
molished or altered so far as is necessary to avoid contravention of a 
building scheme drawn up under section 192: 
Provided further that if any notice is issued by the Executive 
Officer under this section on the ground that a building has been begun 
or has been erected in contravention of the terms of any sanction 
granted or in contravention of any bye-J.aw made under \:lection 190 the 
person to whom the notice is issued may, within fifteen days from the 
date of service of $uch notice, appeal to the committee, and, subject to 
Power of 
committee 
to make 
bye-laws 
as to erec-
tion or 
rc-erection 
of build-
ings. 
Punish-
ment for 
erection 
or I'j,!-4!rec-
tion of a 
building 
On sanc-
tion of Q 
building 
scheme 
under 
section 
192. 
Penalty 
for diso-
bedience. 

Power at 
committee 
to stop 
building 
operations. 
Appeals 
from 
orders of 
commi~­
tee. 
Authority 
for 
prosecu-
tions. 
14 
the provisions of sections 225, 232 and 236, the decision of the committee 
shall be final. 
195-A. (1) Where a building is begun as described in section 195 but 
not completed, the committee may by notice, to be delivered to the 
owner within six months from the commencement of the building, or 
from the contravention of the terms of any sanction, or of any bye-law 
framed under section 190, as the case may be, require the building 
operations to be discontinued from the date of the service of such 
notice. 
(2) Any person failing to comply with the terms of such notice shall 
be punishable with a fine which may extend to one thousand rupees and 
when the non-compliance is a continuing one, with a further fine which 
may extend to fifty rupees for every day after the first during which 
the non-compliance continues. 
... ... ... ... • 
225. (1) Any person aggrieved-
(a) by the refusal of a committee under section 193 to sanction 
the erection or re-erection of a building, or 
(b) by a notice from a committee under section 171 requiring 
a street to be drained, levelled, paved, flagged, metalled or provided 
with proper means of lighting, or declaring a street to be a public 
street, or under section 195 requiring the alteration or demolition 
of a building, or 
(c) by any order made by a committee under the powers con-
ferred upon it by sections 107, 116, 121, 123 or 124, 
may appeal within thirty days from the date of such prohibition, notice 
or order to such officer as the State Government may appoint for the 
pUrpose of hearing such appeals or any or them, or, failing such appoint-
ment, to the Commissioner in the case of a committee of a first class 
municipality, or to the Deputy Commissioner in the case of a committee 
of a second class municipality; and no such refusal, notice or order shall 
be liable to be called in question otherwise than by such appeal: 
Provided that, if in the latter case the Deputy Commissioner or S'uch 
other officer as aforesaid be himself a member of the committee, the 
appeal shall lie to the Commissioner . 
• ... • • • 
Offences and Prdsecu.tions 
228. Unless otherwise expressly provided, no court shall take cogni-
zance of any offence punishab1e under this Act or any rule or any bye-
law thereunder, except On the complaint of, or upon information receiv-
ed from the committee or some person authorized by the committee in 
this behalf. 
Explanation.-The committee may authorjze any person and shall 
be deemed to have authorized any person appointed to this end by the 
State Government, to make oomplaints or give information, without 
previous reference to the committe~ either generally in regard to all 
offences against this Act and the rules or bye-laws thereunder, or partl .. 

15 __ ." .. 
c:ularly in regard only to specified offences, or offences of a specified 
class. The person authorized may be authorized by office, if he is pre-
sident, vice-president, Medical Officer of Health or secretary of the 
committee, or officer in charge of a police station; in other c;ases the 
authority must be personal. The authority must in all cases be in 
writing, and may at any time be cancelled by the committee . 
* * • • • 
240. (1) The State Government may frame forms for any proceeding 
of a committee and may make any rules consistent with this Act to carry 
out the purposes thereof and in particular and without prejudice to the 
generality of the foregoing power may make rules-
• • • • • • 
Power of 
State 
Govern-
ment to 
frame 
forms 
and 
make 
rule •. 

LOK SABHA 
It. 
BILL 
further to amend the Punjab Municipal Act, 1911, as in force in 
New Delhi. 
(Shri P. Venkatasubbaiah, 
Minister Of State in. the 
Minis"" 01 Home Affa,irs.) 