THE COW (PROTECTION) BILL, 2010
By
SHRI CHANDRAKANT KHAIRE, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for protection of cows and its progeny.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-first Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1.   (1) This Act may be called the Cow (Protection) Act, 2010.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force at once.
2.  In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appropriate Government" means in relation to a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(b) "cow" includes its progeny; and
(c) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Definitions.
TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Bill No. 106 of 2010.
5

2
3. Slaughter of cow is hereby prohibited.
4. (1) The appropriate Government shall cause to be established adequate number of
shelters for reception and care of stray cows.
(2) The shelters shall be maintained in such manner as may be prescribed.
5. (1) It shall be the duty of every citizen to inform such authority of the appropriate
Government, as it may designate, about any stray cow noticed by him.
(2) On receipt of such information, the designated authority shall, as early as possible,
take the stray cow to the nearest shelter.
6. The provisions of this Act and rules made thereunder shall have effect
notwithstanding that the provisions of this Act are inconsistent with any other law for the
time being in force.
7. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session  immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Prohibition of
slaughter of cow.
Appropriate
Government to
established
shelters for
cows.
Duty of every
citizen to
inform the
designated
authority.
Act to have
overriding
effect.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20

3
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Article 48 of the Constitution provides that the State shall endeavour to organize
agriculture and animal husbandry on modern and scientific lines and shall, in particular, take
steps for preserving and improving the breed, and prohibiting the slaughter of cows and
calves and other milch and draught cattle. It may be observed that article 48 casts a duty
upon the Government to prohibit slaughter of cows and calves.
Cow is held in high esteem since times immemorial and also worshipped by millions of
people in our country. It is reared in almost every household in the rural area. Its milk is
beneficial and nutritious for children and the sick persons. It serves the nation in many fields
of life.
However, it is a fact that cow is subjected to cruelty and atrocity. It is in the interest of
the nation to take effective steps to prevent cruelty to cows by prohibiting slaughter of
cows, which is the extreme form of cruelty. It is, therefore, necessary to have legislation not
only for banning slaughter of cow but also for providing protection, shelter and care to cow
and its progeny in the country.
The Bill seeks to provide for establishment of cow shelters for taking care of stray and
abandoned cows and for prohibition of slaughter of cow and its progeny in the country.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; CHANDRAKANT  KHAIRE
July 27, 2010.

4
FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 4 of the Bill provides for establishment of adequate number of cow shelters for
reception and care of stray cows by the appropriate Government. The expenditure relating to
States shall be borne out of the Consolidated Funds of the respective States. However, the
expenditure in respect of Union territories shall be borne out of the Consolidated Fund of
India. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund
of India. It is likely to involve a recurring expenditure of about rupees five hundred crores per
annum.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees one thousand crores is also likely to be
incurred.

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 7 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character.
5

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for protection of cows and its progeny.
————
(Shri Chandrakant Khaire, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—3967LS (S5)—18-08-2010.