1
Short title
and
commencement.
THE JUVENILE JUSTICE (CARE AND PROTECTION OF CHILDREN)
AMENDMENT BILL, 2022
By
SHRI BHARTRUHARI MAHTAB, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Act, 2015.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children)
Amendment Act, 2022.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In section 86 of the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Act, 2015 in
sub-section (2), for the words “non-cognizable”, the words “cognizable” shall be substituted.
Bill  No. 106 of  2022
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5
Amendment
of section 86.

2
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Act was enacted in the year 2015
with the objective to consolidate and amend the law relating to children alleged and found
to be in conflict with law and children in need of care and protection by catering to their
basic needs through proper care, protection, development, treatment, social re-integration,
by adopting a child-friendly approach in the adjudication and disposal of matters in the
best interest of children and for their rehabilitation.
The Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Amendment Act, 2021 made
certain amendments to the principal Act, including section 86 thereof. Section 86 originally
provided, inter alia, that an offence carrying punishable of imprisonment for three years
and above upto seven years, shall be cognizable and non-bailable. However, the aforesaid
amendment Act changed this provision to provide that such offences shall be
non-cognizable and non-bailable. These include serious offences as defined under
section 2(54) of the principal Act.
One such offence is sale and procurement of children for any purpose (section 81). The
offence is punishable with rigorous imprisonment for upto five years. In the Act, as
originally enacted, this offence was cognizable and the police was mandated to register a
case and start investigation. Now, the offence has been made non-cognizable. The
aggrieved must, therefore, approach the appropriate court and seek directions from the
court for registration of a case so that the investigation may begin. Since these offences are
committed against children, who are socially very vulnerable, it would be utterly absurd to
expect such children or their parents to approach court for registration of a case. The new
provision will definitely reduce the number of registered offences, but, at the same time, it
will seriously dent the very objective of the Act, i.e. “care and protection of children” as a
majority of such offences will remain unrecorded.
It is, therefore, essential that the aforesaid amendment to section 86 of the Act making
such offences non-cognizable, is rescinded and the original provision, appearing in the
original Act, is restored.
The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects.
NEW DELHI;              BHARTRUHARI MAHTAB
23 February, 2022.

3
ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE JUVENILE JUSTICE (CARE AND PROTECTION OF CHILDREN)
ACT, 2015
* * * * * *
“86. (1) Where an offence under this Act is punishable with imprisonment for a term of
more than seven years, then, such offence shall be cognizable and non-bailable.
(2) Where an offence under this Act is punishable with imprisonment for a term of
three years and above, but not more than seven years, then, such offence shall be
non-cognizable and non-bailable.
(3) Where an offence, under this Act is punishable with imprisonment for less than
three years or with fine only, then, such offence shall be non-cognizable and bailable.
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 or the
Commission for Protection of Child Rights Act, 2005 or the Protection of Children from
Sexual Offences Act, 2012, offences under this Act shall be triable by the Children’s Court.”.
* * * * * *
Classification
of offences
and
designated
court.
3

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Act, 2015.
————
(Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab, M.P .)