As introduced in Lok Sabha
                   
                                                       
          
Bill  No. 106 of  2024
THE ANDHRA PRADESH REORGANISATION (AMENDMENT) 
BILL, 2024
By
Shri Maddila Gurumoorthy , M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Andhra Pradesh Reorganisation Act, 2014. 
Be it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fifth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 
1. ( 1) This Act may be called the Andhra Pradesh Reorganisation (Amendment)  
Act, 2024.
(2)  It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the official Gazette, appoint. 
Short title and 
commencement.
5

2. In the Andhra Pradesh Reorganisation Act, 2014, in Part IX, in section 90, the 
following section shall be inserted:—
“90A. The Central Government shall, for the purposes of the section 90,—
(a) provide financial assistance of rupees 55,548.87 crore as per the Revised 
Cost Estimates (RCE) of the 2017-18 price level approved by the Technical 
Advisory Committee (TAC) of the Central Water Commission (CWC);
(b) consider the water supply component as an integral part of the irrigation 
component of the Polavaram Irrigation Project (PIP);
(c) reimburse the expenditure incurred by the State of without restricting to 
component-wise eligibility including expenses incurred towards the construction 
of the PIP and towards the Rehabilitation and Resettlement of the people displaced 
by the project:
Provided that the reimbursement shall not be delayed for a period more than one 
month from the date that the State Government of Andhra Pradesh raised a demand 
through proper channels:
Provided further that the reimbursement shall be made from an Escrow Account 
maintained by the Reserve Bank of India in which the Central Government shall 
deposit an amount which is not less than the Revised Cost Estimates (RCE) of the 
Technical Advisory Committee (TAC) of the Central Water Commission (CWC) as per  
clause (a).”.
2
Insertion of new 
section 90A.
6 of 2014.
Central 
Government to 
provide financial 
assistance to 
State of Andhra 
Pradesh for 
Polavaram 
Irrigation Project.
15
10
5
20

STATEMENT  OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
 The Polavaram Project is a National Project and is considered the lifeline of the people 
of Andhra Pradesh, having grave important to the State’s people. As per the Andhra Pradesh 
Reorganisation Act, 2014, it is upon the Central Government to execute the project and 
obtain all requisite clearances including environmental, forests and rehabilitation and 
resettlement norms.
 The estimated cost was Rs. 16,010.45 crore at the 2010-11 Price Level and has increased 
multi folds considering time and cost overruns, the inclusion of command area development 
works and increased compensation under the Right to Fair Compensation and Transparency 
in Land Acquisition, Rehabilitation and Resettlement Act, 2013. Owing to the inflation and 
severe cost overruns, it is difficult to execute the project in 2022 at the 2011-12 Price Level.
 The Andhra Pradesh Government submitted the 2nd Revised Cost Estimate (REC-II) 
for Rs. 57,297.42 crore at 2017-18 Price Level in 2018 with the provisions required for 
completion of the Polavaram Irrigation Project as recommended by the Polavaram Project 
Authority. The Technical Advisory Committee (TAC) of the Central Water Commission 
approved RCE-II for Rs. 55,548.87 crore at the 2017-18 Price Level in 2019. Further, the 
same dispensation is sought for funding the water supply component from the centre, as it is 
an integral part of the irrigation component. But regardless of the submission, these issues 
are yet to be placed before the cabinet for their approval. The Bill, therefore seeks to amend 
the Andhra Pradesh Reorganisation Act, 2014 to achieve the stated objectives.
 Hence this Bill.
       New Delhi;                                MADDILA GURUMOORTHY   
    July 9,  2024.
3

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
 Clause 2 of the Bill vide proposed section 90A provides for the provision of financial 
assistance of Rupees fifty-five thousand five hundred forty-eight crore as per the Revised 
Cost Estimates of 2017-18 price level, approved by the Technical Advisory Committee 
of the Central Water Commission (CWC). It also provides that Central Government shall 
reimburse the expenditure incurred by the State for the Polavaram Irrigation Project. 
Further, it also provides that the Central Government shall provide adequate funds for the 
Rehabilitation and Resettlement of the people displaced by the project. The Bill, if enacted, 
will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a non-
recurring expenditure of about rupees 55548.87 crore is likely to be involved from the 
Consolidated Fund of India.
 No recurring expenditure is likely to be involved from the Consolidated Fund of India.
4

ANNEXURE 
[Extract from the Andhra Pradesh Reorganisation Act, 2014]
( Act No. 6 of 2014)
*                         *                             *             *                *
 90.   (1) The Polavaram Irrigation Project is hereby declared to be a national project.
  (2)  It is hereby declared that it is expedient in the public interest that the Union should 
take under its control the regulation and development of the Polavaram Irrigation Project for 
the purposes of irrigation.
 ( 3) The consent for Polavaram Irrigation Project shall be deemed to have been given 
by the successor State of Telangana.
  (4) The Central Government shall execute the project and obtain all requisite 
clearances including environmental, forests, and rehabilitation and resettlement norms.
*                         *                             *                        *                             *
Polavaram 
Irrigation 
Project to be a 
national project.
5

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Andhra Pradesh Reorganisation Act, 2014.
————
(Shri Maddila Gurumoorthy, M.P.)