"Bill!fo. 108 of 1_ 
THE PUNJAB MUNICIPAL (DELHI AMEND~NT) 
BILL, 1952 
(As rNTBODUOED IN TBB HOUSK 01' TO l'BOPLB) 
A 
BILL 
further to Gm,end the P'IUljab Municipal Act, 1911, tu in ,force i'lt. t'M 
State 0/ Delfti. 
BE it enacted by :Parliament aB followB:-
1. Short title &D4 commencemlllt.-(l) ThiB Act may be called the 
Punjab Municipal (Delhi Amendment) Act, 1952. 
(2) It Bhall come into force on Buch date BB the State (tovernment 
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
i. Amendment of lectlDll 169, Punjab Act Iii of 1911, as bl force In 
Delhi.-In sub-section (1) of section 159 ot the PWljab Municipal Act, 
1911, 8S in force in the State of Delhi (hereinafter referred to aB the prin-
cipal Act), the words .. Subject to the proviBions hereinafter contained with 
respect to the cUBtomary rights of Bweepers" shall be omitted. 
3. Amendment of· IICtIoD 160, PunJlb Act m of 1911, 18 In force In 10 
Delhl.-In Bection 160 of the principal Act, clauBe (a> shall be omitted. 
,. SUbstitution of DeW IICtloD for 8ectloD 166, PunJab .&.ct m at 
1911, .. Ii fOrce In DeIJI1.-For 8leCtion 165 of the principal Act, the follow-
ing section shall be substituted, namely: - 15 
"] 651. p,lftiB'hment 0/ sweeper for discontinuing to do "aue-
8cavenging.-Should any sweeper, who iB under a contract to do the 
house-Bcavenging of a house or building, discontinue to do such house-
scavenging without having given fourteen daYB' notice to his employer 
or without reasonable cause, he Bhall, on conviction, be pllIliahable 20 
with a fine which may extend to ten rupeeB.'! 

t 
,~T OF OBJECTS AND REA.SO~S 
.Numerous .public ~a1amade to .theD.elhiJ,lunioJ.pal Committee 
re.ea111hat customary '1JWeeperB I halve become 'tlegligeut and trreaular in 
discharging their duty of :bGuse-aoa.ansing. The existing insanitary 
.conditions in the residential areas of Delhi are found to be due largely to 
the persistent '~sDees 'Of such' .".pera and'1rIreir hTe8ponaible manner 
·of dirt disposal. The statutory proteetion afforded to customary sweepers 
stands in the way of the Municipal Committee making alternative arrange-
ments for house-scavenging even a.t .. request of the owners of houses. 
It is, therefore, propoud to. olothe the ,Committee with .necessary powerl 
in this beh8lf. 
In view of clause (0) of the 'proviso to section.Jll .aLthe Government 
·of Part C States Act, 1961, the legislation has to be w:tdertaken by Parlia-
ment·.d not ~y,~e ·.Lepi.t.re of~-*Ise"fI*Me of,Daw . 
.u.r;RIT KA UR. 
NEW DELHI; 
The 4th NO'Dembe" 1962. 

J 
ANNEXURE 
~XTRAC'1'8 DOli rBB PuNJAB MUNICIPAL ACT, 1~11 (Ptl'JIIAB ACT m 01' 1911) 
(AS IN 1'08OB 1)1' DBLlIl) • 
• * • • • 
B40tm, 15.9(1) 
1&9. lJIl4ertaJdq ." committee of Jloue..acaveqIDg pDlrallJ.--: (1) 
Sublject to the provisions hereinafter contained with respect to the 
customary rights of sweepers, the committee may at any time undertake 
the house-scavenging of any house or building on the application or with 
the consent of the occupier. 
• I • Bec"'" ,1«)(11) 
• • 
180. S&vtDg III favour of CuatoDlIlJ SW'lIptII aDd of agrlculturlatl.-
Notwithstanding anything in the last foregoing section, the committee 
shall not, except in accordance with the provisions of this cbapter,-
(a.) undertake the house-scavenging of any house or building in 
respect whereof any sweeper has a customary right to do such house-
scavenging ; 
• * • • * 
S6.c._l~ 
186. PuDtab m6Dt 01 .Q~ ........... ". DlglIg6Dce.-(l) Should 
8. sweeper who has a customary right to do the house-scavenging of a house 
or building (hereinafter called the customary sweeper) fail to perform 
such house-scavenging in a proper way and at reasonable intervalS, the 
occupier of the house or building or the committee may complain to a 
lllagistrate. 
(2) The magistrate receiving such complaint shall hold an enquiry, 
and, should it appear to him that the customary sweeper has failed to 
perform the house-scavenging of the house or building in a proper way 
or at reasonable intervals, he may impose upon such sweeper a fine which 
may extend to ten rupees, and, .upon .a second or any later conviction 
in regard to the same house or building, may also direct the right of the 
customary sweeper to do the house-scavenging of the house or building 
to be forfeited, and thereupon such right shall be forfeited accordingly. 
(3) Shoulkl aby sMeper (other than a customary sweeper) who is under 
contract to do the house-sc;avenging of a house or building discontinue 
to do such house-scavenging without having given 14 days' notice to 
his employer or without reasonable cause, he shall on conviction be 
punishable with a fi~ which may extend to tlen rupees. 

.. 
HOUSE OF THE PEOPLE 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Punjab Munioipal Act, 1911, as in fora& 
in the State of Delhi. 
(Raj1c'Umari Amrit Kaur, 
M, ni8ter lor H ealtA.) 
aIPD-LAD-8,OPB-IO-ll-82-150. 