1
Short title and
commencement.
THE CONSTITUTION (ONE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH
AMENDMENT) BILL, 2012
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-third Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1.  (1)  This Act may be called the Constitution (Ninety-ninth Amendment)
Act, 2012.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. After  article 371-I of the Constitution, the following article shall be inserted,
namely:—
“371J. (1) The President may, by order made with respect to the State of
Karnataka, provide for any special responsibility of the Governor for—
(a) establishment of a separate development board for Hyderabad-
Karnataka region with the provision that a report on the working of the
board will be placed each year before the State Legislative Assembly;
Insertion of new
article 371J.
Special
provisions with
respect to State
of Karnataka.
Bill No. 106-C of  2012
5
10
AS PASSED BY LOK SABHA ON 18.12.2012

2
(b) equitable allocation of funds for developmental expenditure
over the said region, subject to the requirements of the State as a whole;
and
(c) equitable opportunities and facilities for the people belonging
to the said region, in matters of public employment, education and
vocational training, subject to the requirements of the State as a whole.
(2) An order made under sub-clause (c) of clause (1) may provide for—
(a) reservation of a proportion of seats in educational and vocational
training institutions in the Hyderabad-Karnataka  region for students
who belong to that region by birth or by domicile; and
(b) identification of posts or classes of posts under the State
Government and in any body or organisation under the control of the
State Government in the Hyderabad-Karnataka region and reservation of
a proportion of such posts for persons who belong to that region by birth
or by domicile and for appointment thereto by direct recruitment or by
promotion or in any other manner as may be specified in the order.”.
5
10
15

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
——— —
(As passed by Lok Sabha )
GMGIPMRND—4248LS(S3)—18-12-2012.