As nmtoDuCED IN LOK SABHA ON 
., 3 ~ ur, 1~'~ 
Bill No. 106 of 198'2. 
---
THE STATE BANK OF SIKKIM (ACQUISITION OF SHARES) AND 
MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS BILL, 1982 
A 
BILL 
to provide, in the public interest, tOT the acquisition CYf certain 'Shares 
of the State Bt£nk of Sikkim for the pu'l'pose of better consolidation 
and extension of banking facilities in the State ot Sikkim and for 
matters connected therewith or incidental thereto. 
w~ for the purpose of better consolidation and exterJSion of 
banking facilities in the State of Sikkim, it is expedient to provide for a 
Single apex banking institution in that State, and for that purpose to 
provide for the acquisition of certain shares of the State Bank of Sikkim 
and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto; 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty-third Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
5 1. (1) This Act may be called the State Bank of Sikkim (Acquisition Short 
of Shares) and Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1982. title 
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government 
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
10 (a) "appointed day" means the date on which this Act comes 
into force; 
and 
com. 
menc .. 
ment. 
DeAn1-
tions. 

Vest-
ing in the 
Central 
Govern-
melltof 
certain 
shares 
of 
Sikkim 
Bank. 
r 
,. 
(b) "co-operative bank" means the Sikkim State Co-operative 
Bank Limited, a society registered under the Sikkim Co-operative 
Societies Act, 1978; 
(c) "notification" means a notificaticn pUblished in the Official 
Gazette; 
(d) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act; 
(e) "Sikkim Bank" means the State Bank of Sikkim constituted 
under the State Bank of Sikkim Proclamation, 1968; 
5 
(f) "State Government" means the Sta~ Government of Sikkim; 
(g) "United Commercial Bank" means the United Commercial 10' 
Bank constituted under section 3 of the Banking Companies (Acqui-
Sikkim 
Act No. 12 
of 1978. 
sition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1970; 5 of 1970. 
(h) words and expressions used herein and not defined but 
defined in the Companies Act, 1956, shall have the meanings respec-
tively assigned to them in that Act. 
CHAPTER II 
ACQtnSITION AND TRANSFER OF CERTAIN SHARES OF SIKKIM BANIK 
3. (1) On the appointed day, all the shares in the share capital of the 
State Bank of Sikkim, other than the shares held by the State Govern-
ment, shall, by virtue of this Act, stand transferred to, and shall vest in, 20 
the Central Government. 
(2) All the shares which have vested in the Central Government 
under sub-section (1) shall, by force of such vesting, be freed and di!;-
charged of all trusts, liabilities, obligations, mortgages, charges, liens 
and otber encumbrances E.fiecting them, and any attachment or injunc- 25 
tion or any decree or order of any court, tribunal or other authority 
restricting the use of s1:lch shares in any manner shall be deemed to have 
been withdrawn. .A _. 
(3) Notwithstanding the transfer of the Hhares of the Sikkim Bank 
to the Central Government under sub-section (1), any person holding 30' 
such shares, who immediately before the appointed day is entitled to' 
payment of dividend on such shares, shall be entitled to receive from 
the co-operative bank-
(a) all dividends accruing due on his shares in respect of the 
half-year which ended before the appointed day and remaining 35 
unpaid; i • 
(b) dividends calculated at a rate to be specified by the Central 
Government in respect of any period immediately preceding the 
appolnted day for which the Sikkim Bank had not declared any 
dividend. 40 
1 o'f 1956. 
,4 
J 
/ 
\ ... 

~. -"'.'~,:"1. -.... ~,.':.: ...... Y" ••. - .• - .. -~ .. ---. 
I 
CHAPTER III 
. --..., 
VESTING aF U~DERTAKINGS OF SIKKIM BANK IN THE CENTRAL GOVERNMENT 
4. On the appointed day, the undertakings of the Sikkim Bank 
shall, by virtue of this Act, stand transferred to, and shall vest in, the 
5 Central Government. 
5. (1) The undertakings of the Sikkim Bank shall be deemed to 
include all assets, rights, powers, authorities and privileges, and all pro-
perty, movable and immovable, cash balances, reserve funds, investments 
and all other rights and interests in, or arising out of, such property as 
10 were immediately before the appointed day in the ownership, posses~.iCJn, 
power or control of the Sikkim Bank in relation to its undertakings, and 
all books of account, registers; records and all other documents of wha.-
ever nature relating thereto and shall also be deemed to includ~ all 
borrowings, liabilities and obligations of whatever kind then subsisting 
15 of the Sikkim Bank in relation to its undertakings. 
(2) Unless otherwise expressly provided in this Act, all contracts, 
deeds, bonds, agreements, powers of attorney, grants of legal represen-
tation and other instruments of whatever nature subsisting or having 
effect immediately before the appointed day and to which the Sikkim 
20 Bank is a party or which are in favour of the said Bank shall be of as 
full force and effect against or in favour of the Central Government. 
(3) If, on the appointed day, any suit, appeal or other proceeding of 
whatever nature in relation to any business of the undertakin~s which 
have heen transferred under section 4 is pending by or against thp. Sikkim 
25 Bank, the same shall not abate, be discontinued, or be in any way prf'ju-
dicial1y affected by reason of the transfer of the undertakings of the 
Sikkim Bank or of anything contained in this Act, but the suit, appeal 
or other proceeding may be continued, prosecuted or enforced by or 
against the Central Government. 
30 6. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in sections 3, 4 and 5 the 
Central Government shall, as soon as may be, after the commencement of 
this Act, direct, by notification, that the shares of the Sikkim Bank which 
have vested in the Central Government under s-:ction 3 and the under-
takings of the Sikkim Bank which have vested in the Central Govern-
35 ment under section 4 shall, instead of continuing to vest in the Central 
Government, vest in the State Government of Sikkim, on the date of the 
notification. 
(2) Where the shares and the und~rtakings of the Sikkim Bank vest 
in the State Government under sub-section (J), the State Government 
O shall on and from the date of such vesting, be deemed to have become 4 . , h . the owner in relation to such shares and undertakings and all the rig ts 
and liabilities of the Central Government in relation to SUCD shares and 
Vest. 
in, of 
under. 
taking. 
ot 
Sikkim 
Bank. 
General 
effect 
of 
vestinc. 
Vestin, 
of the 
shares 
and 
under-
takings 
of 
Sikkim 
Bank 
in the 
State 
Govern-
ment. 

Power 
of 
State 
Govern-
mentto 
direct 
vesting 
of the 
under-
takings 
of 
Sikkim 
Bank 
in 
the 
Sikkim 
co-opera-
tive 
bank. 
Pay_ 
mentof 
amounts. 
Manage-
ment, 
etc., 
of the 
under-
takings 
of 
Sikkim 
Bank. 
4 
undertakings shall, on and from the date of such vesting, be deemed to 
have become the rights and liabilities, respectively, of the State Govern-
ment. 
7. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in sections 4, 5 and 6, the 
State Government may, if it is satisfied that the co-operative bank is 5 
willing to comply, or has complied, with such terms and conditions as 
that Government may think fit to impose, including the terms and con-
ditions regarding allotment of its shares, direct, by notification, that the 
undertakings of the Sikkim Bank which have vested in the Central 
Government under section 4 and thereafter in the State Government 10 
under section 6, shall, instead of continuing to vest in the State Govern-
ment, vest in the co-operative bank either on the date of the notiflcation 
or on such earlier or later date (not being a date earlier than the 
appointed day) as may be specified in the notification. 
(2) Where the undertakings of the Sikkim Bank vest in the co- 15 
operative bank under sub-section (1), that bank shall, on and from the 
date 01 such vesting, be deemed to have become the owner in relation 
to such undertakings, and all the rights and liabilities of the Central 
Government or the State Government in relation to such undertakings 
shall, on and from the date of such vesting, be deemed to have become 20 
the rights and liabilities, resvective1y, of the co-operative bank. 
CHAPTER IV 
PAYMENT Qf' AMOUl)lTS 
8. (1) For the transfer to, and vesting in, the Central Government, 
of the shares of tbe Sikkim Bank under section 3, there shall be given by 25 
the Central Government to the holders of such shares in cash and 
in the manner specified in the Schedule, an amount of rupees eight 
Iakhs five thousand one hundred and forty-five. 
(2) The amount specified in sub-section (1) shall carry simple int~t 
at the r~te of five and. a half per cent. per annum 'for the period 30 
commencmg 011 the appomted day and ending on the date Oft which pay-
ment of sucb amount is made to the shareholders. 
CHAPTER V 
MANAGEMENT, ETC., OF THE, UNDERTAKINGS OF SIKKIM BANK 
9. (1) The State Government in which the undertakings of Sikkim 
Bank have vested' under section 6 shall be entitled to exercise all such 3D 
powe~s and do all such things as the Sikkim Bank is authorised to 
exerCISe and do in relation to its undertakings. 
(2) The. general su~rintendence, direction, control and management 
of the affaIrs and busmess of the undertakings of Slkkim Bank which 40 
hav~ vest~ under section 4 in the Central Government and under 
sectlon 6 m the State Government shall, where a direction has been 
made by the State Government under sUb-$ection (1) of section 7, vest 

5 
in the co-operative bank specified in such direction, and, thereupon, the 
co-operative bank shall be entitled to exercise all such powers and do all 
such things as the Sikkim Bank is authorised to exercise and do in 
relation to its undertakings. 
5 1,1). (1) On the vesting of the undertakings of the Sikkim Bank in the 
State Government under section 6, every person in whose possession or 
custody or under whose control any property referred to in sub-section 
(1) of section 5 may be, shall deliver the property to the State Govern-
ment forthwith. 
10 (2) Any person, who, on the appointed day, h~ in his possession or 
under his control any books, documents or other papers relating to the 
undertakings of the Sikkim Bank which have vested in the State Govern-
ment under section 6 and which belong to that Bank, or would have 
so belonged if the undertakings of Sikkim Bank had not vested in the 
J 5 State Government, shall be liable to account for the said books, docu-
ments or other papers to the State Government and shall deliver them 
up to the State Government. 
(3) The State Government may take, or cause to be taken. all neces-
sary steps for securing possession of all properties which have vested in 
20 that Government under this Act. 
CHAPTER VI 
PROVISIONS RELATING TO THE EMPLOYEES OF THE SIKKIM BANK 
11. (1) Every officer or other employee of the Sikkim Bank (excepting 
the Managing Director thereof) in the employment of the Sikkim Bank 
125 immediately before the appointed day shall become,-
(a) an officer or other employee of the State Government on and 
from the appointed day, and 
(b) where the undertakings of the Sikkim Bank are directed, 
under sub-section (1) of section 7, to vest in the co-operative bank, 
an officer or other employee of the co-opetative bank on and from 
the date of such vesting, 
and shall hold his office or service under the State Government or the 
co-operative bank, as the case may be, with the same rights and privileges 
as to pension, gratuity and other matters as would have been admissib~~ 
35 to him if there had been no such vesting and shall continue to do so 
unless and until his employment under the State Government or the co-
operative bank, as the case may be, is duly terminated. Or until his re-
muneration and other conditions of service are duly altered by the State 
Government, or by the co-operative bank, as the case may be. 
40 (2) Any person who, on the appointed day, is entitled to, or is in 
receipt of, a pension 01' other superannuation or compassionate allow-
ance or benefit from the Sikkim Bank or any provident fund, pension 
or other fund or any authority administering such fund shall be entitled 
to be paid by. and to receive from. the co-operative bank or any pro-
45 vident fund, pension or other fund or any authority administering such 
fund. the same pension, allowance or benefit so long as he observes the 
conditions on which the pension, allowance or benefit was granted. and 
if any question arises as to whether he has so observed such conditions, 
the question shan be determined by the State Government. 
Date of 
delivery, 
posses-
sion of 
property 
acquired 
nnd 
docu-
ments 
relating 
thereto. 
Transfer 
of 
service 
of 
existing 
officer3 
and 
employees 
of 
the 
Sikkim 
Bank 
to the 
Co;-opera-
tive 
bank. 

Act to 
have 
overriding 
e1fect. 
Protec-
tion of 
action 
taken in 
good 
raith. 
6 
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1) or sub-
section (2), no appointment made or promotion, increment in salary, 
pension allowance or any other benefit granted to any person after the 
16th day of November, 1976, Bnd before the appointed day which would 
not ordinarily have been made or granted or which would not ordinarily 5 
have been admissible' under the rules or authorisations of the Sikkim 
Bank or of any provident fund or other fund in force prior to the 16th 
day of November, 1976, shall have effect Or be payable or claimable 
from the co-operative bank or from any provident fund, pension or other 
fund or from any authority administering the fund, unless the State 10 
Government has, by general or special order, confirmed the appoint-
ment, promotion or increment, or has directed the continued grant of 
the pension, allowance or other benefit, as the case may be. 
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Industrial Disputes 
Act, 1947, or in any other law for the time being in force, the transfer 15 14 of 1947. 
of the services of any officer or other employee of the Sikkim Bank 
to the State Government or the co-operative bank shall not entitle such 
officer or other employee to any compensation under that Act or under 
any other law for the time being in force and no such claim shall be 
entertained by any court, tribunal or other authority. 20 
(5) Any person holding office as Managing Director of the Sikkim 
Bank immediately before the appOinted day shall be deemed to have 
vacated his office as such on thp. appointed day and, notwithstanding 
anything contained in this Act or in any other law for the time being 
in force or in any agreement or contract, he shall not be entitled to 25 
any amount from the Sikkim Bank, State Government, or the co-
operative bank for the loss of office or for the premature termination of 
any agreement or contract relating to his employment, except such pen-
sion, amount or other benefit which the co-operative bank may grant 
to him, having regard to what that person would have received as an 30 
officer of the Sikkim Bank if this Act had not been passed and if he 
had retired from his employment in the ordinary course. 
(6) Where the Managing Director of the Sikkim Bank has, after the 
16th day of November, 1976 and before the appointed day, been paid any 
sum by way of compensation or gratuity, the co-operative bank shall be 35 
entitled to claim. refund of any sum so paid if the payment is not confirm-
ed by the State Government by general or special order. 
CHAPTER VII 
MISCELLANEOUS 
12. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding any- 40 
thing inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time 
being in force or in any instrument having effect by virtue of any law, 
other than this Act, or in any decree or order of any court, tribunal or 
other authority. 
13. (1) No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against 45 
the Central Government or any officer of that Governm~nt or the Stat.e 
Government, or the co-operative bank or any officer of the State Gov-
ernment or the co-operative bank or other person authorised by the 
Central Government or the State Government or the co-operative bank, 
for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done under 50 
this Act. 
II 

7 
(2) No suit or other legal proceeding shall lie against the Central 
Government or any officer or other employee of that Government, or 
the State Government or the co-operative bank or any officer or other 
employee of the State Government or of the co-operative bank or other 
5 person authorised by the State Government or the co-operative bank, 
for any damage caused or likely to be caused by anything which is in 
good faith done or intended to be done under this Act. 
10 
15 
20 
2; 
1'4. Any person who,-
(a) having in his possession, custody or control any property 
forming part of the undertakings of the Sikkim Bank, wrongfully 
withholds such property from the Central Government, or the 
State Government or the co-operative bank; or 
(b) WTongfully obtains pos~ession of, or retains, any property 
for.ming part of any undertaking of the Sikkim Bank Or wilf"llly 
withholds or fails to furnish to the Central Government or the State 
Government or the co-operative bank, or any person or body of per-
sons specified b~ that Government Or the State Government or the 
co-operative bank, any document relating to such undertaking which 
may be in his possession, custody or control or falls to deliver to the 
Central Government, or the State Government or the co-operative 
bank or any person Or body of persons specified by the Central Gov-
ernment or the State Government or the co-operative bank, any 
assets, books of account, registers or other documents in his posses-
sion, custody or control, relating to the undertakings of the Sikkim 
Bank; or 
(c) wrongfully removes or destroys any property forming part 
of any undertaking of the Sikkim Bank or prefers any claim under 
this Act which he knows or has reasonable cause to believe to be 
false or grossly inaccurate, 
30 shall be punishable with imprisonment for a tenn which may extend to 
two years, or with fine which may extend to ten thousand rupees, or 
with both. 
Penalties. 
15. (1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a Offences 
company, every person who at the time the offence was committed was by CGm-
in charge of, and was responsible to, the company for the conduct of panles. 
35 the business of the company, as well as the company, shall be deemed. 
to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and 
punished accordingly: 
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render any 
such person liable to any punishment, if he proves that the offence was 
40 committed without his knowledge or that he had exercised all due dili-
gence to prevent the commission' of such offence. 
(2) NotWithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), where 
any offence under this Act has been committed by a company and it is 
proved that the offence has been committed with the consent or conni-
45 vance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of, any director, 
manager, secretary, or other officer of the company, such director, mana-
ger, secretary, or other officer shall be deemed to be guilty Of that offence 
and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly. 

Delega-
tion of 
powers. 
Power of 
Central 
Govern-
ment to 
make 
rules. 
Power to 
remove 
dUII.-
culties. 
Refe-
rences to 
Sikldm 
Bank in 
other 
laws. 
Dissolu-
tiol1 of 
Sikkim 
Bank. 
8 
Explanation.-For the purposes of this section, .... 
(a) "company" means any body corporate and inclUdes a firm or 
other association of individuals; and 
(b) "director", in relation to a firm, means a partAer in the firm. 
16. (1) The Central Government may, by notification, direct that all 5 
or any of the powers exercisable by it under this Act, other than the 
powers conferred by sections 17 and 18, may also. be exercised by such per-
son or persons as may be specified in the notification. 
(2) Whenever any delegation of power is made under sub-section (1), 
the person to whom such power has been delegated shall act under the 10 
direction, co~trol and supervision of the Central Government. 
17. (1) The Central Government may, by notification, make rules for 
carrying out the provisions of this Act. 
(2) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act 
shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of IS 
Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which 
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, 
and if, before the expiry of the session immediately follOWing the session 
or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any 
modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be ~o 
made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or 
be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modifica-
tion. or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything 
previously done under that rule. . 
18. ~ any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, 25 
the Central Government may, by order, not inconsistent with the provi-
sions of this Act, remove the difficulty: 
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of a 
period of two years from the appointed day. 
19. On and from the appointed day, any reference to Sikkim Bank 30 
in any law (other than this Act Or the State Bank of Sikkim Proclama-
tion, 1968) or in any contract or other instrument shall, except as other-
wise provided in any general or special order made by the C::entral 
Government, be deemed to be a reference to the co-operative bank. 
20. On the date of the issue of notification under sub-section (1) of 35 
section 6, the Sikkim Bank shall stand dissolved, and the State Bank of 
Sikkim Proclamation, 1968, shall stand repealed. 
THE SCHEDULE 
[See section 8(1)] 
MANNER OF PAYMENT OF AMOUNT FOR THE TRANSFER OF SHARES OF THE 
STATE BANk OF SIKKIM TO THE CENTRAL GOVERNMENT 
1. In this Schedule, "shareholder" means any person who, imme-
diately before the appointed day, is registered as the holder of a share 
in the Sikkim Bank, other than the State Government of Sikkim. 

9 
2. For every share in the share capital of the Sikkim Bank which, by 
reason of this Act, is transferred to and vested in the Central Govern-
ment, thO? Central Government shall pay to every holder thereof in the 
manner specified in paragraph 3 of this Schedule an amount calculated at 
5 the rate of rupees fifty-five per share. 
lU 
3. Every person who is registered as the holder of a share in the 
Sikkim Bank on the appointed day and whose shares have been acquired 
under the provisions of this Act shall, for every such share so held by 
him. be paid an amount calculated at the rate specified in paragraph 2 by 
cheque drawn on the Reserve Bank of India. 

STATEMENT OF OWECTS AND REASONS 
In ktleping with the uc~nt o~ mral and agricUltural development as part of 
the stratogy for· the ~~ry s rapid economic progress, Government appointed a 
Study Team~· InstJ~utlOna1 Arrangements tor Agricultural Credit in Sikkim 
under the chaumanshlp of Dr. C. D. Datey, a former Executive Director of the 
Reserve Bank. One of the tenns of reference of the Team was to consider the 
ques~io~ of setting up a Regional RUI"al Bank in Silclcim on the pattern 
of similar banks established in the country. In its report submitted't'O the 
Government, the Teem was broadly of the view that in order to meet the banki~g 
needs of Sikkim, it would be appropriate to set up a single apex institution 
which would combine both agric'ultural and non-agricultural banking operations 
and also transact Government busine~s. The specific reoommendation in this 
context related to the setting up of a State Co-operative Bank in Sikkim to 
which the undertakinp of the existing State Bank of Sikkim, a bank established 
under the State Bank of Sikkim P:-oc1amation dated the 24th June, 1968, may 
be transferred. This recommendation was made solely on the consideration 
that in Sikkim there is no scope for more than one banking institution of 
the comprehensiVe type proposed and that some of the advantages Of a State 
Co-operative Bank will Itot be available to the 'State Bank of Sikkim if its 
separate identity is retained as a banking institution under the Banking Regulation 
Act, 1949. This recommendation was accepted in principle and the details of 
the proposals for implementing this recommendation had been worked out. .The 
Sikkim Legislative Assembly has passed the Sikkim O>-operative Societies Act. 
1978, and the Sikk.im State Co-operative Bank Ltd. had already been registered 
under that Act. It is now proposed to acquire the undertakings of the State Bank 
of Sikkim for the purpose of transferring them to the SiJdcim State Co.operotive 
Bank Ltd. The Bill seeks to achieve this object. 
2. The BiU provides, among other things, for the transfer to, and vesting 
or all the shares of the State Bank of Sikkim, other than those held by the State 
Government of SiJddm, and also the oodertakings of the said Bank in. 
the Central Government. Thereafter, the Central Government shall direct. by 
a notification, that the shares vested in it as also the UIKlertakings of the 
State Bank of Sikkim shall vest in the State Government of Sikkim. The State 
Government would direct, by a notification, that the underta~in~s of the State 
Bank of Sikkim sb1l11 be transferred to, and ve.~tedin, the Slkklm State Co-
operative Bank Ltd. The Bill also provides for the transfer of the servi~es Of all 
the employees of the State Bank of Sikkim to the Sikkim State Co-operative Bank 
Ltd. and al!lO for the payment of amounts to the shareholders whose, shares are 
proposed to be acquired and for certain other incidental and consequential matters. 
NEW DELHI; 
The 7tll August, 1982. PRANAB MUKHERJEE. 
10 

FiNANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Clause 8~ D of the Bill provides for the paYDlcnt of lln amoqnt of ~s. ~,O!i, t4; 
by the Central Government in cash to the shareholders of the State Bank of 
Sikkim whose, shares are proposed to be acquired. Sub.cliuse(2) of this clause 
provides for the payment of simple interest at the rate of five and a hatf per cent. 
per annum to such shareholders for the period commencing on the c:ppointed 
day and ending on the date on which payment of such amount is made to the 
shareholders. It.is not possible to estimate precisely the amount payable on this 
account as this will depend on the time taken for the payment of the amount due 
to the various shareholders. 
2. The Bill, if enacted and brought into operation. is not likely to involve 
any other expenditure either recurring or non·recurring. 
JI 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DEL EGA TED LEGISLA nON 
Clause 17 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for 
carryiDg OUt the provisions of the Bill. The matters in respect of wl,lich such 
rules may be made would relate to matters of procedure and administrative 
detail and it is Dot practicable to provide for them in the Bill itself. The delega-
tion of the legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character. 
, 
,"." 12 

LOIC SABHA 
BILL 
to provide. in the public interest, for the acquisition of certain shares of the State 
Benk of Sikkim for the purpose of better consolidation and extension of 
baDkiD& facilities in the State of Sikkim and for matters connected therewith or 
iDcidcDtal thereto. i . 
(Shri PratUlb Kumar Mukherjee, 
Minister of Finance.) 