1
THE SPECIAL FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE TO THE STATE OF
WEST BENGAL BILL, 2014
By
SHRI ADHIR RANJAN CHOWDHURY,  M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for special financial assistance to the State of West Bengal for the purpose of
promoting the welfare of Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and
Other Backward Sections of people and for the development,
exploitation and proper utilization of its resources
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-fifth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Special Financial Assistance to the State of
West Bengal Act, 2014.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. There shall be paid such sums of moneys out of the Consolidated Fund of India,
every year, as Parliament may by due appropriation provide, as special financial assistance
to the State of West Bengal to meet the costs of such schemes of development, as may be
undertaken by the State with the approval of the Government of India for the purpose of
Short title and
commencement.
Special
financial
assistance to
the State of
West Bengal.
Bill No.  106  of  2014
TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5

2
promoting the welfare of Scheduled Castes,  Scheduled Tribes and Other Backward Sections
of people and for the development, proper utilization and exploitation of the resources in the
State.
3. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other
law for the time being in force.
Act not in
derogation of
other laws.
5

3
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The State of West Bengal is socially and economically backward. The problems of
poverty, unemployment and illiteracy are required to be addressed urgently and in a
time-bound manner. Measures for proper utilization of resources, welfare of weaker sections
in the region and initiating new development schemes are also required to be undertaken in
an expeditious and time-bound manner. The State of West Bengal has also been facing the
problem of naxalite violence for a number of years. In view of its economic backwardness, the
naxalites have found sympathetic elements within the population. Therefore, economic
backwardness is the root cause of the naxalite problem. It is, therefore, necessary that the
Central Government should provide special financial assistance to the State of West Bengal
for its all-round development including the welfare of weaker sections and for the development
and exploitation of its vast natural resources. Such a step of providing financial assistance to
this State would go a long way in building this nation more and more strong.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; ADHIR RANJAN CHOWDHURY
July 14, 2014.
PRESIDENT’S  RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLE
 117 (3) OF THE  CONSTITUTION
————
[Copy of D.O. No. 42(20) PF-I/2014 dated 21 August, 2014 from Shrimati Nirmala
Sitharaman, Minister of State in the Ministry of  Finance to the Secretary-General,
Lok Sabha].
The President, having been informed of the subject matter of the Special Financial
Assistance to the State of  West Bengal Bill, 2014 by Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury, M.P.,
recommends the consideration of the Bill by Lok Sabha under article 117(3) of the Constitution.

4
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill provides that there shall be paid such sums of moneys out of the
Consolidated Fund of India, every year, as Parliament may by due appropriation provide, as
special financial assistance to the State of West Bengal to meet the costs of such schemes of
development, as may be undertaken by the State with the approval of the Government of
India.
The Bill, therefore, on enactment, will involve expenditure out of the Consolidated
Fund of India for providing special financial assistance to the State of West Bengal. As the
sums of moneys which will be given to the State of West Bengal as special financial assistance
by appropriation by law made by Parliament will be known only after the welfare schemes to
be implemented by the State Government with the approval of Government of India are
identified, it is not possible to give the estimates of recurring expenditure, which would be
involved out of the Consolidated Fund of India at this stage.
No non-recurring expenditure is likely to be  incurred from the Consolidated Fund of
India.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for special financial assistance to the State of West Bengal for the purpose of
promoting the welfare of Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and Other Backward
Sections of people and for the development, exploitation and proper
utilization of its resources
————
(Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—2383LS(S3)—01.11.2014.