Bill No. 106 of 1990
ee

THE SALARIES AND ALLOWANCES OF OFFICERS OF PARLIAMENT
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 1990

A
BILL

further to amend the Salaries and Allowances of Officers of Parliament
Act, 1953.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Forty-first Year of the Republic
of India as follows:—

1. (1) This Act may be called the Salaries and Allowances of Officers
of Parliament (Amendment) Act, 1990.

(2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the Ist day of April,
88. .

2. In section 3 of the Salaries and Allowances of Officers of Parlia-
ment Act, 1953 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), in subs
Section (1), the following shall be inserted at the end, namely:—

“and an allowance for each day during the whole of his term as
the Chairman at the same rate as is specified in section 3 of the
Salary. Allowances and Pension of Members of Parliament Act, 1954
with respect to members of Parliament”.

Short title
end

cement,

Amend-
ment of
section 3,


Gant! elf Given “A.B

‘Substitu- 3. For section 10A of the principal Act, the following section shali
tion be substituted, namely: —
of new
section
for sec-
tion 10A.
Lees “10A. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Income-tax

m
liability Act, 1961,—
ed (a) in computing ‘he total income of a previous year of the
income. ) s
tax on Chairman of the Council of States, any income by way of an
daily allowance referred to in sub-section (7) of section 3 shall not be
allow- included;
ance
received (b) the value of rent free furnished residence (including
by the ‘maintenance thereof) provided to an officer of Parliament under 19
Coen sub-section (1) of section 4 shall not be included in the computa-
aay tion of his income chargeable under the head “Salaries” under
perquisi- section 15 of the Income-tax Act, 1961.”.
tes recei-
Ved by an
officer of
Parlia-

‘ment,



STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

| view of the amendment made in 1988 in the Salary, Allowances
-and Pension of Members of Parliament Act, 1954, the officers of Parlia-
Ment, other than the Chairman of the Council of States, are entitled to
the salary, daily allowance and constituency allowance at the enhanced
rates with effect from the Ist day of April, 1988. However, emolunients
of the Chairman of the Council of States remaineq unchanged. To
overcome the said anomaly, it is now: proposed to- provide that the Chair-
man of the Council of States shall be entitled to a daily: allowance at
the same rate as is applicable to the Speaker of the House of the People.
‘Tt is also proposed to exempt the saiq daily allowance from income-tax.

2. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects.

New Deum; P. UPENDRA,
29th May, 1990. OF


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 2 of the Bill seeks to amend section 3 of the Salaries and |
Allowances of Officers of Parliament Act, 1953 to entitle the Chairman
of the Council of States to the daily allowance, during the whole of |
his terms, at the rate of one hundred and fifty rupees per day. This
would involve an expenditure of Rs. 54,000/- per annum from the Con-
solidated Fund of India.

2. The provisions of the Bill will not involve any other expenditure
either recurring or non-recurring.


ANNEXURE

EXTRACIS FROM THE SALARIES AND ALLOWANCES Or OFFICERS or PARLIAMENT
Act, 1953

(20 oF 1953)

* * 7 * . * *
3. (1) There shall be paid to the Chairman of the Council of States a
salary of seven thousand five hundred rupees per mensem.

रू * * * *

10A. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Income-tax Act,
1961, the value of rent free furnished residence (including maintenance
thereof) provided to an officer of Parliament under sub-section (1) of
section 4 shall not be included in the computation uf his incume charge-

able under the head “Salaries” under section 15 of the Income-tax Act,
1961.

SMerinitse tT te cen) to seams welt

अत:

PHS Tb १७७: heen थे लड़ी
5

Salaries,
ete, of
officers

of Parlia-
ment.

Exemp-
tion.
from
Hiability
to pay
income-
tax on
certain
perquisi-
tes recei-
ved by
an, officer
of Par
liament,


LOK SABHA

A
BILL

further to amend the Salaries and Allowances of Officers of Parliament
Act, 1953.

(Shri P. Upendra, Minister of Parliamentary Affairs)