C O R R lG E i^ D A
t o
TBE SAIARX, ALLOiftSU'jCE;:^ M D  P S K S lD N  OF M E^TEH S OF P A R L Ja MEIv'T
(A H S N D iM E lJ T ) BILL, 1988
( l b be/As introduced in Lok Ss-bha)
1. Page I jlin e  13 ,-
for ”fo lo vin g rea d  "fo 1 lo win g "
2 . Page 2 , lin e  6 ,-
omit "(1)’ '
3. Page 2 , lin e  2Q ,-
for ^substituted'’ read "inserted"
2, lin e  3^,-  
for ’nearnest" read ’nearest"
5. page 2, lin es U 6  and ^ 7,-
.  omit 'tor a companion"
iiS'w DEIiil;
■ Septeirber 19S8_____
Bhadra "tJ+7 191 ^ (Saka)


; / v ' /
\
I A )
As INTRODUCED IN LOK S a b hA ON
Bill No. 106 of 1988
THE SALARY, ALLOW ANCES AND PEN SIO N  OF MEMBERS OF 
PA R LIA M EN T (AM ENDM ENT) BILL, 1988
A
B ILL
|/w.rthier to  amend the Salary, AllovMnces and Pension of Members  of
I  Parliament Act,  1954.
B e it enacted by P arliam ent in th e  T hirty-ninth Y ear of the 
R epublic of India as follows—
Amend­
ment of 
section 3.
1. (1) This A ct m ay be called the Salary, A llow ances and Pension short
of M em bers of P arliam en t (A m endm ent) Act, 1988. title
5 ( 2 ) I t shall be deem ed to have come into force on the 1st day of
A pril, 1988. ment.
2. In section 3 of the Salary, Allowances and Pension of Members, of  
Parliament Act, 1954 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), for  
the words ‘‘one thousand rupees” and ‘"seventy-five rupees’* , the words  
1 0  ‘^one thousand and five hundred rupees” and " " on e hundred and fifty  
rupees” shall respectively be substituted.
1 3 . In  sub-section ( 1) of section 4 of th e principal Act, in clause (c), 
afte r sub-clause (ii), th e folow ing proviso shall be inserted, nam ely: —
“Provided that where the spouse, if any, of a member performs  
15 such journey or part thereof by road unaccompanied by such mem­
ber, the road mileage prescribed under thisTsub-clause shall be allow­
ed to him for such journey or part thereof.”.
Amend­
ment of 
section 4.


A m end­
m ent of 
section 6A
Amend­
ment of
section 6.
Insertion 
of new  
sectioM 
6AA.
Special 
facility 
to mem­
bers from 
Ladakh.
4. In section 6  of thi| principal Act, for the words ^first class’^ where­
ver they occur, the words ‘‘air-coinditioned tWo-tier’^  shall be substituted.
5. In  section 6A of th e  p rin cip al A ct,—
(a) in  sub-section ( 1), fo r th e  opening p arag ra p h , th e  follow ing 
shall be su b stitu ted , n a m e ly :— . ^
" ‘( i)  Without prejudice to the provisions of section 6 , every  
member representing -the Union territory of the Andaman and  
Nicobar Islands or the Union territory of Lakshadweep shall,—
(a) be provided with one free non-trarisferable pass
which shall entitle him to travel at any time by the highest 1 0  
class by steamer to and from any part of his constituency and  
any other part of his constituency or the nearest part\ in the  
main land of India; and • . t .r
(b)  be entitled to an amount equal to the fare by air  
from his usual place of residence to the nearest, airport in the 1 5  
mainland of India;
(b) in sub-section ( 6),—
(i) in the opening portion, for the words ‘'a free steamer  
pass issued to a member” the words ‘ '"the facilities provided to  
a member” shall be substituted; 2 0
(ii)  in clause (i), —
(A ) for the words “lowest class”, the words ^Tiighest  
class” shall be substituted;
(B) for the word "and”, occurring at the end, the
word “or” shall be substituted; 25
(H i) in clause (ii), fo > r the words ‘"once during every session”,  
the words '‘at any time between the Island and the main land of  
India; and” shall be substituted;
(iv) a fte r clause (ii), th e follow ing clause shall be substituted, 
n a m e ly :—  30
.(H i) to an amount equal to the fare by air 1 either for the  
spouse, if any, of the member or fo!r one -person to accompany  
the member from the usual place (of residence in the Island to the  
nearnest airport of the main land of India.”.
6 . A fte r section 6A of th e  p rin cip al A ct, th e  follow ing section shall be 3 5  
in serted , nam ely: —
“6 AA. (1 ) Without prejudice^ to the provisions of section 6 , every  
member who has his ordinary placejof residence in the Ladakh area  
of the State of Jammu and Kashmir shall be entitled to an amoimt  
equal to the fare( by air for each single journey by air performed by 40  
him from any airport in Ladakh to the airport in Delhi and back at  
any time.
(2 ) In addition to the air travel provided to a member under  
sob-section ( 1), he shall ^Iso be entitled to  an amount equal to the  
fare by air for each singfe joorney  ]by air performed by the if 4 5
any, of the member or o ^  p e r ^  to i^comipa^y' ^uch n iffliW , or a 
ccttnpanion from any ai:ea to t i k e  9ifpo 0  in DdM  M d
fiidt at any time.’’.


7. In  section 6B  of th e  principal Act,—
(a) in clause (i), for the words “and first class’’^  the words '‘and
.. aircofnditioned two-tier” shall be substituted;
(b ) in clause (ii),  for the words "first class”, the words “air
5  ..^.conditioned two tier” shaM be substituted;
(c) in  clause (n i),—
(i) in  th e  opening paragraph,—
(1 ) for the words “first class”, the words “air-condi­
tioned two-tier” shall be substituted;
10 ( 2 ) fo r th e  portion beginning w ith the w ords “and if such
jo u rn e y ” and ending w ith  th e words “or p a rt thereof”, th e  follow­
ing shall be substituted, nam ely: —
“and if such jo u rn ey  or any p a rt thereof is perform ed by air 
from  any place o th er th an  the usual place of residence of the 
^  m em ber, or from  any other place to Delhi and back,to an
am o u n t equal to  th e fa re by a ir for such journey or p art 
thereof;
P rovided th a t w h ere such journey or p a rt thereof by such 
spouse is perform ed by air from  an y  other place, th e  expen-
20  d itu re on such jou rn ey  or p a rt thereof shall not exceed th e
am ount payable if th e  jo u rn ey  had been perform ed from  the 
usual place of residence of the m em ber to Delhi and back:
(ii) for th e  proviso, th e  follow ing proviso shall be substitu­
ted  nam ely'—
25 “P rovided fu rth e r th a t w here a m em ber travels by rail
in  first class air-conditioned, and no person accompanies 
th a t m em ber in th a t journey in air-conditioned tw o-tier by 
v irtu e of th e  free air-conditioned tw o-tier railw ays pass re fer­
re d  to in  clause (ii), th en  in determ ining th e am ount paya- 
30 ble by th e  m em ber u n d er clause (i) the am ount of air-con­
ditioned tw o -tier fa re for such journey shall be adjusted
against th e  difference re ferred  to in th a t clause; so, how ­
ever, th a t th e  m em ber shall not be entitled to claim  th e
balance of such air-conditioned tw o-tier fare left afte r such
35 ad justm ent.”
8. In  section 8 of th e principal Act,— (a) afte r the words “electricity 
facilities”, th e  w ords “electricity and office expense allow ance” shall 
be inserted;
(b) a fte r th e  w ords “such facilities” th e words “or allow ance” 
40 shall be inserted.
9. In section 8A  of th e principal Act, after sub-section (1), the 
follow ing sub-section shall be inserted, nam ely: —
“ (lA ) W ith  effect from  th e  com m encem ent of the Salary, Allow­
ances and Pension of M em bers of P arliam en t (A m endm ent) Act, 
45 1&88 , th e re  sh all be paid a pension of five hundred rupees per m ensem
to  the spouse, if any, or dependant of any m em ber who dies during 
his te rm  of office as such m em ber, fo r a period of five years from  the 
d ate of his death.”.
10. In  section 8B  of th e  principal Act, for the w ords “tw enty thousand 
50 rupees”, th e  w ords “fifty thousand rupees” shall be substituted.
Amend­
ment of 
section 
6B. 1
Amend­
ment of 
section 8.
Amend­
ment of 
section 8A.
Amend­
ment of 
section SB


The Joint Committee on Salary and Allowances of M.Ps. has made a  
number of recommendations for increasing the allowances and facilities  
of Members of Parliament. It is proposed to implement some of the  
reconamendations as accepted by the Government with regard to: —
(i) increase in the salary and daily allowance;
(ii) rail travel of M.Ps., their companions and spouses in AC
II tier;
(iii) air travel facilities to M Ps. from the Andaman and Nico-  
bax Islands and Lakshadweep and their spouses or companion;
(iy) travel by the highest class by steamer (without diet) by  
spouse or companion of M.Ps. from the Andaman and Nicobar  
Islands and Lakshadweep;
(v) air travel by spouse of M.Ps. from a place other than the  
usual place of residence of the M P . to Delhi and vice versa;
(vi) air journey accompanied either by spouse or companion  
between Ladakh and Delhi;
(vii) provision for an office expense allowance;
(viii) payment of pension to widow/dependant of a Member  
dying in harness;
(ix) road mileage allowance for journeys of spouses of M.Ps.  
when they do not accompany the M.Ps.
2. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
STATEMENT O F OBJECTS AND REASONS
N e w  D e l h i ;  H. K. L. BHAGAT.
The  3rd Septem ber,  1988.


T he BiU seeks to am end various provisions of the Act to provi(ie for
(i) increase in th e S alary from  Rs. 1000 to Rs. 1500 per m onth,
(ii) increase in th e  ra te  of Daily Allowance irom  Rs. 75 per diem  to 
Rs. 150 p e r diem ; (iii) R ail trav el of M.Ps., their com panions and 
spouses in AC II T ier; (iv) A ir trav e l facilities to M em bers of P arlia­
m e n t from  islands and th e ir spouse or compariion; (v) T ravel by th e 
h ig h est class by steam er (w ithout diet) by spouse or companion of 
M em bers of P a rlia m e n t from  islands; (vi) A ir journey accompanied 
e ith e r b y  spouse or com panion betw een L adakh and Delhi; (vii) P ay ­
m en t of an  Ofl&ce E xpense A llow ance; (viii) P aym ent of pension to 
w id o w /d ep en d en t of a M em ber dying in harness; and (ix) P aym ent of 
R oad M ileage fo r jo u rn ey s of spouses of M em bers of P arliam ent when 
th e y  do n o t accom pany th e  M em bers of Parliam ent.
2. T h e above provisions w ould involve a recurring expenditure from
th e  C onsolidated F u n d  of India to th e  tu n e  of Rs. 4 crores p er annum  
approxim ately. *  '
3. T he provisions of th e  B ill w ill n ot involve any other expenditure 
e ith e r recu rrin g  o r non-recurring.
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM


Clause 8 of the BiU seeks to amend section 8 of the Salary, Allow­
ances and Pension of Members of Parliament Act, 1954 to provide for  
payment of an office expense allowance by rviles made by the Joint  
Committee under section 9 of the Act. Rules under section 9 are made  
in consultation of the Central Government. The delegation of legisla­
tive power is, therefore, of a normal character.
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION


LO K SABHA
A
BILL
further to amend the Salsiry, Allowances and Pension of Members of
Parliament Act, 1954.
(Shri H. K. L. Bhagat, M inister of Parliamentary Affairs and  
Inform ation and Broadcasting.)
