1
Short title and
commencement.
Bill  No.  106 of  2018
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
THE INDIAN EASEMENTS (AMENDMENT) BILL,  2018
By
DR. KIRIT PREMJIBHAI SOLANKI, M.P.
A
BILL
to amend the Indian Easements Act, 1882.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Indian Easements (Amendment) Act, 2018.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government, may by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In section 7 of the Indian Easements Act, 1882 (hereinafter referred to as the principal
Act), in the Illustrations—
(a) illustration (g) shall be omitted; and
5 of 1882.
Amendment of
section 7.
5

2
(b) for illustration (j), the following illustrations shall be substituted, namely:—
"(j) The right of every owner of land abutting on a natural stream,
lake or pond to use and consume its water for drinking, household purposes
and watering his cattle and sheep; and the right of every such owner to
use and consume the water for irrigating such land:
Provided that the use of water from such natural stream, lake or
pond as well as any existing aquifer, well or mechanized tube-well shall be
regulated by the concerned Gram Sabha or Municipality, as the case may
be, under whose territorial jurisdiction it falls to ensure the equitable
distribution of water to all and prevent the depletion of the groundwater
table or over-extraction of groundwater.’’
Explanation.— For the purposes of this illustration,—
(a) "aquifer" refers to the rocks in which groundwater is stored;
(b) "Gram Sabha" shall have the same meaning as assigned to it under article 243
of the Constitution;
(c) "Municipality" shall have the same meaning as assigned to it under
article 243P of the Constitution; and
(d) "natural stream" means a stream, whether permanent or intermittent, tidal or
tideless, on the surface of land or underground, which flows by the operation of nature
only and in a natural and known course.
(ja) The right to construct new wells or tube wells shall be regulated by the
concerned Gram Sabha or Municipality, as the case may be.
3. After section 7 of the principal Act, the following sections shall be inserted,
namely:—
‘‘7A. The State Government concerned may, by notification, make rules
consistent with the existing laws on the use and regulation of groundwater to ensure
equitable distribution of groundwater and prevent the depletion of the water table.
7B. The Gram Sabha or Municipality, as the case may be, may formulate the
regulations to ensure equitable distribution of water and prevent depletion of the
water table under their territorial jurisdiction.".
Insertion of
new sections
7A and 7B.
Power of State
Government
to make rules.
Power of
Gram Sabha or
Municipality
to make
regulations.
5
10
15
20
25
30

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Indian Easements Act, 1882 is a pre-Independence legislation that is based on the
principle that ownership of groundwater flows from the ownership of land. Section 7 (g) of
the Act provides every landowner with the right to collect and dispose, within his own limits,
all water under the land and on the surface. This private ownership of groundwater has led
to its unregulated use, which has resulted in over extraction of water and a depletion of the
water table. It has been found that nearly sixty per cent. of all districts in India face issues
related to either the availability of groundwater, or the quality of groundwater, or both.
Furthermore, the legal consequences of this pre-Independence legislation are not just
that the landowner can dig wells and extract water at his or discretion, but also the fact that
this legal framework inadvertently excludes more than thirty per cent. of' the population that
do not own land and hence, are excluded from groundwater rights. In this context, it must be
noted that the Supreme Court and various High Courts have evolved a fundamental right to
water as a part of 'Right to Life' under article 21 of the Constitution.
Since independence, several policy postures of the Central Government have addressed
this issue. Both the National Water Policy, 2012 as well as the Planning Commission Report
on Ground Water Management and Ownership, 2007 came out in support of a 'public trust
doctrine' for groundwater management. This means that the Government should be the
ultimate guardian of all natural resources, including groundwater, to prevent over-extraction
and ensure equitable distribution.
Since, 'water' falls under the State List of the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution, it
is the prerogative of the State Legislative Assemblies to amend or enact laws pertaining to
ground water management and regulation that are in line with the public trust doctrine, as set
out under this Act.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; KIRIT PREMJIBHAI SOLANKI
January 5, 2018.
3

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 3 of the Bill empowers the State Governments to make rules to ensure equitable
distribution of groundwater. It also empowers the Gram Sabha and the Municipalities to
make regulations regarding the management of groundwater. As the rules and regulations
will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of legislative power is of normal nature.
4

5
ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE INDIAN EASEMENTS ACT, 1882
[5 OF 1882]
* * * *
7. Easements are restrictions of one or other of the following rights (namely):—
(a) * * * *
(g) The right of every owner of land to collect and dispose within his own limits
of all water under the land which does not pass in a defined channel and all water on its
surface which does not pass in a defined channel.
* * * *
(j) The right of every owner of land abutting on a natural stream, lake or pond to
use and consume its water for drinking, household purposes and watering his cattle
and sheep; and the right of every such owner to use and consume the water for
irrigating such land, and for the purposes of any manufactory situated thereon, provided
that he does not thereby cause material injury to other like owner.
* * * *
Easement for
limited time or
on condition.

LOK  SABHA
—————
A
BILL
to amend the Indian Easements Act, 1882.
—————
(Dr. Kirit Premjibhai Solanki, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—289LS(S3)—08-06-2018.