As INTRODUCED IN Lox SABHA

{

11 ane ? (|

No.

THE CHILD LABOUR IN HAZARDOUS EMPLOYMENT (ABOLITION,
REHABILITATION AND WELFARE) BILL, 2000

By
‘Surman Kant Sincu, M.P.
A
BILL
to abolish employment of Children, bonded or otherwise, in hazardous employment,

rehabilitation of those children who are employed and for welfare measures for
them and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-first Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—

1. (1) This Act may be called the Child Labour in hazardous Employment (abolition,
Rehabilitation and Welfare) Act, 2000.

(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force with immediate effect.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires:—

(2) “appropriate Government” means in case of a State’ the Government of
the concerned State and in respect of rest of territories, the Central Government;

(b) "child labourer" means a child below the age of fourteen years and who is
engaged in any job or occupation; ‘
(c) “employer” means a person who engages a child in any job or occupation

and if the employer is a company or a corporate body, the Chairman, Managing
Director or an executive head of such body or company;

Short title, ex-
tent and com-


2

(d) "hazardous employment" means engagement in a job, occupation or
enterprise, in a situation where the worker is exposed to hazards to life or serious
accident, chronic diseases, depravity or degeneration in life, and risk of grievious
hurt, and which would include engaging children in begging or collection of alms or
in immoral and criminal acts including prostitution or those having direct impact on 5
moral and character of the child and other hazardous employment as prohibited

61 of 1986. under the Child Labour (Prohibition and Regulation) Act, 1986;

(e) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act.

Abolition of 3. Child Labour in hazardous employment in any form is hereby abolished.
child labour.

Penalty. 4. Whoever engages a child in hazardous employment, shall be punished
imprisonment which shall not be less than three years and with fine which shall not be less
than twenty-five thousand rupees:

Provided that if the child employed is—

(a) a girl child;

(9) a bonded child labourer;

(©) is engaged in—
(0 begging;
(ii) prostitution;
(iii) jobs involving crime and moral terpitude; or
(iv) work having direct impact on the morality and character of the child,

the employer shall be punished with imprisonment which shall not be less than five years
and with fine which shall not be less than fifty thousand rupees but may extend to one lakh
Tupees in case where the child is employed as sex worker, smuggling or as carrier in
espionage and other heinous crimes.
Census of child 5. The appropriate Government shall conduct census of child labour within its
labour. territorial jurisdiction in such manner as may be prescribed.

Rehabilitation 6. The appropriate Government shall rehabilitate the child labour found under
of child boot. section 5 in such manner as may be prescribed.

Police officer to 7. If a police officer responsible for registering cases under his territorial jurisdiction

be punished for refuses to register First Information Report for an offence under this act, or otherwise aids

Tp.” or abets the commission of such offence he shall be punished with imprisonment for a

£ term which shall not be less than two years and with fine which shall not be less than
twenty thousand rupees.

Appropriate 8. The appropriate Government shall with immediate effect declare a comprehensive
Government to list of hazardous employments and jobs being carried out within its territorial jurisdiction. —
declare hazard-

ous employ-
‘ment.

Facilities. 9. Every employer who employes a child in non-hazardous job shall arrange free
education and vocational training for the children employed in his workshop, establishment.
or household and shall also provide adequate facilities for games, sports and recreation
after working hours, or otherwise, in such manner, as may be prescribed.

Power to make 10. The appropriate Government may within a month of the enforcement of this
males. Act, frame rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act, which shall be duly notified in
the Official Gazette and laid before the both Houses of Parliament,


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

Article 24 of the Constitution of India Provides for prohibition of employment of
children below fourteen years of age "in any factory or mine or engaged in any other
hazardous employment." Every child has a right against exploitation. The very fact that a
child is kept away from school and is made to work for earning bread by itself speaks of
exploitation. In a welfare democratic ‘State’ like India, it is for the 'State' to provide for
conditions in which personality of a citizen can develop to its best self, But when a child
is forced to give up its toys and take to tools, and is deprived of basic education, so
essential for development of personality, it obviously speaks to exploitation of the Child,

Yet the growing population of the country, a high Percentage of which (over 35%)
continues to live below poverty line, explains the inevitability of a huge work force
comprising of children. "Immediate ban on child labour would be both unrealistic and
counter-productive” observed the Supreme Court in its May 1, 1997 judgement. Yet
exploitation of the child in tender age, say 10 years of age, amounts to a grave abuse of
child-hood, and needs to be prohibited. Also, the presence of child labour in hazardous
industries and jobs represents a gross violation of human rights. If child labour is a
Practical necessity, it has to be regulated strictly allowing full mental and physical
development of the child by way of education, sports, training and recreation, There is
thus a need for effective enforcement and implementation of Article 24 of the Constitution
‘oprohibit employment of children in hazardous jobs. Despite the constitutional provision
Prohibiting engagement of children in hazardous jobs, millions of children continue to
work in firework and match factories at Sivakasi, glass and bangle factories at Ferozabad,
carpet factories at Varanasi, biri factories and other hazardous factories. Lakhs of children
are engaged by their parents and their masters in begging, which occupation by its very

employment of children in hazardous jobs, Even though the 1986 Act incorporated a
schedule enumerating the hazardous jobs, yet the law does not define Precisely what
“hazardous employment" means. A serious attempt should, therefore, be made to define
what is called “hazardous employment", not only to encompass jobs involving hazards to
life and physical self of the child, but also to include jobs Posing grave threat of devastation
to the morality, character and nature of the child even forcing them into depravity.

Since the enactment of the law has failed to Provide any deterrent against engagement
of children in hazardous jobs, and the number of child workers in such jobs continue to
increase, even during the last 16 years when we have been particularly alive to the evil of

Presence of children amongst beggars and sex workers is a matter of shame for the Nation.
An effort, therefore, need to be made to make the law mote deterrent, not only for employers,
but also for the law enforcers who collude in preferring to turn a blind eye to child labour
employed in varied hazardous jobs.

Hence this Bill.

New Detut; KANTI SINGH
May 3, 2000.


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 5 of the Bill provides that the appropriate Government shall conduct census
of child labour.

Clause 6 provides for the rehabilitation of child labour found in census by the
appropriate Government. The Bill, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the
Consolidated Fund of India to the tune of rupees one hundred crore per annum as recurring
expenditure.

‘A sum of rupees fifty crore may also involve as non-recurring expenditure.



MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 10 of the

Bill gives power to the appropriate Government to make rules for
carrying out the purpo:

' of the Bill. The rules will relate to matters of detail only,
‘The delegation of legislative power is of a normal character,


|
1

LOK SABHA

A
BILL
to abolish employment of Children, bonded or otherwise, in hazardous |

rehabilitation of those children who are employed and for welfare measures for them
and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.

(Shrimati Kanti Singh, M.P)
MGIP(PLU)MRND—1468LS—22.06.2000.