1
THE BAMBOO, CANE, SCREW PINE AND MAT WEAVERS AND
WORKERS (WELFARE) BILL, 2017
By
DR. A. SAMPATH, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for protection to and welfare measures for the bamboo, cane, screw pine and
mat weavers and workers and their family members and for matters connected therewith.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-eighth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Bamboo, Cane, Screw pine and Mat Weavers and
Workers (Welfare) Act, 2017.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette appoint.
Short title and
commencement.
Bill No. 106 of  2017
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(b) "Authority" means the National Bamboo, Cane, Screw pine, Mat Weavers
and Workers Welfare Authority established under section 3;
(c) "Fund" means the National Bamboo, Cane, Screw pine, Mat Weavers and
Workers Welfare Fund constituted under section 5;
(d) "bamboo, cane, screw pine and mat weaver" means a person engaged in the
planting, nursing, cutting, transporting, storing, processing, weaving, value adding,
distributing, exhibiting or selling bamboo, cane, screw pine and mat;
(e) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act; and
(f) "worker" means a bamboo, cane, screw pine or mat weaver engaged in the
production of bamboo, cane, screw pine or mat and who earns wages on daily, weekly,
monthly or any other basis.
3. (1) The Central Government shall, as soon as may be, by notification in the Official
Gazette, establish an Authority to be known as the National Bamboo, Cane, Screw Pine,
Mat Weavers and Workers Welfare Authority for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) The Authority shall consist of—
(a) a Chairperson having adequate knowledge and professional experience in
bamboo, cane, screw pine and mat weaving sector;
(b) a Deputy Chairperson with such qualification, as may be prescribed;
(c) three members to represent bamboo, cane, screw pine and mat weaving
sector cooperatives and State Government undertakings;
(d) three members to represent bamboo, cane, screw pine and mat weaving
sector and worker of the registered trade unions;
(e) four members to represent the Union Ministries of Finance, Planning, Labour
and Employment and Textiles,
to be appointed by the Central Government in such manner, as may be prescribed;
(f) four members to be nominated by the State Governments on rotation basis in
alphabetical order; and
(g) five members of Parliament, of whom three shall be from the House of the
People and two shall be from Council of States, to be nominated by the Presiding
Officers of the respective Houses.
(3) The Authority shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid, having perpetual
succession and common seal, with power to acquire, hold and dispose of property, both
movable and immovable, and to contract and shall, by the said name, sue or be sued.
(4) The salary and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of service of
the Chairperson, Deputy Chairperson and members of the Authority and the procedure to
be followed in the discharge of the functions of the Authority shall be such as may be
prescribed.
(5) The Headquarter of the Authority shall be at New Delhi.
(6) The Authority shall establish its zonal offices in the States of Kerala, Assam,
Jammu and Kashmir, Madhya Pradesh and Maharashtra.
(7) The Authority may establish its offices at such other places, as it may deem
necessary, for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
Definitions.
Establishment
of National
Bamboo,
Cane, Screw
Pine and Mat
Weavers and
Workers
Welfare
Authority.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
(8) The Authority shall have a secretariat with such Officers and staff having such
terms and conditions of services as may be prescribed.
4. (1) The Authority shall, in coordination with the State Governments, take steps for
the overall welfare of workers including, removal of poverty and indebtedness, raising the
standard of living, modernizing the looms and making easy availability of raw materials at
affordable prices and marketing of products of bamboo, cane, screw pine and mat.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provision, the Authority
shall,—
(a) formulate and implement welfare policy for the bamboo, cane, screw pine
and mat weavers and workers;
(b) maintain a District-wise register of bamboo, cane, screw pine and mat
weavers and workers with such particulars and in such manner as may be prescribed;
(c) regulate the service conditions of workers in such manner as may be
prescribed;
(d) fix minimum wages for bamboo, cane, screw pine and mat weavers and
workers from time to time;
(e) ensure modernization of techniques of plants, producing and value adding
of bamboo, cane, screw pine and mat weaver products;
(f) encourage and provide all necessary assistance to bamboo, cane, screw pine
and mat weavers cooperatives;
(g) organize exhibitions, melas and such other activities to promote products
of bamboo, cane, screw pine and mat in different parts of the country;
(h) make suitable arrangements for purchase of products of bamboo, cane,
screw pine and mat weavers by Government department undertakings and agencies
on cash and carry basis;
(i) encourage export of bamboo, cane, screw pine and weavers products; and
(j) perform such other functions as may be assigned to it by the Central
Government from time to time.
5. ( 1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette,
constitute a Fund to be called the Bamboo, Cane, Screw Pine and Mat Weavers and Workers
Welfare Fund.
(2) The Central Government and the State Governments shall contribute to the Fund
in such ratio as may be prescribed.
(3) There shall also be credited to the Fund such other sums as may be received by way
of donations, contributions, assistance or otherwise from individuals and ogranisations.
(4) The Fund shall be utilized for—
(a) providing interest free consumption loans to bamboo, cane, screw pine and
mat weavers and workers;
(b) making ex-gratia payments at prescribed rates to each of the bereaved families
of bamboo, cane, screw pine and mat weavers who die in harness;
(c) providing loans at nominal rate of interest for purchasing necessary raw
materials to the bamboo, cane, screw pine and mat weavers and workers;
(d) providing insurance cover to all bamboo, cane, screw pine and mat weavers
and workers;
Functions of
the Authority.
Constitution
of Bamboo,
Cane, Screw
Pine and Mat
Weavers and
Workers
Welfare Fund.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

4
(e) providing healthcare facilities to the bamboo, cane, screw pine and mat
weavers and workers and their dependent family members;
(f) providing educational facilities and vocational training to the wards of bamboo,
cane, screw pine and mat weavers and workers; and
(g) such other welfare measures as may be prescribed.
6. (1) It shall be the duty of the Central Government to ensure regular supply of raw
materials to the bamboo, cane, screw pine and mat weavers and workers at affordable and
subsidized rates.
(2) It shall be compulsory for all Ministries,  Departments and Subordinate Offices
under the appropriate Government and Public Sector Enterprises to purchase their entire
finished goods requirements exclusively from the primary bamboo, cane, screw pine and
mat weavers and workers.
(3) The appropriate Government shall take steps to minimize the export of raw material
used for products of bamboo, cane, screw pine and mat weavers and workers.
7. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law
in this behalf, provide to the Authority such sums as it may consider necessary for the
efficient functioning of the Authority.
8. (1) The Authority shall prepare, in such form and manner, as may be prescribed, an
annual report giving a true and full account of its activities during the previous year and
submit it to the Central Government.
(2) The Central Government shall cause to be laid before each House of the Parliament
the report submitted to it under sub-section (1).
9. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, not
in consistent with the provisions of this Act, as appear to it to be necessary or expedient for
removing the difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of the period of two years
from the date of the commencement of this Act.
(2) Every order made under this section shall, as soon as may be after it is made, be laid
before each House of the Parliament.
10. The Provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other
law for the time being in force regulating any of the matters dealt with in this Act.
11. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Central
Government
to ensure
regular supply
of raw
materials.
Central
Government
to provide
Funds.
Annual
Report.
Power to
remove
difficulties.
Act not in
derogation of
any other law
for time being
in force.
Power to make
rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

5
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Bamboo, cane, screw pine and mat industry is one of the largest segments in the
unorganized sector. It is a traditional industry and hence has a unique place in our economy.
This sector has sustained itself by transferring skills from one generation to another. Adoption
of modern techniques has become an urgent necessity because the sector faces challenges
of extinction due to the ill effects of economic liberalization. The scarcity of raw materials,
absence of human resource with modern skills, lack of research and development and
innovation are the threats for this traditioinal industry. More than one million families depend
on the sector directly. And hence this Bill is of an urgent nature.
The workers in this sector mostly belong to the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled
Tribes, Other Backward Classes and minority categories. The majority of them are women
workers. The sector is not doing very well and is on the verge of collapse and extinction. The
foremost reason for this is non-availability of raw materials at affordable prices and non-
availability of loans at low interest rate from banks and other financial institutions to this
sector for purchasing raw material and other necessary items. The facility of marketing for
bamboo products is also a handicap for these poor people. The most disturbing and sad part
is that most of the workers engaged in bamboo, cane, screw pine and mat industry are
alarmingly poor. The problem is further compounded by powerful lobbying from the exporters
of raw materials. Bamboo, cane, screw pine and mat weavers and workers have been at the
receiving end due to changes shaped by globalization and transient socio-economic
conditions. For decades, most bamboo, cane, screw pine and mat weavers and workers never
had any access to various policies and schemes meant for their growth and benefit. On the
other hand, Government departments and implementing agencies do not have adequate
information and data that would have helped in increasing the reach of such programmes
and policies. There has been, thus, a widening gap between policy formulation and
implementation.
It is, therefore, proposed to constitute a National Bamboo, Cane, Screw pine and Mat
Weavers and Workers Authority to take steps for welfare and overall development of weavers
and workers engaged in the sector and for promotion and effective implementation of policies
of this sector in the country.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; A. SAMPATH
February 13, 2017.

6
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill seeks to establish the National Bamboo, Cane, Screw pine and Mat
Weavers and Workers Welfare Authority. Clause 4 provides for certain steps to be taken by
the Authority for welfare of Bamboo, Cane, Screw pine and Mat Weavers and Workers.
Clause 5 provides for the constitution of Bamboo, Cane, Screw pine and Mat Weavers and
Workers. Clause  6 provides that the Central Government shall ensure supply of raw materials
to Bamboo, Cane, Screw pine and Mat Weavers and Workers. Clause 7 provides that the
Central Government shall provide funds to the Authority. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will
involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a recurring
expenditure of about rupees two hundred crores per annum would be involved from the
Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of rupees fifty crores is also likely to be involved.
————

7
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 11 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for protection to and welfare measures for the bamboo, cane, screw pine and mat
weavers and workers and their family members and for matters connected therewith.
————
(Dr . A. Sampath, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—474LS(S3)—10-07-2017.