THE  UNDERPRIVILEGED,  ORPHAN,  V AGABOND  AND  OTHER
STREET CHILDREN (PREVENTION OF ABUSE, REHABILITATION
AND WELFARE) BILL, 2015
By
SHRI NISHIKANT DUBEY, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for the prevention of abuse and exploitation of orphan, vagabond, runaway
and other street children by  providing deterrent punishment for the violators and for
rehabilitation and other welfare measures to be undertaken by the Union and the State
Governments for such children who usually subsist on rag picking, begging, shoe
polishing, working as potters, performing acrobatics or who are forced to indulge in
crimes like stealing, pickpocketing, snatching, smuggling, prostitution and unnatural
acts by taking their custody and providing them with shelter, care, protection, education,
medical care, vocational training etc., and for matters connected therewith and
incidental thereto.
B
E  it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Underprivileged, Orphan, Vagabond and other Street
Children (Prevention of Abuse, Rehabilitation and Welfare) Act, 2015.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force with immediate effect.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Definitions.
Bill No. 107 of 2015
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
National
Policy for
under-
privileged
Street
Children.
(b) "child" means any person who is below the age of eighteen years;
(c) "fund" means the Underprivileged Street Children Welfare Fund constituted
under section 6;
(d) "home" means juvenile home established under this Act ;
(e) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(f) "street children" include a child who is orphan or has been abandoned or has
run away from home, or vagabond and who subsists on income earned by ragpicking
or begging or working as a potter or vendor or shoe shiner or petty crimes like stealing,
pick pocketing, snatching, smuggling drugs or liquor etc. and who lives on a pavement
or in a hutment or slum or railway platform or yard or bus stop or such other
place.
3. (1) The Central Government shall, as soon as may be, but within one year of the
commencement of this Act, formulate a National Policy for the rehabilitation and welfare of
the underprivileged street children covered under this Act so as to extend all rights of
childhood to enable them to grow as responsible and respected citizens in the society.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provision, the National Policy
referred to in sub-section (1) may include,—
(a) on the basis of the census data or otherwise conducting a survey of the
underprivileged street children in the country and taking their custody and provide
them boarding, lodging and other requisite facilities in the homes;
(b) provision of educational facilities including higher medical, engineering,
information technology education, vocational training and facilities for developing
moral values and other skills among the underprivileged street children to make them
self reliant;
(c) undertaking such measures including counselling, as may be necessary to
discourage the children covered under this Act from returning to their earlier means of
subsistence;
(d) nutrutious food, medical care, entertainment facilities etc. in the homes;
(e) transport facilities between home and educational institutions, access to
libraries, access to games and sports facilities free of cost;
(f) provision of employment through reservation or otherwise for the children
covered under this Act after they complete their education or vocational training, as
the case may be;
(g) provision of annual grants-in-aid to orphanages and Non-Governmental
organisations which are working for the underprivileged street children; and
(h) such other provisions as may be deemed necessary and expedient for carrying
out purposes of this Act.
4. It shall be the duty of the appropriate Government to implement the National Policy
for underprivileged street children formulated under section 3.
5. The appropriate Government shall establish such number of juvenile homes as it
may deem necessary for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
6. (1) The Central Government shall, as soon as may be, for the purposes of this Act,
by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute a Fund to be known as the Underprivileged
Street Children Welfare Fund with an initial corpus of rupees twenty thousand crore to be
Appropriate
Government
to implement
the National
policy.
Establishment
of juvenile
homes.
Constitution
of Underprivi-
leged Street
Children
Welfare Fund.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
provided by the Central Government by due appropriation made by Parliament by law in this
behalf.
(2) The Fund shall also include,—
(a) contributions made by the Central Government and Governments of the
States in such ratio as may be prescribed;
(b) moneys received by way of donation, contribution or assistance from
individuals, firms, body corporates, financial institutions of both domestic and foreign
ones and organisations etc.
(3) The Fund shall be utilised for the rehabilitation and welfare of the
underpriviledged street children covered under this Act in such manner as may be
prescribed.
7. The appropriate Government shall,—
(a) maintain a district-wise register of children covered under this Act within its
territorial jurisdiction with such particulars and in such manner as may be prescribed;
(b) open such number of schools and colleges as it may deem necessary for
carrying out the purposes of this Act including imparting education to the children
covered under this Act and providing books, writing materials, uniforms, and other
relevant articles free of cost;
(c) take custody of every child covered under this Act in such manner as may be
prescribed;
(d) send every child so taken custody of to a home or to a non-governmental
organisation certified by the appropriate Government in such manner as may be
prescribed;
(e) take such other measures as it may deem necessary and expedient for carrying
out the purposes of this Act.
8. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force,
whoever,—
(a) forces any child covered under this Act to beg, commit petty crime like
stealing, pickpocketing, snatching, smuggling etc. or rag picking or any act which is
injurious to the health of such child shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment for
a term which shall not be less than seven years but which may extend to ten years and
also with a fine which may extend to five lakh rupees.
(b) sexually exploits any child covered under this Act or forces into prostitution
or unnatural act shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall
not be less than ten years but which may extend to life imprisonment and also with fine
which may extend to ten lakh rupees.
(c) having already been convicted of an offence under this Act or an abetment of
such offence is again convicted of any such offence or abetment shall be punished
with life imprisonment and also with fine which may extend to ten lakh rupees.
9. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law
in this behalf, provide requisite funds for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
10. The provisions of this Act and rules made thereunder shall have effect
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time
being in force.
11. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other
law for the time being in force dealing with any of the matters dealt with in this Act.
Measures to be
taken by
appropriate
Government.
Penalty.
Central
Government to
provide funds.
Act to have
overriding
effect.
Act to
supplement
other laws.
45
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

4
12.  (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
Power to
make rules.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
5
10

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
It is a common sight in Mumbai, National Capital Delhi and other Metropolitan cities
and urban areas where early in the morning children of all ages, particularly adolescents can
be seen carrying sacks on their backs and collecting waste paper, plastic, metal scrap etc.
from dumping pits and public places. These rag pickers collect the waste throughout the day
and sell it in the evening to Kabadiwalla for their subsistence. V ery often these hapless
children are forced to do so by anti-social elements or mafias. Similarly, many of such
underprivileged street children can be seen begging at road crossings, near religious places,
markets, bus stops and other public places. Many a times, they are forced to indulge in petty
crimes like stealing, pick pocketing, snatching for their survival owing to their social and
financial condition. Such children have been found to be members of certain gangs and of
late the street children are being used by hardened criminals even for murders as they knew
that there is no jail terms for such juveniles. They are exploited and abused physically by
anti-social elements, organized criminal gangs, mafias, etc. Such exploited and abused children
become hardened criminals when they grow up.
The girl child in this category is very often sexually exploited and ultimately pushed
into prostitution. These hapless underprivileged children fall prey to all kinds of dreaded
diseases. They remain illiterate and even two square meals a day is luxury for them. These
underprivileged children are in fact the most vulnerable to abuse, exploitation and depravity.
On the contrary, being the future citizens of the country the children should be brought
up in a good atmosphere, providing them all requirements of life, good education and a joyful
childhood with all care and love. But unfortunately in our country, there are millions of
orphans, abandoned, runaway vagabond and destitute children who are mostly homeless
and are known as street children many of whom are very talented but their talent goes waste.
Our country being a welfare state, it is the solemn duty of the Government to take care
of these underprivileged hapless street children and ensure that they must enjoy their
childhood by bringing them into the national mainstream by giving them every opportunity
and protection they deserve, in order to fully develop their potentials and talent.
Hence, this Bill.
N
EW DELHI;
March 24, 2015.         NISHIKANT  DUBEY
5

FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 5 of the Bill provides for the establishment of Juveniles homes. Clause 6 provides
for the constitution of the Underprivileged Street Children Welfare Fund with an initial
corpus of rupees twenty thousand crores to be provided by the Central Government. Clause
9 provides that the Central Government shall provide requisite funds for carrying out the
purposes of the Bill. The Bill, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund
of India. It is estimated that a sum of rupees twenty thousand crore will be involved as
recurring expenditure per annum. A non-recurring expenditure of rupees fifty thousand crore
will also be involved.
6

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 12 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of details only the delegation of
legislative power is of normal character.
7

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the prevention of abuse and exploitation of orphan, vagabond, runaway
and other street children by providing deterrent punishment for the violators and for
rehabilitation and other welfare measures to be undertaken by the Union and the State
Governments for such children who usually subsist on rag picking, begging, shoe
polishing, working as potters, performing acrobatics or who are forced to indulge in
crimes like stealing, pickpocketing, snatching, smuggling, prostitution and unnatural acts
by taking their custody and providing them with shelter, care, protection, education, medical
care, vocational training etc., and for matters connected therewith and incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Nishikant Dubey, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—40LS(S3)—17-04-2015.