1
THE NATIONAL AGRICULTURAL POLICY COMMISSION
BILL, 2019
By
SHRI NIHAL  CHAND, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for establishment of a National Agricultural Policy Commission to formulate
policies on improvement and development of agriculture in the country and
for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventieth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the National Agricultural Policy Commission Act, 2019.
(2) It shall come into force with immediate effect.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "agriculture" includes horticulture, animal husbandry, forestry, dairy and
poultry farming, pisciculture, and other allied activities, whether or not undertaken
jointly with agriculture;
Short title and
commencement.
Bill No. 107 of  2019
Definitions.
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
(b) "agricultural produce" includes paddy, wheat, coarse, cereals, pulses,
vegetables, fruits and flowers and such other agricultural produce as may be notified
by the Central Government, from time to time;
(c) "Commission" means the National Agriculture Policy Commission constituted
under section 3;
(d) "farmer" means any person who cultivates land or causes it to be cultivated
for agricultural or horticultural purposes;
(e) "Fund" means the Agriculture Development Fund constituted under
section 6; and
(f) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, establish
a Commission to be known as the National Agriculture Policy Commission for carrying
out the purposes of this Act.
(2) The Commission shall consist of—
(a) a Chairperson, having special knowledge in the field of agriculture; and
(b) four members including agricultural producers and experts in matters
related to the agriculture and agricultural research,
to be appointed by the Central Government in such manner as may be prescribed.
(3) The Central Government shall provide such number of experts, officers and staff
to Commission, as may be required for its efficient functioning.
(4) The salary and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of service of
the Chairperson, members, experts and officers and staff of the Commission shall be such
as may be prescribed.
4. It shall be the responsibility of every State Government to furnish the following
information to the Commission:—
(a) total area under agriculture under its jurisdiction;
(b) total production in agriculture;
(c) annual demand of agricultural products;
(d) potential for increase in export of agricultural products; and
(e) potential for establishment of industries based on agriculture.
5. (1) The Commission shall, on receipt of information from the State Governments
under section 4, formulate such policies, as it may deem appropriate, for the development of
agriculture in the country.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provision, the policies shall
include:—
(a) appointment of experts to study the situation of agriculture, from time to
time;
(b) formulating measures to improve production and quality of agricultural
produce by reducing the cost of agricultural inputs;
(c) taking steps related to storage and marketing of agricultural produce;
(d) undertaking study of capacity and weaknesses of farmers in agriculture;
(e) analysing the reasons for reduction in income from agriculture and suggestions
for increasing the income of farmers;
Establishment
of National
Agriculture
Policy
Commission.
Responsibility
of the State
Government
to furnish
information to
the
Commission.
Functions of
the
Commission.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
(f) framing scheme to increase productivity, profitability and stability of
agricultural systems in States;
(g) suggestions to maximise the agricultural production with the use of available
surface water and minimum use of underground water;
(h) measures for prevention of crop damage due to climate change, maintain
environmental balance and increase the soil fertility;
(i) formulation of short-term and long-term policies for agricultural produce;
(j) providing funds to States for establishment of industries based on agricultural
products and development of agriculture; and
(k) formulate such other policies, from time to time, as it may deem appropriate
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
6. The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute a
Fund to be known as the Agriculture Development Fund for carrying out the purposes of
this Act.
7. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law
in this behalf, provide necessary requisite Funds, from time to time, for carrying out the
purposes of this Act.
8. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent
therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force.
9. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purpose of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under the rule.
Constitution
of the
Agriculture
Development
Fund.
Central
Government
to provide
requisite funds.
Act to have
overriding
effect.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Farmers and agriculture can survive only when farmers are given due priority and
respect. Former Prime Minister Late Shri Lal Bahadur Shastri had given a slogan ‘Jai Jawan
Jai Kisan' to safeguard the interests of farmers and encourage sustainable practice of
agriculture. However, the incidence of suicide by farmers and agricultural crisis are not less
than any national disaster. Intensive agriculture based on high external grants has seriously
affected our soil, water, biodiversity and climate. Therefore, concrete steps should be taken
to make the livelihood of farmers stable, respectable and self-reliant.
After seventy years of independence there is a need for constituting a National
Agriculture Policy Commission for the welfare of farmers to ensure income of farmers and
minimize risks related to productivity so that farmers are not forced to leave farming. Resources
like land, water, jungle, seed and knowledge are required to be protected. There is a need to
review the agricultural policy based on increased consumption of water supply, energy and
chemicals to reduce the cost of agriculture. Infrastructure development be encouraged at
village level for storage, processing, marketing of agricultural produce through cooperative
institutions so that farmers can prosper.
The Bill, therefore, seeks to establish a National Agriculture Policy Commission for
improvement and development of agriculture and also to increase the productivity and
quality of agricultural produce in the country.
The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
N
EW DELHI; NIHAL CHAND
June 6, 2019
4

5
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the constitution of a National Agriculture Policy
Commission. It also provides that the Central Government shall make available necessary
experts, officers and staff for the efficient functioning of the Commission. Clause 6 provides
for the constitution of an Agriculture Development Fund. Clause 7 provides that the Central
Government shall provide requisite funds to the Commission for carrying out the provisions
of this Act. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, is likely to involve expenditure from the Consolidated
Fund of India. It is estimated that an annual recurring expenditure of about rupees six hundred
crore would be involved from the Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees one hundred crore is also likely to be
involved.

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 9 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.
6

LOK  SABHA
—————
A
BILL
to provide for establishment of a National Agricultural Policy Commission to formulate
policies on improvement and development of agriculture in the country and
for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
—————
( Shri Nihal Chand, M.P .)
MGIPMRND—491LS(S3)—21-06-2019.