AS INTRODUCED IN Lok SANHA

£8 jut 2000

Bill No. 107 of 2000

THE OLD AGE PENSION AND REHABILITATION BILL, 2000

By
Suri RaMDAS ATHAWALE, M.P.

A
BILL

17 provide for payment of pension and provision of other rehabilitation facilities to old
persons.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-first Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—

1. (7) This Act may be called the Old Age Pension and Rehabilitation Act, 2000. Short title, ex-

tent and com-
(2) It extends to the whole of India. mencement.

“J (3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.

2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—

Definitions.

(a) “appropriate Government” means in the case of a State, the State Government
___ and in the case of a Union territory, the Central Government; and

“10 (6) “old person” means any person who has attained the age of sixty years or more
| and who has no independent and adequate means of livelihood.

3. (7) Every old person shall, on an application made in the prescribed form, Pension to old

be paid rupees one thousand per mensem as pension, by the appropriate persons
। Government.


Facilities for in-
firm persons

Facilities to old
persons,

Constitution of
Old Persons
Welfare Fund.

Expenses to be
‘met out of the
Fund.

Power to make
rules,

(2) The pension payable shall be subject to alteration on the basis of the prevailing
cost-index as may be determined by the Central Government.

(3) The pension referred to in sub-section (/) shall be disbursed to old persons
the appropriate Government through Government Treasury or any branch of nationalised
bank as may be prescribed by the Central Government.

4. The infirm from amongst the old persons shall be kept in "Old Persons Homes"
to be set up in every district by the appropriate Government.

5. It shall be the responsibility of appropriate Government in their respective
jurisdiction to provide to old persons—

(a) free medical aid in Government hospitals and other nearest dispensaries
recognised by the Government; and

(6) residential accommodation free of cost.

6. (1) There shall be constituted by the Central Government a Fund to be known
as the "Old Persons Welfare Fund" to carry out the purposes of this Act.

(2) The Fund shall consist of the sums paid into it by the Central Government _
and grants and donations received from welfare agencies including international
agencies.

7. The expenses incurred on providing the old persons with pension and other
rehabilitation facilities provided under this Act shall be met out of the Fund constituted
under section 6.

8. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the payment of perision at the rate of rupees one
thousand per month to such old persons who have attained the age of 60 years or more and
who have no independent and adequate means of livelihood. Clause 4 provides that infirm
persons from amongst the old persons shall be accommodated in old persons homes to be
set up in every district. Clause 5 provides for medical aid and residential facilities free of
cost to old persons. Clause 6 provides for the constitution of Old Persons Welfare Fund by
the Central Government. The Bill, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the
Consolidated Fund of India.

It cannot be estimated at this stage as to how many old persons will need assistance
from the Central Government. However, an annual recurring expenditure of about rupees
four hundred crore is likely to be involved from the Consolidated Fund of India.

A non-recurring expenditure to the tune of rupees twenty lakh will also be involved
at the initial stage.


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 8 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying
out the purposes of this Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation
of legislative power is of a normal character.


LOK SABHA

A
BILL

to provide for payment of pension and provision of other rehabilitation facilities to
persons.

(Shri Ramdas Athawale, M.P)

MGIP(PLU)MRNO—1470LS—28.06.2000.