1
Short title and
commencement.
THE ANCIENT MONUMENTS AND ARCHAEOLOGICAL SITES AND
REMAINS (AMENDMENT) BILL,  2018
A
BILL
further to amend the Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sites
and Remains Act, 1958.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-eighth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sites and
Remains (Amendment) Act, 2018.
 (2)  It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In the Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sites and Remains Act,1958
(hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), in section 2, after clause (j), the following clause
shall be inserted, namely:—
‘(ja) “public works” means construction works related to infrastructure financed
and carried out by any department or office of the Central Government for public
purposes which is necessary for the safety or security of the public at large and
emergent necessity is based on specific instance of danger to the safety or security of
the public at large and there is no reasonable possibility of any other viable alternative
to such construction beyond the limits of the prohibited area;’.
Amendment
of section 2.
24 of 1958.
Bill  No. 107-C of  2017
5
10
AS PASSED BY  LOK SABHA
ON  2.1.2018

2
3. In section 20A of the principal Act, after sub-section (4), the following sub-sections
shall be inserted, namely:—
“(5) Nothing contained in sub-section (4) shall apply to the public works:
Provided that any question as to whether or not a construction works is public
works, shall be referred to the Authority which shall on being satisfied make its
recommendation, for the reasons to be recorded in writing, to the Central Government
whose decision thereon shall be final:
Provided further that if the decision of the Central Government differs from the
recommendation of the Authority, the Central Government shall record its reasons
thereof.
(6) Any Department or office of the Central Government proposing to carry out
any construction works, including reconstruction or repair or renovation, of any public
works in the prohibited area, shall make an application to the competent authority for
carrying out such construction works.
(7) Upon decision of the Central Government determining a construction works
as public works in accordance with the provisions of sub-section ( 5), the competent
authority shall convey the decision of the Central Government to the applicant within
ten days of the receipt of such decision.
(8) The provisions of section 20C shall apply mutatis mutandis to the public
works in a prohibited area.”.
4. In section 20D of the principal Act, in sub-section ( 8), for the words “Director
General”, the words “competent authority” shall be substituted.
5. In section 20-I of the principal Act, after clause ( e), the following clause shall be
inserted, namely:—
“(ea) to consider the impact, including archaeological impact, visual impact and
heritage impact assessment, of public works which may be proposed in the prohibited
area and make recommendations to the Central Government in respect thereof:
Provided that no recommendation for any construction works shall be made
unless the Authority is satisfied that there is no reasonable possibility of any other
viable alternative for shifting such construction works beyond the limits of the
prohibited area.”.
Amendment of
section 20A.
Amendment of
section 20D.
Amendment of
section 20-I.
5
10
15
20
25
30

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sites
and Remains Act, 1958.
————
(As passed by  Lok Sabha)
GMGIPMRND—3379LS(S3)—02-01-2018.