ede rtp

Rad? Vai BIS bites छक्का व Joojzo1! lid izeroees
shod isifslee inf coolisrivt ६87१9 with ni

53 icity Hobe at 196) 2 1908 inert 55D

gies! ही। are SHR. ete Maan i

gndtirtss oer (BH
further to amend the Constitution of India

‘It shall come into force on. such date as the Central Govern-
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.

After article 371-I of the Constitution, the following article shall
|, namely: —

_ “371J.. Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution,

(a) the Legislative Assembly of the Capital State of Delhi

have, but the Parliament shall have, power to make

State or any part thereof with respect to any of
enumerated in entries 1 and 2 in the State List;



eo ANAS tal te onrmterrety of

2

(0) the Governor of the Capital State of Delhi shall
special responsibility with respect to law and order in ‘hat
State and in the discharge of his functions in relation thereto,
the Governor shall exercise, subject to such general or special

directions, if any, as may be given by the President, his indivi-

dual judgment as to the action to be taken;

(०) the approval of the Governor of the Capital State of
Delhi shall be obtained with respect to any matter relating to
provision of municipal services required by the Union, the

Delhi Urban Arts Commission and the preparation and finalisa- 1

tion of the Master Plan of Delhi, including any amendments
thereto, and in the discharge of his functions in relation thereto,
the Governor shall exercise, subject to such general or special
directions. if any, as may be given by the President, his indivi-
dual judgment as to the action to be taken:

Provided that if any question arises whether any matter is or
is not a matter as respects which the Governor is under clause (b)
or clause (c) required to act in the exercise of his individual judg-
ment, the decision of the Governor in his discretion shall be final

and the validity of anything done by the Governor shall no: be 2

called in question on the ground that he ought or ought not to have
acted in the exercise of his individual judgment,”

08४५ te vob ७4 Ibe
3 THthE "Fist Schedule to the Constitution —

Amend-

ment ०... का i, Ce RL ee Mag a
Schedule, following entry shall be inserted, namely:—

atter entry 25, the

“26. Capital State of ‘Delhi The territory which immedia-

मु tely before the commencement

of this Constitution was com

ans . prised in the Chief Commissioner’s
Province of Delhi.”;

(®) under the heading “II. THE UNION TERRITORIES”, entry
1 relating to Delhi shall be omitted and entries 2 to 7 shall be re-
numbered as entries 1 to 6 respectively p

4. In the Fourth Schedule to the Constitution, in the Table, for entry
26, the followirig entry shall be ‘stibstituted, namely: e

+ “26. -Capital ‘State of Delhi... . . it. 20, २०108. 8: s

x



STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

The Union territory of Delhi is at present administered through an
Administrator, designated as the Lieutenant Governor. Under the Delhi
Administration Act, 1966 it hada ‘Metropolitan Council, which functioned
5 an advisory body on important, matters relating to the administration
of the Union territory, and an ixeetive"Council’ cérisisting of not more
than four members; appointe¢l. by, ,the,,. President ,to .gssist and advise
the Administrator in the exercise of functions, other than those
‘which he was required: to’ exercise*in“his dis¢ketion. The need for re-
organising the administrative set-up 30. 008 Union territory of Delhi has
been under consideration of the’ Government for quite some time.

2. There has béen a general demand bythe piiblic of Delhi that they
should be given an.effective voice in the running of their own admini-
stration and that in o¥der to satisfy the democratic and politital’ aspira-
tions -of the people, Delhi-should be accorded the: status of a full-fledged
constituent State of the, Union. At present, according to some, there
i lack of accouritability of adininistration to the people. The Govern-
‘ment of India had’ appointed’on 24h December, 1987 a Committee to go
into thé Va¥iolis 189165 connected with tevddministration of Delhi
and to recommend jinter-alia the, streamlining of the existing admini-
strative set-up. The Committee submitted its Report to the Govern-
ment on 14th December, 1989. After considering the recommendations
of the Committee, and after having considerable discussions with various
political parties, it is Aow proposed to confer Statehood on the Union
territory of Delhi. It will/bé known: as ‘Capital)State of Delhi”. Having
regard to the location of the National Capital in Delhi it is also proposed
as, follows:— AattranttA

6) the Legislative Assembly 6f the proposed State: shall not
hhave powers to make laws with respect to any of the mattefs ent-
merated in entries 1 (Public Order) and 2 (Police) of the State List
of the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution; Pras

(ii) the Governor of the new proposed State shall have special
responsibilities with respect to>law and order in the State and in
the ‘discharge of his functions in relation thereto, the Governor shall
exercise his individual judgment as to the action to be taken and
shall act in conformity with such general or special directions as
may be given by the President;

(iii) Matters relating to provision of municipal services requir-
ed by the Government of India, and the Delhi Urban Arts Commis-
sion, and the preparation and finalisation of the Master Plan of Delhi
shall be subject to the approval of the Governor acting in his indi-
vidual judgement but under such general or special directions as
may be given by the President.

3. In order to give effect to the above proposal it is necessary to
make special provisions in the Constitution. The Bill accordingly seeks
further to amend the Constitution to provide for the aforesaid matters.
A separate legislation to give effect to the proposal will be brought
forward later.

New Devnt;
The 29th May, 1990. MUFTI MOHAMMED SAYEED.


; “ANNEXURE-
Bxrnacts FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
* क्र * * *
HE FIRST SCHEDULE

* . * * *

Ii. THE UNION TERRITORIES

Name Extent

1. Delhi ‘The territory which immediately before the com-
mencement of this Constitution was comprised in
the Chief Commissioner’s Province of Delhi.

. * * * *

THE FOURTH SCHEDULE
§ [Articles 4(1) and 80(2)]
Allocation of seats in the Council of States

To each State or Union territory specified in. the first column of
the following table, there shall be allotted the number of seats specified
in the second column thereof opposite to that State or that Union
territory, as the case may. be.

TABLE.

* + 2 * कर

26. Delhi 3