As INTRODl1CBD IN L(nt BABKA ON 
t 1 MAY \\ill 
BUt He. 187 of 1985 
-THE TEA -COMPANIES (ACQUISITION AND TRANSFER OF SICK 
TEA UNITS) 'BILL, 1985 
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES 
CHAPTER I 
CLAUSES 
1. Short titlE' and commencement. 
2. Definitions. 
CHAPTER II 
ACQUISI'nON AND TRANSrBR OF THII SICK T&A UNITS OP THE TIA 
COMPANIES 
3. Acquisition of rights of. tea companies in respect of sick tea units. 
4. General effect of vesting. 
5. Tea companies to be liable for certain prior liabilities. 
CHAPTER III 
PAYMENT OF AMOUNTS 
6. Payrnent of amount. 
7. Payment of further amount.· 
CHAPTER IV 
MANAGEMENT, ETC., OF THE SIait TM uNITS OF THE TEA COMPANI. 
8. Management, etc., of the sick tea units of the tea companies. 
• 9. Duty of persons in charge of management of the sick tea unitl to 
deliver all assets, etc. 
10. Duty of pf'rsons to account for assets, etc., in their possession. 
CHAPTER V 
PROVISIONS Rl!:LA.TING TO EMPLOYEIlS OF 'nfE TEA OOMPANIIS 
11. Continuance of employees. 
12. Provident fund and other funds. 
eHAPTER·VI 
COMMISSIONER· OF PAYMENTS 
13. ApPOintment of Commissioner of Payments. 
14. Payment by the Central Government to the CommissioTlt>r 
15. Certain powers of the Tea Tradin~ Corporation. 

,,' ... 
ii 
(.U11SlllS 
'le:Claimi :'th 1i- tqUe to the Commissioner .. 
17. Priority of claims. 
i8. Examination of clamls. 
19. Admission or rejection of claims. 
20. Disbu~ement of money ,by the Commissioner. 
21. Disb~rsement of amounts to the tea ,companies. 
22. Und~sbursed or unclaimed amounts to be deposited with the gen. 
ral !'evenuc account: 
CAAPTER VII 
MISCELLANEOUS 
23. Act to have overricUng effect. 
24. Assumptitlll of liability. 
25. Management to con~inue to vest. in certain persons until alternative 
arra~gements have been made. 
26. Contracts to ~ase to have effect unl.::ss ratified by the Tea Trad-
ing Corporation. 
27. Penalties. 
28. Offences by companies. 
29. Protection of action taken in good faith. 
30. Tea companies not to be wouJ'!d up by the court. 
31. Delegation of powers. . 
32. Power to make rules. 
33. Power to remove difficulties. 
34. Repeal and saving. 
THE FIRST SCHEDULE. 
THE SECOND SCHEDlJLK 

29 of 19.53. 
Bill No. 107 of lSIl5 
THE TEA COMPANIES (ACQUISITION AND TRANSFER OF SICK 
TEA UNITS) BILL, 1985 
A 
BILL 
to provide jar the acquiaition and tramjer of the sick tea units ,pecified 
in the First S-cheduZe and the right, title and inteTest oJ the tea com-. 
panies in respect of the said tea units with a 'View to securing proper 
reorganisation and management of BUch tea units 80 as to subserve 
the interests of the general public by augmenting the productioft and 
manufacture of different varieties of tea which Gre essential to the 
needs of the economy of the country and for matters connected 
therewith or incidental thereto. 
WHEREo\S the sick tea units specified in the First Schedule had been 
engaged in the production and manufacture of different varieties at tea; 
AND WHEREAS the management of the said tea units was taken over 
by the Central Government under the Tea Act, 1953; 
5 AND WHEREAS the Central Government had invested large sums of 
money with a view to making the said tea units viable; 
AND WHEREAS further investment of large sums of money is necetl8llrY 
for reorganising and rehabilitating the said tea units; 
. AND WHEREAS' the acquisition by the Central Government of the said 
10 tea units is necessary to enable it to invest sueh large sums of money 
and to protect the large investments already made and also the intereets 

Short titl. 
ancl 
commen. 
cement. 
Defini. 
tioD& 
• 01 the workmen employed therein by proper reorganisation and manage-
ment of the said tea units and thereby· to augment the production and 
manufacture of different varieties of tea which are essential to the needs 
of the economy of the country; 
BB it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty-sixth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows: - . 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Tea Companies (Acquisition and 
Transfer of Sick Tea Units), Act, 1985. 
(2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 8th day of 'April, 
1985. ' 
2. In this Act, unless the .context otherwise requires,-
(a) "appointed day" means the date of commencement of this 
5 
10 
Act; 15 
(b) "Commissioner" means the Commissioner of Payments 
apPointed under section 13; . 
(c) "notiftcation" means a notification published in the Official 
GaZette; 
(d) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act; 20 
'(e) "sick tea unit" means a tea unit, specified in column (2) of 
the First Schedule, th~ managerllent of which had, before the 
a~inted day, been taken over by the 'Central Government under 
the Tea Act, 1953; ,.-
(f) "specified date", in relation to any provision of this Act, 25 
means such date as the Central Government may, be notification, 
sPeci~y ,for the. ,purposes of thatprovieion and dffterent dates may be 
specified for different provisions of this Act; 
(g) "tea companies" means the companies (being companies as 
29 of 1953, 
defined in the Companies Act,. 1956) specified in column (3) of the 30 1 of 1956. 
'FLrst Schedule; 
(h) "Tea Trading Corporation" means the Tea Trading Corpo-
ration of India I1mited, a cOinpany incorpora:ted and registered 
under the Companies Act, 1956; 
(i) words and expressions used herein and n()t defined but 35 
defined in the Tea Act, 1953, shall have the meanings respectively 
uaipedto them 'in that Act; . 
(j) wordsahd expressions used herein and not defined either 
1 of 1956. 
29 of 1953. 
in this' Aet or in the Tea Act. 1953, but defined in the Companies 29 (If 1953. 
A.ct; 1~56 shnU··l:\ave the meanings r£'spectively assigned to them. in 40 ] of J9'6. 
the· Companies 'Act, 1956. 

CHAPTER II f ' 
A(:Qt1I$1hoN A'ND TRANSFER OF THE SICK TEA UNITS 'OF THE _ COKPANlII 
3. (1) On th~ app,inted day, every sick tea unit and (be right, title 
and interest of every' tea company in relation to its sick tea untts or, 
5 as trte 'ease may be, sick tea unit shall, by virtue of this Act, stand trans-
ferred to, and Ves't in, the Central Government. ' 
(2) Every sick tea unit which stands vested in the Central Govem-
ment by virtue of sub-section (1) shall, immediately after it has so 
vested, sta'rid transferred to, and vested in, the Tea Trading Corporation. 
10 4. (1) Every sick tea unit shall be deemed to include all aHets, riIIaf8, 
lease-holds, powers authorities and privileges and all property, movable 
and immovable, including -lands, b~ldings, workshops, stores, instru-
ments, machinery and equipment, cash balances, cash on hand, reserve 
funds, investinents, book debts and all other rights and interests in, or 
15 arising out 'of, such property 'as were, immediately before the ap~ted 
day, in the ownership, possession, power or control of the tea company 
cdriCemed, whether within or outside India, and all books of account, 
registers and all other documents of whatever nature relating thereto 
and shall also be deemed to include the liabilities specified in sub-section 
20 (1) of seetion 24. 
(2) All properties as aforessfd which have vested in the Tea Trading 
Corporation under sub-section (2) of section 3 shall, by force of such 
vesting, be freed and discharged from any trust, obligation, mortgage, 
charge, lien and all other incumbrances affecting them and any attach-
25 ment, injunction, decree or order of any court, tribunal Or other authority 
restricting the use of such properties in any manner or appOinting any 
receiver in respect of the whole or any part of such properties ~hal1 be 
deemed to have been withdrawn. 
(3) Every mortgagee of any property which has vested under this 
30 Act in the Tea Trading Corporation and every person holding any charge, 
lien or other interest in, or in relation to, any such property shan give, 
within su·ch time and in such manner as may be prescribed, an intima-
tion to the Commissioner of such mortgage, charge, lien or other interest. 
(4) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that the mort-
. 5 gagec of any property referred to in sub-section (3) or any other person 
3 holding any charge, lien or other interest in, or relation to,. any such 
property shall be entitled to claim, in accordance with his rights and 
interests, payment of the mortgage money or other dues, in whole or in 
part, out of the amounts directed to be given under sections 6 and 7to 
40 the tea company concerned but no such mortgage, charge, lien or other 
interest shall be enforceable against any property which has vested in 
the Tea Trading Corporation. 
(5) Any licence 6r other instrUment granted to a tea company in 
rehition to its sick tea unit which has vested in the Tea Trading Corpo-
45 ration tinder sub.;section (2) cif section 3 at any time before the appointed 
day and in force imtnediately befoTe that day shall continue to be in 
force on and after such day in accordance with its tenor in relation to 
and for thE.' purposes of such sick tea unit, and that Corporation shan be 
Acquial-
tion of 
riihts of 
tea com-
panies in 
I'espect of 
lick tea 
units. 
General 
eJl'ect of 
vesting. 

Tea com· 
panies to 
be Uable 
for cer· 
tam 
prior 
llabili· 
ties. 
Payment 
of 
amount. 
Payment 
of 
further 
amount. 
.(. 
deemed to be substituted in web licence or other instrume~t as if such 
licence or other instrument had been granted to such Corporation and 
such Corporation shall hold it for the remainder of the period for which 
the tea company would have held. it under the terms thereof. 
(6) If, on the appointed day, any suit, appeal or other proceeding of 5 
whatever nature, in relation to any matter specified in sub-section (1) 
of section 24, in respect of the sick tea unit of any t~a company which 
has vested in the Tea Trading Corporation under sub-section (2) of 
section 3, instituted or preferred by or against that company, is pending, 
the same shall not abate, be discontinued or be, in any way, prejudicially 10 
affected by reason of the transfer of the sick tea unit of such tea com-
pany or of anything contained in this Act, but the suit, appeal or other 
proceeding may be continued, prosecuted or enforced by or against the 
Tea Trading Corporation. 
5. Subject to the other provisions of this Act, every liability, other than 15 
the liability specified in sub-section (1) of section 24, of a tea company 
in respect of any period prior to the appointed day, shall be the liability 
of that company and shan be enforceable against it and not against the 
Tea Trading Corporation." --
CHAPrER III 
PAYMENT OF AMOUNTS 
8. Every tea compa,~y slaall be given by the Central Government for 
the transfer to and vesting in ~hat Government under sub-section (1) 
of section 3 of the sick tea unit or, a" the case may be, each siek tea unit 
20 
of that com,pany and the right, title a.nd interest of that company in 25 
rf!1ation to such sick tea unit, in cash and in the manner specified in 
Chapter VI, such amount as if' specified against the name of that sick 
tea unit iu column (4) of the First Schedule. 
7. (1) En!'y tea company shall be given, by the Central Gover11ment 
per annum,for tbc deprivation of the management of its sick tea unit, go 
an amount as is specified 'agai.nst the nallle of that sick tea unit in column 
(5) of the First Schedule, for tlae periOd comm~Dcing on the date on 
which the management of such sick tCD unit was taken over in pursuance 
of tbe order made by the Centrnl Governm~t under the provisions of 
tbe Tea Ad, 1953 and ending on the appoulted day.' 35 29 of 1953. 
(2) Every amount specified in columns (4)' and (5) of the First 
Schedule shall carry simille interest at the rate of four per cent. per 
an.num. for the period commencing on the appointed day and ending on 
the date on which the payment of such amount is made by tbe Central 
Government to ate Commissioner. 40 
(3) The amounts determined in relation to any tea company in 
aocordance with the proVisions of sub-section (2) shall be given by the 
Central Government to the tea company in addition to the amounts 
specified in columns (4) and (5) of the First Schedule against that 
company. 45 

5 
CHAPTER IV 
MAKAGEMENT, ETC., OF TliE SICK 'rEA UNITS OF THE 'rEA COMPANIES 
8. The Tea Trading Corporation or any person which that Corpora-
tion may, by order in writing, specify, shall be entitled to exercise the 
:, powers of general superintendence, direction, control and management 
of the affairs and business of a sick tea unit, the right, title and interest 
of the tea company in relation to which have vested in the Corporation 
under sub-section (2) of section 3, and do all such things as the tea 
company of the sick tea unit is authorised to exercise and do. 
10 9 .. (1) On the vesting of the management of the sick tea units of 
the tea companies in the Tea· Trading Corporation, the persons in charge 
of the management of such ~ick tea units 'immediately before such 
vesting shall be bound to deliver to the Tea Trading Corporation all 
nssets, hooks of account,· registers and all other, documents in their 
15 custody relating to such sick tea units. 
(2) The Central Government may issue such directions as it may 
deem desirable in the circumstances of the case to the Tea Trading 
Corporation and the said Corporation may also, if it is considered 
necessary so to do, apply to the Central Government at any time for 
20 instructions as. to the manner in which ·the management of the sick tea 
units of the tea companies shall be conducted or in, relation ·to any other 
matter arising in the course of such management. 
10. (1) A~y person who has, on the appointed d·ay, in his possession 
or under his control any assets, books, documents or other papers 
25 relating to any sick tea unit owned by a tea company which has vested 
in the Tea Trading Corporation under this Act shall be Hable to 
account for the said assets, books, documents and other papers to the 
Tea Trading Corporation and shall deliver them up to that Corporation 
or to such person or persons as that Corporation may specify in this 
30 behalf. 
(2) The Tea Trading Corporation may take or cause to be taken all 
necessary steps for securing possession of the sick tea units of the tea 
companies which have vested in that Corporation under this Act. 
(3) EVery tea company shall, within such period as the Tea Trading 
35 Corporation may allow in this behalf, furnish to that Corporation a com-
I plete inventory of all property and assets, as on the appointed day, per-
taining to its sick tea unit, which have vested in that. Corporation under 
~ub-section (2) of sect,ion 3, and for this purpose, the Corporation shall 
afford to such company all reasonable facilities. 
CHAPTER V 
PROVISIONS RELATING TO EMPLOYEES OF THE TEA COMPANDS 
Manale-
meDt, etc., 
of the 
lick tea 
units 
of the 
tea 
com-
panies. 
Dutvof 
persona 
in charge 
of 
manage-
ment 
of ,the 
sick 
tea 
units 
to deliver 
all aaets. 
etc 
Duty of 
persons 
to accoUllt 
for 
I1811etS, 
etc., 
in their 
pOS8es. 
sion. 
11. (1) Every person who has been, immediately before the appoint- Ccmtlnu-
ed day, employed in any sick tea unit of any of the tea companies shall ance of 
become, on and from the appointed day, an employee of the Tea Trading em. 
Corporation and shall hold office or sel'V;ice under that Corporation, with ployeel. 
45 the same rights and privileges as to pension, gratuity and other matters 
as would have been admissible to him if there had been no such vesting 

• 
Provi-
dent 
fund 
and 
o~r 
funds. 
Appoillt-
ment 01. 
Commis-
sioner 
of 
Pay-
ments. 
Pay-
ment by 
the 
~ual 
Govem-
ment to 
the 
Com-
missioner. 
6 
and shall continue to do so unless and until his employment under that 
Corporation is duly terminated or until his remuneration and other con-
ditions of service are duly altered by thart Corporation. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained. in the Industrial Disputes 
Aet, 1947, or in any other law for the time being in force, the transfer of 
the services of any officer or other person employed in any sick tea wit 
of any tea company, to the Tea Trading Corporation, shall not entitle 
sueh otIcer or other employee to any compensation under this Act or 
any other law for the . time being in force and no such claim shall be 
entertained by any court, tribunal or other authority. 
5 140t 
1947. 
10 
12. (1) Where ~ tea company has established a provident fund, super-
annuation fund, welfare fund or other funds for the benefit of persons 
employed in a lick tea unit owned by it, the monies relatable to its em-
ployees whose services have become transferred by or under this Act 
to· the Tea Trading Corporation shall, out of the monies' ~tallding, 15 
on the appointed day, to the credit of such provident fund, superannua-
tion fund, welfare fund or other funds, stand transferred to, ~nd vest 
in, the Tea Trading Corporation. 
(2) The monies which stand transferred under sub..section (1) to the 
Tea Trading Corporation, shall . be dealt with by that Corporation in 20 
INch manner as may be prescribed. 
CHAPI'ER VI 
COMMISSIONER OF PAYMENTS 
1.3. (1) 'the Ct-ntrRI Govcr:lment sbaU~ for the purpose of disbursing 
the aID .... ,. Pltyable under sedio,lIs 6 and 7 to the tea companies, by gs 
.. etifteatiQIl, appoint D Commissioner of Payments. 
(2) The Central ('lIOVernment may appoint such othell. penonR as it 
may think fit to assist the Commissioner Di1Id thereupon the Comma-
. sioner may aulhorise one or more of such persons also to exercise all or 
1HlJ' of. the powers cserciA)'le lay him under ~is Act and dUferent 30 
penoa ... , .N 8IIthol'ised to exereile cliJlerent powers. 
(3) Any person authorised by the Commissioner to exercise any of 
thepGW8rS exercisable by the Commissioner may exercise those powers 
in the MJDe manner and with the lame effect as if they have been con-
fen" on that person directly by this' Act and not by way of authori- 35 
aa1ion. 
(4) '!tie salaries and .11o\Vaa.ce~ of tile COIUliIIBiOD'er aud other per. 
'SODS appointed under this aeetiOD shall be def.-ayed out of the ConlOli· 
dated Fund of India. 
It. (1) The Central Government. shall,. within thirty days from the 40 
speciftedda"', pay in cash to the Commissioner, for payment· to every 
tea company,- . 
(a) an amount equal to the amounts or amount specified against 
the name of that· company in column (4) of the First Schedule; and 
(b) a 1urther amount equal to the amounts or amount specified 45 
against the name of that company in column (5) ot the First Sche-
,~ule. 

7 ... 
.(2) A deposit account shall be opened by the Central Government in 
favour of the Commissioner fn the Public Account of India, and every 
If~ount paid under this Act to the Commissioner shall be depo-
sited by him to the credit of the said deposit aCcount and the. said depo-
5 o;it account shall be operated by the Commissioner. 
(3) Separate records shall be maintained by the Commissioner in 
respect of each of the tea companies in relation to which payment has 
been made to him under this Act. . 
(4) Interest accruing on the amount in relation to a tea company 
10 standing to the credit of the deposit account referred to in sub.seetion 
(2) shalf ensure tn the benefit of such tea company. 
15. (1) Th(! 'l'{~a Trading Corporation shall be entitled to receive, up 
to the specified date, to the exclusion of all other persons, any money due 
to any tea company in relation to its sick tea unit which has vested in 
J 5 the Corporation under sub-section (2) of section 3, and realised after 
the appointed day, notwithstanding that the realisation perta;ns to a 
period prior to the appointed day. 
(~) The Tea Trading Corporation may make a claim to the Commis~ 
sioner with regard to every payment made by that CorpOration, after 
20 the appointed day, for discharging any liability of a· tea company, not 
being any liability specified in sub-section (1) of section 24, in relation 
to any sick tea ,unit owned by it in respect of any period priOl' to the 
appointed day; and every such claim shall have priority, in accordance 
with the priorities attaching 'lUlder this Act to the matter in relation to 
25 which such liability has been discharged by the Tea Trading Corporation. 
(3) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, the liabilities of a tea 
company in relation to any sick tea unit owned· by it in respect of 
any transaction prior to the appointed day, which have not been dis-
charged on or before the specified date, shall be the liabilities of that 
30 company. 
Certain 
powerll 
of the 
Tea 
Trading 
Corpora_ 
tion. 
16. Every person having a claim against a tea company with regard 
to any of the matters specified in the Second Schedule,. pertaining to 
any sick tea unit owned by it, shall prefer such claim before the Com-
missioner within thirty days from the specified' date: 
Claims 
'i5 Provided that if the Commissioner is satisfied that the claimant was 
.. prevented by sufficient cause from preferring the claim within tr.e said 
period of thirty days, he may entertain the claim within a further period 
of thirty days. but not thereafter . .. 
to be 
made 
to the 
Com_ 
missioner. 
17. The claims made under section 16 shall have priorities in accord- Priol'ity 
.:(.0 ance with the following principles, namely:- of 
claims. 
(a) Category I shall ha\1e precedence over all other categories 
and Category II shall have precedence over Category III, and so on; 
(b) the claims specified in each of the categories shaH rank 
equally and be paid in full, but if the amount paid to the Commis-
45 sioner under this Act is insufficient to meet such claims in full. they 
shall .abnte in ('qUo'll proportions and be paid accordingly; and 

P4tamina-
tion of 
claim •. 
Admi ... 
sion or 
rejection 
of claimll. 
8 
(c) the question of discharging Bny liability with regard to a 
matter specified in a lower category shall Jlrise only if a surplus is 
Jeft after meeting all the liabilities specified in the immediately 
higher category. 
18. '(I) On receipt of the claims made under section 16, the Commis-. 5 
sioner shall arrange the claims in the order of priot:ities gpecified in the 
Second Schedule and examine the same in accordance with such order. 
(2) If on an examination of the claims against a tea company, the 
Commissioner is of the opinion that the amount paid to him under this 
Act for payment to such company is not sufficient to meet the liabilities JO 
specified in any lower category, he shall not be required to examine 
any claim in respect of such lower category. 
19. (1) Mter examining the claims against a tea company. with refer-
ence to the priorities set 'lut in the Second Schedule, the Commissioner 
shall fix a date on or before which every claimant against the tea com- J 5 
pany shall file' the proof of his claim. 
(2) Not less than fourteen days' notice of the date so fixed shall be 
given by advertisement in one issue of any daily newspaper in the Eng-
lish language having circulation in the major parts of the country and 
one issue of any daily newspaper in such regional language as the Com- ~o 
missioner may consider suitable, and every such notice shaH call upon 
the claimant to file the proof of his claim with the Commissioner within 
the period specified in the advertisement. 
(3) Every claimant who fails to file the proof of his claim within the 
period specified by the Commissioner shall be excluded from the, dis- ~5 
bursements made by the Commissioner. 
(4) The Commissioner shall, after such investigation as may, in his 
opinion, be necessary and after giving the tea company concerned an 
opportunity of refuting the claim and after giving the claimant a reason-
able opportunity of being heard, by order in writing, admit 01' rejp.ct the 30 
claim in whole or in part. 
(5) The Commissioner shall have the power to regulate his own pro-
cedure in all matters arising out of the discharge of his functions, includ-
ing the place or places at which he may hold his sittings and shall. for 
the purpose of making any investigation under this Act, have the sam~ 35 
powers as are vested in a Civil Court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 
1908, while trying a suit in respect of the following matters, namely:-
(II) the summoning and enforcing the attendance of any witncss 
and examining him on oath; 
(b) the discovery and production of ,any document 01' ot?cr 40 
material object producible as eVidence; , 
(c) the reception of evidence on affidavit; 
(d) the iSSUing of any commission for the examination of 
witnesses. 
5 of 1908. 

• 
(6) Any investigation before. the Commissioner shalI be deemed to be 
a judicial proceeding within the meaning of sections 193 and 22ft of the 
45 of 1860. Indian Penal Code, and the Commissioner shall be deemed to be a Civil 
Court for the purposes of section 195 and Chapter XXVI of the Code of 
2 of 1974. Criminal Procedure, 1973. 
5 
(7) A claimant who is dissatisfied with the decision of the Commis-
sioner may prefer an appeal against such dec~sion to the High Court 
within the local limits of whose jurisdiction the registered office of the 
tea company. concerned is situated and every such appeal shall be heard 
10 nnd disposed of by not less than two Judges of that High Court 
I 
20. After admitting a claim against a tea company under this Act, 
the amount due in respect of such claim shall be paid by the Commis-
sioner to the person or persons to whom such amount is due and on such 
payment, the liability of such tea company in respect of such claim 
15 shall stand discharged. 
_ . ., .. 
21. (1) If out of the monies paid to him in relation to a tea company, 
there is a balance left after meeting the liabilities as specified in the 
Second Schedule, the Commissioner shall disburse such balance to such 
tea company. 
20 (2) Where the possession of any machinery, equipment or other pro-
perty possess(.>d by a tea company has vested in the Tea Trading 
Corporation under this Act but such maChinery, equipment or other 
property does not belong to such tea company, it shall be lawful for that 
Corporation to continue to possess such machinery or eqUipment Or other 
25 property on the same terms and conditions under which they were pos-
sessed by such tea company immediately before the appointed day. 
22. Any money paid, to the Commissioner which remains undisbursed 
or unclaimed on the date immediately preceding the date on which the 
office of the Commissioner is finally wound up, shall be transferred by 
SO the Commissioner, before his offiee is finally wound up, to the general 
revenue account of the Central Government, but a claim to any money 
so transferred may be preferred to the Central Government by the per-
son entitled to such payment and shall be dealt with as if such transfer 
had not been made, and the order, if any, for payment of the claim being 
. 35 treated as an order for the refund of revenue. 
CHAPTER VII 
MISCELLANEOUS 
23. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding 
anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time 
10 being in force or in any instrument having effect by virtue of any law, 
other than this Act, or in any decree or order of any court, tribunal or 
other authority. 
24. (1) Wherp any liability of Ii tea compa.ny arising out of lU'Iy item 
specified in Category I of the Second ~hedule is not di&eharged fully 
45 by the Commissioner out of the amounts paid to him under tbis Act, 
. the Commis!lioner shall intimat(" in writi.ng to the Central Government 
Disburse-
ment of 
mont~y by 
the Com-
missioner. 
Disburse-
.ment of 
amounts 
to the 
tea (.'om-
panies. 
Undis_ 
bursed Or 
unclaimed 
amountlil 
to be 
deposited 
with the 
general 
revenue 
RCCOunt • 
Act to 
have 
overridinJr 
effect. 
Assump_ 
tion of 
UabiUty. 

Manqe-
met to 
continue 
to vut ill 
certain 
persons 
untn 
alterna-
,tive 
arranle-
menta 
have been 
made. 
Contracts 
to cease 
to have 
effect 
unless 
ratified 
by the 
Tea 
Trading 
Corpora_ 
tion. 
Pcmaltie.. 
10 
the exteat of tile liability which .remains UDdischa~ and that liability 
shall be assQ~ed by the Ce~tral Government. 
(2) The Central Government may, by order, direct the 'rea Tradin'g 
Corporation to take over the liability assumed by the Central Govern-
ment under sulrsection (1), and on receipt of such direction, it shall be 5 
the duty of that Corporation to discharge such liability. 
25. Notwithstanding the vesting under this Act of a sick tea unit 
of any tea company in the Tea Trading Corporation-
(a) any person who has been managing the affairs of such sick 
tea unit before the date on which that unit had so vested. shall, until 10 
alternative arrangements have been made by the Tea Trading Cor-
poration for the management of such unit, continue to manage the 
affairs of the unit, as if such person had been authorised by the Tea 
Trading Corporation, to manage'such unit; 
(b) such person shall, until alterna,tive arrangements have been 15 
made by the Tea Trading Corporation,' continue to be authorised to 
operate, in relation to the sick tea unit of such tea company, any 
account of such unit in any bank as jf he had been authorised by 
the Tea Tra~ing Corporation to operate such account, 
26. Every contract entered into by any tea company in relation to ~o 
any sick tea unit owned by it which has vested in the Tea Trading Cor-
poration under sub-section (2) of section 3, for any service, sale or supply 
and in force, immediately before the appointed day, shall, on and from 
the expiry of a period of one hundred and eighty days from the appointed 
day, cease to have effect unless such cO(lb'act is, before the t!xpiry of that 25 
period, ratified in writing by the Tea Trading Corporation, and in ratify-
ing such ccntrqct, the Tea Trading Corporation may make such altera-
tions or modifications therein as it may think fit: 
Provided that the Tea Trading Corporation shall not omit to ratify 
a contract and shall not make any altE"ration or modification In a. 30 
contract-
(a) unless it is satisfied that such contract is unduly onerous 
or has been entered into in bad faith or is detrimental to the inter-
ests of the Tea Trading Corporation; and 
(b) except after giving the parties to the contract a reasonable 35 
opportunity of being heard and except after recording in writing 
its reasons for refusal to ratify the contract or for making any 
alteration or modification therein. 
21. Any person who,-
(a) having in his possession, custody or control any property 40 
forming part of a sick tea unit owned by any tea company wrong-
fully withholds, such property from the Tea Trading Corporation; 
or . 
(0) wrongfully obtains posseSSion of, or retains any property 
forming part of, a sick tea unit owned by any tea company;, 01' 41 

11 
(c) wilfully withholds Ol" fails to furnish to the Tea Trading 
Corporation or any person or body of persons specified by that 
Corporation, any document or inventory relating to a sick tea unit 
owned by any tea company, which may be in his, possession, custody 
.5 or control; or 
(d) fails to deliver to the Tea Trading Corporation or any 
person or body of persons specified by that Corporation, any assets, 
books of account, registers or other documents in his possession, 
custody or control relating to a sick tea unit owned by any tea com-
10 pany; or 
(e) wrongfully removes or destroys any property forming part 
of a sick tea unit owned by any tea company or prefers any claim 
under this Act which he knows or has reason to believe to be false 
or grossly inaccurate, 
15 shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend 
to two years and also with fine which may extend to ten thousand 
rupees. 
:lO 
28. (1) Where an offence punishable under this Act has been com-
mitted by a company, every person who, at the time the offer.ce was 
committed. was in charge of, and was responsible to, the company for 
the conduct of the business of the' company, as well as the company, 
shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be 
proceeded against and punished accordingly: 
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render 
Offcncc,.'1 
by ('001-
panie~. 
, any such person liable to any punishment, if he proves that the offence • 
25 was committed without his knowledge or that he had exercised all due 
diligence to prevent the commission of such offence. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), where 
any offence under this Aet has been eommitted by a company and it is 
proved that the offence has been committed with the consent or 
30 connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of, any 
director, manager, secretary or other officer of the company, such 
director, manager, secretary or other officer shall be deemed to be guilty 
of that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished 
3 accordingly. 
5 
Explanation.-For the purposes of this section-
(a) "company" means any body corporate and includes a firm 
or other association of individuals; and 
(b) "director", in relation to a firm, means a partner in the 
firm. 
29. (1) No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie 
against the Central Government or any officer of that Government or 
the Tea Trading Corporation or other person authorised by that Gov-
ernment or Corporation for anything which is in good faith done or 
45 intended to be done under this A~t. 
(2) No suit or other legal proceeding shall lie against the Central 
Government or any of its omcers or other employees or the Tea Trading 
Corporation or any officer or other person authorised by that Corpora-
Protecti!)n 
of action 
taken ill 
good 
faith. 

Tea 
com-
panies 
'lOt to be 
wound 
up by 
the 
court. 
Delega-
tion of 
powers. 
Power 
to 
make 
ruleR. 
Power 
to remove 
diffi_ 
culties. 
Repeal 
nnd 
flavlng. 
12 
tion for any damage caused or likely to be caused for anything which 
is in good faith done or intended to be done under this Act. 
30. No proceeding for the winding up of a tea company, the right, 
title and interest in relation to a sick tea unit owned by which have 
vested in the Tea Trading Corporation under this Act or for the 5 
appointment of a receiver- in respect of -the business of the sick tea unit 
shall lie or be proceeded with in any court except with the consent of 
the Central Government. 
31. (1) The Central Government may, by notification, direct that all 
or any of the powers exercisable by it under this Act, other than the 10 
powers conferred by this section and sections 32 and 33, may alSo be 
exercised by such person or persons as may be specified in the notification. 
(2) Whenever any delegation of power is made under sub-section 
(1), the person to whom such power has been delegated shall act under 
the direction, control and supervision ()f the Central Government. 15 
32. (1) The Central Government .may, by notification, make rules for 
carrying out the provisions of this Act. 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the 
foregoing power, such rules may provide for all or any of the followirig 
matters, namely:- 20 
(a) the time within which, and the manner in which, an inti-
mation referred to in sub-section (3) of section 4 shall be given; 
(b) the manner, in which the monies in any provident fund or 
other fund, referred to in sub-.section (2) of section 12, shall be 
dealt with; 25 
(c) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, 
prescribed. 
(3) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act 
shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of 
Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period at thirty days which 10 
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, 
and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session 
or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any 
modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not 
be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in suchmodifted 35 
form or be of no ,effect, as the case may be; 80, however, that any such 
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of 
anything previously done under that rule. 
33. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this 
Act, the Central Government may, by order; not inconsistent with the 40 
provisions of this Act, remove the difficulty: 
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of a period 
of two years from the appointed day~ 
34. (1) The Tea Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Sick Tea 
r 
Units) Ordinance, 1985, is hereby repealed. 45 3 of 1985. 
(2) Notwithstandi:qg such repeal, anything done or any action taken 
under the said Ordinance shall be deemed to have been done or taken 
under the corresponding provisions of this Act. 

5 
10 
'5 
THE FIRST SCHEDULE 
[See sections 2(e) and (g), 6, 7 and 14 (1)] 
Sf. Name of the 
N,l. sick tea unit 
Name of tbe tea company Amount l-'lI~t 11fT 
(Rupees ,·mount 
in lllkhB) (Rupees) 
--~ -- ... -.---.-.--------~ .. -- --------~---~----------.. -----
(Il) 
-----
I. Pashok Tea 
Estate 
1:1. Looban Tea 
Estate 
3. V \h·Tukvlf 
Tea Estate 
4. Potong Tca 
Estate 
MelSrs palhok Tea Company I.imitr.d, 
10, Pollock Street, Calcutta. 
Mears Palhok Tea Company Limited, 
10, Pollock Srreet, CalcUlta. 
M"M~r8 S.dhi Tara Tea Comp 'ny Pri Vale 
Limih-d, Daljecling. 
M!'Isrs Moon Moon Tea Company (Pri. 
vate) Limikd, 5, Clive Row, Calcutta. 
THE SECOND SCHEDULE 
(4) 
a6.03 
100. IS 
liS_HI! 
16.35 
[See sections 16, 18(1), 19(1). 2t'(1) and 24(1)] 
ORDER opo PRIORITIEs 
Category 1-
(S) 
7,64 0 
!h34o 
4·,!J,4·0 
30460 
.-_ .. _----
Employees, dues on account of unpaid salaries, wages, provident 
20 fund, Employees' State Insurance contribution or premium' relating to 
the Life Insurance Corporation of India and any other amounts due to 
employees in respect of any period whether before or after the manage-
ment of the sick tea units had been taken over by the Central Govern-
ment. 
115 Category 1I-
Land revenue, taxes, cesses, rural employment cess, electricity duty, 
or other dues to the State Government and Local Authorities in respect 
of any period whether before or after the management of the sick tea 
units had been taken over by the Central Government. 
30 Category III-
Loans and other financial accommodation, together with interest, 
provided by the Central Government as well as similar accommodation 
provided by commercial banks and public financial institutions during 
any period after the management of the sick tea units had been taken 
35 over by the Central Government. . 
Category IV-
Revenue, taxes, cesses, rates or other dues to the Central Govern-
ment, in respect of any period whether before or after the management 
of the sick tea units had been taken over by the Central Government. 

Category V-
Secured loans obtained by any tea company for the purposes of its 
sick tea unit from nationalised banks, Tea Board constituted under the 
Tea Act, 1953, and public financial institutions during any period before 
the management of that sick tea unit had been taken over by the Cen-
tral Government. 
Category VI-
29 of 19'3. 
5 
Any. other credit availed of by any tea company for trade or manu-
facturing purposes with respect to its sick tea unit, during any period 
before the management of that 'Sick tea unit had been taken over by the 10 
Central Government 

STA'I'EMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Tea Companies (Acquisition and :rransfer of Sick Tea Units) 
Ordinance, 1985 was promulgated by the President OD the 8th April, 
1985, to acquire four sick tea units. The management of the four sick 
units, namely, Pashok, Looksan, Vah-Tukvar and Potong was taken 
over by the Central Government under the provisions of the Tea Act, 
1953 after continued m~anagement and neglect of the said tea u~ts 
by the tea companies concerned, coupled with reckless investments 
made and incumbrances created by those companies, had led to a state 
of deterioration which threatened the very continuance of the said tea 
units as alS(l of the employment of about 3000 workers. The Centra! 
Government had invested considerable effort and money to nurse the 
tea un,its back to health with a view to safeguarding the interests of 
the workmen employed ,therein, and exploiting the full potential of the 
tea units for augmenting the production and manufacture of different 
varieties of tea which are essential to the needs of the economy of the 
country. Further investment of large sums of money was also consi-
dered necessary for re-organising and rehabilitating these gardens for 
attaining the objective fully. It was necessary for the Central Gov-
ernment to have an effective control' ov~r the affairs of the 'gardens t'o 
enable it. to make further investments of such large sums of money ~nd 
to protect the large investments already made. Since the period of 
take-over of management was expiring on the 10th April, 1985 in respect 
of Pashok, Looksan and Vah-Tukvar tea units and on the 19th June, 1985 
in respect of Potong tea unit, it was decided to acquire these tea units 
without any further loss of time. In view of the urgency of the matter, 
and as the Council of States was not in Session at that time, the above-
mentioned ,Ordinance was promulgated. 
2. The Bnl seeks to replace the said Ordinance. 
NEW DI:LHI; 
The 24th April, 1985 VISHWANATH PRATAP SINGH. 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Clause 6 of the Bill provides that every tea company shall be given 
by the Central Government, for the transfer to and vesting in that Gov-
ernment of the sick tea unit or, as the case may be, each sick tea unit 
of that company and the right, title and interest of that company in 
relation to such sick tea unit, an amount in cash. The amount so pay-
able will be approximately Rs. 168.35 lakhs. The said amount will ·be 
placed at the disposal of a Commissioner of Payments, to be appointed 
under clause 13 of the Bill, for payment to. the said tea companies. 
2. Sub-clause (1) of clause 7 of the Bill provides for the payment of 
an amount to every tea company, for the deprivation of the management 
of its sick tea unit, for the period commencing on the date on which the 
management of such sick tea unit was taken over by the Central Gov-
ernment under the Tea Act, 195'3 and ending on the appointed day. The 
amount so payable for a period of 81 years in respect of 3 gardens and 
51 years in respect of the remaining garden will be approximately Rs. 2.1 
lakhs. 
3. Sub-clause (2) of clause 7 of the Bill provides that the amount 
rayable to the tea companies in terms of clause 6 and sub-clause (1) of 
clause 7 of the Bill shall carry simple interest at the rate of four per cent. 
per annum for the period commencing on the appointed day and ending 
on the date on which the payment of such amount is made by the Cen-
tral Government to the Commissioner of Payments. This amount will 
be appr.oximately Rs. 7 lakhs. 
4. Clause 13 of the Bill provides for the appointment of a Commissioner 
of Payments and such other persons as the Central Government may 
think fit to assist the Conunissioner of Payments. Under sub-clause (4) 
of clause 13, the salaries and allowances of the Commissioner of Payments 
and other persons appointed under that clause shall be defrayed out of 
the Consolidated Fund of India. The expenditure to be incurred on this 
account may not exceed Rs. 1 lakh per annum. 
5. Clause 24 of the Bill provides for assumption of certain liabilities 
by the Central Government. The total extent of liabilities covered by 
that clause is much less than the total amount payable to the Commis-
sioner as indicated in paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Memorandum. No addi-
tional financial liability is, therefore, likely to devolve on the Central 
Government under this clause. 
6. It is also estimated that funds to the tune of B.s. 1.10 crores will be 
required, inclusive of bank loans and Government equity contribution, 
for investments to make the gardens viable and to meet cash deficits 
during the gestation period. The gardens are expected to achieve break-
even by around 1991-92 and are likely to be in a position to pay back 
investments and losses' during gestation period by 1995-96. 
7. The Bill, if enacted, is not likely to involve any other recurring or 
non-recurring expenditure. 
16 

MEMORANDUM REGARDlNG DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 32 of the Bill empowen the Central Government to make 
rules to carry out the provisions of the Bill. The matters in respect of 
which rules may be made, inter alia, relate to the time within which, 
and the manner in which, intimation regarding any mortgage, charge, 
lien or other interest in, or in relation to, the properties which have 
vested in the Tea Trading Corporation under clause 3 of the Bill, shall be 
given to the CommiFsioner of Payments and the manner in whicK the 
monies in apy provident fund, superannuation, welfare or other fund 
maintained by the tea company shall be dealt With by the Tea Trading 
Corporation. 
2. The matters in respect of which rules may be made are matters 
of procednre and administrativ~ detail. The delegation of legislative 
power is thus of 8 normal character. 
17 

" 
LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the acquisition and transfer of the sick tea units specified 
in the First Schedule and the right, title and interest of the tea com-
panies in respect of the said tea units with a' view to securing proper 
reorganisation and management of such tea units so as to subserve 
the interests of the general public by augmenting the production B;Dd 
manufacture of different varieties of tea which are essential to· the 
needs of the economy of the country and for matters connected 
therewith or incidental thereto. 
(Shri ViBhW4f14th Pratap SirtP. 
Mif&\Itef' ~ CommeTce.) , 