THE WOMEN (EMPOWERMENT AND WELFARE) BILL, 2018
By
SHRI BHAIRON PRASAD MISHRA, M.P.
A
BILL
to establish a Women Empowerment and Welfare Authority to provide for monthly
incentive schemes for girl child to delay marriage until age of twenty one
years, special saving schemes for women with higher rate of interests
inclusive of annual bonus if husband is non-alcoholic, special fund
for micro credit schemes, guidelines for mobile healthcare
 facilitiesfor agricultural labour, regulation of private
placement agencies, schemes for widows and for
all matters connected therewith and
incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-ninth Year of the Republic of  India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Women (Empowerment and Welfare) Act, 2018.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "annual report" means a report giving the details of developmental activities
Bill No. 107 of 2018
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Definitions.
5
As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
Constitution of
Women
Empowerment
and Welfare
Authority.
Meetings of
the Authority.
taken up over the year by the authority and detailing about targets set and achieved;
(b) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State or a Union territory
having legislature, the concerned State Government or the Union territory Government,
as the case may be, and in all other cases, the Central Government.
(c) "Authority" means the Women Empowerment and Welfare Authority
established under section 3;
(d) "domestic worker" means a woman employed to do work in or for a private
household(s) which includes cooking, cleaning, gardening, childcare, and old-age care.
(e) "health certificate" means a certificate of non-alcoholic issued by a competent
physician to a person.
(f) "placement agency" means any agency or contractor, whether registered or
otherwise, engaged in the placement of domestic workers with prospective employers.
(g) "prescribed" means prescribed by the rules made under this Act; and
(h) "small family" means family having not more than two living children.
3. (1) With effect from such date as the Central Government may, by notification,
appoint, there shall be constituted, for the purposes of this Act, an Authority, to be known as
the Women Empowerment and Welfare Authority consisting of—
(a)  Union Minister, Ministry of Women and Child Development —ex officio
Chairperson;
(b)  Chairperson, National Commission for Women—ex officio Member;
(c)  Secretaries of the Union Ministries of (i) Women and Child Development,
(ii) Health and Family Welfare and (iii) Statistics and Programme Implementation—
ex officio Members;
(d)  Director General of Health Services, Ministry of Health and Family
Welfare—ex officio Member; and
(e)  Director, National Institute of Health and Family Welfare—ex officio
Member.
(2) The Central Government shall appoint such number of officers and staff as it
considers necessary for the efficient functioning of the Authority under this Act.
(3) The salary and allowances  payable  to and other terms and conditions of services
of officers and staff of the Authority shall be such as may be prescribed.
4. (1) The Authority shall meet at such intervals and places and shall observe such
rules of procedure in regard to transaction of business at its meetings as may be prescribed
by the Central Government.
(2) The expenditure incurred to attend meetings by the Members referred to in
sub-clauses (a) to (e) of section 3, shall be borne by their concerned department or authority.
5. (1) Subject to any guidelines issued by the Central Government under the provisions
of this Act, the Authority shall perform and undertake such functions as may be necessary
to ensure empowerment of women in the country and shall formulate a comprehensive policy
within one year of its constitution to achieve the objective.
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions contained in sub-section ( 1), the Authority
shall,—
(a) undertake a baseline study to collect comprehensive data about girl child
Functions of
the Authority.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
Annual report
and its laying
before the
Parliament.
above the age of eighteen years and their families within one year of setting up of the
Authority;
(b) formulate a monthly incentive scheme to provide for regular income to families
having unmarried girl child upto the age of twenty one years;
(c) recommend to the Central Government to prepare a special savings scheme
for women with higher rates of interest;
(d) formulate a special bonus scheme for families where the husband obtains
health certificate;
(e) provide for funds to encourage micro credit for young women entrepreneurs;
(f) frame guidelines for agricultural land owners to provide for mobile healthcare
facilities and social security cover for the women agricultural labour;
(g) recommend to the appropriate Government for formulating stringent
regulations for private placement agencies and regulations for domestic workers;
(h) recommend to the appropriate Government for penalties for harassment of
domestic workers;
(i) establish a separate widow welfare board to look into collecting data on
widowed woman and formulating rehabilitation schemes for widow women;
 (j) provide guidelines to the appropriate Government for establishing all women
police stations, banks and courts as district levels within specific timelines;
(k) undertake, promote and publish studies relating to the importance of women
empowerment;
(l) frame syllabus for including awareness about woman empowerment in school
curriculum; and
(m) undertake such other activities as may be prescribed by the Central
Government.
(3) The Authority shall disseminate necessary knowledge and information collected,
to the respective departments of the appropriate Government.
6. (1) The Authority shall prepare once in every year, in such form and at such time as
may be prescribed, an Annual Report giving the summary of its activities, including schemes
it has undertaken and recommended to the Government during the year and it shall contain
statements of Annual Accounts of the Authority.
(2) A copy of the report shall be forwarded to the Central Government, and the Central
Government shall cause the report to be laid before each House of Parliament.
7. The Central Government shall, from time to time provide, after due appropriation
made by Parliament by law in this behalf, requisite funds for carrying out the purposes of
this Act.
8. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government in consultation with the State Governments may make such order or give such
direction not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appears to it to be necessary or
expedient for the removal of any difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of three years from the date
of commencement of this Act.
9. (1) The Central Government may, in consultation with the State Governments, by
notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
Central
Government to
provide funds.
Power to
remove
difficulty.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

4
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
5

5
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
'There is no chance for the welfare of the world unless the condition of women is
improved. It is not possible for a bird to fly on only one wing.' This was said by
Swami Vivekananda when he was asked about welfare of women. Out of the 125 crore citizens
of this country, 65.2 crores are women. The sex ratio is 945females per 1000 males. Though
targeted welfare schemes, taken up by the Government over the past five decades for women
have resulted in better livelihood for them, still there is a lot more to be achieved. Literacy
rates among women in India is still lagging and the numbers relating to women in the workforce
is abysmal. Though our Constitution envisages to provide for equal means of livelihood and
equal pay for men and women, it is still a distant dream.
We pride ourselves as a country, with regard to our economic growth but this growth
remains a façade, masking our low social indicators. Women should be key players for this
change to happen. Policy which aims at bringing higher proportion of women into the
workforce, as teachers, health care workers and skilled labour force in factories should be the
first stepping stone towards this. Providing them with the weapon of education will give
them this much required freedom.
This Bill proposes to create a Women Empowerment and Welfare Authority to carry
out major policy changes and provide for the necessary guidelines. This Authority will
inter alia bring in monthly incentive schemes for families of girl children who have not been
married until the age of twenty one. Also, special saving schemes shall be introduced for
woman in every household with higher rates of interest and annual bonuses if husband
produces a non-alcoholic certificate from Government hospital. Special fund would be created
to provide for micro credit to women entrepreneurs who plan on start-ups just after their
college education. Mobile health care facilities and social security cover would also be
provided for agricultural labour working in their lands. It will regulate placement of agency
and also organizing domestic workers under a newly formed body to safeguard their rights.
A separate widows welfare arm proposed to be created to provide for maintaining data on
widowed women in the country and to provide for a subsistence allowance to the needy.
This Bill, shall endeavour to create a positive and just social and economic environment
for the women of this country. Women must be put in a position to solve their own problems
in their own ways. The State must endeavour to take that extra effort to provide for the equal
platform. This is what this Bill envisions, to offer the required momentum to kick start this
process. Our country's journey to regain the status of ' Vishwa Guru' will become a reality
only if the womenfolk of this great nation lead the way.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; BHAIRON  PRASAD  MISHRA
January, 18, 2018.

6
FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for constitution of the Women Empowerment and Welfare
Authority and appointment of officers and staffs for its functioning. Clause 7 makes it
obligatory for the Central Government to provide requisite funds for carrying out the purposes
of this Bill. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve recurring expenditure of five thousand
crore rupees per annum from the Consolidated Fund of India. A non-recurring expenditure to
the tune of rupees two hundred crore is also likely to be involved.

7
MEMORANDUM   REGARDING   DELEGATED   LEGISLATION
Clause 9 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of  a normal character.

MGIPMRND—258LS(S3)—08.06.2018.
LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to establish a Women Empowerment and Welfare Authority to provide for monthly
incentive schemes for girl child to delay marriage until age of twenty one
years, special saving schemes for women with higher rate of interests
inclusive of annual bonus if husband is non-alcoholic, special fund
for micro credit schemes, guidelines for mobile healthcare
 facilitiesfor agricultural labour, regulation of private
placement agencies, schemes for widows and for
all matters connected therewith and
incidental thereto.
————
(Shri  Bhairon Prasad Mishra,  M.P.)