5 
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA 
Bill No. 107 of 2026 
THE CONSTITUTION (ONE HUNDRED AND THIRTY-FIRST 
AMENDMENT) BILL, 2026 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Constitution of India. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy -seventh Year of the Republic of 
India as follows:–– 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (One Hundred and Thirty -first
Amendment) Act, 2026. 
(2) It shall come into force  on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
2. In article 55 of the Constitution, for the Explanation, the following
Explanation shall be substituted, namely:–– 
Short title and 
commencement. 
Amendment of 
article 55. 

2 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Amendment of 
article 81. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Amendment of 
article 82. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Amendment of 
article 170. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Amendment of 
article 330. 
 ‘Explanation.––In this article, the expression “population” means the 
population as ascertained at such census, as Parliament may by law determine 
under article 82 or article 170, of which the relevant figures have been 
published.’. 
3. In article 81 of the Constitution,–– 
(a) for clause (1), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:–– 
“(1) The House of the People shall consist of—  
(a) not more than eight hundred and fifteen members chosen 
by direct election from territorial constituencies in the States; and  
(b) not more than thirty-five members to represent the Union 
territories, chosen in such manner as Parliament may by law 
provide.”; 
(b) for clause (3), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:–– 
‘(3) In this article, the expression “population” means the 
population as ascertained at such census, as Parliament may by law 
determine, of which the relevant figures have been published.’. 
4. In article 82 of the Constitution,–– 
(a) in the marginal heading, for the words “after each census”, the words 
“of constituencies” shall be substituted; 
(b) for the words “Upon the completion of each census, the allocation of 
seats”, the words “The allocation of seats” shall be substituted;  
(c) for the words “by such authority and in such manner”, the words “in 
such manner and on the basis of such census, by the Delimitation 
Commission,” shall be substituted; 
(d) the third proviso shall be omitted. 
5. In article 170 of the Constitution,–– 
(a) in clause (1), for the words and figures “Subject to the provisions of 
article 333, the Legislative Assembly”, the words “The Legislative Assembly” 
shall be substituted; 
(b) in clause (2), for the Explanation, the following Explanation shall be 
substituted, namely:–– 
‘Explanation.––In this clause, the expression “population” means 
the population as ascertained at such census, as Parliament may by law 
determine, of which the relevant figures have been published.’; 
(c) in clause (3),–– 
(i) for the words “Upon the completion of each census, t he total 
number of seats”, the words “The total number of seats” shall be 
substituted; 
(ii) for the words “ by such authority and in such manner”, the 
words “in such manner and on the basis of such census, by the 
Delimitation Commission,” shall be substituted; 
(iii) the third proviso shall be omitted. 
6. In article 330 of the Constitution, after clause ( 3), for the Explanation, the 
following Explanation shall be substituted, namely:–– 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
15 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
20 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
25 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
30 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
35 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
40 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
45 
 

3 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10 
 
 
 
 
 
 
15 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
20 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
25 
 
 
 
 
 
 
30 
 
 
 
 
 
 
35 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
40 
 
 
 
 
 
 
45 
 
 
 
 
 
 
50 
‘Explanation.––In this article and in article 332, the expression 
“population” means the population as ascertained at such census, as Parliament 
may by law determine, of which the relevant figures have been published.’. 
7. In article 332 of the Constitution, for clauses ( 3A) and (3B), the following 
clauses shall be substituted, namely:–– 
“(3A) Notwithstanding anything containe d in clause ( 3), upon 
readjustment of the number of seats under article 170, the seats which shall be 
reserved for the Scheduled Tribes in the Legislative Assemblies of the States 
of Arunachal Pradesh, Meghalaya, Mizoram and Nagaland shall be,–– 
(a) if all  the seats in the Legislative Assembly of any such State 
are held by members of the Scheduled Tribes, all the seats except one; 
(b) in any other case, such number of seats as bears to the total 
number of seats, a proportion not less than the number of memb ers 
belonging to the Scheduled Tribes which the existing Assembly bears to 
the total number of seats in that Assembly. 
(3B) Notwithstanding anything contained in clause ( 3), upon 
readjustment of the number of seats under article 170, the seats which shall be 
reserved for the Scheduled Tribes in the Legislative Assembly of the State of 
Tripura shall be such number of seats as bears to the total number of seats, a 
proportion not less than the number of members belonging to the Scheduled 
Tribes which the existing Assembly bears to the total number of seats in that 
Assembly.”. 
8. For article 334A of the Constitution, the following article shall be 
substituted, namely:–– 
“334A. (1) Notwithstanding anything in the foregoing provisions of this 
Part or Part VIII, the provisions of this Constitution relating to the reservation 
of seats for women in the House of the People, the Legislative Assembly of a 
State, the Legislative Assembly of the National Capital Territory of Delhi, the 
Legislative Assembly of the Union territory of Puducherry and the Legislative 
Assembly of the Union territory of Jammu and Kashmir shall come into effect 
after an exercise of delimitation is undertaken for this purpose. 
(2) The reservation of seats for women in the House of the People, the 
Legislative Assembly o f a State, the Legislative Assembly of the National 
Capital Territory of Delhi, the Legislative Assembly of the Union territory of 
Puducherry and the Legislative Assembly of the Union territory of Jammu and 
Kashmir shall cease to have effect on the expiry of a period of fifteen years 
from the commencement of the Constitution (One  Hundred and Sixth 
Amendment) Act, 2023 unless Parliament may by law extend the period for 
such further time as it may specify in this behalf. 
(3) The seats reserved for women in the House of the People, the Legislative 
Assembly of a State, the Legislative Assembly of the National Capital Territory 
of Delhi, the Legislative Assembly of the Union territory of Puducherry and the 
Legislative Assembly of the Union territory of Jammu and Kashmir shall be 
allotted by rotation to different constituencies in a State or Union territory. 
(4) Nothing in this article shall affect any representation in the House of 
the People, the Legislative Assembly of a State, the Legislative Assembly of 
the National Capital Territory of Delhi, the Legislative Assembly of the Union 
territory of Puducherry or the Legislative Assembly of the Union territory of 
Jammu and Kashmir after the exercise of delimitation is undertaken, until the 
dissolution of the then exi sting House of the People or  the Legislative 
Assembly of a State or Union territory.”. 
  
 
 
 
Amendment of 
article 332. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Substitution of 
article 334A. 
 
Reservation of 
seats for women 
to take effect. 
 
 
 

4 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Article 82 and clause (3) of article 170 of the Constitution provide that upon 
completion of each census, the total number of seats allotted to each State in the 
House of the People and in the Legislative Assemblies, and the division of each 
State into territorial constituencies shall be readjusted by such authority and in such 
manner as Parliament may by law determine. The third proviso to article 82 and the 
third proviso to clause (3), of article 170, inter alia, provide that there shall be no 
fresh readjustment of constituencies until the relevant figures for the first census 
taken after the year 2026 have been published.  
2. The Constitution (Eighty -fourth Amendment) Act, 2001 amended
articles 55, 81, 82, 170, 330 and 332 to freeze the allocation of seats in the House of 
the People and State Legislative Assemblies on the basis of the 1971 census until 
the first census conducted after the year 2026, while providing for the readjustment 
of territorial constituencies on the basis of the figures of the 1991 census. 
3. Subsequently, the Constitution (Eighty -seventh Amendment) Act, 2003
amended articles 81, 82, 170 and 330 to provide for readjustment of territorial 
constituencies including those reserved for the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled 
Tribes, based on the figures of 2001 census, without affecting the total number of 
seats allotted to the States in the House of the People or the State Legislative 
Assemblies.  
4. While the freeze of seats on the basis of population figures of the year 1971
census served an important policy purpose, the country’s demographic profile has 
since undergone substantial changes, as reflected in the population figures of the 
latest published census, including significant inter -State and intra-State population 
shifts, rapid urbanisation and migration, and disproportionate growth in certain 
regions, resulting in wide disparities in the population and the constituencies. 
5. Meanwhile, the Constitution (One Hundred and Sixth Amendment)
Act, 2023 (popularly known as ‘ Nari Shakti Vandan Adhiniyam ’), amended 
article 239AA and inserted articles 330A, 332A and 334A in the Constitution, to 
provide for reservation of nearly one -third of seats for women in the House of the 
People and the Legislative Assemblies (including women belonging to the 
Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes) with the objective of achieving greater 
participation of women in the House of the People, the Legislative Assembly of a 
State and the Legislative Assembly of the National Capital Territory of Delhi. The 
said provisions contemplate that such reservation shall become operative after the 
first delimitation is undertaken on the basis of the relevant census taken after the 
commencement of the said Amendment Act.  
6. The next census and the consequential delimitation exercise thereafter will
take considerable time and thus, delay the effective and dedicated participation of 
women in our democratic polity. Hence, the objective of the proposed Bill is to 
operationalise one-third reservation for women, including women belonging to the 
Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes, in the House of the People and the 
Legislative Assemblies of the States, the National Capital Territory of Delhi and the 
Union territories through delimitation exercise to be undertaken on the basis of the 
population figures of the latest published census. Thus, the implementation of 
reservation of seats for women is linked to the constitutional scheme of readjustment 
in the allocation of seats in the House of the People and the Legislative Assemblies 
and re -drawing boundaries of territorial constituencies by the Delimitation 
Commission. 

5 
 
  7. The proposed Bill would facilitate delimitation of territorial constituencies 
and put in operation, the provisions providing for reservation of seats for women in 
the House of the People and the Legislative Assemblies. This will also promote 
women empowerm ent and provide opportunity for women to participate in the 
nation-building process. In addition, the increased representation of women in the 
decision-making process will promote inclusivity and help in achieving the goals of 
Viksit Bharat@2047. 
The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives. 
 
NEW DELHI;             ARJUN RAM MEGHWAL. 
The 11th April, 2026.     
  
 

6 
Manner of 
election of 
President. 
Composition of 
the House of the 
People. 
ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
* * * * * 
55. (1) As far as practicable, there  shall be uniformity in the scale of
representation of the different States at the election of the President. 
(2) For the purpose of securing such uniformity among the States inter se as
well as parity between the States as a whole and the Union, the number of  votes 
which each elected member of Parliament and of the Legislative Assembly of each 
State is entitled t o cast at such election shall be determined in  the following 
manner:— 
(a) every elected member of the Legislative Assembly of a State shall
have as many votes as there are multiples of one thousand in the quotient  
obtained by dividing the population of the  State by the total number of  the 
elected members of the Assembly; 
(b) if, after taking the said multiples of one thousand, the remainder is
not less than five hundred, then the vote of each member referred to in 
sub-clause (a) shall be further increased by one; 
(c) each elected member of either House of Parliament shall have such
number of votes as may be obtained by dividing the total number of votes 
assigned to the members of the Legislative Assemblies of the States under 
sub-clauses (a) and ( b) by the total number of the elected members of both 
Houses of Parliament, fractions exceeding one-half being counted as one and 
other fractions being disregarded. 
(3) The election of the President shall be held in accordance with the system
of proportional representation by means of the single transferable vote and the 
voting at such election shall be by secret ballot. 
Explanation.—In this article, the expression “population” means the 
population as ascertained at the last preceding census of which the relevant figures 
have been published: 
Provided that the reference in this Explanation to the last preceding census of 
which the relevant figures have been published shall, until the relevant figures for 
the first censu s taken after the year 2026 have been published, be construed as a 
reference to the 1971 census. 
* * * * * 
81. (1) Subject to the provisions of article 331, the House of the People shall
consist of— 
(a) not more than five hundred and thirty members chosen by direct
election from territorial constituencies in the States; and 
(b) not more than twenty members to represent the Union territories,
chosen in such manner as Parliament may by law provide. 
*   *   * * * 
(3) In this article, the exp ression “population” means the population as
ascertained at the last preceding census of which the relevant figures have been 
published:  
Provided that the reference in this clause to the last preceding census of which 
the relevant figures have been published shall, until the relevant figures for the first 
census taken after the year 2026 have been published, be construed,— 

7 
(i) for the purposes of sub-clause (a) of clause (2) and the proviso to that
clause, as a reference to the 1971 census; and 
(ii) for the purposes of sub-clause (b) of clause (2) as a reference to the
2001 census. 
82. Upon the completion of each census, the allocation of seats in the House
of the People to the States and the division of each State into territorial 
constituencies shall be readjusted by such authority and in such manner as 
Parliament may by law determine: 
Provided that such readjustment shall not affect representation in the House of 
the People until the dissolution of the then existing House:  
Provided further that such readjustment shall take effect from such date as the 
President may, by order, specify and until such readjustment takes effect , any 
election to the House may be held on the basis of the territorial constituencies 
existing before such readjustment: 
Provided also that until the relevant figures for the first census taken after the 
year 2026 have been published, it shall not be necessary to readjust— 
(i) the allocation of seats in the House of the People to the States as
readjusted on the basis of the 1971 census; and 
(ii) the division of each State into territorial constituencies as may be
readjusted on the basis of the 2001 census, 
under this article. 
*   *   * * * 
170. (1) Subject to the provisions of article 333, the Legislative Assembly of
each State shall consis t of not more than five hundred, and not less than sixty, 
members chosen by direct election from territorial constituencies in the State. 
(2) For the purposes of clause ( 1), each State shall be divided into territorial
constituencies in such manner that th e ratio between the population of each 
constituency and the number of seats allotted to it shall, so far as practicable, be the 
same throughout the State. 
Explanation.—In this clause, the expression “population” means the 
population as ascertained at the last preceding census of which the relevant figures 
have been published: 
Provided that the reference in this Explanation to the last preceding census of 
which the relevant figures have been published shall, until the relevant figures for 
the first census ta ken after the year 2026 have been published, be construed as a 
reference to the 2001 census. 
(3) Upon the completion of each census, the total number of seats in the
Legislative Assembly of each State and the division of each State into territorial 
constituencies shall be readjusted by such authority and in such manner as 
Parliament may by law determine:  
Provided that such readjustment shall not affect representation in the 
Legislative Assembly until the dissolution of the then existing Assembly:  
Provided further that such readjustment shall take effect from such date as the 
President may, by order, specify and until such readjustment takes effect,  any 
election to the Legislative Assembly may be held on the basis of the  territorial 
constituencies existing before such readjustment:  
Provided also that until the relevant figures for the first census taken after the 
year 2026 have been published, it shall not be necessary to readjust— 
Readjustment 
after each 
census. 
Composition of 
the Legislative 
Assemblies. 

8 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reservation of 
seats for 
Scheduled 
Castes and 
Scheduled 
Tribes 
in the House of 
the People. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reservation of 
seats for 
Scheduled 
Castes and 
Scheduled 
Tribes 
in the 
Legislative 
Assemblies of 
the States. 
 (i) the total number of seats in the Legislative Assembly of each State as 
readjusted on the basis of the 1971 census; and  
(ii) the division of such State into territorial constituencies as may be 
readjusted on the basis of the 2001 census, 
under this clause. 
*   *   *   *   * 
PART XVI 
SPECIAL PROVISIONS RELATING TO CERTAIN CLASSES 
330. (1) *   *   *   *   * 
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in clause ( 2), the number of seats 
reserved in the House of the People for the Scheduled Tribes in the autonomous  
districts of Assam shall bear to the total number of seats allotted to that State a 
proportion not less than the population of the Scheduled Tribes in the said 
autonomous districts bears to the total population of the State. 
Explanation.—In this article a nd in article 332, the expression “population” 
means the population as ascertained at the last preceding census of which the 
relevant figures have been published: 
Provided that the reference in this Explanation to the last preceding census of 
which the relevant figures have been published shall, until the relevant figures for 
the first census taken after the year 2026 have been published, be construed as a 
reference to the 2001 census. 
*   *   *   *   * 
332. (1) *   *   *   *   * 
(3A) Notwithstanding anything contained in clause (3), until the taking effect, 
under article 170, of the re-adjustment, on the basis of the first census after the year 
2026, of the number of seats in the Legislative Assemblies of the States of Arunachal 
Pradesh, Meghalaya, Mizoram and Nagaland, the seats which shall be reserved for 
the Scheduled Tribes in the Legislative Assembly of any such State shall be,— 
(a) if all the seats in the Legislative Assembly of such State in existence 
on the date of coming into f orce of the Constitution (Fifty seventh 
Amendment) Act, 1987 (hereafter in this clause referred to as the existing 
Assembly) are held by members of the Scheduled Tribes, all the seats        
except one; 
(b) in any other case, such number of seats as bears to the total number 
of seats, a proportion not less than the number (as on the said date) of members 
belonging to the Scheduled Tribes in the existing Assembly bears to the total 
number of seats in the existing Assembly. 
(3B) Notwithstanding anything  contained in clause ( 3), until the                                        
re-adjustment, under article 170, takes effect on the basis of the first census after the 
year 2026, of the number of seats in the Legislative Assembly of the State of Tripura, 
the seats which shall be reserved for the Scheduled Tribes in the Legislative 
Assembly shall be, such number of seats as bears to the total number of seats, a 
proportion not less than the number, as on the date of coming into force of the 
Constitution (Seventy-second Amendment) Act, 1992, of members belonging to the 
Scheduled Tribes in the Legislative Assembly in existence on the said date bears to 
the total number of seats in that Assembly. 
*   *   *   *   * 
  

9 
 
  334A. (1) Notwithstanding anything in the foregoing provision of this Part or 
Part VIII, the provisions of the Constitution relating to the reservation of seats for 
women in the House of the People, the Legislative Assembly of a State and the 
Legislative Assembly of the National Capital Territory of Delhi shall come into 
effect after an exercise of delimitation is undertaken for this purpose after the 
relevant figures for the first census taken after commencement of the Constitution 
(One Hundred and Sixth Amendment ) Act, 2023 have been published and shall 
cease to have effect on the expiration of a period of fifteen years from such 
commencement.  
(2) Subject to the provisions of articles 239AA, 330A and 332A, seats reserved 
for women in the House of the People, the Legislative Assembly of a State and the 
Legislative Assembly of the National Capital Territory of Delhi shall continue till 
such date as the Parliament may by law determine. 
(3) Rotation of seats reserved for women in the House of the People, t he 
Legislative Assembly of a State and the Legislative Assembly of the National 
Capital Territory of Delhi shall take effect after each subsequent exercise of 
delimitation as the Parliament may by law determine. 
(4) Nothing in this article shall affect any representation in the House of the 
People, the Legislative Assembly of a State or the Legislative Assembly of the 
National Capital Territory of Delhi until the dissolution of the then existing House 
of the People, Legislative Assembly of a State  or the Legislative Assembly of the 
National Capital Territory of Delhi. 
*   *   *   *   * 
 Reservation of 
seats for women 
take effect. 
 

LOK SABHA 
———— 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Constitution of India. 
———— 
(Shri Arjun Ram Meghwal, Minister of State (I/C) for Law & Justice and 
Minister of State of Parliamentary Affairs) 