AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Bill No. 107 of 2022
THE  CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2022
By
SHRIMATI DIYA KUMARI, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India
as follows:—
1. This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment)
Act, 2022.
2. In the Eighth Schedule to the Constitution, the existing entries 17 to 22 shall
be re-numbered as entries from 18 to 23, respectively, and before entry 18 as so
re-numbered, the following entry shall be inserted, namely:
“17. Rajasthani.”
5
Short title.
Amendment of
the Eighth
Schedule.

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Language is indicative of the history, culture, people, system of governance,
ecology, politics, etc. of a region. ‘Rajasthani’ is a language of western Indo-Aryan
origin spoken widely across Rajasthan and parts of Haryana, Gujarat and Madhya
Pradesh. Rajasthani language is written in the Devanagari script. It has a rich heritage
that can be traced back to more than 1500 years. Works of renowned ancient
philosophers, astronomers, mathematicians, poets and writers dating back to
7th Century AD in Rajasthani language have also been identified and preserved.
Rajasthani language can also be seen in different cultural fields such as music, arts,
dance and drama.
Rajasthani language, while being historically and traditionally very rich, is
subjected to gross neglect at the national level. This poses a risk of the language
eventually losing its existence. Further Rajasthani language has so far not been
included in the scheme of examinations being conducted by the Union Public Service
Commission. As a result, students proficient in the language are unable to apply it
efficiently. Hence by including Rajasthani in the Eighth Schedule, avenues of
employment shall also be generated.
There have been persistent demands from the Rajasthani-speaking people for
inclusion of the Rajasthani language in the Eighth Schedule to the Constitution. The
National Academy of Letters, the Sahitya Akademi and the University Grants
Commission recognize Rajasthani language as a distinct language. Rajasthani language
is also taught in the Rajasthan State Board of Secondary Education. Yet, national
recognition has not been accorded to the Rajasthani language.
Therefore, in view of the above, in order to protect, promote and preserve the
sanctity of Rajasthani language and to protect the culture and the traditions of the
speakers of this language, and also taking into consideration the importance of this
language, it is necessary that Rajasthani language be given due recognition by
including it in the Eighth Schedule to the Constitution.
Hence this Bill.
NEW DELHI;                        DIYA KUMARI
6 April, 2022
2

  ANNEXURE
[EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA]
EIGHTH  SCHEDULE
[Articles 344(1)  and 351]
Languages
* * * * *
  1. Assamese.
  2. Bengali.
  3. Bodo.
  4. Dogri.
  5. Gujarati.
  6. Hindi.
  7. Kannada.
  8. Kashmiri.
  9. Konkani.
10. Maithili.
11. Malayalam.
12. Manipuri.
13. Marathi.
14. Nepali.
15. Oriya.
16. Punjabi.
17. Sanskrit.
18. Santhali.
19. Sindhi.
20. Tamil.
21. Telugu.
22. Urdu.
* * * * *
3

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India
————
(Shrimati Diya Kumari, M.P .)