.. ", 
9 of 1890. 
As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABIIA ON 
.. ~~- ,DfC 116& 
am No. 107 of I96&. 
THE INDIAN RAILWAYS (SECOND AMENDMENT) 
BILL, 1968 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Indian Railways Act, 1890. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Nineteenth Year of the 
Republic of India as follows:-
I, This Act may be called the Indian Railways (Second Amend- Short 
ment) Act, !MIL title, 
S Z. In the Indian Railways Act, 1890 (hereinafter referred to as Amend-
the principal Act), in section 112,- ment of 
section 
(4) in Bub-section (1), for the words "which may extend 112. 
to one hundred rupees", the words "which shall not be less than 

2 
ten rupees but which ray extend to five hundred rupees" shall 
be substituted;. • 
(b) in sUb-section (LA), for the words "fifty naye paise", 
the words "ten rupees" shall be substituted. . 
Amend- 3. In section 113 of the principal Act, in sub-section (3), for the 5 
ment of words "fifty naye paise" and "fifteen naye paise", the words "ten 
section rupees" and "ftve rupees" shall respectively be substituted. 
113. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The probl~m of passengers travelling without tickets or with im-
proper tickets on the railways has become more aggravated in recent 
years. A recent review of the incidence of ticketless and other 
types of irregular travel on the railways has ,revealed that, despite 
all possible e1forts made during the last ten years to curb the 'evil, 
the poSition has deteriorated. The loss' on this account to Govern-
ment is estimated to be between rupees ten crores and rupees fifteen 
crores per annum. 
2. Sections 112 and 113 of the Indian Railways Act, 1890, contain 
provisions for punishment, and levy of excess charges, for travelling 
without tickets or passes or with insUftlctent tickets or passes. h-
perience has shown that these provisions are not sufficient deterrents. 
It is therefore proposed to make the penafties by way of . line more 
stringent and to increase the minimum limits of excess charges. 
The Bill seeks to give diet to this propaul. 
Nzw DILBI; C. M. POQNACHA. 
The 20th November, 1968. 
.. 

ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS FROM THE INDIAN RAILWAYS Ac:r, 1890 
(9 OF 1890) 
• • • • • 
CHAPTER IX 
PENALTIES AND OFFENCES 
• • • • * 
Fraudu- 112. (1) If a person, with intent· to defraud a' railway adminis-
lently tration,-
travelling 
or 
eUempt-
ing to 
travel 
without 
}:roJ)@r 
pau (Jf 
ticket. 
Travelling 
without 
pas! or 
ticket or 
with in-
:lu1ricient 
pa!!11 or 
(0) enters or remains in any carriage on a railway in con-
traventionof section 68, or 
(b) uaes or attempts to· use a single pass or 'single ticket 
which has already been used on a previous journey or, in the 
case of a return ticket, a half thereof which has already been 
so used, 
he shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may ex-
tend to three months or with fine which may extend to one hundred 
rupees and shall also be liable to pay the excess charge hereinafter 
in this section mentioned in addition to the ordinary single fare for 
the distance which he has travelled, or where there is any doubt 
as to the station from which he started, the ordinary single fare from 
the station from which the train originally started, or if the tjckets 
of passengers travelling in the train have been examined since the 
original starting of the train, the ordinary single fare from the place 
where the tickets were examined or, in case of their having been 
examined more than once, were last examined. 
(1A) The excess charge referred to in sub-section (1), shall be 
a sum equivalent to the ordinary single fare referred to in that sub-
section or fifty naye paise, whichever is greater. 
• • • • • 
113. (1) • • • • • 
(3) The excess charge referred to in sub-section (1) and sub-
section (" shall be a sum equivalent to the amount otherwise pay-
4 

.5 
able under those sub-sections or fifty naye paise whichever is 
ereater : 
Provided that where the passenger has immediately after incur-
ring the charge and before being detected by a railway servant noti-
fied to the railway servant on duty with the train the fact of the 
charge having been incurred, the excess charge shall be one-sixth 
of the excess charge otherwise payable calculated to the nearest 
multiple of five naye paise, or fifteen naye paise whichever ill 
greater: 
Provided furthel' that if the passenger has with him a certificate 
gran!ed under sub-section (2) of section 68, no excess ,charge shall 
i)e payable. 
• • • • • 
ticket or 
,beyond 
autho-
rized 
distance. 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Indian Railways Act. 1890. 
(Shri C. M. Poonacha, 
Minisur III &:dlrDllY$). 