AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Bill No. 108 of 2021
THE  REPRESENTA TION OF THE PEOPLE (AMENDMENT)
BILL, 2021
By
DR. D. RA VIKUMAR, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Representation of the People Act, 1951.
Be it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-second Year of the Republic of
India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Representation of the People (Amendment)
Act, 2021.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
5
Short title and
commencement.

2. In section 62 of the Representation of the People Act, 1951, in sub-
section (5),—
(a) the words, “or is in the lawful custody of the police” shall be omitted; and
(b) for the first proviso, the following proviso shall be substituted, namely:
“Provided that nothing in this sub-section shall apply to a person convicted
of an offence punishable with imprisonment for a term not more than two
years or subjected to preventive detention under any law for the time being
in force.”.
Amendment of
section 62.
5
2
43 of 1951.

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
        In our country a person who is an under-trial has been deprived of right to vote.
However, a person who has committed a grave offence and is on parole or on bail has
right to vote.
Section 62 of the Representation of Peoples Act, 1951 deprives convicts and
under trials of their Right to vote.  The march of time and the development of the law
on human rights makes this deprivation arbitrary and unnecessary. The right to vote
is an expression of political will, although expressly recognised only under the
Representation of Peoples Act, 1951, and it is also a constitutional right under
article 326, available to all citizens.  Several modern democracies have extended the
right to vote to prisoners of varying categories.  In a country like ours where a
substantial number of people confined in prisons are under-trials, the deprivation of
the right to vote aggravates the harms that they already suffer.   It is, therefore,
propose to extend the right to vote to all prisoners – except those confined in prison
pursuant to a conviction for a term of more than two years.
The Bill, therefore, seeks to amend the Representation of the People Act, 1951
with a view to confer voting rights to every under trial who is under custody of the
police and person convicted of an offence punishable with imprisonment for a term
not more than two years.
Hence this Bill.
   NEW DELHI;
July 7, 2021.              D. RA VIKUMAR
3

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE REPRESENTA TION OF THE PEOPLE ACT, 1951
(43 OF1951)
 *   *  *  *
62. * * * * *
(5) No person shall vote at any election if he is confined in a prison, whether
under a sentence of imprisonment or transportation or otherwise, or is in the lawful
custody of the police:
Provided that nothing in this sub-section shall apply to a person subjected to
preventive detention under any law for the time being in force:
Provided further that by reason of the prohibition to vote under this sub-section,
a person whose name has been entered in the electoral roll shall not cease to be an
elector.
* * * * *
4
Right to vote.

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Representation of the People Act, 1951.
—————
(Dr . D. Ravikumar , M.P .)