1
THE  POOR  AND  DESTITUTE  AGRICULTURAL  WORKERS  AND
ARTISANS  (WELFARE)  BILL,  2009
By
SHRI SHAILENDRA KUMAR, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for welfare measures for the poor and destitute and such other agricultural
workers and artisans living in villages through an Authority and establishment of a
Welfare Fund for payment of compensation in cases of death or permanent disability,
old-age pension, medical assistance, maternity and creche facilities for the women
workers and artisans and for regulating the conditions of work and for matters
connected therewith or incidental thereto.
B
E it enacted by Parliament in the Sixtieth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Poor and Destitute Agricultural Workers and Artisans
(Welfare) Act, 2009.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Bill No. 108 of  2009
TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5

2
2.  In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “agricultural land” means any cultivable land used for cultivation of any
agricultural produce, dairy farming, growing and harvesting of any horticultural product,
raising and rearing of livestock, beekeeping, poultry, growing fodder and such other
activities as may be connected with agriculture;
(b) “agricultural worker” means any person who works as a labourer on hire or
in exchange whether in cash or in kind or partly in cash and partly in kind in farming
activities including cultivation and tillage of soil, dairy farming, activities related to
harvesting of horticultural commodities and includes any activity related to production
of agricultural produce and rearing of livestock, poultry or any such work;
(c) “appropriate Government” means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in other cases, the Central Government;
(d) “artisans” includes all skilled workmen such as craftsmen, weavers, potters,
blacksmiths, handicraft artisans, goldsmiths, painters and such other artisans working
in villages;
(e) “Authority” means the Poor and Destitute  Agricultural Workers and Artisans
Welfare Authority established under section 3;
(f) “employer” means any person who employs agricultural workers or artisans
in any manner;
(g) “Fund” means the Poor and Destitute Agricultural Workers and Artisans
Welfare Fund established under section 5;
(h) “poor and destitute” means any person not living in a pucca house and
includes those who live in huts with thatched roof or kutcha house and whose annual
income from all sources does not exceed rupees ten thousand; and
(i) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. (1)  The Central Government shall, as soon as may be, by notification in the Official
Gazette, establish a Poor and Destitute Agricultural Workers and Artisans Welfare
Authority for the purposes of this Act.
(2) The Authority shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid having perpetual
succession and common seal with power to acquire, hold and dispose off property, both
movable and immovable, and to contract and shall by the said name, sue and be sued.
(3) The headquarters of the Authority shall be at Lucknow in the State of Uttar
Pradesh and the Authority may establish offices at such other places in the Country as it
may deem necessary for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(4) The Authority shall consist of the following members, namely:—
(a) the Union Minister of Labour and Employment, who shall be the Chairperson
ex-officio;
(b) a Deputy Chairperson to be appointed by the Central Government having the
background or specialization in labour related issues and such other qualifications
as may be prescribed;
(c) five members of Parliament of whom three shall be from the House of the
People and two from the Council of States to be nominated by the presiding officer of
the House concerned;
(d) four members to be appointed by the Central Government to represent the
Union Ministries of Agriculture, Finance, Labour and Employment and Rural
Development respectively;
Definitions.
Establishment
of a Poor and
Destitute Agri-
cultural Work-
ers and Arti-
sans Welfare
Authority.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
(e) three members to be appointed by the Central Government from amongst the
poor and destitute agricultural workers and artisans in such manner as may be
prescribed; and
(f) not more than four members to be appointed by the Central Government in
consultation with the State Governments, representing State Governments in the
alphabetical order and it shall be ensured that all the States get represented in the
Authority by rotation.
(5) The salaries and allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of service
of the Deputy Chairperson and other Members of the Authority shall be such as may be
prescribed.
(6) The Authority shall have a Secretariat with such number of officers and staff with
such terms and conditions of service as may be prescribed from time to time.
(7) The Commission shall observe such procedure in the transaction of its business,
as may be prescribed.
(8) The quorum to constitute any sitting of the Commission shall be such as may be
prescribed.
4. (1) The Authority shall perform such functions relating to welfare measures for the
poor and destitute agricultural workers and artisans as may be assigned to it by the Central
Government.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of sub-section (1), the welfare
measures referred to therein may also provide for,—
(i) maintaining a district-wise register of poor and destitute agricultural
workers and artisans in such manner and with such particulars and details as may be
prescribed;
(ii) maintaining village-wise records pertaining to artisans and in particular
relating to weavers such as number of handlooms existing in each village, number of
handloom weavers and workers and details of other artisans living in a village with
such particulars and in such manner as may be prescribed;
(iii) maintaining agricultural land records from village level to district level;
(iv) maintaining district-wise register of employers employing poor and destitute
agricultural workers or the artisans, as the case may be, with such particulars and in
such manner as may be prescribed;
(v) ensuring availability of raw materials to the weavers and other artisans of
villages and work to the poor and destitute agricultural workers round the year;
(vi) regulating the conditions of work and fix minimum wages for the poor and
destitute agricultural workers and artisans covered under this Act;
(vii) ensuring remunerative prices for the finished products of artisans by
making suitable arrangements for purchase of such products by Government agencies
including Ministries or Departments by opening exclusive showrooms for their
products, establishing stalls at conspicuous places for selling the products, arranging
craft fairs, exhibitions and such other promotional activities as may be prescribed
from time to time;
(viii) payment of old-age pension to the poor and destitute agricultural workers
and artisans and provision of provident fund facilities for them;
(ix) payment of compensation at prescribed rates to the families of poor and
destitute agricultural workers and artisans who die prematurely due to accident or
illness or due to any other unnatural reason;
(x) 
providing free of cost health care to the poor and destitute agricultural
workers and artisans in such manner as may be prescribed;
Functions of
the Authority.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

4
(xi) providing maternity and creche facilities for the female workers and artisans
covered under this Act;
(xii) providing insurance facility to all the workers and artisans covered under this
Act; and
(xiii) such other provisions as may be deemed necessary for carrying out the purposes
of this Act.
5. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, establish
a Welfare Fund for the purposes of this Act to be called the Poor and Destitute Agricultural
Workers and Artisans Welfare Fund with an initial corpus of rupees ten thousand crore to
be provided by the Central Government by due appropriation made by law by Parliament in
this behalf.
(2) The Central Government, State Governments and employers of the poor and
destitute agricultural workers and artisans shall contribute to the Fund in such ratio as
may be prescribed.
(3) Such other sums as may be received by way of donations, contribution or assistance
from individuals, organizations or otherwise shall also be credited to the Fund.
(4) The fund shall be used for the welfare of the poor and destitute agricultural workers
and artisans by the Authority in such manner as may be prescribed.
6. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the  time being in force, it
shall be the duty of the appropriate Government to ensure effective implementation of the
provisions of this Act.
7. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may make such order or give such direction, not inconsistent with the provisions
of this Act, as appears to it to be necessary or expedient for the removal of such difficulty.
8. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other
law for the time being in force regulating any of the matters dealt with in this Act.
9. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Establishment
of a Poor and
Destitute
Agricultural
Workers and
Artisans
Welfare Fund.
Appropriate
Government
to ensure
implementation
of the Act.
Power to
remove
difficulties.
Act not in
derogation of
any other law.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35

5
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Majority of our population lives in the villages and most of them depend on agriculture
in one way or the other. Millions of poor and destitute agricultural workers and village
artisans like handloom weavers, potters, goldsmiths, blacksmiths, shoemakers, barbers,
handicrafts artisans, doll makers, mat and basket makers, painters, carpenters, etc. also form
part of the rural population. The agricultural workers work on the fields or farms of the
farmers to earn their livelihood. They are poverty-stricken, homeless as they live in huts with
thatched roof with no security from rains and cold and are landless and remain exploited
throughout their lives. As they are unorganized they are denied even the basic facilities of
minimum wages, work round the year, maternity benefit etc. by their employers. Even two
square meals and a pair of clothes is a luxury for them. The artisans too are poverty-stricken.
They do not get raw materials at reasonable prices or marketing facilities or working capital
or any other protective measures from the State. Though their works are internationally
acclaimed and are very much in demand abroad, their art is at the verge of extinction.
Ours is a welfare State, hence it is the duty of the Central and State Governments to
protect the poor and destitute agricultural workers and village artisans who make immense
contribution to our GDP by introducing welfare measures and legal protection for them as
they too are part and parcel of our society and the nation.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; SHAILENDRA KUMAR
November  3, 2009.

FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the establishment of a Poor and Destitute Agricultural
Workers and Artisans Welfare Authority. Clause 4 provides for maintaining a district-wise
register of poor and destitute agricultural workers and artisans and for provision of certain
facilities to these workers and artisans. Clause 5 provides for the establishment of the Poor
and Destitute Agricultural Workers and Artisans Welfare Fund with an initial corpus of
rupees ten thousand crore to be provided by the Central Government. Thereafter funds are
to be provided annually. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, is likely to involve expenditure from
the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a sum of rupees five thousand crore
would be involved as recurring expenditure per annum.
A sum of rupees one thousand crore would also be involved as non-recurring
expenditure.
6

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 9 of the Bill gives power to the Central Government to make rules for carrying
out the purposes of the Bill. The rules will relate to matters of detail only.
The delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character.
7

GMGIPMRND—4715LS(S-5)—26-11-2009.
LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for welfare measures for the poor and destitute and such other agricultural workers
and artisans living in villages through an Authority and establishment of a Welfare
Fund for payment of compensation in cases of death or permanent disability,
old-age pension, medical assistance, maternity and creche facilities for the women
workers and artisans and for regulating the conditions of work and for
matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Shailendra Kumar, M.P.)