5 
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA 
Bill No. 108 of 2026 
THE DELIMITATION BILL, 2026 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the readjustment of the allocation of seats in the House of the People 
to the States and Union territories, the total number of seats in the Legislative 
Assembly of each State and Union territories having a Legislative Assembly,  
the division of each State and each Union territory having a Legislative 
Assembly into territorial const ituencies for elections to the House of the 
People and Legislative Assemblies of the States and Union territories and for 
matters connected therewith. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy -seventh Year of the Republic of 
India as follows:— 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Delimitation Act, 2026.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
Short title and 
commencement.

2 
Definitions. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Constitution of 
Delimitation 
Commission. 
 2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— 
(a) “article” means an article of the Constitution; 
(b) “associate member” means a member nominated under section 5; 
(c) “Commission” means the Delimitation Commission constituted 
under section 3; 
(d) “Election Commission” means the Election Commission referred to 
in article 324; 
(e) “latest census figures” means the latest census figures published as 
on the date of the constitution of the Commission under section 3; 
(f) “member” means a member of the C ommission and includes the 
Chairperson; 
(g) “notification” means notification published in the Official Gazette; 
(h) “population” means the population ascertained at the latest census of 
which the relevant figures have been published as on the date of the 
constitution of the Commission; and 
(i) “State” includes a Union territory having a Legislative Assembly. 
3. ( 1) The Central Government may, from time to time, by notification, 
constitute a Commission to be called the Delimitation Commission. 
(2) The Commission shall comprise of the following members, namely:— 
(a) one member, who shall be a person who is or has been a Judge of the 
Supreme Court, to be appointed by the Central Government, as the 
Chairperson of the Commission; 
(b) the Chief Election Commissio ner or an Election Commissioner 
nominated by the Chief Election Commissioner, ex officio: 
Provided that after the nomination of an Election Commissioner as a 
member under this clause, no further nomination under this clause shall be 
made except to fill the casual vacancy of such member under section 6; and 
(c) the State Election Commissioner of the State concerned, ex officio. 
Explanation.—For the purposes of clause (c), the State Election Commissioner 
of the State concerned,— 
(i) in respect of the duties of the Commission relating to a State (other 
than the State s of Meghalaya  and Nagaland) , means the State Election 
Commissioner appointed by the Governor of that State under clause ( 1) of 
article 243K; and 
(ii) in respect of the duties of the Commission relating to the State s of 
Meghalaya and Nagaland, means a person nominated by the Governor of that 
State for such purposes. 
(3) The Central Government may, by notification, specify the term of the 
Commission: 
Provided that the Central Government may, on the request of the Commission, 
extend the term of the Commission by such further period as it may consider 
necessary. 
(4) The Election Commission shall act as Delimitation Commission for the 
purpose of delimiting constituencies in the Le gislative Assembly of the Union 
territory of Jammu and Kashmir falling under the occupation of Pakistan, when the 
area of the Union territory of Jammu and Kashmir under the occupation of Pakistan 
ceases to be so occupied.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
15 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
20 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
25 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
30 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
35 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
40 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
45 
 

3 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
15 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
20 
 
 
 
 
 
 
25 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
30 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
35 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
40 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
45 
4. It shall be the duty of the Commission to readjust, on the basis of the latest 
census figures, the allocation of seats in the House of the People to the States and 
Union territories, the total number of seats in the Legislative Assembly of each        
State and the division of each State and Union territories into territorial 
constituencies for the purpose of elections to the House of the People and to the 
Legislative Assembly: 
Provided that where on such readjustment only one seat is allocated in the 
House of the People to a State or Union territory, the whole of that State or Union 
territory shall form one territorial constituency for the purpose of elections to the 
House of the People from that State or Union territory. 
5. (1) The Commission shall associate with itself for the purpose of assisting 
it in its duties in respect of each State, ten persons, five of whom shall be members 
of the House of the People representing that State and five shall be members of the 
Legislative Assembly of that State: 
Provided that where the number of members of the House of the People 
representing any State is five or less, then, all such members shall be the associate 
members for that State and in the latter case the total number of associate members 
shall be less than ten by such number as by which the total number of members of 
the House of the People representing that State is less than five. 
(2) The persons to be so associated from each State shall be nominated, in the 
case of the members of the House of the People, by the Speaker of that House, and in 
the case of members of a Legislative Assembly, by the Speaker of that Assembly, 
having due regard to the composition of the House or, as the case may be, of the 
Assembly. 
(3) The first nominations to be made under sub-section (2) shall be—  
(a) made by the Speakers of the Legislative Assemblies within one 
month, and by the Speaker of the House of the People within two months, 
from the date of notification issued under sub-section (1) of section 3; and  
(b) communicated to the Chief Election Commissioner, and where the 
nominations are made by the Speaker  of a Legislative Assembly, also to the 
Speaker of the House of the People. 
(4) None of the associate members shall have a right to vote or to sign any 
decision of the Commission.  
(5) The Commission shall have power to call upon—  
(a) the Registrar -General and Census Commissioner, India or his 
nominee; or  
(b) the Surveyor General of India or his nominee; or  
(c) any other officer of the Central Government or State Government; or  
(d) any expert in geographical information system; or  
(e) any other person,  
whose expertise and knowledge are considered necessary by the Commission to 
provide assistance to it in addition to the assistance provided by the persons referred 
to in sub-section (1) and the officers and persons so called upon shall be duty bound 
to assist the Commission. 
(6) One of the Secretaries to the Election Commission, to be nominated by the 
Election Commission, shall be the ex officio Secretary of the Commission and shall 
discharge his functions with the assistance of the employees of the Election 
Commission under the supervision of the Chairperson of the Commission. 
 Duties of the 
Commission. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Associate 
members. 

4 
Casual 
vacancies. 
 
 
 
 
 
Procedure and 
powers of 
Commission. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Readjustment of 
number of seats. 
 6. If the office of the Chairperson or of a member or of an associate member 
falls vacant owing to his death or resignation, it shall be filled as soon as may be 
practicable by the Central Government or the Speaker concern ed under and in 
accordance with the provisions of section 3 or, as the case may be, of section 5. 
7. ( 1) The Commission shall determine its own procedure and shall, in the 
performance of its functions, have all the powers of a civil court under the Code of Civil 
Procedure, 1908, while trying a suit, in respect of the following matters, namely:—  
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of witnesses;  
(b) requiring the production of any document; and  
(c) requisitioning any public record from any court or office. 
(2) The Commission shall have power to require any person to furnish any 
information on such points or matters as in the opinion of the Commission may be 
useful for, or relevant to, any matter under the consideration of the Commission. 
(3) The Commission may authorise any of its members to exercise any of the 
powers conferred on it by clauses ( a) to (c) of sub-section (1) and sub-section (2), 
and any order made or act done in exercise of any of those powers by the member 
authorised by the Commission in that behalf shall be deemed to be the order or act, 
as the case may be, of the Commission. 
(4) If there is a difference of opinion among the members, the opinion of the 
majority shall prevail, and acts and orders of the Commission shall be expressed in 
terms of the views of the majority. 
(5) The Commission as well as any group of associate members shall  have 
power to act notwithstanding the temporary absence of a member or associate 
member or the existence of a vacancy in the Commission or in that or any other 
group of associate members; and no act or proceeding of the Commission or of any 
group of assoc iate members shall be invalid or called in question on the ground, 
merely of such temporary absence or of the existence of such vacancy. 
(6) The Commission shall be deemed to be a civil court for the purposes of 
sections 384 and 385 of the Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023.  
Explanation.—For the purposes of enforcing the attendance of witnesses, the 
local limits of the jurisdiction of the Commission shall be the limits of the territory 
of India. 
8. The Commission shall, on the basis of the latest census figures and having 
regard to the provisions of articles 81, 82, 170, sub -clause (b) and sub-clause (bc) 
of clause (2) of article 239AA, articles 330, 330A, 332, 332A and 334A, and also in 
relation to the Union territory of Puducherry, the National Capital Territory of Delhi 
and the Union territory of Jammu and Kashmir, having regard to the relevant 
provisions of the Government of Union Territories Act, 1963, the Government of 
National Capital Territory of Delhi Act, 1991 and the Jammu and Kashmir 
Reorganisation Act, 2019, respectively, by order, determine,— 
(a) the number of seats in the House of the People to be allocated to each 
State and Union territory and the number of seats, if any, to be reserved for 
the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes;  
(b) the total number of seats to be assigned to the Legislative Assembly 
of each State and the number of seats, if any, to be reserved for the Scheduled 
Castes and the Scheduled Tribes; and 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
15 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
20 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
25 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
30 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
35 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
40 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
45 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 of 1908. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
46 of 2023. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
20 of 1963. 
 
1 of 1992. 
 
34 of 2019. 

5 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
15 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
20 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
25 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
30 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
35 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
40 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
45 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
50 
(c) the reservation of as nearly as may be, one -third of the total number 
of seats in the House of the People and the Legislative Assemblies of the States 
for women, including women belonging to the Scheduled Castes and the 
Scheduled Tribes: 
Provided that the total number of seats assigned to the Legislative 
Assembly of any State under this section shall be an integral mu ltiple of the 
number of seats in the House of the People allocated to that State: 
Provided further that the seats reserved for women in the House of the 
People and the Legislative Assemblies of the States, including  women 
belonging to the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes, shall be allotted 
by rotation to different constituencies in a State or a Union territory: 
Provided also that seats reserved for women belonging to the Scheduled 
Castes and the Scheduled Tribes shall be rotated wi thin the constituencies 
reserved for the Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled Tribes, as the case may be. 
9. (1) The Commission shall, in the manner herein provided, distribute the 
seats in the House of the People allocated to each State and Union territory and the 
seats assigned to the Legislative Assembly of each State to single-member territorial 
constituencies and delimit them on the basis of the latest census figures, having 
regard to the provisions of the Constitution , the provisions of the Acts specifie d in 
section 8 and the following provisions, namely:— 
(a) all constituencies shall, as far as practicable, be geographically 
compact areas, and in delimiting them regard shall be had to physical features, 
existing boundaries of administrative units, facili ties of communication and 
public convenience; 
(b) every Assembly constituency shall be so delimited as to fall wholly 
within one Parliamentary constituency; 
(c) constituencies in which seats are reserved for the Scheduled Castes 
shall be distributed in dif ferent parts of the State and located, as far as 
practicable, in those areas where the proportion of their population to the total 
is comparatively large;  
(d) constituencies in which seats are reserved for the Scheduled Tribes 
shall, as far as practicable , be located in areas where the proportion of their 
population to the total is the largest; and 
(e) constituencies in which seats are reserved for the women including 
women belonging to the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes, and 
rotation of such seats. 
(2) The Commission shall— 
(a) publish its proposals for the delimitation of constituencies, together 
with the dissenting proposals, if any, of any associate member who desires 
publication thereof, in the Gazette of India and in the Official Gazettes o f all 
the States concerned and also in such other manner as it thinks fit; 
(b) specify a date on or after which the proposals shall be further 
considered by it; 
(c) consider all objections and suggestions which may have been 
received by it before the date so specified, and for the purpose of such 
consideration, hold one or more public sittings at such place or places in each 
State as it thinks fit; and 
(d) thereafter by one or more orders determine—  
(i) the delimitation of Parliamentary constituencies; and  
(ii) the delimitation of Assembly constituencies, 
of each State. 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Delimitation of 
constituencies. 
 

6 
Publication of 
orders and their 
date of 
operation. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Power to 
maintain 
delimitation 
orders up-to-
date. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 10. (1) The Commission shall cause each of its orders made under section 8 
or section 9 to be published in the Gazette of India and in the Official Gazettes of 
the States concerned and simultaneously cause such orders to be published at least 
in two vernacular newspapers and publicise on radio, television and other possible 
media available to the public and after such publication in the Official Gazettes of 
the States concerned, every District Election Offic er shall cause to be affixed, the 
Gazette version of such orders relating to the area under his jurisdiction, on a 
conspicuous part of his office for public notice. 
(2) Upon publication in the Gazette of India, every such order shall have the 
force of law and shall not be called in question in any court. 
(3) As soon as may be after such publication, every such order shall be laid 
before the House of the People and the Legislative Assemblies of the States 
concerned. 
(4) Subject to the provisions of sub -section ( 5), the readjustment of 
representation of the several territorial constituencies in the House of the People or 
in the Legislative Assembly of a State and the delimitation of those constituencies 
provided for in any such order shall apply in relation to every election to the House 
or to the Assembly, as the case may be, held after the publication in the Gazette of 
India of that order and shall so apply in supersession of the provisions relating to 
such representation and delimitation contained in any oth er law for the time being 
in force or any order or notification issued under such law in so far as such 
representation and delimitation are inconsistent with the provisions of this Act. 
(5) Nothing in this section shall affect the representation in the Hou se of the 
People or in the Legislative Assembly of a State until the dissolution of the House 
or of the Assembly, as the case may be, existing on the date of publication in the 
Gazette of India of the final order or orders of the Commission relating to the  
delimitation of Parliamentary constituencies or, as the case may be, of the Assembly 
constituencies of that State and any bye -election to fill any vacancy in such House 
or in any such Assembly shall be held on the basis of the provisions of the laws and 
orders superseded by sub -section ( 4) as if the said provisions had not been 
superseded. 
(6) The Commission shall endeavour to complete and publish each of its 
orders referred to in sub -section ( 1) in the manner provided in that sub -section, 
within the term specified in the notification issued under sub -section ( 3) of         
section 3. 
11. (1) The Election Commission may, from time to time, by notification in 
the Gazette of India and in the Official Gazette of the State concerned,— 
(a) correct any print ing mistake in any of the orders made by the 
Commission under section 9 or any error arising therein from an inadvertent 
slip or omission; and 
(b) where the boundaries or name of any district or any territorial 
division mentioned in any of the said orders are or is altered, make such 
amendments as appear to it to be necessary or expedient for bringing the orders 
up-to-date, so, however, that the boundaries or areas or extent of any 
constituency shall not be changed by any such notification. 
(2) Every notification under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after 
it is issued, before the House of the People and the Legislative Assembly of the State 
concerned. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
15 
 
 
 
 
 
 
20 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
25 
 
 
 
 
 
 
30 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
35 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
40 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
45 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

7 
 
 
 
 
 
33 of 2002. 
 12. The provisions of this Act shall have overriding  effect, notwithstanding 
anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, in respect of duties, 
powers and functions of the Commission under this Act. 
13. The Delimitation Act, 2002 is hereby repealed. 
 Act to have 
overriding 
effect. 
 
 
 
Repeal. 
 
  

8 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The existing allocation of seats of Parliamentary and Assembly Constituencies 
is based on the population figures published as per 1971 census and division of 
territorial constituencies is based on the population figures published as per 2001 
census. The gr owth of population thereafter, across different constituencies in 
various parts of the country as well as within the same State along with migration 
of people from one place to other, especially from rural areas to urban areas, have 
resulted in varying density of population in electoral constituencies.   
2. Articles 82 and 170 of the Constitution provide that the allocation of seats
in the House of the People to the States and in the Legislative Assemblies, and the 
division of each State into territorial co nstituencies shall be readjusted in such 
manner and on the basis of such census, by such authority (the Delimitation 
Commission), as Parliament may by law determine.  
3. Further, articles 239AA, 330A, 332A and 334A provide for, as nearly as
may be, one-third reservation of seats for women in the House of the People and the 
Legislative Assemblies of the States, including within the seats reserved for the 
Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes. These articles make provisions for 
enhancing women’s representation in the House of the People and the Legislative 
Assemblies effectively to enable greater participation of women in policy making 
and governance.  
4. The purpose of the Bill is to constitute the Delimitation Commission to
undertake the exercise of delimitation, inter alia, to provide reservation of seats for 
women in the House of the People and the Legislative Assemblies.  
5. The provisions of the Bill seek to provide for the manner in which such
exercise of delimitation will be undertaken by the Delimitation Commission, as may 
be constituted from time to time. The Delimitation Commission is empowered with 
the task of carrying out delimitation of Parliamentary and Assembly constituencies 
and to allocate seats to be reserved for women, including women bel onging to the 
Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes, in the House of the People and the 
Legislative Assemblies. The proposed delimitation will apply to every general 
election to the House of the People and the Legislative Assemblies held after the 
final orders of the Delimitation Commission are published and to every bye-election 
held thereafter. 
The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives. 
NEW DELHI; ARJUN RAM MEGHWAL. 
The 11th April, 2026. 

9 
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Clause 3 of the Bill seeks to provide for the constitution of a Delimitation 
Commission consisting of three members of whom one shall be a person who is or 
has been a Judge of the Supreme Court and two other members being the Chief 
Election Commissioner or  an Election Commissioner nominated by the Chief 
Election Commissioner and the State Election Commissioner of the concerned 
State, ex officio. The Commission shall also associate with itself for the purpose of 
assisting it in its duties in respect of each State, ten persons, five of whom shall be 
the members of the House of the People representing that State nominated by the 
Speaker of that House and five shall be the members of the Legislative Assembly 
of that State nominated by the Speaker of that Assembly. 
2. The expenditure on account of setting up of the Commission including the
salary and allowances of the Chairperson and other expenses in connection with the 
working of the Commission will be met from the Consolidated Fund of India and 
will be borne by  the Election Commission of India along with other expenses 
incurred for the purpose of delimitation by the Commission. 
3. At this stage, it is not possible to estimate precisely the total expenditure
likely to be incurred on the proposed Commission. 

LOK SABHA 
———— 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the readjustment of the allocation of seats in the House of the People 
to the States and Union territories, the total number of seats in the 
Legislative Assembly of each State and Union territories having a 
Legislative Assembly,  the division of each State and each Union territory 
having a Legislative Assembly into territorial constituencies for elections to 
the House of the People and Legislative Assemblies of the States and Union 
territories and for matters connected therewith. 
———— 
(Shri Arjun Ram Meghwal, Minister of State (I/C) for Law & Justice and 
Minister of State of Parliamentary Affairs) 