As IntRobUCED IN Lok SABHA

23 Er 1999

THE RESERVATION (SERVICES AND HIGHER
EDUCATION) BILL, 1999

By
‘Sur G. M. BANatwALLa, M.P.
A
BILL

Provide for adequate reservation in Posts and services under the Central Government
and its public sector undertakings and in higher educational institutions for the
Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes, other backward classes and backward
minorities and for matters connected therewith.

Br it enacted by Parliament in the Fiflieth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Reservation (Services and Higher Education) Act,

(2) Itextends to the whole of India.

(3) It shall come into force at once,

Bill No. 108 of 1999
—_—_—_

Short title,
extent and
Commence
ment.


Definitions.

Reservation in
posts and serv-
ices.

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, —

(७) “appointing authority” means the authority empowered to make appoint
toa service or a post in the Central Government or its undertaking; 1

(0) “backward minorities” means and includes persons belonging to Musi
Christian and Sikh minorities and such other groups or communities as
recognised by the Central Government or State Government as backward mino
ication in the Official Gazette; :

(c) “Government establishment” means any office of the Central Gove
public sector undertaking or statutory authority established under an Act of Parl
or a Corporation, an institution, an organisation or a society, engaged in any acti
fifty-one per cent. of whose capital or recurring expenditure is contributed
or indirectly by the Central Government and shall include universities, al
colleges and educational institutions owned or aided by the Central Goyerni

(@ “higher education” means education at a level higher than the secor
level and shall include professional and technical waining;

(०) “Other Backward Classes" means other castes, classes or such group
persons as may be recognised as other backward classes by the Central Governn
by notification in the Official Gazette;

0) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act,

(g) “recruitment year” means the calendar year during which recruitm
made;
* (A) “Scheduled Castes” means the castes specified in the Constitution (Sched!

Castes) Order, 1950 made by the President of India under article 341 of the Constitu
of India and as amended from time to time;

(i) “Scheduled Tribes” means the tribes specified in the Constitution (Sel
Tribes) Order, 1950 made by the President of India under article 342 of the Constitut
of India and as amended from time to time.

3. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being i
force, Central Government shall reserve or cause to be reserved vacancies in posts an
services in Government establishments for persons belonging to the Scheduled Castes, th
Scheduled Tribes. Other Backward Classes and for each of the backward minorities.

(2) The reservation for the persons belonging to the Scheduled Castes, the Schedul
‘Tribes and Other Backward Classes shall be in the same manner as is being reservet
the Central Government immediately before the commencement of this Act.

(3) While reserving the vacancies under sub-section (1), the Central Gov
shall, as far as practical, adhere to the percentage of the persons belonging to the Scheduled
Castes, the Scheduled Tribes, Other Backward Classes and each of the backward minorit
as the case may, is to the total population as recorded in the latest census.

(4) The vacancies reserved under this Act shall not filled up by candidates o
than those for whom they have been reserved unless otherwise prescribed in order to d
with any situation of non- availability of candidates to fill up the vacancies reserved fo
the various categories.

Explanation — For the purpose of this Act, reservation shall include reservation i
promoption.


3

4, (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in
and subject to the rights of the educational institutions of minorities pursuant to
le 30 of the Constitution of India, there shall be reservation of seats in higher educational
tutions for students belonging to the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes, Other
skward Classes and for each of the backward minorities,

(2) The provisions of section 3 shall, as far as practical, apply to reservation of
eats in higher educational institutions,

5. In the matter of recruitment to reserved vacancies,—

(a) the upper age limit prescribed for recruitment shall be relaxed by as many
years as may be prescribed;

(b) no fee be charged for competitive examination; and

(c) candidates shall be paid prescribed travelling allowance for appearing in
competitive examination or interviews thereof conducted by the Public Service
Commission, Staff Selection Board/ Commission or such other agency under the control
of Central Government.

6. (1) There shall be appointed a Special Officer for Reservation who shall be
appointed by the President.

(2) It shall be the duty of the Special Officer for Reservations to investigate all
matters relating to reservations under this Act and report to the President upon the working
implementation of the Act at such intervals as the President may direct and the President

॥ cause all such reports to be laid before each House of Parliament.

4, Every appointing authority of Government establishments and every authority
at admits students in higher education institutions shall furnish to the Special Officer for
ations appointed under section 6, the Chairman of the National Commission for
Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes and the Chairman of the National
mmission for the Minorities, an annual report in the prescribed manner and within the
ibed period, on appointments/admissions made under this Act and maintain such
ier records as may be prescribed.

8, The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
or carrying out the purposes of this Act.

Reservation in
higher
educational
institutions.

Relaxations in
recruitment.

Special Officer
for Reserva-
tions.

Annual report.

Power to make
rules.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

The Bill secks not only to codify the present policy of reservations available
Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes and the Other Backward Classes but also to
reservation in posts and services and in higher educational institutions to persons bel
to the backward minorities. The prevalent condition and the continuous declining tr
the position of the minorities is appalling. The facts and the figures presented by the:
of the High Power Panel on Minorities constituted by Government of India it
demand reservation for minorities in posts and services and in admission in higher educa
institutions. Only then can the imperatives of social justice be met to usher in an eq

society.
Hence this Bill.

New Deu,
October 20, 1999.


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 6 of the Bil! provides for the establishment of the office of a Special Officer
Reservations. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the
| Fund of India. It is likely to involve a recurring expenditure of twenty-five
per annum. :

It is also likely to involve a non-recurring expenditure of about rupees ten lakh.


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 8 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying
the purposes of the Bill. Since the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the |
legislative power is of a normal character.



LOK SABHA

A
BILL.

to provide for adequate reservation in posts and services under the Central Goverm

and its Public Sector Undertakings and in higher educational institutions for |

Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes, other Backward Classes and backward
minorities and for matters connected therewith.

(Shri G.M. Banatwalla, M.P.)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—1882LS -26-11-1999.