Bill No. 108 of  2023
THE POKKALI FARMING (PROTECTION, ENRICHMENT 
AND WELFARE) BILL, 2023 
By
Sඁඋං Hංൻං Eൽൾඇ,  M.P.
ൺ
BILL
to provide for the protection, enrichment and welfare of Pokkali farmers and 
for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
 B ൾ it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fourth Year of the Republic of India 
as follows:—
CHAPTER I
Pඋൾඅංආංඇൺඋඒ
1. (1) This Act may be called the Pokkali Farming (Protection, Enrichment and
Welfare) Act, 2023. 
(2) It extends to the whole territory of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date, not being later than three months from
the date of assent of the President, as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
AS ංඇඍඋඈൽඎർൾൽ ංඇ Lඈ඄ Sൺൻඁൺ
Short title, 
extent and 
commencement.

 2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
  ( a) "pokkali farming" means the farming of paddy and prawn in a coordinated 
manner in the coastal areas of the country;
  ( b) "coastal areas" means the areas specified as such by the Central 
Government by notification in the Official Gazette; and
  ( c) "farmer" means a person engaged in pokkali farming.
CHAPTER II
Pඋඈඍൾർඍංඈඇ ൺඇൽ Eඇඋංർඁආൾඇඍ ඈൿ Pඈ඄඄ൺඅං Fൺඋආංඇ඀
 3. The Central Government shall declare pokkali farming as an industry and 
shall take necessary steps to provide all necessary facilities and support for the 
growth and development of the industry.
 4.  The Central Government shall take necessary measures for the protection 
of pokkali farming, including,—
  ( a) measures to protect the rights of the farmers;
  ( b) measures to prevent the exploitation of the farmers;
  ( c) measures to ensure that the farmers get a fair price for their produce;
  ( d) measures to prevent the conversion of pokkali farming land for 
other purposes;
  ( e) measures to provide technical support and assistance to the farmers;
  ( f) measures to promote research and development in the field of 
pokkali farming;
  ( g) measures to provide financial assistance to the farmers for the purpose 
of improving the quality of their produce;
  ( h) measures to provide market support to the farmers; and
  ( i) measures to promote the export of Pokkali farming produce.
CHAPTER III
Mංඌർൾඅඅൺඇൾඈඎඌ
 5.  The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by 
Parliament by law in this behalf, provide adequate funds for carrying out the 
purposes of this Act.
 6. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the 
Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such 
provisions, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as may appear to it to be 
necessary for removing the difficulty:
      Provided that no such order shall be made under this section after the expiry 
of a period of two years from the commencement of this Act.
  ( 2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after 
it is made, before each House of Parliament.
 7.  (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules for carrying out the provisions of this Act.

  ( 2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing 
power, such rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:
(a) the manner in which the protection and enrichment of pokkali farming 
shall be carried out;
(b) the manner in which the rights of the farmers shall be protected;
(c) the manner in which the exploitation of the farmers shall be prevented;
(d) the manner in which the farmers shall be provided with a fair price 
for their produce;
(e) the manner in which the conversion of pokkali farming land shall be 
prevented;
(f) the manner in which technical support and assistance shall be provided 
to the farmers; and
(g) the manner in which research and development in the field of pokkali 
farming.

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
 The Pokkali farming system, which involves the coordinated cultivation of 
paddy and prawn in the coastal areas, is a unique and important aspect of the Indian 
agricultural sector. Despite its significance, this traditional system has been facing 
various challenges in recent years, such as land conversion, exploitation of farmers, 
and a lack of technical support and financial assistance.
 The need is to provide for the protection and enrichment of Pokkali farming, 
so as to preserve this traditional system and ensure its growth and development. 
It is also required to declare Pokkali farming as an industry and provide all necessary 
facilities and support for its growth and development. It also provides for measures 
to protect the rights of farmers, prevent their exploitation, and ensure they receive 
a fair price for their produce. Measures to promote and encourage the growth of 
Pokkali farming, including providing technical support, promoting research and 
development, and providing financial assistance to farmers for the purpose of 
improving the quality of their produce is also required to be taken.
 The present Bill aims to address the challenges faced by Pokkali farmers and 
ensure that this unique and valuable system continues to thrive and contribute to the 
Indian agricultural sector.
 The Bill, therefore, proposed for the protection and enrichment of Pokkali 
farming, so as to ensure the growth and development of this important traditional 
system and the well-being of its farmers. 
 Hence this Bill.
   Nൾඐ Dൾඅඁං; HIBI EDEN 
March 13, 2023.   

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 4 of the Bill provides for Central Government to take various measures 
for the protection and enrichment of pokkali farming. Clause 5 provides for the 
Central Government to provide adequate funds for carrying out the purposes of this 
Act. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated 
Fund of India. It is estimated that a recurring expenditure of about rupees hundred 
crore per annum would be involved from the Consolidated Fund of India. 
A non-recurring expenditure of rupees fifty crore is also likely to be involved.

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGA TED LEGISLATION
Clause 7 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for 
carrying out the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail 
only, the delegation of legislative power is of a normal character.

LOK  SABHA
ൺ
BILL
to provide for the protection, enrichment and welfare of Pokkali 
farmers and for matters connected therewith 
or incidental thereto.
(Shri Hibi Eden, M.P .)