THE DAM SAFETY BILL, 2010
————
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES
————
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
CLAUSES
1. Short title, extent and commencement.
2. Application of Act.
3. Definitions.
CHAPTER II
NATIONAL COMMITTEE ON DAM SAFETY
4. Constitution of National Committee.
5. Tenure of specialists or experts as Members of National Committee.
6. Meetings.
7. Vacancies, etc., not to invalidate proceedings of the National Committee.
8. Functions of National Committee.
CHAPTER III
C
ENTRAL DAM SAFETY ORGANISATION
9. Establishment of Central Dam Safety Organisation.
10. Appointment of employees.
11. Functions of Central Dam Safety Organisation.
CHAPTER IV
S
TATE COMMITTEE ON DAM SAFETY
12. State Committee on Dam Safety.
13. Functions of State Committee.
14. Functions of State Committee to be discharged by National Committee in certain cases.
CHAPTER V
S
TATE DAM SAFETY ORGANISATION, STATE DAM SAFETY CELL, NON-STATE DAM SAFETY
ORGANISATION AND NON-STATE DAM SAFETY CELL
A. State Dam Safety Organisation
15. Establishment of State Dam Safety Organisation.
B. State Dam Safety Cell
16. Establishment of the State Dam Safety Cell in certain cases.
C. Non-State Dam Safety Organisation
17. Establishment of Non-State Dam Safety Organisation.
D. Non-State Dam Safety Cell
18. Establishment of Non-State Dam Safety Cell.
(i)
Bill No. 108 of  2010
TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

CHAPTER VI
DUTIES AND FUNCTIONS IN RELATION TO SAFETY OF DAMS
19. Surveillance and inspection.
20. Maintenance of Log Books.
21. Instructions on safety of specified dams.
22. Funds for maintenance and repairs.
23. Technical documentation.
24. Reporting.
25. Individual responsible for safety of specified dams to be qualified.
26. Jurisdiction of State Dam Safety Organisation or State Dam Safety Cell and Central Dam
Safety Organisation.
27. Cost of investigation to be borne by dam owner.
28. Construction or operation or alteration of dams.
29. Initial filling of reservoirs.
30. Responsibility of dam owner.
CHAPTER VII
S
AFETY, INSPECTION AND DA TA COLLECTION
31. Periodical inspection.
32. Instrumentations to be installed in every specified dam.
33. Establishment of hydro-meteorological station.
34. Installations of seismological station.
CHAPTER VIII
E
MERGENCY ACTION PLAN AND DISASTER MANAGEMENT
35. Obligation for emergency action plan and disaster management.
36. Assistance to other disaster management authorities.
CHAPTER IX
COMPREHENSIVE DAM SAFETY EVALUATION
37. Obligation for comprehensive dam safety evaluation.
38. Compulsory evaluation in certain cases.
39. Reports of comprehensive evaluation.
CHAPTER X
M
ISCELLANEOUS
40. Annual report of safety status of dams.
41. Safety measures in respect of dams other than specified dams.
42. Measures of safety of dams located outside territory of India.
43. Effect of Act on other laws.
44. Power of Central Government to give directions.
45. Power of  Central Government to make rules.
46. Power of State Government to make rules.
47. Power to make regulations.
48. Power  to remove difficulties.
49. Rules and regulations to be laid before Parliament and State Legislature.
(ii)
C
LAUSES

THE DAM SAFETY BILL, 2010
A
BILL
to provide for proper surveillance, inspection, operation and maintenance of all dams of
certain parameters in India to ensure their safe functioning  and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.
W
HEREAS it is expedient to provide for uniform dam safety procedure which shall
ensure national investment and benefits by safeguarding human life, livestock and property;
AND WHEREAS Parliament has no power to make laws for the States with respect to any
of the matters aforesaid except as provided in articles 249 and 250 of the Constitution;
AND WHEREAS in pursuance of clause (1) of article 252 of the Constitution, resolutions
have been passed by all the Houses of Legislatures of the States of Andhra Pradesh and
West Bengal to the  effect that the matters aforesaid should be regulated in those States by
law made by the Parliament;
T
O BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Bill No. 108 of  2010

2
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-first Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. (1) This Act may be called the Dam Safety Act, 2010.
(2) It shall come into force in the States of Andhra Pradesh, West Bengal and in all the
Union territories, on such date as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official
Gazette, appoint and in any other State, which adopts this Act under clause (1) of article 252
of the Constitution, on the date of such adoption; and any reference in this Act to the
commencement of this Act shall, in relation to any State or Union territory, means the date on
which this Act comes into force in such State or Union territory.
2.  The provisions of this Act applies,—
(a) in the first instance, to the whole of the  States of Andhra Pradesh, West
Bengal and to all the Union territories; and it shall also apply to such other State which
adopts this Act by resolution passed in that behalf under clause (1) of article 252 of the
Constitution;
(b)  to every owner of a specified dam, being public sector undertaking or
institution or a body owned or controlled by the Central Government or the State
Government, as the case may be, to which this Act shall apply as per sub-clause (a);
(c) to every owner of a specified dam, being undertaking or company or institution
or a body  other than those owned or controlled by the State Government or the
Central Government, as the case may be.
3. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “alteration of dam” means only such alterations or repairs as may directly
affect the safety of the dam or reservoir;
(b) “annual report” shall mean a report giving therein the activities of the
organisation or cell concerned and the safety status of the specified dams falling
under their control or jurisdiction during each financial year;
(c) “appurtenant work” means the structures being,—
(i) spillways, either in the dam or separate therefrom;
 (ii) reservoir and its rim;
(iii) low level outlet works and water conduits such as tunnels, pipelines
or penstocks, either through the dam or its abutments or reservoir rim;
(iv) hydro-mechanical equipments including gate, valve, hoist, elevators;
(v) energy dissipation and river training works; and
(vi) other associated structures acting integrally with dam body;
(d) “Central Dam Safety Organisation” means the Organisation established under
section 9;
(e) “dam” means any artificial barrier including appurtenant works constructed
across rivers or tributaries thereof with a view to impound or divert water;
(f) “dam failure” shall mean such failures in the structures or operation of a dam
which may lead to uncontrolled release of impounded water resulting in downstream
flooding affecting the life and property of the people;
(g) “distress condition” shall mean the occurrence or potential development of
such conditions in the dam or appurtenance or its reservoir or reservoir rim, which if
Short title,
extent and
commence-
ment.
Application of
Act.
Definitions.

3
left unattended to, may impede the safe operation of dam for its intended benefits or
may pose unacceptable risks to the life and property of people downstream;
(h) “documentation” shall mean all permanent records concerning investigation,
design, construction, operation, performance, maintenance and safety of dams and
includes design memorandum, construction drawings, geological reports, reports of
specialised studies simulating structural and hydraulic response of the dam, changes
made in design and drawings, quality control records, emergency action plan, operation
and maintenance manual, instrumentation readings, inspection and testing reports,
operational reports,  and dam safety review reports;
(i) “enlargement of dam” means any change in the scope of an existing dam or
reservoir, which raises water storage elevation or increases the volume of water
impounded by the dam;
(j) “inspection” shall mean visual examination of all components of dam and its
appurtenances and includes examination of non-overflow blocks, spillways, abutments,
stilling basin, piers, bridge, downstream toe, drainage galleries, operation of mechanical
systems, interior of outlet conduits, instrumentation records and record-keeping
arrangements of instruments;
(k) “investigation” shall mean detailed examination, analysis or scrutiny of a
specific problem pertaining to the dam and its appurtenances or a part thereof, and
includes laboratory testing, in situ testing, geological exploration, model testing and
mathematical simulation of the problem;
(l) “National Committee” means the National Committee on Dam Safety
constituted under section 4;
(m) “New specified dam” means,—
(a) a specified dam which is constructed after the commencement of this
Act;
(b) a dam not being a specified dam existing on or before such
commencement and whose height is increased or altered or modified on or after
such commencement so as to fall within the definition of  specified dam under
this Act;
(n) “Non-State Dam Safety Cell” means the Dam Safety Cell established under
section 18;
(o) “Non-State Dam Safety Organisation” means the Dam Safety Organisation
established under section 17;
(p) “notification” means a notification published in the Official Gazette;
(q) “owner of dam” means the Central Government or a State Government or
public sector undertaking or local authority or company and any or all of such persons
or organisations, who own, control, operate, or maintain a specified dam;
(r) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made by the Central Government or,
as the case may be, by the State Government under this Act;
(s) “public sector undertaking” means,—
(i) a Government company as defined in section 617 of the Companies
 Act, 1956;
(ii) a corporation (including a co-operative society) established by or
under a Central, Provincial or State Act, which is owned, controlled or managed
by the Government;
1 of 1956.

4
(t) “regulations” means the regulations made by the Central Dam Safety
Organisation under this Act;
(u) “remedial measures” shall mean such structural or non-structural measures,
which may be required in relation to the dam or appurtenance or reservoir or reservoir
rim or catchment area of reservoir, for the purpose of removing or reducing the distress
condition of the dam;
(v) “Reservoir” shall mean any water spread which contains impounded water;
(w) “specified dam” means a large dam which is,—
(i) above fifteen meters in height, measured from the lowest portion of the
general foundation area to the crest; or
(ii) between ten meters to fifteen metres in height and satisfies at least one
of the following, namely:—
(A) the length of crest is not less than five hundred metres; or
(B) the capacity of the reservoir formed by the dam is not less than
one million cubic metres; or
(C) the maximum flood discharge dealt with by the dam is not less
than two thousand cubic metres per second; or
(D) the dam has specially difficult foundation problems; or
(E) the dam is of unusual design;
(x) “State” means the State to which the provisions of this Act applies in
accordance with the provisions of sub-section (2) of section 1;
(y) “State Committee” means the State Committee on Dam Safety constituted
under sub-section (1) of section 12;
(z) “State Dam Safety Cell” means the State Dam Safety Cell constituted under
section 16;
(za) “State Dam Safety Organisation” means the State Dam Safety Organisation
constituted under section 15.
CHAPTER II
N
ATIONAL COMMITTEE ON DAM SAFETY
4.  With effect from such date as the Central Government may, by notification, appoint,
there shall be constituted, for the purposes of this Act, a National Committee to be known as
the “National Committee on Dam Safety” consisting of the following members, namely:—
(a) Chairman, Central Water Commission – ex officio, Chairperson;
(b) Member, Design and Research Wing, Central Water Commission — ex officio,
Vice- Chairperson;
(c) Member (Hydro), Central Electricity Authority—ex officio, Member;
(d) Commissioner (Projects), Ministry of Water Resource – ex officio, Member;
(e) Director General, Geological Survey of India – ex officio, Member;
(f) Director General, Indian Meteorological Department – ex officio, Member;
(g) Scientist E, Ministry of Environment and Forests —  ex officio, Member;
(h) Engineer-in-Chief or equivalent officer of Irrigation Department of States
having specified dams – ex officio, Members;
(i) Engineer-in-Chief or equivalent Officer of other Dam owning Organisations
with specified dams — ex officio, Members;
(j) Specialists or experts in the field of dam safety to be nominated by the Central
Government—Members; and
Constitution
of National
Committee.

5
(k) Chief  Engineer, Central Dam Safety Organisation, Central Water Commission—
ex officio, Member Secretary.
5. The tenure of specialists or experts as Members of National Committee shall be valid
for a period of three years from the date of notification issued under that section.
6. (1) The National Committee shall meet at such times and places and shall observe
such rules of procedure in regard to the transaction of business at its meetings (including
quorum at such meetings) as may be prescribed by the Central Government:
Provided that the National Committee shall meet at least twice in a year:
Provided further that the National Committee may invite,—
(a) the representative of the owner of a specified dam in such meetings where his
dam is taken up for deliberation;
 (b) such specialists or experts in Dam Safety, as it may consider appropriate, for
the discharge of its functions.
(2) The Chairperson or, if for any reason, is unable to attend a meeting of the Committee,
the Vice-Chairperson shall preside at the meeting.
(3) The expenditure incurred (including the travelling allowance, dearness allowance
and other incidental expenses) to attend the meeting by the Members, referred to in clauses
(a) to (h) and (j) of section 4, shall be borne by their concerned controlling authorities.
(4) The specialists or experts referred to in clause ( i) of section 4 and specialists or
experts  invitees referred to in clause (b) of second proviso to sub-section (1) to attend the
meetings shall be paid such fees and allowances as may be prescribed by the Central
Government.
(5) All questions which come up before any meeting of the National Committee shall be
decided by a majority of votes of the members present and voting, and, in the event of an
equality of votes, the Chairperson, or in his absence, the Vice-Chairperson, shall have a
second or casting vote.
7. No act or proceeding of the National Committee shall be invalid merely by reason
of—
(a) any vacancy in, or any defect in, the constitution of the National Committee;
or
(b) any defect in the appointment of a person acting as a Member of the National
Committee; or
(c) any irregularity in the procedure of the National Committee not affecting the
merits of the case.
8. (1) The National Committee shall discharge such functions as may be necessary to
ensure proper surveillance, inspection, operation and maintenance of all specified dams in
the country and ensure their safe functioning.
 (2) Without prejudice to the provisions contained in sub-section (1), the functions of
the National Committee shall include,—
(a) to monitor broadly the functioning of State Dam Safety Organisations or
State Dam Safety Cells, as the case may be, and Non-State Dam Safety Organisations
or Non-State Dam Safety Cells, as the case may be;
(b) to monitor and evaluate dam safety practices in various States and suggest
improvements to bring dam safety practices in conformity with latest international
practices consistent with Indian conditions;
Tenure of
specialists or
experts as
Members of
National
Committee.
Meetings.
Vacancies,
etc., not to
invalidate
proceedings
of the
National
Committee.
Functions of
National
Committee.

6
(c) to act as a forum for exchange of views on techniques to be adopted for
remedial measures to relieve distress conditions in dams and appurtenances;
(d) to analyse the causes of failures in cases of major dam failures and suggest
changes in the plan philosophy, specifications, construction, operation and maintenance
practices in order to avoid re-occurrence of such failures;
(e) to evolve comprehensive dam safety management approach as an integration
of dam safety evaluation, risk assessment and risk management; and
(f) to render advise on any specific matter relating to safety of dams which may
be referred to it by the Central Government or the State Government, as the case may
be.
(3) The knowledge and information collected or generated by the National Committee
on Dam Safety shall be disseminated by the Central Dam Safety Organisation to all State Dam
Safety Organisations or State Dam Safety Cells, as the case may be, and Non-State Dam
Safety Organisations or Non-State Dam Safety Cells, as the case may be, for the purposes of
achieving uniform standards in dam safety practices.
(4) The Central Dam Safety Organisation shall act as Secretariat of the National
Committee for the purpose of discharging its functions under this Act.
CHAPTER III
C
ENTRAL DAM SAFETY ORGANISATION
9.  The Central Government shall, for the purposes of this Act, by notification, establish
a separate division under the Ministry of Water Resources, in the Central Water Commission,
an Organisation to be known as the “Central Dam Safety Organisation” to be headed by an
officer not below the rank of Chief Engineer.
10. (1) The Central Government shall, for the purpose of enabling the Central Dam
Safety Organisation to perform its functions under this Act, provide such number of officers,
and other employees as it may consider necessary.
(2) The functions, powers and terms and conditions of service of the employees
appointed under sub-section ( 1) shall be such as may be prescribed by the Central
Government.
11. (1) The Central Dam Safety Organisation shall,—
(a) provide the state-of-the-art technical and managerial assistance to the State
Dam Safety Organisations or the State Dam Safety Cells, as the case may be, and to the
Non-State Dam Safety Organisations or the Non-State Dam Safety Cells, as the case
may be;
 (b) maintain a national level data-base of all specified dams in the country,
including distress conditions, if any, noticed therein;
(c) maintain liaison with the State Dam Safety Organisation or the State Dam
Safety Cell, as the case may be, of each State and the Non-State Dam Safety Organisation
or Non-State Dam Safety Cell, as the case may be, of each dam owning Organisation
for standardisation of dam safety related data and practices, and related technical or
managerial assistance;
(d) publish and update from time to time  the standardised guidelines and check-
lists or format or proforma for routine inspection and detailed investigations of dams
and appurtenances;
Establishment
of Central
Dam Safety
Organisation.
Appointment
of employees.
Functions of
Central Dam
Safety
Organisation.

7
(e)  maintain the records of major dam failures in the country;
(f) examine wheresoever a need is felt, either through its own engineers or through
a panel of experts, the cause of any major dam failure, and submit its report to the
National Committee;
(g) examine whenever required, either through its own engineers or through a
panel of experts, the cause of any major public safety concern in respect of any
specified dam, and issue appropriate instructions on further investigations, operational
parameters or remedial measures; and
(h) look into the unresolved points of issue between the State Dam Safety
Organisation or State Dam Safety Cell, as the case may be, of two States, or between
the State Dam Safety Organisation or State Dam Safety Cell, as the case may be, of a
State and the Non-State Dam Safety Organisation or the Non-State Dam Safety Cell, as
the case may be, of a owner of dam, for a proper solution.
(2) All decisions of the Central Dam Safety Organisation in matters referred to in clause
(h) of sub-section (1) shall be final and binding.
CHAPTER IV
S
TATE COMMITTEE ON DAM SAFETY
12. (1) With effect from such date as the State Government may, by notification appoint,
there shall be constituted, for the purposes of this Act, a States Committee by the State
Government to be known as the “State Committee on Dam Safety”:
Provided that the States in which the numbers of specified dam are twenty or less than
twenty, such State may not constitute State Committee under this Act.
(2) The State Committee on Dam Safety shall consist of a Chairperson and such
number of Members as may be determined by the State Government.
(3) The terms and conditions subject to which the Chairperson and Members of the
State Committee may be appointed and the time, place of the meetings of the State Committee
and procedure in regard to the transaction of business at these meetings shall be such as
may be prescribed by the State Government.
13. (1) The State Committee shall discharge such functions as may be necessary to
ensure proper surveillance, inspection, operation and maintenance of all specified dams in
that State and ensure their safe functioning.
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions contained in sub-section (1), the functions of
the State Committee shall include to,—
(a) review the work done by the State Dam Safety Organisation;
(b) recommend the appropriate measures to be taken in relation to the safety of
specified dam which is under distress condition;
(c) review the progress on measures recommended in relation to dam safety;
(d) establish priorities for investigations undertaken under sub-section ( 2) of
section 19;
(e) in cases where investigations with respect to safety of any specified dam in
the State had already been undertaken, to order further investigations in relation to
safety of such specified dam and assign responsibilities for execution including the
use of non-departmental resources, and need for the association of independent experts
with next phase of such investigations;
(f) establish priorities among projects requiring remedial safety works; and
(g) keep the State Government informed of its activities and recommendations.
State
Committee
on Dam
Safety.
Functions of
State
Committee.

8
14. In States where State Dam Safety Committee are not constituted and in all cases of
Central undertakings and private entities or bodies, the periodical reviews of the works or
progress or prioritisation by the concerned State Dam Safety Organisation or State Dam
Safety Cell and the Non-State Dam Safety Organisation or the Non-State Dam Safety Cell
shall be undertaken by the National Committee on Dam Safety through the Central Dam
Safety Organisation.
CHAPTER  V
S
TATE DAM SAFETY ORGANISATION, STATE DAM SAFETY CELL, NON-STATE DAM SAFETY
ORGANISATION AND NON-STATE DAM SAFETY CELL
A. State Dam Safety Organisation
15. (1) Every State, having more than twenty numbers of specified dams owned by it,
shall establish in its Water Resources Department or Irrigation Department or Public Works
Department or a department dealing with the matter relating to water resources, a separate
Organisation, to be known as the “State Dam Safety Organisation” headed by an officer not
below the rank of Chief Engineer or equivalent.
(2) The constitution and functions of the State Dam Safety Organisation shall be such
as may be prescribed by the State Government.
(3) The State Dam Safety Organisation shall consist of the persons having professional
qualifications and sufficient experience in the field of safety of dams preferably from the
areas of dam-designs, hydro-mechanical engineering , hydrology, geo-technical investigation
and instrumentation or such other field as the State Government may consider appropriate.
(4) The State Government shall, having regard to the number of specified dams in that
State, provide such number of officers and employees to the State Dam Safety Organisation
constituted by it for the efficient and effective functioning of the said Organisation.
(5) The administrative and other expenses of the State Dam Safety Organisation shall
be borne by the concerned State Government.
B. State Dam Safety Cell
16. (1) Every State, having twenty or less than twenty numbers of specified dams
owned by it, shall establish in its Water Resources Department or Irrigation Department or
Public Works Department or a department dealing with the matter relating to water resources,
a separate Cell, to be known as the “State Dam Safety Cell” headed by an officer not below
the rank of Superintendent Engineer or its equivalent.
(2) The constitution and functions of the State Dam Safety Cell shall be such as may be
prescribed by the State Government.
(3) The State Dam Safety Cell shall consist of the persons having professional
qualifications and sufficient experience in the field of safety of dams preferably from the
areas of dam-designs, hydro-mechanical engineering, hydrology, geo-technical investigation
and instrumentation or such other field as the State Government may consider appropriate.
(4) The State Government shall, having regard to the number of dams in that State,
provide such number of officers and employees to the State Dam Safety Cell constituted by
it for the efficient and effective functioning of the said Cell.
(5) The administrative and other expenses of the State Dam Safety Cell shall be borne
by the concerned State Government.
C. Non-State Dam Safety Organisation
17. (1) Every dam owner (other than the Central or State Governments) having more
than ten numbers of specified dams owned by it, shall establish a body called “Non-State
Dam Safety Organisation” headed by an officer not below the rank of Chief Engineer or its
equivalent.
Functions of
State
Committee to
be discharged
by National
Committee in
certain cases.
Establishment
of State Dam
Safety
Organisation.
Establishment
of the State
Dam Safety
Cell in certain
cases.
Establishment
of Non-State
Dam Safety
Organisation.

9
(2) The Non-State Dam Safety Organisation shall consist of the persons having
professional qualifications and sufficient experience in the field of safety of dams preferably
from the areas of dam-designs, hydro-mechanical engineering, hydrology, geo-technical
investigation and instrumentation or such other field as the dam owner may consider
appropriate.
(3) In the case of owner of a specified dam, being the public sector undertakings or
institution or company or a body owned or controlled by,—
(a) the Central Government; or
(b) the Central Government and the State Government; or
(c) any undertakings or institution or a body owned or controlled by the Central
Government or the State Government; or
(d) entities or bodies not falling in clause (a) or clause (b) or clause (c) [excluding
specified dams referred to in sub-section (4)],
the constitution and functions of the Non-State Dam Safety Organisation shall be such as
may be specified by regulations made by the Central Dam Safety Organisation.
(4) In the case of owner of a specified dam being the public sector undertakings or
institution or a body owned or controlled by the State Government or the undertakings or
institution or a body owned or controlled by it or both,   the constitution and functions of the
Non-State Dam Safety Organisation shall be such as may be specified by the State
 Government.
D. Non-State Dam Safety Cell
18. (1) Every owner of a specified dam (other than Central or State Governments),
having ten or less than ten number of specified dams owned by it, shall establish a body
called “Non-State Dam Safety Cell” headed by an officer not below the rank of Superintendent
Engineer or equivalent.
(2) The Non-State Dam Safety Cell shall consist of the persons having professional
qualifications and sufficient experience in the field of safety of dams preferably from the
areas of dam-designs, hydro-mechanical engineering, hydrology, geo-technical investigation
and instrumentation or such other field as the dam owner may consider it appropriate.
(3) In the case of owner of a specified dam, being the public sector undertakings or
institution or a company or a body owned or controlled by,—
(a) the Central Government; or
(b) the Central Government and the State Government; or
(c) any undertakings or institution or a body owned or controlled by the Central
Government or State Government; or
(d) entities or bodies not falling in clause (a) or clause (b) or clause (c) [excluding
specified dams referred to in sub-section (4)],
the constitution and functions of the Non-State Dam Safety Cell shall be such as may be
specified by regulations made by the Central Dam Safety Organisation.
(4) In the case of owner of a specified dam being the public sector undertakings or
institution or a body owned or controlled by the State Government or the undertakings or
institution or a body owned or controlled by it or both,   the constitution and functions of
the Non-State Dam Safety Cell shall be such as may be specified by the State Government.
Establishment
of Non-State
Dam Safety
Cell.

10
CHAPTER VI
DUTIES AND FUNCTIONS IN RELATION TO SAFETY OF DAMS
19. (1) Every State Dam Safety Organisation, State Dam Safety Cell, Non-State Dam
Safety Organisation and Non-State Dam Safety Cell shall, —
(a) keep perpetual surveillance;
(b) carry out routine inspections;
(c) monitor the operation and maintenance,
of all specified dams falling under their control to ensure continued safety of such specified
dams and take such measures as may be necessary to address safety concerns that are
noticed.
(2) The State Dam Safety Organisation or the State Dam Safety Cell or the Non-State
Dam Safety Organisation or the Non-State Dam Safety Cell, as the case may be, shall, for the
purpose of enabling it to make decisions compatible with public safety make or cause to be
made such investigations and shall gather or cause to be gathered such data as may be
required for proper review and study of the various features of the design, construction,
repair and enlargement of dams, reservoirs and appurtenances under their control.
20. Every concerned State Dam Safety Organisation or State Dam Safety Cell or
Non-State Dam Safety Orgainsation or Non-State Dam Safety Cell, shall maintain a Log Book or
Data-base for each specified dam under their control recording therein all activities related to
the surveillance and inspection and all important events related to the dam safety and such
other details as may be specified by the Central Dam Safety Organisation and as per the format
or data-base program specified by  the regulations made by the Central Dam Safety Organisation.
21. (1) Every State Dam Safety Organisation or State Dam Safety Cell or Non-State
Dam Safety Organisation or Non-State Dam Safety Cell, shall from time to time render its
advice to the concerned owner of a specified dam on the safety measures or the remedial
measures required to be taken with respect to any dam.
(2) Every State and specified dam owner shall issue appropriate instructions for
implementing the advice or guidelines issued by the State Dam Safety Organisation or State
Dam Safety Cell or Non-State Dam Safety Organisation or Non-State Dam Safety Cell, as the
case may be.
(3) It shall be the duty of every State Dam Safety Organisation or State Dam Safety
Cell, Non-State Dam Safety Organisation or Non-State Dam Safety Cell to monitor and ensure
the implementation of the instructions issued under sub-section (1).
22.  All State Governments and other owners of specified dam shall earmark sufficient
and specific funds for maintenance and repairs of the specified dams and to implement the
recommendations of the State Dam Safety Organisation or the State Dam Safety Cell, as the
case may be, and the Non-State Dam Safety Organisation or, the Non-State Dam Safety Cell,
as the case may be.
23. (1) Every State Government and every owner of specified dam shall compile all
technical documentations concerning hydrology, dam foundation, structural engineering of
dam, watershed upstream of dam, and nature or use of land downstream of dam along with
information on all resources or facilities of economic or logistic importance which are likely to
be affected due to operation of the dam and keep for record in the concerned State Dam
Safety Organisation or State Dam Safety Cell or the Non-State Dam Safety Organisation or
Non-State Dam Safety Cell, as the case may be.
(2) The Non-State Dam Safety Organisation or Non-State Dam Safety Cell, as the case
may be, shall furnish all such information to the Central Dam Safety Organisation and
concerned State Dam Safety Organisation or State Dam Safety Cell, as the case may be, as
and when required by them.
Surveillance
and
inspection.
Maintenance
of Log Books.
Instructions
on safety of
specified dams.
Funds for
maintenance
and repairs.
Technical
documentation.

11
(3) Every State Government and every owner of specified dam shall ensure that the
State Dam Safety Organisation or State Dam Safety Cell or Non-State Dam Safety Organisation
or Non-State Dam Safety Cell, as the case may be, have been adequately equipped at all times
with the state-of-the-art of information technology tools to store, retrieve, and distribute the
data related to the dam safety and dam performance.
24. (1) The State Dam Safety Organisation or the State Dam Safety Cell, as the case
may be, shall be responsible to, and functionally report to, the highest engineering or technical
authority of the concerned State Government.
(2) The Non-State Dam Safety Organisation or the Non-State Dam Safety Cell, as the
case may be, shall be responsible to, and functionally report to, the highest engineering or
technical officer of the owner of the specified dam.
25. (1) Every individual responsible for safety of specified dams and all activities
related thereto shall possess such qualifications and experience as may be specified by the
regulations made by the Central Dam Safety Organisation.
(2) Every individual referred to in sub-section ( 1) shall undergo such training
programmes and at such intervals as may be necessary to make him aware of up-to-date
standardised dam safety practices.
26. (1) Without prejudice to the provisions of this Act, all specified dams, shall fall
under the jurisdiction of the State Dam Safety Organisation or State Dam Safety Cell, as the
case may be, of the State in which dam is situated in matters related to dam inspections,
analysis of information, reports or recommendations regarding safety status, and remedial
measures to be undertaken to improve dam safety; and in all such matters full co-operation
shall be extended by the concerned Non-State Dam Safety Organisation or the Non-State
Dam Safety Cell and the owner of the specified dam.
(2) The authorised representative of the Central Dam Safety Organisation, concerned
State Dam Safety Organisation or State Dam Safety Cell, as the case may be, for the purposes
of making any inspection or investigation necessary for the implementation of the provisions
of this Act, may enter upon any part of the specified dam or its site as and when required and
apply such investigation methods, as may be considered necessary.
(3) In case, after making inspection or investigation under sub-section ( 2), the
representative referred in that sub-section is of the opinion that certain remedial measures
are required to be taken, he shall report such remedial measures to the officer-in-charge of
such specified dam and the Non-State Dam Safety Organisation or Non-State Dam Safety
Cell, as the case may be, and to the concerned State Dam Safety Organisation or State Dam
Safety Cell, as the case may be.
(4) The Central Dam Safety Organisation and concerned State Dam Safety Organisation
or State Dam Safety Cell, as the case may be, in cases of dams being found to be endangered
on account of their age, degeneration, degradation, structural or other impediments, shall
suggest such remedial measures on such operational parameters (including maximum reservoir
level, maximum spillway discharge and maximum discharges through other outlets) as it may
consider necessary.
(5) Nothing contained in sub-sections (1), (2), (3) and (4) shall absolve the dam owner
or any other authority or person from any of his responsibilities or obligations entrusted
upon  him under the provisions of this Act and the provisions of sub-sections ( 1), (2), (3)
and (4) shall be in addition to, and not in derogation of any provisions of this Act.
 27. All costs to be incurred by Central Dam Safety Organisation or State Dam Safety
Organisation or State Dam Safety Cell on any form of investigation agreed by the owner or
felt necessary by Central Dam Safety Organisation or State Dam Safety Organisation or State
Dam Safety Cell, including payments given to the consultants and panel of experts, shall be
paid by the owner of concerned specified dam.
Individual
responsible
for safety of
specified
dams to be
qualified.
Reporting.
Jurisdiction
of State Dam
Safety
Organisation
or State Dam
Safety Cell
and Central
Dam Safety
Organisation.
Cost of
investigation
to be borne
by dam owner.

12
28. (1) All new specified dams shall be investigated, designed and constructed by the
organisations recognised for the said purpose.
(2) Every organisation referred to in sub-section ( 1) shall for the purpose of
investigation, design and construction employ such qualified, experienced and competent
engineers, as may be specified by the regulations made by the Central Dam Safety Organisation.
(3) Every organisation referred to in sub-section (1) shall demonstrate the safety of the
design, operational parameters and policies to the Central Government or concerned State
Governments or concerned authority to approve the design of the dam to be constructed by
such organisation.
(4) The construction of any new specified dam or the alteration or enlargement of any
existing specified dam shall be taken up only with the approval of the Competent Authority,
as may be specified by the Central Government or the concerned State Government, as the
case may be.
(5) Every owner of the specified dam shall be responsible for operation, maintenance
and safety of the dams owned by it.
(6) Every owner of the specified dam shall ensure that a well documented Operation
and Maintenance Manual is kept at all times at each of his specified dams and sufficient
number of trained Operation and Maintenance engineers or technical persons are posted at
such dams.
29. (1) Before initial filling of any reservoir of a specified dam, the organisation
responsible for its design shall draw the filling criteria and prepare an initial filling plan, with
adequate time for monitoring and evaluating the performance of the dam and its appurtenances.
(2) Before initial filling of the reservoir is taken up, the State Dam Safety Organisation
or State Dam Safety Cell or the concerned Non-State Dam Safety Organisation or Non-State
Dam Safety Cell, as the case may be, shall arrange for safety inspection of the dam either
through its own engineers or by an independent panel of experts, who shall also examine the
initial filling programme and prepare a detailed report in respect thereof.
(3) The Non-State Dam Safety Organisation or the Non-State Dam Safety Cell, as the
case may be, shall forward the report of inspection or examination referred to in sub-section
(2) to the concerned State Dam Safety Organisation or State Dam Safety Cell, as the case may
be.
30. Nothing contained in this Act shall be construed to absolve an owner of a dam of
the duties, obligations or liabilities incidental to the construction, operation, maintenance
and supervision of the dam or reservoir.
CHAPTER VII
S
AFETY, INSPECTION AND DA TA COLLECTION
31.  (1) Every owner of a specified dam shall establish operational and maintenance set
up for each dam and through such set up, undertake pre-monsoon and post-monsoon
inspections of each of its dams to be done, —
(i) in the case of specified dams, being of hundred meters height or above, by the
concerned Chief Engineer;
(ii) in the case of specified dams, being of thirty meters height or above, but less
than hundred meters height, by the concerned Superintendent Engineer or higher
level officer;
(iii) in the case of specified dams, being of fifteen meters height or above, but
less than thirty meters height, by the concerned Executive Engineer or higher level
officer;
Construction
or operation
or alteration
of dams.
Initial filling
of reservoirs.
Responsibility
of dam owner.
Periodical
inspection.

13
(iv) in the case of specified dams, being of ten meters height or above, but
less than fifteen meters height, by the concerned Assistant Engineer or higher level
officer.
(2) Without prejudice to sub-section (1), every owner of a specified dam shall undertake
special inspections, of each of his dams to be undertaken by the engineers referred to in sub-
section (1), during and after floods, after earthquake, and if any sign of distress or unusual
behaviour is noticed in the dam, appurtenance or reservoir fringes.
(3) Every owner of a specified dam shall,—
(a) carry out all inspections referred to in sub-section (1) and sub-section (2) as
per checklist or format or proforma or guidelines specified by the regulations made by
the Central Dam Safety Organisation;
(b) station, at each of his specified dams site throughout the monsoon period,
such engineer, as may be decided, in consultation with the State Dam Safety Organisation
or the State Dam Safety Cell or the Non-State Dam Safety Organisation or  the Non-
State Dam Safety Cell, as the case may be, and Chief Engineer-in-charge of such dams:
Provided that such engineers shall be required to be stationed at their respective
dam sites during entire period of emergency following an earthquake or any other
natural or manmade hazard that may create distress conditions in the dam.
(c) forward the inspection report referred in sub-section (1) and sub-section (2)
to the State Dam Safety Organisation or the State Dam Safety Cell or the Non-State
Dam Safety Organisation or the Non-State Dam Safety Cell concerned, which shall
analyse such report and submit their comments on the deficiency and remedial
measures, if any, to the highest engineering or technical authority of the owner of
specified dam:
Provided that the Non-State Dam Safety Organisation or the Non-State Dam
Safety Cell, as the case may be, shall forward the copy of such report and submit their
comments on the deficiency and remedial measures, if any, to the concerned State Dam
Safety Organisation or State Dam Safety Cell, as the case may be.
32. (1) Every owner of a specified dam  shall have a minimum number of sets of
instrumentations as may be specified by the regulations made by the Central Dam Safety
Organisation at all times for monitoring the performance of dam, in respect of all his specified
dams.
(2) In case the instrumentation installed is required to be replaced, such instrumentation
shall be replaced in a manner so as to maintain the continuity of readings exhibited in such
instrumentations.
(3) Every owner of the specified dam shall maintain a record of readings of the
instrumentation referred to in sub-sections ( 1) and ( 2) and forward such readings, to the
State Dam Safety Organisation or the State Dam Safety Cell or the Non-State Dam Safety
Organisation or the Non-State Dam Safety Cell concerned, in the form, manner and at such
interval specified by them.
(4) The State Dam Safety Organisation or State Dam Safety Cell or Non-State Dam
Safety Organisation or Non-State Dam Safety Cell concerned shall analyse the readings
referred to in sub-section (3) and wheresoever required to submit observations or advice to
the highest engineering or technical authority of the owner of dam.
(5) The Non-State Dam Safety Organisation or Non-State Dam Safety Cell shall also
forward the copy of its observations or advice to the concerned State Dam Safety
Organisation or State Dam Safety Cell, as the case may be.
Instrumentations
to be installed
in every
specified dam.

14
33. (1) Every owner of specified dam shall establish a hydro-meteorological station in
the vicinity of at each such dam.
(2) Every hydro-meteorological station referred to in sub-section (1) shall be capable
of recording data relating to, among other parameters, rainfall, atmospheric pressure, maximum
or minimum temperature, and humidity, wind speed, wind direction, height of waves and
reservoir-water temperature.
 (3) Every owner of the specified dam shall collect, compile, process and store data
referred to in sub-section (2) at suitable central location of such dam.
34. (1) Every owner of a specified dam, in the case of specified dam being of thirty
meters height or above or specified dam being falling in the seismic zone III or above, shall
establish a seismological station in the vicinity of each such dam.
(2) Every owner of specified dam shall collect, compile, process and store data referred
to in sub-section (1) at a suitable location.
CHAPTER VIII
E
MERGENCY ACTION PLAN AND DISASTER MANAGEMENT
35. (1) Every owner of the specified dam, in respect of each specified dam, shall,—
(a) establish well designed hydro-meteorological network and an inflow
forecasting system;
(b) establish an emergency flood warning system for the probable flood affected
areas down stream of the dam;
(c) test periodically for the aptness of systems referred to at (a) and (b) above;
(d) install such scientific and technical instruments which are invented or adopted
after the commencement of this Act for the purpose of ensuring the safety of dam and
the life and property of people downstream;
(e) make available the information relating to maximum anticipated inflows and
outflows including flood warning and an adverse impact of the same, if any, on persons
and property towards the upstream or downstream of the dam, to the concerned
authorities and also make available such information in public domain.
(2) Every owner of the specified dam, for each of its dam shall,—
(a) carry out risk assessment studies at an interval of twenty years or at such
interval as may be specified by the regulations made by the Central Dam Safety
Organisation;
(b) in respect of each specified dam existing on or before the commencement of
this Act, prepare emergency action plan within five years from the date of commencement
of this Act and thereafter update such plans at regular intervals;
(c) in respect of each specified dam which are constructed and filled initially after
the commencement of this Act, prepare emergency action plan before the initial filling
of the reservoir and thereafter update such plans at regular intervals .
(3)  The emergency action plan referred to in sub-section (2) shall,—
(a) set out the procedures to be followed for the protection of persons and
property upstream or downstream of the dam in the event of an actual or imminent dam
failure or to mitigate the effects of the disaster;
(b) include therein,—
(i) in advance the type of emergencies which are likely to occur in the
operation of any reservoir;
(ii) identification of the likely catastrophic flood in the event of any failure
of the dam, along with probable areas, population, structures and installations
likely to be adversely affected due to flood water released from the reservoir;
Establishment
of hydro-
meteorological
station.
Installations
of
seismological
station.
Obligation for
emergency
action plan
and disaster
management.

15
(iii) warning procedures, inundation maps and advance preparations for
handling efficiently and in the best possible manner the likely adverse situations
especially to avoid loss of human life;
(iv) such other matters which may having regard to the geographical
condition, size of the dam and other relevant factors as may be necessary.
(4) The Emergency Action Plan referred to in sub-sections (2) and (3) shall be put into
action as and when conditions arise which are or likely to be hazardous to a dam or potentially
hazardous to public safety, infrastructure, other property or the environment.
(5) Every owner of the specified dam shall, while preparing and updating the emergency
action plan, undertake a consultation process with all disaster management agencies and
other concerned departments entrusted with disaster management and relief in the area likely
to be affected and owners of other dams in the immediate vicinity likely to be affected, so as
to bring transparency and allay any unwarranted fear on dam safety issues.
36. Without prejudice to the provisions contained in this Act or liability of the owner
of the specified dam and other organisations and authorities under this Act, every such
owner, organization and authority shall render necessary co-operation if so required by the
authorities under the Disaster Management Act, 2005 to meet or mitigate any disaster or
emergency arising out of the specified dams.
CHAPTER IX
C
OMPREHENSIVE DAM SAFETY EVALUATION
37. (1)  The State Dam Safety Organisation or the State Dam Safety Cell, as the case
may be, or the concerned Non-State Dam Safety Organisation or the Non-State Dam Safety
Cell, as the case may be, shall, at least once in ten years, arrange for comprehensive safety
evaluation of every specified dam falling under their control either through their own engineers
or by an independent panel of experts for the purpose of determining the conditions of the
specified dam and reservoir:
Provided that the first comprehensive safety evaluation for each existing specified
dam shall be conducted within five years after the coming into force of this Act.
(2) The exact frequency of comprehensive evaluation shall be based on previous
assessments, complexity of specified dam, operating history, recently held rehabilitation
works, dam performance, age of dam and the hazard potential of dam.
(3) The comprehensive safety evaluation shall consists of, but not be limited to,—
(a)  review and analysis of available data on the design, construction, operation,
maintenance and performance of the structure;
(b) general assessment of hydrologic and hydraulic conditions with mandatory
review of design floods as defined in the guidlines issued by the Central Government
in case of dams which are more than fifteen meters in height or whose storage capacities
are more than sixty million cubic meter;
(c) evaluation of the operation, maintenance and inspection procedures;
(d) evaluation of any other conditions which constitute or could constitute a
hazard to the integrity of the structure.
 38. The comprehensive evaluation referred to in section 37 shall be compulsory in the
case of,—
(a) major modification to the original structure or design criteria;
(b) discovery of an unusual condition at the dam or reservoir rim; and
(c) an extreme hydrological or seismic event.
Assistance to
other disaster
management
authorities.
53 of 2005.
Obligation for
comprehensive
dam safety
evaluation.
Compulsory
evaluation in
certain cases.

16
39. (1) The State Dam Safety Organisation or State Dam Safety Cell, as the case may be,
shall report the results of the comprehensive safety evaluation undertaken under section 37 or
38, directly to the highest engineering or technical authority of concerned State Government.
(2) The Non-State Dam Safety Organisation or the Non-State Dam Safety Cell, as the
case may be, shall report the results of the comprehensive safety evaluation undertaken
under section 37 or 38, to the highest engineering or technical authority of the Organisation
and to the concerned State Dam Safety Organisation or State Dam Safety Cell, as the case
may be.
(3) The reports referred to in sub-section (1) and sub-section (2) shall include, but not
be limited to,—
(a) assessment of the condition of the structure based on the visual observations
and available data on the design, hydrology, construction, operation, maintenance
and performance of the structure;
(b) recommendations for any emergency measures or actions, if required, to
assure the immediate safety of the structure;
(c) recommendations for remedial measures and actions related to design,
construction, operation, maintenance and inspection of the structure, if required;
(d) recommendations for additional detailed studies, investigations  and analyses,
if required; and
(e) recommendations for improvements in routine maintenance and inspection
of dam, if required.
(4) In case where the comprehensive safety evaluation undertaken under section 37 or
38,  results in recommendations for a remedial action, the State Dam Safety Organisation or
the State Dam Safety Cell and the concerned Non-State Dam Safety Organisation or the Non-
State Dam Safety Cell, as the case may be, shall pursue with the concerned authorities or
owner of the specified Dam, as the case may be, to ensure that remedial measures are carried
out in time, for which the State Government or such owner shall provide adequate funds.
(5) In case where there are unresolved points of issues emerging between an
independent panel of experts referred to in section 37 and the owner of the specified dams or
concerned authorities, as the case may be, the matter shall be referred to the State Dam
Safety Organisation or State Dam Safety Cell, as the case may be, and in case, no agreement
is arrived at, the matter shall be referred to the Central Dam Safety Organisation which shall
give required guidance wherever necessary and send their recommendations to the State
Government concerned for their implementation.
CHAPTER  X
M
ISCELLANEOUS
40. (1) Every Non-State Dam Safety Organisation or the Non-State Dam Safety Cell, as
the case may be, shall prepare and forward the annual report, within three months of the
expiry of the preceding financial year, to each of the concerned State Dam Safety Organisation
or State Dam Safety Cell, as the case may be, and to the Central Dam Safety Organisation.
(2) Every State Dam Safety Organisation or State Dam Safety Cell, as the case may be,
shall prepare annual report, within five months of the expiry of the preceding financial year,
of its activities and safety status of dams in the State and such report shall be forwarded to
the concerned State Government for placing it before the concerned State Legislature and to
the Central Dam Safety Organisation.
(3) The State Dam Safety Organisation or the State Dam Safety Cell, as the case may
be, of each State and the Non-State Dam Safety Organisation or the Non-State Dam Safety
Cell, as the case may be, of each owner of a specified dam shall provide to the Central Dam
Safety Organisation,   documentation of the projects,   report of enquiries into failure and
such other data as required in such format or manner as it may be specified by the regulations
made by the Central Dam Safety Organisation.
Reports of
comprehensive
evaluation.
Annual report
of safety
status of
dams.

17
(4) The Central Dam Safety Organisation, shall prepare a consolidated annual report of
the dam safety activities in the country and submit the same to the Central Government
within eight months of the expiry of the preceding financial year, and such reports shall be
placed before each House of Parliament by the Central Government.
(5) The Central Dam Safety Organisation shall forward its annual  report  on the safety
status of dams to the National Disaster Management Authority and also make available such
reports in public domain.
(6) The State Dam Safety Organisation or the  State Dam Safety Cell, as the case may
be, of each State and Non-State Dam Safety Organisation or Non-State Dam Safety Cell, as
the case may be, of each owner of a specified dam shall forward their annual reports to the
concerned  State Disaster Management Authority and also make available such reports in
public domain.
41. Every owner of the dam other than specified dams shall undertake such measures
as may be necessary to ensure safety of the dams and shall comply with the instructions and
guidelines which may be issued by the concerned State Governments or the authorities.
42. (1) Where a dam is located outside the territory of India and the Central Dam Safety
Organisation suo motu or on receipt of information from any person or organisation or
authority or source prima facie is of the opinion that measures are required to be taken to
ensure safety of such dams and failure of which may endanger the life and property of people
located in India, it shall in writing submit an intimation thereof  to the Central Government
indicating therein the likely damages which may arise due to failure of such dams and the
safety measures required to be taken in respect of such dam.
(2) The Central Government on receipt of intimation under sub-section (1) or otherwise
shall endeavor to take suitable measures to ensure safety of such dams by entering into
treaty, agreement or convention with any other country or countries concerned with the
safety of such dams and lay a report in respect of such measures before both the Houses of
Parliament at the earliest.
43. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent
therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force.
44. The Central Government may give such directions, as it may consider necessary, to
the State Government and owner of the specified dams for the effective implementation of
the provisions of this Act.
45. (1) The Central Government may, by notification, make rules to carry out the
provisions of this Act.
(2)  In particular, and without prejudice to the foregoing power, such rules may provide
for all or any of the following matters, namely:—
(a) the time and place of the meetings of the National Committee and the procedure
to be followed at such meetings under sub-section (1) of section 6;
(b)  the fee and allowances paid to the specialists or expert Members and
Specialists or expert invitees under sub-section (4) of section 6;
(c)  the functions, powers and terms and conditions of service of the employees
of the Central Dam Safety Organisation under sub-section (2) of section 10;
(d)  any other matter which is to be or may be, prescribed or in respect of which
provision is to be made by the Central Government by rules.
46. (1) The State Government may, by notification, make rules to carry out the provisions
of this Act.
(2)  In particular, and without prejudice to the foregoing power, such rules may provide
for all or any of the following matters, namely:—
(a) the terms and conditions of the Chairperson and Members of the State
Committee and the procedure in regard to transaction of business at these meetings of
the said Committee under sub-section (3) of section 12;
Safety
measures in
respect of
dams other
than specified
dams.
Measures of
safety of dams
located outside
territory of
India.
Effect of Act
on other laws.
Power of
Central
Government
to give
directions.
Power of State
Government
to make rules.
Power of the
Central
Government
to make rules.

18
(b) the constitution and functions of State Dam Safety Organisation under sub-
section (2) of section 15;
(c) the constitution and functions of the State Dam Safety Cell under sub-section
(2) of section 16;
(d) any other matter which is to be or may be, prescribed or in respect of which
provision is to be made by the State Government by rules.
47. (1) The Central Dam Safety Organisation may make regulation consistent with this
Act and the rules made there under to carry out the purposes of this Act.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such
regulations may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely: —
 (a) the constitution and functions of the Non-State Dam Safety Organisation
under sub-section (3) of section 17;
 (b) the constitution and functions of the Non-State Dam Safety Cell under sub-
section (3) of section 18;
(c) the details pertaining to the maintenance of Log Books by the State Dam
Safety Organisation or State Dam Safety Cell or Non-State Dam Safety Organisation or
Non-State Dam Safety Cell under section 20;
(d) the qualifications and experience of the individuals responsible for safety of
specified dams under sub-section (1) of section 25;
(e) the qualifications and experience of the engineers responsible for investigation,
design and construction of specified dams under sub-section (2) of section 28;
(f) the checklist or format or proforma or guidelines of inspections under clause
(a) of sub-section (3) of section 31;
(g) the minimum number of set of instrumentations to be installed in the new
specified dam under sub-section (1) of section 32;
(h) the frequency of risk assessment studies to be carried out under clause (a) of
sub-section (2) of section 35;
(i) the format or manner with respect to such other data as received under sub-
section (3) of section 40; and
(j) any other matter which is to be specified or in respect of which provision is to
be made by the Central Dam Safety Organisation by regulations.
  48. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may, by order, published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as may appear to be necessary or expedient for
removing the difficulty:
Provided that no order shall be made under this section after the expiry of two years
from the date of commencement of this Act.
(2) Every order made under this section shall, as soon as may be after it is made, be laid
before each House of Parliament.
49.
 (1) Every rule and  every regulation made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as
may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total
period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the
successive sessions aforesaid, both the Houses agree in making any modification in the rule
or regulation or both  Houses agree that the rule or regulation should not be made, the rule
or regulation shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the
case may be, so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice
to the validity of anything previously done under that rule or regulation.
(2) Every rule made by a State Government under this Act shall be laid as soon as may
be, after it is made, before the State Legislature, where it consists of two Houses, or where
such legislature consists of one House, before that House.
Power to make
regulations.
Power to
remove
difficulties.
Rules and
regulations to
be laid before
Parliament
and State
Legislature.

19
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Dams are critical infrastructure constructed with large investments for multi-purpose
uses such as irrigation, power generation, flood moderation and supply of water for drinking
and industrial purposes. An unsafe dam constitutes a hazard to human life, ecology and
public and private assets (including crops, houses, buildings, canals and roads). Therefore,
the safety of dam is a matter of great concern to the general public and becomes a national
responsibility to take necessary steps to ensure the safety of dams.
2. The Government of India, keeping the importance of safety of dams, constituted a
Standing Committee in 1982, under the Chairmanship of Chairman, Central Water Commission,
to review the existing practices and to evolve unified procedure for safety of dams in India.
The Standing Committee in its report dated the 10th July, 1986 has recommended for unified
dam safety procedures for all dams in India and the necessary legislation on dam safety.
Initial efforts for dam safety legislation were directed towards enactment of appropriate
legislation by respective State Governments, and accordingly the State of Bihar enacted the
Dam Safety Act, 2006. However, some of the States favoured the idea of a uniform central
legislation on dam safety. The States of Andhra Pradesh and West Bengal have adopted
resolutions in their States for an Act of Parliament.
3. In view of the above, it is necessary to enact a law to provide for proper surveillance,
inspection, operation and maintenance of dams of certain parameters in India to ensure
their safe functioning and thereby to protect the persons and property against risks associated
with dam failure. In the first instance, the provisions of the proposed legislation shall apply
to the States of Andhra Pradesh, West Bengal and the Union territories, and also to their
public sector undertakings and to the public sector undertakings of the Central Government.
It shall also apply to such owners of specified dams other than those owned or controlled
by the Central Government or the State Government. However, the provisions of the proposed
legislation shall also apply to other States if resolution to that effect is passed by the
Houses of Legislature of those States under clause (1) of article 252 of the Constitution.
4. The proposed Dam Safety Bill, 2010, inter alia, provides for—
(a) constitution of the National Committee on Dam Safety, consisting of a
Chairperson, eight members, specialists or experts in the field of dam safety and a
Member -Secretary, to ensure proper surveillance, inspection, operation and
maintenance of all specified dams and ensure their safe functioning;
(b) establishment of the Central Dam Safety Organisation in the Central Water
Commission to provide, inter alia, the technical and managerial assistance to the
State Dam Safety Organisations or the State Dam Safety Cells, the Non-State Dam
Safety Organisations or the Non-State Dam Safety Cells; to settle the unresolved
points of issues between the State Dam Safety Organisation or State Dam Safety Cell
of two States, or between the State Dam Safety Organisation or State Dam Safety Cell
of a State and the Non-State Dam  Safety Organisation or the Non-State Dam Safety
Cell, etc.;
(c) constitution of the State Committee on Dam Safety by the State Governments
having more than twenty specified dams, to ensure proper surveillance, inspection,
operation and maintenance of all specified dams in that State and to ensure their safe
functioning;
(d) establishment of the State Dam Safety Organisations in States having more
than twenty specified dams to discharge such functions as may be prescribed by the
concerned State Government;

20
(e) establishment of the State Dam Safety Cells in States, having twenty or less
than twenty number of specified dams, to discharge such functions as may be
prescribed by the concerned State Government;
(f) establishment of Non-State Dam Safety Organisations by the dam owners,
(other than the Central Government or State Governments) having more than ten
specified dams, to discharge such functions as may be specified by the Central Dam
Safety Organisation or the State Dam Safety Organisation;
(g) establishment of Non-State Dam Safety Cell by the dam owner (other than
the Central Government or State Governments), having ten or less than ten numbers
of specified dams, to discharge such functions as may be specified by the Central
Dam Safety Organisation or the State Dam Safety Organisation;
(h) an obligation upon every owner of a specified dam to establish operational
and maintenance set up for undertaking pre-monsoon and post-monsoon inspections
and special inspections during and after floods, earthquakes, etc.;
(i) an obligation upon the concerned State Dam Safety Organiation, Non-State
Dam Safety Organisations, State Dam Safety Cell and Non-State Dam Safety Cell to
arrange for comprehensive safety evaluation of every specified dam at least once in
every ten years;
(j) an obligation upon the Central Dam Safety Organisation to forward its annual
report to the National Disaster Management Authority and the State Dam Safety
Organisation or State Dam Safety Cell, Non-State Dam Safety Organisation or Non-
State Dam Safety Cell to forward their annual reports on safety status of dams to the
concerned State Disaster Management Authority;
(k) empowers the Central Government and the State Governments to make rules
to carry out the provisions of the proposed legislation.
5. The Notes on Clauses explain in detail the various provisions contained in the Bill.
6. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
N
EW DELHI; PAW AN KUMAR BANSAL
The 18th   August, 2010.

Notes on clauses
Clause 1.—This clause relates to the short title, extent and commencement of the
proposed legislation. This clause enables the Central Government to appoint a date by
notification with respect to the commencement of the proposed legislation in the States of
Andhra Pradesh, West Bengal and in all the Union territories. With respect to any other
State, the proposed legislation shall come into force on the date of adoption of the enacted
legislation under clause (1) of article 252 of the Constitution.
Clause 2.—This clause relates to application of the proposed legislation.
This clause provides that the provisions of the proposed legislation applies — (a) in
the first instance, to the whole of the States of Andhra Pradesh, West Bengal and to all the
Union territories; and it shall also apply to such other State which adopts the enacted
legislation by resolution passed in that behalf under clause (1) of article 252 of the
Constitution; (b) to every owner of a specified dam, being public sector undertaking or
institution or a body owned or controlled by the Central Government or the State Government;
and (c) to every owner of a specified dam, being undertaking or company or institution or a
body other than those owned or controlled by the State Government or the Central Government.
Clause 3.— This clause defines certain expressions used in the Bill.
Clause 4.— This clause relates to constitution of the National Committee on Dam
Safety.
This clause provides for the constitution of a National Committee to be known as the
"National Committee on Dam Safety" on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification, appoint and the composition of said Committee is specified in the said clause.
Clause 5.— This clause relates to the tenure of specialists or experts as Members of
the National Committee.
This clause provides that tenure of specialists or experts as Members of  the National
Committee shall be valid for a period of three years from the date of issuance of the notification.
Clause 6.— This clause relates to the meetings of the National Committee on Dam
Safety.
This clause provides that the National Committee shall meet at such times and places
and shall observe such rules of procedure in regard to the transaction of business at its
meetings (including quorum at such meetings) as may be prescribed by the Central
Government. This clause further provides that the National Committee may invite such
specialists or experts in Dam Safety, as it may consider appropriate, for the discharge of its
functions. This clause also contains the provisions relating to the expenditure incurred, the
fee and allowances paid to the specialists or experts and the method of deciding of questions
which come up before any meeting of the National Committee.
Clause 7.— This clause relates to the vacancies, etc., not to invalidate proceedings of
the National Committee.
This clause provides that no act or proceeding of the National Committee shall be
invalid merely by reason of — (a) any vacancy in, or any defect in the constitution of the
National Committee; or (b) any defect in the appointment of a person acting as a member of
the National Committee; or (c) any irregularity in the procedure of the National Committee
not affecting the merits of the case.
Clause 8.— This clause relates to the functions of National Committee.
This clause provides that the National Committee shall discharge such functions as
may be necessary to ensure proper surveillance, inspection, operation and maintenance of
21

22
all specified dams in the country and ensure their safe functioning. The functions of the
National Committee shall include,— (a) to monitor broadly the functioning of State Dam
Safety Organisation or State Dam Safety Cell, as the case may be, and Non-State Dam Safety
Organisation or Non-State Dam Safety Cell, as the case may be; (b) to monitor and evaluate
dam safety practices in various States and suggest improvements to bring dam safety
practices in conformity with latest international practices consistent with Indian conditions;
(c) to act as a forum for exchange of views on techniques to be adopted for remedial measures
to relieve distress conditions in dams and appurtenances; (d) to analyse the causes of
failures in cases of major dam failures and suggest changes in the plan philosophy,
specifications, construction, operation and maintenance practices in order to avoid re-
occurrence of such failures; (e) to evolve comprehensive dam safety management approach
as an integration of dam safety evaluation, risk assessment, and risk management; and (f) to
render advise on any specific matter relating to safety of dams which may be referred to it by
the Central Government or the State Government. This clause further provides that the
knowledge and information gathered or generated by the National Committee on Dam Safety
shall be disseminated by the Central Dam Safety Organisation to all State Dam Safety
Organisations or State Dam Safety Cells, as the case may be, and Non-State Dam Safety
Organisations or Non-State Dam Safety Cells, as the case may be, for achieving uniform
standard in dam safety practices. This clause also provides that the Central Dam Safety
Organisation shall act as Secretariat of the National Committee for the purpose of discharging
its functions under the proposed legislation.
Clause 9.— This clause relates to the establishment of Central Dam Safety Organisation.
This clause provides that the Central Government shall, for the purposes of the proposed
legislation, by notification, establish a separate division in the Ministry of Water Resources,
in the Central Water Commission, an Organisation to be known as the "Central Dam Safety
Organisation" to be headed by an officer not below the rank of Chief Engineer.
Clause 10.— This clause relates to the appointment of employees of the Central Dam
Safety Organisation.
This clause provides that the Central Government shall, for the purpose of enabling
the Central Dam Safety Organisation to perform its functions under the proposed legislation,
provide such number of officers, and other employees as they may consider necessary. This
clause further provides that the functions, powers and terms and conditions of service of the
employees shall be such as may be prescribed by the Central Government.
Clause 11.— This clause relates to the functions of Central Dam Safety Organisation.
This clause provides that the Central Dam Safety Organisation shall, — (a) provide the
state-of-the-art technical and managerial assistance to the State Dam Safety Organisations
or State Dam Safety Cells, as the case may be, and Non-State Dam Safety Organisations or
Non-State Dam Safety Cells, as the case may be; (b) maintain a national level data-base of all
specified dams in the country; (c) maintain liaison with the State Dam Safety Organisation or
State Dam Safety Cell, as the case may be, of each State and the Non-State Dam Safety
Organisation or Non-State Dam Safety Cell, as the case may be, of each dam owning
Organisation for standardisation of dam safety related data and practices, and related technical
or managerial assistance; (d) issue and update from time to time the standardised guidelines
and check-lists or format or proforma for routine inspections as well as detailed investigations
of dams and appurtenances; (e) maintain the records of major dam failures in the country; (f)
examine wheresoever a need is felt, either through its own engineers or through a panel of
experts, the cause of any major dam failure, and submit its report to the National Committee
on Dam Safety; and (g) look into unresolved points of issue between the State Dam Safety
Organisation or State Dam Safety Cell, as the case may be, of two States, or between State
Dam Safety Organisation or State Dam Safety Cell, as the case may be, of a State and the
Non-State  Dam Safety Organisation or Non-State Dam Safety Cell, as the case may be, of a
owner of a specified dam, for a proper solution. This clause further provides that all decisions
of Central Dam Safety Organisation shall be final and binding.
Clause 12.— This clause relates to the constitution of  State Committee on Dam Safety.

23
This clause provides for the constitution of a State Committee to be known as the State
Committee on Dam Safety on such date as the State Government may,  by notification,
appoints. This clause further provides that the States in which the numbers of specified dam
are less than twenty, such State may not constitute State Committee under this Act. This
clause also provides that the State Committee on Dam Safety shall consist of a Chairperson
and such number of members as may be determined by the State Government. This clause
also provides that the provisions relating to the terms and conditions subject to which the
Chairperson and members of the State Committee may be appointed and the time, place of the
meetings of the State Committee shall be such as may be prescribed by the State Government.
Clause 13.— This clause relates to the functions of State Committee on Dam Safety.
This clause provides that the State Committee shall discharge such functions as may
be necessary to ensure proper surveillance, inspection, operation and maintenance of all
specified dams in that State and ensure their safe functioning. This clause further provides
that the functions of the State Committee shall include to,—(a) review the work done by the
State Dam Safety Organisation; (b) recommend the appropriate measures to be taken in
relation to the safety of specified Dam; (c) review the progress on measures recommended in
relation to dam safety; (d) establish priorities for investigations undertaken under sub-
section (2) of section 19; (e) in cases where investigations with respect to safety of any
specified dam in the State had already been undertaken, to order further investigations in
relation to safety of such specified dam and assign responsibilities for execution including
the use of non-departmental resources, and need for the association of independent experts
with next phase of such investigations; (f) establish priorities among projects needing remedial
safety works; and (g) keep the State Government informed of its activities and
recommendations.
Clause 14.— This clause relates to the functions of State Committee to be discharged
by National Committee in certain cases.
This clause provides that in States where State Dam Safety Committee are not
constituted and in all cases of Central undertakings and private entities or bodies, the
periodical reviews of the works or progress or prioritisation by the concerned State Dam
Safety Organisation or State Dam Safety Cell and Non-State Dam Safety Organisation or
Non-State Dam Safety Cell shall be undertaken by the National Committee on Dam Safety
through Central Dam Safety Organisation.
Clause 15.— This clause relates to the establishment of State Dam Safety Organisation.
This clause provides that every State having more than twenty numbers of specified
dams owned by it shall constitute a body called "State Dam Safety Organisation" headed by
an officer not below the rank of Chief Engineer or equivalent. This clause further provides
that the constitution and functions of the State Dam Safety Organisation shall be such as
may be prescribed by the State Government. This clause also provides that the State Dam
Safety Organisation shall consist of the persons having professional qualifications and
sufficient experience in the field of safety of dams preferably from the areas of dam-designs,
hydro-mechanical, hydrology, geo-technical investigation and instrumentation or such other
field as the State Government may consider appropriate. This clause also provides that the
administrative and other expenses of the State Dam Safety Organisation shall be borne by
the concerned State Government.
 Clause 16.— This clause relates to the establishment of the State Dam Safety Cell in
certain cases.
This clause provides that every State having twenty or less than twenty numbers of
specified dams owned by it shall establish a body called "State Dam Safety Cell" headed by
an officer not below the rank of Superintendent Engineer or its equivalent. This clause
further provides that the establishment and functions of the State Dam Safety Cell shall be
prescribed by the State Government. This clause also provides that the State Dam Safety Cell

24
shall consist of the persons having professional qualifications and sufficient experience in
the field of safety of dams preferably from the areas of dam-designs, hydro-mechanical,
hydrology, geo-technical investigation and instrumentation or such other field as the State
Government may consider appropriate. This clause also provides that the administrative and
other expenses of the State Dam Safety Cell shall be borne by the concerned State Government.
Clause 17 .— This clause relates to the establishment of Non-State Dam Safety
Organisations.
This clause provides that every dam owner (other than Central or State Governments)
having more than ten numbers of specified dams owned by it, shall establish a body called
"Non-State Dam Safety Organisation" headed by an officer not below the rank of Chief
Engineer or equivalent. This clause further provides that the Non-State Dam Safety
Organisation shall consist of the persons having professional qualifications and sufficient
experience in the field of safety of dams preferably from the areas of dam-designs, hydro-
mechanical, hydrology, geo-technical investigation and instrumentation or such other field
as the dam owner may consider appropriate. This clause also provides that in the case of
owner of a specified dam, being the undertakings or institution or a company or a body
owned or controlled by the Central Government or by the Central Government and State
Government, or any undertakings or institution or a body owned or controlled by the Central
Government or the State  Government and other private entities or bodies, the constitution
and functions of the Non-State Dam Safety Organisation shall be specified by regulations
made by the Central Dam Safety Organisation. This clause also provide that in the case of
owner of a specified dam being the undertaking or an institution or a body owned or controlled
by the State Government or the undertaking or an institution or a body owned or controlled
by it or both, the constitution and functions of the Non-State Dam Safety Organisation shall
be such as may be specified by the State Government.
Clause 18.— This clause relates to the establishment of Non-State Dam Safety Cell.
This clause provides that every owner of a specified dam (other than Central or State
Governments), having ten or less than ten number of specified dams owned by it, shall
establish a body called "Non-State Dam Safety Cell" headed by an officer not below the rank
of Superintendent Engineer or its equivalent. This clause further provides that the Non-State
Dam Safety Cell shall consist of the persons having professional qualifications and sufficient
experience in the field of safety of dams preferably from the areas of dam-designs, hydro-
mechanical, hydrology, geo-technical investigation and instrumentation or such other field
as the dam owner may consider appropriate. This clause also provides that in the case of
owner of a specified dam, being the public sector undertakings or institution or a body
owned or controlled by the Central Government; or by the Central Government and the State
Government or any undertakings or institution or a body owned or controlled by the Central
Government or State Government and other private entities or bodies, the constitution and
functions of the Non-State Dam Safety Cell shall be such as may be specified by regulations
made by the Central Dam Safety Organisation. This clause also provides that in the case of
owner of a specified dam being the undertaking or institution or a body owned or controlled
by the State Government or the undertaking or institution or a body owned or controlled by
it or both, the constitution and functions of the Non-State Dam Safety Cell shall be such as
may be specified by the State Government.
Clause 19 .—This clause relates to the surveillance and inspection.
This clause provides that every State Dam Safety Organisation, State Dam Safety Cell,
Non-State Dam Safety Organisation and Non-State Dam Safety Cell shall, — (a) keep perpetual
surveillance; (b) carry out routine and special inspections; (c) monitor the operation and
maintenance, of all specified dams falling under their jurisdiction to ensure continued safety
of such specified dams and take such steps as may be necessary in this regard.  This clause
further provides that the State Dam Safety Organisation or State Dam Safety Cell or Non-
State Dam Safety Organisation or Non-State Dam Safety Cell shall, for the purpose of enabling

25
it to make decisions compatible with public safety make or cause to be made such investigations
and shall gather or cause to be gathered such data as may be required for proper review and
study of the various features of the design, construction, repair and enlargement of dams,
reservoirs and appurtenances under their control.
Clause 20.— This clause relates to maintenance of  log books.
This clause provides that every concerned State Dam Safety Organisation or State
Dam Safety Cell, or  Non-State Dam Safety Organisation or Non-State Dam Safety Cell,  shall
maintain a log book or Data-base for each specified dam recording therein all activities
related to the surveillance and inspection and all important events related to the dam safety
and such other details as may be specified by regulations by the Central Dam Safety
Organisation.
Clause 21.— This clause relates to the instructions on safety of specified dams.
This clause provides that every State Dam Safety Organisation or State Dam Safety
Cell or Non-State Dam Safety Organisation or Non-State Dam Safety Cell shall from time to
time render advice to the concerned owner of  a specified dam on the safety measures
required to be taken with respect to any dam.  This clause further provides that it shall be the
duty of every State Dam Safety Organisation or State Dam Safety Cell, Non-State Dam Safety
Organisation or Non-State Dam Safety Cell to ensure necessary action in monitoring and
implementing the instructions.
Clause 22.— This clause relates to the funds for maintenance and repairs.
This clause provides that all State Governments and other owners of specified dam
shall earmark sufficient and specific funds for maintenance and repairs of the specified dams
and to implement the recommendations of the State Dam Safety Organisation or the State
Dam Safety Cell, as the case may be, and the Non-State Dam Safety Organisation or, the Non-
State Dam Safety Cell, as the case may be.
Clause 23.— This clause relates to the technical documentation.
This clause provides that every State Government and every owner of specified dam
shall compile all technical documentations concerning hydrology, dam foundation, structural
engineering of specified dam, watershed upstream of dam, and nature or use of land
downstream of dam along with information on all resources or facilities of economic or
logistic importance which are likely to be affected due to operation of the dam,  and kept for
record in the concerned State Dam Safety Organisation or State Dam Safety Cell or the Non-
State Dam Safety Organisation or Non-State Dam Safety Cell, as the case may be. This clause
further provides that the Non-State Dam Safety Organisation or Non-State Dam Safety Cell,
as the case may be, shall furnish all such information to the Central Dam Safety Organisation
and concerned State Dam Safety Organisation or State Dam Safety Cell, as the case may be,
as and when required by them. This clause also provides that every State Government and
every owner of specified dam shall ensure that the State Dam Safety Organisation or State
Dam Safety  Cell or Non-State Dam Safety Organisation or Non-State Dam Safety Cell,  have
been adequately equipped with the state-of-the-art of information technology tools to store,
retrieve and distribute the data related to the dam safety and dam performance.
Clause 24.— This clause relates to the reporting of the State Dam Safety Organisation
or the State Dam Safety Cell or Non-State Dam Safety Organisation or Non-State Dam Safety
Cell.
This clause provides that the State Dam Safety Organisation or the State Dam Safety
Cell shall be responsible to and functionally report to the highest engineering or technical
authority of the concerned State Government. This clause further provides that the Non-
State Dam Safety Organisation or the Non-State Dam Safety Cell shall be responsible to and
functionally report to the highest engineering or technical officer of the owner of the specified
dam.
Clause 25.— This clause relates to the individual responsible for safety of specified
dams to be qualified.

26
This clause provides that every individual responsible for safety of specified dams
and all activities related thereto shall possess such qualifications and experience as may be
specified by the Central Dam Safety Organisation. This clause further provides that every
individual shall undergo such training programmes and at such intervals as may be specified
by the Central Dam Safety Organisation.
Clause 26.— This clause relates to the jurisdiction of the State Dam Safety Organisation
or State Dam Safety Cell and Central Dam Safety Organisation.
This clause provides that all specified dams, shall fall under the jurisdiction of the
State Dam Safety Organisation or State Dam Safety Cell, as the case may be, of the State in
which dam is situated in matters related to dam inspections, analysis of information, reports
or recommendations regarding safety status, and remedial measures to be undertaken to
improve dam safety; and in all such matters full co-operation shall be extended by the
concerned  Non-State Dam Safety Organisation or Non-State Dam Safety Cell and the dam
owner. This clause further provides that the authorised representative of the Central Dam
Safety Organisation or State Dam Safety Organisation may enter upon any part of the specified
dam or its site as and when required. This clause also provides that the Central Dam Safety
Organisation  and concerned State Dam Safety Organisation  or State Dam Safety Cell in
cases of dams being found to be endangered on account of their age, degeneration,
degradation, structural or other impediments, shall suggest such remedial  measures  on
such operational parameters as it may consider necessary.
Clause 27.—This clause relates to the cost of investigation to be borne by the dam
owner.
This clause provides that all costs to be incurred by Central Dam Safety Organisation
or State Dam Safety Organisation or State Dam Safety Cell on any form of investigation
agreed by the owner or felt necessary by Central Dam Safety Organisation or State Dam
Safety Organisation or State Dam Safety Cell, including payments given to the consultants
and panel of experts, shall be paid by the owner of concerned specified dam.
Clause 28 .— This clause relates to the construction or operation or alteration of
dams.
This clause provides that all new specified dams shall be investigated, designed and
constructed by Organisations recognised by the Government and consisting of such qualified,
experienced and competent engineers, as may be specified by the Central Dam Safety
Organisation. This clause further provides that the construction of any new specified dam or
the alteration or enlargement of any existing specified dam shall be taken up only with the
approval of the Competent Authority, as may be specified by the Central Government or the
concerned State Government, as the case may be. This clause also provides that every
owner of the dam shall be responsible for operation, maintenance and safety of the dams
owned by it and shall ensure that a documented Operation and Maintenance Manual is kept
at all times at each of his dam and sufficient number of trained Operation and Maintenance
engineers or technical persons are posted at such dams.
Clause 29.— This clause relates to the initial filling of reservoirs.
This clause provides that before initial filling of any reservoir of a specified dam, the
organisation responsible for its design shall draw the filling criteria and prepare a initial filling
plan, with adequate time for monitoring and evaluating the performance of the dam and its
appurtenances as the reservoir is being filled for the first time. This clause further provides
that before the filling of the reservoir is taken up, the State Dam Safety Organisation or State
Dam Safety Cell or the concerned Non-State Dam Safety Organisation or Non-State Dam
Safety Cell, as the case may be, shall arrange for safety inspection of the dam either through
its own engineers or by an independent panel of experts, who shall also examine the initial
filling programme and prepare a detailed report in respect thereof. This clause also provides

27
that the Non-State Dam Safety Organisation or Non-State Dam Safety Cell, as the case may
be, shall forward the report of inspection or examination to the concerned State Dam Safety
Organisation or State Dam Safety Cell.
Clause 30.— This clause relates to the responsibility of dam owner.
This clause provides that nothing contained in this Act shall be construed to absolve
an owner of a dam of the duties, obligations or liabilities incidental to the construction,
operation, maintenance and supervision of the dam or reservoir.
Clause 31.— This clause relates to periodical inspection.
This clause provides that every owner of a specified dam shall establish operational
and maintenance set up for each dam and through such set up, undertake pre-monsoon and
post-monsoon inspections of each of its dams to be done,— (i) in the case of specified dams,
being of hundred meters height or above, by the concerned Chief Engineer; (ii) in the case of
specified dams, being of thirty meters height or above, but less than hundred meters height,
by the concerned Superintendent Engineer or higher level officer; (iii) in the case of specified
dams, being of fifteen meters height or above, but less than thirty meters height, by the
concerned Executive Engineer or higher level officer; (iv) in the case of specified dams, being
of ten meters height or above, but less than fifteen meters height, by the concerned Assistant
Engineer or higher level officer. This clause further provides that every owner of a specified
dam shall undertake special inspections, of each of its dam to be undertaken by the Engineers
during and after floods, after earthquake, and if any sign of distress or unusual behaviour is
noticed in the dam, appurtenance or reservoir fringes. This clause also provides the
responsibilities to be fulfilled by every owner of a specified dam for the purpose of inspection.
Clause 32.— This clause relates to the instrumentations to be installed in every specified
dam.
This clause provides that every owner of a specified dam shall have a minimum number
of sets of instrumentations at all times for monitoring the performance of dam in respect of all
its specified dams. This clause further provides that in case the instrumentation installed is
required to be replaced, such instrumentation shall be replaced in such manner so as to
maintain the continuity of readings exhibited in such instrumentations. This clause also
provides that every owner of specified dam shall maintain a record of readings of the
instrumentation and forward such readings, to the State Dam Safety Organisation or the
State Dam Safety Cell or the Non-State Dam Safety Organisation or the Non-State Dam
Safety Cell concerned, in the form, manner and at such interval specified by them and the
State Dam Safety Organisation or State Dam Safety Cell or Non-State Dam Safety Organisation
or Non-State Dam Safety Cell concerned shall analyse the readings and wheresoever's
required to submit observations or advice to the highest engineering or technical authority
of the owner of dam. This clause also provides that the Non-State Dam Safety Organisation
or Non-State Dam Safety Cell shall also forward the copy of its observations or advice to the
concerned State Dam Safety Organisation or State Dam Safety Cell, as the case may be.
Clause 33.— This clause relates to the installations of  hydro-meteorological station.
This clause provides that every owner of specified dam shall establish a
hydro-meteorological station in the vicinity of at each such dam and every hydro-
meteorological station shall be capable of recording data relating to, among other parameters,
rainfall, atmospheric pressure, maximum or minimum temperature, and humidity, wind speed,
wind direction, height of waves and reservoir-water temperature.
Clause 34. This clause relates to installations of  seismological station.
This clause provides that every owner of a specified dam, in the case of specified dam
being of thirty meters height or above or specified dam being falling in the seismic zone III or
above, shall establish a seismological station in the vicinity of each such dam. This clause
further provides that every owner of specified dam shall collect, compile process and store
data at a suitable location.

28
Clause  35 .— This clause relates to the Emergency Action Plan and Disaster
Management.
This clause provides that the every owner of the specified dam shall, in respect of in
each specified dam, establish, —(a) well designed hydro-meteorological network and an
inflow forecasting system; (b) an emergency flood warning system for the probable flood
affected areas downstream of the dam; (c) test periodically for its aptness; (d) instal or adopt
such scientific and technical instrument which are invented or adopted after the
commencement of this Act for the purpose of ensuring the safety of dam; and  (e) to provide
the information relating to maximum auticipated inflows and outflows including flood warning
and an adverse impact of the same, if any, on persons and property towards the upstream or
downstream of the dam, to the concerned authorities and also make available such information
in public domain. This clause further provides that every owner of a specified dam, for each
of its dam shall,— (a) carry out risk assessment studies at an interval of twenty years or at
such interval as may be specified by the Central Dam Safety Organisation; (b) in respect of
each specified dam existing on or before the commencement of this Act prepare emergency
action plan within five years from the date of commencement of this Act and thereafter
update such plans at regular intervals; (c) in respect of each specified dam which are
constructed and filled initially after the commencement of this Act, prepare emergency action
plan before the initial filling of the reservoir and thereafter update such plans at regular
intervals. This clause also provides that the Emergency Action Plan shall, — (a) set out the
procedures to be followed for the protection of persons and property upstream or downstream
of the dam in the event of an actual or imminent dam failure or to mitigate the effects of the
disaster; (b) include therein, — (i) in advance the type of emergencies which are likely to
occur in the operation of any reservoir; (ii) identification of the likely catastrophic flood in
the event of any failure of the dam, along with probable areas, population, structures and
installations likely to be adversely affected due to flood water released from the reservoir;
(iii) warning procedures, inundation maps and advance preparations for handling efficiently
and in the best possible manner the likely adverse situations especially to avoid loss of
human life; (iv) such other matters which may having regard to the geographical condition,
size of the dam and other relevant factors may be necessary. This clause also provides that
the Emergency Action Plan shall be put into action as and when conditions arise which are
or likely to be hazardous to a dam or potentially hazardous to public safety, infrastructure,
other property or the environment and every owner of the specified dam shall, while preparing
and updating the emergency action plan, undertake a consultation process with all disaster
management agencies and other concerned departments entrusted with disaster  management
and relief in the area likely to be affected and owners of other dams in the immediate vicinity
likely to be affected so as to bring transparency and allay any unwarranted fear on dam
safety issues.
Clause 36 .— This clause relates to the assistance to other disaster management
authorities.
This clause provides that every owner of specified dam, organisations and authorities
under this Act shall render assistance if so required by the authorities under the Disaster
Management Act, 2005 to meet any disaster or emergency arising out of the specified dams.
Clause 37.— This clause relates to the obligation for Comprehensive Dam Safety
Evaluation.
This clause provides that the State Dam Safety Organisation or State Dam Safety Cell
or the concerned Non-State Dam Safety Organisation or Non-State Dam Safety Cell, as the
case may be, shall, at least once in ten years, arrange for comprehensive safety evaluation of
every specified dam falling under them either through their own engineers or by an
independent panel of experts for the purpose of determining the conditions of the specified
dam and reservoir. This clause further provides that the exact frequency of comprehensive
evaluation shall be based on previous assessments, complexity of specified dam, operating
history, recently held rehabilitation works, dam performance, age of dam and the hazard
potential of dam.

29
Clause 38.— This clause relates to the compulsory comprehensive evaluation in certain
cases.
This clause provides that the comprehensive evaluation shall be compulsory in the
case of,—(a) major modification to the original or design criteria; (b) discovery of unusual
condition at the dam or reservoir rim; and (c) after an extreme hydrological or seismic event.
Clause 39.— This clause relates to the reports of comprehensive evaluation.
This clause provides that the State Dam Safety Organisation or State Dam Safety Cell,
as the case may be, shall report the results of the comprehensive safety evaluation directly
to the highest engineering or technical authority of concerned State Government similarly
the Non-State Dam Safety Organisation or Non-State Dam Safety Cell, as the case may be,
shall report the results of the comprehensive safety evaluation, to the highest engineering or
technical authority of the Organisation and to the concerned State Dam Safety Organisation
or State Dam Safety Cell, as the case may be. This clause further provides that the
comprehensive evaluation reports shall include, but not be limited to—(a) assessment of the
condition of the structure based on the visual observations and available data on the design,
hydrology, construction, operation, maintenance, performance of the structure; (b)
recommendations for any emergency measures or actions, if required, to assure the immediate
safety of the structure; (c) recommendations for remedial measures and actions related to
design, construction, operation, maintenance and inspection of the structure, if required; (d)
recommendations for additional detailed studies, investigations and analyses, if required;
and (e) recommendations for improvements in routine maintenance and inspection of dam, if
required. This clause also provides that in case where the comprehensive safety evaluation
resulted in recommendations for a remedial action, the State Dam Safety Organisation or
State Dam Safety Cell and the concerned Non-State Dam Safety Organisation or Non-State
Dam Safety Cell shall pursue with the concerned authorities or owner of the specified dam, as
the case may be, to ensure that remedial measures are carried out in time, for which the State
Government or such owner shall provide adequate funds and in case where there are unresolved
points of issues emerging between an independent panel of experts and the owner of the
specified dams or concerned authorities, as the case may be, the matter shall be referred to
the State Dam Safety Organisation or State Dam Safety Cell, as the case may be, and in case,
no agreement is arrived at, the matter shall be referred to the Central Dam Safety Organisation
which shall give required guidance wherever necessary and send their recommendations to
the State Government concerned for their implementation.
Clause 40.— This clause relates to the annual report of safety status of dams.
This clause provides that every Non-State Dam Safety Organisation or Non-State Dam
Safety Cell, as the case may be, shall prepare and forward the annual report within three
months of the expiry of the preceding financial year, to each of the concerned State Dam
Safety Organisation or State Dam Safety Cell, as the case may be, and to the Central Dam
Safety Organisation. Similarly every  State Dam Safety Organisation or State Dam Safety Cell
shall prepare annual report within six months of the expiry of the preceding financial year of
its activities and safety status of dams in the State and such report shall be forwarded to the
concerned State Government for placing it before the concerned  State  Legislature  and to
the Central Dam Safety Organisation. This clause further provides that the State Dam Safety
Organisation or State Dam Safety Cell, as the case may be, of each State and the Non-State
Dam Safety Organisation or Non-State Dam Safety Cell of each owner of a specified dam
shall provide to Central Dam Safety Organisation, documentation of the projects, report of
enquiries into failure and such other data as required in such format or manner as it may be
specified by the regulations made by the Central Dam Safety Organisation.This clause also
provides that the Central Dam Safety Organisation shall prepare a consolidated annual
report of the dam safety activities in the country and submit the same to the Central Government.
This clause also provides that the Central Dam Safety Organisation shall forward its annual
report to the National Disaster Management Authority and also make available such reports
in public domain, similarly the State Dam Safety Organisation or the State Dam Safety Cell, as
the case may be, of each State and Non-State Dam Safety Organisation or Non-State Dam

30
Safety Cell, as the case may be, of each owner of a specified dam shall forward their annual
report to the concerned State Disaster Management Audhority and also make available such
reports in public domain.
Clause 41.— This clause relates to the safety measures in respect of dams other than
specified dams.
This clause provides that every owner of the dam other than specified dams shall
undertake such measures as may be necessary to ensure safety of the dams and shall comply
with the instructions and guidelines which may be issued by the concerned State
Governments or the authorities.
Clause 42.— This clause relates to the measures of safety of dams located outside
territory of India.
This clause provides that where a dam is located at outside territory of India and the
Central Dam Safety Organisation suo motu or on receipt of information from any person or
organisation or authority or source prima facie is of the opinion that measures are required
to be taken to ensure safety of such dams and failure of which would may endanger the life
and property located in India, it shall in writing submit an intimation thereof to the Central
Government indicating therein the likely damages which may arise due to failure of such dam
and the safety measures required to be taken in respect of such dam. This clause further
provides that the Central Government on receipt of intimation or otherwise shall endeavour
to take suitable measures to ensure safety of dams by entering into treaty, agreement or
convention with any other country or countries concerned with the safety of such dam and
lay a report in respect of such measures before both Houses of Parliament.
Clause 43.— This clause relates to the effect of Act on other laws.
This clause provides that the provisions of this proposed legislation shall have effect
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time
being in force.
Clause 44.— This clause relates to the power of Central Government to give directions.
This clause provides that the Central Government may give such directions as it may
consider necessary to the State Government and owner of the specified dam for the effective
implementation of the provisions of this proposed legislation.
Clause 45.— This clause relates to the power of the Central Government to make rules.
This clause confers power upon the Central Government to make rules in respect of
matters specified in the said clause.
Clause 46.— This clause relates to the power of the State Government to make rules.
This clause confers the power upon the State Government to make rules in respect of
matters specified in the said clause.
Clause 47.— This clause relates to the power of the Central Dam Safety Organisation
to make regulations.
This clause confers power upon the Central Dam Safety Organisation to make
regulations consistent with this Act and the rules made thereunder to carry out the purposes
of this Act.
Clause 48.— This clause relates to the power to remove difficulties.
This clause empowers the Central Government to remove any difficulty which may
arise in giving effect to the provisions of the proposed legislation.
Clause 49.— This clause relates to the rules and regulations to be laid before Parliament
and State Legislatures.
This clause provides that the rules made by the Central Government shall be laid
before each House of Parliament. Similarly, every rule made by the State Government shall be
laid before the State Legislature.

31
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 4 of the Bill provides for constitution of a National Committee on Dam Safety
consisting of a Chairperson and eight ex officio Members, and other specialists or experts
in the field of dam safety as Members and invitees and a Member Secretary. Clause 9 of the
Bill provides for establishment of Central Dam Safety Organisation in Central Water
Commission. Clause 10 of the Bill provides for the appointment of officers and other employees
of the Central Dam Safety Organisation. Clause 40 of the Bill provides to prepare an annual
report on the activities related to Dam Safety. The recurring expenditure of rupees fifty lakhs
per annum is anticipated for meeting expenses of the National Committee on Dam Safety,
Central Dam Safety Organisation, expenses relating to fee and allowances for experts and
specialists and for the preparation of annual reports, etc.,  which would be met under the
existing schemes of the Ministry of Water Resources. In respect of clauses 9 and 10 of the
Bill, no additional post of officers or staff is envisaged presently.
The provisions of the Bill will not involve any other expenditure of recurring or non-
recurring nature.

32
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Sub-clause (1) of clause 45 empowers the Central Government to make rules for the
purpose of carrying out the provisions of the proposed legislation. Sub-clause (2) specifies
the matters in respect of which such rules may be made. These matters, inter alia, include—
(a) the times and places of the meetings of the National Committee on Dam Safety and the
procedure to be followed at such meetings under sub-section (1) of section 6; (b) the fee
and allowances paid to the specialists or expert members and specialists or expert invitees
under sub-section (4) of section 6; (c) the functions, powers and terms and conditions of
service of the employees of the Central Dam Safety Organisation under sub-section (2) of
section 10; (d) any other matter which is to be or may be, prescribed or in respect of which
provision is to be made by the Central Government by rules.
2.  Sub-clause (1) of clause 46 empowers the State Government to make rules for the
purpose of carrying out the provisions of   the proposed legislation. Sub-clause (2) specifies
the matters in respect of which such rules may be made. These matters, inter alia,
include —(a) the terms and conditions of the Chairperson and members of the State Committee
on Dam Safety and the procedure in regard to transaction of business at these meetings of
the said Committee under sub-section (3) of section 12; (b) the constitution and functions
of the State Dam Safety Organisation under sub-section (2) of section 15; (c) the constitution
and functions of the State Dam Safety Cell under sub-section (2) of section 16; (d) any other
matter which is to be or may be, prescribed or in respect of which provision is to be made by
the State Government by rules.
3. Sub-clause (1) of clause 47 empowers the Central Dam Safety Organisation to make
regulations consistent with the proposed legislation and the rules made thereunder to carry
out the purposes  of the proposed legislation. Sub-clause (2) specifies the matter in respect
of which such regulations may be made. These matters, inter alia,  include — (a) the
constitution and functions of the Non-State Dam Safety Organisation under sub-section
(3) of section 17; (b) the constitution and functions of the Non-State Dam Safety Cell under
sub-section (3) of section 18; (c) the details pertaining to the maintenance of log books by
the State Dam Safety Organisation or State Dam Safety Cell or Non-State Dam Safety
Organisation or Non-State Dam Safety Cell under section 20; (d) the qualifications and
experience of the individuals responsible for safety of specified dams under sub-section (1)
of section 25; (e) the qualifications and experience of the engineers responsible for
investigation, design and construction of specified dams under sub-section (2) of section
28; (f) the checklist or  format or proforma or guidelines of inspections under clause (a) of
sub-section (3) of section 31;  (g) the minimum number of set of instrumentations to be
installed in the specified dam under sub-section (1) of section 32; (h) the frequency of risk
assessment studies to be carried out under clause (a) of sub-section (2) of section 35; (i)  the
format or manner with respect to such other data as required under sub-section (3) of
section 40; (j) and any other matter which is to be specified or in respect of which provision
is to be made by the Central Dam Safety Organisation by regulations.
4. Clause 49 provides that every rule made by the Central Government and every
regulation made by the Central Dam Safety Organisation are required to be laid before each
House of Parliament and every rule made by the State Government are required to be laid
before each House of the State Legislature where it consists of two Houses, or where such
Legislature consists of one House, before that House.
5. The matters in respect of which rules may be made by the Central Government and
the State Government are matters of procedure and administrative details and it is not
practicable to provide for them in the Bill itself. The delegation of legislative power is,
therefore, of a normal character.

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for proper surveillance, inspection, operation and maintenance of all dams of
certain parameters in India to ensure their safe functioning  and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Pawan Kumar Bansal, Minister of Parliamentary Affairs & Water Resources)
GMGIPMRND—4123LS(S3)—20-08-2010.