Bill No. 108 of  2018
Short title.
Amendment of
article 16.
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2018
By
SHRI VINOD KUMAR BOIANAPALLI, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2018.
2. In article 16 of the Constitution, in clause (4), for the words “adequately
representated”, the words “represented in proportionate to its population” shall be substituted.
3. In the Ninth Schedule to the Constitution, after entry 284 and the Explanation, the
following entry shall be added, namely:—
“285. The Telangana Backward Classes, Scheduled Castes, and Scheduled Tribes
(Reservation of Seats in Educational Institutions and of Appointments or Posts in the
Services under the State) Act, 2017 (Telangana Act 33 of 2017).”.
Amendment of
the Ninth
Schedule.
As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
India is a country of diverse people and religions. While some have fared better than
the others, concept of reservations was introduced in the system to bring at par the marginalised
and backward classes of people. The Hon'ble Supreme Court of India, in Indra Sawhney v.
Union of India had held that such reservations should not cross the bar of fifty per cent. in
total. This bar has not been prescribed by a law in Parliament nor it is based on any research
or reasoning. These marginalised and backward people cannot be held back based on a
decision which does not correctly account for the number of such persons in the country. It
is a well-established fact that the backward classes account for much more than fifty
per cent. of the country's population and hence must be given opportunities based on their
proportion to the country's population.
The Bill, therefore, seeks to amend article 16 of the Constitution to allow reservation
in education and employment opportunities on a proportionate manner, in contrast the current
situation which provides for adequate reservation.
To this effect, the State Government of Telangana, after careful consideration and
study of the backward population in the State, has enacted ‘‘the Telangana Backward Classes,
Scheduled Castes, and Scheduled Tribes (Reservation of Seats in Educational Institutions
and of Appointments or Posts in the Services under the State) Act, 2017, which seeks to
increase reservation in the State to sixty-two per cent. from the existing fifty per cent. The
extension beyond the prescribed limit of fifty per cent. is in line with what was held by the
Supreme Court in the judgement, which allows for crossing the fifty per cent. threshold if it
is necessary and the decision is based on quantifiable data. For this purpose, the proposed
Bill seeks to amend the Ninth Schedule to the Constitution in order to place the State Act in
this Schedule and to protect the interests of the persons belonging to the backward classes in
the newly formed State of Telangana.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; VINOD KUMAR BOIANAPALLI
March 23, 2018.
2

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA.
* * * * *
16. (1)* * * * *
(2)* * * * *
(3)* * * * *
(4) Nothing in this article shall prevent the State from making any  provision for the
reservation of appointments or posts in favour of any backward class of citizens which, in
the opinion of the State, is not adequately represented in the services under the State.
* * * * *
NINTH SCHEDULE
[Article 31B]
284. The West Bengal and Land Reforms Tribunal Act, 1991 (West Bengal Act 12 of
1991).
* * * * *
3
Equality of
opportunity in
matters of
public
employment.

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Shri Vinod Kumar Boianapalli, M.P .)
MGIPMRND—309LS(S3)—08-06-2018.