LOK aABHA 
COrtRI G~~DA 
-'.:,(,) 
THE CONTRAC1' UBCurt (:~ZGL;k7.[Ol; Ail;n ABOLI TION) 
13ILL, 1967 
(~o be/As in~roduceg ~~~) 
1. Page 4, line 26,-
2. Page 6, line 6,-
f.Q.r "pur-pose" ~ IIpurposes ll 
3. Page 7, line 34,-
after "limits" :j.nsert 
4. Page 8, line 35,-
I..QI. ". II ~ "," 
5. Page 14, lineiO,-
for "1888" ~ "1898" 
6. Page 14, line 16,-
" II , 
aft ar "labour" ~ " II , 
--. 
7. Page 16, line 36,-
(i) . ~ a sh&ll" ~ a should." 
(11) !.siS. "sug-section (1)," ~ "sut-section (1) 
8. correct line numbers on pages 1, 5 and 7. 
N3\'1 DOl· 
~:y 27, 19$7 -avana 5, 1889 ( Saka) 

As INTRODUCED IN LoK SABRA ON 
3 1 JUL 1967 
DUI' No. 108 of I", 
THE CONTRACT LABOUR (REGULATION AND 
ABOLITION) BILL, 1967 
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES 
CHAPTER I 
PRI!'!LIMINARY 
CLAUSES 
1. Short title, extent, commencement and application. 
2. Definitions. 
CHAPTER II 
I'm: ADVISORY BOARDS, 
3. Central Advisory Board. 
4. State Advisory Board. 
5. Power to constitute committees. 
CHAPTER In 
REGISTRATION OF ESTABLISHMINTS EMPLOYING 
00lmlA.(2' ~ 
6. Appointment of registering oftlcers. , 
7. Registration of certain establishments. 
8. Revocation of registration in certain cases. 
9. Effect of non-registration. 
10. Prohibition of employment of contract labQur. 
CHAPTER IV 
LICENSING OF CONTRACTORS 
11. Appointment of licensing ofliC'ers. 
12. Licensing of contractors. 
13. Grant of licences. 
14. Revocation, 'Suspension and amendment of licences. 
15. Appeal. 

(ii) 
CHAPTER V 
WELFARE AND HEALTH OF CONTRACT LABOUR 
CLAUSES 
16. Canteens. 
17. Rest-rooms. 
18. Other facilities. 
19. First-aid facilities. 
20. Liability of principal employer in certain cases. 
21. Responsibility for payment of wages. 
CHAPTER VI 
PENALTIES AND PROCEDURl!j 
22. Obstructions. 
23. Contravention of provisiQIl$ r~garding emploYlncnt of co~:" 
tract labour. 
24. Other offences. 
25. Offences by companies. 
26. Cognizance of offences. 
27. Limitation of prosecutions. 
CHAPTER VU 
MISCELLANEOUS 
28. Inspecting staff. 
29. Registers and other records to be maintained. 
30. Effect of laws and agreements inconsistent with this Act. 
31. Power to exempt in special cases. 
32.. Protection ot action taken under this Act. 
33. Power to give directions. 
34. Power to remove difficulties. 
~5. power to make rules. 

S 
DiU No. 108 of 12'7 
THh CONTRACT LABOUR-(REGULATION AND 
ABOLITION}~ILL, 1967 
A. 
BILL 
to regulate the employment of contract labour in certain eltablfsh· 
ments and to provide for its abolition in certain circumstances 
and for matters connected therewith. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Eighteenth Year of the 
Republic of India a8 follow.:-
CHAPTER! 
PRELIMINARY 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Contract Labour 
and Abolition) Act, 1967. . 
(Regulation Short 
title, 
extent, 
com.. 
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu mence_ 
Kashm ment IlIld 
and fr. applica-
tion. 

Deftni-
tions. 
2 
(3) It shall Come into force on such date as the Central Govern-
ment may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint, and 
different dates may be appointed for different provisions of this Act. 
(4) It applies-
(a) to every establishment in which twenty or more work- S 
men are employed or were 'employed on any day of the preced-
ing twelve months as contract labour; 
(b) to every contractor who employ,:; or who employed 
on any day of the preceding twelve months twenty or more 
workmen: 
Provided that the appropriate Government may, after giving not 
less than two months' notice of its intention so to do, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, apply the provisions of this Act to any estab-
lishment or contractor employing such number of workmen less 
10 
than twenty as may be specified in the notification. IS 
(5) (a) It shall not apply to establishments in which work only 
of an intermittent or casual nature is performed. 
(b) If a question arises whether work performed in an estab-
lishment is of an intermittent or casual nature, the decision of the 
appropriate Government thereon shall be final. 20 
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requircs,--
(a) "appropriate Government" means,-
(l) in relation to-
(i) any establishment pertaining to any industry 
carried on by or under the authority of the Central 2.5 
Government, or pertaining to any such controlled in-
dustry as may be specified in this behalf by the Cen-
tral Government, or 
(ii) any establishment of any railway, Cantonment 
Board, major port, mine or oil-freId, or 30 
(iii) any establishment of a banking or izwuftnce 
company, 
the Central Government, 
(2) in relation to any other establishment, the Govern-
ment of the State in which that other 'establishment is 3S 
situated; 
(b) a workman shall be deemed to be employed as "con-
tract labour" in or in connection with the work of an establish-
ment .~~~n he is hired in or in connection with such work by 

no! 19'8. 
~ 
or through a contractor, with or without the knowledge oi the 
principal employer; 
(c) "contractor", in relation to an establishment, means 8 
pt'lWn who 12lldertakes -to proouce ·a given 1"eSuit for'the E"stab-
5 lisbment, other thana mere sapply of goods 'Or Iirtic1esof manu .. 
facture to such p.Rtablishment, through contract laboUr (jr Who 
supplies contract labour for any work of the establishment and 
includes a sub-contractor; 
(d) "controll'ed industry" means any industry the control 
10 of which by the Union has been declared by any Central Act 
to be expedient in the public interest; 
(e) "establiebment" means-
(i) any office or department of the Government or a 
local authority, or 
IS (ii) any place where any industry, trade, business, 
manufacture or occupation is carried on; 
<f) "prescri.bed" m.eana pre&er'ibed .by rules macie· under this 
Act; 
(g) "principal employer" meana-
:LO (i) in relation to.any 4ftiaeor depalthlent af the Gov-
2S 
30 
ernment or a local authority, the head of that office or de-
partment or such other officer as the Government or th'e 
local authority,. the·cae may be, may specify in this be-
half, 
(ii) in a factory, the owner or occupier of the factory 
and where a person has been named as the manager of the 
factory under the Factmies Act, 1948, the person 80 named, 
(iii) in a mine, the owner or agent of the mine ad 
where a person has befen named as the manager of the mine, 
the person so named, 
(iv) in any other establishment, any person responsible 
for the supervision and control of the establishment; 
35 of 1952. 
.Expl4nation.-For the pUJ'}XlB'e of sub-dauae (iii) of thil 
clause, the expressions "mine", "owner" and "agent" shall have 
the meanings respectively assigned to them in clause (j), clause 
(1) and claUS'e (c) of sub-section (1) of section 2 of the MineI 
Act, 1952; 
"of 1938. 
(h) "wages" shall have the meaning usignedto it in .clause 
(vi) of section 2 of the Payment of Wag .. Act, 1~; 

Central 
Advisory 
Board. 
4 
(i) "workman" means any person employed in or in con-
nection with the work of any establishment to do any skiUed, 
semi-skilled or un-skilled manual, supervisory, technical or cle-
rical work for hire or reward, whether the terms' of employ-
ment be express or implied, but does not include any such 5 
person-
(A) who is employed mainly in a managerial or admin-
istrative capacity; or 
(B) who, being employed in a supervisory capacity 
draws wages exceeding five hundred rupees p'er mensem. or 10 
exercises, either by the nature of the duties attached to th'e 
office or by reason of the powers vested in him, functions 
mainly of a managerial nature; or 
(C) who is an out-worker, that is to say, a person to 
whom any articles or materials are given out by or on be- IS 
half of the principal employer to be made up, cleaned, wash-
ed, altered, ornamented, finished, repaired, adapted or other-
wise processed for sale for the purposes of the trade or 
.business of the principal employer and the process is to be 
carried out either in the home of the out-worker or in some 20 
other premises, not being premises und'er the control and 
management of the principal employer. 
CHAPTER II 
THE ADVISORY BoAlU>S 
3. (1) The Central Government shall, as soon as may be, constitute 2S 
a broad to be called the Central Advisory Contract LaboUr Board 
(hereinafter referred to as the Central Board) to advise the Central 
Government on such matters arisin" out of the administration of this 
Act as may be referred to it and to carry out other functions assiened 
to it under this Act. 
n-
(2) The Central Board shall consist of-
(a) a Chairman to be appointed by the Central Govern-
Ment; 
(b) the Chief Labour Commissioner (Central), ex-otJi.cio; 
(c) such number of members, not exceeding seventeen. as 35 
the Central Governm'ent may nominate, to represent that Gov-
ernment, the Railways, the coal industry, the mining industry, 
the contractors, the workmen and any other interests which, in 
the opinion of the Central Government, ought to be represented 
on the Central Board. 40 

S 
(3) The number of persons to be appointed as members from 
each of the categories specifi:ed in sub-section (2), t.he term of office 
and other conditions of service of, the procedure to be followed in 
the discharge of their functions by, and the manner of filling vacan-
S cies among, the members of the Central Board shall be such as may 
, be prescribed. 
4. (1) The State Government may constitute a board to be called state 
the State Advisory Contract Labour Board (hereinaftpr referred to Adviaory 
as the State Board) to advise thp gtate Government on such matters Board. 
10 arising out of the administration of this Act as may be referred to 
J5 
20 
it and to carry out other functions assigned to it under this Act. 
(Z) The State Board shall consist of-
(a) a Chairman to b~ appointed by the State Government; 
(b) the Labour Commissioner, ex-officio, or in his absence 
any other officer nominated bv the State Government in that 
b~h!llfi ¥ 
(c) such number of members, not exce«iing eleven, a. the 
State Government may nominate to repreeent that GoY'era. 
ment, the industry, the contracton, the workmen and any oth .. 
interests which, in the opinion of the State Government,. ourht 
to be repreaented on the State Board. 
(a) The number of persons to be appointed •• members from 
each of the categories specified in su~tlon (2), the term of offtee 
and other conditions of service of, the procedure to b'e followed 1n 
25 the discharge of their functions by, and the manner of fi111ng vacan-
des among, the members of the State B08J'd shall be. such as may 
be prescribed. 
5. (1) The Central Board or the State Board, 85 the case may be, Powerto 
may constitute such committees and' for such purpose or PUJ'POSflI as =~ 
30 it may think fit ' tees. 
(2) The committee constitut"d under sub-Js€'ction (1) shan meet 
at such times and places and Sh~l11 ob~erve such rules of procedure 
in regard to the transaction of business at its meetings as may he 
prescribed. 
35 (3) The members of a committee .hall be paid such fees and, 
allowances for attending its meetings as may be pre8eriW: ' 
Provided that no fees shall be payable to a member who is an 
officer of Government or of any corporation elltablh'lhed by any law 
tw ijle *im~ being in force. 

Appoint-
mentOl 
register-
in, 
Omeer •. 
Relistra-
tion of 
certain 
establish-
ment.. 
]tevbCa-
tian of 
regiatra-
tion in 
ce~n 
~. 
Effect of 
non-regis-
tration. 
6 
CHAPTER III 
RzaISTRATION OF ESTABLISHMENTS JDMPLOYIMG CONTRACT LABOUR 
6. The appropriate Government may, by an order notified in the 
Official Gazette-
(a) appoint such persons, being Gazetted Officers of Govem- 5 
ment, as it thinks flt to be registering officers for the purpose of 
thb Chapter, and 
(b) define the limits within which a registering officer shall 
exercise the powers conferred on him by or under this Act. 
7. (1) Every principal employer of an establishment to which 10 
this Act applies shall, within such period as the appropriate Gov-
ernm'ent may, by notification in the Official Gazette, fix in this be-
half with respect to establishments generally or with respect to any 
class of them, make an application to the registering officer in the 
prescribed mann~r for regi~tr~ti'm of the establishment: 15 
Provided that the registering officer may entertain any such 
appltcation for registration after expiry of the period fixed in this 
bMalf; if the registering oftleer -is, satisfied ,that the applicant was 
pDe'YElDted by suffttiEmt caUSe from· making the apJ,'Hcation in timE'. 
(2) If the appUcation for .re~r.atjOf;l is,.eQm~1.ete..in,. aU r~cts. 20 
the registering officer shall register the establishment and issue to 
tl~_ ~llcip,l, employe,; of tb.e: ~l:ill~ a eert.i~,ot 'Agiltta-
tiQafr~Oll*",iQiJ:l. a~ch: partJ~,_ ~M' ~ ~., 
~" If_ tl~.f,r~~~.illa .0i'-.QOr:.. is. saJ;i..ft..~4., ~h~· ooa .. l'e~f,~~., 
m_~ge to h4l\.inth~ ~~Jf. 01;- otb~:;,- tllat thx:l.rp.&istUtiptJ otJO,Y.25 
establishment has been obtained by misrepresentation 10f" r.uppres,:,. 
sion of any material fact, or that for any other reason the registra-
tion has ~om.e useless. or ineffective and, therefore, reql1ires to be 
revoked,the registering oftker may, after giving an opportunity to. 
the principal employer of the establishment to be heard and with 30 
the previotls approval of the appropriate Government, revoke the 
registration. 
9. No principal employer of an establishment, to which tQis Act 
applies, shall-
(a) in the case of an establishment required to be register- 35 
~d under section 7, bu.t which has not been registered within 
the time -fixed for the purpose under that section, 
(b) in the case of an esta})li,slwtent the regi,str.atio~ .in res-
pecl of which has been revok~ und.et. section 8, 
employ ~ontract labour in the establishment attar the. exp~ of. the,4° 

1 
period referred to in clause (a) or after the revocation of registra-
tion referred to in clause (b), as the case may be. 
10. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the Prohibi-
appropriate Gove-rnment may, after consultation 'with the Central tion o.f 
.5 Board or, as the case may be, a State Board, prohibit, by notification empt)oyt-
. th Offi' I G men ° In e cIa azette, employment of contract labour in any pro- contract 
cess, operation or other work in any establishment. labour. , 
(2) Before issuing any notification under sub-section (1) in rela-
tion to an establishment, the appropriate Government shall have 
10 regard to the conditions of work and benefits provided for the con-
tract labour in that establishment and other relevant factors, such 
as:- I 
(a) whether the process. operation or other work is inci-
dental to, or necessary for the industry, trade, businen, manu-
IS facture or occupation that is carried on in the establishment: 
20 
(b) wheiher it is of perennial nature, that Is to say, it is of 
sufficient duration having regard to the nature of ind1lstry, 
trade, business, manufacture or occupation carried on In that 
es-tablishment; 
(e) whether it is done ordinarily through regular workmen 
in that establishment or an establishment similar thereto; 
(d) whether it is sufficient to employ considerable num-
ber of whole-time workmen. 
ExpZanatton.-If a question arises whether a'ny process or ope-
2S ration or other work is of perennial nature, the decision of the 
appropriate Government thereon shall be finnl. 
r " '-_·I~_I_ 
CHAPTER IV 
LICENSING OF CONTRACTORS 
11. The appropriate Gover'nment may, by an 
30 the Oftlcial Gazette,-
order notified in Appoint-
ment of 
35 
(a) appoint sueh penoD5, bein, Gazetted OfIlcers of Govern-
ment, as it thinks fit to be licensiq ofllcers for the purpoees of 
this Chapter; and 
(b) define the limits within which a licenSing officer shan 
exercise the powers conferred on licC1)sing officers by or under 
this Act. 
lieenline 
offteen. 

8 
Licenainc 12. (1) With eftect from such date as the appropriate Govern-
of eon- ment may, by notificatidn in the Official Gazette, appoint, no con-
tractors. tractor to whom this Act applies, shall undertake or execute any 
Grant of 
ncences. 
ReV"OC1l-
tion., Ius. 
pension 
and 
amend-
ment Of 
lic:eneea. 
work through contract labour except under and in accordance with 
a licence issued in that behalf by the licensing officer. S 
(2) Subject to the provisions of this Act, a licence under sub-
section (1) may contain such conditions includi·ng. in particular, 
conditions as to hours of work, fixation of minimum wages and 
other essential ame'nities in respect of contract labour as the appro-
priate Government may deem fit to impose in accordance with the 10 
rules, if any, made under section 35 and shall be issued on pay-
ment of such fees and dn the deposit of such sum, if any, as secu-
rity for the due performance of the conditions as may be prescribed. 
~-.... -- ---------.. __ . ,..,--- -"--'~ 
13. (1) Every application for the grant of a licence under sub-
section (1) of section 12 shall be made in the prescribed form and IS 
shall contain the particulars regarding the location o~ the establish-
ment, the nature of process, operation or work for which contract 
labour is to ,be employed and such other particulars as may be 
prescribed. 
(2) The licensing officer may make such investigation in respect 20 
of the application received under sub-section (1) and in making 
any such investigation the licensing officer shall follow such proce-
dure as may be prescribed . 
....... ' -~-"-'''''-''- - .. - -- .. _-
(3) A licence granted under this Chapter ~hall be valid for the 
period specified therein and may be renewed from time to time for 25 
such period and on payment of such fees and on such conditions 
as may be prescribed. 
14. (1) If the licensing officer is satisfied, either on a reference 
made to him in this behalf or otherwise, that-
(a) a licence granted under section 12 has been obtained 30 
by misrepresentation or suppression of any material fact, or 
(b) the holder of a lice'nce has, without reasonable cause, 
failed to comply with the conditions subject to which the licence 
has been granted or has contravened any of the provisions of 
this Act or the rules made thereunder. 3S .,...-
then, without prejudice to any other pe'nalty to which the holder 
of the licence may be liable under this Act, the licensing officer 
may, after giving the holder of the licence an opportunity of .show-
ing cauS'e, revoke or suspend the licence or forfeit the sum, if any, 

I) 
or any portion thereof deposited as security for the due pertor-
mance of the conditions subject to which the licence haa been 
granted. 
(2) Subject to any rules that may be made in this behalf, the 
5 licensing oftlcer may vary or amend a licence granted under lee-
'don 12. 
15. (1) Any person aggrieved by an. order made under section 7, ~.l. 
section 8, section 12 or section 14 may. within thirty days from the 
date on which the order is communicated to him, prefer aD appeal 
JO to an appellate officer who shall be a person nominated in this 
behalf by the appropriate Government: 
Provided that the appellate officer may entertain the appeal after 
the expiry of the said period of thirty days, if he is sattsfled that 
the appellant was preve'nted by sufficient cause from ftling the 
I S appeal in time. 
(2) On receipt of an appeal under sub-section (1), the appellate 
officer shall, after giving the appella'nt an opportunity of beina 
heard dispose of the appeal as expeditiously as possible. 
CHAPTER V 
WELFARE AND HEALTH OF CONTRACT LABOUR 
16. (1) The appropriate Government may make rules requiring Canteen •. 
that in every establishment-
(a) to which this Act applies, 
(b) wherein work requiring employment of contract labour 
2S is likely to continue for such period as may be prescribed, a'nd 
(c) wherein contract labour numbering one hundred or 
more is ordinarily employed by a contractor, 
one or more canteens shall be provided and maintained by the con-
tractor for the use of IUch contract labour. 
30 (2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, 
35 
such rules may provide for-
(a) the date by which the canteens shall be provided; 
(b) the number of canteens that shall be provided and the 
standards in respect of construction, accommodation, furniture 
and other equipment of the canteens; and 

Rest-
rooms. 
ltl 
(c) the foodstufts which may he served therein and the 
charges which may be made therefor. 
17. (1) In every place wherein contract labour is required to halt 
at night in connection with the work of an establishment-
(4) to which this Act applies, and 
(b) in which work requiring employment of contract 
labour is likely to continue for such period as may be pres-
cribed, 
5 
there shall be provided and maintained by the contractor for the 
use of the contract labour such number of. rest-rooms or such other 10 
suitable alternative accommodation within such time a8 may be 
prescribed. 
(2) The rest-rooms or the alternative accommodation to be pro-
vided under sub-section (1) shall be sufficiently lighted and venti-
lated and shall be maintained in a clean and comfortable condition. 15 
Other 18. It shall be the duty of every contractor employing contract 
facilities. labour in connection with the work of an establishment to which 
this Act applies, to provide and maintain-
First. 
aid 
facilities. 
Liabillty 
of prin-
cipal em-
,ployer in 
certain 
C8sea. 
(a) a sufficient supply of wholesome drinking water for the 
contract labour at convenient places; 20 
(b) a sufficient number of latrines and urinals of the pres-
cribed types so situated as to be convenient and accessible to 
the contract labour in the establishment; and 
(c) washing facilities. 
19. There shall be provided and maintained by the contractor SO 25 
as to he readily accessible during all working hours a first-aid box 
equipped with the prescribed. contents at every place where con-
tract labour is employed by him. 
20. (1) If any amenity required to be provided under section 16, 
section 17, section 18 or section 19 for the benefit of the contract 30 
labour employed in an establishment is not provided by the con-
tractor within the time prescribed therefor, such amenity shall be 
provided by the principal employer within such time as may be 
prescribed. 
(2) All expenses incurred by the principal employer in provid- 35 
. ing the amenity may be recovered by the principal employer from 
the contractor either by deduction from any amount payable to the 

11 
~ntractot Under any contract or as a debt payable by the contrae:-
'.or. 
..' J<' , •• 
21. (1) A contractor shall be l'esponSlble for payment of waa es Resptrfta-
to each worker employed by him as contract labour and such waaes bUtty for 
S shall be paid before tne expiry 01 such period as may be p.rescribed. pafJftl8nt 
of".... 
(2) Every principal employer shall nominate a representative 
duly authorised by him to be present at the time of disbursement, 
01 wages by the contractor and it shaH be the duty 01 such repre-
sentative to certify the amounts paid as wages in such manner as 
10 may be prescribed. 
(3) It shall be the duty of the contractor to ensure the disburse-
ment of wages in the prese-nce of the authorised representatIve 01 
.lle prmcipal employer. 
(4) In case the contractor fails to make payment 01 wages wlthlO 
IS the prescribed period or makes short payment, then the prinClpa! 
empioyer shall be liable to make payment 01 wages in 1wi or 'Ull! 
u'opald balance due, as the case may be, to the contract labour 
employed by the contractor and recover the amount so paid !.rom 
the contractor either by deduction trom any amount payaole to the 
:!ontractor under any contract or as a debt payable by the contrac-
20 ',or. 
CHAPTER VI 
PENALTIES AND PROCEDURE 
22. (1) Whoever obstructs an inspector in the diBcharae of his Oblltruo-
2S Juties under thi8 Act or refuses or willuUy neglects to atford. the tionI, 
inspector any reasanable facility for making any inapecLlon, eu-
mination, inquiry or investigation authorised by or under this Act 
in relation to an establishment to which, or a contractor to whom, 
this Act applies, shall be punishable witn imprisonment for a term 
which may extend to three months, or with tine which may extend 
30 to five hundred rupees, or with both. 
\ (2) Whoever wilfully refuses to produce on the demand of an 
inspector any register or other document kept in pursuance of thii 
Act or prevents or attempts to prevent or does any thing which 
he has reason to believe is likely to prevent any person from 35 . ed b . t .. . appearing before or being examm Y an mspec or aCwng m pur-
suance of his duties under this Act, shall be punishable with im-
prisonment for a term which may extend to three months, or with 
fine which may extend to five hundred rupees, or with both. 

Contra-
ventionof 
provisiora 
re,ard-
in, em-
ployment 
of con-
tract 
labour. 
Offences 
by com-
paNes. 
U 
23. Whoever contravenes any provision of this Act or of any 
rules made thereunder prohibiting, restricting or regulating the 
employment of contract labour, or contravene'S any condition of a 
licence granted under this Act, shall be punishable with imprison-
ment for a term which may extend to three month'S, or with fine S 
which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both, and in 
the case of a continuing contravention with an additional fine 
which may extend to one hundred rupees for every day during 
which such contravention continues after conviction for the first 
such cdntravention. 
24. If any person contravenes any of the provisions of this Act 
or of any rules made thereunder for which no other penalty is else-
where provided, he shall be punishable with imprisonme'nt for a 
term which may extend to three months or with fine which may 
extend to one thousand rupees, or with both. 
25. (1) If the person committing an offence under this Act is a 
company, the company as well as every person in charge of, and 
responsible to, the company for the conduct of its business at the 
time of the commission of the offence shall be deemed to be guilty 
10 
of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and 2.0 
punished accordingly: 
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall re'nder 
any such person liable to any punishment if he proves that the 
offence was committed without his knowledge or that he exercised 
all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence. 25 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub.section (1), 
where an offence under this Act has been committed by a company 
and it is proved that the offence has been committed with the con-
sent or connivance of, or that the commission of the offence is 
attributable to any neglect on the part of any director, manager, 30 
managi'ng agent or any other officer of the company, such director, 
manager, managing agent or such other officer shall also be deemed 
to be guilty of that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded 
against and punished accordingly. 
Explanation:--}<'or the purpose of this section-
(a) "company" means any body corporate and includes a 
firm or other association of individuals; and 
(b) "director", in relation to a firm, means a partner in the 
firm. 
3S 

13 
26. No court shall take cognizance of any offence under this Act OocBlz-
except on a complaint made by, or with the previous sanction in anee of 
writing of, the inspector and no court inferior to that of a Presidency offences. 
Magistrate or a magistrate of the first class shall try any offence 
S puni$hable under this Act. 
27. No court shall take cognizance of an offence punishable Limitation 
under this Act unless the complaint thereof is made within three of ~rOl'le_ 
months from the date on which the alleged commission of the cuhons. 
offence came to the knowledge of an inspector: 
10 Provided that where the offence consists of disobeying a written 
IS 
order made by an inspector, complaint thereof may be made within 
six months of the date on which the offence is alleged to have been 
committed. 
CHAPTER VII 
MISCELLANEOUS 
28. (1) The appropriate Government may, by notification in InspeetinJ 
the Official Gazette, appoint such persons as it thinks fit to be Ina- atafr. 
pectors for the purposes of this Act, and define the lo::al limits with. 
in which they shaU exercise their powen under this Act. 
20 (2) Subject to any rules made in this behalf, an inspector may, 
within the local limits for which he is appointed-
(a) enter, at all reasonable hours, with such assistance (if 
any), being persons in the service of the GOV"ernment or any 
local or other public authority as he thinks fit, any premises 
2S or place where contract labour is employed, for the purpose 
of examining any register or record or notices required to be 
kept or exhibited by or under this Act or rules made there-
under, and require the production thereof for inspection; 
(b) examine any person whom he finds in any such premises 
30 or place and who, he has reasonable cause to believe, is a work-
man employed therein; 
(c) require any person giving out work and any workman, 
to give any information, which is in his poWpr to give with 
respect to the names and addresses of the persons to, for and 
35 from whom the work is given out or received, and with respect 
to the payments to be made for the workj 

K-.isterll 
and 
tnher 
records 
to be 
maintaift-
ed. 
Etrect of 
lawtand 
aaree-
menta 
inconsis-
tent 
with this 
Act, 
14 
(d) seize or take copies of such register, record of wages 
or notices or portions thereof as he may consider relevant in 
respect of an offence under this Act which he has reason to 
believe has been committed by the principal employer; and 
(e) exercise such other powers as may be prescribed. 5 
(3) Any person required to produce any document or thing or to 
give any in.formation required by an inspector under sub-section (2) 
shall be deemed to be legally bound to do so within the meaning of 
section 175 and sedion ] 76 of the Indian Penal Code. 45 of 1860, I 
(4) The provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1888, shall, 10 5 of 1898. J 
10 far as may be, apply to any search or seizure under sub-sec-
tion (2) as they apply to any search or seizure made under the 
authority of a warrant issued under section 98 of the said Code. 
29. (1) Every principal employer and every contractor shall 
maintain such registers and r€<:ords giving such particulars of 15 
contract labour, employed, the nature of work performed by the con-
tract labour, the rates of wages paid to the contract labour and such 
other particulars in such form as may be prescribed. 
(2) Every principal employer and every contractor shall keep 
exhibited in such manner as may be prescribed within the premises 20 
of the estahlishm'ent where the contract labour is employed, notices 
in the prescribed form containing particulars about the hours of 
work, nature of duty and such other information as may be prescrib-
ed. 
30. (1) The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwith- 25 
standing anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other 
law or i'n the terms of any agreement or contract of service, or in 
any atanding orders applicable to the establishment whether made 
before or after the commencement of this Act: 
Provided that where under any such agreement, contract of 30 
service or standing orders the contract labour employed in the 
establishment are entitled to benefits in respect of any matter which 
are more favourable to them than those to which they would be 
entitled under this Act, the contract labour shall continUe to be 
entitled to the more favourable benefits in respect of that matter, 35 
notwithstanding that they receive benefits in respect of other matters 
under this Act. 
(2) Nothing contained in this Act shall be construed as preclud-
ing any such contract labour from entering into an agreement with 

~. - .. IS 
Ute principal employer or the contractor, as the case may be, for 
granting them rights or privileges in respect of any matter which 
are more favourable to them than those to which they would be 
entitled under this Act. 
, 31. The appropriate Government, may, if in its opinion it is Power to 
necessary or expedient so to do, direct, by notification in the Olftcial exempt in 
Gazette, that subject to such conditions and restrictions, if any, and special 
for such period or periods, as may be spectfted in the notifieat'lon, CU8L 
all or any of the provisions of this Act or the rules made thereunder 
10 shall not apply to any establishment or class of establishments or 
any class of contractors. 
32. (1) No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall Jle Protection 
against any registering officer, licensing officer or any other Govem- ot .ction 
ment servant or against any member of the Central Board or the taken 
IS State Board, as the -ease may be, for anything which is in good faith under 
done or intended to be done in pursuance of this Act ~r any rule or tbJJ Act. 
order made thereund'er. 
(2) No suit or other legal proceeding shall lie against the Gov-
ernment for any damage caueed or likely to be caused by anything 
20 which is in good faith don'e or intended to be done in pursuance of 
this Act or any rule or order made thereunder. 
33. The Central Government may give directioD:i to the Govern- Power 
ment of any State as to the carrying into ex'eCution in the State of to live 
the provisions contained In this Act. . directions. 
25 34. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the proviaion. of Power 
this Act, the Central Government may, by order published in the to remove 
Official Gazette, make suob provisions not tnconsistent with thea d:ltIlculUee. 
provisions of this Act, as appears to it to be necessary or expedient 
'for removing the difficulty. 
30 35. (1) The appropriate Government may, subject to the condl- Power to 
tion of previous publication, make rules for carrying out the pur- make 
poses of this Act. ruI •. 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the 
foregoing power, such rules may provide for all or any of the 
35 following matters, namely:-
(a) the number of persons to be appointed as memben 
representing various interests on the Central Board and the 

16 
State Board, the term of their office and other conditions of 
service, the procedure to be followed in the discharge of their 
functions and the m8nn£'T of filling vacancies; 
(b) the times and places of the meetings of any commit,tee 
constituted under this Act, the procedure to, be followed at such 5 
meetings including the quorum necessary for the transaction of 
business, and the :fees and allowances that may be paid to the 
m'embers of a committee; 
, (c) the manner in which establishments may be registered 
under section 7, the levy of a fee therefor and the form of certi. 10 
flcate of registration; 
(d) the form of application for the grant or renewal of a 
licence under section 13 and the particulars it may contain; 
(e) the manner in which an i'nvestigation! is to be made in 
respect of an application for the grant of a licence and the mat- IS 
ters to be taken into account in granting or refusing a licence; 
(f) the form of a licence which may be granted or renewed 
under section 12 and the conditions subject to which the licence 
may be granted or renewed, the fees to be levied for the grant 
or renewal of a licence and the deposit of any sum as security 20 
for the performance of such conditions; I 
(g) the circumstances under which licences may be varied 
or amended under sectiO'n 14; 
(h); the form and manner in which appeals may be flIed 
under section 15 and the procedure to be followed by appellate 25 
officers in disposing of the appeallS; 
(i) the time within which facilities required by this Act to 
be provided and maintained may be so provided by the contrac-
tor and in case of default on the part of the contractor, by the 
principal employer; 30 
(j) tlie number and types of canteens, rest-rooms, latrines 
and urinals that should be provided and maintained; 
(k) the type of equipment that should be provided in the 
first-aid boxes; 
4 
(1) the period within which wages payable to contract 3S 
labour shall be paid by the contractor under sug-section (1), -si. 
of section 21; 

(m) the fonn of registers and records to be maintained b;V 
principal employers and contractors; 
(n) the submission of returns, forms in which, and the 
authorities to which, such retums may be submitted; 
(0) the collection of any informatlon or statistics in relation 
to contract labour; aDd 
(p) any other matter which has to be, or may be, prelCrib-
ed under thi. Act. 
(3) Every rule made by the Central Govel"llment under this Act 
10 shall be laid as soon as may be after it is made, before each House 
of Parliament while it is in session for a total period of thirty days 
which may be comprised in one session or in two successive sessioDl, 
and if before the expiry of the sessictn in which it is so laid. or the 
session immediately following, both Houses agree in making any 
IS modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should 
not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modi-
fied form or be of no effect, as the case may be; 80 however that a'nY 
such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the 
validity of anything previously done under that rule. 

2. The proposed Bill aims at the abolition of contract ~abour in 
respect of such categories as may be notified by the appropriate Gov-
ernment in the light of certain criteria that have been laid down, 
and at regulating the s'ervice conditions of contract labour where 
abolition is not posatble. The Bill provides for the setting up of 
Advisory Boards of a tripartite character, representing various inte-
rests, to advise the ,Central and State Governments in administering 
th~ legislation and registration of establishments and contractors. 
Under the scheme of the Bill, the provision and maintenance of cer-
tain basic welfare amenities for contract labour, like drinking water 
and first-aid facilities, and in certain cases rest-rooms and cant~ens. 
have been made obligatory. Provisions have also been made to 
guard against defaults in the matt.er of wage payment. 
NEW DELHI; JAISUKHLAL HATHL 
The 3rd June, 1967. 
PRESIDENT'S RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLE 117 OF 
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA 
[Copy of letter No. LWI(I)14(4)j67, dated the 29th June, 1967 
from Shri Jai Sukh La! Hathi, Minister of Labour, Employment and 
Rehabilitation to the Secretary, Lok Sabha.] 
The President, having been informed of the subject matter of the 
above BiU, has recommended it, under article 117 (3) of the Consti-
tution, for consideration of the Lok Sabha. 
. .n. 18 "':"'. 

FINANCIAL MtMORANDtJM 
The following clauses of the Contract Labour (Regulation and 
Abolition) Bill involve expenditure to the Central Govet'llment:-
(1) Clause 3-Constitution of a Central Advisory BOard. 
(2) Clause f>-Appointment of Committees by the Central 
Advisory Board. 
(3) Clause S:-Registration of establishments. (AppoJntment 
of registering officers for the Central iphere.) 
(4) Clause ll-Appointment of licensing oftlcen and l.ue of 
licencea for the Central .phere. 
(5) ClaU8e 28-Appointme'llt of inapecting .taft bl tbe Central 
Government. 
2. It is proposed to entrust the enforcement of ~,pn*ODl of 
the Bill in all establishments in respect of which the Central Gov-
ernment is 'appropriate' Government, i.e., work relating to registra-
tion of establishment. employine contract labour (clauae 6), 1teenI-
ing of contractors (clause 11), tnspecti0D8 (clause 28), etc., to the 
Central Industrial Relations Machinery. It may be n8Cellary to ap-
point one Assistant Labour Commi8llli(1ner at each re,ional headquart-
ers namely, Bombay, Calcutta, Madras. Jabalpur, Kanpur, DhIDbad 
and Hyderabad, and two Labour Enforcement 0fBcen in each 
region. Taking into account the aclminiltratlve work that may 
devolve on the office of the Chief Labour CommlssioDer ,ed the 
Department of Labour and Employment, the foUowJna ttIIft it ItbIy 
to be requ1red:-
I. Department of lAbour and Employment 
1. Section Oftlcer 
2. U.D.C. 
3. L.D.C. 
. " 
1 Rs. ~(400)-800 
1 
1 
u. OJ1ice oj the Ch.ief Labour CommiuiOner 
" 
1. Regional Lebaur Commissioner 1 RI. 800-1260 
2. Section 01Ilcer 1 ,: , 
a. Stenosrapher 1~, , , 
. ,. .... ~" 
" 

df. 
't • I 
,. " 
20 
•. Assistants 
5. U.D.C •• 
6. L.D.Ca. 
7. ,Daftly 
8. PeGDI 
--. IlL RegionCll Headquarter. 
1. Assistant Labour CommiSflioners 
2. U.D.Cs. 
3. L.D.Cs. 
4.Peona Q. 
IV. For field work 
1. Labour Enforcement Officers 
2. L. D. Cs. 
3. PeoDI 
! 
2 
2 
1 
2 
7 Rs. 600-950 
7 
7 
7 
14 Rs. 350-25-575 
14 
14 
The total non-recurring expenditure likely to be incurred on the 
purchase of furniture, typewriters, etc., will amount to Rs. 37,000 
and recurring expenditure to about Rs. 4,52,000 per annum. 
3. In addition to the expenditure mentioned above expenditure 
on TA and DA of the non-ofticial members of the Central Advisory 
Board, to be constituted under clause 3 and Committees to be consti-
tuted under clause ~ of the Bill will also be met by the Department 
of Labour and Employment. For holding two meetings in a year 
the expenditure is likely to be Rs. 10,000 per annum, thus increasing 
the annual recurring expenditure to Rs. 4,62,000. 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 16 of the Bill empowers the appropriate Government to 
make rules regarding canteens to be provided by contracton. in every 
establishment wherein contract labour numbering one hundred or 
more is ordinarily employed and wherein work requiring employ-
ment of. contract labour is Ukely to continue for the prescribed 
period. The matters in respect of which rules may be made relate 
to the date by which the canteens should be provided, the number 
of canteens, the standards in respect of construction, accommodation 
and furniture to be provided and the foodstuffs which may be serv-
ed and the charges which may be made therefor. 
---" 2. Clause 28 (2) of the Bill provides for the making of rules sub-
iect to which the Inspecting staff may exercise the powers of entry, 
inspection, search and seizure conferred under that clause. 
3. Clause 35 of the BUl empowers the appropriate Government to 
make rules for carrying out the purposes of the Act. The various 
matters in respect of which rules may be made are specified in sub-
clause (2) of that clause. They relate in.ter-alia to the constitution 
of the Central and the State Advisory Boards, the procedure to be 
followed by the Central Board and the State Boards and by the 
Committees thereof, manner and procedure for registration of eostab-
lishments, the fonn of application for the grant or renewal of licen-
ces for contractors, etc., the form and manner in which appeals may 
be filed and the procedure to be followed by appellate ofBcert; the 
manner and time within which facflities like canteens, rest-rooms. 
~l1pplv of. whol~me drinking water, latrines, urinals and ftrst-ald 
facilities shall be provided and maintained by the contractors, and 
in certain contingencies, by the principal employer, the period within 
which the wages have to be paid by the contractor and the manner 
in which the representative of the principal employer shOUld certify 
the payment of wages, the forms of registers to be maintained and 
the returns to be submitted. 
4. These are all matters of administrative procedure and detail. 
The delegation of ~egislative power is thus of a nonnal character. 
21 

LOK SABHA 
A 
RILL 
, ) _ tepte the employment of confJ act Jabour in certain estab-
lishments and to provide for its abolition in certain 
chcumf,t8nces and for mattcrs connected thcjewith. 
(Shri Jm Sukh Lal Hatm, 
Minister of Labour, Employment and Rehabilitation) 