AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

ae og

are

THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2005
By
Cu. LAL Sincu, M.P.
A
| BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-sixth Year ot the Republic of India as follows:
1. This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2005.
2. In the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution,—
(i) In List I, after entry 63, the following entry shali be inserted, namely:—

5 "63A. Education, including technical education, medical education and
Universitics; vocational and technical training of labour."; and ~*~

(1) In List U1, entry 25 shall be omitted.

Bill No. 108 of 2005
‘SERS CORRE oe छह PET AP EES SEE

Short title.

Amendment
of the
Seventh
Schedule.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

India's commitment to the spread of knowledge and freedom of thought among its
citizens is reflected in its Constitution. At present, the subject Education, including technical
education, medical education and Universities, etc. finds place in entry 25 of List III ie.
Concurrent List of the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution. The Central Government
formulates educational policies for the country but leaves their implementatior. to the State
Governments. The experience, however, shows that State Governments adopt indifferent
attitude in the matter of implementation of the educational policies formulated by the Central.
Government due to paucity of funds or lack of will on their part. As a result, standard of
education in States is not good. The present Bill seeks to transfer entry 25 from Concurrent
List to Union List so that Union Government does not only formulate the educational
policies but also has the responsibility of implementing those policies. The Bill will go along
way in improving the standard of education throughout the country.

The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.

New DELHI; | CH. LAL SINGH
July 26, 2005



ANNEXURE
Extract from the Constitution of india
SEVENTH SCHEDULE
[Article 246]

LIST [-Union List

63. The institutions known at the commencement of this Constitution as the Banaras
Hindu University, the Aligarh Muslim University and the Delhi University; the University
established in pursuance of article 3715; any other institution declared by Parliament by law
to be an institution of national importance.

* * * * * के *

LIST Il
कं * x x * x x

25. Education, including technical education, medical education and universities,
subject to the provisions of entries 63, 64, 65 and 66 of List I; vocational and technical
training of labour. |

* * * के कं * %


LOK SABHA |

A
BILL

further to amend the Constitution of India.

(Ch. Lal Singh, M.P_)

MGIPMRND—2357LS(S3)—11-08-2005.