Bill No •• 08 of '95 8 e 
THE lNDIAN ELECTRICITY 
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 1958 
(As INTRODUCED IN I..oK SABHA) 

5 
9 of 1910• 
I:J 
20 
Bill Mo.-lo8 or 1"8 
rHE INDIAN ELECTRICITY (AMENDMEN1) BILL, 1958 
(As INTRODUCED IN LoK SABHA) 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Indian Electricity Act, 1910. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Ninth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
1. This Act may be called the Indian Electricity (Amendment) Short title. 
Act, 1958. 
z. Throughout the Indian Electricity Act, 1910 (hereinafter Substitution 
referred to as the principal Act), unless otherwise expressly ~!on5 ~ri~ 
provided,- line" and 
tBiectric In.-(i) for the words "aerial line" wherever they occur, the pector" by-
words "overhead line" shall be substituted; and certain other exprenions. 
(ii) for the words "Electric Inspector" wherever they occur, 
the words "Electrical Inspector" shall be substituted. 
3. In section 2 of the principal Act,- Amendment 
(i) for the words "have the meanings assigned to them in ~~ aec:Uoa 
that Act", the words, brackets and figures "or in the Electricity 
(Supply) Act, 1948, have the meanings assigned to them in 
either of those Acts" shall be substituted; 
(ii) for ctause (a), the following clause shall be substi-
tuted, namely:-
• (a) "appropriate Government" means in relation to 
any works or electric installations belonging to, or under 
the control of, the Central Government or in relation to any 
mines, oil-fields, railways, aerodromes, telegraphs, broad-
casting stations and any works of defence, the Central 
Government, and in any other case, the State Govern-
ment;'; 

2 
(iii) for clause (c), the following clause shall be substituted, 
namely:-
'(c) "consumer" means any person who is supplied with 
energy by a licensee or the Government or by any other per-
son engaged in the business of supplying energy to the S 
public under this Act or any other law for the time being in 
force, and includes any person whose premises are for the 
time being connected for the purpose of receiving energy 
with th~ works of a licensee, the Government or such other 
person, as the case may bej'j 10 
(iv> for clause (f>, the following clause shall be substituted, 
Ilamely:-
'(f) "electric supply-line" means e wire, conductor or 
other means used for conveying, transmitting or distributing 
energy (whether by overhead line or underground cable), 15 
together with any casing, coating, covering, tube, pipe or 
"insulator enclosing, surrounding or supporting the Same or 
any part thereof, or any apparatus connected therewith for 
the purpose of so conveying, transmitting or distributing 
such energy and includes any support, cross-arm, stay, strut 20 
or safety device erected or set up for that purposej , j 
(v) in clause (i), the words "by a licensee" shall be omitted; 
(vi) after clause (i), the following clause shall be insert~d, 
Ilameiy:-
'(ii) "overhead line" means an electric supply-line whil!h 25 
is placed above ground and in the open air but does not in-
clude live rails of a traction system;'; 
(vii) in clause (1), the words "bye licensee" shall be omitted 
and in sub-clause (i), for the words "licensee's premises", the 
words "supplier's premises" shall be substituted; 3r. 
(viii) after clause (1), the following clause shall be inserted, 
namely:-
'(ll) "State Electricity Board" in relation to any State 
means the State Electricity Board, if any, constituted for that 
State under section 5 of the Electricity (SupPly) Act, 1948; , ; 35 S4 of 1948 
(ix) for clause (n), the following clause shall be substitut-
ed, ,namely:-
'(n) "works" includes electric supply-line and any build-
ing, plant, machinery, apparatw: and any other thing of what-
ever description required to supply energy to the public and 4) 
to carry into effect the objects of a license or sanction 

10 
20 
35 
a 
granted under this Act or any other law for the time being 
in force.' . 
.t. In section 3 of the principal Act,- Amendment of section :3. 
(i) in sub-section (1), after the words "prescribed form", 
the words "ond after consulting the State Electricity Board" shall 
be inserted; 
(ii) in sub-section (2).-
(a) in clause (a), in item (ii).-
(i) after the word "cantonment,", the word "aero-
drome," shall be inserted; 
(ii) for the words "naval or military purposes", the 
words "defence purposes" and for the words "Engineer-
in-Chief, Army Headquarters, India", the words "Cen-
tral Government" shall respectively be substituted; 
(b) in clause (d) ,-
(i) in item (i), the words "and as to the limits of 
price to be charged in respect of the supply of energy," 
shall be omitted; 
(ii) in item (ii) , for the words and figures "sections 
5 and 7", the words and figures "sections 5 and 6" and 
for the words and figures "section 5 or section 7", the 
words and figures "section 5 or section 6" shall be substi-
tuted. 
5. In ~tion 4 of the principal Act,-
(i) in sub-section (1).-
(a) after the words "so requires", the words "and after 
consulting the State Electricity Board" shall be inserted; 
(b) in clause (c), for the words, brackets, figure and 
letter "sub-section (3), clause (b)", the words, figures, 
letter and brackets "section 4A, sub-section (1)" shall be 
substituted; 
(c) in clause (d), for the words "where the licensee is, 
in the opinion of the State Government, unable, by reason of 
his insolvency", the words "where in the opinion of the State 
Government the financial position of the licensee is such that 
he is unable" shall be substituted; 
(d) after clause (d), the following clause shell be insert-
ed, namely:-
"(e) where a licensee, in the opinion of the State 
Government, has made default in complying with any 
direction issued under section 22A."; 
Amendmenl 
of section 
4· 

(ii) for sub-sections (2) and (3), the following sub-sectiona 
shall be substituted, namely:-
"(2) Where in its opinion the public interest so per-
mits. the State Government may, on the application or with 
ihe consent of the licensee, and after consulting the State 5 
Electricity Board, and the Central Government where that 
Government is interested, and if the licensee is not a local 
authority, after consulting also the local authority. if any, 
concerned, revoke a license as to the whole or any part of 
the area of supply upon such terms and conditions as it thinks 10 
fit. 
(3) No license shall be revoked under sub-section (1) 
unless the State Government has gi¥en to the licensee not less 
than three months' notice, in writing, stating the grounds 
on which it is proposed to revoke the license and has cOllii- IS 
dered any cause shown by the licensee within the period of 
that notice, against the proposed revocation. 
(4) Where the State Government might under sub-sec-
tion (1) revoke a license it may instead of revoking the 
license permit it to remain in force subject to such further 20 
terms and conditions as it thinks fit to impose and any fur-
ther terms or conditions so imposed shall be binding lIpon, 
and be observed by, the licensee, and shall be of like force 
,and effect as if they were contained in the license.". 
Inaertion of 6. After section 4 of the principal Act, the following section shall 2S 
n~ section be inserted, namely:-
4A. "4A. (1) Where in its opinion the public interest so permits, 
Amendment of license.. the Smte Government, on the application of the licensee or 
otherwise and, after consulting the State Electricity Board, and 
if the licensee is not a local authority, also the local authority, 30 
if any, concerned, may make such alterations and amendments in 
the terms and conditions of a license, including the pl'ovisions 
specified in section 3, sub-section (2), clause (f), as it thinks tit: 
Provided that no such alterations or amendments shall 
be made except with the consent of the licensee unless such 35 
consent has, in the opinion of the State Government, been un-
reasonably withheld. 
(2) Where the licensee has made an application under sub-
leCtion (1) proposing any alt~rations or amendments in his 
license, the following provisions shall have effect, namely:- 40 
(a) the licensee shall publish a notice of the appUca-
. tion in the prescribed manner and with the prescribed partt-
culars; 

s 
10 
I 
(b) the State Government shaH not make any altera-
tions or amendments until all objections received by it with 
reference to the application within three months from the 
date of the first publication of the notice have been consi-
dered; 
(c) in the case of an application proposing alterations 
or amendments in the area of supply comprising the whole 
or any part of any cantonment, aerodrome, fortress, arsenal, 
dockyard or camp or of any building or place in the occupa-
tion of the Government for defence purposes, the State 
Government shall not make any alterations or amendments 
except with the consent of the Central Government.". 
7. For sections 5, 6 and 7 of the principal Act, the following sec- Subsritutioe 
. 11 b b' d I . of new sec-tions sha e su sbtute , name y. - rions for sec-
tions S. 6 
and 7. 
IS "5. (1) Where the State Government revokes, under section Provisions 
20 
4, sub-section (1), clause (c), the license of a licensee, the State :,h~~i=:: 
Government shall serve a notice of revocation upon the licensee is revo·ked. 
and on and with effect from the date on which such notice is 
served, all the powers and liabilities of the licensee under this 
Act shall absolutely cease and determine. 
(2) Where the State Government revokes, under any other 
provision of section 4, sub-section (1), the license of a licensee, 
the following provisions shall have effect, namely:-
(a) the State Government shall serve a notice of revoca-
25 tion upon the licensee and shall fix a date on which the revo-
cation shall take effect; and on and with effect from that date, 
or on and with effect from the date, if earlier, on which the 
undertaking of the licensee is sold to a purchaser in pursuance 
of any of the succeeding clauses or is delivered to a designated 
30 purchaser in pursuance of sub-section (4), all the powers 
al'1d liabilities of the licensee under this Act shall absolutely 
cease and determine; 
(b) the State Government shall enquire from the State 
Electricity Board, and where the licensee is not a local autho-
35 rity, also from any local authority constituted for the area 
within which the whole of the area of supply is included, 
whether it is willing to purchase the lIlndertaking; 
(c) if the State Electricity Board is willing to purchase 
the undertaking, the State Government shall, by notice in 
writing require the licensee to sell, and thereupon, the 
licensee shall sell the undertaking to the State Electr.icity 
Board; 

6 
(d) if the State Electricity Board is not willing to pur-
chase the undertaking, the State Government shall have the 
option of purchasing the undertaking and if it elects to pur-
chase, it shall by notice in writing require the licensee to sell, 
and thereupon the licensee shall sell the undertaking to it; S 
(e) if the State Electricity Board is not willing to pur-
chase the undertaking and the State Government does not 
itself elect to purchase it, the State Government in any case 
where the local authority referred to in clause (0) is willing 
to purchase the undertaking shall by notice in writing require 10 
the licensee to sell and thereupon the licensee shall sell the 
undertaking to that local authority; 
(f> if no sale of the undertakina is eftected under any of 
the foregoing clauses and if any other person is willing to 
purchase the undertaking, the State Government shall by IS 
notice in writing require the licensee to sell, and thereupon 
the licensee shall sell the undertaking to such other person. 
(3) Where an undertaking is sold under sub-section (2), the 
purchaser shall pay to the licensee the purchase price of the 
undertaking determined in accordance with the provisions of sub- 20 
section (1) and (2) of section 7A. or as the case may be, sub-
section (3) of that section. 
,(4) Where the State Government issues any notice under sub-
section (2) requiring the licensee to sell the undertaking, it may 
by such notice require the licensee to deliver, and thereupon the 2S 
licensee shall deliver on a date specified in the notice the under-
taking to the designated purchaser pending the determination and 
payment of the purchase price of the undertaking. 
(5) Where before the date fixed in the notice issued under 
clause (a) of sub-section (2) as the date on which the revocation 30 
of the license shall take effect, no notice has been issued to the 
licensee requiring him to sell the undertaking, the licensee shall 
have the option of disposing of all lands, buildings, works, mate-
rials and plant belonging to the undertaking in such manner as he 
may think fit: 35 
Provided that if the licensee does not exercise such option 
within a period of six months from the aforesaid date, the State 
Government may forthwith cause the works of the licensee in, 
under, over, along, or across any street to be removed and every 
such street to be reinstated, and recover the cost of such 40 
removal and reinstatement from the licensee.· 

10 
20 
2S 
3S 
7 
6. (1) Where a license has been granted to any person, not 
being a local authority, the State Electricity Board sha11,-
(a) in the case of a license granted before the commence-
ment of the Indian Electricity (Amendment) Act, 1958, on 
the expiration of each such period as is specified in the 
license; and 
(b) in the case of Q license granted on or after the com-
mencement of the said Act, on the expiration of such period 
not exceeding twenty years and of every such subsequent 
period, not exceeding ten years, as shall be specified in this 
behalf in the license; 
have the option of purchasing the undertaking and such option 
shall be exercised by the State Electricity Board serving upon 
the licensee a notice in writing of not less than one year requir-
ing the licensee to sell the undertaking to it at the expiry of the 
relevant period referred to in this sub-section. 
(2) Where a State Electricity Board has not been constituted, 
or if constituted, does not elect to purchase the undertaking, the 
State Government shall have the like option to be exercised in 
the like manner of purchasing the undertaking. 
(3) Where neither the State Electricity Boord nor the State 
Government elects to purchase the undertaking, any local 
authority constituted for an area within which the whole of the 
area of supply is included shall have the like option to be 
exercised in the like manner of purchasing the undertaking. 
(4) If the Stete Electricity Board intends to exercise the 
option of purchasing the undertaking under this section, it shall 
send an intimation in writing of such intention to the State 
Government at least eighteeI! months before the expiry of the 
relevant period referred to in sub-section (1) and if no such 
intiII1Qtion as aforesaid is received by the State Government the 
State Electricity Board shall be deemed to have elected not to 
purchase the undertaking. 
(5) If the State Government intends to exercise the option of 
purchasing the undertaking under this section, it shall send an 
intimation in writing of such intention to the local authority, if 
any, referred to in sub-section (3) at least fifteen months before 
the expiry of the relevant period referred to in sub-section (1) 
and if no such intimation as aforesaid is received by the local 
authority, the State Government shall be deemed to have elected 
not to purchase the undertaking. 
(6) Where a notice exercising the option of purchasing the 
undertaking has been served upon the licensee under this section, 
1114(B) LS-2. 

Vesting of 
the under-
taking in the 
purchaser. 
Determi-
nation 
4)f purchase 
price. 
8 
the licensee shall deliver the undertaking to the State Electricity 
Board, the State Government or the local authority, as the case 
may be, on the expiration of the relevant period referred to in 
sub-section (1) pending the determination and payment of the 
purchase price. 5 
(7) Where an undertaking is purchased under this section, 
the purchaser shall pay to the licensee the purchase price deter-
mined in accordance with the provisions of sub-section (4) of 
section 7A. 
7. Where an undertaking is sold under sectiml 5 or section 6, 10 
then upon the completion of the sale or on the date on which the 
undertaking is delivered to the intending purchaser under sub-
section (4) of section 5 or under sub-section (6) of section 6, as 
the case may be, whichever is earlier-
(i) the undertaking shall vest in the purchaser or the IS 
intending purchaser, as the case may be, free from any debt, 
mortgage or similar obligation of the licensee or attaching to 
the undertaking: 
Provided that any such debt, mortgage or similar obli-
gation shall attach to the purchase money in substitution for 20 
the undertaking; 
(ii) the rights, powers, authorities, duties and obligations 
of the licensee under his license shall stand transferred to the 
purchaser or intending purchaser and such purchaser or in-
tending purchaser shall be deemed to be the licensee: 25 
Provided that where the undertaking is sold or delivered 
to a State Electricity Board or the State Government, the 
license shall cease to have further operation. 
7A. (1) Where an undertaking of a licensee, not being a local 
authority, is sold under sub-section (2) of section 5, the purchase 30 
price of the undertaking shall be the fair market value of the 
undertaking at the time of purchase or where the undertaking 
has heen delivered before the purchase under sub-section (4) of 
that section, at the time of the delivery of the undertaking, re-
duced in either case by the value of contributions made by 35 
consumers towards the cost of construction of service lines or 
other capital works; and if there is any difference or dispute 
regarding such purchase price. the same shall be determined by 
arbitration. 
(2) The fair market value of' an undertaking for the pur- 4Q 
pose of sub-section (1) shall be deemed to be the value of all 
lands, buildings, works, materials and plant of the licensee suit-
able to, and used by him, for the purpose of the undertaking, 

9 
o,thet ,I.han Ii generat.i.ng station declared by the license not to form 
part of the undertaking for the purpose of purchase, due regard 
being had to the nature and condition for the time being of such 
lands, buildings, works, materials and plant and the state of re-
S pair thereof and to the circumstance that they are in such posi-
tion as to be ready for immediate working and to the suitability 
of the same for the purpose of the undertaking, but without any 
addition in respec.t of compulsory purchase or of goodwill or of 
any profits which may be or might have been made from the 
10 undertaking or of any similar consideration. 
(3) Where an undertaking of a licensee, being a local autho-
rity, is sold under sub-section (2) of section 5, the purchase price 
of the undertaking shall be such as the State Government, having 
regard to the market value of the undertaking at the date of deU-
I S very of the undertaking, may determine. 
(4) Where an undertaking of a licensee is purchased under 
section 6, the purchase price shall be the value thereof as deter-
mine(! in accordance with the provisions of sub-sections (1) and 
(2) : 
20 Provided that there shall be added to &uch value such per-
centage, if any, not exceeding twenty per centum of that value 
as may be specified in the license on account of compulsory pur-
chase.". 
8. In section 8 of the principal Act,- Amcnd:ncnr 
, of section 8. 
25 (t) for the words, figures and brackets "section 7, sub-section 
(1), neither a local authority nor the State Government purchases 
the undertaking", the words, figures and brackets "sec-
tion 6, sub-section (1), the undertaking is not purchased by 
the State Electricity Board, the State Government or the local 
30 authority" shall .be substituted; 
(ii) in the proviso, for the words, figure, qrackets and letter, 
"section 5, clause (f), proviSO", the words, figures and brackets 
"section 5, sub-section (5), proviso" shall be substituted. 
9. In section 9 of the principal Act, in 2ub.lSection (1), for the 
3S words beginning with "notice of the application to every local au tho- Atmcnd,ment 
." d di 'th'" d 0 section 9. nty an en ng WI or mten s to supply, energy", the following 
shall be substituted, namely:-
"notice of the application-
(a) to the State Electricity Board; and 
(b) to every local authority both in the licensee's area of 
supply and also in the area in which such other person sup-
plies, or intends to supply. energy". 

10 
:rea::= 10. In section 10 of the principal Act, for ,the words and figures 
10. "sections 5,7 and 8", the words and figures "sections 5, 6 and 8" shall 
be substituted. 
Amf endmC!lt 11. In section 12 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), for the o aecuon d S u. war s "owner and occupier", the words "owner or occupier" shall 
Ameodment 
of aec:tioD 
13· 
Amendment 
ef aec:tiou 
ao. 
Amendment 
of lection 
21. 
be substi.tuted. 
12. In section 13 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1),-
• (i) in clause (a), after the words "not being a service line", 
the words "other than a service line in, under, over, along or 10 
across a railway," shall be inserted; 
(ii) in clause (f), after the words "service line", the words 
"other than a service line in, under, over, along or across a 
railway," shall be inserted. 
13. In section 20 of the principal Act,-
(i) in sub-section (1),- IS 
(a) after the words "to which energy is or has been 
supplied by him", the words "or any premises or land, 
under, over, along, across, in or upon which the electric 
supply-lines or other works have been lawfully pIeced by 
him" shall be inserted; 20 
(b) in clause (a), for the words "inspecting and test-
. ingot, the words "inspecting, testing, repairing or altering" 
shall be substituted; 
(ii) in sub-section (2), for the words beginning with "the 2 
District Magistrate or" and ending with "belonging to the con- S 
su~er", the following shall be substituted, namely:-
"a Magistrate of the first class and after giving not less 
than twenty-four hours' notice in writing to the occupier-
(a) enter any premises or land referred to in sub-
section (1) for any of the purposes mentioned therein; 30 
(b) enter any premises to which energy is to be 
supplied by him, for the purpose of examining and 
"testing the electric wires, fittings, works and apparatus 
for the use of energy, belonging to the consumer". 
14. In section 21 of the principal Act,-
(i) in sub-section (1),-
(a) after the words "save as provided", the words, 
brackets and figure "in any conditions made under sub-sec-
tion (Z) or" shall be inserted; 
35 

11 
(b) in the proviso, for the words "interfere with the 
supply by the licensee of energy to any other person", the 
following shall be substituted, namely:-
"interfere with-
5 (a) the safety or efficient working of a 
licensee's electric supply-lines or other works; or 
(b) the supply of energy by the licensee to 
any other person"; 
(ii) in sub-section (2) ,-
10 (a) the words, bmckets and figure "Subject to the 
20 
35 
proviSions of sub-section (1)" shall be omitted; 
(b) after the words "after consulting", the words "the 
State Electricity Board and also" shall be inserted; 
(iii) in sub-section (3), for the word "cancel", the words 
"add any new condition or cancel or otherwise amend" shall be 
substituted. 
15. After section 22 of the principal Act, the following sections Insertion of 
shaH be inserted namely:- new s eetions 
, 22A and 228. 
"22A. (1) The State Government may, if in its opinion it Powers of 
is necessary in the public interest so to do, direct any licensee ~~~~ ~v~; 
to supply, in preference to any other consumer, energy re- di~eetion gt,? 
quired by- • hcensee In regard to the 
lIupply of (a) any establishment belonging to, or under the ~nergy to 
control of the Central Government or the State Govern- certain class of consumera ment; or 
(b) any other establishment notified by the State 
Government in the Official Gazette, being an establishment 
which in the opinion of the State Government, is essential 
to the life of the community. 
(2) Where any direction is issued under sub-section (1) 
requiring a licensee to supply e~ergy to any establishment and 
any difference or dispute arises as to the price or other terms 
and conditions relating to the supply of energy, the licensee 
shall not by reason only of such difference or dispute be entitled 
to refuse to supply energy but such difference or dispute shall 
be determined by arbitration. 
(3) Where any agreement by a licensee, whether made 
before or after the commencement of the Indian ElectriCity 
(Amendment) Act, 1958, for the supply of energy with any 
establishment referred to in sub-section (1) expires, the licensee 
sOOll continue to supply energy to such establishment on the 
same terms and conditions as are specified in the agreement untn 

Power to COI!-
t rol the di s-
tribution and 
consumption 
of energy. 
Amendment 
ef section 
23· 
ne receives a notice in writing from the establishment requiring 
him to discontinue the supply. 
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, or in 
the Electricity (Supply) Act, 19-f8, ,orm hisUcense or in any 
agreement entered into by him for the supply of energy, a 5 
licensee shall be bound to comply with any ~rectioq given to 
him under sub-section (1) and any action taken by him in 
pursuance of any such direction shall not be deemed to be a 
contravention of section 23. 
22B. (1) If the State Governtnent is of opinion that it is ,"0 
necessary or expedient so to do, for maintaining the supply and 
securing the equitable distribution of energy, it may by order 
provide for regulating the distribution, supply, .consumption or 
use thereof. 
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of .the powers con- IS 
ferred by sub-section (1) an order made thereunder may cij,rect 
the licensee not to comply, except with the permission of the 
State Government, with-
(i) the provisions of any contract, agreement or requisi-
tion whether made ~fore or after the commencement of 20 
the Indian Electricity (Amendment) Act, 1958, for the supply 
i other than the resumption of a supply \ or an iocrease in 
the supply of energy to any person, or 
(ii) any requisition for the resumption of supply of 
energy to a consumer after a period of six months, from the 25 
date of its discontinuance, or 
(iii) any requisition for the resumption of supply of 
energy made within six months of its discontinuance, where 
the requisitioning consumer was not himself the consumer 
of the supply at the time of its discontinuance.". 30 
16. In section 23 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), the 
words "but may, save as aforesaid, make such charges for the 
supply of energy as may be agreed upon, not ~xceeding the limits 
imposed by his license" shall be omitted. 
Amendment 17. In section 24 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), for the 35 
of section 24. words "has been referred under this Act to an Electric Inspector", 
the words "which by or under this Act is required to be determined 
by an Electrical Inspector, has been referred to the Inspector" shall 
by substituted. 
Amen~ment 18. In section 25 of the principal Act, ,the words "101' ~be purpose 40 
ofs~ctJ()n 25. of supplying energy," shall be omitted. 

10 
20 
35 
11 
19. In section 26 of the principal Aet,-
(i) in sub-section (5), for the words beginning with "with-
out giving" and ending with "his intention", the following shall 
be substituted, namely:-
"but he may by giving not less than forty-eight hours' 
notice in writing to the licensee require the licensee to 
connect or disconnect such meter and on receipt of any 
such requisition the licensee shall comply with it within 
the period of the notime"; 
(ii) for sub-section (6), the following sub-section shall be 
substituted, namely:-
" (6) Where any difference or dispute arises as to 
whether any meter referred to in sub-section (1) is or ilt 
not correct, the matter shall be decided, upon the applica-
tion of either party, by an Electrical inspector; and where 
the meter has, in the opinion of such Inspector ceased to 
be correct, such Inspector shall estimate the amount of the 
energy supplied to the consumer or the electrical quantity 
contained in the supply, during such time, not exceeding 
six mtmths, as the meter shall not, in the opinion of such 
Inspector, have been correct; but save as aforesaid, the 
register of the meter shall, in the abscnc~ of fraud, be con-
clusive proof of such amount or quantity: 
Provided that before either a licens('e or a consumer 
applies to the Electrical Inspector under this sub-section, 
he shall give to the other party not less than seven days' 
notice of his intention so to do.". 
10. In section 28 of the principal Act,-
Amendment 
of section 010. 
Amen:lment 
of Sc<.:tiOD 
(i) for sub-section (1), the following sub-sections shall be 018. 
substituted, nemely:-
.. (1) No person, other than a licensee. shall engage in 
the business of supplying energy to the public except with 
the previous sanction of the State Government and in 
accordance with sUch conditions as the State Government 
may fix in this behalf, and any agreement to the contrary 
shall be void. 
(lA) The State Government shall not give any sanc-
tion under 6ub.section (1)-
(a) eJtcept after consulting the State Electricity 
Board; and 

14 
(b) except with the consent-
(i) in any case where energy is to be supplied 
in any area for which a local authority is consti-
tuted, of that local authority; 
(ii) in any case where energy is to be supplied S 
in any area forming part of any cantonment, aero-
drome, fortress, arsenal, dockyard or camp or of 
any building or place in the occupation of the 
Government for defence purposes, of the Central 
Government; 10 
(iii) in any area falling within the area of 
supply of a licensee. of that licensee: 
Provided that except in a case falling under sub-
clause (ii) , no such consent shall be necessary if the 
State Government is satisfied that such consent has IS 
been unreasonably withheld."; 
(ii) in sub-section (2), after the words "supplying energy", 
the words ''to the public" shall be inserted. 
Amendment 21. In section 29 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), after 
of section the words "supplying energy", the words "to the public" shall be 20 
29· inserted. 
Amendment 
... Mction 
30• 
22. In section 30 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), for the 
words, brackets, letters and figures beginning with "No person other • than a licensee" and ending with "as may be applicable", the follow-
ing shall be substituted, namely:- 2S 
"No person other than a licensee or a person to whom 
sanction is granted under section 28. duly authorised under the 
terms of his license or sanction, as the case may be, shall 
transmit or use energy at a rate exceeding two hundred and 
fifty watts and one hundred volts- 30 
(a) in aI)y street, or· 
(b) in any place,-
(i) in which one hundred or more persons are 
likely ordinarily to be assembled, or 
(ii) which is a factory within the meaning of the 3S 
Factories Act, 1948, or a mine within the meaning of 63 of 1948. 
the Mines Act, 1952, or 35 of 1952. 
(iii) to which the State Government, by general 
or speeial order, declares the provisions of this sub-
section to apply. 

5 
10 
IS 
20 
25 
35 
15 
without giving, before the commencement of transmission 
or use of energy, not less than seven days' notice in writing of 
his intention to the Electrical Inspector and to the District 
Magistrate, or in a presidency-town to the Commissioner of 
Police, containing particulars of the electrical installation and 
plant, if any, the nature and the purpose of supply, and comply-
ing with such of the provisions of Part IV, and of the rules 
made thereunder, as may be applicable". 
23. In section 31 of the principal Act,- Amendment 
of IeCdoa (i) after the word "railway," where it occurs for the first 31. 
time, the word "aerodrome," shall be inserted; 
(ii) after the word "railway," where it occurs for the second 
time, the word "airway," shall be inserted. 
24. In section 33 of the principal Act,- Amendment 
of .~on 
(i) for sub-section (l), the following sub-section shall be 33. 
substituted, namely:-
"(1) If any accident occurs in connection with the 
generation, transmission, supply or use of energy in or in 
connection with, any pert of the electric supply-lines or 
other works of any person and the accident results or is 
likely to have resulted in loss of human or animal life or 
in any injury to a human being or an animal, such person 
shall give notice of the occurrence and of any such loss or 
injury actually caused by the accident, in such form and 
within such time as may be prescribed, to the Electrical 
Inspector and to such other authorities as the appropriate 
Government may by general or special order, direct."; 
(ii) in sub-section (2), for the words "The State Govern-
ment", the words "The appropriate Government" shall be 
substituted; 
(iii) after sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall 
be inserted, namely:-
"(3) Every Electrical Inspector or other person hold-
ing an inquiry under sub-section (2) shall have all the 
powers of a Civil Court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 
1908, for the purpose of enforcing the attendance of wit-
nesses and compelling the production of documents and 
material objects; and every person required by an Electrical 
Inspector or such other person as aforesaid to furnish any 
inforrnation shall be deemed to he legally bound to do so 
within the meaning of section 176 of the Indian Penal 
Code.". 
1114(B) LS--3. 

Amendment 
Of section 
34. 
substitution 
of new sec-
tion for 
~ection 36. 
A intmenr 
g nJectrical 
Inspecton. 
Amendment 
of section 
36 A. 
16 
25. In section 34 of the principal Act,-
(i) for the words "State Government" wherever they occur, 
the words "appropriate Government" shall be substituted; 
(ii) in sub-section (2), for the words "the use of any electric 
supply-line", the words "the use of, and the supply of energy to,S 
any electric supply-line" shall be substituted. 
26. For !>cction :~Ii (If the principal Act, the following section 
shall be substituted, namely:-
"3G. (1) 'fhe appropl"illte Government may, by notifi(~ation 
in the Official Gazette, appoint duly qualified persons to be Etec- 10 
trical Inspectors and every Electrical Inspector so appointed shall 
exercise the powers and perform the functions of an Electrical 
Inspector under this Act within such areas or in respect of such 
class of works and electric installations and subject to such res-
trictions as the appropriate Government may direct. IS 
(2) In the absence of express provision to the contrary in this 
Act, or any rule made thereunder, an appeal shall lie from the 
decision of an Electrical Inspector to the appropriate Government 
or if the appropriate Government, by general or special order so 
directs, to an Advisory Board.". 20 
27. In section 36A of the principal Act,-
(i) for sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be 
substituted, namely:-
"I (2) The Central Electricity Board shall consist of 
twenty-five members, namely:- 2S 
(a) a Chairman and four other members to be nomi-
nated by the Central Government; 
(b) one member to be nominated by the Gowrn-
ments of each of the States, not being a Union territory, 
to which this Act extends; 30 
(c) one member to be nominated by the Central Gov-
ernment to represent each of the Union territories of 
Delhi and Himachal Pradesh; 
(d) one member to be nominated by the Central 
Goyernment to represent the Union territories of Mani- 35 
pur, Tripura and the Andamans and Nicobar Islands; 
(e) one member to be nominated by the Central 
Government to represent the Federation of Electricity 
Undertakings of India; 
(f) one member to be nominated by the Railway 40 
"Board; 

35 of J95 2• 
36 of 1952 
5 
17 
(g) one member to be nominated by the Chief Ins-
pector of Mines appointed under section 5 of the Mines 
Act, 1952; and 
(h) one member to be nominated by the Indian 
Standards Institution constituted under the Indian Stand-
ards Institution (Certification Marks) Act, 1952."; 
(ii) sub-section (6) shall be omitted. 
28. Section 36B of the principal Act shall be omitted. Omiuioo of 
section 36B. 
29. In section 37 of the principal Act, in sub-section (3), for the Amen~ent 
10 woeds, brackets and letters "clause (f) or clause (h) ", the words, ~~. sec:UOD 
brackets and letters "clauses (e) to (j) (both inclusive)" shall be 
substituted. 
IS 
20 
25 
35 
30. For section 42 of the principal Act, the following section shall Substitution 
be substituted namely:- o.f newaer.-, tlon for 
section 42. 
"42. Whoever- Penalty for 
illegal or 
(a) being a licensee or a person who has obtained the defect I ive supp y or 
sanction of the State Government under section 28 to engage for non-
in the business of supplying energy to the public, save as ~°itt~::::. 
permitted under section 27 or section 51 or by his license or 
as the case may be, by the conditions of sanction, supplies 
energy or lays down or places any electric supply-line or 
works outside the area of supply; or 
(b) being a licensee or a person who has obtained the 
sanction of the State Government as aforesaid, in contraven-
tion of the provisions of this Act or of the rules thereunder, or 
in breach of the conditions of license or of the sanction, as the 
case may be, and without reasonable excuse, the burden of 
proving which shall lie on him, discontinues the supply of 
energy or fails to supply energy; or 
(c) makes default in complying with any of the provi-
sions of an order or of any notice or requisition issued under 
section 5 or section 6; or 
(d) makes default in complying with any directions 
issued to him under section 2~A; or 
(e) makes default in complying with any order issued to 
him under section 22B 'or sub-section (2) of section 34; 
shall be punishable with fine which may extend to one thousand 
rupees, and, in the oose of a continuing offence or default, with 
a daily fine which may extend to one hundred rupees.". 

~men\lmenl 
pf aectioll 
cU· 
3 
\mendment 
)f ,ection 
,7. 
18 
31. In section 44 of the principal Act,-
(i) in clause (a), the words ", without giving to the licensee 
forty-eight hours' notice in writing of his intention" shall be 
omitted; 
(ii) in clause (b), the words, "without such licensee's con- 5 
sent" shall be omitted. 
32. In section 47 of the principal Act, after the words "conditions 
of his license", the words and figures "or in the case of a person who 
has obtained the sailction of the State Government under section 28, 
with any of the conditions of the sanction" shall be inserted. 10 
{n,ertion of 33. After section 49 of the principal Act, the following section 
lU' aec- shall be inserted, namely:-
ion 49A. 
'49A. (1) If the person committing an offence under this Act 
)tren~ by is a company, every person who at the time the offence was com-:JmPIIWet. 
Amendment 
I.f section 
,I. 
mitted was in charge of, and was responsible to, the company for 15 
the conduct of the business of the company as well as the com-
pany, shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be 
liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly: 
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall 
render any such person liable to any punishment, if he proves that 20 
the offence was committed without his knowledge or that he 
exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of such 
offence. 
(2) N.'otwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), 
where an offence under this Act has been committed with the 25 
consent or connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the 
part of, any director or manager, secretary or other officer of the 
company, such director, manager, secretary or other officer shall 
also be deemed to be guilty of that offence and shall be liable to 
be proceeded against and punished accordingly. 30 
Explanation.-For the purposes of this section,-
(a) "company" means any body corporate and includes a 
fil'tl'l 01' other association of individuals; and 
(b) "director" in relation to a firm theans a partner in 
the firm. ' . 3S 
34. In section 51 of the principal Act, for the words "appliances 
and apparatus for the transmission of energy, confer upon any pub-
lic officer or licensee", the words "electric supply-lines, appliances 
and apparatus for the transmission of energy or for the purpose of 
telephonic or telegraphic communications necessary for the proper 40 
co-ordtnation of works, confer upon any public officer, licensee or 

19 
any other person engaged in the business of supplying energy to 
the public under this Act" shall be substituted. 
35. After section 51 of the principal Act, the following section shall InsenioD.ot new section 
be inserted, namely:- 51A. 
5 "51A. Where the State Government engages in the business State . Gov-
of supplying energy to the public, it shall have all the powers hcrnmenr. to ave pOwer~ 
and obligations of a licensee under this Act: and obliga-
Provided that nothing in seetions 3 to 11 (both inclusive), U~~;sc~f a 
section 21, sub-sections (2) and (3), sections 22 and 27 or in Ander this 
IO clauses I to V (both inclusive), clause VII and clauses IX to ct. 
XII (both inclusive) of the Schedule relating to the duties and 
obligations of a licensee shall apply to the State Government: 
Provided further that the provisions of clause VI of the 
Schedule shall apply to the State Government in respect of that 
15 area only where distribution mains have been laid by the State 
Government and the supply of energy through any of them has 
commenced." . 
16. To section 52 of the principal Act, the following proviso shall Amendment 
be added namely:- ofsectioD , ~ 
20 "Provided that where the Government or a State Electri-
city Board is a party to a dispute, the dispute shall be referred to 
two ':lrbitrators, one to be appointed by each party to the dispute.". 
37. In section 54 of the principal Act, for the words, figures, Amendment 
brackets and letter "section 5, clause (f), section 6, sub-section (2) ", of aec:tioD 
25 the words, figures and brackets "section 5, sub-section (5)" shall S4· 
30 
35 
be substituted. 
38. Section 56 of the principal Act shall be re-numbered as sub- Amendment 
section (1) thereof. and after the sub-section as so re-numbered, the of section 
following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:- 56. 
"(2) No court shall take cognizance of an offence under this 
Act, by a public officer except with the sanction-
(a) in the case of a person employed in connection with 
the affairs of the Union, of the Central Government; and 
(b) in any other case, of the State Government.". 
39. In the Schedule to the principal Act,-
(a) in clause 1,-
(i) in sub-clauses (a) and (b), for the words, figures. 
brockets and letter "section 4, sub-section (3), clause (b) ", 
the words. figures, letter and brackets "section 4A, sub-
section (1)" shall be substituted; 
(ii) in sub-clause (c), after the word "shall", the wortls 
"unless forfeited" shall be inserted; 
Amendment 
of the Sche-
dule. 

20 
(b) in clause II, in sub-clause (b), after the words "and in-
formation", the brackets and words" (including technical data and 
statements of energy generated and sold)" shall be inserted; 
(c) in clause III, for the words "capital employed for the 
purposes of the undertaking", the words "undertaking relating 5 
to the generation, supply or distribution of energy" shall be 
substituted; 
(d) in clause V,-
(i) in sub-clause (1), for the words "six or more", the IO 
words "two or more" shall be substituted; 
(ii) in sub-clause (1) (a) ,-
(a) after the words "written contract", the words 
"in a form approved by the State Government" shall be 
inserted; 
(b) for the words "produce annually, at the current 15 
rates charged by the licensee, a reasonable return to the 
licensee", the words and brackets "assure to the licensee 
at the current rates charged by him, an annual revenue 
not exceeding fifteen per centum of the cost of the distri-
buting mains (not including transformers and other sub- 20 
station equipment) required to comply with the requisi-
tion" shall be substituted; 
(iii) for sub-clausG! (2), the following sub-clause shall be 
substituted, namely:-, 
" (2) Where any difference or dispute arises between 2S 
the licensee and such owners or occupiers as to the suffi-
ciency of the security offered under this clause, or as to 
the cost of the distributing mains or as to the amount of 
energy to be taken or iUaranteed as aforesaid, the matter 
shall be referred to the Electrical Inspector and decided 30 
by him."; 
(e) in clause VI,-
(i) in sub-clause (1), in the first proviso, in part (a), for 
the words "produce, at current rates charged by the licensee, 
a reasonable return to the licensee", the words "assure to the 3S 
licensee at the current rates charged by him, an annual reve-
nue not exceeding fifteen per centum of the cost of the ser-
vice line required to comply with the requisition" shall be 
substituted; 
(ii) in sub-clause (3), after the words "by any owner 40 
or occupier", the words "or as tt> the position of the meter 
board" shall be inserted; 

5 
21 
<f) in clause VII, for the words "any five or more", 1 he words 
"any two or more" shall be substituted; 
(g) in clause VIII, after sub-clause (2), the following sub-
clause shall be inserted, namely:-
10 
"(3) Where the State Government or the local authority 
has complied with the provisions of sub-clauses (1) and (2), 
it may require the licensee to provide the mains and other 
equipments for public lamps and if any difference or dispute 
arises under this clause, it shall be determined by arbitra-
tion." ; 
(h) in clause IX,-
(i) in sub-clause (1) (b), for the words "as will pro-
duce a reasonable return to the bulk-licensee on the outlay", 
the words "as will assure to the bulk-licensee an annual reve-
lS nue not exceeding fifteen per centum of the outlay" shall be 
substituted; 
(ii) sub-clause (1) (c) shall be omitted; 
(i) in clause X, in sub-clause (2), for the words and brackets 
"to the local authority (if any) concerned", the words and 
20 brackets "to the State Electricity Board and the local authority 
(if any) concerned and to the Electrical Inspector" shall be subs-
tituted; 
(j) clauses XI and XIA shall be omitted; 
(k) in clause XII, after the words "for the public: lamps", 
25 the words "and other charges to be paid to him in connection 
therewith" shall be inserted; 
(l) in clause XIV, after the words "shall afford", the words 
"to an Electrical Inspector or other person authorised by such 
Inspector" shall be inserted; 
30 (m) in clause XV,-
(i) for the words "Electric Inspector" where they 
occur for the. first time, the words and brackets "Electri-
cal Inspector or a person authorised by him in this behalf 
(hereinafter referred to as the authorised person)" shall be 
35 substituted; 
(ii) for the words "Electric Inspector" wherever they 
occur elsewhere in the clause, the words "Electrical Inspector 
or the authorised person" shall' be substituted. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Bill is largely based on the recommendations of the Advi-
lory Board appointed by the Government of India ir. 1953 to suggest 
amendments to the Indian Electricity Act, 1910 (hereinafter re-
ferred to as the Act). In making the~ recommendations, the Board 
had, besides consulting the State Governments, given careful consi-
deration to the views of the private sector of th~ electricity supply 
industry. 
2. The main objects of the Bill are:-
(a) to enlarge the scope of facilities available to consu-
mers of electricity; 
(b) to extend the same facilities to consumers served by a 
Government Electricity Department, as are enjoyed by con-
sumers of private licensees and State Electricity Boards; 
(c) to exercise stricter control over licensees; 
(d) to take powers to regulate the distribution, supply: 
consumption and use of energy in certain circumstances; and 
(e) to provide for the inspection of electric works and 
installations of the Central Government. 
3. With a view to making it easier for even scattered consumers 
to obtain the supply of electricity, the minImum number of 
persons entitled to get the mains extended to their premises at 
the licensee's cost is being reduced from six to two. Under the 
existing provisions of the Act, the gross revenue to be guaranteed 
by a consumer before receiving the supply of electricity is not defini'te 
and varies from undertaking to undertaking. Such gross revenue is 
now being specified as 15 per cent. of the cost of distribution mains 
(excluding the equipment in the sub-station) required for compli-
ance with the requisition for supply of electricity. This figure is 
based on the average revenue actually guaranteed by a large majority 
of consumers of electricity in the country. 
4. Persons served by licensees or State Electricity Boards, are 
entitled to certain statutory rights and privileges in respect of ex-
tension of the distribution mains', requisitioning the supply of 
energy and meters, supply of energy for public lighting and freedom 
to use the energy in a prescribed manner. Although the Government 
22 

Electricity Departments generally extend similar facilities to their 
consumers, no statutory obligation is imposed upon them in this 
behalf. It is accordingly proposed to give the same rights to con-
sumers of a Government Electricity Department as are enjoyed by 
those receiving supply from a State Electricity Board. 
5. Control over licensees is being tightened by empowering the 
State Government to forfeit the security deposit of a licensee on 
account of his failure to, complete within the period specified in the 
licence, compulsory works referred to in the Schedule to the Act. 
Inspectors appointed to investigate the causes of an electrical 
accident are being vested with powelS of a civil court under the 
Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, for the purpose of compelling atten-
dance of witnesses and production of documents, etc. 
6. Difficulty is often experienced on account of a licensee neglect-
ing to supply energy promptly to essential services. It is, there~ 
fore, proposed to empower State Governments to direct a licensee to 
supply and to continue to maintain the supply of energy, to 
essential services within his area of supply. Any dispute with 
respect to the price or other tel'lllS and conditions governing such 
supply shall be settled by arbitration. With a view to maintaining 
the supply and equitable distribution of energy, the State Govern-
ments are also being empowered to regulate the dis~ribution, 
lIupply, consumption or use of energy. 
7. In view of the increasing share of the Central Government in 
the field of generation and utilisation of electricity, it has been 
found necessary, for ensuring the safety of life and property, to sub-
ject their installations in all fields, to inspection and tests, similar 
to those prescribed in the case of the installations in mines and 
railways. It is, therefore, proposed to authorise the Central Govern-
ment, to appoint inspectors with powers exercisable by electrical 
inspectors for mines and railways under the existing provisions of 
the Act, in respect of all other electric installations under the con-
trol of the Central Government. 
H. MOHD. IBRAHIM. 
NEW DELHI; 
The 19th' AugUst, 1958. 
1114(B) LS-4. 

Notes on clauses 
Clause 2.-This clause makes certain formal amendments. 
Clause 3.-This clause makes a few clarificatory amendments in 
certain existing definitions and adds a few new definitions. 
Clause 4.-This clause provides that a State Government while 
granting a licence under the Act shall consult the State Electricity 
Board. It further provides that where an aerodrome is included in 
the area of supply, the State Government shall not grant a licence 
without ascertaining that the Central Government has no objection 
to the grant of such lieence. The clause further brings the provi-
sions of section 3 in line with those of paragraph I of the Sixth 
Schedule to the Electricity (Supply) Act, 1948. 
Clause 5.-This clause provides that where a State Government 
proposes to revoke a licence, it shall consult the State Electricity 
Board. An additional ground for revocation of a licence would 
be non-compliance by the licensee with any directions issued under 
new section 22A. The clause further provides for giving an oppor-
tunity to the licensee of being heard before his licence is cancelled. 
Clause 6.-All the provisions relating to the amendment of a 
licence in the existing Act are being made the subject matter of a 
separate .section. It is further being provided that before a licence 
is amended, the State Government shall consult the State Electri-
city Board. 
Clause 7.-This clause lays down the procedure to be followed in 
respect of revocation of a licence, purchase of an undertaking, the 
conditions on which the undertaking shall vest in the purchaser and 
the method of determination of the purchase price. The existing 
law on this subject is not being changed except that the State 
ElectriCity Board would have the first option of purchasing the 
undertaking, the State Government the secend option and the local 
authority which at present had the first option will have the third 
option. 
Clause B.-This amendment is consequential on the amendments 
made by clause 7. 
Clause 9.-This clause provides that the State ElectriCity Soard 
shall be consulted before a licensee is permitted to purchase, M' 

usociat. himJelf with, the undertakina of any other licensee or 
~o transfer hia own undertaking. 
Clauie 1O.-This amendment is consequential on the amendments 
made by clause 7. 
Clause 11.-l'his clause permits an occupier of premises, who is 
not the owner himself, to obtain supply of electricity without the 
conlent of the owner. 
Clause 12.--This clause provides that in the case of erection of a 
service line in, under, over, along or acr08S a railway, the pro-
cedurelaid down in clauses (a) to (e) of sub-section (1) of section 
13 shall be followed. 
Clause 13.-This amendment enlarges the power of inspection of 
a licensee so as to enable him to inspect and test the electric supply-
lines not only in the premises of the consumers but also in certain 
other premises or land. . 
Clau,e H.-This clause provides that the State Government 
while approving the conditions of supply of a licensee shall consult 
the State Electricity Board. It also makes certain other clariBca-
tory amendments. 
Clatue I5.-This clause adds certain new provisions in the Act 
which empower the State GOVel'nment to give directions to a 
licensee in regard to iupply of energy to .essential services and also 
to control the distribution and, consumption of energy. 
Clau3e 16.-This amendment brings the proviSions of section 23 
in line with those of paragraph I of the Sixth Schedule to the Elec-
tricity (Supply) Act, 1948. 
Clause 17.-This amendment is of a clarificatory nature. 
Clause 13.-This clause provides that the procedure laid down 
in section 25 shall apply even w~1en the electric supply-lines are 
laid by a licensee for the purpose of utilising energy. 
Clause 19.-This clause prohibits a consumer from connecting or 
cwconnecting a meter to the electric supply-line himself but makes 
it obligatory on the licensee to comply with the requisition of the 
consumer in this behalf. It further provides for the reference of 
any dispute between a licensee and a consumer in regard t~ the 
alleged inaccuracy of meters, to an Electrical Inspector. 
Clauie 2ft-This clause makes it clear that the sanction of the 
S.te Government is ~uired only for engaetng in the business of 

supplying energy to the public. It further provides that sanction for 
supplying energy cannot be given in an area forming part of canton-
ment, aerodrome, fortress or a place in occupation of the Govern-
ment for defence purposes except with the consent of the Central 
Government. 
Clause Zl.-The amendment made by this clause is clarificatory 
only. 
Clause ZZ.-This clause deftnes the quantum of power for trans-
mission or use of which, through any street, etc., by a person other 
than a licensee or a sanction holder, a notice is required to be given 
to the District Magistrate and the Electrical Inspector. 
Clause 23.-This clause includes within the ambit of section 31 
"aerodromes" and "airways". 
Clause 24.-'I1lis clause vests Electrical inspectors inquiring into 
the causes of accidents with certain powers of a civil court. It also 
empowers the Central Government to prescribe the form and 
manner of sending notice of accidents in connection with the instal-
lations with which they are concerned. The other amendments 
made by the clause are clarificatory only. 
Clau3e 25.-The amendments made by this clause are consequen-
tial onlr. 
Clause 26.-This clause empowers the Central Government to 
appoint Electrical Inspectors for inspecting electric installations 
of the Central Government. 
Clame 27.-This clause provides for the re-constitution of the 
Central Electricity Board in view of the constitutional changes in 
the country and for giving representation to the private sector ana 
the Indian Standards Institution. 
Clause 28.-The amendment made by this clause is consequen-
tial on the amendment made by clause 27. 
Clame 29.-This clause makes the rules with referenee to clauses 
(e) to (;) of sub-section (2) of section 37 of the Act binding on 
the Government. 
Clame 30.-The penal provision;; of section 42 are being enlarged 
80 as to include a penalty for contravention of the new provisions 
added by the Bill. 
Clause 31.-The amendinent made by this clause is consequen-
tial on amendment made by clause 19(i). 

27 
Clauss S2.-The scope of application of the penal prOVUllons of 
lIIection 47 is being extended to cover cases of sanction holders. 
Clau.se "".-This clause makes specific provision in respect ot 
offences by companies on the lines of similar provisions inothe, 
Acts. 
Clau.se 34.-The amendment made by this clause is clarifteatory 
only. 
Clause 3S.-This clause imposes the same obligations on State 
Governments when they engage in the business of supplying electri-
city to the public, as are imposed on a State Electricity Board under 
aection 26 of the Electricity (Supply) Act, 1948. 
Clause 36.-This clause provides that where a State Govern-
ment or a State Electricity Board is a party to a dispute, the dispute 
shall be referred to two arbitrators, one to be nominated by each 
party. 
Clause 37.-This amendment is consequential on the amendment 
made by clause 6. 
Clause 3B.-This clause is intended to protect public officers 
against frivolous and vexatious prosecutions. 
Clame 39.-
(a) (i) The amendments are consequential on the amend-
ment made by clause 6. 
(ii) This amendment makes it clear that the State 
Government shall be competent to forfeit the security of a 
licensee for his failure to complete "compulsory works" in 
time. 
(b) This is a formal amendment. 
(c) This makes a c1arificatory amendment. 
(d) (i) Th~ minimum number of persons entitled to require 
the licensee to extend his mains to the locality where such 
persons reside has been reduced from six to two. 
(ii) (a) The form of agreement to be executed between 
a licensee and his consumers is to be approved by the State 
Government. 
(b) This defines the "reasonable return" to be 
assured by the consumers of a licensee. 
(iii) This provides that all disputes between a licensee 
and the owners or occupiers arising out of the provisions of 

, 18 
elause V of the Sched\lle Ihall be determined by th. Electri-
cal lnlpector. 
(e) (i) This amendment is related to the amendment made 
by sub-clauae (d) (ii) (b). 
(ii) This enlarges the scope of matters, difference or 
dilpUte regarding which, between a licensee and a consumer, 
may be referred to an Electrical Inspector. 
(n Thb amendment is related to the amendment made by 
I\tb-elau.e (d) (i). 
(g) 'rhis empowers the State Government and the local 
authority to require the licensee to provide mains and other 
eqUipm._t for public lamps. It further lays down the manner in 
WhJcll diJputte between a licensee and the authorities concerned 
sblll be detennined in such cases. 
(h) (i) This amendment is related to the amendment made 
by 8ub-elaute (d) (U) (b). 
(it) This amendment is consequential on the amend-
ment made by clause 4(ii) (b). 
(i) This provides that the notice regarding the change of 
the method of charge shall also be given to the State Electricity 
Board and the Electrical Inspector. 
(j) This amendment is consequential on the ameadment 
made by clause 4(ii) (b). 
(k) This amendment is consequential on the amendment 
made by sub-clause (g). 
(l) This is a clarificatory amendment only. 
(m) This amendment is consequential on the amendment 
made by sub-clause (l). 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Section 36 of the Indian Electricity Act, 1910 (9 of 1910) em-
powers the Central Government to appoint Electrical Inspectors in 
relation to mines, oil-fields and railways. Under clause 26 of the 
Bill, read with clause 3 (ii) of the Bill, the Central Government i. 
further being empowered to appoint such Inspectors to examine and 
test any works or electric installations belonging to, or under the 
control of, the Central Government in all the remaining depart-
ments, e.g., aerodromes, telegraphs, broadcasting statiGDS, and any 
works of defence, etc. The proposed amendment would involve a 
recurring expenditure of approximately rupees two lakhs per 
annum, in addition to a non-recurring expendUure of rupeee 
twenty thousand. 

LOKSABHA 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Indian Electricity Act, 1910. 
The President has, in pursuance of clause (3) of article 1I7 
of the Constitution of India, recommended to Lok Sabha 
the consideration of the Bill. 
M. N. KAUL, 
Secretary. 
(Hafiz Mohammad Ibrahim, 
Mmister of Irrigation and POfDer). 