THE MAHATMA GANDHI NATIONAL RURAL EMPLOYMENT
GUARANTEE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2020
By
SHRI GANESH SINGH,  M.P .
A
BILL
further to amend the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee
Act, 2005
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-first year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1.(1) This Act may be called the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment
Guarantee (Amendment) Act, 2020.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the official Gazette, appoint.
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Short title and
commencement.
5
   Bill No.  108 of  2020

2
2. In Schedule I of the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee
Act, 2005,—
(a) in sub-para (1) of para 4, the following entry shall be added at the end,
namely:—
"V. Category E: INDIVIDUAL  ASSETS FOR HOUSEHOLDS
OTHER THAN IN PARAGRAPH 5
(i)  Agricultural operations or related activities creating individual
assets on land or homestead owned by unskilled family members of
households other than in paragraph 5; and
(ii) Improving livelihoods through horticulture, sericulture,
plantation, pisciculture and farm forestry.";
(b) in sub-para (3) of para 4, the words ‘‘,agricultural operations,’’ shall be
omitted;
(c) after para 6, the following para shall be inserted, namely:—
"6A. The Central Government shall, in consultation with the State
Governments, frame a scheme to,—
(i) give preference to the family members of each household to
undertake agricultural operations or related activities in the farms owned
by themselves or their parents;
(ii) encourage the unemployed young family members of each
household to undertake agricultural operations or related activities in
the farms owned by themselves or their parents and provide payment on
a daily basis; and
(iii) provide for welfare of the unemployed young family members
of each household on the basis of their population.".
Amendment of
Schedule I.
5
10
15
20
25

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
The Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee (MGNREGA)
Scheme formulated under the MGNREGA Act, 2005 is directly linked with the life of
the poor people and promoting wider development. It is immensely contributing to
society by ensuring employment to the families in rural areas.
Farmers assign tilling, sowing, irrigation and other jobs for Rabi and Kharif
crops to the labourers on daily wage basis in their farms. At present farmers in rural
areas are bound to pay wages more than what is prescribed under the Mahatma
Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme. As a result, the youth belonging
to farmers' families are heading towards urban areas in search of employment. In
cities, they get petty jobs, with the help of which they manage to send the meager
amount to their parents in order to enable them to pay wages to the labourers who are
working in their fields. Usually, the son of farmer moves to a city in search of private
job so that his parents do not have to sell the foodgrains or ration collected through
Rabi or Kharif crops in order to pay the wages to the labourers working in the farms.
The unemployed youth of villages are moving from villages to cities in search
of jobs. For want of manpower as well as funds, during harvest season, the farmers
are now forced to use crop cutting machines to reap the crops. The use of crop
cutting machine leaves crop stubbles and other materials in the fields which can be
avoided if crop is cut manually by labourers. Farmers put crop stubbles left in the
fields on fire before preparing the field for next crop. Burning of stubbles results in air
pollution besides noticeable shortfall in cattle fodder.
The employment under MGNREGA is based on physical labour in which there
is no interference of contractors and machines. Moreover, the fields of the farmers
have not been included under MGNREGA. If the agricultural activities are covered
under the parent Act, adult boys and girls of the farmers families will be able to get the
benefit of MGNREGA for working in their own fields or parents' fields. In such a
situation, it is very important to cover agriculture activities within MGNREGA in
order to ensure economic development and overall welfare of farmers.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; GANESH  SINGH
March 11, 2020
3

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill provides for covering of agricultural operations or related
activities creating individual assets on land or homestead owned by unskilled family
members of households under the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment
Guarantee (MGNREGA) Scheme. It also provides for payment of wages to the
unemployed young family members of each household to undertake agricultural
operations or related activities in the farms owned themselves or their parents. The
Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of
India. However, at this stage it is not possible to estimate the recurring expenditure
likely to be involved from the Consolidated Fund of India.
No non-recurring expenditure is likely to be involved.
4

ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE MAHATMA GANDHI NATIONAL RURAL EMPLOYMENT GUARANTEE
ACT, 2005
(42 OF 2005)
* * * * * *
SCHEDULE  I
[See section 4(3)]
MINIMUM FEATURES OF A RURAL EMPLOYMENT GUARANTEE SCHEME
* * * * * *
4. (1) The focus of the Scheme shall be on the following works as categorised
below:
* * * * * *
(3) Works Which are non-tangible, not measurable, repetitive such as, removing
grass, pebbles, agricultural operations, shall not be taken up.
* * * * * *
6. The State Government shall take concrete steps to achieve effective inter-
departmental convergence till the last mile implementation level of the works under
the Scheme with other Government Schemes/programmes so as to improve the quality
and productivity of assets, and bring in synergy to holistically address the multiple
dimensions of poverty in a sustainable manner.
* * * * * *
5

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee
Act, 2005.
————
(Shri Ganesh Singh, M.P .)
MGIPMRND—129LS—07.09.2020.