As Inrropucen एव Lok SABHA

i
; है8 10 १00

Bill No._108 of 2000

THE SCHEDULED CASTES, SCHEDULEDTRIBES AND BACK WARD
CLASSES (RESERVATION IN SERVICES) BILL, 2000
By
‘Sur Sus. KUMAR SHinvE, M.P.
A
BILL

to provide for reservation in appoiniments to the services and posts in public sector
undertakings, banks and autonomous bodies, private sector enterprises and other
organisations for the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes and the Backward
classes and for matters connected therewith.

Be itenacted by Parliament in the Fifty-first Year of the Republic of India as follows:-—

1, (J) This Act may be called the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes and the
Backward Classes (Reservation in Services) Act, 2000.

(2) It shall extend to the whole of India.
5 (3) It shall come into force with immediate effect.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires —
(a) “appropriate Government" means:—
(@ the Central Government in case of —

(a) an enterprise or organisation wholly owned or managed or in
10 which fifty-one percent, of shares are held by the Central Government;

Short title
extent and
‘commence-
ment.

Definitions.


Recruitment
and promotion
policy for
reservction of
posts for
Scheduled
Castes,
Scheduled
Tribes and
Backward
Classes.

2

(6) a Ministry/Department of the Central Government and its
attached/subordinate and other offices; and

(c) any enterprise or organisation or establishment situated in a
Union territory.

(id) the State Government in case of —

(a) an enterprise or organisation wholly owned or managed or in
which fifty-one percent. of shares are held by the State Government;

(b) a Ministry/Department of the State Government and its
attached/subordinate and other offices; and

(©) local or Municipal authority in a State.
(b) "enterprise" means:—
(i) central and State Government establishments;

(ii) public sector undertakings wholly owned by the Central or State
Government or in which fifty-one percent and shares are held by the appropriate
Government;

(iii) local or autonomous bodies constituted under any Central Act or a
State Act for the time being in force;

(iv) nationalised and all scheduled banks, mutual funds and other financial
institutions owned or managed by the appropriate Government;

(v) any trade, business industrial or service organisation or any other
establishment employing ten or more persons operating in any State or Union
territory;

‘entral Act or
ernment, and

(vi) any educational institution i
by a State Act or receiving funds from ९

ding established by
niral or a State (

(vii) hospitals including charitable hospitals.

(c) "Backward Classes" means as defined in Natioani Commission for
Backward Classes Act, 1993;

(४) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules and regulations framed under this
Act.

3. (1) The appropriate Government shall lay down a recruitment and promotion
policy for reservation of posts for the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes and the
Backward Classes in all enterprises.

(2) It shall be incumbent on all private enterprises to ensure that the posts and
appointments in different categories and grades are reserved as per policy laid down under
sub-section (/) and to ensure that the same are’ duly filled in, with persons drawn from
different categories as contemplated thereunder.

(3) Failure to comply with the reservation policy provided under sub-section (7)
shall attract penalties as may be prescribed by the Board set up under section 6.

(4) It shall be the duty of each financial institution, to ensure before granting loans,
aid or grants to any enterprise to fulfil the following: —

(i that they conform to the recruitment and promotion policy laid down under
sub-section (/) of section 3;

(ii) they submit a statement of the staff and personnel employed and to be
employed; and


3

(iii) they submit a declaration and an undertaking that they would continue to
conform to the policy laid down under sub-section (1).

4. The appropriate Government shall constantly ensure through such authorities as

Labour Commissioner that the recruitment and promotion policy as laid down in section 3

5 is followed by each enterprise.

20

25

5. (1) The appropriate Government shall constitute a Board for monitoring the

recruitment and promotion policy for reservation of posts for Scheduled Castes,
Scheduled Tribes and Backward Classes in all enterprises.

(2) The Board shall consists of —

(a) a Chairperson to be nominated by the appropriate Government who shall
be from Scheduled Castes, or the Scheduled Tribes or Backward Classes;

(8) such other members, not less than four, nominated by the appropriate
Government:

Provided that one member shall be from the Scheduled Castes, or the Scheduled
Tribes or the Backward Classes.

6. The Board shall perform all ‘or any of the following functions: —

(@) to protect the interests of the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes and
the Backward Classes under the provisions of this Act;

(8) to aver-see the implementation of the provisions of this Act;

(c) to entertain complaints against enterprises alleged to have defaulted in
carrying out the provisions of this Act;

(४) ७ issue orders and directions to State and private enterprises and
organisations to ensure compliance of the provisions of this Act;

(0 to carry out any functions, consequential and incidental thereto; and
(any other matter which may be referred to it by the appropriate Government,

7. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette make rules,

or carrying out the provisions of this Act.

Implementa-
tion of policy.

Board for
‘monitoring the
reservation and
promotion
policy.

Functions of
the Board.

Power to make
rules.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

With the enforcement of economic reforms and with the advent of liberalisation of
economy since 1991, greater emphasis in Government's economic policy is being given to
free trade, business and industry. The economy has, so to say, been transformed from
Protected economy, into liberal economy with emphasis on free enterprise. With India
having signed the agreements as a member of the World Trade Organisation, more and
more of public sector enterprises are being passed into private hands, workers’ co-operatives
or being transformed into joint-sector enterprises with increasing private equity and joint-
Ventures with foreign countries, non-resident Indians or multinational organisations.

In this scenario the public sector is shrinking fast and the provision for reservations
of posts and jobs for weaker sections of the society, as contemplated under article 16(4) or
under the Mandal Commission Report, being restricted only to appointments to services
and posts in connection with affairs of the Union and the State Government are losing
their significance, in so far as protection of the interests of the Scheduled Castes, Scheduled
Tribes and Backward Classes are concerned.

Time has come and situation has arisen when the spirit of the provisions of the
Constitution and the Mandal Commission recommendations should be extended to cover
besides the services of the ‘State’, the joint sector, private sector, co-operative enterprises
and other organisations.

Even after 53 years of independence, the Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and
other socially and educationally Backward Classes of citizens continue to suffer deprivation
and are denied their due share of opportunities for development and their upliftment,
Moreover, Supreme Court, has through recent judgements, stich as those in Indra Sawhni
and Ajit Singh (12) cases, tried to lay down a restricted interpretation of the provisions of
article 16(4)-and (4A), to the detriment of these deprived classes.

Hence this Bill.

New Dewi; SUSHIL KUMAR SHINDE
April 13, 2000


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 5 of the Bill provides for the constitution of a Board for monitoring the
recruitment and promotion policy for reservations in enterprises. The Bill, therefore, if
enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is likely to
involve an annual recurring expenditure of about rupees two crore. A non-recurring
expenditure of about rupees one crore is also likely to be involved.


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 7 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for
‘out the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the |
of legislative power is of a normal character.



LOK SABHA.

A

BILL

to provide for reservation in appointments to the services and posts in public
undertakings, banks and autonomous bodies, and in co-operative, joint
sector and private sector enterprises and other organisations, for the
Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes and the Backward
Classes and for matters connected therewith.

(Shri Sushil Kumar Shinde, M.P.)

MGIP(PLU)MRNO—1541LS—8-7-2000.