Clauses
1. Short title,
2, Definitions.
commencemen'
Charge op gift-tax and gifts subject
3- Charge of gift-tax.
4- Gifts to include certain transfers.
5. Exemption in respect of certain pifts
Gift-tax authorities
V . Gift-tax authorities and their jurisdiction. 
8- Control of gift-tax authorities.
9. Instructions to subordinate authorities.
10. Jurisdiction of Assessing Officers r,™
Commissioner to make
A s  INTRODUCED IN LQk SABHA ON
3 *  May  :m
THE GIFT-TAX BILL, 1990
ARRANGEMENT of clauses
CHAPTER I
Preliminary
CHAPTER, IT
TO SUCH CHARGE
o- Value- of gifts how determined.
CHAPTER III
1L Power of Chief Commissioneror Commissioner and. of Deputy
enquiries.
CHAPTER IV
12. Return of gifts.
13. Return after due date and amendment of return.
14- Return by whom to be signed.
15. Self-Assessment.
16. Assessment.


Clauses
17. Gift escaping assessment.
18- Time limit for completion of assessment and reassessment.
19. Interest for defaults in furnishing return of gifts.
20- Penalty for failure to furnish returns, to comply with notices 
and concealment of gifts, etc.
•  ■  • •  •  Penalty for failure to answer questions, sign statements^ 
furnish information, allow inspection, etc.
CHAPTER V
. Liability to assessment in special cases
22- lax of deceased person payable by legal representative.
23. Assessment of persons leaving India.
24. Assessment of a minor, lunatic or idiot.
25. Liability after partition of a Hindu undivided family and in 
die case of discontinued firm or association of persons.
26- Company in liquidation.
CHAPTER VI
Appeals, revisions and references
27. Appeal to the Deputy Commissioner (Appeals), Commissioner 
(Appeals), from orders of Assessing Officers.
28. Appeal to the Appellate Tribunal.
29. Powers of Commissioner to revise orders of subordinate 
authorities.
30. Appeal to the Appellate Tribunal from orders of penalty or 
enhancement by Chief Commissioner or Commissioner.
31. Reference to High Court.
32. Hearing by High Court.
33. Appeal to Supreme Court- 
34- Tax to be paid notwithstanding reference, etc.
35. Definition of High Court.
CHAPTER VII 4 ' ■
Payment and recovery of gift-tax
36. Gift-tax by whom payable.
37. Gift-tax to be charged on property gifted.
38- Notice of demand. ; ■


Clauses
39. Recovery of tax and penalties.
40. Mode of recovery.
CHAPTER VIII 
' Refunds
41. Refunds.
CHAPTER IX 
Miscellaneous 
'42: Rectification of mistakes.
43- Prosecutions.
44. Offences by companies.
45. Offences by Hindu undivided families,
46. Section 360 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 and the 
Probation of Offenders Act, 1958 not to apply.
47- Presumption as to culpable mental state.
48. Proof of entries in records or documents.
49. Power regarding discovery, production of evidence, etc.
50. Power to call for information.
51. Effect of transfer of authorities on pending proceedings.
52- Computation of period of limitation.
53. Service of notice.
54. Publication of information respecting assessees.
55'. Disclosure of information respecting assessees.
56. Return of gifts, etc., not to be invalid on certain grounds.
57. Bar of suits in civil court.
58. Appearance before gift-tax authorities by authorised represen­
tatives- ■
59. Appearance by registered valuer in certain matters.
65- Agreement for avoidance or relief of double taxation, with 
respect to gift-tax.
61. Rounding off of taxable gifts.
62. Rounding off of tax, etc.
63. Power to make rules-
64. Repeal and savings.
65. Power to remove difficulties.
THE FIRST SCHEDULE.
THE- SECOND SCHEDULE-


THE GIFT-TAX BILL, 1990
A
BILL
to provide for the levy of gift-tax.
Bf it enacted by Parliament in the Forty-first Year of the Republic of 
India as follows: —
CHAPTER I
Preliminary
1. (1) This Act may be called the Gift-tax Act, 1990. Short
title,
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and extent
Kashmir. and comence-
(3) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 20th day of ment. 
March, 1990.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— Deftni.
(i) ‘‘amalgamation" shall have the meaning assigned to it in tl0T)s- 
clause (IB) of section 2 of the Income-tax Act;
(it) "Appellate Tribunal" means the Appellate Tribunal con­
stituted under section 252 of the T ncome-tax Act;


(iii) “assessee'’ means a person by whom gift-tax or any other 
sum of money is payable under this Act, and includes—
(a) every person in respect of whom any proceeding under 
this Act has been taken for the determination of gift-tax payable 
by him or by any other person or the amount of refund due to 5 
him or such other person;
(b) every person who is deemed to be an assessee under 
this Act;
(c) every person who is deemed to be an assessee in
default under this Act; jq
(w) “Assessing Officer” means the Assistant Commissioner or 
the Income-tax Officer who is vested with the relevant jurisdiction 
by virtue of directions or orders issued under sub-section (.1) or 
sub-section (2) of section 120 or any other provision of the 
Income-tax Act which apply for the purposes of gift-tax under 15 
section 7 of this Act. and also the Deputy Commissioner who is 
directed under clause (b) of sub-section (4) of the said section 120
to exercise or perform all or any of the powers and. functions 
conferred on or assigned to the Assessing Officer under that Act;
(«) “assessment” includes reassessment; 20
(vi) “assessment year” means the period of twelve months 
commencing on the 1st day of April every year;
(vii) “Board" means the Central Board of Direct Taxes consti­
tuted under the Central Boards of Revenue Act, 1963;
(viii) “charitable purpose” includes relief of the poor, education, 25 
medical relief, and the advancement of any other object of general 
public utility;
(ix) the expressions “company", “Indian company’’ and 
“company in which the public are substantially interested" shall 
have the meanings respectively assigned to them under section 2 3q 
of the Income-tax Act;
(x) “convertible foreign exchange” means foreign exchange
which is for the time being treated by the Reserve Bank of India as 
convertible foreign exchange for the purposes of the Foreign Ex­
change Regulation Act, 1973 and any rules made thereunder; 35
(xi) “donee” means any person who acquires any property 
under a gift, and, where a gift is made to a trustee for the benefit of 
another person, includes both the trustee and the beneficiary;
(.tu) “donor” means any person who makes a gift;
(xiii) “executor” includes an Administrator or any other pel-son 
administering the estate of a deceased person;
(xiu) “Foreign Exchange Regulation Act” means the Foreign 
Exchange Regulation Act, 1973; 46


(xv) the expressions “firm”, “partner” and “partnership” 
shall have the meanings respectively assigned to them under section 
2 of the Income-tax Act;
(xvt) “gift” means the transfer by one person to another of any 
existing movable or immovable property made voluntarily and 
without consideration in money or money's worth, and includes the 
transfer or conversion of any property referred to in section 4, 
deemed to be a gift under that section but does not include receipts 
which are income within the meaning of the Income-tax Act;
10 Explanation.—A transfer of any building or part thereof referred to 
in clause (in). clause {iHa) or clause (mb) of section 27 of the Income- 
tax Act by the person who is deemed under the said clause to be the 
owner thereof made voluntarily and without consideration in money or 
money s worth, shall be deemed to be a gift made by such person;
15 (xvii) "Income-tax Act” means the Income-tax Act. 1961:
(xt’iii) legal representative’"  has the meaning assigned to it 
in clause (11) of section 2 of the Code of Civil Procedure. 1938;
(xix) “non-resident” shall have the meaning assigned to it in 
the Income-tax Act;
(xx> non-resident Indian” shall have the meaning assigned to
yj *n clause (e) of section 115C of the Income-tax Act;
(x,xi) person includes a Hindu undivided family or a company 
or an association or a body of individual or persons, whether in­
corporated or not;
(xxii) “person resident outside India" shall have the same
25 meaning assigned to it in clause (q) of section 2 of the Foreign 
Exchange Regulation Act, 1973;
(xxii;) political party” shall mean an association or body of 
individual citizens of India registered with the Election Commis­
sion under any law for the time being in force;
30 (xxiv) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this
Act;
(xxv) ‘previous year’ in relation to any assessment year 
means any period, not exceeding twelve months, ending on the 31st 
day of March immediately preceding the assessment year:
35 Provided that the previous year for the assessment year commenc­
ing on the 1st day of April, 1991, shall be the period commencing on 
the 20th day of March, 1990 and ending on the 31st day of March, 1991;
(xxvi) “principal officer”, used with reference to a company or 
association of persons, means—
40 (a> the secretary and treasurer, manager, managing agent.
managing director or agent of the company or association; or
(b) any person connected with the management of the 
affairs of the company or association upon whom the Assessing 
Officer has served a notice of his intention of treating him as
45 principal officer thereof;


(xxvii) “property” includes any interest in property, movable 
or immovable;
(xocviii) “registered valuer’’ shall have the meaning assigned to 
it in clause (oaa) of section 2 of the Wealth-tax Act;
(xxix) “regular assessment” means the assessment made under 5 
sub-sections (5) and (7) of section 16;
(xxx) “relative” shall have the meaning assigned to it in 
clause (41) of section 2 of the Income-tax Act;
(xxxi) “resident”,—
(a) in the case of an individual, means, if during that year 10 
he is a resident within the meaning of section 6 of the Income- 
tax Act, subject to the modification that reference in that 
section to India shall be construed as references to the territories 
to which this Act extends;
(b) in the case of a Hindu undivided family, firm or other '5 
association of persons, means, if during that year, the control 
and management of its affairs was situated wholly within the 
territories to which this Act extends;
(c) in the case of a company, means, if during thei previous
year,— 2Q
(i) it is a company formed and registered under the 
Companies Act, 1956, or is an existing company within the 1  of 
meaning of that Act; or
(ii) the control and management of that company was 
situated wholly In the territories to which this Act extends; 25
(d) in any other case, shall have the meaning assigned to it in 
section 6 of the Income-tax Act;
(xxxli) “tax” means gift-tax chargeable under the provisions of 
this Act;
(xxxiii) “taxable gifts” means gifts chargeable to gift-tax under 30 
this Act;
(xxxiv) “transfer of property” means any disposition, convey­
ance, assignment, settlement, delivery, payment or other alienation 
of property and, without limiting the generality of the foregoing, 
includes— , 55
(a) the creation of a trust in property;
(b) the grant or creation of any lease, mortgage, charge, 
easement, licence, power, partnership or interest in property;
(c) the exercise of a power of appointment (whether 
general, special or subject to any restrictions as to the persons 40 
in whose favour the appointment may be made) of property 
vested in any person, not the owner of the property, to deter­
mine its disposition in favour of any person other than the 
donee of the power; and
4


(d) any transaction entered into by any person with intent 
thereby to diminish directly or indirectly the value of his
own property and to increase the value of the property of
any other person;
5 (xxiru) “Valuation Officer” shall have the meaning assigned to it
in clause (r) of section 2 of the Wealth-tax Act;
H ®5'- (xxxvi) “Wealth-tax Act” means the Wealth-tax Act, 1957;
(xxxvii) the expressions “Chief Commissioner”, “Director 
General”, “Commissioner”, "Commissioner (Appeals) ”, “Director’, 
10 “Deputy Director”, “Deputy Commissioner”, “Deputy Commissioner 
(Appeals)”, “Assistant Director”, “Assistant Commissioner”, "Income- 
tax Officer”, “Tax Recovery Officer” and “Inspector of Income tax” 
shall have the meanings respectively assigned to them under section 
3 of the Income-tax Act,
15 CHAPTER II
Charge of gift-tax and gifts subject to such charge
3. Subject to the other provisions contained in this Act, there shall be 
charged for every assessment year commencing on and from the 1st day 
of April, 1991, gift-tax in respect of the gifts, if any, received by a person 
20 during the previous year, at the rate or rates specified in Schedule I.
Charge of 
gift-tax.
25
30
35
40
4, (1) For the purposes of this Act,—
(a) where property is transferred otherwise than for adequate 
consideration, the amount by which the market value of the 
property at the date of the transfer exceeds the value of the 
consideration shall be deemed to he a gift received by a transferee;
(b) where property is transferred for a consideration which, 
having regard to the circumstances of the case, has not passed or is 
not intended to pass either in full or in part from the transferee to 
the transferor, the amount, of the consideration which lias n.ot 
passed or is not intended to pass shall be deemed to be a gift 
received by the transferee;
(c) where there is a release, discharge, surrender, forfeiture or 
abandonment of any debt, contract or other actionable claim or 
of any interest in property by any person, the value of the release, 
discharge, surrender, forfeiture or abandonment to the extent to 
which it has not been found, to the satisfaction of the Assessing. 
Officer to have been bonafide, shall be deemed to be s gift 
received by the person in whose favour such release, discharge, 
surrender, forfeiture or abandonment, is made;
(d) where a person absolutely entitled to property causes or has 
caused the same to be vested in whatever manner in himself and 
any other person jointly without adequate consideration and 
such other person makes an appropriation from or out of the said 
property, the amount of the appropriation used for the benefit of
Gifts to 
include 
certain 
transfers.


the person making the appropriation or for the benefit of any 
other person shall be deemed to be a gift received in his favour by 
the person who causes or has caused the property to be so vested;
(e) where a person who has an interest in property as a tenant 
for a term or for lift or a remainderman surrenders or relinquishes 5. 
his interest in the property or otherwise allows his interest to be 
terminated without consideration or for a consideration which is 
not adequate, the value of the interest so surrendered, 
relinquished or allowed to be terminated or, as the case may be, 
the amount by which such value exceeds the consideration 10 
received, shall be deemed to be a gift received by the person in 
whose favour such surrender, relinquishment or termination is 
made
(2) Where in the case of an individual being a member of a Hindu 
undivided family, any property having been the separate property of the 15 
individual has been converted by the individual into property belong­
ing to the family through the act of impressing such separate property 
with the character of property belonging to the family or throwing it 
into the common stock of the family (such property being hereafter 
in this sub-section referred to as the converted property), then, notwith- 20 
standing anything contained in any other provision of this Act 01 any 
other law for the time being in force, for the purpose of computation 
of the taxable gifts received by the individual, the individual shall be 
deemed to have made a gift of so much of the converted property as the 
members of the Hindu undivided family other than such individual 25 
would be entitled to, if a partition of the converted property had taken 
place immediately after such conversion.
5- (1) Gift-tax shall not be charged under this Act in respect of gifts 
received by any person—
(i) of immovable property situate outside the territories to 30 
which this Act extends;
(ii) of movable property situate outside the territories to which 
this Act extends, unless the person' receiving the gift—
(a) being an individual, is a citizen of India and is resident
in the said territories; or 35
(b) not being an individual, is resident in the said
territories, during the previous year in which the gift is
received;
(iii) from a person resident outside India, out of the moneys 
standing to his credit in a Non-resident (External) Account in any 40 
hank in India in accordance with the provisions of the Foreign 
Exchange Regulation Act and any rules made thereunder;
(iv) in convertible foreign exchange remitted from a country
outside India in accordance with the provisions of the Foreign 
Exchange Regulation Act and any rules made thereunder; 45
(w) from a non-resident Indian, being h:s relative, of pronertv 
in the form of any foreign exchange asset as defined in clause (b>  
of section 115G of the Income-tax Act;


7
(pi) from a non-resident Indian, being his relative of property 
in the form of the bonds specified under sub-clause (iid) of clause 
(15) of section 10 of the Income-tax Act:
Provided that the exemption conferred by this clause shall be 
5 available only if the gift of such bonds is received after a period 
of three years from the date of their purchase:
Provided further that where the donor, who is a non-resident 
Indian in any previous year in which the bonds are acquired, 
becomes a resident in India in any subsequent year, the pro- 
I jq visions of this clause shall apply in respect of the gifts of pro­
perty referred to in this clause in such subsequent year or any year 
thereafter;
(vii) being any local authority or any authority referred to in 
clause (20A) of section 10 of the Income-tax Act;
[ j (win) being any institution or fund established or deemed to be
established for a charitable purpose to which the provisions o; section 
80G of the Income-tax Act, apply;
,(ix) (a) being such temple, mosque, gurdwara, churcli or other 
place as has been notified by the Central Government for the pur- 
20 poses of clause (b) of sub-section (2) of section 80G of the Income- 
tax Act; or
(b) by way of settlement on trust, of property, the income 
from which, according to the deed of settlement, is to be used ex­
clusively in connection with the temple, mosque, gurdwara, church 
25 or other place specified therein and notified as aforesaid;
(x) on the occasion of the marriage of such person subject to a 
maximum of rupees one lakh in value;
(xi) under a will;
(xii) being an employee or the dependent of a diseased employee 
30 from a employer by way of bonus, gratuity or pension, to the extent
to which the payment of such bonus, gratuity or pension is. proved 
to the satisfaction of the Assessing Officer as being reasonable having 
regard to the circumstances of the case and has received solely 
in recognition of the services rendered by the employee;
(xiii) in the nature of any benefit, directly or indirectly, arising 
out of any expenditure incurred by a relative, on the maintenance 
or education or medical treatment of such person:
Provided that the donee is a dependent on a donor and the 
expenditure is actually incurred for the aforesaid purposes,
(xiv) from any person, for the purposes of medical treatment, to 
40 the extent to which such amount is actually spent on the medical 
treatment within the previous year or within such period as may be 
extended by the Commissioner and the amount not so utilised for


Value of 
gifts 
how 
deter­
mined.
the aforesaid purpose is deposited in a public sector bank asi defined 
in clause (S3D) of section 10 of the Income-tax Act:
Provided that the donee is not a dependent relative of the donor;
, be'-nS an Indian company from any other company in a
scheme of amalgamation; 5
(xvi) being a political party;
(xvii) being a candidate, in connection with any election to any 
legislative, municipal or other public authority m India, to the extent 
.o which the amount so received is not in excess of the limits, if any,
xed under any law for the time being in force relating to such' 10 
elections or to the extent such amount is actually utilised in connec­
tion with the election, whichever is lower;
8
(xviii) any gift received in the form of National Saving Certifi-
f  X1 X?Ue) 3nd NationaI having Certificates (VII Issue) issued 
under the Government Savings Certificate Act, 1959; 15
Rj r x r y gift Z pr°perty received in the form °f Special Bearer nds, 1991 issued by the Central Government.
46 of
X fX X  t0 thf provisions of sub-section (2), the value of any
of this^Act be VvX ’ tran3f+ X reu by Way °f ^  sha11' for ^
and shafl he H , “  ° "  the date « n w h ich  gift was recXed 20and shall be determined in the manner laid down in Schedule II.
(2) Where a person receives a gift which is not revocable for a
value f ^  ? 1Ue °f thS pr°Perty received shall be the capitaliseda ue of the income from such poverty during the period for which the 
gift is not revocable 25
(3) The jurisdiction of a gift-tax authority under this Act shall be 
the same as he has under the Income-tax Act by virtue of orders or 
directions issued under section 120 of that Act (including orders or , 
directions assigning concurrent jurisdiction) or under any other provi- 35 
sion of that Act.
(4) The gift-tax authority having jurisdiction in relation to a
person who has no income assessable to income-tax under the Income-
tf,.lAct shal1 be the glft-tax authority having jurisdiction in respect 
of the area in which that person resides. 40


8. Section 118 of the Income-tax Act and any. notification issued 
thereunder shall apply in ’relation to the control of gift-tax authorities aa 
they apply dn relation, to the control of the corresponding income-tax 
authorities, except to the extent to which the Board may, by notification
5 in the Official Gazette, otherwise direct in respect of any gift-tax autho­
rity.
9. (1) The Board may, from time to time, issue such orders, instruc­
tions and directions to other gift-tax authorities as it may deem fit for the 
proper administration of this Act. and such authorities and all other
10 persons employed in the execution of this Act shall observe and follow 
such orders, instructions an^ directions of the Board.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), the 
Board shall not issue any order, instruction or direction—
(a) so as to require any gift-tax authority to make a particular 
15 assessment or to dispose of a particular case in a particular manner;
Dr
(b) so as to interfere with the discretion of the Deputy Commis­
sioner (Appeals) or Commissioner (Appeals) in the exercise of his ap­
pellate functions.
(3) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power,—<
(a) the Board may, if it considers it necessary or expedient so to 
do, for the purpose of proper and efficient management of the work 
of assessment and collection of revenue, issue, from time to time 
(whether by way of relaxation of anv of the provisions of sections
25 12, 13, 16, 17, 19, 20 and 42 or otherwise), general or special orders
in respect of any class of cases, setting forth directions or instruc­
tions (pot being prejudicial to assessees) as to the guidelines, prin­
ciple or procedures to be followed by other gift-tax authorities in the 
work relating to assessment or collection of revenue or the initiation 
30 of proceedings for the imposition of penalties and any such order 
may, if the Board is of opinion that it is necessary in the public in­
terest so to do. be published and circulated in the prescribed manner 
for general information;
(b) the Board may, if it considers it desirable or expedient so to 
35 do for avoiding genuine hardship in any case or class of cases, by
general or special order, authorise any gift-tax authority, not being 
a Deputy Commissioner (Appeals) or Commissioner (Appeals) to 
admit an application or claim for any exemption or refund or any 
other relief under this Act after the expiry of the period specified 
40 by or under this Act for making such application or claim and deal 
with the same on merits in accordance with law.
10. (I) The provisions of sections 124 and 127 of the Income-tax Act
shall, so far as may be, apply for the purposes of this Act as they apply 
for the purposes of the Income-tax Act, subject to the modifications spe- 
rifled in sub-section (2). ;
(2) The modifications referred to in sub-section (1) shall be the 
following, namely: —
(a) in section 124 of the Income-tax Act,—
(i) in sub-section (3), references to the provisions of the 
5Q  Income-tax Act shall be construed as references to the corres­
ponding provisions of the Gift-tax Act, 1990;
9
Control 
of gift- 
tax au­
thorities.
Instruc­
tions to 
subordi­
nate au­
thorities.
Jurisdic­
tion of 
Assessing 
Officers 
and
power to
transfer
cases.


Power of 
Chief 
commis­
sioner 
or Com­
missioner 
and of 
Deputy 
Commis­
sioner to 
make 
enquiries.
Return
of
gifts.
Return 
after due 
date and 
amend­
ment of 
return.
Return 
by whow 
to be
signed.
(ifi) sub-section (5) shall be omitted;
(b) in section 127 of the Income-tax Act, in the Explanation 
below sub-section (4). references to proceedings ■under the Income- 
tax Act shall be construed as including references to proceedings 
under the Gift-tax Act. 1990.
11. The Chief Commissioner or Commissioner and the Deputy Com­
missioner shall be competent to make any enquiry under this Act, and 
for this purpose, shall have all the powers that an Assessing Officer has 
under this Act in relation to the making of enquiries.
10
CHAPTER IV 10
Assessment
12. (1) Every person whto during a previous year has received any 
taxable gifts, or is assessable in respect of the taxable gifts received by 
any other person under this Act, which, in either case, exceeded the maxi­
mum amount not chargeable to gift-tax, shall, on or before the 30th day 15 
of June of the corresponding assessment year, furnish a return of such 
gifts in the prescribed form and verified in the prescribed manner and 
setting forth such other particulars as may be prescribed.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other provision of
this Act, a return, not being a return furnished in response to a notice 20 
under section 17, which shows the amount of taxable gifts below the 
maximum amount which is not chargeable to tax shall be deemed never 
to have been furnished.
13. If any person has not furnished a return within the time allowed ^_ 
under sub-section (1) of section 12 or by a notice issued under clause (i)'
of sub-section (6) of section 16. or having furnished amendment of a 
return discovers any omission or wrong statement therein, he may furnish 
a return or a revised return, as the case may be, at any time before the 
expiry of one year from the end of the relevant assessment year or before 
the completion of the assessment, whichever is earlier. >(l
14. The return made under section 12 or section 13 shall be signed 
and verified—
(a) in the case of an individual,—
(i) by the individual himself;
(ii) where he is absent from India, by the individual him- 25 
self or by some person duly authorised by him in this behalf;
(iii) where he is mentally incapacitated from attending to his 
affairs, by his guardian or any other person competent to act on 
his behalf; and


(iv) where, for any other reason, it is not possible for the in­
dividual to sign the return, by any person duly authorised by 
him in this behalf:
Provided that in a case referred to in sub-clause (ii) or sub-clause 
5 (iv), the person signing the return holds a valid power of attorney from 
the individual to do so, which shall be attached to the return;
(b) in the case of a Hindu undivided family, by the karta, and 
where the karta is absent from India or is mentally incapacitated
from attending to his affairs, by any other adult member of such 
16 family; . , (! ^
(c) in the case of a company, by the managing director thereof 
or where for any unavoidable reason such managing director is not 
able to sign and verify the return, or where there is no managing 
director, by any director thereof:
15 Provided that where the company is not resident in India, the return 
may be signed and verified by a person who holds a valid power of 
attorney from such company to do so, which shall be attached to the 
return:
20
25
30
35
Provided further that,—
(Q) where the company is being wound up, whether under the 
orders of the Court or otherwise, -or where any person has been ap­
pointed as the receiver of any assets of the company, the return shall 
be signed and verified by the liquidator referred to in sub-section (1) 
of section 178 of the Income-tax Act:
(b) where the management of the company has been taken over 
by the Central Government or any State Government under any law,
the return of the company shall be signed and verified by the princi­
pal officer thereof;
(c) in the case of a firm, by the managing partner thereof or
where for any unavoidable reason such managing partner is not able 
to sign and verify the return, or where there is no managing partner 
as such, by any partner thereof, not being a minor;
(d) in thp case of any other association, by any member of the
association or the principal officer thereof; and
(e) in the case of any other person, by that person or by some 
person competent to act on his behalf.
15. (1) Where any tax is payable on the basis of any return furnished 
under section 12 or under section 13 or in response to a notice under 
r clause (0 of sub-section (6) of section 16 or under section 17, after taking 
40 into aeeount the amount of tax, if any. already paid under any provision 
of this Act, the assessee shall be liable to pay such tax, together with 
interest payable under any provision of this Act for any delay in furnish 
ing the return,, before furnislrng the return and the return shall be ac 
companied by proof of payment of such fax and interest.


Explanation.—Where the amount paid by the assessee under this 
sub-section falls short of the aggregate of the tax and interest as aforesaid, 
the amount so paid shall first be adjusted towards the interest payable 
as aforesaid and the balance, if any, shall be adjusted towards the tax 
payable. 5
(2) After the regular assessment under section 1.6 has been made,
any amount paid under sub-section (1) shall be deemed to have been 
paid towards such regular assessment. .
(3) If any assessee fails to pay the whole or any part of such tax or 
interest or both in accordance with the provisions of sub-section (1), he ]q 
shall, without prejudice to any other consequences which he may incur, 
be deemed to be an assessee in default in respect of the tax or interest or 
both remaining unpaid and all the provisions of this Act shall apply 
accordingly.
16. (1) (a) Where a return has been made under section 12 or section 15 
13 or in response to a notice under clause (i) of sub-section (6),
_
(
?) if any tax or interest is found due on the basis of such return 
after adjustment of any amount paid by way of tax or interest, an 
intimation shall be sent to the assessee specifying the sum so payable,
and such intimation shall be deemed to be a notice issued under sec- 20 
tion 38 and all the provisions of this Act shall apply accordingly; and
(ii) if any refund is due on the basis of such return, it shall be 
granted to the assessee:
Provided that in computing the tax or interest payable by, or re­
fundable to the assessee the following adjustments shall be made in the 25 
taxable gifts declared in the return, namely: —
(i) any arithmetical errors in the return, accounts or documents 
accompanying it shall he rectified;
(ii) any exemption which, on the basis of the information avail­
able in such return, accounts or documents, is prima facie admissible 39
but which is not churned in the return, shall be allowed;
(in) any exemption claimed in the return, which, on the basis of 
the information available in such return, accounts or documents, is 
prima facie inadmissible, shall be disallowed:
Provided further that where adjustments are made under the first 35 
proviso, an intimation shall be sent to the assessee, notwithstanding that 
no tax or interest is found due from him after making the said adjust­
ments:
Provided also that an intimation for any tax or interest due under 
this clause shall not be sent after tbfe expiry of two years from the end 49
of the assessment year in which the gifts were first assessable.
(b) Where as a result of an order made under sub-section (5) or sub­
section (7) of this section or section 17 or section 27 or section 23 or sec­
tion 29 or section 31 or section 33 or section 42 relating to any earlier


- assessment year and passed subsequent to the filing of the return Referred 
to in clause (a), there is any variation in the exemption claimed in the 
return, and as a result of which,—
(i) if any tax or interest is found due, an intimation shall be sent 
5 to the assessee specifying the sum so payable, and such intimation 
shall be deemed to be a' notice of demand issued under section 38 and 
all the provisions of this Act shall apply accordingly; and
(U) if any refund is due, it shall be granted to the assessee:
Provided that an intimation for any tax or interest due under this 
10 clause shall not be sent after the expiry of four years from the end
of the financial year in which any such order was passed,
(2) (a) Where in the case of any person, the taxable gift, as a result 
of the adjustments made under the first proviso to clause (a) of sub­
section (1), exceeds the taxable gift declared in the return by any
15 amount, the Assessing Officer shall,—
(i) further increase the amount of tax payable under sub-section 
(1) by an additional gift-tax calculated at the rate of twenty per 
cent, of the tax payable on such excess amount and specify the 
additional gift-tax in the intimation to be sent under sub-clause (j)
2o of clause (a) of sub-section (1); 1
(ii) where any refund is due under sub-section (1), reduce the 
amount of such refund by an amount equivalent to the additional
, gift-tax calculated under sub-clause (i).
(b) Where as a result of an order under section 27 or section 28 or 
25 section 29 or section 31 or section 33 or section 42, the] amount on 
which additional gift-tax •  s payable under clause fa) has been increased 
or reduced, as the case may be, the additional gift-tax shall be increased 
or reduced accordingly, and,—
(t) in a case where the additional gift-tax is increased, the As­
sessing Officer shall serve on the assessee a notice of demand under 
section 38; ;
-  - ' j
(ii) in a case where the additional gift-tax is reduced, the excess 
amount paid, if any, shall be refunded.
Explanation—For the purposes of this sub-section, “tax payable on 
22 such excess amount” means the difference between the, tax on the tax­
able gift and me tax mat would nave neen cnargeame nad such taxuoie 
gift been reduced by the amount of adjustments.
(3) Where an assessee furnishes a revised return under section 13 
after the issue of an intimation, or the grant of refund, if any, under
^  sub-section (1) of this section, the provisions of sub-sections (1) and (2) 
of this section shall apply in relation to such revised return and—
(i) the intimation already sent for any gift-tax, additional gift-
tax or interest shall be amended on the basis of the said revised 
return and where any amount payable by way of gift-tax, additional


jjift-tax or interest specified in the said intimation has already been 
paid by the assessee then, if any such amendment has the effect of— 1
(a) enhancing the amount already paid, the intimation am­
ended under this clause shall be sent to the assessee specifying 
the excess amount payable by him and such intimation shall be 5  
deemed to be a notice of demand issued under section 38 and 
■ ( all the provisions of this Act shall apply accordingly;
(f>) reducing the amount already paid, the excess amount
paid shall be refunded to the assessee;
(ii) the amount of the refund already granted shall be en- lo 
hanced or reduced on the basis of the said revised return and where 
the amount of refund already granted is—
(a) enhanced, only the excess amount of refund due to the 
assessee shall be paid to him;
(b) reduced, the excess amount so refunded shall be deemed 15
to be the tax payable by the assessee and an intimation shall 
be sent to the assessee specifying the amount so payable, and 
such intimation shall be deemed to be a notice of demand issued 
under section 38 and all the provisions of this Act shall apply 
accordingly; J
Provided that an assesse, who has furnished a revised return under 
section 13 after the service upon him of the intimation under sub-section
(1) of this section, shall be liable to pay additional gift-tax in relation 
to the adjustments made under the first proviso to clause (a) of sub­
section (1) and specified in the said intimation, whether or not he has 25 
made the said adjustments in the revised return.
(4) Where a return has been made under section 12 or section 13 or 
in response to a notice under clause (i) of sub-section (6) of this sec­
tion, the Assessing Officer shall, if he considers it necessary or expedi­
ent to ensure that the assessee has not omitted to disclose any taxable ^ 
gift or has not understated the amount or value of any such gift or 
has not under-paid the tax in any manner., serve on the assessee a notice 
requiring him, on a date to be specified therein, either to attend, at the 
office of the Assessing Officer or to produce, or cause to be produced 
there, any evidence on which the assessee may rely in support of the 
return;
Provided that no notice under this sub-section shall be served on 
the assessee after the expiry of the financial year in which the return 
is furnished or on the expiry of six months from the end of the month 
in which the return is furnished, whichever is later. 40
(5) On the date specified in the notice issued under sub-section (4) 
or, as soon afterwards as may be, after hearing such evidence as the 
assessee may produce and such other evidence as the Assessing Officer
14


I
15
15
20
£***■ r *  a,,et “ * »  “ » « .u «to.
order In writine s « «  'n,h''" gathered the Assessing Officer shall, by
and determine the sum payable V * ,^Xable S*fts; received by the assessee 
SUm payablc b5’ hlm °n the basis of such assessment.
5A ,J ” n„F° ^ ! , P0,P"“ ‘ °' " " kl"S “  — < m  under this Act, the 
under M ™ , ; , ! , ” ” , "  “ y P" !<'n h«- ” •* • return
notice reaitirino- bim a * furmshmg the return has expired, a■  1 g  him, on a date to be specified therein,__
a
llowed P P * T h Pfrson has not made a return within the time
i taxable ‘iff P ° \ P  °f SeCti°n 12’ t0 furnish a return *  thetaxable gifts received by him or of the taxable gifts received Hv
“  T ” \ °' WMCh *  '--------*>• u u t  S  t S i
s
S i b S T r and setting forth such °^her » 4  be
or otw ‘h Pr°dUC! °r CaUSe t0 be producc(i such accounts, records or other documents as the Assessing Officer may require,
(7) If any person,—
_  , (a\ falls to make the return required under sub-section (2)
undTr V  haS n0t made a return or a revised returnunder section 13, or
(b) fails to comply with all the terms of a notice issued 
under sub-section (4) or sub-section (6),
25 the Assessing Officer, after taking into account all relevant material 
w ich he has gathered, shall, after giving such person an opportunitv 
f being heard _ estimate the value of taxable gifts to the best of his 
judgment and determine the sum payable by such person on the basis 
of such assessment: -__i.
3
0 Provided that such opportunity shall he given by the Assessing Offi­
ah w 7 onL a UP°n thp pGrs0n t0 show “ use, on a dateand time to be specified in the notice, why the assessment should not
g completed to the best of his judgment:
35 nit Pr°Vlded further tKat it shall not be necessary to give such opportu­
nity ,n a case where a notice under sub-section (6) has been issued prior 
to the making of the assessment under this sub-section.
nf J  v NotwithstandinR anything contained in section 6, for the purpose 
of making an assessment under this Act. where under the provisions of 
40 section 6 read with Schedule IT. the fair market value of any property 
transferred by wav of gift is to be taken into account in such assessment, 
Assessing Officer may refer the valuation of such property to the 
Valuation Officer,—
fa) m a case, where the value of the property as returned in 
accordance with the estimate made by a registered valuer, if the


Assessing Officer is of opinion that the value so returned is less 
than its fair market value;
•  " 7  ivjf1
(b) in any other case, if the Assessing Officer is of opinion—
(i) that the fair market value of the property exceeds the 
value of the property as returned by more than such percentage 5 
of the value of the property as returned or by 
more than such amounts as may be prescribed in this 
behalf; or I ■  |
. (ii) that having regard to the nature of the property and
other relevant circumstances, it is necessary so to do, 10
•  tr ■  .. , ■  .
and where any such reference is made, the provisions of sub-sections (2),
(3) 0 , (5) and (6) of section 16A, clause (ho) of sub-section (1) and
sub-section (3A) and (4) of section 23, sub-section (5) of section 24, 
section 34AA. section 35 and section 37 of the Wealth-tax Act, shall 
with the necessary modifications, apply in relation to such reference as 15 
they apply in relation to a reference made by the Assessing Officer 
under sub-sefction (I) of section ISA of that Act.
(9) Where a regular assessment under sub-section (5) or sub-section
(7) is made,—
(o) any tax or interest paid by the assessee under sub-section 20
(2X stall be deemed to have been paid towards such regular assess­
ment;
(b) if no refund is due on regular assessment or the amount 
refunded under sub-section (1) exceeds the amount refundable on 
regular assessment, the whole or the excess amount so refunded 25 
shall be deemed to be tax payable by the assessee and the provisions 
of this Act shall apply according.
17. (1) If the Assessing Officer has reasons to believe that the tax­
able gifts in respect of which any person is assessable under this Act 
(whether received by him or by any other person) have escaped assess- 30 
ment for any assessment year (whether by reason of under-assessment 
or assessment at too low a rate or otherwise), he may, subject to the 
other provisions of this section and section 18, serve on such person a 
notice requiring him to furnish within such period, not being less than 
thirty days, as may be specified in the notice, a return in the prescribed 35 
form and verified in the prescribed manner, setting forth the taxable 
gifts received by him or by such other oerson during the previous year 
mentioned in the notice, in respect of which he is assessable, along with 
such other particulars as may be required by the notice, and may pro­
ceed to assess or re-assess such gifts and also any other taxable gifts 40 
in respect of which such person is assessable, which have escaped assess­
ment and which come to his notice subsequently in the course of the 
proceedings under this section for the assessment year concerned (here­
after in this section referred to as the relevant assessment year); and 
the provisions of this Act stall, so far as may be, applv as if the return 45 
were a return required under section 12:


I . .
_ Provided that where an assessment under sub-section (5) of section 
16 or this section has been made for the relevant assessment year, no 
action shall be taken under this section after the expiry of four years 
from the end of the relevant assessment year, unless any taxable gift 
5 chargeable to tax has escaped assessment for such assessment year by 
reason of the failure on the part of the assessee to make a return under 
section 12 or section 13 or in response to a notice issued under sub­
section (6) of section 16 or this section or to disclose fully and truly 
all material facts necessary for his assessment for that assessment year:
| Jo Provided further that the Assessing Officer shall, before issuing any 
notice under this sub-section, record his reasons for doing so.
Explanation.—Production before the Assessing Officer of account 
books or other evidence from which material evidence could with due 
diligence have been discovered by the Assessing Officer will not neces- 
15 sarily amount to disclosure within the meaning of the forgoing proviso.
(2) No notice under sub-section (1) shall be issued for the relevant 
assessment year,— f j
(a) in a case where an assessment under sub-section (5) of sec- 
section 16 or sub-section (1) of this section has been made for such
20 assessment year,— |  ;
(i) if four years have elapsed from the end of the rele­
vant assessment year, unless the case falls under sub-section (ii) 
or sub-clause (in);
(ll> lf four years, but not more than seven years, have 
elapsed from the end of the relevant assessment year, unless the 
value of taxable gifts chargeable to tax which have escaped 
assessment amounts to or is likely to amount to rupees fifty 
thousand or more for that year;
(ui) if seven years, but not more than ten years, have elap- 
-50 sec^  from the end of the relevant assessment year, unless the
value of taxable gifts chargeable to tax which have escaped 
assessment amounts to or is likely to amount to rupees one lakh 
or more for that year;
(b) in any other case,— |  j.
35 (0 if four years have elapsed from the end of the relevant
assessment year, unless the case falls under sub-clause (ii) or 
sub-clause (Hi); ] i
(ii) if four years, but not more than seven years, have elap­
sed from the end of the relevant assessment year, unless the
40 value of taxable gifts chargeable t0 tax which have escaped
assessment amounts to or is likely to amount to rupees 
twenty-five thousand or more for that year;
(ui) if seven years, but not more than ten years, have elap­
sed from the end of the relevant assessment year, unless the 
4j value of taxable gifts chargeable to tax which have escaped
assessment amounts to or is likely to amount to rupees fiftv 
thousand or more for that year.


Explanation< —For the purposes of sub-section (1) and sub-section
(2), the following shall also be deemed to be cases where taxable gifts 
chargeable to tax have escaped assessment, namely: —
(a) where no return of taxable gifts has been furnished by the 
assessee although the taxable gifts received by him or the taxable 5 
gift received by any other person in respect of which he is 
assessable under this Act during the previous year exceeded 
the maximum amount which is not chargeable to gift-tax;
(b) where a return of taxable gifts has been furnished by the 
assessee but ho assessment has been made and it is noticed by the 10 
Assessing Officer that the assessee has understated the amount or 
value of the taxable gifts or has claimed excessive exemption 
in. the return. ]
(3) (a) In a case where an assessment under sub-section (5) of 
section 16 or sub-section (I) of this section has been made for the rele- jj 
vant assessment year, no notice shall be issued under sub-section (I) by 
an Assessing Officer, who is below the rank of Assistant Commissioner, 
unless the Deputy Commissioner is satisfied on the reasons recorded by 
such Assessing) Officer that it is a fit case for the issue of such notice:
Provided that, after the expiry of four years from the end of the 2q 
relevant assessment year, no such notice shall be issued unless the 
Chief Commissioner or Commissioner is satisfied, on the reasons record­
ed by the Assessing Officer aforesaid, that it is a fit case for the issue 
of such notice.
18
(b) In a case, other than a case falling under clause (a), no notice 25 
shall be issued under sub-section (I) by an Assessing Officer, who is 
below the rank of Deputy Commissioner, after the expiry of four years 
from the end of the relevant assessment year, unless the Deputy Com­
missioner is satisfied, on, the reasons recorded by such Assessing Officer, 
that it is a fit case for the issue of such notice. jq
(4) Nothing contained in this section limiting the time within which 
any proceedings for assessment or reassessment may be commenced 
shall apply to an assessment or reassessment to be made on the assessee 
or any person in consequence of or to give effect to any finding or 
direction contained in an order under section 27, section. 28, section 29, ^ 
section 31 or section 33 or by a court in any proceedings under any 
other law. ! !
Time 
limit for 
comple­
tion of 
assess­
ment and 
reassess­
ment.
18- (1) No order of assessment shall be made under section 16 at 
any time after the expiry of two years from the end of the assessment 
year in which the gifts were first assessable. 40
(2) No order of assessment or reassessment shall be made under 
section 17 after the expiry of two years from the end of the financial 
year in which the notice under sub-section (1) of that section was 
served. ! 1
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-sections (1) and (2), 
an order of fresh assessment in pursuance of an order passed under


B
section 2?, section 28, or section 29, setting aside or cancelling an assess­
ment, may be made at any time before the expiry of two years from the 
end of the financial year in which the order under section 27 or section 
28 is received by the Chief Commissioner or Commissioner or, as the 
5 case may be, the order under section 29 is passed by the Chief Commis­
sioner or Commissioner.
(4) The provisions of sub-sections (1) and (2) shall not apply to the 
assessment or reassessment made on the assessee in consequence of, or 
to give effect to, any finding or direction contained in an order under 
10 section 27, section 28, section 29, section 31 or section 33 or in an order 
of any court in a proceeding otherwise than, by way of appeal or refer­
ence under this Act and such assessment or reassessment may, subject 
to the provisions of sub-section (3), be completed at any time.
Explanation 1.—In computing the period of limitation for the pur- 
15 poses of this section— ■
(i) the time taken in reopening the whole or any part of the 
proceeding or in giving an opportunity to the assessee to be reheard 
under the proviso to section 51, or
(ii) the period during which the assessment proceeding is stay- 
20 ed by an order or injunction of any court,
shall be excluded. >
Explanation 2.—Where, by an order referred to in sub-section (4), 
any gift is excluded from the taxable gifts for an assessment year in 
respect of an assessee, then, an assessment of such gift for another as­
sessment year shall, for the purposes of sub-section (4) of section 17 
and this section, he deemed to be one made in consequence of, or to give 
effect to, any finding or direction contained in the Said order.
19. (1) Where a return of gifts for any assessment year under sub­
section (I) of section 12, or section 13, or in response to a notice under 
30 clause (i) of sub-section (6) of section 16, is furnished after the 30th day 
of June -of such year, or is not furnished, the assessee shall be liable to 
pay simple interest at the rate of two per cent, for every month or part 
of a month comprised in the period commencing on the 1st day of July 
of the assessment year and,—
Interest 
for de­
faults in 
furnish­
ing 
return 
of gifts.
35 (a) where thg return is furnished after the 30th day of June
ending on the date of furnishing of the return; oi‘
(b) where n,o return has been furnished, ending on the date of 
completion of the assessment under sub-section (7) of section 16,
on the amount of tax payable on the taxable gifts as determined under 
40 sub-section (1) of section 16 or on regular assessment.
Explanation 1.—In this sub-section, “tax payable on the taxable gifts 
as determined under sub-section (1) of section 16” shall not include the 
additional gift-tax, if any, payable under section 16.


Penalty
for
failure to
furnish
returns,
to comply
with
notices
and
conceal­
ment of 
gifts, etc.
Explanation 2.—Where in relation to an assessment year, the assess­
ment is made for the iirst time under section 17, the assessment so made 
shall be regarded as a regular assessment for the purposes of this section.
Explanation 3.—in this sub-section, “tax payable on the taxable gifts 
as determined under sub-section (1) of section 16 or on regular assess- j 
ment" shall, for the purposes of computing the interest payable under 
section 15„ be deemed to be tax payable on the taxable gifts as declared 
in the return.
(2) The interest payable under sub-section (1) shall be reduced by 
the interest, if any, paid under section 15 towards the interest chargeable jq 
under this section.
(3) Where the return of gifts for any assessment year, required by a
notice under sub-section (1) of section 17 issued after the determination 
of taxable gifts unaer sub-section (1) of section 16 or alter the comple­
tion of an assessment under suo-section (5) or sub-section (7) of section 
16 or section 17, is furnished after the expiry of the time allowed under 
such notice, or is not furnished, the assessee shall be liable to pay simple 
interest at the rate of two per cent, lor every month or part of a month 
comprised in the period commencing on the day immediately following 
the expiry of the time allowed as aforesaid, and,— 20
(a) where the return is furnished after the expiry of the time 
aforesaid, ending on the date of furnishing the return; or
(b) where no return has been furnished, ending on the date of
completion of the reassessment under section 17.
on the amount by which the tax on the taxable gifts determined on the 25 
basis of such reassessment exceeds the tax on the taxable gifts as ’deter­
mined under sub-section (1) of section 16 or on the basis of the earlier 
assessment aforesaid.
(4) Where, as-a result of an order under section 27 or sect.on 28 or 
sec non 29 of section 31 or section 33 or section 42, the amount of tax on jq 
which interest was payable under this section has been increased or 
reduced, as the ease may be, the interest shall be increased or reduced 
accordingly, and,—
(i) in a case where the interest is increased, the Assessing Officer 
shall serve on the assessee a notice of demand in the prescribed ^ 
form specifying the sum payable, and such notice of demand shall 
be deemed to be a notice under section 38 and the provisions of this 
Act shall apply accordingly, and
(ii) in a case where the interest is reduced, the excess interest
paid, if any, shall be refunded. 40
20. (1) If the Assessing Officer, Deputy Commissioner (Appeals), 
Commissioner (Appeals), Chief Commissioner or Commissioner or 
Appellate Tribunal, in the course of any proceedings under this Act, is 
satisfied that any person'— .
(a) has failed to comply with a notice under sub-section (4) or 45 
sub-section (6) of section 16; or
(b) has concealed the particulars of any gift or deliberately 
furnished inaccurate particulars thereof,
20


21
10
lie or it may, by order in writing, direct that such person shall pay by 
way of penalty— * 7 y
0) in the cases referred to in clause (a), in addition to the 
amount of gift-tax payable by him, a sum which shall not be less 
than one thousand rupees but which may extend to twenty-five 
thousand rupees for each such failure;
(ii) in the cases referred to in clause (b), in addition to any 
gift-tax payable by him, a sum which shall not be less than twenty 
per cent, but which shall not exceed one and half times the amount 
of the tax if any, which would have been avoided if the return 
made by such person had been accepted as correct:
Provided that in the cases referred to in clause (a), no penalty 
s all be imposable if the person proves that there was a reasonable 
cause for the failure referred to in that clause-
Id Explanation—Where any adjustment is made in the taxable gifts
declared in the return under the first proviso to clause (a) of sub-section
(1) of section 16 and additional gift-tax charged under that section, the 
provisions of this sub-section shall not apply in relation to the adjust­
ments so made.
20 (2) No order imposing a penalty under sub-section (1) shall be
made unless the assessee has been heard or haS been given a reasonable 
Opportunity of being heard. |
(3) No order imposing a penalty under sub-section (1) shall be
made,*—; 1
(i) by the Income-tax Officer, where the penalty exceeds ten 
thousand rupees;
25
(ii) by the Assistant Commissioner, where the penalty ex­
ceeds twenty thousand rupeesj '
except with the prior approval of the Deputy Commissioner.
30 (4) A Deputy Commissioner (Appeals), a Commissioner (Appeals),
a Chief Commissioner or Commissioner or the Appellate Tribunal on 
making an, order under this section imposing a penalty, shall forthwith 
send a copy of the same to the Assessing Officer,
(5) No order imposing a penalty under this section shall be passed—
35 (i) in a case where the assessment to which the proceedings for
imposition of penalty relate is the subject-matter of an appeal to 
the Deputy Commissioner (Appeals) nr Commissioner (Appeals) 
under section 27 or an appeal to the Appellate Tribunal under sub­
section (2) of section 28, after the expiry of the financial vear in 
40 which th£ proceedings, in the course of which action for the im­
position of penalty has beer initiated, are como1et°d. n*- six months 
from the end of the month m which the order of the Denutv Com­
missioner (Appeals) or the Commissioner (Appeals) or. as the case 
may be, the Appellate Tribunal is received by the Chief Commis- 
.45 sioner or Commissioner, whichever is later;


(ii) in a case where the relevant assessment is the subject- 
matter of revision under sub-section (2) of section 29, after the 
expiry of six months from the end of the month in which such order
of revision is passed;
(in) in any other case, after the expiry of the financial year in-5 
which the proceedings, in the course of which action for the impo­
sition of penalty has been initiated, are completed, or six months 
from the end of the month in which action for imposition of penalty 
is initiated, whichever period expires later.
Explanation—In computing the period of limitation for the purposes 10 
of this section,—
(i) the time taken in giving an opportunity to the assessee to 
be reheard under the proviso to section 51, and
22
(ii) any period during which a proceeding under this section 
for the levy of penalty is stayed by an order or injunction of any 1'5 
court,
shall be excluded. |
Penalty
for
failure to 
answer 
questions, 
sign 
state­
ments, 
furnish 
informa­
tion, 
allow 
inspec­
tion, etc.
21. (1) If a person,—
(o) being legally bound to state the truth of any matter touch­
ing the subject of his assessment, refuses to answer any question 20 
put to him by a gift-tax authority in the exercise of his powers 
under this Act; or .
(b) refuses to sign any statement made by him in the course of " 
any proceedings under this Act, which a gift-tax authority may 
legally require him to sign; or 2J
(e) to whom a summons is issued under sub-section (1) of sec­
tion 49, either to attend to give evidence or produce books of account' 
or other documents at a certain place and time omits to attend or 
produce the books of account or documents at the place and time,
he shah pay, by way of penalty, a sum which shall not be less than. five;3Q  
hundred rupees but which may extend to ten thousand rupees' for each 
such default or failure; ■
Provided that no penalty shall be imposable under clause (c) if the - 
person proves that there was reasonable cause for the said failure.
■  r- ,'ry . ■
(2) If a person fails to furnish in due time any statement or infor- 35 
mation which such, person is bound to furnish to the Assessing Officer 
under section 50, he shall pay, by way of penalty,, a sum which shall not 
be less than one hundred rupees but which may extend to two hundred 
rupees for every day during which the failure continues:
Provided that no penalty shall be imposable under this sub-section 40, 
Of the person proves that there was reasonable cause for the said failure. ^


(3) Any penalty imposable under sub-section (1) or sub-section (5) 
shall be imposed,-—
(a) in a case where the contravention, failure or default in res­
pect of which such penalty is imposable occurs in the course of any
i proceeding before a gift-tax authority not lower in rank than a 
Deputy Director or a Deputy Commissioner, by such gift-tax autho­
rity;
(b) in any other case, by the Deputy Director or the Deputy 
Commissioner,t /
1  •  (4) No order under this section shall be passed by any gift-tax autho­
rity referred to in sub-section (3) unless the person on whom penalty is 
proposed to be imposed has been heard or has been given a reasonable 
opportunity of being heard in the matter by such authority.
23
Explanation.—In this section, “gift-tax authority’’ includes a D'rec- 
15 tor General, Director, Deputy Director, Assistant Director or Valuation 
Officer while exercising the powers vested in a court under the Code of 
iollSO B , Civil Procedure, 1908 When trying a suit in respect of the matters speci­
fied in sub-section (1) of section 49.
CHAPTER V
20 Liability to assessment in Special cases
Tax of
; 22. (1) Where a person dies, his executor, administrator or other deceased
legal representative shall be liable to pay out of the estate of the deceased payl'bie 
person, to the extent to which the estate is capable of meeting by legal 
the charge, the gift-tax determined as payable by such person, or any rcpresen- 
25 sum which would have been payable by him under this Act, if he had tat*ve- 
not died.
(2) Where a person dies without having furnished a return under 
section 12 or after having furnished a return which the Assessing Officer 
has reason to believe to be incorrect or incomplete, the Assessing Officer 
30 may make an assessment of the value of the taxable gifts received by ' 
such person and determine the gift-tax payable by him, and fo.r this 
purpose may, by the issue of the appropriate notice which would have 
had to be served upon the deceased person if he had survived, require 
from the executor, administrator or otner regal representative of the 
35 deceased person any accounts, documents, or other evidence which might.
Under the provisions of section 16, have been required from the deceased 
person.
(3) The provisions of sections 12, 13 and 17 shall apply to an executor, 
administrator or, other legal representative as they apply to any person 
40 referred to in those sections.
23. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 3, when it mentof 
appears to the Assessing Officer that any individual may leave India persons 
during the current assessment year, or shortly after its expiry and leaving 
that he has no present intention of returning to India, the gifts received India.
45 by such individual during the period from the expiry of the previous 
year for that assessment year up to the probable date of his departure 
from India, shall be chargeable to gift-tax in that assessment year.


(2) The taxable gifts received in each completed previous year of
part of any previous year included in such period shall be chargeable to 
gift-tax at the .rate or rates specified in Schedule I, and separate assess­
ments shall be made in respect of each such completed previous year 
or part of any previous year. 5
(3) The Assessing Officer may estimate the value of the gifts receiv­
ed by such individual during such period or any part thereof, where 
it cannot be readily determined in the manner provided in this Act.
(4) For the purpose of making an assessment under sub-section (1>, 
the Assessing Officer may serve a notice upon such individual requiring 10 
him to furnish,, within such time, not being less than seven days, as 
may be specified in the notice, a return in the same form and verified 
in the same manner as a return under sub-section (1) of section 12, 
giving particulars of the gifts received by him during each completed 
previous year comprised in the period refered to in sub-section (!) lj 
and during any part of the previous year comprised in that period; and 
the provisions of this Act shall, so far as may be, and subject to the 
provisions of this section, apply as if the notice were a notice issued 
under clause (i) of sub-section (6) of section 16.
(5) The gift-tax chargeable under this section shall be in addition 20 
to the tax, if any, chargeable under any other provision of this Act.
(6) Where the provisions of sub-section (1) are applicable, any 
notice issued by the Assessing Officer under clause (i) of sub-Section
(6) of section 16 or under section 17 in respect of any gift-tax charge­
able under any other provisions of this Act may, notwithstanding any- 25 
thing contained in clause (1) of sub-section (6) of section 16 or section 
17, as the case may be, require, the furnishing of the return by such 
individual within such period, not being less than seven days, as the 
Assessing Officer may think proper.
24. (1) Where the gift of any property is made in favour of a minor 3q 
lunatic or idiot, the guardian or manager who is entitled to receive Ot 
manage the property on behalf of such minor, lunatic or idiot shall be 
the representative assessee.
(2) Every representative assessee shall be deemed to be ah assessee
for the purposes of this Act. 35
(3) Every representative assessee, as regards the gift in respect of 
which, he is a representative assessee, shall be subject to the same duties, 
responsibilities and liabilities as if the gift were gift received by him, 
and shall be liable to assessment in his own name in respect of that 
gift; but any such assessment shall ba deemed to be made upon him in 40 
his representative capacity only, and the tax shall be levied upon and 
recovered from him in like manner and to the same extent as it would 
be leviable upon and recoverable from the person represented by him.
(4) Every representative assessee who, as such, pays any sum under
this Act, shall be entitled to recover the sum so paid from the person on 45 
whose behalf it is paid, or to retain out of any moneys that may be in 
his possession or as may be received by him in his representative capacity, 
an amount equal to the sum so paid, , , j.- '


hp n!? T  repref ntative lessee, or any person who apprehends that 
he may be assessed as a representative assessee, may retain out of anv 
money payable by him t0 be person on whose’ b e ^ J T l Tbta T o
5e i r +( T Dafter "  Se" ti0n ref61Ted as *e principal) a sum 5 equal to his estimated liability under this Act, and in the event of
or peSS ongaser S  T  principal and representative assessee
Z  Z Z t0 be S° retained’ SUch representati \re assessee
amount T y SCCU?  fr°m the AssessinS Officer a certificate stating the 
10 r  i  ° S° ret! ,m d pendin^ final settlement of the liability, and 
certificate so obtained shall be his warrant for retaining that amount.
(6) The amount so recoverable from such representative assessee or 
person at the tune of final settlement shall not exceed the amount spe­
cified m such certificate, except to the extent to which such representa-
five assessee or person may at such time have in his hands additional 
J assets of the principal, ,,
. T  Wll" e an^ ceySon is*  respect of any gift, assessable under 
this Act in the capacity of a representative assessee, he shall not 
m respect of that gift, be assessed under any other provision of this Act
25
20
25
30
25, (1) Where,— i
(i) at the time of making an assessment, it is brought to> the 
notice of the Assessing Officer that a partition has taken place among 
the members of a Hindu undivided family, and the Assessing Officer 
after enquiry, is satisfied that the joint family property has been 
partitioned among the various members or groups of members in 
definite portions, he shall record an 0rdcr to that effect and he shall 
make assessments on the value of the taxable gifts received bv the 
family as such as if no partition had taken place and each member 
or group of members shall be liable jointly and severally for| the 
tax assessed on the value of the? taxable gifts made bv the joint 
family as such: . ..
Provided that where the Assessing Officer is not so satisfied he 
may, by order, declare that such family shall be deemed for ’the 
purposes of this Act to continue to be a Hindu undivided family;
(«) a firm or association of persons liable to pay gift-tax has 
been discontinued or dissolved, the Assessing Officer shall determine 
the gift-tax payable by the firm or association, of persons as such as 
if no such discontinuance or dissolution had taken place and every 
person who was at the time of such discontinuance or dissolution, a 
partner of the firm or a member of the association, as the case may 
be, shall be jointly and severally liable for the amount 0f tax or 
penalty payable, and all the provisions of Chapter VII, so far as may 
be, shall apply to any such assessment or imposition of penalty.
(2) If the Assessing Officer, the Deputy Commissioner (Appeals)", 
the Commissioner (Appeals) or the Appellate Tribunal in the course of 
45 Sny proceeding under this Act in respect of any such firm or other asso­
ciation of persons as is referred to in clause (it) of sub-section (I) is 
satisfied that the firm or association is guilty of any of the acts specified in
35
40
Liability 
after 
partition 
of a 
Hindu 
undivided 
family 
and in 
the case 
of dis­
conti­
nued 
firm or 
associa- 
tonof 
persons.


fclaiise (a) or clause (b) or clause (c) of sub-section (1) of section 20. he 
Dr it may impose or direct the imposition of a penalty in accordance 
with the provisions of that section.
' 26. (I) Every person— ; p ;:
(a) who is the liquidator of any company which is being wound 5 
- up, whether under the orders of a court or otherwise; or
(by who has been appointed the receiver of any assets of th“ei 
company,
(hereinafter referred to as the liquidator) shall, within thirty days 
after he has become such liquidator, give notice of his appointment as 10 
such to the Assessing Officer who is entitled to assess the taxable gifts 
received by the company. ■
(2) The Assessing Officer shall, after making such enquiries or calling
for such information as he may deem fit, notify to the liquidator within 
three months from the date on which he receives notice of the appoint- *5 
ment of the liquidator the amount which, in the opinion of the assessing 
officer, would be sufficient to provide for any tax which is then, or is 
likely thereafter to become, payable by the company. :
(3) The liquidator—
-
(“) shall not, without the leave of the Chief Commissioner or 20 
. Commissioner, part with any of the assets of the company or the 
properties in his hands until he has been notified by the Assessing 
Officer under sub-section (2); and
r (k) on being so notified, shall set aside an amount, equal to the
. . amount notified and, until he so sets aside such amount, shall not 25
part with any of the assets of the company or the properties in his 
hands; -
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall debar the 
liquidator from parting with such assets or properties for the purpose 
of the payment of the tax payable by the company or for making any 30 
payment to secure creditors whose debts are entitled under law to 
priority of payment oyer debts due t0 Government on the date of 
liquidation or for meeting such costs and expenses of the wounding up of 
the company as are in the opinion of the Chief Commissioner or Com­
missioner reasonable, 35
(4) If the liquidator fails to give the notice in accordance with sub­
section (I) or fails to set aside th|e amount as required by sub-section (3) 
or parts with any of the assets of the company or the properties in his 
hands in contravention of the provisions of that sub-section; he shall be 
personally liable for the payment of the tax which the company would 
bh liable to pay: J ■4U
Provided that if the amount of any tax payable by the company is 
notified under sub-section (2); the personal liability of the liquidator 
under this sub-section shall be to the extent of such amount.


27
10
15
(5) Where there are more liquidators than one, the obligations and 
liabilities attached to the liquidator under this section shall attach to all 
the liquidators jointly and severally.
CRAPTER VI
Appeals, revisions And references
27. (1) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (2), any persons—
(a) objecting to the value of taxable gifts determined under this 
Act; or
(b) objecting to the amount of gift-tax determined as payable 
by him under this Act; or
(c) denying his liability to be assessed under this Act; or
(d) objecting to any penalty imposed by the Assessing Officer 
under section 20; or
(e) objecting to any order of the Assessing Officer under clause 
(i) of sub-section (1) of section 25; or
(f) objecting to any penalty imposed by the Assessing Officer 
under sub-section (1) of section 221 of the Income-tax Act as applied 
under section 40 for the purposes of gift-tax; or
T*>
20
V , ( g) objecting to an order of the Assessing Officer under section
42 having the effect of enhancing the assessment or reducing a refund 
or an order refusing to allow the claim made by the assessee under 
that section,
may appeal to the Deputy Commissioner (Appeals) against the assess­
ment or order, as the case may be, in the prescribed form and verified in 
25 the prescribed manner:
' : Provided that no appeal shall lie under clause (f) unless the tax has 
been paid before the appeal is filed.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), any 
person—
30
35
(a) objecting to the value of taxable gifts determined under this 
Act or objecting to the amount of gift-tax determined as payable by 
him or denying his liability to be assessed under this Act where the
' value of taxable gifts determined on assessment exceeds two lakh 
rupees; or
(b) objecting to any assessment or order referred to in clauses
(o) to (g) (both inclusive) of sub-section (1), where such assessment
or order has been made by the Deputy Commissioner in exercise of 
the powers or functions conferred on or assigned to him under sec­
tion 7 or section 10; or
Appeal 
to the 
Deputy 
Commis­
sioner 
(Appeals) 
from 
orders of 
Assessing 
Officers.
40 (c) objecting to any penalty imposed under sub-section (1) of
section 20 with the previous approval of the Deputy Commissioner 
as specified in sub-section (3) of that section; ori ts *- ' ' '
(d) objecting to any penalty imposed by the Deputy Director 
or the Deputy Commissioner under section 21; or


(e) objecting to any order made by an Assessing Officer in the 
case of such persons or classes of persons as the Board may, having 
regard to the nature of the eases, the complexities involved and other 
relevant considerations, direct,
may appeal to the Commissioner (Appeals) against the assessment or 5 
order, as the case may be, in the prescribed form and verified in the 
prescribed manner:
Provided that no appeal shall lie under clause (b) of this sub-section 
against any order referred to in clause (f) of sub-section (1) unless the 
tax has been paid before the appeal is filed. 10
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (2),the Board 
or the Director General or the Chief Commissioner or the Commissioner, 
if so authorised by the Board, may, by order in writing, transfer any 
appeal which is pending before a Deputy Commissioner (Appeals) and 
any matter arising out of or connected with such appeal and which is so lj 
pending, to the Commissioner (Appeals), if the Board or as the case may 
be, the Director 'General, the Chief Commissioner or the Commissioner 
(at the request of the appellant or otherwise) is satisfied that it is neces­
sary or expedient so to do having regard to the nature of the case, the 
complexities involved and other relevant consideration and the Com- ^0 
missioned (Appeals) may proceed with such appeal 0r matter from the 
stage at which it was before it was so transferred:
Provided that the appellant may demand that before proceeding fur­
ther with the appeal or matter, the previous proceeding or any part 
thereof he reopened or that he be reheard. 25
(4) An appeal shall he presented within thirty days of the receipt of
the notice of demand relating to the assessment or penalty objected to, 
or the date on which any order objected to, is communicated to him, but 
the Deputy Commissioner (Appeals) or, as the case mav be, the Commis­
sioner (Appeals) may admit an appeal after the expiration of the period 30 
aforesaid if he is satisfied that the appellant had sufficient cause for not 
presenting the appeal within that period-
(5) The Deputy Commissioner (Appeals) nr as the case may he, the
Commissioner (Appeals) shall fix a day ard place for the hearing of the 
appeal and may from time to time adjourn the hearing. 35
(<5) The Deputy Commissioner (Appeals) or, as the1  case may he, 
the Commissioner (Appeals) may,—
(a) at the hearing of an appeal, allow an appellant tn g0 into 
any ground of appeal, not specified in the grounds of appeal;
(h)’ before disposing of an appeal, make such further inquiry 40 
as he thinks fit or cause further inquiry to he made hv the Assessing 
Officer. ! -I
28


(7) In disposing of an appeal, the Deputy Commissioner (Appeals) 
or, as the case may be, the. Commissioner (Appeals), may pass such order
as he thinks fit which may include an order enhancing the amount of 
gift-tax determined or penalty imposed:
5 Provided that no order enhancing the amount of gift-tax determined 
or penalty imposed shall be made unless the person affected thereby 
has been given a reasonable opportunity of showing cause against such 
enhancement.
•<i > •  : C  ev- a.., j -■  •  •  h:Y vj, \ ,1  ,
(8) In disposing of an appeal, the Deputy Commissioner (Appeals) 
10 or, as th)e case may be, the Commissioner (Appeals), may consider and
decide any matter arising out of the proceedings in which the order ap­
pealed against was passed, notwithstanding that such matter was not 
raised before the Deputy Commissioner (Appeals) or,'ns the case may 
be, the Commissioner (Appeals) by the appellant.
15 (9) The order of the Deputy Commissioner (Appeals) or, as the
c%S£ ipay, be, the Commissioner (Appeal:-;) disposing of. the appeal shall 
be.-in writing and shall state the points lor determination, the decision 
thereon and the reasons for the decision.
(10) A copy of every order passed by the Deputy Commissioner 
20 (Appeals) or, as the case may be, the Commissioner (Appeals), under this
section, shall be forwarded to the appellant and the Chief Commissioner 
or Commissioner.
28. (I) An assesses, objecting to an order passed by the Deputy 
Commissioner (Appeals) or, the Commissioner (Appeals) under section 
25 20 or section 21 or section 27 may appeal to the Appellate Tribunal within 
sixty days of the date on which the order is communicated to him.
seia.j .... ,, ■  j: ,
(2) The Commissioner may, if he is not satisfied as to the correct­
ness of any order passed by a Deputy Commissioner (Appeals) i or, a 
Commissioner (Appeals) under section 27, direct the Assessing Officer
30 to appeal to the Appellate Tribunal a'gaint such order, and such appeal 
may be made at any time before the expiry of sixty days of the date on 
which the order is communicated to the Commissioner. ■
(3) The Assessing Officer or the assessee, as the! case may be, on 
receipt of tha notice that an appeal against the, or.dqr of the Deputy
35 Commissioner (Appeals) or the Commissioner (Appeals), has'been pre­
ferred under sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) by the other party may, 
notwithstanding that he may not have appealed against such order or 
any part thereof, within thirty days of the receipt of the notice, file a 
memorandum of cross objections, verified in the prescribed manner, 
40 against any part of the order of the Deputy Commissioner (Appeals) or 
the Commissioner (Appeals'), and such memorandum shall be disposed 
of by the Appellate Tribunal as iE it were an appeal presented within 
the time specified in sub-section (1) nr sub-section (2).
(4) The Appellate Tribunal may admit an appeal or permit the fiD
45 ing of a memorandum of cross objections after the expiry of the rele-


ad
Vant period referred to in sub-section (I) or sub-section (2) or sub*
section (3) it it is satisfied that there was sufficient cause for not pre­
senting it within that period.
(5) An appeal to the Appellate Tribunal shall be in the prescribed 
form and shali be verified in the prescribed manner and shall, except in 5 
the case of an appeal referred to in sub-section (2), be accompanied by
a fee of two hundred rupees.
(6) The Appellate Tribunal may, after giving the parties to the ap­
peal an opportunity of being heard, pass such orders thereon as it thinks 
nVf'and any such orders may include an order enhancing the amount of 10 
giit-tax determined or penalty imposed:
>  ! .
Provided that no order enhancing the amount of gift-tax determined 
or penalty imposed shall be made unless the person affected thereby has 
been given a reasonable opportunity of showing cause against such en­
hancement . 15
(7) A copy of every order passed by the Appellate Tribunal under 
this section shall be forwarded to the assesses and the Commissioner,
(S) Save as provided in section 31, any order passed by the Appel­
late Tribunal on appeal shall be final.
(9) The provisions of sub-sections (I>, (4) and (5) of section 255 of 20 
the Income-tax Act shall apply to iiie Appellate Tribunal in the dischar­
ge of its function under this Act as they apply to it in the] discharge of 
its functions under the Income-tax Act.
Powers of 
Commis­
sioner 
to revise 
orders of 
subordi­
nate 
authori­
ties.
2a. (1) The Commissioner may, either on his own motion or on ap­
plication made by an assessee in this behalf, call for the record of any 
proceeding under this Act in which an order has been passed by any 
authority subordinate to him, and may make such enquiry, or cause 
such enquiry to be made, and, subject to the provisions of this Act, 
pass such order thereon, not being an order prejudicial to the assessee, 
as the Commissioner thinks fit: --
Provided that the Commissioner shall not revise any order under this 
sub-section in any case—
(a) where an appeal against the order lies to the Deputy Com­
missioner (Appeals) or to the Commissioner (Appeals) or to the 
Appellate Tribunal and the time within which such appeal can be
made has not expired or, in the case of an appeal to the Commis­
sioner (Appeals) or to the Appellate Tribunal, the assessee has not 
waived his right of appeal;
(b) where the order is pending in appeal before the Deputy 
Commissioner (Appeals) or lias been the subject of an appeal to the 40 
Commissioner (Appeals) or to the Appellate Tribunal;
(c) where the application is made by the assessee for such re­
vision unless—
' ■  . . .(i) the application is accompanied by a fee of rupees 
twenty-five; and


31
(ii) the application is made within one year from the date 
of the order sought to be revised or within such further period 
as the Commissioner may think fit to allow on being satisfied 
that the assessee was prevented by sufficient cause from making 
5 the application within that period; and
(d) where the order is sought to be revised! by the Commission­
er on his own motion, if such order ig made more than one year 
previously. 1
Explanation■ —For the purposes of this sub-section,—
10 (a) the Deputy Commissioner (Appeals) shall be deemed to be
an authority subordinate to the Commissioner; and
(b) an order by the Commissioner declining to interfere shall 
be deemed not to be an order prejudicial to the assessee.
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions contained irs pub-section.
15 (1), the Commissioner may call for and examine the record of any pro­
ceeding under this Act, and if he considers that any order passed there­
in by an Assessing Officer is erroneous in so far as it is prejudicial to 
the interest of revenue, he may, after giving the assessee an opportu­
nity of being heard, and after making or causing to be made such en-
20 quiry as he deems necessary, pass such order thereon as the circum­
stances of the case justify including an order enhancing or modifying the 
assessment or cancelling it and directing a fresh assessment.
Explanation.—For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that, 
for the purposes of this sub-section,—
25 (a) an order passed by the Assessing Officer shall include an
order passed by the Deputy Commissioner in exercise of the pow­
ers or in performance of the functions of an Assessing Officer con­
ferred on or assigned to him under orders or directions issued by 
the Board or by the Chief Commissioner or Director General or
30 Commissioner authorised bv the Board in this behalf under section 
120 of the Income-tax Act read with' section 7 of this Act;
(b) “record” shall include all records relating to any proceed­
ing under this Act available at the time of examination by the Com­
missioner;
35 (c) where any order referred to in this sub jection and posted
by the Assessing Officer had been the subject-matter of any appeal, 
the powers of the 'Commissioner under this sub-section sb*’1  ex­
tend to such matters as had not been considered and. decided in such 
appeal 1
40 (3) No order shall be made under sub-section (2V after the expiry
of two years from the end of the financial year in which the order sought 
to be revised was passed.
Explanation—In computing the period of limitation fo- Purpose* of 
this sub-section, the time taken in .giving an opportunity to the assessee
45 to be reheard under the proviso to section 51 and any period du-ng 
which anv proceeding under this section is stayed by an order or in. 
junction of any court shall be excluded.


Appeal
to the
Appellate 
Tribunal 
from 
orders of 
penalty or 
enhance­
ment by 
Chief 
Jommis- 
si'oner or 
Commis­
sioner
Refer­
ence to 
High 
Chief
30. (1) An assessee objecting to an order of penalty passed by the 
Chief Commissioner or Commissioner under section 20 or section 21 or 
to an order of enhancement passed by him under section 2S) or an order 
passed by the Director General or Director under section 21 may ap­
peal to the Appellate Tribunal within sixty days of the date on which 5 
the order is eomfnun’oated to him,
(2) An appeal to the Appellate Tribunal under sub-section (1) shall 
be in the prescribed form and shall be verified in the prescribed manner 
and shall be accompanied by a fee of two hundred rupees-
(3) Thai provisions of sub-sections (4), (6), (7) and (S) of section 23 10 
shall apply in relation to any appeal under thfS section as they apply in 
relation to any appeal under that section.
31. (1) The assessee or the Chief Commissioner or Commissioner 
may, within sixty days of the date upon which he is served with notice 
of an order’ under -section 28 or section 30. by application in the prescri- 35 
bed form, accompanied, where the application is made by the assessee, 
by a fee of two hundred rupees require the Appellate Trbunal to re­
fer to the High Court any question of law arising out of such order 
and, subject to the other provisions contained in this section, the Appel­
late Tribunal shall, within ore hundred and twenty days bf the receipt „„'It ' /Uof such application, draw up a statement of the Case and- refer it to the 
High Court.
(2) The Appellate Tribunal may, if it is satisfied that the applicant 
was prevented by sufficient cause from presenting the application with­
in the period specified In sub-section (1), allow it to be presented with- 25 
in a further period not exceeding thirty days.
(3) Tf. on an Application made under sub-section (1), the Appellate 
Tribunal,—
32
(a) refuses to state a case on the ground that no question of law
arises, or 30
(b) rejects it on the ground that it is time-barred,
the applicant may. within ninety days from the date on which he is 
served with a notice bf refusal or rejection, as the case may be. apply 
to the High Court, and the High Court may, if it is not satisfied with the 
correctness of the decision of the Appellate Tribunal, require the Ap- 35 
peltate Tribunal to state the case to the High Court, and on receipt of 
such requisition the Appellate Tribunal shall state the case:
Prov;ded that, if in. any case where the Appellate Tribunal has been 
required by an assessee to state a case, the Appellate Tribunal refuses 
to do so on the ground that no question of law arises, the assessee may. 4Q  
within thirty days from the date on which he receives the notice of 
refusal to state the case, withdraw bis application, and if b= does so, 
the fee pa;d by him under sub-section fit shall be refunded to him.
(4) Tf, on an application made under this section, the Appellate Tri­
bunal is of the opinion that on account of a conflict in the decisions of 45


High Courts in respect of any particular question of law, it is expedient 
that a reference should be made direct to the Supreme Court, the Ap­
pellate Tribunal may draw up a statement of the case and refer it 
through its President direct to the Supreme Court.
5 (5) The statement to the High Court or the Supreme Court shall set-
forth the facts, determination of the Appellate Tribunal and the question 
of law which arises out of the case.
(6) If the High Court or the Supreme Court is not satisfied that the 
case as stated is sufficient to enable it to determine the question, of law 
10 raised thereby, it may require the Appellate Tribunal to make such 
modification therein as it may direct.
(7) The High Court or the Supreme Court, upon hearing any such 
case, shall decide the question of law raised therein, and n doing so, 
may’ if it thinks fit, alter the form of the question of law and 
15 shall deliver judgment thereon containing the grounds on which such 
decision is founded and shall send a copy of the judgment under the 
seal of the Court and the signature of the Registrar to the Appellate 
Tribunal and the Appellate Tribunal shall pass such orders as are neces­
sary to dispose of the case conformably to such judgment.
2o (8) The cost of any reference to the High Court or the Supreme 
Court which shall not include the fee for making the reference, shall be 
in, the discretion of the Court.
32. When a case has been stated to the High Court under section 31, 
it shall be heard by a Bench of not less than two Judges of the High 
25 Court and shall be decided in accordance with the opinion of such Jud­
ges or of the; majority of such Judges, if any:
Provided that where there is no such majority, the Judges shall 
state the point of law upon which they differ and the case shall then be 
heard upon that point only by one or more of the Judges of the High 
30 Court, and such point shall be decided according to the opinion of the 
majority of the Judges who have heard the case including those who 
first heard it. •
33. (1) An appeal shall lie to the Supreme Court from any judg­
ment of the High Court delivered on a case stated under section 31 in 
3 5 any case which the High Court certifies as a fit case for appeal to the 
Supreme Court.
(2) Where the judgment of the High Court is varied or reversed 
on appeal under tiffs section, effect shall be given to the order of the 
Supreme Court in the manner provided in sub-section (7) of section 31­
40 (3) The High Court may, on application made to it for the execu­
tion, of any order of the Supreme Court in respect of any costs awarded 
by it, transmit the order for execution to any court subordinate to the 
High Court,


Tax 
to be 
paid 
notwith­
standing 
refer­
ence, 
etc.
Defini­
tion of 
High 
Court,
Gift-tax 
by whom 
payable.
Gift-tax 
to be 
charged
on pro­
perty 
gifted.
■N otice of 
demand.
Recovery 
of tax 
and
penalties.
34. Notwithstanding that a reference has been made to the High 
Court or the Supreme Court, or an appeal has bt^en preferred to the 
Supreme Court, tax shall be payable in accordance with the assessment 
made in the case.
34
35. In this Chapter, ‘‘High Court” means— 5
(i) in relation to and State, the High Court of that State;
(ii) in relation to the Union territory of Delhi, the High Court 
of Delhi;
(Hi) in relation to the States of Arunaehal Pradesh and Mizo­
ram, the Gauhati High Court (the High Court of Assam, Nagaland, 10. 
Meghalaya, Manipur, Tripura and Mizoram);
(in) in relation to the Union, territory of Andaman and Nicobar 
Islands, the High Court at Calcutta;
(v) in relation to the Union territory of Lakshadweep, the 
High Court of Kerala'; J5
(ui) in relation to the Union territory of Chandigarh, the 
High Court of Punjab and Haryana;
(vii) in relation to the State of Goa and the Union territories 
of Dadra and Nagar Haveli and Daman: and Bin, the High Court at 
Bombay; ; 20
(viii) in relation, to the Union territory of Pondicherry, the 
High Court at Madras.
CHAPTER VII
Payment and recovery of gift-tax
36. Subject to the provisions of this Act, gift-tax shall be payable by 25 
the donee.
37. Gift-tax payable in respect of any gift comprising immovable
property shall be a first charge on that property but any such charge 
shall not affect the title of a bona fide purchaser for valuable considera­
tion without notice of the charge. 30
38. When any tax, additional gift-tax, interest, penalty, fine or any 
other sum is payable in consequence of any order passed under this Act, 
the Assessing Officer shall serve upon the assessee a notice of demand 
in the prescribed form specifying the sum so payable.
39. (1) Any amount specified as payable in a notice of demand under 35 
section 38 shall be paid within thirty days of the service of the notice
at the place and to the person mentioned in the notice;
Provided that where the Assessing Officer has any reason to believe 
that it will be' detrimental to revenue if the full period of thirty days 
aforesaid is allowed, he may, with,! the previous approval of the Deputy 
Commissioner, direct that the sum specified in the notice of demand 
shall he paid within such period being a period, less than the period of 
thirty days aforesaid as may be specified by him in the notice of demand,


(2) If the amount specified in any notice of demand under section 
38 is riot paid within the period limited under sub-section (1),, the 
assessee shall be liable to pay simple interest at one and one-half per 
cent, for every month or part of a month comprised in the period com-
5 mencing from the day immediately following the end of the period men­
tioned in sub-section (1) and ending with the day on which the amount 
is paid:
Provided that where as a result of an order under section 27, or 
section 28, or section 29, or section 30, or section 31. or section 33, o.r sec-
10 tion 42, the amount on which interest was payable under this section 
had been reduced, the interest shall be reduced accordingly and the 
excess interest paid, if any., shall be refunded.
(3) Without prejudice to the provisions contained in sub-section (2), 
on an application made by the assessee before the expiry of the due
15 date under sub-section (1), the Assessing Officer may extend the time 
for payment or allow payment by instalments subject to such conditions 
as he may think fit to impose in the circumstances of the case.
(4) If tile amount is not paid within the time limited under sub­
section (1) or extended under sub-section (3), as the case may be, at the
20 place and to the person mentioned in the sa;d notice, the assessee shall 
be deemed to be in default,
(5) If, in a case where payment by instalments is allowed under 
sub-section (3), the assessee commits default in paying any one of the 
instalments within the time fixed under that sub-section, the assessee
25 shall be deemed to be in default as. to the whole of the amount then out­
standing, and the other instalment or instalments shall be deemed to 
have been due on the same date as the instalment actually in default.
(6) Where the assessee has presented an appeal under section 27, 
the Assessing Officer may in his discretion and subject to such condi-
30 tions as he may think fit to impose in the circumstances of the case, 
treat the assessee as not ‘being in default in respect of the amount in 
dispute in the appeal, even though the time for payment has expired as 
long as such appeal remains undisposed of.
40. The provisions contained in sections 221 to 227, 228A, 229 and Mode of
,, 232 of the Income-tax Act and the Second and the Third recovery. 
Schedules to that Act and any rules, made thereunder shall, so 
far as may be, apply as if the said provisions were Provisions 
of this Act and referred to gift-tax, additional gift-tax and 
sums imposed by way of penalty, fine and interest under this Act in-
40 stead of to income-tax and sums imposed by way of penalty, fine and 
interest under that. Act and to the corresponding gift-tax authorities 
instead of to the income-tax authorities specified therein.
Explanation l—Any reference to sub-section (2) or sub-section (6) 
of section 220 of the Income-tax Act in the said provisions of that Act
45 or the rules made thereunder shall be construed as references to sub­
sections (2) and (6) respectively of section 39 of this Act.
Explanation II—The Chief Commissioner or Commissioner and the 
Tax Recovery Officer referred to in the Income-tax Act shall be deemed
35


to be the corresponding gift-tax authorities for the purpose of recovery 
oi gift-tax, additional gift-tax and sums imposed by way of penalty, 
fine and interest under this Act.
26
CHAPTER VIII
Refunds .
Refunds. ^ Where, as a result of any order passed in appeal or other
proceeding under this Act, refund of any amount becomes due to the 
assessee., the Assessing Officer shall, except as otherwise provided in 
this Act, refund the amount to the assessee without his having to make 
any claim in that behalf:
Provided that where, by the order aforesaid,_
(a) 
an assessment is set aside or cancelled and an order of fresh 
assessment is directed to be made, the refund, if any, shall become 
due only on the making of such fresh assessment;
(h) the assessment is annulled, the refund shall become due 15 
only of thg amount, if any, of the tax paid in excess of the tax 
chargeable on the taxable gift returned by the assessee.
(2) Where refund of an amount becomes due to the assessee as a 
result of an order under this Act or under the provisions of sub-section
(I) of section 16 after a return has been made under section 12 or sec- 20 
tion 13 or in response to a notice under clause (i) or sub section (6) of 
section 16 and the Assessing Officer is of the oioinion, having regard to 
the fact that—
(t) a notice has been issued, or is likely to be issued, under sub­
section (4) of section 16 in respect of the said return; or 25
(ii) the order is the subject-matter of an appeal or further 
proceeding; or
(Hi) any other proceeding under this Act is pending, that a 
grant of refund is likely to adversely affect the revenue, the 
Assessing Officer may, with the previous approval of the Chief Com- 30 
missioner or Commissioner, withhold the refund till such time as 
the Chief Commissioner or Commissioner may determine-
(3) (a) Where refund of any amount becomes due to the assessee 
under this Act he shall, subject to the provisions of this sub-section, be 
entitled to receive, in addition to the said amount, simple interest there- 35 
on calculated at the rate of one and one-half per cent, for every month or 
part of a month comprised in the period or periods from the date or, as 
the case may be, dates of payment of the tax or penalty to the date on 
which the refund is granted.
Explanation—For the purposes of this clause, “date of payment of 40 
the tax or penalty” means the date on and from which the amount of 
tax or penalty specified in the notice of demand issued under section 38 
is paid in excess of such demand.


•  r CeedingS relUlting in the refund are de]ayed for reasonsattributable to the assesses whether wholly or in part period of the delay
ff mSbl1^ 16]t0 ^  ShaU be excluded from the Period for which interest5 * fd w h ^ re  any question arises as to the period to he excluded,
i s a e eci ed by the e-hief Commissioner or Commissioner whose 
decision thereon shall be final.
Wbere’ aS a Tesult of on order under sub-section (5) or sub-section
(7) of section 16 or section 17 or section 27 or section 281 or section 23 or
10 SSCt1?? 31 0! SeCtl0ri 33 or section 42>  the Bmaant on which the interest was 
payable under clause (a) has been increased or reduced, as the case mav 
he, interest shall be increased or reduced accordingly, and, in a case where 
the interest ls reduced, the Assessing Officer shall serve on the assessee a 
notice of demand in the prescribed form specifying the amount of the ex-
15 I f  l rf tp “ dand re< 3uiring him to pay such amount; and such notice
. demand shall be deemed to be: a notice under section 38 and the provi- 
siojis of . this Act shall apply accordingly.
(4) Where under any of the provisions of this Act, a refund is found 
to be due to any person, the Assessing Officer, Deputy Commissioner 
20 (Appeals) Commissioner (Appeals) or Chief Commissioner or Gommis- 
sioner, as the case may be, may, in lieu of payment of the refund, se+ off 
the amount to be refunded or any part of that amount, against the sum, 
if any, remaining payable under this Act by the person to whom the refund 
is due, after giving an intimation in writing to such person of the action 
proposed to be taken under this section.
25 CHAPTER IX
MrscELLANEOtrs
30
35
40
45
42 (1) With a view to rectifying any mistake apparent from the
record— 1
(a) the Assessing Officer may amend any order of assessment or 
of refund or any other order passed by him;
(b) a gift-tax authority may amend any intimation sent by it 
under sub-section (1) of section 16 or enhance or reduce the amount 
of refund granted by it under that sub-section;
(c) the Deputy Director or Deputy Commissioner or Director or 
Commissioner or Deputy Commissioner (Appeals) or Commissioner 
(Appeals) may amend any order passed by him under section 21;
(A) the Deputy Commissioner (Appeals) or Commissioner 
(Appeals) may amend any order passed by him under section 27;
(e) the Commissioner may amend any order passed by him under
section 29; ,
(f) ibe Appellate Tribunal may amend any order passed bv it 
under section 28 or section 30.
(2) Subject to the other provisions of this section, the authority con­
cerned—' .
(a) may make an amendment under sub-section (1) of its own 
motion; and


(b) shall make such amendment for rectifying any such ndsfralm 
which has been brought to its notice by the assesses, and where the 
authority concerned is the Deputy Commissioner (Appeals) or the 
Commissioner (Appeals) or the Appellate Tribunal, by the Assessing 
Officer also. 5
(3) An amendment, which has the effect of enhancing an assessment 
or reducing a refund or otherwise increasing the liability of the assessee,
shall not be made under this section unless the authority concerned has 
given notice to the assessee of its intention so to do and has allowed the 
assessee a reasonable opportunity of being heard. lo
(4) Where an amendment is made under this section an order shall 
be passed in writing by the gift-tax authority concerned.
(5) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (2) of section 41, where 
any such amendment has the effect of reducing the assessment, the Asses­
sing Officer shall make any refund which may be due to such assessee. 15
(6) Where any such amendment has the effect of enhancing the 
assessment or reducing a refund already made, the Assessing Officer shall 
serve on the assessee a notice of demand in the prescribed form specifying
the sum payable, and such notice of demand shall be deemed to be issued 
under section 38 and the provisions of this Act shall apply accordingly. 20
(7) No amendment under this section shall be made after the expiry 
of four years from the end of the financial year in which the order sought 
to be. amended was passed.
43. (1) If any person fails without reasonable cause,—
(a) to furnish in due time any return of gifts under this Act; 25
(b) to produce, or cause to be produced, on or before the date
mentioned in any notice under sub-section (5) of section 16, such 
accounts, records and documents as are referred to in the notice;
he shall, on conviction before a magistrate, be punishable with fine which 
may extend to rupees ten for every day during which the default continues. 30
(2) If a person makes a statement in a verification in any return of 
gifts furnished jindst this Act or in a verification mentioned in section 27,
23 or 30 which is false, and which he either knows or believes to be false, 
or does not believe to be true, he shall, on conviction before a magistrate,
be punishable with simple imprisonment which may extend to one year, 35. 
or with fine which may extend to rupees one thousand, or with both. '
(3) If a person abets or induces in any manner another person to make 
and deliver an account, statement or declaration relating to any gifts 
chargeable to tax which is false and which he either knows to be false or 
■roes not believe to be true, he shall, on conviction before a magistrate, 49 
be punishable with .simple imprisonment which may extend to six months ' 
or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both.
(4) A person shall not bp proceeded agaipst for an offence under this
Act except with the previous sanction of the Chief Commissioner or 
Director Ganeral or Commissioner: * «


or a body of individuals,
"  * "*  «  “ « « *  ”<
(a) the Board or a Chief Commissioner or a Director General 
authorised by the Board in this; behalf in Y if generaltinn wra,H iL +n . / s behalf? in a case where the prosecu- 
■  le at the instance of the Commissioner (Appeals);
in any J f e f l  C «M o n e r or Director General or Commissioner,
Explanation,—For the purposes Gf this section “magistrate” means 
a presidency magistrate or a magistrate of the first class.
39
44. (1) Where an offence underthisAct has been committed by a
company, every person who, at the time the offence was committed was
.5 L S l f  “ d w“  I'sp«“ ‘Me «» <* *»= S i r
f c e „ffT pany,/ \ w,f’d s ““  c° " w 51,311 ■>' O'5”*®1  *» b.
£ 3  “ d  s t a I !  b6 lhb,<i fc »" ■«»
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render any
op S“ Ft™  hahle t0 any P™ishment if he proves that the offence was
eenrTt T u  S kaowled^ °r that he had exercised all due dili­gence to prevent the commission of such offence.
(2) Notwithstanding. ,** „ , , - anything contained in sub-section (1) where
n offence under this Act has been committed by a company and it
proved that the offence has been cor 'J' ’ - tomPany an« W
25 of, or is attributable to any neglect 
secretary or other officer of the
proved that the offence has been com m itted^
on the part of, any director, manager, 
„ j. company', such director manager
and shafl "ten Sha11 £f°. to be Sui%  «  that offenceand shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.
Explanation. -For the purposes of this section,—
(a) ‘ company” means a body corporate, and includes—
(i) a firm, and
<?0 an association of persons 
whether incorporated or not; and
(b) “director”, in relation to—
35 Ci) a firm, means a partner in the firm,
(ii) an association of persons or a body of individuals, means 
any member controlling the affairs thereof.
45. (1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a
™dlVlded family‘ the karta thereof shall be deemed to be guilty Of the offence and shaTI Ki Ite-w- u; ......., . . . * . r.
Offences 
by com­
panies.
Offenses
an r* «  '".7 r;:7v ’ ‘v“,r  “*“ ’«««-■ m il aeemed to be guilty by Mibaii
40 - e offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished undiyided
accordingly: &  1 faibilite.
IcaJn thBt noth!n,g contained in this sub-section shall render the
f* liable to any punishment if he proves that the oflWe was commit­
,, ^  0r that he had all due diligence to45 prevent the commission of such offence.


Section 360 
of the 
Code of 
Criminal 
Procedure, 
1973 a®d 
the Pro­
bation of 
Offenders 
Act,
1958, 
sot to 
apply. 
Presump­
tion aa 
t©
culpable
mental
state.
Proof of
entries
in
records or 
docu­
ments.
Power
regarding
discovery,
production
of
evidence, 
etc. '
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), where 
an offence under this Act has been committed by a Hindu undivided 
family and it is proved that the offence has been committed with the 
consent or connivance of, or is attributable to any [neglect on the part of, 
any member of the Hindu undivided family, such member shall also be 5 
deemed to he guilty of that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded 
against and punished accordingly.
.46. Nothing contained in section 360 of the Code of Criminal Proce­
dure, 1973, or in the Probation of Offenders Act, 1958, shall apply to a 2 of 1974.
person convicted of an offence under this Act, unless that person is 10 20of,95S' 
eighteen years of age.
40
47, (1) In any prosecution for any offence under this Act which 
requires a culpable mental state on the part of the accused, the court shall 
presume the existence of such mental state but it shall be a defence for 
the. accused to prove the fact that he had no such mental state with 15 
respect to the act charged as an offence in that prosecution.
Explanation,—In this sub-section “culpable mental state” includes 
intention, motive1  or knowledge of a fact, or belief in, or reason to believe, 
a fact,
(2) For the purposes of this section, a fact is said to be proved only 20 
when the court believes it to exist beyond reasonable doubt and not 
merely when its existence is established by a preponderance of probability.
48, Entries in the records or other documents in the custody of a 
gift-tax authority shall be admitted in evidence in any proceedings for the 
prosecution of any person for an offence under this Act, and all such 25 
entries may be proved either by the production of the records or other 
documents in the custody of the gift-tax authority containing such 
entries, or by the production of a copy of the entries certified by the gift- 
tax authority having custody of the records or other documents under its 
signature and. 'stating that it is a true copy of the original entries anfi that 30 
such original entries are contained in the records or other documents in 
his custody.
49, (1) The Assessing Officer, the-Deputy Commissioner (Appeals), 
the Commissioner (Appeals), the Chief Commissioner or Commissioner 
and the Appellate Tribunal shall, for the purposes) of this Act, have the 35 
same powers as are vested in a court under the Code of Civil Procedure,
1908, when trying a suit in respect of the following matters, namely:— 5 of 1908
(a) discovery and inspection;
.- (b) enforcing the attendance of any person, including any officer
of a hanking company and examining him on oath; 40
(c) compelling the production of books of account and other 
documents; and
(d) issuing commissions.


(2) XI the Director General or Director or Deputy Director or Assis­
tant Director has reason to suspect that any gifts chargeable to tax under 
this Act have been concealed, or are likely to be concealed, by any person 
or class of persons within his jurisdiction, then, for the purposes of mak- 
5 ing any inquiry or investigation relating thereto, it shall be competent for 
him to exercise the powers conferred under sub-section (1) on the gift-tax 
authorities referred to in that sub-section, notwithstanding that no pro­
ceedings with respect to such person or class of persons are pending 
before him or any other gift-tax authority.
10 . 50. .Where, for the purposes of this Act, it appears necessary for any
gift-tax authority to obtain any statement or information from any person 
or banking company, such gift-tax authority may serve a notice requiring 
such person, on or before a date to be therein specified, to furnish such 
_ statement or information on the points specified in the notice, and that 
person shall, notwithstanding anything in any law to the contrary, be 
bound to furnish such statement or information to such gift-tax autho­
rity: |
Provided that no legal practitioner shall be bound to furnish any 
statement or information under this section based on any professional 
2®  communications made to him otherwise than as permitted by section 126 
of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872,
51. Whenever in respect of any proceeding under this Act, any gift- 
tax authority ceases to exercise jurisdiction and is succeeded by another 
who has and exercises such jurisdiction, the authority so succeeding may
25 continue the proceeding from the stage at which the proceeding was left 
by- his predecessor;:
Provided that the assesses concerned may demand that before the 
proceeding is so continued' the previous proceeding or any part thereof 
be reopened or that before any order of assessment is passed against him, 
3U  he be reheard.
52. In computing the period of limitation prescribed for an appeal 
or an application under this Act, the day on which the order complained 
of was served and if the assessee was not furnished with a copy of the 
order when the notice of the order was served upon him, the time
35 requisite for obtaining a copy of such order shall be excluded.
53. (1) A notice or a requisition under this Act may be served on the 
person therein named either by post as if it were a summons issued by a 
court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908.
(2) Any such notice or requisition may, in the case of a firm or a 
40 Hindu undivided family be addressed to any member of the firm or to
the manager or any adult male member of the family, and in the case of 
a company or association of persons be addressed to the principal officer 
thereof. "
(3) After a finding of total partition has been recorded by the Assess- 
45 :%  Officer under section 25 in respect of any Hindu undivided fam ly
notices under this Act in respect of the gift made by the family, she1! be 
served on the person who was the last manager of the Hindu undivided 
family, or if such person is dead, then on all surviving adults who were 
' members of the Hindu undivided family immediately before the partition.
41
Power to 
call for 
information.
Effect of 
transfer of 
authorities 
on
pending
proceedings.
Computation 
of period 
of
limitation.
Service- of 
notice.


Publica­
tion 
of in­
formation 
respect­
ing asses­
sees.
Disciosurc 
of in­
formation 
respecting 
assessees.
Return of 
gifts, etc., 
not to be 
invalid on 
certain 
grounds
(4) Where a firm or other association of persons is dissolved,, notices
under this Att in respect Of the gift received by the firm or associdtidh riiiif 
be served on any person who was. a partner (not being a minor) of
member of the association, as the case may be, immediately before its 
dissolution.
54. (1) If the Central Government is of opinion, that it is necessary
or expedient in the public interest to publish the names of assessees 
and any other particulars relating to any proceedings or prosecutions 
under this Act in respect of such assessees, it may cause to be published 
such names and particulars in such manner as it thinks fit.
(2) No publication under this section shall be made 
any penalty imposed under this Act until the time for presenting an 
appeal to the Deputy Commissioner (Appeals) or, as the case may be 
the Commissioner (Appeals) has expired without an appeal having been 
presented or the appeal, if presented, has been disposed of.
Explanation.~lri the case of a firm, company or other association of 
persons, the names of the partners of the firm, directors, secretaries and 
reasurers, or managers of the company, 0r the members of the associa-
on as the case may be, may also be published if, in the opinion of the
Central Government, the circumstances of the case justify it.
in relation to
20
55. Where a person makes an application to the Chief Commissioner 
or Commissioner m the prescribed form for any information relating to 
any assessee in respect of any assessment made under this Act the Chief 
C .™ „,„ner „„ Commissioner may, i, h, „
”  *° d°' «  —  *> b. furnished the information «
re,peM -  «-•  «— « " l y »nd his derision in b”  *  
“  * * be toaI “ d »« to in ,„y c o *
inB!“ “  f * — — •  » “<*. — a or Cher pro^d-
sions of this Aet h n h °r *” p™ “ ce «  any of the provi-«  of this Aet shall be «  or sh.l, be deemed b, invaIid
.-t- _ ........l
l 1SASOn 0t any lmstake’ defect or omission in such retufn of gifts 
’' n° !C 6> SUmm°nS °r °ther Proceeding, if such return of gifts!assessment notice.summons or other
effect in conformity with nr u " pr°ceedin5> is in substance and conrormity with or according to the intent and
Act, purpose of this 35
Bar of 
suits in 
civil 
court.
SS?** "‘k"' ”  ” Mde*'mdriua I f S  7
. T r -  -  r —
be done *  “  S“ d * *  «  « • *  »


58. An assesses who Is entitled to or required to attend before any 
gift-tax authority or the Appellate Tribunal in connection with any 
proceeding under this Act, except where he is required under this Act
to attend in person, may attend by a person who' would be entitled to 
represent him before any Income-tax authority or the Appellate Tribunal 
under section 2S8 of the Income-tax Act.
59. Any assesses who is entitled or required to attend before any gift- 
tax authority or the Appellate Tribunal in connection with any matter
relating to the valuation of any asset, except where he is required 
10 under this Act to attend in person, may attend by a registered valuer.
tho
t Appearance 
before 
gift-tax
authorities
by
autho­
rised
representa­
tives.
Appear­
ance by 
registered 
valuer in 
certain 
matter.
Aggre-
ment
for
avoidance 
or relief 
of
doublE
taxation
with
respect to 
gift-tax.
The Central Government may enter into an agreement with 
Government of any reciprocating country—
(a) for the avoidance or relief of double taxation with respect to 
gift-tax payable under this Act and under the corresponding law in 
force in the reciprocating country, or
_  C°) for exchange of information for the prevention of evasion or 
avoidance of gift-tax chargeable under this Act or under the corres­
ponding law in force in that country or investigation of cases of such 
evasion or avoidance, or
(c) for recovery of tax under this Act and under the correspond­
ing law in force ini that country,
and may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make such provision as 
may be necessary for implementing the agreement.
Explanation.—The expression “reciprocating country” for the purposes 
25 of this Act means any country which the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, declare to be a reciprocating country.
61. The amount assessed in accordance with the foregoing provisions of 
this Act as being the value of all taxable gifts shall be rounded off to the 
nearest multiple of ten rupees and, for this purpose, any part of a rupee 
30 conssstog of paise shall be ignored and thereafter, if such amount is not a 
multiple of ten rupees, then, if the last figure in that amount is five or 
more, the amount shall be increased to the next higher amount which is 
multiple of ten and, if the last figure is less than five, the amount shall be 
reduced to thje next lower amount which is a multiple of ten; and the 
35 amount so rounded off shall be deemed to be the value of all taxable gifts 
of the assesses for the purposes of this Act.
€2. The amount of gift-tax, additional gift-tax, interest, penalty, fine 
or any other sqm payable, and the amount of refund due, "under the 
provisions of this Act, shall be rounded off to the nearest rupee and, for 
40 this purpose, where such amount contains a part of a rupee consisting of 
paise, then, if such part is fifty paise or more, it shall be increased to one 
rupee, and if such part is less than fifty paise, it shall be ignored;
|83. (1) The Bo.apd may, by notification in the Official Gazette, jpake Power to 
rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act- ' - V - mak®;
Hound­
ing off of 
taxable 
gifts.
Rounding 
off of 
tax, ©to.


(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the fore­
going power, rules made under this section may provide for—
(a) the manner in which the orders relating to instructions to
subordinate authority shall be published and circulated for general 
information under sub-section (3) of section 8; 5
(b) the form in which returns under sub-section (1) of section 12. 
shall be made and the manner in which they shall be verified.
(c) the form in which returns under sub-section (6) of section 
16 shall he made and the manner in which they shall be verified;
(d) the percentage or the amount by which the fair market value j.q  
of the property shall not exceed the value of the property as return­
ed -by the assesses under sub-section (8) of section 16;
(e) the form in which return under sub-section (1) of section 17 
shall be made and the manner in which they shall be verified under 
that sub-section;
(f) the form in which notice of demand under sub-section (4) 
of section, 19 or under section 38 or under section 41 are to be made.
(g) the form in 'which appeals under sub-section (1) or sub_ 
section (2) of section 27, or under sub-section (5) of section 28, or 
under sub-section (2) of section 30 shall be made, and the manner in 
which they shall be verified;
(h) the form in which application for reference is to be made 
under sub-section (1) of section 31;
(i) the form, in which an application is to be made under section
55; : : j
(j) any other matter which, has to be or may bel prescribed for 
the purposes of this Act.
(3) The power to make rules conferred by this section shall include 
the power to give retrospective effect, from a date not earlier than the 
date of commencement of this Act, to the rules or any of them and, 
unless the contrary is permitted (whether expressly or by necessary 
implication), no retrospective effect shall be given to any rule so as to 
prejudicially affect the interests of assessees.
(4) The Central Government shall cause every rule made under 
this Act to be laid as soon as may be after it is made before each House 
of Parliament while it is in session for a total period of thirty days which ^ 
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, 
and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session 
or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any 
modifications in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not 
be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified 
form or be of no effect, as the case may be, so however, that any such 
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of 
anything previously done under that ride. 1


64- (1) The Gift-tax Act, 1958, is hereby repealed,
(2) Notwithstanding the repeal of the Gift-tax Act, 1958 (hereinafter 
referred to as the repealed Act) —
(a) in clause (xx) of section 2 of the repealed Act, the “previous 
year relevant to assessment year commencing on the 1st day of 
April, 1990 shall be the period ending on the 19th day of March, 1990;
(b) where a return of gift has been filed before the commence­
ment of this Act by any person for any assessment year, proceedings 
for the assessment of that person for that year may be taken and
10 . continued in accordance with the provisions of the repealed' Act, as
if this Act had not been passed;
(c) where a return of gift is filed, after the commencement of
this Act by any person for the assessment year ending on the 31st 
day of March, 1991, or any earlier year, the assessment of that
15 person for that year shall be made in accordance with the provisions
of the repealed Act, as if this Act had not been passed;
(d) any proceeding pending on the commencement of this Act
before any gift-tax authority, the Appellate Tribunal or any court, 
by way of appeal, reference,, or revision, shall be continued and
2o disposed of in accordance with the provisions of the repealed Act, as
if this Act had not been passed;
(e) where in respect of any assessment year ending on the 31st 
day of March, 1991,—
(i) a notice under section 10 of the repealed Act had been 
25 issued before the commencement of this Act, the proceedings in
pursuance of such notice may be continued and disposed of in 
accordance with the provisions of the repealed Act, as if this 
Act had not been passed;
(®) any gift chargeable to tax had escaped assessment 
30 within the meaning of that expression in section 16 and no pro­
ceedings under section 16 of the repealed Act in respect of any 
such gift are pending at the commencement of this Act, a notice 
under section 16 may be issued with respect to that assessment 
year and all the provisions of the repealed Act shall apply 
35 accordingly, as if this Act had not been passed;
(f) any proceeding for the imposition of a penalty in respect of 
any assessment completed before the 20th day of March, 1990,
may be initiated and any such penalty may be imposed in accordance 
with the provisions of the repealed Act as if this Act had not been 
40 passed;
(g) any proceeding for the imposition of a penalty in respect of 
any assessment for the year ending on the 31st day of March, 1991.,
or any earlier year, which is completed on or after the 20th day 
of March, 1990 may be initiated and any such penalty may be imposed 
45 under the repealed Act as if this Act had not been passed;


(h) where, in respect of any assessment completed before the 
commencement of this Act, a refund falls due after such commence­
ment or default is made after such commencement in the payment 
of any sum due under such completed assessment, the provisions of ' 
the repealed Act relating to interest payable by the Central Govern-15 
ment on refund and1  interest payable by the assesseses for default 
shall apply, as if this Act had not been passed;
(i) any sum payable by way of gift-tax;, additional gift-tax, 
interest, penalty or otherwise under the repealed Act may be recover­
ed under the repealed Act, as if this Act had not been passed-
Power 
to remove 
difficul­
ties.
65. (I) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of 
this Act, the Central Government may, by order published in the Official 
Gazette, make such provisions not inconsistent with the such provisions 
of this Act as may appear necessary for removing the difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made after the 31st day of 
March, 1994.
(2) Every order made under sub-section (1) shall be laid, as soon 
as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament.


THE SECOND SCHEDULE  
[See sections 6 and 16(8)3
Rules for determining the value of property gifted
Value of  gifted, property, how to be determined  '
The value of any property, other than cash, transferred by way . 5 
of gift shall, for the purposes of this Act, be determined in accordance 
with the provisions , of Schedule III to the Wealth-tax Act, which shall 
apply subject to the following modifications, namely:__
In 
the said Schedule,—
(a) reference by whatever form of words to the Wealth-tax
Act shall be construed as references to this Act;
(b) in rule 5, the reference 'to the year ending on the valuation
date shall be construed as a reference to the previous year as defined 
in this Act; .
(c) save as provided in clause (b). references to the valuation -
date shall be construed as references to date on which the gift was 25 
made; , ^
(d) reference to section 7 of the Wealth-tax Act shall be cons­
trued as references to section 6' of this Act;
(e) references to section 16A of the Wealth-tax Act shall be 20
construed as references to sub-section (8) of section 16 of this Act.


At present, gift-tax is charged annually on the value of all taxable 
gifts made by a donor during a year- There is no tax on the gifts re­
ceived by a donee, irrespective of the value. The object of 'this Bill 
is to shift the burden of tax: from donors to the recipient of the gifts,1 
with a view to curbing laundering of black money and the practice of' 
explaining wasteful and ostentatious expenditure as; having be^ft 
incurred out of gifts received.
2. The Bill has the following salient features: —
(i) gift-tax will be levied in respect of gifts received by a 
person during the previous year;
(ii) in computing the value of all taxable gifts a number df 
exemptions shall be taken into consideration. The exemptions, 
inter alia, includes exemption for gifts received in convertible' 
foreign exchange remitted from a country outside India in accordance 
with the provisions of the Foreign Exchange Regulation Act, 1973;, 
gifts received by art individual oft he occasion of his marriagb' tip■  tof 
a maximum of rupees one lakh and gifts received under a will;
(iii) there will be a basic exemption of rupees twenty thousand 
for each year and gift-tax will be levied at progressive rates in- case 
the gifts received in any year exceeds the maximum limit of exemp­
tion. ;
3. The Bill also provides for all other matters relating to levy cjf 
interest, filing of appeals, rectification of mistakes, recovery of tax, im­
position of penalty and prosecution and matters relating to procedure on 
the lines of the relevant provisions of the existing Gift-tax Act, 1958:
New Delhi; MADHU DANDAVATE-
The 30th May, 1990. .,
, STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
PRESIDENT’S RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLE 117 OF THE  
CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
[Copy of letter dated the 30th May 1990 from Prof. Madhu Daftdavate, 
Minister of Finance to the Secretary-General. Lok Sabha.]
The President, having been informed of the subject matter of the Gift- 
tax Bill, 1990 recommends under clauses (1) and (3) of article 117 of the 
Constitution, the introduction of the above Bill in Lok Sabha.


Clause 2 defines, infer cilia, “gift”, “previous year” and “transfer of 
property . All voluntas transfers of property without consideration 
and transfers deemed to be gifts under clause 4 of the Bill are covered 
by the definition of “gift”. However, any receipt which is income 
within die meaning of the Income-tax Act, shall not be treated as a gift. 
The definition of “previous year” secures that all gifts received during 
any period, not exceeding, twelve months, ending on the 31st day 
of March immediately preceding 'the assessment year, are
charged to gift-tax in one year. However,, the previous year in respect 
of the assessment year 1991-92 shall be the period commencing on the 
20th day of March, 1990 and ending on the 31st day of March, 1991. The 
definition of “transfer of property” is designed to cover all possible 
transfers of property.
Clause 3 is the charging clause which provides that the tax is to be 
levied on all gifts received during the previous yea,r by any person, being 
an individual or a Hindu undivided family or a company or a firm or an 
association of persons or a body of individuals.
Clause 4 brings to charge certain transfers which are for nominal or 
inadequate consideration or for a consideration which although stipu­
lated is not meant to pass actually. Similarly, the release or discharge 
from one’s debts or liabilities, appropriations or withdrawals from joint 
accounts for the benefit of a person other than the persons who made 
the original deposit or investment are brought within the scope of gifts.
Clause 5 provides for the exemptions of various types of gifts. These 
inter alia, includes— .
(a) gifts of immovable property situated outside the territories 
to which this Act expends;
(b) gift by a person resident outside India, out of the monies 
standing to his credit in a non-resident (external) aceount in any 
bank in accordance with the provisions of the Foreign Exchange 
Regulation Act;
f (c) gifts in convertible foreign exchange remitted from a coun­
try 'outside India in accordance with the provisions of the Foreign 
Exchange Regulation Act; j
(d) gifts on the occasion of the marriage subject to a maximum 
of rupees one lakh in value;
(e) gifts received by a political party; and ■  :
(f) gifts received under a will. f
Clause 6 provides for ®e manner in which the values of gifts may be 
determined. The method of valuation shall be the same as provided in 
the Wealth-Tax Act, 1957. : }
N otes on clauses  ..'1


_  Clauses 7 to 11 deal with 'the administrative machinery. The intention 
is to entrust the administration of this Act to the officers of the Income- 
tax Department under a procedure which follows' broadly the procedure 
in the repealed Gift-tax Act, 195ft.
Clauses 12 to 21 are provisions relating to assessment which follows 
similar provisions in the repealed Gift-tax Act, 1958.
Clauses 22 to 26 relate to assessment in special cases. Tnese provisions 
provide for the liability to assessment in tnd case of a deceased person, 
persons leaving India, a minor, lunatic or idiot. It also provides for 
assessment on partition of a Hindu undivided family, discontinuance of 
firm or association of persons and a company in liquidation.
Clauses 27 to 35 relate to appeals, revision and references and: are 
similar to those in the repealed Gift-tax Act, 1958.
Clause 36 provides that the tax is the liability of the donee.
Clause 37 makes the gift-tax a first charge on the immovable property 
comprised in the gift.
Clauses 38 to 40 provide for payment and recovery of the tax and 
other connected matters and are similar to those in the repealed 
Gift-tax Act, 1958.
Clause 41 relates to refund and is similar to the provisions on refund 
in the repealed Gift-tax Act, 1958.
* -
Clauses 42 to 62 provide for rectification of mistakes, prosecutions, 
liability of persons for offences by companies or a Hindu undivided 
family, non-applicability of section 360' of the Code of Criminal Proce­
dure, 1973 and the provision of Probation of Offenders Act, 1958, pre­
sumption as to culpable mental state, proof of entries in records or docu­
ments, power regarding discovery, evidence, etc., power to call for infor­
mation, effect of transfer of authorities on pending proceedings, compu­
tation of period of limitation, service of notice, publication of informa­
tion respecting assessees, disclosure of information respecting assessees, 
return of gifts, etc., not to be invalid on certain grounds, bar of suits in 
civil courts, appearance before gift-tax authorities by authorised repre­
sentative appearance by registered valuer in certain matters, agreement 
for avoidance or relief of double taxation with respect to gift tax, round­
ing off of taxable gifts, and rounding off of tax, etc. These provisions are 
similar to those, in the repealed Gift-tax Act, 1958.
Clause 63 makes the provision authorising the Central Board of Direct 
Taxes to make rules for carrying out the purposes of the'Act.
Clause 64 provides for the repealing of the Gift-tax Act, 1958.
Clause 65 empowers the Central Government to issue any order so 
as to remove any difficulty that may arise in giving effect to'the provi­
sions of this Act. These orders are required to be published in the 
Official Gazette and will be laid before each House of Parliament. How­
ever, no order shall be made after the 31st day of March, 1994,


financial memorandum
, . create gift-tax authorities for the P
n nf the Bill seeks to create So­cialise ? of the “  Act.Clause 7 ol we w  Act.
poses of the admimstra ion * pTOposed legislation will
9 The posts of gift-tax authorities under ^  J t-tax authorities under
drawn
lroro are Consolidated Fun ^  ^dltua
, the Gift-tax Act, 1958.
“  * “  M oJ the Bill win no, involve any other expenditure


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 63 of the Bill authorises the Central Board of Direct Taxes to 
make rules with respect to matters like the manner in which the order? 
relating to instruction to subordinate authorities shall be published antr 
circulated for general information, the form in which returns may be 
made under various provisions of the Act, the form in which appeals 
should be filed, the form in which a memorandum of cross objections 
under the Act shall be made and the form in which notices of demand 
should be issued.
2. Clause 65 of the Bill relates to power to remove difficulties. The 
provisions of the said clause empower the Central Government to make 
orders for removing any difficulty which may arise in giving effect to 
the provisions of the proposed legislation. It is also being provided that 
no such order shall be made after the 31st day of March, 1B94 and every 
such order shall be published in the Official Gazette and laid before each 
House of Parliament.
3. The matters in respect of which the said rules or orders may be 
made are matters of procedure and administrative detail, and it is not 
practicable to provide them in the proposed legislation itself.
4. The delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal 
raster. . ... .. • -
•  - (.a- *  '■ /-


iiOK SABHA
A
BILL
to P^ide for the levy of gift-tax.
<Pr°l  MMhu B****™*, Minister of Pirnnc,.)
