THE PROTECTION OF CHILDREN FROM SEXUAL OFFENCES
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 2017
By
SHRI NISHIKANT DUBEY, M.P .
A
BILL
further to amend the Protection of Children from Sexual Offences Act, 2012.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-Eighth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Protection of Children from Sexual Offences
(Amendment) Act, 2017.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In the Protection of Children from Sexual Offences Act, 2012, Section 19 shall be
omitted.
Bill No.  108 of  2017
Short title
and com-
mencement.
Omission of
Section 19.
No. 32 of
2012.
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5

2
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Section 19 of the Protection of Children from Sexual Offences Act, 2012 compels even
Court Judges, hearing a divorce case or in marriage discord cases to provide information to
police authorities or otherwise face penal punishment under section 21 of the said Act. This
places an unacceptable onus on the public and public Judicial persons on their mere
apprehension of a possible offence being committed.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; NISHIKANT  DUBEY
January 11, 2017.

ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE PROTECTION OF CHILDREN FROM SEXUAL OFFENCES ACT, 2012
(NO. 32 OF 2012)
* * * * *
CHAPTER  V
PROCEDURE FOR REPORTING OF CASES
19. Reporting of offences: (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of
Criminal Procedure, 1973, any person (including the child), who has apprehension that an
offence under this Act is likely to be committed or has knowledge that such an offence has
been committed, he shall provide such information to—
(a) the Special Juvenile Police Unit; or
(b) the local police.
(2) Every report given under sub-section (1) shall be—
(a) ascribed an entry number and recorded in writing;
(b) be read over to the informant;
(c) shall be entered in a book to be kept by the Police Unit.
(3) Where the report under sub-section (1) is given by a child, the same shall be
recorded under sub-section (2) in a simple language so that the child understands contents
being recorded.
(4) In case contents are being recorded in the language not understood by the child or
wherever it is deemed necessary, a translator or an interpreter, having such qualifications,
experience and on payment of such fees as may be prescribed, shall be provided to the child
if he fails to understand the same.
(5) Where the Special Juvenile Police Unit or local police is satisfied that the child
against whom an offence has been committed is in need of care and protection, then, it shall,
after recording the reasons in writing, make immediate arrangement to give him such care
and protection including admitting the child into shelter home or to the nearest hospital
within twenty-four hours of the report, as may be prescribed.
(6) The Special Juvenile Police Unit or local police shall, without unnecessary delay
but within a period of twenty-four hours, report the matter to the Child Welfare Committee
and the Special Court or where no Special Court has been designated, to the Court of
Session, including need of the child for care and protection and steps taken in this regard.
(7) No person shall incur any liability, whether civil or criminal, for giving the information
in good faith for the purpose of sub-section (1).
* * * * *
3
2 of 1974

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Protection of Children from Sexual Offences Act, 2012.
————
(Shri Nishikant Dubey,  M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—977LS(S3)—11-07-2017.