As Inrropucen In Lok SABHA

£8 ॥॥ 2000

Bill No. 109 of 2000

THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2000
By
Suri Vitas Murremwar, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-first Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2000,
2, Inarticle 324 of the Constitution, in clause (2), after the words “to be made by the
President” the following words shall be added, namely :—

“on the recommendation of a Committee consisting of the Chairman of the
Council of States, the Prime Minister, the Chief Justice of India, the Speaker of the
House of the People, the Leader of Opposition in the Council of States and the Leader
of Opposition in the House of the People.”,

Short title,

Amendment
of article 324,


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

For the last few years, the Election Commission has attracted criticism for taking
arbitrary decisions which were not agreed to by all political parties including party in power.
On several occasions there have been confusion and conflict between Election Commission
and the Government on various issues, which were subsequently taken up before the
Supreme Court. The division of opinion among the Election Commissioners has surfaced
on various issues from time to time. The functioning of the Election Commission has been
a subject matter of debate in the media and among the public.

In order to ensure that the Election Commission functions in a proper manner, it is
necessary that the Chief Election Commissioner and other Election Commissioners be
appointed by the President on the recommendations of a Committee comprising the Chairman
of the Council of States, the Prime Mini: the Chief Justice of India, the Speaker of the
House of the People, the Leader of Opposition in the House of the People and the Leader of
Opposition in the Council of States.

The Bill seeks to achieve the above objective.

New Dewi, VILAS MUTTEMWAR
June 26, 2000


ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA

. * * *
324. (/) * . + .

(2) The Election Commission shall consist of the Chief Election Commissioner and
such number of other Election Commissioners, if any, as the President; may from time to
time fix and the appointment of Chief Election Commissioner and other Election
Commissioners shall, subject to the provisions of any law made in that behalf by Parliament,
be made by the President

Superintend-
cence,
direction and
control of
elections to be
vested in an
Election
Commission


LOK SABHA

A
BILL

further to amend the Constitution of India.

(Shri Vilas Muttemwar, M.P)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—1602LS—1 0-07-2000.