1
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2012
By
SHRI ANANT GANGARAM GEETE, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-third year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1.   This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment)  Act, 2012.
2. In article 72 of the Constitution, after clause (3), the following clause shall be added,
namely:—
"(4) Nothing in this article shall apply to the punishment or sentence of any person
convicted of—
(i)  waging, or attempting to wage war, or abetting waging of war, against the
Government of India; or
Short title.
Bill No. 109 of  2012
TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Amendment
of article 72.
5

2
(ii) conspiracy to wage war against the Government of India by means of criminal
force or show of criminal force within or outside India; or
(iii) collecting arms with intention of waging war against the Government of
India; or
(iv) concealing the existence of a design to wage war or facilitating the waging of
such war against the Government of India.".
5

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Article 72 of the Constitution empowers the President of India to grant pardons, etc.,
and to suspend, remit or commute sentences in certain cases.
However, in cases like attack on Parliament House in the year 2001 and later attack on
Mumbai known as 26/11 attack in the year 2008 have been held as acts of waging war against
India by the Supreme Court.
While Afzal Guru, the convict in the case of attack on Parliament has made a clemency
petition to the President, Ajmal Kasab, the accused of Mumbai attack is also likely to do so.
The acts of violence perpetuated by the above accused amount to waging war against
India and therefore should not be considered on par with other offences. The feeling of law-
abiding citizens of India is that the sentence be executed immediately and such convicts
should not be given the benefit of exceptional provision in the Constitution of India.
Therefore, the provision of President's discretion of pardoning or suspending the
sentence pronounced by the Supreme Court of India should not be available to persons
convicted of offences like waging of war against Government of India.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; ANANT  GANGARAM  GEETE
August 30, 2012.
3

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
* * * * * *
PART V
THE  UNION
CHAPTER I.—THE EXECUTIVE
The President and Vice-President
* * * * * *
72. (1) The President shall have the power to grant pardons, reprieves, respites or
remissions of punishment or to suspend, remit or commute the sentence of any person
convicted of any offence—
(a) in all cases where the punishment or sentence is by a Court Martial;
(b) in all cases where the punishment or sentence is for an offence against any
law relating to a matter to which the executive power of the Union extends;
(c) in all cases where the sentence is a sentence of death.
******
Power of
President to
grant
pardons, etc.,
and to
suspend,
remit or
commute
sentences in
certain cases.
4

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Shri Anant Gangaram Geete, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—3104LS(S3)—06.11.2012.