1
THE DESIGNATION OF ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF PAKISTAN AS
STATE SPONSOR OF TERRORISM BILL, 2019
By
DR. SANJAY JAISWAL, M.P.
A
BILL
to designate Islamic Republic of Pakistan as State sponsor of terrorism
and for matters connected therewith.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventieth Y ear of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Designation of Islamic Republic of Pakistan as State
Sponsor of Terrorism Act, 2019.
(2) It shall come into force immediately.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “terrorist act" means doing of any act with intent to threaten or likely to
threaten the unity, integrity, security or sovereignty of India or with the intent to
strike terror in the people or any  section of the people in India, or in any foreign
country, or with the intent to influence by threat or likely to influence by the threat the
Government of India or an international Government organisation—
Short title, and
commencement.
Bill No.   109 of  2019
Definitions.
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5
10

2
(i) by using bombs, dynamites or other explosive substances or inflammable
substances or firearms or other lethal weapons or poisonous or noxious gases or
other chemicals or by any other substances (whether biological, radioactive, nuclear
or otherwise) of a hazardous nature or by any other means or whatever nature to
cause—
(a) death of, or injuries to any person or persons; or
(b) loss of, or damage to or destruction of property; or
(c) disruption of any supplies or services essential to the life of the
community in India or in any foreign country; or
(d) damage or destruction of any property in India or in a foreign country
used or intended to be used for the defence of India or in connection
with any other purposes of the Government of India, any State
Government or any of their agencies; or
(ii) by overawing by means of criminal force or the show of criminal force
attempt to do so or cause death of any public functionary; or
(iii) by designing to seriously interfere with or seriously disrupt an electronic
system, computer system or network or to attempt to do so; or
(iv) by providing support by means of sponsoring or making provisions,
including by non-enforcement of any law to prevent the same for the training of any
militia, paramilitary or guerrilla forces to wage proxy war against the Government of
India; or
(v) by detaining, kidnapping or abducting any person and threatens to kill or
injure such person or does any other act in order to compel the Government of India,
any State Government or the Government of a foreign country or any other person to
do or abstain from doing any act.
(b) "State Sponsor of Terrorism" means the Islamic Republic of Pakistan and
the Government of any country which has provided support to terrorist acts, directly
or indirectly, including through its instrumentalities or retired officials or through
negligence in taking effective steps to curtail or prevent the use of its territory for
commission of terrorist acts against India.
3. The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official gazette, declare Islamic
Republic of Pakistan as State Sponsor of Terrorism and cease all bilateral relations with it
including diplomatic, economic and political.
4. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force,
the Central Government shall order temporary suspension, for a period of one hundred
eighty days, of entry of nationals of Islamic Republic of Pakistan into India for all purposes
except for matters connected with the security of India.
5. (1) The Central Government shall, as soon as may be, but after one hundred eighty
days after the date of enactment of this Act, through the Foreign Secretary and in consultation
with the heads of other appropriate departments and agencies, submit to both the Houses
of the Parliament a report describing whether the Government of Islamic Republic of Pakistan
continues to be a State Sponsor of Terrorism and if not, a detailed justification as to why the
conduct described in the report does not meet the legal criteria for determination in the
affirmative.
Declaration of
Islamic
Republic of
Pakistan as
State Sponsor
of Terrorism.
Temporary
suspension of
nationals of
Islamic
Republic of
Pakistan.
Central
Government
to submit a
report on
determining
Islamic
Republic of
Pakistan a
State Sponsor
of Terrorism.
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
5

3
(2) The Central Government shall, as soon as may be, but not later than sixty days,
after receipt of report under sub-section ( 1), cause it to be laid before each House of
Parliament:
Provided that for calculation of period of sixty days, the intervening periods during
which the House(s) has been adjourned for more than three days shall not be taken into
consideration.
5

4
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
The Islamic Republic of Pakistan continues to provide safe heaven to dreaded
terrorists like Hafeez Saeed and terrorist organizations like the Taliban, Al-Qaeda, Jama'at-
ud-Da'wah, Jaish-e-Mohammad, the Haqqani Network, Lashkare-e-Taiba among many others.
Despite clear evidences of involvement of perpetrators from Islamic Republic of
Pakistan, India continues to engage diplomatically and otherwise with the country. The Bill
intends to act as a strong condemnation of Pakistan's continued sponsoring of nefarious
activities against India and hopes to set in place a process that redeems the loss of countless
Indian lives lost in these activities.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; SANJAY JAISWAL
June  10, 2019.

LOK   SABHA
————
A
BILL
to designate Islamic Republic of Pakistan as State sponsor of terrorism
and for matters connected therewith.
————
(Dr . Sanjay Jaiswal, M.P .)
MGIPMRND—618LS(S3)—24-06-2019.