fUn Ho. 109 or 196i 
THE STATE-ASSOCIATED BANKS 
(M!SCELLANEOU S PROVISIONS) 
BILL, 1962 
(As INTRODUCED IN LoK SABRA 
ON 19TH NOVEMBER, 15)62) 

I of 1956. 
bill No 109 of 19-'2 
THE STATE-ASSOCIATED BANKS (MISCEllaNEOUS 
PROVISIONS) BILL, 1.962 
(As INTRODUCED IN LoK SUIIA) 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the State Bank of India Act, 1955, the State BaRk 
of India (Subsidiary Banks) Act, 1959, and the Bankers' Books 
. EIPide9ace Act, 1891, and to prooide fOT the winding up of certain 
minor State-asSOciated banks and for matters connected 
therewith. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirteenth Year of the Repub-
lic of India as follows:-
1. (1) This Act may be called the State-Associated Banks (Mis- Shon title 
cellaneous Provisions) Act, 1962. ~!:m. 
s (2) Section 3, except clauses (ii) , (iv) and (vii) thereof, shall 
come into force on IUlch date as the Central Government may, by 
notift.cation in the Official Gazette, eppoint; and the rest of this Act 
shall come into force at once. 
2. In. the State Bank of India Act, 1951>- ~ ': of Ac. ... ~ Cd{; • 
10 (i) in sub-section (3) of section 31, the following proviso 19S5 .. · 
IS 
shall be inserted at the end, namely:-
"Provided that nothing contained in this sub-sectioD 
shall apply to such director by reason only of his being-
(i) a shareholder (other than a director) holding not 
more than two per cent. of the paid-up capital in any 
public company as defined in the Companies Act, 1956, or 
any corporation established by or under any law for the 
time being in force in India or any co-operative society, 
with whioh or to which the State Bank has entered into 
or made, or proposes to enter into Or make. a. contract. 
loan, arrangement or proposal; or 

Amendment 
of Act 
38 of 19S90 
2 
(ii) a director ex ot1icio of the State Bank or a 
director of a subsidiary bank."; 
(ii) in .section 34,-
(a) in sub-section (5), after the words "without secu-
rity", the words "or without security of a description autho- S 
rised by this Act" shall be Inserted; 
(b) in sub-section (6)-
(i) for ·the word and figures "section 33", the words 
"this. Act" shall be substituted; 
(ii) the words "interest in" shall be omitted; and 10 
(iii) in section 50, in clause (q) of sub-section (2), efter the 
words "without security" In both the places where they occur, 
the words "or without security of a description authorised by 
this Act" shall be Inserted. 
3. In the Sta·te Bank of India (Subsidiary Banks) Act, 1959-
(i) in section 2, sub-clause (iii) of clause (b), 
(iii) of clause (c) and sub-clause (iii) of clause (d) 
omitted; 
sub-clause 
shall be 
IS 
(ii) in CbapteI' II, for the existing heading, the 
heading shall be substituted, namely:-
following 
20 
"CONSTITUTION OF NEW· BANKS AND CHANGE OP NAME OP ANY 
SUBSmlARY BANK"; 
(iii) In section 3, clause (c) shall be omitted; 
(iv) after section 3, the following section shall be inserted, 
namely:- 25 
"3A. (1) The Central Government after consulting the 
State Bank and the Reserve Bank may, by notification In 
the Official Gazette, direct tlPltt the name of any subsidiary 
bank shall, with effect from such date as may be specified in 
this behalf, be changed to any other name and thereupon 30 
any reference to that subsidiary bank in this Act or any other 
law for the time being In force or in any contnlct, instrument 
or document shall be construed as a reference to that bank 
by its new name. 
(2) The change in the name of a subsidiary bank under 3S 
sub-section (1) shall not affect any rights or obligations of 
that bank or render defective any legal proceedings by or 

3 
against it, and any legal proceedings which might have been 
continued or commenced by or against that bank by tt. 
former name may be continued by or against it by its new 
name."; 
s (v) in section 12, after sub-section (3), the following section 
10 
20 
shall be inserted, mmely:-
• (4) For the purposes of this section,-
(4) "corresponding new bank" means in relation to 
the Bank of Jaipur Limited, the institution eonstftuted 
under section 3 as the State Bank of Bikaner; 
(b) "existing bank" includes the Bank of Jaipur 
Limited'; 
(vi) in section 13. for sub-section (13), the following sub-
section shall be substituted, namely:-
• (13) For the purposes of this section,-
(4) "corresoonding new bank" does not include the 
Smte Bank of Patlala and means in relation to the 
Baak of Jaipur Limited the institution constituted under 
section 3 as the State Bank of Bikaner; 
(b) "existing bank" Ineludes the Bank of Jafpur 
Limited. but does not include the Bank of Patfala.'; 
(vU) in section 34. for the orovfso to sub-section (5), the 
following proviso shall be substituted, namely:-
"Provided that nothinJ( contained in this sub-seetlon 
2S shall apply to such director by reason only of his being-
35 
(i) a shareholder (other than a director) holding not 
more than two per cent. of the paid-up capital in any 
pubIlc company as defined in the Companies Act, 1956, 
or anv corooration established bv or under any law for 
the time befn~ in force in India or any co-operative 
society. with which or to which the subsidiary bank has 
entered into or made, or proJ)Oses to enter into or make, 
a contract, loan, arrangement or proposal; or 
(U) a director of the State Bank or of any other 
subsidiary ba·nk beinl! a director under clause (0) or 
clause (e) of sub-section (1) of section 25 or befng an 

eonatruction 
4 
officer of the Reserve Bank or the State Bank nominated 
under clause (b)· or clause (c) of that sub-section."; 
(viii) in section 36, sub-sections (3) and (4) Shall'be omitted; 
and 
(iz) for section 59, the following section shall be'substitut- 5 
ed, namely:-
of referenCd· • 
to cxiatina 
banb. 
u59. (1) For the purposes of sections 45, 49, 55, 58 and 
,the First Schedule, the expression 'existing bank' shall 
include the Bank of JaipurLimited; . 
Amendment, 
of Act 18 
of 1891, 
(2) Except as otherwise provided in any general or 10 
special order made ,by the Central Government, any refe-
rence in any law, other than this Act, or in any contract or 
other instrument-
(a) to an existing bank, shall be construed as a 
reference to the eorresponding new bank; 15 
(b) , to the 'Bank of J aipur· Limited" shall be construed 
as a reference to the State Bank of Bikaner.". 
- , . 
,. -In the Bankers' Books Evidence Act, 1891, in section 2-
. "(i) for" clause (1), the following clauses shall be substituted, 
namely:- 20 
, (1) "company~' means any company as defined in section 
,3 9f the .companies Act, 1956, and i.r)cludes a foreign company 
within the meaning of section 591 of that Act; I of 1956. 
'(JA) '-~colporatiGn" means any body corporate establish-
ed by any law for the time being in 'force in ,Lndia and 25 
includes the Reserve Bank of India, the State Bank of India 
".ndllny subsidiary bank 'as defined in'the State Bank of 
-India (Subsidiary Banks) Act; 1959;'; 
, . (ii) for sub-clause (cz) of dause (2). the following clause 38 of 1959· 
shall·be substituted, namely:-
"'(4) any C!ompany 'Or' corporation earrying on the busi- 30 
. 'ness'Of 'banking,". ' 
Provi.ion. . 'S: -(1) NotwIthstandIng anything to theconttary oontained in 
thin res~s ct of'any"ot1ier low or in any orderor other instruinen~ e tate", , 
Bank, (a) the Central Government may, by order appoint one or 35 
Dholpur. more officers to take over the management of the Dholpur bank 
or to wind up its affairs -ahd distribute its 'assets and any ex-
" peaditure Incurred in connl!ction with 'lIUch appointment, 
• 'mari'ageJl\~t. w,inding up or distribution shall be ,payable by that 
bank: , 40 

s 
10 
20 
30 
3S 
5 
(b) the principal civil court of original jurisdiction in the 
district in which the Dholpur bank's head office is situated 
shall have exc'usive jurisdiction to entertain and decide any 
claim made by or against the Dholpur bank or any question 
whatever, whether of law or of fact, which may relate to or arise 
in the course of the windi,ng up of that bank, whether such claim 
br question has accrued or arisen before or accrues or arises 
after the date of the winding up order, and any suit or other 
legal proceeding, whether of a civil or criminal nature, relating 
to any such claim or question and pending in any other court 
at the commencement of this Act shall not be proceeded with 
except in accordance with this section; 
(c) in regard to the admissibility of the entries in the books 
of account as evide~ce in the course of the proceedings for the 
winding up of the bank, the settlement of the list of debtors of 
the bank, the passing of orders for the payment of the amounts 
due by the said debtors, the execution of the said orders or any 
other orders or decrees -of the court, the priority of the claims 
on the bank, the making of preferential payments and the dis-
charge of the other liabilities of the bank and any other inciden-
tal or connected matters, the law relating to the winding up of 
banking companies, as in force for the :time being, shall 
apply as if the Dholpur bank were a banking company; 
(d) the period of limitation for any suit or app'ication 
relating to' any payment due to the Dholpur bank which has 
accrued before or ~ay accrue on- or after the date of the first 
appointment of the officer in charge of winding up of the bank 
shall be twelve years from the date of the accrual of the claim 
or five years from the date of such first appointment of the 
officer aforesaid, whichever may end later; and 
(e) after the repayment of all the deposit liabilities and any 
other amounts due to be paid by the bank including the amounts 
due to the Government of Rajasthan, the remaining assets, if-
any, of the bank shall be utilised, as far as may be, for the pur-
poses and objects specified in the State Bank, Dholpur Act, 1915, 
and other relevant documents. 
(2) In this section, "Dholpur bank" mea·ns the bank known as 
the Dholpur State Bank and governed at the commencement of this 
section by the State Bank, Dholpur Act, 1915. 
6. In the State Bank of Kurundwad (Junior) Act, 1933,- Amendment 
of the State 
Bank of 
(4) in section 22, for the words "The Indian Companies Act Ku~ndwad 
as applied to the State," the words and figures "The Companies ~~t~l~i33. 
Act, 1956" shall be sub~tltuted; and 

Special pro-
vi.ion for 
winding up 
of the bank. 
(b) after section 22, the followi·ng section shall be inserted, 
namely:-
"22A. No provision of law relating to the ~nding up of 
companies or corporations shall apply to the bank and-
" 
(i) the provisions of section 5 of the State-Asso-
ciated Banks (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act, 1962, ex-
cept the previsions of clauses (d) and (e) of sub-section 
(1) thereof, and 
(ii) the provisions of section 45-0 of the Banking 
Companies Act, 1949, 
shall apply to or in relation to the bank as if references to 
the court were references to the principal civil court of 
original jurisdiction in the district in which the bank's head 
office is situated and references to the Dholpur bank were 
references to the State Bank of Kurundwad (Junior) Ltd.". 

STATEMENT OF OBjECTS AND REASONS 
It has been decided, in consultation with the State Bank of India 
and the Reserve Bank that the State Bank of Bikaner, which has 
been constituted as a subsidiary of the State Bank of India under 
section 3 of the State Bank of India (Subsidiary Banks) Act, 1959, 
should take over the undertaking, assets and liabilities of the State 
Bank of Jaipur, another subsidiary of the State Bank of India, in 
accordance with the provisions of section 38 of the Act. The State 
Bank of India and the banks concerned have indicated that they 
would like the name of the transferee institution, after the amalga-
mation, to be changed so as to include a reference therein to both 
Bikaner and Jaipur. As the existing provisions of the law do not 
provide for a change in the name of any of the statutory subsidiaries 
of the State Bank of India, it is proposed to amend the State Bank 
of India (Subsidiary Banks) Act, 1959 suitably, so as to provide for 
any such change in the name. 
2. The opportunity provided by this amendment is also being 
utilised to clarify the provisions of the State Bank of India Act, 
1955, relating to voting by the directors of the State Bank, to modify 
the provisions of the Bankers' Books Evidence Act, 1891 so as to 
make it applicable to the Reserve Bank of India, the State Bank of 
India and other statutory banking corporations, and to provide for 
the orderly winding up of two minor state-associated banks, namely, 
the State Bank of Dholpur and the State Bank of Kurundwad 
(Junior), which were established under statutes enacted by the 
former Indian rulers but have not been functioning normally for 
some time. 
NEW DELHI; MORARJI DESAI. 
The 12th Nowember, 1962. 
7 

, . 
ANN~URE 
Mcctin,s of 
the Central 
Board. 
EXTRACTS rRo;M THE STATE BANK OF INDIA ACT, 1955 (No. 23 OF 1955) 
:u.. (l) The Central Board shall meet at such time and place and 
shall observe such rules of procedure in regard to the transaction o~ 
b\.lSiness at its meetings as may be prescribed . 
Business 
which the 
State Bar.k 
may not 
transact. 
POWer of 
Centtal BoaN to 
make reau-
lationa. 
• • • • • 
(3) A dire(!tor Who is directly or indirectly concerned or in. 
rere:;ted in any contract, loan, arrangement or proposal entered into 
or pl·OpOSed to be entered into by or on behalf of the State Bank shall 
at the earliest pOSSible opportunity disclose the nature of his intere.t 
to the Central Board and shall Dot be present at any meeting of the 
Central Board when any such contract, loan, arrangement or propo-
sal is discussed unless his presence is required by the other directorI 
for the purpose of eliciting informatioD, and no director· so required 
to be present shall vote on any such contract, loan, arranpment or 
p~oposal. 
III 
• • • 
:M. • • • • • 
(5) Nothing contained in this section shall prevent the State 
Bank from allowing any person who keeps an account with the 
State Bank to overdraw such account without security to such extent 
as mJY be pr~scribed. 
(6) Sl\ve as otherwise provided in section 33, the State Bank shall 
not own or acquire any interest in in:unovable property except for 
the purpose of providing buildings or other accommodation in which 
to carry on the business of the State Bank or for providing residences 
for its officers and other employees: 
Provided that if any such building or other accommodation is not 
immediately required -for any of the purposes of the St~te Bank, the 
State Bank may utilize it to the best advant~e by lett1,ng it out· ~ 
in any other manner. 
• • • • • 
50. (1) • • ... ... • 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the 
foregoing power, such regulations may provide for-
• • ... ... • 
8 

9 
(q) the maximum amounts which may be advanced or lent 
to, or for which bills may be discounted for, any individual or 
partnership without security, the conditions under which ad-
vances may be made on security and the extent to which accounts 
may be overdrawn without security; 
• • • • • 
THI: STATE BANK OF INDIA (SUBSmIARY BANKS) AI:r, 1959 
(No. 38 OF 1959) 
Z. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
• • • • • 
(b) "corresponding bank" means,-
• • • • • 
(iii) in relation to the State Bank of Jaipur, the Bank of 
Jaipur, Limited; 
• • • • • 
(c) "corresponding new bank" meana,-
• • • • • 
(iii) in relation to the Bank of Jaipur, Limited, the State 
Bank of Jaipur; 
• • • • • 
(d) "existing bank" means any of the . following banks, 
namely:-
• • • , • 
(iii) Bank of Jaipur, Limited; 
• • • • • 

CHAPTER II 
CONSTITUTION OF NEW BANlCS 
Batabliah- 3. With eftect from such date as the Central Government may, by 
:.of new notification in the Official Gazette, specify in this behalf, there shall 
be constituted the following new banks, namely:- • . 
• • • • • 
(c) the State Bank of Jaipur; 
• • • • • 
and different dates may be specified for diffenmt new banks. 
<:Ampensa- 13. (1) Every person who and any State Government which 
t~~ I:e- immediately before the appointed day is registered as a holder of 
existing shares in the books of an existing bank shall be given by the State 
~=·tb!her Bank such compensation in respect of the transfer to the State Bank 
Ba~k of of the shares in the capital of that bank as is determined in accor-
Patlala. dance with the principles contained in the First Schedule. 
• • • • • 
(13) In this section, the expression "existing bank" does not in-
clude the Bank of Patiala, and the expression "corresponding new 
bank" does not include the State Bank of Patiala. 
• • • • 
Meetinp of 34. (1) The Board of Directors of a subsidiary bank shall meet at 
th~ Board of such time and place and shall observe such rules of procedure in 
Dll'cctors. regard to the transaction of business at its meetings as may be pres-
cribed. 
• • • • 
(5) A director of a subsidiary bank who is directly or indirectly 
concerned or interested in any contract, loan, arrangement 
or proposal, entered into or proposed to be entered 
into or made by or on behalf of the subsidiary 
bank shall, ,at the earliest possible opportunity, disclose the nature 
of his interest to the Board of Directors of that bank; and any such 
director shall not be present at any meeting of the Board of Directors 
when any such contract, loan, arrangement or proposal is discussed, 
unless his presence is required by the other directors for the purpose 
of eliciting information and where any director is so required to be 
10 

11 
present, he shall not vote on any such contract, loan, arrangement or 
proposal: 
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall apply to 
such director by Il'eason only of his being a shareholder (other than 
a director) holding not more than two per cent. of the paid-up capital 
[ of 1956. in any public company as defined in the Companies Act, 1956, with 
which the subsidiary bank has entered into or proposes to enter into 
a contract or other arrangement. 
• • • • • 
36. (1) A subsidiary bank shall, if so required by the State Bank, Subsidiary 
act as agent of the State Bank at any place in India for- abank to ct as agent 
(a) paying, receiving, collecting and remitting money, bul- ~~:l~ State 
lion and securities on behalf of any Government in India; and 
(b) undertaking and transacting any other business which 
the Reserve Bank may, from time to time, entrust to the State 
Bank. ' 
... ... ... ... ... 
(3) Until an arrangement is made by the State Bank with the 
Hyderabad Bank or the State Bank of Mysore, as the case may be, 
under this section, or until the expiry of a period of six months from 
the appointed day (which period may from time to time be extended 
by the Reserve Bank) whichever is earlier, the Hyderabad Bank and 
the State Bank of Mysore may respectively act as agent of the 
Reserve Bank, at the same places where and for the same purposes 
for which, and on the same terms and conditions on which, the 
Hyderabad Bank or the Bank of Mysore Limited, as the case may pe,' 
was acting as agent of the Reserve Bank immediately before the 
appointed day or with the preVious approval of the Central Govern-
ment at any other place or for any purpose. 
(4) Until an arrangement is made by the State Bank with the 
State Bank of Bikaner, the State Bank of Jaipur, the Saurashtra 
Bank or the State Bank of Travancore, as the case may be, under this 
section or until the expiry of a period of six months from the appoint-
ed day (which period may from time to time be extended by the 
Reserve Bank) whichever is earlier, the State Bank of Bikaner, the 
State Bank ,of Jaipur, the Saurashtra· Bank or the State Bank of 
Travancore may act as agent of the State Government of Rajasthan or 
the State Govemment1of Gujarat or the State Government of KeraIa, 
as the case may be, at the same places where and for the same pur-
poses for which, and on the same terms and conditions on which, the 
Bank of Bikaner, Limited, or the Bank of Jaipur, Limited, or the 

12 
Saurashtra Bank, or the Travancore Bank, Limited, as the case may 
be, was acting as agent for the State Government immediately before 
the appointed day or with the previous approval of the Central Gov-
ernment at any other place or for any purpose. . 
• • • • • 
Reference in 59. On and from the appointed day, any reference to an existing 
:t::i:;S to bank in any law, other than this Act, or in any contract or other 
banks. inst!'Ulllent, shall, except as otherwise provided in .any general or 
Definition •• 
special order made by the Central Government, be construed as a 
reference to the corresponding new bank. 
• • • • • 
EXTRACT FROM THE BANKERS' BooKS EVIDENCE ACT, 1891 (No. 18 OF 
1891) 
• • • • • 
2. In this Act, unless there is something repugnant in the subject 
or context,-
(1) "company" means a company registered under any of the 
enactments relating to companies for the time being in 
force in any part of His Majesty's dominions or incor-
porated by an Act of Parliament (of the United King-
dom) or by an Indian law or by Royal Charter or by 
Letters Patent:) 
(2) "bank" and "banker" mean-
(a) any company carrying on the business of bankers, 
• • • • • 
TRANSLATION 
The copy of the St4te Bank, Dholpur Act (palled btl Shri 
HUZUT on 25th June, 1915) 
PRELIMINARY 
The Bank has been established in Dholpur State in 1894 out of 
the funds allotted by the late Shri Badi Maharani Sahiba as the late 
Maharaj Rana Nihalsinh Saheb Bahadur desired that the amount of 
the allotment (vaqf) be invested so as to earn interest until such 
time that sufficient amount could be had to raise a magniftcent and 
lasting memorial to the late Maharani Sahiba. As the Bank is COD-
nected with the State, it is ~amed as State Bank. 
As it was also one of the aims of the Bank to help the deserving 
employees, agriculturists and the people of the State, the high offtclals 
of the Finance Department, Military and Judicial Departments have 
been appointed as the members of the Bank, I so that the recoveries of 
the Bank may not be at the mercy of the· Court procedures and the 

13 
people can avail of the help of the Bank very easily. It was also felt 
necessary that all the rules and orders issued by the Bank from time 
to time may be reconsidered and put together so that the people may 
get acquainted therewith and can avail of the help of the Bank as 
and when needed. 
This Act of the State Bank, having been passed by Shri Huzur, 
has been issued in 1915. 
KAMESHWAR NATH BATAL, 
Secretary, 
State Bank, Dholpur. 
Extract from General Rules 
R. 1 The amount allotted (vaqf) by the late Shri Badi Maharani 
Sahiba shall be invested so as to earn the interest thereon as 
d~ired by the late Maharaj Rana Nihalsinh, Saheb Bahadur and 
the interest so earned shall be adejed to the principal amount 
until such time that sufficient amount can be had to raise a 
magnificent and last memorial to the late Badi Maharani 
Sahiba. In this connection, all such sums that are allotted 
(vaqf) or donated for any particular purpose by other people 
shall also be invested so as to earn interest. 
• • • • • 
R. 3 The management of the Bank shall vest with a Committee of 
seven members t'Vil Fel' 8 members. 
• • • • • 
R. 53 The members of the Committee shan be free to recover the 
108D8 of the BaDk through the orders of the State in the same 
way as the dues of the State are recovered. 
• • • • • 

14 
EXTRACT FROM THE STATE BANK OF KURUNDWAD (JUNIOR) ACT, 1933 
• • • • • 
22. The Indian Companies Act, as applied to the State, shall not 
apply to this Bank which shall be governed by this Act: 
* • • • • 
• 

LOK SABHA 
A 
Bll..L 
further to amend the State Bank of India Act, 1955, the State 
Bank of India (Subsidiary Banks) Act, 1959, and the Bankers' 
Books Evidence Act, 1891, and to provide for the winding up 
of certain minor State-associated banks and for matters 
connected therewith. 
• 
(Shri Morarji Desai, 
Minister of Firumce.) 