5 
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA 
Bill No. 109 of 2026
THE UNION TERRITORIES LAWS (AMENDMENT) 
BILL, 2026 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Government of Union Territories Act, 1963, the Government 
of National Capital Territory of Delhi Act, 1991 and the Jammu and Kashmir 
Reorganisation Act, 2019. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy -seventh Year of the Republic of 
India as follows:–– 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
1. ( 1) This Act may be called the Union Territories Laws (Amendment)
Act, 2026. 
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
Short title and 
commencement.

2 
 
 
 
 
 
Amendment of 
long title. 
 
 
 
 
 
Substitution of 
certain 
expression with 
certain other 
expression. 
 
Amendment of 
section 1. 
 
 
 
 
 
Amendment of 
heading of              
Part II. 
 
Amendment of 
section 3. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Amendment of 
section 3A. 
 
 
 
 
Omission of 
section 3B. 
 CHAPTER II 
AMENDMENTS TO THE GOVERNMENT OF UNION TERRITORIES ACT, 1963 
2. In the Government of Union Territories Act, 1963 (hereafter in this Chapter 
referred to as the principal Act), in the long title, for the words “Legislative 
Assemblies and Councils of Ministers for certain Union territories”, the words 
“Legislative Assembly and C ouncil of Ministers for the Union territory of 
Puducherry” shall be substituted. 
3. Throughout the principal Act, except section 58, for the word “Pondicherry” 
wherever it occurs, the word “Puducherry” shall be substituted. 
 
4. In section 1 of the principal Act,–– 
(a) in sub -section ( 1), for the words “Union territories”, the words 
“Union territory of Puducherry” shall be substituted; 
(b) in sub-section (2), the provisos shall be omitted. 
5. In Part II of the principal Act, in the heading, for the word “Ass emblies”, 
the word “Assembly” shall be substituted.  
6. In section 3 of the principal Act,–– 
(a) in the marginal heading, for the words “Assemblies for Union 
territories and their”, the words “Assembly and its” shall be substituted; 
(b) in sub -section (1), for the words “each Union territory”, the words 
“the Union territory of Puducherry” shall be substituted; 
(c) for sub -section (2), the following sub -section shall be substituted, 
namely:–– 
“(2) The Legislative Assembly of the Union territory shall consist 
of such number of members, to be chosen by direct election from 
territorial constituencies in the Union territory, as may be determined by 
the Delimitation Commission referred to in section 40A, which shall not 
be less than thirty, in any case.”; 
(d) in s ub-section ( 3), the following proviso shall be inserted,                   
namely:— 
“Provided that the number of persons nominated under this         
sub-section shall be increased to five, out of whom two shall be women, 
only after readjustment of constit uencies takes effect under the 
applicable law on delimitation.”; 
(e) in sub -section (5), for the Explanation, the following Explanation 
shall be substituted, namely:–– 
‘Explanation.—In this sub -section, the expression “population” 
shall have the same meaning as provided in the applicable law on 
delimitation.’. 
7. In section 3A of the principal Act, in sub-section (3), for the words “in such 
manner as Parliament may by law determine”, the words, figures and letter “in the 
manner provided by the applicab le law on delimitation and the provisions of                 
article 334A shall apply to such reservation” shall be substituted. 
8. Section 3B of the principal Act shall be omitted. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
15 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
20 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
25 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
30 
 
 
 
 
 
 
35 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
40 
 
 
 
 
20 of 1963. 

3 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1 of 1992. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
15 
 
 
 
 
 
 
20 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
25 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
30 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
35 
 
 
 
 
 
 
40 
 
9. In section 5 of the principal Act, in the marginal heading, for the word 
“Assemblies”, the word “Assembly” shall be substituted. 
10. In section 25 of the principal Act, the third proviso shall be omitted. 
11. In Part III of the principal Act,–– 
(a) section 38 shall be omitted; 
(b) in section 40, the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:— 
“Provided that the seat allo tted under this section shall be subject 
to readjustment of constituencies by the Delimitation Commission 
referred to in section 40A.”; 
(c) after section 40, the following section shall be inserted, namely:— 
“40A. The readjustment of Assembly and Parliamentary 
constituencies in the Union territory of Puducherry may be determined 
by the Delimitation Commission under the applicable law on 
delimitation: 
Provided that such readjustment shall not affect representation in 
the Legislative Assembly until the dissolution of the then existing 
Assembly: 
Provided further that until such readjustment takes effect, any 
election to the Legislative Assembly may be held on the basis of the 
territorial constituencies existing before such readjustment.”; 
(d) sections 41, 42, 43, 43A, 43B, 43C, 43D, 43E and 43F shall be 
omitted. 
12. In section 44 of the principal Act, in sub -section (1), for the words “each 
Union territory”, the words “the Union territory of Puducherry” shall be substituted. 
13. Sections 53, 54, 54A and 57 of the principal Act shall be omitted. 
 
14. The Second Schedule to the principal Act shall be omitted. 
 
CHAPTER III 
AMENDMENTS TO THE GOVERNMENT OF NATIONAL CAPITAL TERRITORY OF DELHI 
ACT, 1991 
15. In the Government of National Capital Territory of Delhi Act, 1991 
(hereafter in this Chapter referred to as the principal Act), in section 3,–– 
(a) for sub -section (1), the following sub -section shall be substituted, 
namely:— 
“(1) The Legislative Assembly of the Capital shall consist of such 
number of members, to be chosen by direct election from territorial 
constituencies in the Capital, as may be determined by the Delimitation 
Commission referred to in section 38, which shall not be less than 
seventy, in any case.”; 
(b) in sub-section (3), for the Explanation and the provisos, the following 
Explanation shall be substituted, namely:–– 
‘Explanation.—In this sub -section, the expression “population” 
shall have the same meaning as provided in the applicable law on 
delimitation.’. 
 
 
Amendment of 
section 5. 
 
Amendment of 
section 25. 
 
Amendment of 
Part III. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Delimitation of 
constituencies. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Amendment of 
section 44. 
 
Omission of 
sections 53, 54, 
54A and 57. 
 
Omission of 
Second 
Schedule. 
 
 
 
 
 
Amendment of 
section 3. 
 

4 
 
Substitution of 
new section for 
section 38. 
 
Delimitation of 
constituencies. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Omission of 
section 39. 
 
 
 
 
 
Amendment of 
section 10. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Amendment of 
section 14. 
 
 16. For section 38 of the principal Act, the following section shall be 
substituted, namely:–– 
“38. The readjustment of Assembly and Parliamentary constituencies in 
the Capital may be determined by the Delimitation Commission under the 
applicable law on delimitation: 
Provided that such readjustment shall not affect representation in the 
Legislative Assembly until the dissolution of the then existing Assembly: 
Provided further that until such readjustment takes effect, any election 
to the Legislative Assem bly may be held on the basis of the territorial 
constituencies existing before such readjustment.”. 
17. Section 39 of the principal Act shall be omitted. 
CHAPTER IV 
AMENDMENTS TO THE JAMMU AND KASHMIR REORGANISATION ACT, 2019 
18. In the Jammu and Kashmir Reorganisation Act, 2019 (hereafter in this 
Chapter referred to as the principal Act), in section 10, the following proviso shall 
be inserted, namely:–– 
“Provided that the number of seats allocated under this section shall be 
subject to readjustment of constituencies by the Delimitation Commission 
referred to in section 60.”. 
19. In section 14 of the principal Act,–– 
(a) for sub -section (3), the following sub -section shall be substituted, 
namely:–– 
“(3) The Legislative Assembly of  the Union territory of Jammu 
and Kashmir shall consist of such number of members, to be chosen by 
direct election from territorial constituencies in the Union territory, as 
may be determined by the Delimitation Commission referred to in          
section 60, which shall not be less than one hundred and fourteen, in any 
case.”; 
(b) for sub -section (4), the following sub -section shall be substituted, 
namely:–– 
“(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section (3), until 
the area of the Union territory of  Jammu and Kashmir under the 
occupation of Pakistan ceases to be so occupied and the people residing 
in that area elect their representatives, twenty -four seats in the 
Legislative Assembly of Union territory of Jammu and Kashmir shall 
remain vacant and shall not be taken into account for reckoning the total 
membership of the Assembly.”; 
(c) in sub -section (7), for the Explanation, the following Explanation 
shall be substituted, namely:–– 
‘Explanation.—In this sub -section, the expression “population” 
shall have the same meaning as provided in the applicable law on 
delimitation.’; 
(d) sub-sections (9) and (10) shall be omitted. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
15 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
20 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
25 
 
 
 
 
 
 
30 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
35 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
40 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
34 of 2019. 

5 
  
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
15 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
20 
 
 
 
 
 
 
25 
 
20. In section 14A of the principal Act, in sub -section (3), for the words “in 
such manner as Parliament may by law determine”, the words, figures and letter “in 
the manner provided by the applicable law on delimitation and the provisions of 
article 334A shall apply to such reservation” shall be substituted. 
21. Section 14B of the principal Act shall be omitted. 
22. In section 15 of the principal Act, the following proviso shall be inserted,  
namely:––  
“Provided that the number of members nominated under this section 
shall be increased to three, only after readjustment of constituencies takes 
effect under the applicable law on delimitation.”. 
23. In section 15A of the principal Act, the following proviso shall be inserted, 
namely:––  
“Provided that the number of members nominated under this section 
shall be increased to three, only after readjustment of constituencies takes 
effect under the applicable law on delimitation.”. 
24. In Part V of the principal Act,— 
(a) section 59 shall be omitted; 
(b) for section 60, the following section shall be substituted, namely:— 
“60. The readjustment of Assembly and Parliamentary 
constituencies in the Union territory of Jammu and Kashmir may be 
determined by the Delimitation Commission under the applicable law on 
delimitation: 
Provided that such readjustment shall not affect representation in 
the Legislative Assembly until the dissolution of the then existing 
Assembly: 
Provided further that until  such readjustment takes effect, any 
election to the Legislative Assembly may be held on the basis of the 
territorial constituencies existing before such readjustment.”; 
(c) sections 61, 62, 63 and 64 shall be omitted. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Amendment of 
section 14A. 
 
 
 
 
Omission of 
section 14B. 
 
Amendment of 
section 15. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Amendment of 
section 15A. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Amendment of 
Part V. 
 
 
 
 
Delimitation of 
constituencies. 

6 
  STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Constitution (One Hundred and Sixth Amendment) Act, 2023 amended 
article 239AA and inserted articles 330A, 332A and 334A in the Constitution to 
provide for reservation of seats for women in the House of the People and the 
Legislative Assemblies, including in the Legislative Assemblies of Uni on 
territories. The said provisions contemplate that such reservation shall become 
operative after an exercise of delimitation undertaken on the basis of the relevant 
census. 
2. Further, the Constitution (One Hundred and Thirty -first Amendment)                
Bill, 2026 seeks to revise the constitutional framework relating to delimitation, 
allocation of seats and the meaning of “population”, by providing that readjustment 
of constituencies and allocation of seats shall be undertaken by the                       
Delimitation Commission on the basis of such census as Parliament may by law 
determine. 
3. The provisions contained in the Government of Union Territories                              
Act, 1963, the Government of National Capital Territory of Delhi Act, 1991 and the 
Jammu and Kashmir Reorganisation Act, 2019 are presently based on the existing 
constitutional framework relating to population, delimitation and reservation. Under 
the revised constitutional scheme, the expression “population”, the allocatio n of 
seats and the readjustment of Parliamentary and Assembly constituencies are 
proposed to be governed with reference to such census as Parliament may by law 
determine, and such readjustment is to be undertaken by the Delimitation 
Commission. The revised  scheme also aligns the operation of reservation of seats 
for women in the Legislative Assemblies of the concerned Union territories with 
article 334A of the Constitution and the delimitation exercise undertaken 
thereunder. In view of these constitutional changes, the aforesaid enactments require 
suitable amendments so as to bring them in conformity with the revised 
constitutional scheme. 
4. It is, therefore, proposed to amend the aforesaid enactments,                                   
inter alia, to— 
(i) align the provisions relating to determination of population with the 
law relating to delimitation; 
(ii) provide that the total number of seats in the Legislative Assemblies 
and their territorial composition shall be determined by the Delimitation 
Commission in accordance with the law made by Parliament, subject to 
prescribed minimum strength; 
(iii) align the provisions relating to reservation for women with the 
constitutional framework under article 334A and the delimitation law; 
(iv) provide for readjustm ent of Parliamentary and Assembly 
constituencies by the Delimitation Commission along with appropriate 
transitional safeguards; and 
(v) omit obsolete, redundant or inconsistent provisions relating to earlier 
delimitation arrangements, so as to ensure clari ty and coherence in the 
statutory framework. 
 
 

7 
  5. The proposed amendments are largely consequential and enabling in nature, 
arising from the revised constitutional framework, and are intended to ensure 
consistency and effective implementation of the provisions relating to delimitation, 
representation and reservation in the Legislative Assemblies of Union territories. 
They do not involve any independent policy departure but seek to harmonise the 
existing statutory provisions with the amended constitutional scheme. 
6. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives. 
 
NEW DELHI ;                     AMIT SHAH. 
The 10th April, 2026. 
 
 
 

Short title and 
commencement. 
ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS FROM THE GOVERNMENT OF UNION TERRITORIES ACT, 1963 
(20 OF 1963) 
* * * * * 
An Act to provide for Legislative Assemblies and Councils of Ministers for 
certain Union territories and for certain other matters. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fourteenth Year of the Republic of India 
as follows:― 
PART I 
PRELIMINARY 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Government of Union Territories Act, 1963.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint: 
Provided that it shall come into force in the Union territory of Mizoram on 
such date, being a date not earlier than the date of commencement of th e 
Government of Union Territories (Amendment) Act, 1971, as the Central 
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint:  
Provided further that it shall come into force in the Union territory of 
Arunachal Pradesh on such date, being a date  not earlier than the date of 
commencement of the Government of Union Territories (Amendment) 
Act, 1975, as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
appoint:  
Provided also that, subject to the p receding provisos, different dates may be 
appointed for different provisions of this Act and for different Union territories and 
any reference in any such provision to the commencement of this Act shall be 
construed as a reference to the coming into force of that provision. 
* * * * * 
83 of 1971. 
29 of 1975. 
Legislative 
Assemblies for 
Union territories 
and their 
composition. 
PART II 
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLIES
3. (1) There shall be a Legislative Assembly for each Union territory.
(2) The total number of seats in the Legislative Assembly of the Union territory
to be filled by persons chosen by direct election shall be thirty. 
(3) The Central Government may nominate not more than three persons, not
being persons in the service of Government, to be members of the Legislative 
Assembly of the Union territory.  
* * * * * 
(5) The number of seats reserved for the scheduled castes or the scheduled
tribes in the Legislative Assembly of the Union territory under sub-section (4) shall 
bear, as nearly as may be, the same proportion to the total number of seats in the 
Assembly as the population of the scheduled castes in the Union territory or of the 
scheduled tribes in the Union territory, as the case may be, in respect of which seats 
are so reserved, bears to the total population of the Union territory.  
Explanation.―In this sub -section, the expression “population” means the 
population as ascertained at the last preceding census of which the relevant figures 
have been published:  
8

9 
 
Provided that the reference in this Explanation to the last preceding census of 
which the relevant figures have been published shall, until the relevant figures for 
the first census taken after the year 2026 have been published, be construed as a 
reference to the 2001 census. 
*         *                *   *   * 
  
3A. (1) Seats shall be reserved for women in the Legislative Assembly of the 
Union territory of Puducherry. 
(2) As nearly as may be, one -third of the seats reserved for the Scheduled 
Castes in the Legislative Assembly of the Union territory of Puducherry shall be 
reserved for women. 
(3) As nearly as may be, one-third of the total number of seats to be filled by 
direct election to the Legislative Assembly of the Union territory of Puducherry  
(including the number of seats reserved for women belonging to the Scheduled 
Castes) shall  be reserved for women in such manner as Parliament may by law 
determine. 
3B. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the provisions of this Act, the 
provisions relating to reservation of seats for women in the Legislative Assembly of 
the Union territory of Puducherry shall come into effect after an exercise of 
delimitation is undertaken for this purpose after the relevant figures for the first 
census taken after the commencement of the Government of Union Territories 
(Amendment) Act, 2023 have been published and shall cease to have effect on the 
expiration of a period of fifteen years from such commencement. 
(2) Subject to the provisions of section 3A, seats reserved for women in the 
Legislative Assembly of the Union territory of Puducherry shall  continue till such 
date as Parliament may by law determine. 
(3) Rotation of seats reserved for women in the Legislative Assembly of the 
Union territory of Puducherry shall take effect after such subsequent exercise of 
delimitation as Parliament may by law determine. 
(4) Nothing in section 3A shall affect any representation in the Legislative 
Assembly of the Union territory of Puducherry until the dissolution of the then 
existing Legislative Assembly of the Union territory of Puducherry.”. 
*         *                *   *   * 
 Reservation 
of seats for 
women in 
Legislative 
Assembly of 
Union 
territory of 
Puducherry. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reservation 
of seats for 
women to 
take effect. 
 
 
  5. The Legislative Assembly of the Union territory, unless sooner dissolved, 
shall continue for five years from the date appointed for its first meeting and no 
longer, and the expiration of the said period of five years shall operate as a 
dissolution of the Assembly:  
Provided that the said period may, while a Proclamation of Emergency issued 
under clause (1) of article 352 is in operation, be extended by the President by order 
for a period not exceeding one year at a time and not extending in any case beyond 
a period of six months after the Proclamation has ceased to operate. 
*         *                *   *   * 
 Duration of 
Legislative 
Assemblies. 
  25. When a Bill has been passed by the Legislative Assembly of the Union 
territory, it shall be present ed to the Administrator and the Administrator shall 
declare either that he assents to the Bill or that he withholds assent therefrom or that 
he reserves the Bill for the consideration of the President:  
*         *                *   *   *  
Provided also that without prejudice to the provisions of the second proviso, 
the Administrator shall not assent to, but shall reserve for the consideration of the 
President, any Bill which has been passed by the Legislative Assembly of the Union 
 Assent to Bills. 

10 
 
territory of Mizoram and which relates to any area comprised in any autonomous 
district in that Union territory under the Sixth Schedule to the Constitution.  
Explanation.―For the purposes of this section and section 25A, a Bill shall be 
deemed to be a Money Bill i f it contains only provisions dealing with all or any of 
the matters specified in sub-section (1) of section 23 or any matter incidental to any 
of those matters and, in either case, there is endorsed thereon the certificate of the 
Speaker of the Legislative Assembly signed by him that it is a Money Bill. 
*         *                *   *   *  
 
 
 
 
Definitions. 
 
 PART III 
DELIMITATION OF CONSTITUENCIES 
38. In this Part, unless the context otherwise requires,— 
 (a) “associate member” means a member associated with the 
Delimitation Commission under section 42 or with the Election Commission 
under section 43A or section 43C;  
(b) “Delimitation Commission” mea ns the Delimitation Commission 
constituted under section 3 of the Delimitation Act, 2002;  
(bb) “Election Commission” means the Election Commission appointed 
by the President under article 324;  
(c) “latest census figures” mean the census figures in the Union territory 
ascertained at the latest census of which the finally published figures are 
available;  
(d) “parliamentary constituency” means a constituency provided by law 
for the purpose of elections to the House of the People from the Union territory 
including the Union territory of Delhi. 
*         *                *   *   * 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
33 of 2002. 
Representation 
of Pondicherry 
in the House of 
the People. 
 40. There shall be allotted one seat to the Union territory of Pondicherry in the 
House of the People and that Union territory shall form one parliamentary 
constituency. 
  
Duties of 
Delimitation 
Commission. 
 41. (1) It shall be the duty of the Delimitation Commission—  
(a) to delimit the assembly constituencies in each Union territory, and  
(b) to determine, on the basis of the latest census figures, the number of 
seats to be reserved for the scheduled castes and for the scheduled tribes in the 
Legislative Assembly of the Union territory other than the Union territory of 
Goa, Daman and Diu, and the constituencies in which these seats shall be so 
reserved. 
(2) It shall also be the duty of the Delimitation Commission—  
(a) to readjust, on the basis of the latest census figure s, the division of 
each of the Union territories of Delhi, Himachal Pradesh, Manipur and Tripura 
into parliamentary constituencies, the number being 7, 4, 2 and 2;  
(b) to determine the constituency in which the seat shall be reserved for 
the scheduled castes or for the scheduled tribes, as the case may be; and  
(c) to divide the Union territory of Goa, Daman and Diu into two          
single-member parliamentary constituencies. 
  
Associate 
members. 
 42. (1) For the purpose of assisting the Delimitation Commission in its duties, 
the Delimitation Commission shall associate with itself,— 
(a) in respect of the Union territory of Delhi, all the members of the 
House of the People representing that Union territory;  
  

11 
 
(b) in respect of each of the Union territories of Himachal Pradesh, 
Manipur and Tripura, all the members of the House of the People representing 
that Union territory and three members of the Legislative Assembly of that 
Union territory to be nominated by the Speaker of the Assembly from among 
the members thereof;  
(c) in respect of the Union territory of Goa, Daman and Diu, the two 
members of the House of the People representing that Union territory;  
(d) in respect of the Union territory of Pondicherry , three members of 
the Legislative Assembly of that Union territory to be nominated by the 
Speaker of the Assembly from among the members thereof. 
(2) The nomination of members of the several Legislative Assemblies under 
sub-section ( 1) shall be made by th e respective Speakers thereof as soon as 
practicable and shall be communicated to the Delimitation Commission.  
(3) If owing to death or resignation the office of an associate member falls 
vacant, it shall be filled as soon as practicable under and in acco rdance with the 
foregoing provisions of this section.  
(4) None of the associate members shall have the right to vote or to sign any 
decision of the Delimitation Commission. 
 
 
61 of 1962. 
 43. The provisions of sections 7, 9, 10 and 11 of the Delimitation Commission 
Act, 1962, shall apply, as far as may be, in relation to the delimitation of 
parliamentary and assembly constituencies under this Part as they apply in relation 
to the delimitation of parliamentary and assembly constituencies under that Act. 
 Procedure as to 
delimitation. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
81 of 1971. 
 43A. (1) The provisions of sections 39 to 43 (both inclusive) shall not apply to 
the delimitation of constituencies for the purpose of elections to the Legislative 
Assembly of the Union territory of Mizoram.  
(2) The Election Commission shall, in the manner herei n provided, distribute 
the seats assigned to the Legislative Assembly of the Union territory of Mizoram 
under sub-section (2) of section 3 to single member assembly constituencies and 
delimit them on the basis of the latest census figures having regard to the provisions 
of the Constitution and to the following provisions:— 
(a) all constituencies shall, as far as practicable, be geographically 
compact areas;  
(b) in delimiting the constituencies, regard shall be had to physical 
features, existing boundaries of administrative units, facilities of 
communication and public convenience.  
(3) For the purpose of assisting in the performance of its functions under sub -
section ( 2), the Election Commission shall associate with itself as associate 
members—  
(a) all the persons who, having been elected to the Legislative Assembly 
of the State of Assam from the Lungleh, Aijal East and Aijal West territorial 
constituencies, are members of that Assembly immediately before the day 
appointed under clause ( b) of section 2 of t he North -Eastern Areas 
(Reorganisation) Act, 1971; and  
(b) such three elected members of the District Council of the Mizo 
District as the Chairman thereof may nominate:  
Provided that none of the associate members shall have a right to vote 
or sign any decision of the Election Commission.  
(4) If, owing to death or resignation, the office of an associate member falls 
vacant, it shall be filled, if practicable, in accordance with the provisions of              
sub-section (3).  
 Special 
provision for 
delimitation of 
constituencies of 
Mizoram 
Legislative 
Assembly. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

12 
 
(5) The Election Commission shall—  
(a) publish its proposals for the delimitation of constituencies, together 
with the dissenting proposals, if any, of any associate member who desires 
publication thereof in the Official Gazette and in such other manner as the 
Commission may consider fit, together with a notice inviting objections and 
suggestions in relation to the proposals and specifying a date on or after which 
the proposals will be further considered by it;  
(b) consider all objections and suggestions which may have been 
received by it before the date so specified;  
(c) after consideration of objections and suggestions which may have 
been received by it before the date so specified, determine by one or more 
orders the delimitation of constituencies and cause such order or orders to be 
published in the Official Gazette; and upon such publication, the order or 
orders shall have the full force of law and shall not be called in question in any 
court.  
(6) The Election Commission may, from time to time, by notification in the 
Official Gazette,― 
(a) correct any printing mistake in any order made under sub-section (5) 
or any error arising therein from inadvertent slip or omission;  
(b) where the boundaries or name of any territorial division mentioned 
in any such order or orders are or is altered, make such amendments as appear 
to it to be necessary or expedient for bringing such order up-to-date.  
(7) Every order made under sub-section (5) and every notification issued under 
sub-section (6) shall be laid as soon as may be after it is made or issued before the 
Legislative Assembly of the Union territory of Mizoram.  
(8) All things done, and all steps taken, before the commencement of thi s Act 
in the Union territory of Mizoram with a view to delimiting the territorial 
constituencies of that Union territory for purposes of elections to the Legislative 
Assembly of that Union territory shall, in so far as they are in conformity with the 
foregoing provisions of this section, be deemed to have been done or taken under 
those provisions as if those provisions were in force at the time such things were 
done or such steps were taken. 
Representation 
of Arunachal 
Pradesh in the 
House of the 
people. 
 43B. In the House of the People to be constituted after the general election to 
that House to be held after the commencement of the Government of Union 
Territories (Amendment) Act, 1975 and thereafter, there shall be allotted two seats 
to the Union territory of Arunachal Pradesh and the First Schedule to the 
Representation of the People Act, 1950 shall be deemed  to have been amended 
accordingly. 
  
 
 
29 of 1975. 
 
43 of 1950. 
 
Special 
provisions for 
delimitation of 
parliamentary 
constituencies in 
Arunachal 
Pradesh and 
constituencies of 
Arunachal 
Pradesh 
Legislative 
Assembly. 
 43C. (1) The provisions of sections 39 to 43 (both inclusive) shall not apply to 
the delimitation of parliamentary constituencies in the Union territory of Arunachal 
Pradesh or to the delimitation of constituencies for the purpose of elections to the 
Legislative Assembly of that Union territory.  
(2) The Election Commission shall divide the Union territory of Arunachal 
Pradesh into two single -member parliamentary constituencies on the basis of the 
latest census figures.  
(3) The Election Commission shall also, in the manner herein provided, 
distribute the seats assigned to the Legislative Assembly of the Union territory of 
Arunachal Pradesh under sub -section (2) of section 3 to single -member assembly 
constituencies and delimit them on the basis of the latest census  figures having 
regard to the following provisions:―  
(a) all constituencies shall, as far as practicable, be geographically 
compact areas;  
  

13 
 
(b) every assembly constituency shall be so delimited as to fall only 
within one parliamentary constituency;  
(c) i n delimiting the constituencies, regard shall be had to physical 
features, existing boundaries of administrative units facilities of 
communication and public convenience.  
(4) For the purpose of assisting in the performance of its functions under                
sub-sections ( 2) and ( 3), the Election Commission shall associate with itself as 
associate members— 
(a) the member of the House of the People representing the Union 
territory of Arunachal Pradesh;  
(b) such five members of the Legislative Assembly of the Union territory 
of Arunachal Pradesh as the Speaker of that Assembly shall, having regard to 
the composition of the Legislative Assembly, nominate:  
Provided that none of the associate members shall have a right to vote or sign 
any decision of the Election Commission.  
(5) If owing to death or resignation, the office of an associate member falls 
vacant, it shall be filled, if practicable, in accordance with the provisions of              
sub-section (4).  
(6) The Election Commission shall—  
(a) publish its proposals for the delimitation of constituencies together 
with the dissenting proposals, if any, of any associate member who desires 
publication thereof in the Official Gazette and in such other manner as t he 
Commission may consider fit, together with a notice inviting objections and 
suggestions in relation to the proposals and specifying a date on or after which 
the proposals will be further considered by it;  
(b) consider all objections and suggestions whi ch may have been 
received by it before the date so specified;  
(c) after consideration of objections and suggestions which may have 
been received by it before the date so specified, determine by one or more 
orders the delimitation of constituencies and cau se such order or orders to be 
published in the Official Gazette; and upon such publication, the order or 
orders shall have the full force of law and shall not be called in question in any 
court.  
(7) The Election Commission may, from time to time, by notif ication in the 
Official Gazette,—  
(a) correct any printing mistake in any order made under sub-section (6) 
or any error arising therein from inadvertent slip or omission;  
(b) where the boundaries or name of any territorial division mentioned 
in any such order or orders are or is altered, make such amendments as appear 
to it to be necessary or expedient for bringing such order up-to-date.  
(8) Every order made under sub-section (6) and every notification issued under 
sub-section (7) shall be laid as soon as may be after 722B it is made or issued before 
the House of the People and the Legislative Assembly of the Union territory of 
Arunachal Pradesh.  
(9) All things done, and all steps taken, before the commencement of this Act 
in the Union territory of Arunachal Pradesh with a view to delimiting the territorial 
constituencies of that Union territory for purposes of elections to the Legislative 
Assembly of that Union territory shall, in so far as they are in conformity with the 
foregoing provisions of this sec tion, be deemed to have been done or taken under 
those provisions as if these provisions were in force at the time such things were 
done or such steps were taken. 

14 
 
Special 
provision for 
determination of 
constituencies in 
the Legislative 
Assembly of 
Goa, Daman and 
Diu for 
Scheduled 
Castes and 
Scheduled 
Tribes. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 43D. ( 1) The Election Commission shall determine on the basis of the 
latest census figures —  
(i) the number of seats to be reserved for the Scheduled Castes and 
for the Scheduled Tribes in the Legislative Assembly of the Union 
territory of Goa, Daman and Diu (her eafter in this section referred to as 
the Legislative Assembly) having regard to the provisions of                       
sub-section ( 5) of section 3; and  
(ii) the constituencies in which those seats shall be so reserved 
having regard to the provisions of  clause ( c), or, as the case may be, 
clause ( d), of sub -section ( 1) of section 9 of the Delimitation Act and 
without altering the extent of any constituency as delimited by the 
Delimitation Commission.  
(2) The Election Commission shall —  
(a) publish its p roposals for the determination of the 
constituencies in which seats shall be reserved for the Scheduled Castes 
or for the Scheduled Tribes, as the case may be, in the Gazette of India 
and in the Official Gazette of the Union territory of Goa, Daman and 
Diu and also in such other manner as the Election Commission may 
consider fit, together with a notice inviting objections and suggestions 
in relation to the proposals and specifying a date on or after which the 
proposals will be further considered by it;  
(b) consider all objections and suggestions which may have been 
received by it before the date so specified;  
(c) after consideration of objections and suggestions which may have 
been received by it before the date so specified, determine by one or more 
orders the number of seats to be reserved for the Scheduled Castes or for the 
Scheduled Tribes, as the case may be, in the Legislative Assembly and the 
constituencies in which those seats shall be so reserved and cause such order 
or orders to be published in the Gazette of India and in the Official Gazette of 
the Union territory of Goa, Daman and Diu; and upon such publication in the 
Gazette of India, the order or orders shall have the full force of law and shall 
not be called in question in any court and the Se cond Schedule to the 
Representation of the People Act, 1950 and the order made by the       
Delimitation Commission under section 9 of the Delimitation Act in relation 
to the Legislative Assembly shall be deemed to have been amended 
accordingly.  
(3) Subjec t to the provisions of sub -section ( 4), the re -adjustment of 
representation of any territorial constituencies in the Legislative Assembly 
necessitated by any order made by the Election Commission under this section, shall 
apply in relation to every electio n to the Legislative Assembly held after the 
publication in the Gazette of India, under sub-section (2), of such order.  
(4) Nothing contained in the foregoing sub -sections shall affect the 
representation in the Legislative Assembly existing on the date of publication in the 
Gazette of India, under sub -section ( 2), of any order made by the Election 
Commission. 
(5) The Election Commission may, from time to time, by notification in the 
Gazette of India and in the Official Gazette of the Union territory of Goa, Daman 
and Diu—  
(a) correct any printing mistake in any order made under sub-section (2) 
or any error arising therein from inadvertent slip or omission;  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
43 of 1950. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

15 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
76 of 1972. 
 
(b) where the boundaries or name of any territorial division mentioned 
in any such order are, or is, altered, make such amendments as appear to it to 
be necessary or expedient for bringing such order up-to-date.  
(6) Every order made under sub-section (2) and every notification issued under 
sub-section (5) shall be laid, as soon as may be, after it is made or issued before the 
Legislative Assembly.  
Explanation.―In this section,―  
(a) “Delimitation Act” means the Delimitation Act, 1972;  
(b) “Delimitation Commission” means the Delimitation Commission 
constituted under section 3 of the Delimitation Act. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
33 of 2002. 
 43E. Notwithstanding anything contained in sections 38 to 43D (both 
inclusive), until the relevant figures for the first census taken after the year 2026 
have been published, it shall not be necessary to readjust the division of each Union 
territory into territorial constituencies and any reference to the “latest census figures” 
in this Part shall be construed as a reference to the 200 census figures.  
43F. Notwithstanding the publication of orders under sub -section ( 1) of 
section 10 of the Delimitation Act, 2 002 or anything contained in                                
sub-section ( 2) or sub -section ( 4) of the said section, any readjustment in the 
division of Union territory into territorial constituencies by the Delimitation 
Commission under the said Act, on t he basis of 2001 census shall take effect 
from such date as the Central Government may, by order, published in the 
Official Gazette, specify and until such readjustment takes effect, any election 
to the Legislative Assembly may be held on the basis of the territorial 
constituencies existing before such readjustment.  
 Special 
provisions as to 
readjustment of 
territorial 
constituencies. 
 
 
Special 
provision as to 
readjustment of 
territorial 
constituencies 
on the basis of 
2001 census. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 PART IV 
COUNCIL OF MINISTERS 
44. (1) There shall be a Council of Ministers in each Union territory with the 
Chief Minister at the head to aid and advise the Administrator in the exercise of his 
functions in relation to matters with respect to which the Legislative Assembly of 
the Union territory has power to make laws except in so far as he is required by or 
under this Act to act in his discretion or by or under any law to exercise any judicial 
or quasi-judicial functions: 
Provided that, in case of diffe rence of opinion between the Administrator and 
his Ministers on any matter, the Administrator shall refer it to the President for 
decision and act according to the decision given thereon by the President, and 
pending such decision it shall be competent for the Administrator in any case where 
the matter is in his opinion so urgent that it is necessary for him to take immediate 
action, to take such action or to give such direction in the matter as he deems 
necessary: 
*         *                *   *   * 
  
 
 
 
Council of 
Ministers. 
  53. (1) As soon as practicable after the commencement of this Act, elections 
shall be held in accordance with law—  
(a) to fill the seats in the House of the People allotted to the Union 
territory of Goa, Daman and Diu; and  
(b) to fill the seat in the House of the People and the seat in the Council 
of States allotted to the Union territory of Pondicherry.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in 
force, the members nominated to represent the Un ion territory of Goa, Daman and 
Diu in the House of the People shall continue to be such until the election of the 
members to fill the two seats in that House allotted to that Union territory:  
 Provisions for 
election to 
Parliament from 
Goa, Daman and 
Diu, and 
Pondicherry. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

16 
 
Provided that where the dates of election of the members are different, the 
members so nominated shall cease to be members of that House on the earlier of 
those two dates.  
Explanation.―In this sub -section, the expression “date of election” has the 
same meaning as in section 67A of the Representation of the People Act, 1951. 
 
 
 
 
43 of 1951. 
Transitional 
provisions for 
administration of 
justice in certain 
areas in the 
Union territory 
of Mizoram. 
 54. On and from the commencement of this Act in the Union territory of 
Mizoram and until other provisions in this behalf are made by a competent 
Legislature or other competent authority, the administration of justice in those areas 
of that Union territory which are not comprised in any autonomous district under the 
Sixth Schedule to the Constitution shall be carried on, so far as may be, in accordance 
with the provisions of paragraphs 4 and 5 of that Schedule, as if those ar eas were 
comprised in an autonomous district under that Schedule and the provisions of the 
said paragraphs were in force in those areas and for this purpose,―  
(i) all powers and functions of a District Council under the provisions of 
the said paragraph 4 shall be exercised and discharged by the Administrator 
or any officer appointed by him in this behalf;  
(ii) the said paragraph 5 shall have effect as if references to the District 
Council, the Regional Council and the courts constituted by the District 
Council, by whatever form of words, had been omitted therefrom; and  
(iii) references to Governor in the said paragraphs 4 and 5 shall be 
construed as references to the Administrator. 
  
Provision as to 
provisional 
Legislative 
Assembly of 
Arunachal 
Pradesh. 
 54A. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act (including provisions 
relating to the strength of the Legislative Assembly of the Union territory of 
Arunachal Pradesh), until the Legislative Assembly of the Union territory of 
Arunachal Pradesh has  been duly constituted and summoned to meet for the first 
session under and in accordance with the provisions of this Act, there shall be a 
provisional Legislative Assembly which shall consist of members, being those 
persons referred to in clauses (b), (c) and (d) of section 3 of the North-East Frontier 
Agency (Administration) Supplementary Regulation, 1971  and who are functioning, 
immediately before the commencement of this Act in the Union territory of 
Arunachal Pradesh, as members of the Pradesh Council constit uted under the said 
section 3.  
(2) The term of office of the members of the provisional Legislative Assembly 
shall expire immediately before the first meeting of the Legislative Assembly duly 
constituted after the first general election to that Assembly.  
(3) The provisional Legislative A ssembly constituted under this section shall, 
for so long as it is in existence, be deemed to be the Legislative Assembly duly 
constituted under this Act and accordingly the other provisions of this Act, so far as 
may be, apply in relation to the provision al Legislative Assembly as they apply in 
relation to the Legislative Assembly. 
*         *                *   *   * 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4 of 1971. 
 
Amendment to 
certain 
enactments. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 57. (1) The enactments specified in the Second Schedule―  
(a) shall, together with all rules, notifications and orders made or issued 
thereunder, extend to and come into force in the Union territories of Goa, 
Daman and Diu, and Pondicherry; and  
(b) shall be subject to the amendments mentioned in the fourth column 
of the said Schedule.  
(2) All things done, and all steps taken, before the commencement of this Act 
in connection with the preparation or revision of electoral rolls for the purpose of 
elections to the House of the People from the Union territories of Goa, Daman and 
Diu, and Pondicherry, and to the Legislative Assemblies of those Union territories 
shall, in so far as they are in conformity with the provisions of the Representation of 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

17 
 
43 of 1950. 
 
 
 
the P eople Act, 1950, as amended by this Act, be deemed to have been done in 
accordance with law. 
*         *                *   *   * 
 
 
THE SECOND SCHEDULE  
(See section 57)  
ENACTMENTS AMENDED 
Year Number Short title Amendments 
(1) (2) (3) (4) 
1950 43 The 
Representation 
of the People 
Act, 1950 
In section 4, in sub -section (1), the words “to Goa, Daman and Diu” shall 
be omitted.  
In section 13B, in sub-section (1), for the words “the Union territory”, the 
words “the Union territory of Delhi” shall be substituted.  
In section 13D, in sub -sections ( 1) and ( 2), for the words “the Union 
territory”, the words “the Union territory of Delhi” shall be substituted.  
In section 27A,―  
(i) sub-section (2) shall be omitted;  
(ii) for sub-section (4), the following sub-section shall be substituted, 
namely:―  
“(4) The electoral college for each of the Union territories                       
of Himachal Pradesh, Manipur, Tripura and Pondicherry shall consist 
of the  elected members of the L egislative Assembly constituted                      
for that territory under the Government of Union territories                         
Act, 1963.”  
In the First Schedule,―  
(i) after the entry “24. Goa, Daman and Diu……2”, the entry “25. 
Pondicherry…….1” shall be inserted and the existing                                                  
entry relating to North East Frontier Tract shall be renumbered as                              
entry 26;  
(ii) for the total, the following total shall be substituted,                     
namely:― 
“Total……………………………………………………..508”.  
In the Second Schedule, after entry 15 relating to Nagaland, the following 
entries shall be inserted, namely:― 
“16. Himachal Pradesh………………………………….40 
17. Manipur..…………………………………………….30  
18. Tripura………………………………………………30  
19. Goa, Daman and Diu.………………………………30  
20. Pondicherry.………………………………………..30”  
The Fifth Schedule shall be omitted. 
 

18 
 
(1) (2) (3) (4) 
1951 43 The 
Representation 
of the People 
Act, 1951 
In section 4, the words “to Goa, Daman and Diu” shall be omitted.  
In section 15, in sub-section (2),— 
(i) for the words “ the  Governor”, the words “the Governor or 
Administrator, as the case may be” shall be substituted;  
(ii) in the proviso, the words and figures “or under the provisions of 
section 5 of the Government of Union Territories Act, 1963, as the case 
may be” shall be added at the end.  
In section 32, the words and figures “or under the provisions of the 
Government of Union Territories Act, 1963, as the case may be,” shall be added 
at the end.  
In section 36, in clause (a) of sub-section (2),—  
(i) the word “and” occurring after the figures “191” shall be omitted;  
(ii) for the words and figure “Part II of this Act”, the words and figures 
“Part II of this Act, and sections 4 and 14 of the Government of Union 
territories Act, 1963” shall be substituted.  
In section 55, t he words and figures “or under the Government of Union 
Territories Act, 1963, as the case may be.” shall be added at the end.  
In section 100, in clause ( a) of sub-section (1), after the words “this Act”, 
the words and figures “or the Government of Union Territories Act, 1963.” shall 
be inserted. 
1956 37 The States 
Reorganisation 
Act, 1956 
In section 15 of the States Reorganisation Act, 1956,—  
(i) in clause ( d), after the words “Maharashtra”, the words “and the 
Union territories of Dadra and Nagar Haveli and Goa, Daman and Diu” 
shall be inserted;  
(ii) in clause (e), after the words “Kerala”, the words “and the Union 
territory of Pondicherry” shall be inserted. 
 
______________  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 EXTRACTS THE GOVERNMENT OF NATIONAL CAPITAL TERRITORY OF DELHI                            
ACT, 1991 
(1 OF 1992) 
*         *                *   *   * 
 PART II 
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY 
3. (1) The total number of seats in the Legislative Assembly to be filled by 
persons chosen by direct election from territorial constituencies shall be seventy.  
*         *                *   *   * 
(3) Seats shall be reserved for the Scheduled Castes in the Legislative Assembly, 
and the number of seats so reserved shall bear, as nearly as may be, the same proportion 
to the total number of seats in the Assembly as the population of the Scheduled Castes 
in the Capital bears to the total population of the Capital and the provisions of               
article 334 shall apply to such reservation.  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Legislative 
Assembly and its 
composition. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

19 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
33 of 2002. 
Explanation.—In this section, the expression “population” means the population 
as ascertained in the last preceding census of which the relevant figures have been 
published:   
Provided that the reference in this Explanation to the last preceding census of 
which the relevant figures have been published shall, until the relevant figures for the 
first census taken after the year 2026 have been published, be construed as a reference 
to the 2001 census:  
Provided further that any readjustment in the division of the Capital into territorial 
constituencies by the Delimitation Commission under the Delimitation Act, 2002 on the 
basis of 2001 census shall take effect from such date as the Central Government may, 
by order, published in the Official Gazette, specify and until such readjustment takes 
effect, any election to the Legislative Assembly may be held on the basis of the territorial 
constituencies existing before such readjustment. 
*         *                *   *   * 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 PART III 
DELIMITATION OF CONSTITUENCIES 
38. (1) The Election Commission shall, in the manner herein provided, distribute 
the seats assigned to the Legislative Assembly under section 3 to single -member 
territorial constituencies and delimit them having regard to the following provisions, 
namely:—  
(a) all constituencies shall, as far as practicable, be delimited in such manner 
that the ratio between the population of each of such constituencies and the total 
population of the Capital is the same; and  
(b) constituencies in which seats are reserved for the Scheduled Castes shall, 
as far as practicable, be located in areas where the proportion of their population 
to the total population is comparatively large.  
(2) The Election Commission shall—  
(a) publish its proposals for the delimitation of constituencies in the Official 
Gazette and also in such other manner as the Commission may consider fit, 
together with a notice inviting objections and suggestions in relation to the 
proposals and specifying a date on or after which the proposals will be further 
considered by it;  
(b) consider all objections and suggestions which may have been received 
by it before the date so specified;  
(c) after considering all objections and suggestions which may have been 
received by it before the date so specified, determine by one or more orders the 
delimitation of constituencies and cause such order or orders to be published in 
the Official Gazette; and upon such publication, the order or orders shall have the 
full force of law and shall not be called in question in any court. 
  
 
 
 
Election 
Commission to 
delimit 
constituencies. 
Power of 
Election 
Commission to 
maintain 
delimitation 
orders up-to-
date. 
 39. The Election Commission may, from time to time, by notification in the 
Official Gazette,—  
(a) correct any printing mistakes in any order made under section 38 or any 
error arising therein from inadvertent slip or omission; and  
(b) where the boundaries or name of any territorial division mentioned in 
any such order are or is altered, make such am endments as appear to it to be 
necessary or expedient for bringing such order up-to-date. 
*         *                *   *   * 
———— 
  

20 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Representation 
in House of the 
People. 
 EXTRACTS THE JAMMU AND KASHMIR REORGANISATION ACT, 2019 
(34 OF 2019) 
*         *                *   *   * 
The House of the People 
10. On and from the appointed day, there shall be allocated five seats to the 
successor Union territory of Jammu and Kashmir and one seat to Union territory of 
Ladakh, in the House of the People, and the First Schedule to the Representation of 
the People Act, 1950 shall be deemed to be amended accordingly. 
*         *                *   *   * 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
43 of 1950. 
Legislative 
Assembly for the 
Union Territory 
of Jammu and 
Kashmir and its 
composition. 
 14. (1) *        *                *   *   * 
(3) The total number of seats in the Legislative Assembly of the Union 
territory of Jammu and Kashmir to be filled by persons chosen by direct election 
shall be 107.  
Provided that subject to the provisions of sub-section (1) of section 60, on and 
from the d ate of commencement of the Jammu and Kashmir Reorganisation 
(Amendment) Act, 2023, the provisions of this sub-section shall have effect as if for 
the figures “107”, the figures “114” had been substituted. 
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (3), until the area of the 
Union territory of Jammu and Kashmir under the occupation of Pakistan ceases to 
be so occupied and the people residing in that area elect their representatives—  
(a) twenty four seats in the Legislative Assembly of Union terri tory of 
Jammu and Kashmir shall remain vacant and shall not be taken into account 
for reckoning the total membership of the Assembly; and  
(b) the said area and seats shall be excluded in delimiting the territorial 
constituencies as provided under PART V of this Act. 
*         *                *   *   * 
(7) The number of seats reserved for the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled 
Tribes in the Legislative Assembly of the Union territory of Jammu and Kashmir 
under sub-section (6) shall bear, as nearly as may be, the same proportion to the total 
number of seats in the Assembly as the population of the Scheduled Castes in the 
Union territory of Jammu and Kashmir or of the Scheduled Tribes in the Union 
territory of Jammu and Kashmir, in respect of which seats are so reserved, bears to 
the total population of the Union territory of Jammu and Kashmir.  
Explanation:—In this sub -section, the expression “population” means the 
population as ascertained at the last preceding census of which  the relevant figures 
have been published:  
Provided that the reference in this Explanation to the last preceding census of 
which the relevant figures have been published shall, until the relevant figures for 
the first census taken after the year 2026 have  been published, be construed as a 
reference to the 2011 census. 
*         *                *   *   * 
(9) In the Second Schedule to the Representation of the People Act, 1950, 
under the heading :— “I. THE STATES:”  
“(a) entry 10 shall be deleted”. 
“(b) entries 11 to 29 shall be renumbered as 10 to 28”.  
(10) In the Second Schedule to the Representation of the People Act, 1950, 
under the sub -heading “II. UNION TERRITORIES”, against serial number 3 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
35 of 2023. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
43 of 1950. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
43 of 1950. 
 

21 
 
relating to “Jammu and Kashmir”, for the entries under columns 2 to 7, the following 
entries shall respectively be substituted, namely:— 
 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 
‘‘3. Jammu and Kashmir 90 7 9 90 7 9”. 
       
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
38 of 2023. 
 14A. (1) *        *                *   *   * 
(3) As nearly as may be, one-third of the total number of seats to be filled by 
direct election to the Legislative Assembly of the Union territory of Jammu and 
Kashmir (including the number of seats reserved for women belonging to the 
Scheduled Castes and th e Scheduled Tribes) shall be reserved for women in such 
manner as Parliament may by law determine.  
14B. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the provisions of this Act, the 
provisions relating to reservation of seats for women in the Legislative Assembly of 
the Union territory of Jammu and Kashmir shall come into effect after an exercise 
of delimitation is undertaken for this purpose after the relevant figures for the first 
census taken after the commencement of the Jammu and Kashmir Reorganisation 
(Second Amendment) Act, 2023 have been published and shall cease to have effect 
on the expiration of a period of fifteen years from such commencement.  
(2) Subject to the provisions of section 14A, seats reserved for women in the 
Legislative Assembly of the Union territory of Jammu and Kashmir shall continue 
till such date as Parliament may by law determine.  
(3) Rotation of seats reserved for women in the Legislative Assembly of the 
Union territory of Jammu and Kashmir shall take effect after such subsequent  
exercise of delimitation as Parliament may by law determine.  
(4) Nothing in section 14A shall affect any representation in the Legislative 
Assembly of the Union territory of Jammu and Kashmir until the dissolution of the 
then existing Legislative Assembly of the Union territory of Jammu and Kashmir. 
 Reservation of 
seats for women 
in Legislative 
Assembly of 
Union territory 
of Jammu and 
Kashmir. 
 
 
Reservation 
of seats for 
women to 
take effect. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Jammu and 
Kashmir Act 
XVI of 1997. 
 15. Notwithstanding anything in sub-section (3) of section 14 the Lieutenant 
Governor of the successor Union territory of Jammu and Kashmir may nominate 
two members to the Legislative Assembly to give representation to women, if in his 
opinion, women are not adequately represented in the Legislative Assembly. 
15A. Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (3) of section 14, the 
Lieutenant Governor of the Union territory of Jammu and Kashmir may nominate 
not more than two members, one of whom shall be a woman, from the community 
of Kashmiri Migrants, to the Jammu and Kashmir Legislative Assembly. 
 Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, the term “Migrant” shall have 
the same meaning as assigned to it in clause ( e) of section  2 of the Jammu and 
Kashmir Migrant Immovable Property (Preservation, Protection and Restraint on 
Distress Sales) Act, 1997. 
*   *   *   *   * 
 Representation 
of women. 
 
 
 
 
Nomination of 
Kashmiri 
Migrants. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
33 of 2002. 
 
PART V 
DELIMITATION OF CONSTITUENCIES 
59. In this Part, unless the context otherwise requires,—  
(a) “associate member” means a member associated with the 
Delimitation Commission under section 60;  
(b) “Delimitation Commission” means the Delimitation Commission to 
be constituted under section 3 of the Delimitation Act, 2002; and thereafter by 
any law made by the Parliament.  
  
 
 
 
 
Definitions. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

22 
 
(c) “Election Commission” means the Election Commission appointed 
by the President under article 324 of the Constitution of India;  
(d) “latest census figures” mean the census figures ascertained at the 
latest census of which the finally published figures are available;  
(e) “Parliamentary Constituency” means a constituency provided by law 
for the purpose of elections to the House of the People from Union territory of 
Jammu and Kashmir and Union territory of Ladakh.  
(f) “Assembly Constituency” means a constituency provided by law for 
the purpose of elections to the Legislative Assembly. 
Delimitation of 
constituencies. 
 60. (1) Without prejudice to sub -sections (3) of section 14 of this Act, the 
number of seats in the Legislative Assembly of Union territory of Jammu and 
Kashmir shall be increased from 107 to 114, and delimitation of the constituencies 
may be determined by the Election Commission in the manner herei nafter 
provided—  
(a) the number of seats to be reserved for the Scheduled Castes and the 
Scheduled Tribes in the Legislative Assembly, having regard to the relevant 
provisions of the Constitution;  
(b) the assembly constituencies into which the Union terr itory shall be 
divided, the extent of each of such constituencies and in which of them seats 
shall be reserved for the Scheduled Castes or for the Scheduled Tribes; and  
(c) the adjustments in the boundaries and description of the extent of the 
parliamentary constituencies in each Union territory that may be necessary or 
expedient.  
(2) In determining the matters referred to in clauses ( b) and ( c) of                               
sub-section ( 1), the Election Commission shall have regard to the following 
provisions, namely:—  
(a) all the constituencies shall be single-member constituencies;  
(b) all constituencies shall, as far as practicable, be geographically 
compact areas, and in delimiting them, regard shall be had to physical features, 
existing boundaries of administrative units, facilities of communication and 
conveniences to the public; and  
(c) constituencies in which seats are reserved for the Scheduled Castes 
and the Scheduled Tribes shall, as far as practicable, be located in areas where 
the proportion of their population to the total population is the largest.  
(3) The Election Commis sion shall, for the purpose of assisting it in the 
performance of its functions under sub-section (1), associate with itself as associate 
members, four persons as the Central Government may by order specify, being 
persons who are the members of the Legislative Assembly of the Union territory of 
Jammu and Kashmir or four members of the House of the People representing the 
Union territory of Jammu and Kashmir:  
Provided that none of the associate members shall have a right to vote or to 
sign any decision of the Election Commission.  
(4) If, owing to death or resignation, the office of an associate member falls 
vacant, it shall be filled as far as practicable, in accordance with the provisions of 
sub-section (3).  
(5) The Election Commission shall—  
  

23 
 
(a) publish its proposals for the delimitation of constituencies together 
with the dissenting proposals, if any, of any associate member who desires 
publication thereof in the Official Gazette and in such other manner as the 
Commission may consider fit, together with  a notice inviting objections and 
suggestions in relation to the proposals and specifying a date on or after which 
the proposals will be further considered by it;  
(b) consider all objections and suggestions which may have been 
received by it before the date so specified; and  
(c) after considering all objections and suggestions which may have been 
received by it before the date so specified, determine by one or more orders 
the delimitation of constituencies and cause such order or orders to be 
published in the Official Gazette, and there upon such publication, the order 
or orders shall have the full force of law and shall not be called in question in 
any court.  
(6) As soon as may be after such publication, every such order relating to 
assembly constituencies shall be laid before the Legislative Assembly of the Union 
territory of Jammu and Kashmir. 
*         *                *   *   * 
  61. ( 1) The Election Commission may by notification in the Official 
Gazette,—  
(a) correct any printing mistakes in any order made under section 60 or 
any error arising therein from inadvertent slip or omission; and  
(b) where the boundaries or name of any terri torial division mentioned 
in any such order or orders is or are altered, make such amendments as appear 
to it to be necessary or expedient for bringing such order up-to-date.  
(2) Every notification under this section relating to an assembly constituency 
shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is issued, before the Legislative Assembly. 
 Power of 
Election 
Commission to 
maintain 
Delimitation 
Orders up-to-
date. 
 
33 of 2002. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
33 of 2002. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
33 of 2002. 
 
 62. (1) On and from the appointed day, notwithstanding the publication of 
orders under sub-section (1) of section 10 of the Delimitation Act, 2002 or anything 
contained in sub-section (2) or sub-section (4) of the said section, the Delimitation 
Act, 2002 shall be deemed to have been amended as provided below:  
(a) in section 2, in clause ( f), the words “but does not include the State 
of Jammu and Kashmir” shall be omitted; and  
(b) for the purpose of delimitation of Assembly and Parliamentary 
Constituencies, the words and figures “census held in the year 2001”, 
wherever occurring, shall be construed as words and figures “census held in 
the year 2011”. 
 (2) Readjustment of the constituencies as provided under section 60 in the 
successor Union territory of Jammu and Kashmir into Assembly Constituencies, 
shall be carried by the Delimitation Commission, to be constituted under the 
Delimitation Act, 2002 as ame nded by this Act, and shall take effect from                              
such date as the Central Government may, by order, publish in the Official Gazette, 
specify.  
(3) Readjustment of the constituencies as provided under section 11 in the 
successor Uni on territory of Jammu and Kashmir into Parliamentary        
Constituencies, shall be carried by the Delimitation Commission, to be constituted 
under the Delimitation Act, 2002 as amended by this Act, and shall take effect from 
such date as the Central Government may, by order, publish in the Official Gazette, 
specify.  
 Special 
provision as to 
readjustment of 
Parliamentary 
and Assembly 
Constituencies 
on the basis of 
2011 census. 
 

24 
 
 
Special 
provisions as to 
readjustment of 
Assembly and 
Parliamentary 
Constituencies. 
 
63. Notwithstanding anything contained in sections 59 to 61, until the relevant 
figures for the first census taken after the year 2026 have been published, it shall not 
be necessary to readjust the division of successor Union territory of Jammu and 
Kashmir into Assembly and Parliamentary Constituencies and any reference to the 
“latest census figures” in this Part shall be construed as a reference to the 2011 
census figures. 
  
 
Procedure as to 
delimitation. 
 
64. The procedure as provided in the law made by Parliament, shall apply, in 
relation to the delimitation of Parliamentary and Assembly constituencies under this 
Part as they apply in relation to the delimitation of Parliamentary and Assembly 
constituencies under that law. 
*         *                *   *   * 
———— 
 
  
 

  LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
———— 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Government of Union Territories Act, 1963, the Government 
of National Capital Territory of Delhi Act, 1991 and the Jammu and 
Kashmir Reorganisation Act, 2019. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
———— 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Shri Amit Shah, Minister of Home Affairs and Cooperation) 
  
 