1
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2016
By
SHRI NISHIKANT DUBEY, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-seventh Y ear of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2016.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. For article 343 of the Constitution, the following article shall be substituted,
namely:—
"343. The national language of the Union shall be Hindi in Devanagari script.".
Short title and
commencement.
Bill No. 109 of  2016
Substitution of
new article for
article 343.
National
language of
the Union.
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
3. In article 348 of the Constitution, for clause ( 1), the following clause shall be
substituted, namely:—
"(1) Notwithstanding anything in the foregoing provisions of this Part, until Parliament
by law otherwise provides—
(a) all proceedings in the Supreme Court and in every High Court shall be both
in Hindi and English; and
(b) the authoritative texts—
(i) of all Bills to be introduced or amendments thereto to be moved in
either House of Parliament or in the House or either House of the Legislature of
a State;
(ii) of all Acts passed by Parliament or the Legislature of a State and of all
Ordinances promulgated by the President or the Governor of a State; and
(iii) of all orders, rules, regulations and bye-laws issued under this
Constitution or under any law made by Parliament or the Legislature of a State,
shall be in Hindi language.
Amendment of
article 348.
5
10
15

3
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
In the British period, in order to establish their sway over India and for their
administrative convenience, British imposed English on the people of India. This is nothing
short of an irony that even after sixty-nine years of independence, linguistically we continue
with that colonial mindset. After independence, our Constitution makers had expressed the
mass sentiment towards Hindi through the Constitution. Keeping the linguistic diversity in
mind, an arrangement was made for using English for official purposes for the next fifteen
years. Alongside, in the Constitution, President was entrusted with the power to constitute
Official Language Commission to resolve the language related issues and promotion of
Hindi. Thereafter, commission was constituted, committees were formed with umpteen
numbers of reports and several orders were issued and attempts to implement the provisions
of Official Language Commission were made. But, eventually, the expected results could
not be achieved. Activities being undertaken in regard to Official Language remain a mere
formality and no concrete effect can be seen on the ground. Due to Government policies,
English evolved rapidly as official language whereas the Hindi, the language of the masses,
remained neglected.
It is unfortunate that English remains the primary language for judicial, parliamentary
and other administrative functions. Even today, we are not in a position to preserve and
promote our rich language. Whereas, the languages of all the rich countries are continuously
flourishing, we are backtracking in the level of our own language. Hindi is the only language
that can unite this diverse nation in one strand. The utmost need of the hour is an initiative
on our part to promote the use of Hindi. It is necessary to take concrete measures so that
Hindi language can get its due respect. We cannot get expected results only from the
Constitutional Commission and Official Language Commission. What we need today is to
entrust the status of national language upon Hindi and make a way for its evolution.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; NISHIKANT DUBEY
April 11, 2016

4
ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
*** *** *** ***
PART XVII
OFFICIAL LANGUAGE
CHAPTER I.—LANGUAGE OF THE UNION
343. (1) The official language of the Union shall be Hindi in Devanagari script.
The form of numerals to be used for the official purposes of the Union shall be the
international form of Indian numerals.
(2) Notwithstanding anything in clause ( 1), for a period of fifteen years from the
commencement of this Constitution, the English language shall continue to be used for all
the official purposes of the Union for which it was being used immediately before such
commencement:
Provided that the President may, during the said period, by order authorise the use of
the Hindi language in addition to the English language and of the Devanagari form of
numerals in addition to the international form of Indian numerals for any of the official
purposes of the Union.
(3) Notwithstanding anything in this article, Parliament may be law provide for the
use, after the said period of fifteen years, of—
(a) the English language, or
(b) the Devanagari form of numerals,
for such purposes as may be specified in the law.
*** *** *** ***
CHAPTER III.—LANGUAGE OF THE SUPREME COURT, HIGH COURTS, ETC.
348. (1) Notwithstanding anything in the foregoing provisions of this Part, until
Parliament by law otherwise provides—
(a) all proceedings in the Supreme Court and in every High Court,
(b) the authoritative texts—
(i) of all Bills to be introduced or amendments thereto to be moved in
either House of Parliament or in the House or either House of the Legislature of
a State,
(ii) of all Acts passed by Parliament or the Legislature of a State and of all
Ordinances promulgated by the President or the Governor of a State, and
(iii) of all orders, rules, regulation and bye-laws issued under this
Constitution or under any law made by Parliament or the Legislature of a State,
shall be in the English language.
*** *** *** ***
Official
language of
the Union.
Language to
be used in the
Supreme Court
and in the
High Courts
and for Acts,
Bills, etc.

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Shri Nishikant Dubey, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—209LS(S3)—02-05-2016.
5