1
THE RESERV ATION OF V ACANCIES IN POSTS AND SERVICES FOR
ECONOMICALLY BACKWARD FARMERS BILL, 2018
By
DR. BOORA NARSAIAH GOUD, M.P .
A
BILL
to provide for reservation of vacancies in posts and services in establishments in favour
of economically backward farmers and for matters connected therewith.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Reservation of Vacancies in Posts and Services for
Economically Backward Farmers Act, 2018.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Bill No. 109 of  2018
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "establishment" means an establishment which is owned, established,
controlled, managed or financed by the Central Government and includes—
(i) a Ministry or department or subordinate office or attached office of the
Central Government;
(ii) a public sector undertaking or statutory authority constituted under
any Central Act;
(iii) a corporation in which not less than fifty-one per cent. of the paid-up
share capital is held by the Central Government;
(iv) a Government company as defined under clause (45) of section 2 of
the Companies Act, 2013;
(v) an autonomous body, organisation or institution receiving grant or aid
from the Consolidated Fund of India;
(vi) a university established by a Central Act and its affiliated colleges,
including medical and engineering colleges and institutions;
(vii) a primary or secondary school or any other educational institution,
which is wholly owned by the Government or receives grant or aid from the
Government;
(b) "economically backward farmer" means a farmer whose annual income does
not exceed rupees five lakhs per annum, occupying land as owner, tenant or share
cropper measuring less than or equal to two hectares, not covered under any of the
scheme of reservation and who does not belong to the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled
Tribes or the Other Backward Classes; and
(c) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. (1) There shall be reserved such percentage of posts, not below five per cent. of
total posts in every establishment, for economically backward farmers for appointment in
civil services by direct recruitment.
(2) The vacancies reserved for the economically backward farmers under
sub-section (1) shall be filled in such manner as may be prescribed.
(3) The vacancies reserved for economically backward farmers during a calendar year
and not filled in that year shall be carried forward to the next calendar year.
4. Every appointing authority shall maintain such documents and records and furnish
every year a report to the Central Government on the appointments by direct recruitment of
economically backward farmers, in such manner and at such time, as may be prescribed.
5. If any difficulty arises in giving effort to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appear to it to be necessary or expedient for
removing the difficult:
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of the period of three years
from the date of commencement of this Act.
6. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything contained in
any other law for the time being in force or any judgment, decree, order or direction of a court
to the contrary regarding ceiling on reservation.
Definitions.
Reservation
of posts in
establishments
for
economically
backward
farmers.
Maintenance
of documents
and records
and furnishing
of reports to
appointing
authority.
Power to
remove
difficulty.
Overriding
effect of the
Act.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
7. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of the Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Power to
make rules.
5
10

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
The agriculture sector is characterised by instability in incomes because of various
types of risks involved in production, market and prices. According to the Agriculture Census,
the total number of operational holdings in India numbered 138.35 million with an average
size of 1.15 hectares. Of the total holdings, eighty-five per cent. are in marginal and small farm
categories of less than two hectares. These small farmers, though operating only on
forty-four per cent. of land under cultivation, are the main providers of food and nutritional
security to the nation. The estimates indicate that small and marginal farmers may account
for more than ninety-one per cent. of farm holdings by the year 2030. The monsoons have
become increasingly erratic and there is no assured water for irrigation. Agrarian debts are
increasing, while income is fading. Farmers are committing suicide.
Prominent agrarian communities, such as the Jats in Haryana, Patels in Gujarat, Gujjars
in Rajasthan and Marathas in Maharashtra have been strongly campaigning for reservation
in the light of deteriorating financial conditions.
Therefore, farmers, irrespective of their caste and religion, should be given reservation
in posts and services like the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes and the Other Backward
classes.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; BOORA NARSAIAH GOUD
March 27, 2018.
4

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 7 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.
5

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for reservation of vacancies in posts and services in establishments in favour
of economically backward farmers and for matters connected therewith.
————
(Dr. Boora Narsaiah Goud, M.P .)
MGIPMRND—326LS(S3)—12.06.2018.