1
THE TRANSGENDER PERSONS (PROVISION OF SOCIAL
SECURITY) BILL, 2015
By
SHRI MAHEISH GIRRI, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for social security to transgender persons and for matters connected
therewith.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Transgender Persons (Provision of Social Security)
Act, 2015.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Bill No. 109 of 2015
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(b) "Fund" means the Transgender Persons Welfare Fund constituted under
section 4;
(c) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act; and
(d) "transgender person" means a person, whose gender does not match with
the gender assigned to that person at birth and includes trans-men and trans-women
(whether or not they have undergone sex reassignment surgery or hormone therapy
or laser therapy), gender-queers and persons having socio-cultural identities such as
kinnars, hijras, aravanis or jogtas.
3. (1) The appropriate Government shall designate a nodal officer not below the rank of
District Collector in every district to compile the details of all transgender persons residing
within his jurisdiction.
(2) It shall be the duty of every nodal officer,—
(a) to forward in such manner and form, as may be prescribed, to the State
Government concerned the details of transgender persons residing in his jurisdiction;
and
(b) to take up the issues of social, economic and other forms of discrimination
against transgender persons residing in his jurisdiction with the appropriate
authorities.
4. (1) The Central Government shall constitute a Fund to be known as the Transgender
Persons Welfare Fund for providing social security to transgender persons.
(2) The Central Government and State Governments shall contribute to the Fund in
such ratio as may be prescribed.
(3) The Fund shall be administered by a Board consisting of—
(a) one eminent person having special — Chairperson;
knowledge or practical experience in
the field of transgender rights and
rehabilitation
(b) one representative of each of the — Members; and
State Government
(c) two transgender persons — Members,
to be appointed by the Central Government in such manner as may be
prescribed.
(4) The salary and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of
service of the Chairperson and members of the Board shall be such as may be
prescribed.
(5) The Central Government shall provide such number of officers and staff to the
Board as may be required for its efficient functioning.
(6) The salary and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of service of
the officers and staff of the Board shall be such as may be prescribed.
5. (1) The Board shall—
(a) study the problems being faced by the transgender persons and suggest
remedial measures to the appropriate Government;
Definitions.
Appropriate
Government
to designate a
nodal officer in
every district.
Constitution
of the
Transgender
Persons
Welfare Fund.
Functions of
the Board.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
(b) make recommendations to the appropriate Government regarding formulation
of a welfare policy for transgender persons; and
(c) promote awareness about the rights of the transgender persons and
safeguards available for their protection.
(2) The Board shall utilize the Fund, for providing the following facilities to
transgender persons, namely:—
(a) payment of old age pension at the rate of rupees five thousand per month
after the age of sixty years;
(b) free healthcare facilities;
(c) free insurance cover; and
(d) housing facilities free of cost.
6. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law
in this behalf, provide adequate funds to the State Governments for carrying out the purpose
of this Act.
7. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent
therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force.
8. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purpose of this act.
(2) Every rule made under this section shall be laid as soon as may be after it is made,
before the House of Parliament while it is in session for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modifications in the rule of both the Houses agree that the
rules should not be made, the rules shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or
be of no effect as the case may be; so, however that any such  modification or annulment
shall be ‘without prejudice to the validity of  anything previously done under the rule.
Central
Government to
provide funds.
Act to have
overriding
effect.
Power to make
rules.
5
10
15
20
25

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Transgender people in our country are the most vulnerable community facing a variety
of issues. They do not have any respect from the society and are frequently discriminated.
In short, they are deprived of the fundamental rights available to the other two sexes i.e. male
and female, and are not considered as the third sex. They do not have regular means of
livelihood. Most of them are engaged in begging, singing, dancing and working, as sex
workers. Their conditions are pathetic particularly in old age when they become unable to
earn their livelihood. The attitude of society towards transgender persons is discriminatory.
It is, therefore, necessary to provide certain welfare measures for transgender persons by the
Government.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; MAHEISH GIRRI
February 27, 2015.
PRESIDENT’S RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLE
117(3) OF THE CONSTITUTION
————
[Copy of letter No. 13011/5(16)/2014-DP. III (TG) dated 7 April, 2015 from Shri
Thaawarchand Gehlot, Minister of Social Justice and Empowerment to the Secretary
General, Lok Sabha].
The President, having been informed of the subject matter of the Transgender Persons
(Provision of Social Security) Bill, 2015 by Shri Maheish Girri, M.P., recommends to the
House the consideration of the Bill under article 117(3) of the Constitution.
————
4

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 4 of the Bill provides for constitution of a Transgender Persons Welfare Fund.
It further provides for constitution of a Board to administer the welfare Fund. Clause 5
provides for certain facilities to transgender persons. Clause 6 provides that the Central
Government shall provide adequate funds to State Governments for carrying the purposes
of the Bill. The Bill, therefore, if enacted will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund
of India. It is likely to involve a recurring expenditure of about rupees one hundred crore per
annum.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees ten crore is also likely to be involved.
5

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 8 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. Since the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.
6

GMGIPMRND—03LS(S3)—20-04-2015.
LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for social security to transgender persons and for matters connected
therewith.
————
(Shri Maheish Girri, M.P.)