1
THE REPRESENTATION OF THE PEOPLE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2017
By
SHRI NISHIKANT DUBEY, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Representation of the People Act, 1950.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-eighth Y ear of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Representation of the People (Amendment) Act, 2017.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In section 14 of Representation of the People Act, 1950, for clause (b), the following
clause shall be substituted, namely:—
"(b) "qualifying date" in relation to preparation or revision of every electoral
roll under this part, shall be the date on which a citizen applies for inclusion of his
name in the electoral roll for the first time after attaining eighteen years of age."
Short title and
commencement.
Bill No. 109  of  2017
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Amendment
of section 14.
5
43 of  1950
10

2
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Article 326 of the Constitution stipulates that elections to the Lok Sabha and State
Assemblies will be on the basis of adult suffrage i.e. every person who is a citizen of India
and who is not less than eighteen years of age on such date as may be fixed in that behalf
by or under any law made by the appropriate Legislature, shall be entitled to be registered
as a voter at any such election.
Clause (b) of section 14 of the Representation of the People Act, 1950 stipulates that
the  "qualifying date" in relation to the preparation or revision of every electoral roll means
the 1st day of January of the year in which it is so prepared or revised.
A combined reading of the above two provisions leads to a situation wherein, barring
those who were born on 1st January, the rest of the youth have to wait till the 1st January
of the year following the year in which he or she was born for getting included in the
electoral roll.
This anomaly virtually deprives a substantial proportion of the younger population
of its right to exercise their franchise in the year in which he or she completes eighteen years
of age. This anomaly needs to be addressed.
The Bill, therefore, seeks to amend the Representation of the People Act, 1950 with  a
view to provide that "qualifying date" in relation to the preparation or revision of every
electoral roll shall be the actual date of birth in respect of the citizens whose name are
included for the first time in the electoral roll on completion of eighteen years of age.
Hence,  this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; NISHIKANT DUBEY
January 11, 2017.

3
ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE REPRESENTATION OF THE PEOPLE ACT, 1950
43 OF 1950
* * * * * * * * *
PART III
ELECTORAL ROLLS FOR ASSEMBLY CONSTITUENCIES
14. In this Part unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "constituency" means as Assembly constituency;
(b) "qualifying date", in relation to the preparation or revision of every electoral
roll under this Part, means 4 [the 1st day of January] of the year in which it is so
prepared or revised:
Provided that "qualifying date", in relation to the preparation or revision of
every electoral roll under this Part in the year 1989, shall be the 1st day of April, 1989.
* * * * * * * * *
Definitions.

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Representation of the People Act, 1950.
————
(Shri Nishikant Dubey, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—976LS(S3)—11-07-2017.