1
Bill No. 109 of 2020
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
THE PARLIAMENTARY CONSTITUENCY (LOK SABHA)
DEVELOPMENT FUND BILL, 2020
By
DR. T.R. PAARIVENDHAR, M.P.
A
BILL
to allocate Funds to each Lok Sabha Parliamentary constituency to undertake various
developmental activities by the member  of Parliament concerned to augment the
infrastructural facilities within the jurisdiction of such Parliamentary constituency
and for matters connected therewith.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-first Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Parliamentary Constituency (Lok Sabha) Development
Fund Act, 2020.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force with immediate effect.
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
5

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "Assembly constituency" means State Legislative Assembly constituency within
the Parliamentary constituency;
(b) "Auxiliary Authority" means the District Collector of concerned Parliamentary
constituency and/or the Assembly constituency;
(c) "Parliamentary constituency" means the Lok Sabha Parliamentary constituency; and
(d) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law
in this behalf, allocate seven crore rupees every year to each Parliamentary constituency to
undertake various developmental activities by the member of Parliament concerned in such
manner as may be prescribed.
4. The Auxiliary Authority concerned shall,—
(a) identify the sectors and areas in the Parliamentary constituency for the developmental
activities and release the funds from the funds allocated under section 3 accordingly; and
(b) coordinate, monitor and supervise the developmental activities being undertaken
in the Parliamentary constituency by utilising the funds allocated under section 3.
5. The Auxiliary Authority shall release the fund from the allocated fund under
section 3 for the developmental activities to be undertaken by the contractor or job undertaker,
as the case may be after being approved by the member of Parliament of the Parliamentary
constituency concerned:
Provided that if any disputes arises in releasing the fund to the contractors or job
undertaker, the dispute shall be sorted out by calling a meeting of member of Parliament of
the Parliamentary constituency concerned with the Auxiliary Authority of the area and
contractors or job undertaker in such manner as may be prescribed.
6. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may, by order, published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as may be necessary for removing the difficulty:
Provided that no order shall be made under this sub-section after the expiry of the two
years from the appointed day.
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament.
7. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other
law or rules made thereunder for the time being in force.
8. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Definitions.
Allocation of
Funds for the
development of
Parliamentary
constituency.
Role of
Auxiliary
Authority.
Auxiliary
Authority to
release the
fund after
approval of
member of
Parliament.
Power to
remove
difficulties.
Act not to be
in derogation
of other laws.
Power to make
rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
During the election campaign, every member of Parliament whether of ruling party or a
opposition party have to make a number of promises to the people of constituency. Once
elected, the elected member of Parliament has to face lot of difficulties and inability to fulfil
the promises made during the election campaign as the allocation of fund to carry out the
local area development under the existing MPLADS (Members of Parliament Local Areas
Development Scheme) is very less.
In some States, every parliamentary constituency covers six or seven Assembly
constituencies and member of Parliament has to face lot of difficulties in giving preference to
undertake any developmental activities such as construction of community hall, smart class
in the schools, etc. in a large area with insufficient allocated funds. At present, rupees five
crores is being allocated under MPLADS (Members of Parliament Local Areas Development
Scheme) which is very less and it becomes very difficult for the member representing the area
to allocate funds to each Assembly constituencies.
Hence, the Central Government shall take necessary steps to replace the existing
MPLADS (Members of Parliament Local Areas Development Scheme) with the proposed
enactment in order to make it legally binding to allocate at least rupees seven crores every
year to each Lok Sabha constituencies to carry out the developmental activities for the
welfare of the society.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; T. R. PAARIVENDHAR
March 11, 2020.

4
FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for allocation of seven crore rupees by the Central
Government for each Lok Sabha constituency. The Bill, therefore, if enacted will involve
expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a recurring expenditure
about rupees three thousand eight hundred and one crore per annum would involve from the
Consolidated Fund of India.
No non-recurring expenditure is likely to be involved.

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLA TION
Clause 8 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.
5

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to allocate funds to each Lok Sabha Parliamentary constituency to undertake various
developmental activities by the member of Parliament concerned to augment the
infrastructural facilities within the jurisdiction of such Parliamentary constituency
and  for matters connected therewith.
————
(Dr. T. R. Paarivendhar,  M.P .)
MGIPMRND—47LS(S3)—07-09-2020.