CORIUGENDA 
to 
THE WATER (PREVENTION AND CONTROL OF POLLUTION) AMENDMENT 
BILL, 1978 
L-To be/As introduced in Ink Sabha 7 
1 • Page 3, line 7,-
after "shall" 
2. Page 3, line 9,-
after " sh F.loll " 
NEW DELHI; 
July 2!), 1978 
As adh a 29, 1900 (Saka) 
insert 'f'be " 
m§ert ''be n 

As INTRODUCm JH LoK SAbA 
Bill No. 109 of 1978 
THE WATER (PREVENTION AND CONTROL OF POLLUTION) 
AMENDMENT BILL, 1978 
A I. ' .....•. , 
BILL 
to amend the Water (Prevention and Control of PoHutton) Act, 1974. 
WHEREAS, in pursuance of clause (1) of a'l'ticle 252 of the Constitution, 
the Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1974, had been 
passed by Parliament; , 
L.. ... '" "_, :, 
.AND WHEREAS from the practical experience gained in the working of 
S the aforesaid Act it is considered necessary to make certain amendments 
thereto; 
AND WHEREAS, in pursuance of clause (1) of article 252 of the Consti-
tution read with clause (2) thereof, resolutions have been passed by the 
Legislative Assemblies of the States of Assam, Haryana and West Beneal 
10 to the effect that the said Act should be amended by an Act of Parlia-
ment for the purposes hereinafter appearing. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twenty-ninth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
1. (1) This Act may be called the Water (Prevention and Control of Shot1 .. 
IS Pollution) Amendment Act, 1978. ~~:~~~~ 
(2) It applies, in the first instance, to the whole of the States of Assam, 
Haryana and West Bengal and the Union territories; and it shall apply 
to .uch other State which adopts this Act by resolution passed in that 
a'lld corn-
rnence-
men\. 

Amend-
ment of 
IeCt.ion 2. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 3. 
Amend-
ment of 
IHt10n 4. 
, , 
behaU-,under clause (1) of article 252 of the Constitution read with claus. 
(2) thereof. .! 
(3) It shall come into force, at once in the States of Assam, Haa:-yana 
and West Bengal and the Union territories, and in any other State which 
adopts this Act under clause (1) of article 252 of the Constitution read S 
with clause (2) thereof on the date of sucn adoption and any reference 
in section 22 of this Act to the commencement of this Act shall, in rela-
tion to any State or Union territory, mean the date on which this Act 
comes into force in such State 'or Union territory. 
Z. In section 2 of the Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 10 
1974 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act) ,- 6 of lW1t. 
(a) after clause (d), the followin,g clause shall be inserted, 
namely:-
'(dd) "outlet" includes any conduit pipe or channel, open o~ 
closed, carrying sewage or trade effluent or any other holding IS 
arrangement which causes, or is likely to cause, pollution;'; 
(b) after clause (g), the following clause shall be inserted, 
namely:-
'(gg) "sewer" means any conduit pipe or channel, open or 
closed, caN}'ing sewage or trade effluent;'. 20 
3. In section 3 of the principal Act, in sUb-section (2) ,-
(a) in clause (a), for the words "matters relating to the use and 
conservation of wa~er resources or the prevention and control of water 
pollution", the words "matters relating to environmental protection" 
shall be substituted; 25 
(b) in clause (b), for the words "five officials", the words "such 
number of OffiCials, not exceeding five," shall be substituted; 
(C) in clause (d), for the words "three non-officials", the words 
"such number of non-ofticials, not exceeding three," shall be substi-
~; ~ 
(d) in clause (1), for the words "and having administrative 
experience", the words "and having practical experience in respect of 
matters relating to environmental protection" shall be substHuted. , 
4. In section 4 of the principal Act,-
(a) in sub.section (1), the brackets and words "(being a date 35 
not later than six months of the commencement of this Act in the 
State)" shall be omitted and shall be deemed always to have been 
omitted.; 
(b) in sub~tion (2),-
(i) in clause (a),-
(1) the word "full-time" shall be omitted; 
(2) for the words IImatters relating to the use and CODiIC!!I'-
vation of water resources Or the prevention and control of 
water pollution", the words "matters relating to environmental 
protection" shall be substituted; 41 
t: '. ; 

I 
(3) the following proviso shall be inserted at the end, 
namely:-
"Provided that the Chairman may be either whole-
time or part-time as the State Government may think 
fit;"; 
(ii) in clause (b), for the w()Jl'ds "five officials", the words 
"such number of offiCials, not exceeding five," shall substituted; 
(iii) in clause (c), for the words "five persons", the words 
"such number of persons, not exceeding five," shall substituted: 
10 (iv) in clause (d), for the words "three non-ofllcials", the 
words "such number of non-officials, not exceeding three," shall 
be substituted; 
(v) in clause (f), for the words "and having administrative 
experience", the words "and having practical experience in 
IS matters relating to environmental protection" shall be substit..1ted. 
6. In section 5 of the principal Act,- Am_d-
ment of 
(a) for sub-section (2), the follOWing sub-section shall be substi- eection e, 
20 
2S 
tuted, namely:-
"(2) The term of office of a member of a Board nominated 
under clause (b) or clause (e) of sub-section (2) of-section 3 or 
clause (b) or clause (e) of sub-section (2) of sectilon 4 shall come 
to an end as soon as he ceases to lioYd the office under the Central 
Government or the State Government or, as the case may be, the 
company or corporation .owned, controlled or managed by the 
Central Government Or the State Government, by virtue of which 
he was nominated."; 
(b) in sub-section (5), for the words, brackets, letters and 
figures "or where he is nominated under clause (c) of sub-section (2) 
of section 3 or under clause (c) of sub-section (2) of section 4, if he 
30 ceases to be a member of the State Board, or as the case may be, of 
the local authority", the following shall be substituted, namely:-
"or where he is nominated under clause (c) or clause (e) of 
sub-secti':m (2) of section 3 or under clause (c) or clause (e) of 
sub-section (2) of section 4, if he ceases to be a member of the 
3S State Board or of the local authority or, as the case may be, of tlie 
company or corpclI'ation owned, controlled or managed by the 
Central Government or the State Government and such vacation 
of seat shall, in either case, take effect from such date as the 
Central Government or, as the case may be, the State Government 
40 may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify". 
6. In section 10 of the principal Act, after sub-section (2), the follow· Amed. 
ing sub-section shall be inserted, namely: - ment Of 
l8Ct1on 10. 
"(3) A person associated with the Board under sub-section (1) 
for any purpose shall be paid such fees and allowances, for attending 
4' its meetings and for attending to any ·other work of the lJoard. ~ PJ8r 
b~ nresoribed." . -.- _ r 

InMrtloa 
01 aew 
.etioft 
llA. 
DelegL 
tion of 
power. to 
Chairmaa. 
AmeRd-
lIleRt Of 
IeCtion 12. 
Amend_ 
ment of 
8eCtion 14. 
4 
'1. After section 11 of the principal Act, the following section shall be 
inserted, namely:-
I: 
"llA. The Chairman of a Board shall exercise such powers and 
perform such duties as may be prescribed or as may, from time to 
time, be delegated to him by the Boa'l'"d.". 5 
8. In section 12 of the principal Act,-
(a) in sub-section (3), the words "and the rules so made may 
provide for the salaries and allowances and other terms and conditions 
of service of such officers and employ~s" shall be omitted; 
(b) after sub-section (3), the following sub-section shall be 10 
inserted, namely:-
"(3A) The method of recruitment and the terms and condi-
tions of service (including the scales of pay) of the officers (other 
than the member-secretary) and other employees of the Central 
Board or a State Board shall be such as may be determined by 15 
regulations made by the Central Board or, as the case may be, 
by the State Board: -
Provided that no regulation made under this sub-section shall 
take effect unless,-
(a) in the case of a regulation made by the Central 20 
Board, it is approved by the Central Government; and 
(b) in the case of a regulation made by a State- Board, 
it is approved by the State Government.". 
9. In section 14 of the principal Act,-
(a) in sub-section (1) ,-
(i) in clause (a). for the words "matters relating to the use 
and conservation of water resources or the prevention and control 
of water pollution", the words "matters relating to environmental 
protection" shall be substituted; -
25 
(ii) in clause (f), for the words "and having administrative 30 
. experience", the W'::>rds "and having practical experience in res-
pect of matters relating to environmental protection" shall be 
substituted; 
(b) in sub-section (2) ,-
(i) in clause (a), for the words "matters rela~ing to the use 3S 
and conservation of water resources or the prevention and control 
of water pollution", the words "matters relating to environmental 
protection" shall be substituted; 
(ii) in clause (f), for the words "and having administrative 
experience", the words "and having practical experience in 40 
I'8Ip8Ct of matter. re1a~8 ~~ 'IJvi,,~~tal ~rotoci1~n". ~JWl ~ 
Mt~tv~~ . ,.., • 't. 

5 of 1898. 
2 of 1974. 
.J 
Ie. In section ~1 of the principal Act, for 8ub-section (4) I the follow- Amend.. 
!ng sUb-section shall be substituted, namely:- ment of 
lIectiOl'l 21. 
u (4) When :1 sample of any sewage or trade affluent is taken 
for analysis unde: sub-sectfon (1) and the person taking the sample 
5 serves on the occupier or his agent, a notice under clause (a) of sub-
section (3) and the occupier or his agent wilfully absents himself, 
then,-
(a) the sample so taken shall be placed in a container which 
shall be marked and sealed and shall also be signed by the 
10 person taking the sample and 'the same shall be sent forthwith 
by ~l1ch person for analysis to the laboratory referred to in sub-
c~lause (i) or sub-clause (ii), as the case may be, of clause (e) 
of sub-£ection (.1) and such );erson shall inform the Government 
analyst c:ppointed und~ su~..ectjon (1) or sub-section (2), as 
15 the case may be, of section 53, in writing about the wilful absence 
of the cCM.lpier or his agent: and 
(1) the cost incurred in getting such sample analysed shall 
be payable by the occupier or his agent and in case of default 
of such payment, the same sh311 be recoverable from the occu-
20 pier or his agent, as the case mfl.y be, as an arrear of land revenue 
or of publk deman:d:' 
PIovi.ded that no such recovery shall be made unless the 
occupier or, as the case may be, his agent has been given a rea-
sonable opportunity of being heard in the matter .... 
11. In :;ection 23 of the principal Act, in sUlb-section (2),- AmeluL. 
ment of 
(0) for 'the worde:; and figun~r, "the Code of Criminal Procedure, section 21. 
11/1;;", the words and figures "the Code of Criminal Procedur~, ] 978" 
shu 11 be r.ubstituted; 
(b) for the word and fi'gures "section 98", the word and figures 
30 "section 94" shall be substituted. 
12. In section 25 of 'the principal Act,-
(a) in sub· section (1), fO!" the words "stream or weU" at b,tb 
the places where they occur, the words "stream or well or sewer or. 
on land" shall be substituted; 
35 (/I) in sub-section (2), after the words, brackets and fi~tlre 
"under sub-section (1) ", the words "shaH be accompanied with such 
fees as may be prescribed and" lilian be :inserted; 
(c) in su~tion (4), in clause (a), for the words ··stream or 
well", the words "stream or well or sewer or on land" shall be sub-
stituted; 
(d) in sub-section (5), for the words ··stream. or well", the 
werds "~trf.'am OT well or sewer or on land" shall be substitl1~ed. 
Amend. 
ment of 
section 25. 
13. In ~ction 26 of the principal Act,-. Amend_ 
ment of 
Ca) for the wordt "Itnam or well", the wwdt ""am or well ,,~ioQ~, 
pr .ewer or em laM" .ball be JUbttttutldJ 

AmencL 
ment of 
section 27. 
Amend_ 
ment of 
section 28. 
Amend_ 
ment of 
p.~tion 38. 
Amend_ 
ment of 
section 37. 
Amend_ 
ment of 
f:ection 39. 
Amend_ 
ment of 
~ion49. 
(b) for the words "shall be made within' a pertod of three 
months of the constitution of the State Board", the words "shall be 
made on or before such da'te as m~y be ~ by the State Gov-
crnmtmt by ncti.ftcation in this beha1f in the Official Ga7.el1;e" shall 
be f'ubstituted. S 
14. In section 27 of the principal Act, for sub-section (2), the follow-
ing sub-section ~haU be substituted, namely:-
"(2) A State ~Board may from time to time review-
('1) any conditioo. imposed under seeUon 25 (other than 01 
('ondition to be satisfied beforE: an outlet is brought into use or 10 
a new di~charge is made), or section 26 and may ilervl? on the 
person ll~ing the outlet or making the discharge, as the case may 
be, a notice, making any reasonable variation of or revoking 
any such condition; 
(I» the refusal of any C'(lD',ent referred to in sub-section (1) IS 
(If section 25 or section 26 or the grant of wch consent withcut 
any condition, and may make such orders as it deems fit.". 
1;'. Tn std.ion 2C of the principal Act, for sub-section (2), the follow-
ing sub-section shaLl be substituted, DVJ'!'Iely:-:-
"(2) An appellate authority shan consist of a single person or 20 
three persons, as the State Government may.'think fit, to be appoint .. 
ed by that Government.". 
]6. In section 36 of the principal Act,-
(a) in sub-section (1), after the word "benefactions", the 
", fees" shall be inserted; 
word 
2S 
(b) in sub-section (2), after the worth "under this Act", the 
words "and, where any law for the time being in force relating to 
the prevention, control or abatement of air poUution provides for the 
performance of any function under such law by the Central Board, 
also for perf:,~ming its functions under such law" shall be inserted. 30 
17. In section ~--: of the principal Act,-
(a) in SI;' _~:!Ction (1), after the word "benefactions", the word 
", fees" shall 1:! inserted; 
(b) in sulHlection (2), after the words "under this Act", the 
worps "and, where any law for the time being in force relating to 3S 
the prevention, control or abatement of air pollution provides for 
the performanoe of any function: under such IlaW by the State Board, 
also for performing its functions under such law" shall be inserted. 
, 18. In seCtion 39 of the principal Act, in sUb-section (1), for the words 
"six months", the words "nine months" shall be substituted. 40 
II. In section 49 of the principal Act,-
(a) in sub-section (1), for the words "Presidency Magistrate or 
a Magistrate". the words "Metropolltan ~aSiltrate or a JucijcJll 
l4ap~*," shall ~ 'lUbtUt"ted; . .. . 

jet 1'808. 
2 of 1974. 
5 
10 
15 
(h) in sub-section (2) ,-
(i) for the words and figures "section 32 of the Code o~ 
Criminal Procedure, 1898", the words and figures "section 29 of 
the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973" shall be substituted; 
(ii) for the words "Magistrate of the first class or for any 
Presidency Magistrate", the words "Judicial Magistrate of the 
firSt clasS or for any Metropolitan Magistrate" shall be substi-
tuted. 
20. In section 63 of the principal Act,-
(a) in sub-section (2) ,-
(i) for clause (d), the following clause shall be substituted, 
name1y:-
"(d) the manner in which and the purposes for whicl1 
persons may be nssociated wIth the Central Board under 
sub-section (1) of section 10 and the fees and allowancet>l 
payable to such persons;"; 
(ii) clauses (h) and (i) shall be omitted; 
(b) dn sub-section (3), for the words "before the expiry of the 
session in which it is so laid or the successive sessions, aforesaid", 
20 the words "before the expiry of the session immediately following 
the session or the successive sessions aforesaid" shall be substituted. 
Amend_ 
ment of 
~ection 63. 
21. In section 64 of the principal Act, in clause (d) of sub-section Amend-
(2), the words "and the fees and allowances payable to such persons" ment of 
shall be inserted at the end. section 64. 
25 22. Notwithstanding anything contained in section 4 of the principal Valida-
Act, as it stood immediately before the commencement of this Act, every tion. 
State Board for the prevention and control of water pollution constituted 
under that section after the expiry of a period of six months of the com-
mencement af the principal Act in the State concerned, shall be deemed 
30 to have been validly constituted and accordingly anything done or any 
action :taken by such S'Utte Board before the comm.eIlICemen.t of this 
Act shall be deemed to have been validly done or taken and no such 
thing or action shall be called in question in any court merely on the 
ground that S\l.('h State Board was cor.stituted after the expiry of the 
35 period specified therefor under the said section 4. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
In the process of implementation of the Water (Prevention and Con-
trol of Pollu'tion) Act, 1974, in various States, certain drawbacks have 
come to the notice of the Government and consequently it has become 
necessary to make certain amendments in the Act. 
2. Section 4 of the Act requires that those State Governments which 
have adopted the Act should set up the State Boards within six months 
from the date of adoption. One of the fifteen States which have so far 
adopted the Act, has not set l..tp the State Board within this time limit. It 
has been felt that the prescribed time limit of six months for constitution 
Of the State Boards may be done away with. Further, it has come to the 
notice of the Government that some State Governments have set up the 
State Boards after the prescribed time limit of six months. It is, there-
fore, necessary to regularise the setting up of these Boards and also the 
action of the State Boards constituted after the prescribed time limit of 
six months. 
3. Moreover, certain States are finding it difficult to provide a full-time 
Chairman for the State Boards. It is, therefore, proposed to amend the 
Act to provide for the appointment of a Chairman of the State Board 
either on full-time or on part-time, depending on the specific situation 
and as the State Government thinks fit. 
4. It is felt that there should be an integrated approach for tackling 
the water and air pollution problem. It is, therefore, proposed that the 
existing Boards for the Prevention and Control of Water Pollution should 
also be authorised to perform functions relating to the prevention, control 
and abatement of air pollu.tion. The Government have already intro-
duced a Bill, namely, the Air (Prevention and Control of Pollution) 
Bill, 1978, in the Lok Sabha on the 17th April, 197'8. It has thus become 
necessary to authorise the Central Board and the State Boards for the 
Prevention and Control of Water Pollution to spend from their funds for 
performing functions relating to prevention, control and abatement of air 
pollution also. 
5. In addition, certain other minor amendments are also proposed in 
the Bill. 
NEW DELm; 
-=T~he---'-'12th July, 1978. 
SlKANDER BAKHT. 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Clause 16 of the Bill empowers the Central Board for the Prevention 
and Control of Water Pollution to expend its funds also on the activities 
connected with the prevention, control or abatement of air pollution. It is 
estimated that the total expenditure on this account shall be Rs. 10.76 
lakhs. Out of this amount, the recurring expenditure shall be to the 
extent of Rs. 5.73 lakhs and the balance shall be non-recurring expendi-
ture. EYen this expenditure may be off-set by the revenue expected 
from the Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Cess Act, 1977. 
9 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
By clause 8 a new sub-section (3A) is being inserted in section 12 of 
tile Act empowering the Central Board or, as the caSe may be, State Board 
to make regulations in respect of the method of recruit11)ent and the terms 
and conditions of service (including scates of pay) offthe officers (other 
than the member-secretary) and other employees of the Central Board 
or, 88 the case may be, State BoaTd. 
2. Clause 20 and clause 21 of the Bill seek to amend section 63 and 
section 64 respectively. These amendments empower the Central Gov-
ernment and the State Governments to make rules with respect to the 
fees and allowances payable to the persons who are associated with the 
Central Board and the State Boards respectively. 
3. The matters in relation to which Tegulations Or rules which.:;may be 
made are matters of procedure and administrative detail and, as such, the 
delegation of legislative power is of a normal character. 
10 

ANNEXURE 
ExTRACTS FROM THE WATER (PREvENnoN AND CONTROL OF POLLUTION) 
ACT, 1974 
(6 OF 1974) 
• • • • • 
Z. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
• • 
3. (1) • • 
(2) The Central Board shall 
namely:-
• • • 
• • • 
consist of the following members, 
(a) a full-time chairman, being a person having special know-
ledge or practical experience in respect of matters relating to the 
use and conservation of water resources or the prevention and 
control of water pollution or a pe'l'SOn having knowledge and 
experience in administering institutions dealing with the matters 
aforesaid, to be nominated by the Central Government; 
(b) five officials to be nominated by the Central Government to 
represent that Government; 
• • • • • 
(d) three non-officials to be nominated by the Central Govern-
ment, to represent the interestS' of agriculture, fishery or industry 
or trade or any ·other interest which, in the opinion of the Central 
Government, ought to be represented; 
• • • • • 
(f) a full-time member-secretary qualified in public health 
"nlZineering and having administrative experience, to be appointed 
by the Central Government. 
• • • • .. 
4. (1) The State Government shall. with effect from such date 
(being a date not later than six months of the commencement of this 
Act in the State) as it may. by notification in the Official Ga!ettp 
appoint, c·onstitute a State Board, under such name as may be specified 
in the notification, to exercise the powers conferred on and perform the 
functions assigned to that Board under this Act. 
(2) A State Board shall consist of the following members, namely: -. 
(a) a fuU-time chairman, being a person having special 
kn()Wledge or practical experience in respect of matters relating t.n 
the use and conservation of water resources or the prevention and 
<:ont.ro! of water pollution or a person having lmowledge and 
,- J II ~. 
Defini-
tions . 
Constitu_ 
tion of 
Central 
Boards. 
Constitu-
hon Of 
State 
Board •. 

Terms 
nnd condi. 
tions at 
t¥ervice of 
members. 
Member. 
secretary 
and oftL 
cen and 
other 
emplo. 
yees of 
Board. 
experience in administering institutions dealing with the matters 
aforesaid, to be nominated by the State Government; 
(b) five officials to be nominated by the State Government to 
represent that Government; 
(c) five persons to be nominated by the State Government from 
amongst the members of the local authorities functioning within the 
State; 
(d) three non-officials to be nominated by the State Govern-
ment to represent the interests of agriculture, fishery or industry 
or trade or any other interest which, in the opinion of the State 
Government, ought to be represented; 
, '" '" ... '" ... 
(f) a full-time member-secretary qualified in public health 
engineering and having administrative experience, to be appointed 
by the State Government . 
'" ... '" • '" 
5. (1) ... ... ... '" ... 
(2) The term of office of a member ,of a Board nominated under 
clause (b) of SUb-section (2) of section 3 or clause (b) of sUb-section 
(2) of section 4 shall come to an end as soon as he ceases to hold the 
office under the Central Government or, as the case may be, the State 
Government, by virtue of which he was nominated . 
... ... ... ... ... 
(5) A member of a Board, other than the member-secretary, shall 
be deemed to have vacated his seat if he is absent without reason, 
sufficient in the opinion of the Board, from three consecutive meetings 
,.,£ the Board, or where he is nominated under clause (c) of sub-section 
(2) of section 3 or under clause (c) of su1:)-section (2) of section 4, if he 
ceaset:; to be a member of the State' Board, or as the case may be, of 
the local authority. I '':'iIf' 
... '" '" '" ... 
12. (1) ... ... ... ... • 
(3) Subject to such rules as may be made by the Central Govern-
ment or, as the case may ~, the State Government in this behalf, a 
Board may appoint such om.~ers and employees as it considers necessary 
for the efficient perfonnance of its functions and the rules so ma4e may 
provide for the salaries and allowances and other terms and conditions 
of service of such officers and employees . 
• ... • * ... 

5 of 1898. 
13 
14. (1) A Joint Board constituted in pursuance of an agreement 
entered into under clause (a) of sub-section (1) of section 13 shall 
consist of the following members, namely:-
(a) a full-time chairman, being a person having special 
knowledge or practical experience in respect of matters relating to 
the use and conservation of water resources or the prevention and 
control of water pollution or a person having knowledge and experi-
ence in administering institutions dealing with the matters afore-
said, to be nominated by the Central Government; 
• • • • • 
<f) a full-time member-secretary qualified in public health 
engineering and having administrative experience, to be appointed by 
the Central Government. 
(2) A Joint Board constituted in pursuance of an agreement entered 
into under clause (b) of sub-section !1) of section 13 shall consist of 
the following members, namely:-
(a) a full-time chairman, being a person having special know-
ledge or practical experience in respect of matters relating to the 'USe 
and conservation of water resources or the prevention and control 
of water pollution or a person having knowledge and experience in 
administering instituti'ons dealing with the matters aforesaid, to be 
nominated by the Central Government; 
• • • • * 
(f> a full-time membel'-secretary qualified in public health 
engineering and having administrative experience, to be appointed 
by the Central Government. 
• • • • • 
• • • • • 
Composi_ 
tiOn of 
Joint 
Boards. 
21. (1) Power 
(4) When a sample of any sewage or trade effluent is taken for to take 
analysis under sub-section (1) and the person taking the sample serves samples of effluents on the occupier or his agent, a notice under clause (a) of sub-section and pro_ 
(3) and the occupier or his agent wilfully absents himself, then, the cedure 
sample 51:> taken shall be placed in a container which shall be marked to be 
and sealed and shall also be signed by the person taking the sample followed 
and th~ same shall be sent forthwith by such person for analysis to the ~:c~f:~ 
laboratory referred. to in sub-clause (i) or sub-clause (ii) , as the case there_ 
may be, of clause (e) of subl-secfion (3)., and such person shall inform with. 
the Government analyst appointed under sub-section (1) or sub-
section (2), as the case may be, of section 53, in writing about the wilful 
absence of the occupier or his agent. 
* • • • • 
23. (1) • • • • • 
(2) The proVISIons of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898, or, in 
relation to the State of Jammu and Kashmir. the provisions of anv 
corresponding law in force in that State, shall, so far as may be, apply 
Power of 
entt-yand 
:nspec_ 
. tion. 
• 

"ric-
lions on 
new out_ 
lets and 
new dis_ 
charges. 
Provision 
regarding 
E.·xisting 
discharge 
of sewage 
or trade 
effluent. 
Refusal 
or with-
drawalof 
consent 
by State 
Board. 
14 
to any search or seizure under this section as they apply to any search 
or seizlU'e made under the authority of a warrant issued under section 
98 of the' said Code, or, as the case may be, under the corresponding 
provisions of the said law. 
• * • • • 
25. (1) Subject to the provisions of this section no person shall, 
Without the previous consent of the State Board, bring into use any 
new or altered outlet for the discharge of sewage or trade effluent into 
a stream or well or begin to make any new discharie of sewage or 
trade effluent into a stream or well. 
(2) An. application for consent of the State Board under sub-
section (1) shall be made in the prescribed f,orm and shall contain 
particulars regarding the proposed construction, installation or operation 
of the industrial or commercial establishment or of any treatment and 
disposal system or of any extension ':Jr addition thereto and such other 
particulars as may be prescribed: 
• • • • • 
(4) The State Board may grant its consent referred to in sub-
section (1), subject to such conditions as it may impose, being-
(a) in the case of a new or eltered outlet, conditions as to the 
p:>int of discharge into the stream or well or the construction of 
the outlet, or as to the use of that ~utlet or any other outlet for 
sewage or trade effluent from the same land or premises; and 
• • • • • 
(5) Where, without the consent of the State Board, a new or altered 
outlet is bJ:'lought into use for the discharge of sewage or trade effluent 
into a stream or well or a new discharge of sewage or trade effluent 
is made, the State Board may serve on the person using the outlet or 
making the discharge, as the case may be, a notice imposing any such 
conditions as it might have imposed on an application for its consent 
in respect to such outlet or discharge. 
• • • • • 
26. Where immediately before the commencement of this Act any 
person was discharging any sewage or trade effluent into a stream or 
well, the provisions 01. secti<:m 25 shall, so far as may be, apply in 
relation to such person as they apply in relation to the person referred 
to in that section subject to the modification that the application for 
consent to be made under sub-seoctbn (2) of that section shall be made 
within a period of three months of the constitution of the State Board. 
rr. (1) • • • • • 
(2) A State Board may from time to time review any condition 
imposed under section 25 (other than a o:mdition to be satisfied before 
an outlet is brought into use or a new discharge is made), or under 
section 26 and may serve on the person using the outlet or making the 
djschar~' as the case may be, a notice, making any reasonable variation 
of or rev,oking -any such condition. 
• • 

5 of 1898. 
IS 
28. (1)· • • • • 
(2) An appellate authority shall consist of three persons . 
• • • • • 
36. (1) The Central Board shall have its own fund, and all sums 
which may, from time to time, be paid to it by the Central Govern-
ment and all other receipts (by way of gifts, grants, donations, bene-
factions or otherwise) of that Board shall be carried to the fund of the 
Board and all payments by the Board shall be made therefrom. 
(2) The Central Board may expend such sums as it thinks fit for 
performing its functions under this Act, and such sums shall be treated 
as expenditure payable out of the fund of that Board. 
37. (1) The State Board shall have its own fund, and the sums which 
may, from time to time, be paid to it by the State Government and 
all other receipts (by way of gifts, grants, donations, benefactions or 
otherwise) of that Board shall be carried to the fund of the Board and 
all payments by the Board shall be made therefrom. 
(2) The State Board may exp~nd such sums as it thinks ftt for per-
forming its functions under this Act, and such sums shall be treated as 
expenditure payable out of the fund· of that Board. 
• • • • • 
39. (1) The Central Board shall during each financial year, prepare, 
in such form and at such time as may be prescribed, an annual report 
giving a true and full account of its activities during the previous 
financial year and copies thereof shall be forwarded to the Central 
Government and that Govemm~nt shall cause every such report to be 
laid before both Houses of Parliament within six months ot the date on 
which it is received by that Government. 
• • • • • 
Appeal,. 
Fund of 
Central 
Board. 
Fund of 
State 
Board. 
Annual 
report. 
49. (1) No court shall take cognizance of any offence under this Act Cognizance 
except on a complaint made by, or with the previous sanction in writ- of oft'ences. 
ing of the State Board, and no court inferior to that of a Presidency 
Magistrate or a Magistrate of the first class shall try any offence 
punishable under this Act. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 32 of the Code 
of Criminal Procedure, 1898, it shall be lawful for any Magistrate of 
the first class or for any Presidency Magistrate to pass a sentence of 
imprisonment for a term exceeding two years or of ftne exceeding two 
thousand rupees on any person convicted of an offence punishable under 
this Act. 
• • • • •• 
63. (1) • • • • :.. 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the 
fooegoing power, such rules may provide for all or any of the following 
matters, namely:-
• • • • • 
Power of 
Central 
Govern_ 
ment to 
make 
rul-. 

Power of 
State 
Govern-
ment to 
make rules. 
(d) the manner in which and the purposes for which persons 
may be associated with a Board under sub-section (1) of section 10; 
* * * * • 
(h) the prohibition or regulation of bathing in any 8b:'eam or 
well or the washing or cleaning therein of things of any class or 
description, or the putting of mter or 'other objectionable matter, 
whether poisonous, noxious or polluting or not into any streiHn or 
well; 
(i) the prohibition or regulaUon of the keeping or use, on any 
stream, of vessels provided with sanitary appliances from which 
polluting matter passes into the stream; 
• • • • • 
(3) Every rule made by the Central Gwernment under this Act 
shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of 
Parliament while it is in session for a total period of thirty days which 
may be comprised in one session ot in two or more successive sessions, 
and if, before the expiry of the session in which it is so laid 
or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any 
modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be 
made, the rule shall thereafter have eRect only in such modified form or 
be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modi-
fication or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of 
anything previously done under that rule. 
64. (1) • • • • • 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the 
foregoing power, such rules may provide for all or any of the following 
matters, namely:-
• • • • • 
(d) the manner in which and the purposes for which persons 
may be associated with the State Board under sub-section (1) of 
section 10; 
• • • • • 

LOK SABHA ' .•... .1.. 
A 
BILL 
to amend the Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1974. 
(Shri Sikandar Bakht, 
Minister of Works and Housing 
and Supply and Rehabilitation). 