THE SALARIES AND ALLOWANCES 
OF MEMBERS OF PARLIAMENT 
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 1958 
(As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABRA) 

....;B_I_II_N_o_ • ....;I_09~of 195' 
THE SALARIES AND ALLOWANCES OF MEMBERS OF 
PARLIAMENT (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1958 
(As INTRODUCED IN LoK SABHA) 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Salaries and Allowances of Members of Parlia-
. m.ent Act, 1954. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Ninth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
1. This Act may be called the Salaries and Allowances of Mem- Short title. 
ben of Parliament (Amendment) Act, 1958. 
Z. In section 2 of the Salaries and Allowances of Members of Amendment 
Parliament Act, 1954 (hereineiter referred to as the principal of lection2. 
Act),-
(a) in clause (b), for the words "but does not include", the 
words "but, save as otherwise expressly provided in this Act, 
does not include" shall be substituted; 
(b) in clause (d), in sub-clause (i), for the words "end of 
the session", the words "date on which the House of Parliament 
is adjourned sine die or for a period exceeding seven days" shall 
be, and shall be deemed always to have been, substituted. 
3. In section 3 of the principal Act, for the word "plus", the words Amenllment 
"and subject to any rules made under this Act", shall be, and shall oflection 3· 
be deemed always to have been, substituted. 
4. In section 4 of the principal Act,-
(a.) in sub-section (1) ,-
(i) after the words "every journey performed by him", 
the words "in India" shall be inserted; 
Amendment 
of section 4. 

2 
(ii) for sub-clause (i) of clause (c), the following sub-
clause shall be, and shall be deemed always to have been, 
substituted, namely:-
"(i) where the journey or any part thereof is per-
former by steamer, an amount equal to one and three- S 
fifths of the fare (without diet) for the highest class in 
the steamer for each such journey or part thereof, or, 
if there is no regular steamer service, such amount for 
each such journey or part thereof as may be prescrlb- 10 
eel by rules made under section 9;"; 
(b) after sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be 
inserted, namely:-
"(3) There shall be psid to a member in respect of a 
journey performed by him in the course of a tour outside 
India undertaken in the discharge of his duties as such 15 
member, such travelling and daily allowances as may be 
prescribed by rules made under section 9.". 
Substitution 5. For section 6 of the principal Act, the following section shall 
o.f new lee- be substituted namely:-hon for ' 
section 6. 
Free transit 
by railway. 
"6. (1) Every member shall be provided with one free 20 
Ilon-transferable first class pass which shall entitle him to travel 
at any time by any railway in India. 
Explanation.-For the purposes of this SUh-sectiOll, a mem-
ber shall include a Minister as defined in the Salaries and 
Allowances of Ministers Ad, 1952! and an officer of Parliam~nt 25 58.f 1952. 
as defined in the Salaries and Allowances ef Officers of Parlia· 
ment Act, 1953, other than the Chairman of the Council of 20 of I953. 
States. 
(2) A free railway pass issued to a member under sub-
section (1) shall be valid for the term of his office and on the ~o 
~piration of such term, the pass shall be surrendered to the 
Secretary of the House of the People or the Council of States, as 
the case may b~: 
Provided that where any such pass is issued to a new mem-
ber before he takes his seat in either House of Pal'liament, he 35 
shall be entitled to use the pass for attending a session of that 
House for taking his seat therein. 
(3) Until a member is provided with a free railway pass 
under 5ub·section (1), he shall be entitled to an amount equal 
to one flnt class fare for any journey of the nature referred. td 40 
in sub-section (1) of aection 4 performed by him by rail. 

3 
(4) A member who on ceasing to b. a member surrenclers 
hill pass under sub-section (2), shall, if he perfonns any retu.rn 
journey by rail of the nature referred to in sub-section (1) of 
section 4, be entitled, in respect of that journey to an amount 
5 equal to one first class fare. 
(5) Nothing in this section shall be construed as disentitl-
ing a member to any travelling allowances to which he is other-
wise entitled under the provisions of this Act." 
Afmend~eDt 6. In section 7 of the principal Act, for the words "Where the 
o soctlon 7. . _ I b t h .. f . f H f 10 m~'t:rva e ween t e termmatIon 0 one sesSIon 0 a ouse 0 
IS 
Amondment 20 
of section 9. 
25 
30 
35 
Parliament or, as the case may be, one sitting of a committee and 
the commencement of another ~ssion or sitting at the same place", 
the following words shall be, and shall be deemed always to have 
been, substituted, namely:-
"Where the interval between the date on which a House of 
Parliament is adjourned and the date on which it re-assembles 
at the same place after such adjournment or, as the case may be, 
between one sitting of a committee and the commencement of 
another sitting at the same place". 
7. In section 9 of the principal Act,-
(a.) after sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall 
be inserted, namely:-
"(2A) A member of the Joint Committee shall hold 
office as such member for one year from the date of his 
nomination and any casual vacancy in the Joint Committee 
may be filled by nomination by the Chairman of the Council 
of States or the Speaker of the House of the People, as the 
case may be. 
Expla.nation.-In the case of a member of a Joint 
Committee holding office as such immediately before the 
commencement of the Salaries and Allowances of Members 
of Parliament (Amendr.lent) Act, 1958, the period of one 
year shall be computed from the date of such commence-
ment."; 
(b) in sub-section (3) ,-
(i) after the word "may", the words "after consulta-
tion with th'e Central Government" shall be inserted; 
(ii) in clause (c), the following words shall be added at 
the end, namely:-
"and the reduction of the daily allowance where 
a member is provided with free board or lodging at 
the expense of the Government or a local authority;"; 

Amend.eDt 
of .ecolon 10 
(iii) after clause (d), the following clauses shan be 
inserted, namely:-
"(dd) the travelling allowance admissible in res-
pect of journeys performed by any vessel where there 
is no regular steamer service; S 
(ddd) the travelling and daily allowances admissi-
ble for journeys performed by a member in the course 
of a tour outside India undertaken in connection with 
his duties as such member;"; 
(c) after sub-section (4), the following sub-section shall 10 
be inserted, namely:-
" (5) All rules made under this section shall be laid 
for not less than thirty days before each House of Parlia-
ment as soon as possible after they are made, and shall 
be subject to such modifications as Parliament may make IS 
during the session in which they are so laid or the session 
immediately following.". 
8. Section 10 of the principal Act shall be re-numbered as sub-
section (1) thereof, and after the said sub-section as so re-numbered, 
the following sub-sections shall be inserted, namely:- 20 
"(2) All travelling and daily allowances paid to a member 
befote the commencement of the Salaries and Allowances of 
Members of Parliament (Amendment) Act, 1958, in respect of 
journeys performed by him in the course of a tour outside India 
in the discharge of his duties as such member, shall be deemed 2S 
to have been validly paid and the payment of such allowances 
shall not be called in question by any authority. 
(3) All rules providing for any of the matters included 
in sub-section (3) of section 9 by the Salaries and Allowances 
of Members of Parliament (Amendment) Act, 1958, made 30 
before the commencement of that Act and in force at such 
commencement shall be deemed to have been validly made as 
if the said sub-section as amended by that Act had been in 
force on the date on which such rules were made.". 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The working of the Salaries and Allowances of Members of 
Parliament Act, 1954, has presented certain difficulties in the 
matter of the reimbursement of the cost of travel by rail to a mem-
ber when he has to perform his first journey from his usual place 
of residence to attend Parliament before receiving a rail pass and 
his return journey to his place of residence after surrendering the 
pass. The Act does not provide for such reimbursement. There 
is also no provision in the Act for the payment of travelling allow-
ances to members going abroad with Parliamentary delegations, 
for journeys by sea otherwise than by steamer and the quantum 
of daily allowance which should be paid when a member is provided 
free board or lodging by the Central or a State Government or local 
authority. The Bill seeks to remove these difficulties. 
The Bill also seeks to provide for the issue of rail passes to Minis-
ters and Officers of Parliament other than the Chairman of the 
Council of States in the same way as they are provided to Members 
of Parliament. 
Opportunity has also been taken to incorporate certain clarifica-
tory amendments. 
S. N. SINHA. 
NEW DELHI; 
The 18th September, 1958. 
5 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
The Bill provides for the payment of rail fare in cash to a mem-
ber of Parliament in case he has to perform his first journey from 
his usual place of residence to attend Parliament before receiving 
a rail pass and his return journey to his place of residence after 
surrendering the pass. As such payments will be in lieu of rail 
passes, no additional expenditure is involved in this provision. 
The Bill also provides for the issue of a First Class Rail Pass to 
every Minister and Officer of Parliament other than the Chairman 
of the Council of States in the same way as every Member of Parlia-
ment is entitled to receive. It is not possible to indicate with any 
degree of accuracy the expenditure likely to be involved through 
this provision. 

Under the Salaries and Allowances of Members of Parliamen.t 
Act, 1954, a Joint Committee of Members of Parliament was 
empowered to make rules to provide for certain specified matters. 
This Bill further empowers the Committee to make rules regarding 
certain other matters such as the quantum of allowances which 
should be paid to members going abroad with parliamentary delega-
tions or when travelling by sea otherwise than by a steamer and 
when treated as State guests. 
The Delegation is of a normal character. 

IrraAcTS FROM THE SALARIES AND A:u...ow ANCES OF MEMBERS dP 
PARLIAMENT ACT, 1954. 
(30 OF 1954) 
• • • • 
z. In this Act,-
• • • • 
(b) "member" means a member of either House of Parlia-
ment, but does not include-
(i) a Minister as defined in the Salaries and Allowances 
of Ministers Act, 1952; and .58 of 19'a. 
(ii) an officer of Parliament as defined in the S .laries 
and Allowances of Officers of Parliament Act, 1953; 
• • • • 
,(d) "period of residence on duty" means the period during 
which a member resides at a place where a session of a House 
of Parliament or a sitting of a committee is held or where any 
other business connected with his duties as such member is 
transacted, for the purpose of attending such session or sittini: 
or for the purpose of attending to such other business, and in-
cludes-
(i) in the case of a session of a House of Parliament, a 
period of such residence, not exceeding three days, immedi-
ately preceding the commencement of the session and a 
period of such residence, not exceeding three days, immedi-
ately s'.lcceeding the end of the session; and 
(ii) in the case of a sitting of a committee or any other 
business, a period of such residence, not exceeding two days. 
Immediately preceding the commencement of the bUSiness 
of the committee or other business and a period of such 
residence, not exceeding two days, immediately succeeding 
the conclusion of the business of the committee or other 
business; 
Explanatiort.-A member who ordinarily resides at a place 
where a session of a House of Parlian:umt or a sitting ot a 
20 of I9S). 

committee is held or where any other business connected with 
his duties as such member is transacted shall, for the duration 
of the session or sitting or the time occupied for the transaction 
of other business (including the three or two days immediately 
preceding or succeeding), be deemed to reside at such place for 
the purpose of attending such session or setting or, as the case 
may be, for the purpose of attending to such other business; 
• • • • 
3. A member shall be entitled to receive a salary at the rate of !u-:riea daily 
four hundred rupees per mensem during the whole of his term of allowance., 
office plus an allowance at the rate of twenty-one rupees for each 
day during any period of residence on duty. 
4. (1) There shall be paid to each member in respect of every Travellilll 
journey performed by him for the purpose of attending a session of allowancea. 
a House of Parliament or a meeting of a committee or for the pur-
pose of attending to any other business connected with his duties 
as a member, from his usual place of residence to the place where 
the session or the meeting is to be held or the other business is to 
be transacted and for the return journey from such place to his 
usual place of residence-
(a) if the journey is performed by rail, an amount equal to 
one first class fare plus one third class fare for each such journey, 
irrespective of the class in which the member actually travels; 
(b) if the journey is performed by air, an amount equal to 
one and one-fourth of the air fare for each such journey; 
(c) if the journey or any part thereof cannot be performed 
by rail or air-
(i) where the journey or any part thereof is performed 
by steamer, an amount equal to one and three-fifths of the 
fare (without diet) for the highest class in the steamer for 
each such journey or part thereof; 
(ii) where the journey or any part thereof is performed 
by road, a road mileage at the rate of eight annas per mile 
for each such journey or part thereof. 
Explanation.-For the purposes of sub-clause (ii) of clause (c) 
of this sub-section, the expression "journey" shall include the jour-
ney from and to the railway station, port or aerodrome to and from 

18 
the usual place of residence of the member or, as the case may be. 
the residence of the member at the place where the session of the 
House of Parliament or a meeting of the committee is to be held or 
where any other business is to be transacted . 
• • • • 
Free transit 6. Every member shall be provided with one free non-transfera-
by railway. ble first class pass which shall entitle him to travel by any railway 
in India at any time, but nothing contained in this section shall affect 
the payment of any travelling allowance payable to a member 
under any other provision of this Act. 
~l,?wan'r rt 7. Where the interval between the termination of one session of 
i~~l~: 0 a House of Parliament or, as the case may be, one sitting of a com-
bet tw~nt.tbe mittee and the commencement of another session or sitting at the CI1DUI& Ion 
Dfonesession same place does not exceed seven days and the member concerned 
IDdmm t~ elects to remain at such place during the interval, he shall be en-co en ...... -
ment of titled to draw for each day of residence at such place a daily allow-
another etc. ance at the rate specified in section 3: lession, 
Provided that if the member leaves such place during the inter-
val, his absence from the place shall be treated as absence during 
a session of a House of Parliament or a sitting of the committee, as 
the case may be, and the provisions of section 5 shall apply accord-
ingly. 
• • • 
Power 10 9. (1) For the purpose of making rules under the ~ction, there 
mate rula. shall be constituted a Joint Committee of both Houses of Parliament 
consisting of five members from the Council of States nominated by 
the Chain-nan and ten members from the House of the People nomi-
nated by the Speaker. 
(2) The Joint Committee constituted under sub-section (1) shall 
elect its Chairman and shall have power to regulate its procedure. 
(J) The Joint Committee constituted under sub-section (1) may 
make rules to provide for all or any of the following matters, 
namely:-
(a) the routes for the performance of any journey; 
(b) the manner in which fractions of a day shall be dealt 
with for the purpose of determining the daily allowance ad-
missible for that day; , 
(c) the travelling allowance admissible where a member is 
provided with free transit for the whole or any part of a jour-
ney; 

1:1·· . 
(d) the travelling allowance admissible where the place 
from which a member commences his journey or to which he 
returns is not his usual place of residence; . 
(e) the form in which certificates, if any, shall be furnished 
by a member for the pUipo3€ of claiming any allowance under 
this Act; 
(f) medical, housing, telephone and postal facilities men-
tioned in section 8; and 
(g) generally for regulating the payment of daily and 
travelling allowances under this Act. 
(4) Any rules made under sub-section (3) shall not take effect 
until they are approved and confirmed by the Chairman of the 
Council of States and the Speaker of the House of the People and 
are published in the Official Gazette, and such publication of the 
rules shall be conclusive proof that they have been d·uly made. 
10. Where a member is entitled to receive travelling allowance Validation 
in respect of any journey performed by him by a railway before~: :~~n! 
the commencement of this Act, he shall, notwithstanding the aboli- travelling 
tion of first class accomIll99.atiW) on such railway, be entitled and allowances. 
be deemed always to have been entitled to receive travelling 
allowance in respect of such journey at the rates admissible to him 
in accordance with the law then in force, as if the first class accom-
modation had not been abolished on such railway and as if the 
member had in fact travelled by first class and, accordingly, the 
payment of any travelling allowance to such member in respect of 
such journey at the aforesaid rates shall be deemed to have been 
validly made and shall not be called in question' by any authority 
on the ground only that the first class accommodation had been 
abokished. 01\ : such railway and that the member had not in fact 
travelled by first class. 

LOKSABHA 
A 
BILL 
J_ I,-.J',',c,,·, 
further to amend the Salaries and Allowances of Members 
of Parliament Act, 1954. 
, The President has, in pursuance of clause (3) of article 117 
of the Constitution of India recommended to Lok Sabha 
the consideration of the Bill. 
M.N. KAUL, 
Secretary 
(Shri Satya Narayan Sinha, 
Minister of Parliamentary Affairs.) 