CORRIGENDA 
to 
THE LIFE INSURANCE CORPOBATIONS Bru, 1983 
(To be/As introd.uc.:ed in wk Sabha) 
1. r.~bi! 
in the marginal beading to clause 7,-
for tlcondtionb" read. "conditionsll 
2. Page 7,-
in the marginal heading to clause 13,-
£Q!. "const tute" 
3 .. Pa.ge 1 f), l:Lne 32,-
read "constj.tute" -
for "end" read "and" 
4 .. Page 11, line 1 ,-
for 11 pro cedul'ems " read " ,Pl'ocerlu l'~R n 
Page 12, line 15,-
for "territoral" read "territorial" 
6. Page 13, line 6,-
after It maturity " insert "claim" 
7 • Page 13, lir. 10,-
8. rap,6 13, line 36,-
:t:or I!deah" rea.d "death" 
9. Page 19,-
against line' 25, in t:.- it $I..)rgiIl,-
for II~ of 198OJ' read "5 of 1908!' 
10. Page 21,-
in thf; marg:i n~l l'l*,l::vfu.g· to ~la.use 47,-
(1) for "privi lagcn read 1\ l)rJ.~Ji 1 P.fr,U't .. -
(li) for "qusiness II ~ "business" 

- 2 -
11. Page 30,-
in the marginal h~ading to clause 67,-
for tlruls" read "rules" 
12. Pal;)..; 33, line 4.=.:, L~~.~·.Jl·l "amongst",-
for "Corporations" read tlCorporationti 
13. Pagl; 36,-
in th(;: marginal he~ing to para~ 6,-
for "dissovlt..d 11 read "dis solved II 
14. Page 36, line 43,-
for "Division ll read. "1ivisions" 
15. Pagb 38, line 6 from bottom,-
for "settlet:l(;nts" rE:nrj "settlement" 
16. Page 46, line 2,-
for "Clause" read IfClaus~ 5" 
17. Page 46, line 5 from bottom,-
for "Rs. lakhs" read "lis. 5 lakhs" 
18. Page 48, line 4 from bottom,-
for "provffidcd" re~d "provided" 
~ DELHI; 
November 11, 1983 
K:.:r~ika 20, 1905 cscltaT 

As INTRODUCED IN LoK SA8lIA 
.1 ~t;" .,;1 J.J 
Bill No. 109 of 1983 
THE LIFE INSURANCE CORPORATIONS BILL, JgB3 
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES 
CHAPTER I 
PRF.UMlNARY 
CLAUSES 
1. Shorl title and commencement. 
2. Definitions. 
3. Dissolution of Ufe Insurance Corporation of India and repeal. 
CHAPTER II 
ESTABLISHMENT O}. LIFE INSURANCE CORPORATIONS AND THEIR CAPITAL 
4. Establishment of Life Insurance Corporations. 
5. Capital. 
6. Constitution of Corporations. 
7. Term of office and conditions of service of Chairman and other 
members. 
8. Disqualifications and removal. 
CHAPTER III 
FUNCTIONS OF LIn: INSURANCE CORPORATIONS 
9. Functions of each Corporation. 
10. Power to impose conditions, etc. 
CHAPTER IV 
MANAGEMENT 
11. Head Office and other offices of each Corporation. 
12. Chairman to be the Managing Director. 
13. Power of each Corporation to constitute Committees. 
14. Power to appoint Executlve Directors, etc, 
CHAPTER V 
TilE LIFE INSURANCE BOARD 
15. Constitution of the Life Insurance Board. 
16. Conditions of service of members of the Board. 
17. Committees of the Board. 

(ii ) 
CLAUSES 
18. Meetings of the Board. 
19. Secretary and other staff of the Board. 
20. Functions of the Board. 
21. Finances of the Board. 
CHAPTER VI 
CONSTITUTION OF TRIBUNALS 
22. Power of Central Government to constitute Claims Tribunals. 
23. Territorial limits of the jurisdiction of a Claims Tribunal. 
24. Applications to Claims Tribunals. 
25. Benches of Claims Tribunal. 
26. Orders of Claims Tribunals. 
27. Power of Central Government to constitute an Appella~e Claims 
Tribunal. 
28. Appeals to the Appellate Claims Tribunal. 
~. Order of the Appellate Claims Tribunal. 
30. Benches of the Appellate Claims Tribunal. 
31. Power of Central Government to constitute Service Matters 
Tribunals. 
32. Redressal of the grievance with respect to service matters. 
33. Benches of Service Matters Tribunal. 
34. Orders of Service Matters Tribunals. 
CHAPTER VII 
PROVISIONS APl'LICABLE TO ALL TRIBUNALs 
35. Powers of Tribunals to enforce attendance of witnesses and to 
regulate their own procedure. 
36. Proceedings before Tribunals to be judicial proceedings for 
certain purposes. 
37. Procedure where the members of a Tribunal differ in their 
opinion. 
38. Method of determination of equivalent rank. 
39. Costs. 
CHAPTER VIn 
FINANCE, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT 
40. Funds of Corporations. 
4.1. Audit. 
42. Actuarial valuations. 
43. Annual report of activities of Corporations and the BoanL 

(Iff) 
CLAUSES 
44. Surplus from life insurance business huw to De utilised. 
45. Profits from any business (other than life insurance business) 
how to be utilised. 
46. Reports to be laid before Parliament. 
CHAPTER IX 
MISCELLANEOUS 
47. Corporations to have exclusive privilege of carrying on life 
insurance business. 
48. Exceptions in the case of life insurance business in respect of 
persons ordinarily residing O'Utside India. 
49. Powers of Corporations to have official seals in certain cases. 
50. Policies of life insurance to be guaranteed by Central 
Government. 
51. LiqUidation. 
52. Penalty for carrying on life insurance bUSiness in contravpntioa 
of the provisions of this Act. 
53. Penalty for withholding property, etc. 
54. Offences by companies. 
55. Bar of jurisdiction of civil courts. 
56. Enforcement of decisions and orders of Tribunals. 
57. Application of the Insurance Act. 
58. Deduction of income-tax not to be made on inteJ:est or dividend. 
59. Act not to apply in certain cases. 
60. Defects in constitution of a Corporation or the Board or of any 
Tribunal not to invalidate acts or proceedings. 
61. Protection of action taken under the Act. 
62. Employees to be deemed to be pUblic servants. 
63. Disqualification for appointment as insurance agent. 
64. Employees not to take active part in politics. 
65. Power to make rules. 
66. Power to make regulations. 
67. Notifications, rules and regulations to be laid before Parliameat. 
68. Act to override all other enactments, etc. 
69. Power to remove difficulties. 
70. Savings. 
THE FIRST SCHEDULE. 
THE SECOND SCHEDULE. 

!l 
Bill No. 109 of 1983 
THE LIFE INSURANCE CORPORATIONS BILL, 1<)83 
A 
BILL 
to provide, with a view to the more e11ecti.ve realisation of the objectives 
oJ nationalisatfbn of life insu.rance busineB8, for Vhe dissolu.tion 01-
the Life Insurance Corporation of India and for the estabUshment 
of a number Of corporations for the more efficient carrying on. Of 
the said business and for matters connected therewith OT incidentttb 
thereto. 
WUEREAS the nationalisation of life insurance business in India was 
made by the Life Insurance Corporation Act, 1956 by transferring all 
such business to the Life Insurance Corporation of India established 
under section 3 of that Act; 
AND WliEREAS for the more effective realisation of the objectives of 
such nationalisation, it is necessary to dissolve the said Corporation and 
establish, in its place, a number of corporations for the more efficient 
<!arrying on of the said business; 
BB it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty-fourth Year ot the Republic 
10 of India as folloW1:-
CHAPI'ER I 
PRl:LIMINABY 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Life Insurance Corporations Act, 
1003. 
15 (2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government 
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 

Definitions. 
Establisb-
ment or Life 
Insurance 
Corporations. 
Z. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
(a.) "Appellate Claims Tribunal" means the Appellate Claiml 
Tribunal constituted under section 27; 
(b) ·'appointed day" means the date on which this Act comes 
into force; 5 
(e) "Board" means the Life Insurance Board constituted under 
section 15; 
(d) "Claims 'rribunal" means a Claims Tribunal constituted 
under section 22; 
(e) "Corporation" means a Life Insurance Corporation est~b- 10 
Hshed under sub-section (1) of section 4; 
(f) "dissolved Corporation" means the Life' Insurance Corpora-
tion of India which shall stand dissolved by virtue of section 3; 
(g) "Insurance Act" means the Insurance Act, 1938; 4 of 1931. 
(11) "Life Insurance Act" means the Life Insurance Corporation 15 
Act, 1956; 31 of 1956. 
(i) "notification" means a notification published in the Official 
Vazette; 
(j) "policy of life insurance" means a contract of insurance 
upon human life and includes any other con~ract, the business of 20 
effecting whereof constitutes life insurance business in accordance 
with the provi'sions of clause (11) of section 2 of the Insurance Act; 
(k) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this 
Act; 
(0 "Service Matters Tribunal" means a Service Matters Tribu- 25 
nai constituted under section 31; 
(m) words and expressions used in this Act but not defined 
herein and defined in the Insurance Act shall have the meaning:; 
respect.ively assigned to them in the Insurance Act. 
3. (1) On the appointed day, subject to the other provisions of this ~o 
Act, the Life Insurance Corporation of India established under section 
3 of ·the Life Insurance Act shall stand diS'solved and the said Act shall 
stand repealed. ~. 
(2) The capital provided to the dissolved Corporation by the Central 
Government, and the officers. other employees and insurance agents 35 
of, and the assets, rights and liabilities of, the dissolved Corporation 
immediately before the appointed day, and all other matters relating 
to the said Corporation, shall be dealt with in accordance with the 
provisions of the First Schedule. 
CHAPTER II 
.l!;STABLlSHMENT OF LIFE INSURANCE CoRPORATIONS AND THEIR CAPITAL 
4. (1) There shall be established with eft'ect from the appointed day, 
the following Life Insurance Corporations, namely:-
(i) the Central Life Insurance Corporation of India, with Its 
Head Office at Kanpur; 45 
(14) the Eastern Life Insurance Corporation of India, with It. 
Head Office at Calcutta. 

5 
3 
(iii) the Northern Life Inl'lurance Corporation of India, with its 
Head Office at Delhi; 
(iv) the Southern Life Insurance Corporation of India, with iots 
Head Office at Madras; 
(v) the Western Life Insurance Corporation of India, with its 
Head Office at Bombay. 
(2) Each Corporation shall be a body corporate having perpetual suc-
cession and a common seal with power, subject to the provisions of this 
Act, to acquire, hold and dispose of property, and Ito contract, and may by 
10 its name sue and be sued. 
5. (1) The authorised capital of each Corporation shall be rupees five Capital. 
crores. 
(2) The sum 0·[ rupees one crore which, by virtue of paragraph 2 of 
the First Schedule, becomes transferred to each Corporation shall be 
J:1 deemed to be the paid-vp capital provided to such Corporation by the 
Central Ciovernment. 
(3) The Central Governmeat may, on the recommendation of a Cor-
poration, increase or reduce the paid-up capital of such Corporation to 
such extent and in such maDDer as that Government may determine, 
20 so, however, that the amount of the paid-up capital _hall not be so 
Increased as to exceed the authorised capital thereof. 
G. (1) Each Corporation. shall consist of such number of members, 
not exceeding sixteen, as the Central Government may think fit to 
appoint theret.o, and one of them shall be appointed by the Central Gov-
25 ernment to be the Chairman thereof. 
(2) Before appointing a person to be a member of a Corporation, 
. the Central Government shall satisfy itself that such person will have no 
such financial or other interest as is likely to affect prejudicially the 
exercise or performance by him of his functions as a member of that 
~ll) Corporation, and the Central Government shall also satisfy itself, from 
time to time, with respect to every member of a Corporation that he 
has no such interest; and any person who is, or whom the Central Gov-
ernment proposes to appoint as, and who has consented to be, a member 
gf a Corporation shall, whenever required by the Central Government 
35 so to do, furnish to it such information as that Government may consider 
necessary for the performance of its duties under this sub-section. 
(3) A member of a Corporation who is in any way directly or in-
directly interested in a contract made or proposed to be made by that 
Corporation shall, as soon as possible after the relevant circumstances 
40 have come to his knowledge, disclose the nature of his interest in the 
contract to the Corporati'on; and such member shall not take part in any 
deliberation or discussion of the eorporation with respect to that con-
tract. 
(4) It is hereby declared that for the purposes of sub-section (1), 
45 any person holding the office of an Executive Director of a Corporation 
may be appointed as a member of such Corporation and on such appoint-
ment. such person shall function as a member of the Corporation in 
addition to his duties as an Executive Director. 
Constitu-
tion or C0r-
porations. 

j 
i 
f 
P 
tj 
Tenuof 
offic«" ;.nd 
condti on' of 
sel'vice of 
ch"irm,n 
and othor 
members. 
Disqualifi· 
catiooa and 
r.mova.J. 
7. (1) The Chairman and other members of a Corporation (except 
where any person is appointed as an ex officio member thereof) shall 
hold office {or such term, not being less than three years, as may be 
prescribed, and shall be eligible for reappointment for a like term. 
(2) A casual vacancy arising from the death, resignation or other- 5 
wise of a member of a Corporation may be filled up by the fresh ap-
pointment of a person as a member of the Corporation and the person 
so appointed to fill the vacancy shall hold office for the remainder of 
the term of office of the member in whose place he is appointed. 
(:1) If the Chairman or any other member of a Corporation is, for 10 
infirmity or otherwise, incapable of carrying o11;t his duties or is absent 
on leave, the Central Governmen~ may appoint another person to act 
in his place for the period during which such Chairman or other mem-
ber is unable to carry out his duties or is absent on ·leave. 
(4) The Chairman of a Corporation shall be entitled to receive such 15 
salary and allowances, and shall be subject to such conditions of service 
in respect of leave, pension, provident fund and other matters, as may 
be prescribed and the other members of a Corporation shall be entitled 
to such allowances as may be prescribed. 
8. (1) No person shall be eligible to be appointed, or to continue, as 20 
a member of a Corporation, or of the Board, who--
(a) is, or at any time has been, adjudicated as insolvent or has 
suspended payment of his debts or has compromised with his credi-
tors; or 
(b) is of upsound mind and stands so declared by a competent 25 
court, or 
(c) is. Or has been, convicted of an offence Which, in the opinion 
of the Cent.ral Government, involves moral turpitude. or 
(d) is, or at any time has been, convicted of an offence under 
W~Acl.M ~ 
(e) has so abused, in the opinion of the Central Government, 
his position as a member of the Corporation. or of the Board~ as to 
render his continuance as such member, detrimental to the interests 
of the Corporation. or of the Board. as the case may be. 
(2) The Central Government shall, by order in writing, remove from 35 
office any member of a Corporation or of the Board who is, or has 
become, subject to any disqualification specified in SUb-section (1): 
Provided that no such removal shall be made unless the member 
concerned has been given a reasonable opportunity of showing cause 
against the proposed action. 40 
~3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (I), or sub-
sectIon (2) ,-
(a) the Central Government may terminate the appointment of 
the Chairman of a Corporation after giving him notice in writing 
of not less than three months without assigning any reason; 45 

(b) the Chairman of a Corporation may resign his ofllce by 
g:ving notice to the Central Government in writing of not less than 
three months without assigning any reason. 
CHAPTER III 
FUNCTIONS OF LIFE INSURANCE CORpORATIONS 
t. (1) ~ubjec~ to the rules, if any, made by the Central Government 
in this behalf, and the o~her provisions of this Act, it shall be the 
general duty of each Corporation to carry on life insurance busineu, 
whether in or outside India, and each such Corporation, shall-
10 (a) be primarily responsible for the intensive development of 
life insurance business within the Zone, and, in particular. in the 
Divisions within the Zone, specified, or deemed to be speclfted, In. 
the corresponding entries against its name in the Second Schedule; 
and 
15 (b) so exercise its powers under this Act as to secure that Ute 
insurance business is developed to the best advantage of the com ... 
munity. 
Ezplan4tion I-For the purposes of this sub-section. and of seet:lon 
11, "Zone" means a Zone specified in the Life Insurance Corporation 
ao Regulations, 1959, as in force immediately before the appointed clay. and 
"Division" means a Division specified against a Zone in the correspond ... 
ing entry in column III of the Second Schedule, and includes such other 
Division as may be established, within a Zone, after the appointed day, 
and on such establishment. such Division shall be deemed to be included 
as in the corresponding entry in column III of the Second Schedule. 
Ezpla.na.tion II.-The territorial limits of each Division specified in 
column III of the Second Schedule shall, until they are duly altered 
under this Act, be such as were specified, immediately before the 
appointed day, by the dissolved Corporation, and the territorial limits 
SO of any Division established after the appointed day shall be INch 88 
may be specified by the concerned Corporation. 
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provisions 
ot this section, but subject to the other provisions of this Act, each Cor .. 
poratlon shall have power-
35 (a.) to carry on capital redemption business, annuity certain 
business or reinsurance business in so far as such reinsurance bus! ... 
ness appertains to life insurance business; 
(b) subject to the rules. if any, made by ithe Central Govern ... 
ment in this behalf, to invest the funds of the Corporation in such 
fO manner as the Corporation may think fit and to take all such steps 
as may be necessary or expedient for the protection or realisation 
of any investment, including the takin~ over of, and administering. 
allY property offered as securitv for the inves~ment until •• ulbble 
opportunity arises for its dispoBat; 
" (c) to aequire, hold and dispose of any property for the ftW'POI8 
"t!lf.ita business; 
(II) to transfer the whole or any part of the lif. mlUHliee 
'buliness" earned on by it outstne India to aJ'lY other M1'SOn or 1'M'-
IOftI If in the interest of the Corporation it is expediet 10 te 40; 

6 
(e) to advance or lend money upon the security of any movable 
or immovable property or otherwise; 
(t) to borrow or raise any money in such manner and upon such 
security as the Corporation may think fit; 
(g) to carry on any other buslneu in any case where IUch other 5 
business was being carried on, immediately before the appointed 
day, by the dissolved Corporation; 
(fl.) to carryon, with the prior approval of the Central Govern-
ment any other business which may seem to the Corporation to be , 10 
capable of being conveniently carried on in connection with its bust· 
. ness and calculated directly or indirectly to render profitable the 
business of the Corporation; 
(i) to do ~ such things u may be incidental, or conducive, to 
the proper exercise of any of the powers of the Corporation. 
(3) In the discharge of any of its functions, each Corporation shaD 15 
act, 80 far as may be, on business principles. 
(4) Each Corporation shall. in the discharge of its functions under 
this Act, be guided by such directions in matten of policy involving pub-
Hc interest as the Central Government may give to it in writing; and if 
any ques~ion arises whether a direction relates to a matter of poUcy 110 
involving public interest, the decision of the Central Government there-
on shan be final. • 
10. (1) In entering into any arrangement with any concero, a Corpo-
ration may impose such conditions as it may think necessary or 
expedient for protecting the interest of that Corporation and for 115 
ensuring that the accommodation granted by it fa put to the best UIe 
by the concern. 
(2) Where any arrangement entered into by a Corporation with 
any concern provides for the appointment by that Corporation 
of one or more directors of such concern, such provision and any So 
appoin~ment 'of directors made in pursuance thereof shall be valid 
and effective notwithstanding anythinR to the contrary contained in the 
Companies Act, 1956, or in any other law for the time befng in foree or 1 ~ l_ 
in the memorandum. articles of association or any o~her instrument re-
lating to the concern, and any provision relfBrdtng share qualification, S5 
age limit, number of dfrectorshlps, removal from oftlee of directors and 
such like conditions contained in any such law or instrument, shall not 
apply to any director appoiJlted by the Corporation in pursuance of the 
arrangement as aforesaid. 
(3) Any director appointed u aforesaid,-
(a) shall hold office during the pleasure of the C011)oration by 
which he was so appointed and may be remeved, or substituted by 
any other person, by order in writing by that Corporation; 
(b) shall not incur any oblf~ation or liability by realon only of 
his being a director or for anything done or omitted to be done In 45 
good faith in the discharge of hiB dutfe8 a •• director or for aDythm • 
. dOne in relation thireto; 

7 
(e) shall not be Uable to retirement by r?tation and the exIst.-
ence of such director shall not be taken into account while compu-
ting the number of directors liable to such retirement. 
CHAPl'ER IV 
5 MANAGEMDn' 
lL (1) The Head Oftlce of each Corporation shall be at the place 
specified in relation to it in section 4. 
(2) Each Corporation may establish as many Divisional Offices, 
Branches :md other offices within the Zone specified against its name in 
10 the Second Schedule as it may think fit: 
• Provided that a Corporation may establish, with the previOUl 
approval of the Central Government, any Divisional Oftice, .Branch 
Oftice or other oftice at any place outside the Zone specified against it in 
the Second Schedule. 
1$ J.2. (1) The Chairman of a Corporation shall be the Managing Direc-
tor thereof and shall, subject to such general or special directions as the 
Corporation or the Executive Committee constituted under sub-section 
(1) of section 13, may from time to time give, exercise all such powers 
AI may be exercised, and do all S'\1ch acts and things as may be done, by 
80 the Corporation. 
(2) The Chairman of a Corporation shall be the President of each 
Committee of the Corporation constituted undeI: section 13 and shall, 
in hi. capacity as the Managing Director of the Corporation, carry out 
the advice of the Investment Committee, constituted under sub-section 
15 (2) of section 13, in regard to investments of the funds of the 
Corporation: 
Provided that it shall be open to the Chairman to reserve the question 
of any such advice on any particular item, for consideration by the 
Corporation. 
So IS. (1) Each Corporation may constitute an Executive Committee 
consisting of its Chairman and not more than six and not less than four 
of its other members and may entrust to that Committee the general 
superintendence and the direction of the affairs and business of the 
Corporation and the Executive Committee 80 constituted may exercise 
S~ all the powers and do all such acts and things, as may be delegated to it 
by the Corpora:ion by which it is constituted. 
(2) Each Corporation may also constitute an Investment Commit. 
tee for the purpose of advising it in matters relating to the invesf;ment 
of its funds, and the Investment Committee shall consist of the Chair-
40 man of the Corporation and not more than eight and not less than six 
other members of whom not less than four shall be members of that 
Corporation and the remaining members shall be persons (whether 
\ members of that Corporation or not) who have special Imowledge ot, 
and experience in, financial matters, particularly matters relating to 
,~ investment of funds. 
(3) Each Corporation may constitute such other Committees u it 
lJl8y think fit for the purpoae of diseharglnl such of its functions u may 
M dele,ated to them. 
OWrmaD 
to be the 
ManII,iDl 
Direclor. 

8 
(4) The members ot a Committee constituted under thie teetloD, 
other than the members of the concerned Corporation, shall be paid such 
fees and allowances as may be prescribed, for attending its meetinga 
and tor any other work of the Corporation. 
(5) A Committee to which any powers or functions are delegated 5 
under this section by any Corporation shall exercise those powers or 
discharge those functions in the same manner and with the same effect 
.. if they had been conferred on such Committee directly by this 
Aet and not by way of delegation. 
14. (1) Each Corporation may, with the approval of the Central Gov- 10 
ernment, appoint one or more persons to be the Executive Directors ot 
the Corporation, and every ExeC'Utive Director so appointed shall be 
a whole-time officer of the Corporation. 
(2) Every Executive Director shall exercise such powers and per-
form such duties, as may be entrusted or delegated to him by the EX8- 15 
cu~ive Committee or the Corporation. 
(3) Subject to the rules, if any, made by the Central Government 
in this behalf, each Corporation may also employ a Secretary and such 
number of other officers and employees as may be necessary for the pur--
pose of enabling it to discharge its functions under this Act. SlO 
(4) The terms and conditions of service of the Executive Directors, 
Secretary and other officers and employees of a Corporation shall be 
such as may be prescribed. 
(5) Every person employed by a Corporation or whose services have 
been transferred to a Corpora ~ion under this Act, shall be liable to serve 25 
anywhere in India. 
(6) Any Executive Director to whom any powers and duties are 
delegated by any Corporation or ExeC'Utive Committee thereof, shall 
exercise those powers or perform those duties in the same manner and 
w~th the ~e effect, as if they had been conferred on such ExeC'Lltlve 30 
Dll'ector directly by this Act and not by way of delegation. 
CHAPTER V 
THE LIFE INSURANCE BOARD 
IS. (1) The Central Government may, by notification, constitute a 
Board, to be called the L.fe Insurance Board, consis .ing of- 35 
(a) the Chairman of each Corporat:on, ex officio) and 
(b) such number of other members, not exceeding eleven, as the 
Central Government may think fit to appoint thereto. 
(2) The office of the Board shall be at New Delhi. 
(3) One of ~he members of the Board shall be appointed by the 40 
Central Government to be the Chairman thereof. 
(4) Before appointing a person to be a member of the Board the 
Central Government shall satisfy Uself that such person will hav~ no 
luch ~ancial or other in~erest as is likely to affect prejudicially the 
exerCIse or performance by him of his functions as a member thereof, 45 
• 

9 
and the Central Government shall also satisfy itself, from time to time, 
with respect to every member of the Board thft he has no such interest, 
and any person who is, or whom the Central Government proposes to 
appoint as, and who has consented to be, a member of the Board shall, 
5 whenever required by the Central Government so to do, furnish to ii 
such information as the Central Government may consider necessary lor 
the performance of its duties under this S'Ub-section. 
(5) A member of the Board who is in any way directly or indirectly 
interested in a contract made or proposed to be made by anyone or 
10 more of the Corporations shall, as soon as possible after the relevant 
circumstances have come to his knowledge, disclose the nature of his 
interest in the contract to the Board and to the Central Government 
and such member shall not take par,t in any deliberation or discussion 
of the Board with respect to that contract. 
15 16. (1) A member of the Board, other than an ex officio member 
::zo 
thereof, shall hold office for such term, not being less than three years, 
as may be prescribed and shall be eligible for reappointment for a like 
term. 
(2) NotWithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1) ,-
(a) the Central Government may terminate the appointment of 
a member of the Board (other than an ex officio member) at any 
time before the expiry of the term of office fixed under sub-section 
(1) by giving him a notice in writing of not less than three months, 
and \I._ 
(b) every such member (other than an ex officio member) may 
resign his membership of the Board at any time before the expiry of 
the term of his office by giving to the Central Government a notice 
in writing of not less than three monthll. 
(3) A casual vacancy arising from the death, resignation or otherwise 
30 of a member of the Board may be ftlled by fresh appointment and the 
person appointed to fill the vacancy shall hold office for the remainder 
of the term of office of the member in whose place he is appointed. 
(4) If the Chairman or any other member of the Board, is, for 
infirmity or otherwise, incapable of carrying out his duties or is absent 
35 on leave, the Central Government may appoint another person to act 
in his place for the period during which such Chairman or other 
member of the Board is unable to carry out his duties or is absent on 
leave. 
(5) A person appointed as a whole-time member of the Board shall 
40 be entitled t.o. receive such salary and allowances, and shall be subject 
to such condItions of service in relation to leave, pension, provident fund 
and other matters as may be prescribed, and a person appointed as a 
part-time member of the Board shall be entitled to such allowances and 
shall he !;ubject to such other conditions of service as may be determined 
45 by the Central Government. . 
17. (1) The Board may constitute as many Committees consisting 
wholly of members of the Board or wholly of other persons or partly 
of members of the Board and partly of other persons and for such pur-
pOles as it may deem fit. 
Conditions 
of servico 
oflllClDbm 
of tho 
Board. 
Committee. 
of the 
Board. 

Mootinp 
or the 
Board. 
~ and other 
ataft'orthe 
Board. 
Puactions 
or tho 
Board. 
to 
(2) The members of a Committee (other than the members of a Cor-
poration or of the Board) shall be paid such fees and allowances as may 
be prescribed, for a~dini its meetingJ and for attending to any other 
work of the Board. 
18. (1) For the purposes of this Act, the Board or any Committe. of 5 
the Board shall meet at such times and places and shall observe such 
rules of procedure in regard to the transaction of business at ita meetings 
as may be prescribed. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), a member 
of the Board who has any direct or indirect pecuniary interest in any 10 
matter [other than a contract referred to in sutHlection (5) of section 15], 
coming up for consideration at a meeting of the Board or a Committee 
thereof shall, as soon as possible after the relevant circumstances have 
come to his knowledge, disclose the nature of his interest in respect of 
that matter at such meetingj and such member shall not take part i.o. 15 
any deliberation or discuuion of the Board or the Committee with 
respect to that matter. 
19. (1) The Board may appoint a Secretary and such other officeH and 
employees as may be neceuary for the performance. of ita functions. 
(2) The terms and conditions of service of the Secretary and other gO 
officers and employees of the Board shall be such as may be prescribed. 
20. (1) S'Ubject to the other provisions of thil Act and the rule. mad. 
thereunder, the Board shall, from time to ttime, review the functioning 
of each of the Corporations and render such service to any Corporation 
as it may deem fit for the promotion of such measures as are, in Ita 2') 
opinion, conducive to the development of life insurance businell. 
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the ,enerality of the fore-
going provisions, the Board may-
(a) suggest measures for co-ordinatini the workins of the Cor-
porations; 30 
(b) plan and or,anise tra1DJ.n.g ot-
(i) persons included in the management cadres end lay 
down norms for trainin, of varioua pe1'IODI in varioua otbar 
cadres, and 
(ii) insurance agents; 
(c) inspect at all reasonable timet the offtcei of any Corporation; 
(d) provide for research and evaluation of life inlurance lChelD8l; 
(e) provide assistance and guidance in relation to the followin,. 
namely:-
.. 
(i) mortality and actuarial investigation on all·India basis 40 
in respect of assured lives, annuitants, impaired lives, lives 
covered under group insurance and pension schemes and fixation 
of underwri ~ing standardsj 
(ii) researc~ an~ development of new plans for intensive de--
velopment of life msurance business and for meetin, specific 45 
insur~~ce needs of various sections of the community; 
(lU) co-ordinating the activities in the matter of conducting 
periodical actuariMJ. evaluations; 

11 
(I) review procedurems and practices in the working of the 
Corporations at all levels; 
(g) perform such other functions u may be prescribed. 
Zl. (1) The Central Government may, from time to time, by general 
or special order and subject to any rules that may be made in this behalf, 
5 direct each Corporation, having regard to the premium income of that 
Corporation and other relevant considerations, to pay to the Board such 
amount as it may determine for meeting t!!e expenditure of the Board. 
(2) If any defr.ut is made by any Corporation in making payment 
10 to the Board of the whole or any part of the amount determined by the 
Central Government under su~sectlon (1), such amount shan be re-
coverable in the same manner and to the same extent as if it were a 
decree passed by the civil court within tae local limits of whose jurisdic-
tion the Head. ()f8ce of that Corporation is situated. 
CHAP1'ER VI 
CoJiSi1l'U'hO'H OP TluauN'AI8 
12. (1) The CeatraJ Government shell, as IOOD as may be after tbe 
appointed day, by notification, cOIIIBtitute u many Claims Tribunals as 
It may deem necellSllry for deciding disputes with respect to claims under 
110 pelicleB of DIe iasuranee. 
(2) Each Claims Tribunal shall consist of ODe member, or where the 
Central Government is of opiDloD that such TrIbunal shall consist of 
more than one member, such number of members, not being less than 
three, u the Central Government may thlak fit to appoint. 
115 (3) Where a Claims Tribunal coasists of ODe member, that member 
shall be a person who Is holcl.ing, or has held, for not lea than seven yean, 
a judicial office in the territory of India or is, or has been, a member 
of the Indian Legal Service, and is holding, or has held, a post not below 
a post in Grade D of that Service, and where the Claims Tribunal consists 
go of more than one member, not less than one of the members of such 
Tribunal shall be a penoD qualified as aforesaid, and the remaining 
member or members lhall he appofated from amongst serving officers of 
a rank not below that of a Director to the Government of India or of 
.. equivalent rank tmder a State Govemment or aD insurance corpora-
35 dOD or the Baud. 
(4) Where the number 01. members of a Claims Tribunal is more than 
Olle, the CeIltral Government ahalI appoint olle of those members to be 
the PresideDt of that Triltunal, who shall preside over the meetings of 
that Tribtmal, and In the abl8llce of the Prelddent, the HDiormOlt mem-
40 her of the Tribunal ,hall preside over Itl meetinp. 
Explanation L ...... For the Parpolell of tide MdIon ad of eections 21 and 
II, "inlurance eorpontllDA" .......... 
(.)the cIIuoIved Corporatioa; 
(b) a c.poraUoa .. bUshed .... this Act; 
FiuaDces or 
'ho Board. 
Power of 
Central 
Gov(,rnment 
to COII$titute 
Oaiml 
Tribunals. 

Territorial 
limit. of the 
jurillCiiction 
or Claim. 
TribWlJ.1. 
u 
(c) the General Iasurmee CorporatlOD ...... under the General 
Insurance Busmess (NationalisatiOD) Act, 1.7Z, or aDy of its lubsl- 57 .r 197J, 
diaries. 
Explanation H.-In eomputiDg, for the PUl'pOlell of this seetioD aWid ef 
sections 27 and 31, the period during which a penon h.. held judicial 5 
office in the territory of India, there shall he mcluded my period, after 
he has held any judicial office, during which the penon hils beeD prac-
tising as an adl"ocate or has held the ofllce of • member of a tribunal or 
any post under the Unioi' or a State, requiriar apeelal Imowledre of law. 
(5) Any vacancy in the member-hlp of a Claims Tribunal shall be 10 
fllled up by the Central Government as soon .. prac:ticahle. 
23. (1) The Central Government shall, from time to time, define, by 
notification. the territorial limits withfn which a Claims Tribunal 
shall exercise its jurisdiction and where two or more Claims Tribunals 
have jurisdiction over the same territoral limits, the Central Govem- 15 
ment shall also provide, by notification, the distribution or allocation 
of work to be done by each of them. 
(2) Each Claims Tribunal shall have jurisdiction to decide all c:Ji8. 
putes with respect to maturity claims or death claims under policies of 
life insurance, arising within the territorial limits of its jurlsdictk 
(3) Where a claimant has more than one maturity claim or death claim 
under policies of life insurance, he shall. while making any claim before 
a Claims Tribunal, include. in the application made by him under sec:-
tion 24, all the claims which he is entitled to make before such Tribunal: 
Provided that he may. if he so desires, relinquish any portion of his l35 
~~ . 
Explanation.-·For the purposes of this sub-section, "maturity claim" 
meAns a claim under a policy of life in!ftlrance in relation to whIch 
there is no douH or dispu+e as to the compliance of all the terms and 
conditions of such policy of life insurance, including the payment of all, 30 
premia payable thereunder. 
(4) If the claimant fails or omits to include, in the application made 
by him under section 24, all his claims or relinqUishes any portion of 
his claim. he shall not be entitled thereafter to make any application 
relatin~ to any claim which he has 80 omitted to include in the appli- 35 
cation aforesaid or which he has so relinquished, and where any a1)1)li. 
cation under section 24 has been adjudicated upon by the Claims 
Tribunal or the Appellate Claims Tribunal, the claimant shall be debarred 
from instituting- any suit or other le~aI proceeding' in relation to any 
claim which he has failed or omitted ~o include in such application or 40 
which hall bM!! .0 reUnquiahed by him. 
(5) Where a cla.imant ho made e'"im. b.fore dffPe"ent ClI,fm" Tri-
bun,,'s. havinl! ;urisdfct'on. he mav alllllv to anv of the said Tribunals 
to make an order, so that all the r.l"imll made bY htm mav ·be heard by 
a sin"l"! """"Ullll1. and the1"4!u\')f)l\ t"e Trlbunll' in wlti'el't melt a""1if!a~ 4S 
tion is made mav bv order determine """'ell of flip. .af,. Trlbunal. shall 
deal with a11 the claims and transf8!' to meb Trtbunal the e1atms 
pending with the other Trlbunalt and the Trlbu:a.1l1 to which the claims 

5 
13 
are l:1O transferred shall deal with each such claim from the stage which 
was reached before the Tribunal from which the claim has been so 
transferred. 
U. (1) Any person aggrieved by-
(a) the decision of a Corporation rejecting the whole or any 
par,t of the maturity or death claim made by him under any: policy 
of life insurance, or 
(b) the omission or failure of a Corporation to give its decision, 
within six months from the date of the application, on the whole or 
10 any part Of the maturity or death claim made by him, under any 
policy of like insurance, 
may make an application to the Claims Tribunal having jurisdiction for 
the determination of his claim and for the grant of such relief as the 
Tribunal may think fit. 
15 (2) Every application made under sub-section (1) shall be made in 
'4~h torm, be verified in such manner, and be accompanied by sucl:l fee, 
not exceeding fiVe hundred rupees, as· may be prescribed on a graded 
.cale depending on the value of the claim. 
(:-/) An application, under S'ub-section (1), for the determination of 
!W a claim shall be made,-
(a) in the case of a decision referred jto in clause (a) of that 
Bub-section, within a period of ninety days from the date on which 
the decision of the Corporation rejecting the claim, whether in 
whole or m part, was communLca~ed to the applicant; 
25 (b) in the case of any omission or failure referred to in clause 
(b) of that sub-section, within a period of ninety days computed 
from the date on which the said period of six months expires: 
Provided that the Claims Tribunal may admit any such application 
after the expiry of the said period of ninety days if it i'S satisfied that 
30 the applicant was prevented by sufficient cause from making the appli-
cation within the said period. 
(4) A:ny person referred to in sub-section (1) may, instead of mak-
ing an application to a Claims Tribunal under sub-section (1), institute 
a suit: or commence any other legal proceeding in a civil court having 
35 juriEdiction for the recovery of any amount due in respect of a maturity 
claim or deah claim under any policy of life insurance or for any other 
relief in relation to such claim, and where any such suit or other legal 
proceeding is instituted or commenced, no Claims Tribunal shaU have 
jurisdiction to entertain any application in relation to the maturity claim 
40 or death claim under any policy of life insurance in relation to which 
such suit or other legal proceeding has been instituted or commenced, 
unle~s such suit or other legal proceeding is withdrawn, within the 
period specified in sub-section (3), by the person by whom it was 
instituted or commenced or, if he has died before the expiry of the said 
45 period, by his legal representative. 
(5) Where a suit or other legal proceeding referred to in sub-·section 
(4) is withdrawn within the period specified in sub-section (3), the 
aggrieved person may make, within the said period, an application 
under lub-section (1) to the Claims Tribunal having jurisdiction for the 
AppIk:a-
tiODl td 
CIIdma 
Tribunala. 

ii.nches 
of Oaims 
TribwW. 
Orden .)1' 
Claims 
Tribunals. 
Power of 
Central 
GovernmeDl 
to constitute 
an AppeIJatiI 
Claims 
TribunaL 
14 
d.etermination of his claim and for : he grant of such reliel as the tri-
bunal may deem fit and on such application being made, the Tribunal 
shall have j'Urisdiction to deal with the matter. 
(6) No suit Or other legal proceeding shall lie in a civil court in 
respect of any matter which is pending before, or which has been de- 5 
cided by, a Claims Tribunal or the Appellate Claims Tribunal. 
25. The powers and functions of a Claims Tribunal may be exer-
cised and discharged by Benches constituted by the President of thQlt 
Tribunal, from amongst the members thereof: 
Provided that the President of the Claims Tribun~l, or any other 10 
member of such Tribunal authorised in this behalf by the President of 
that Tribunal, may, sitting singly, dispose of any claim which has been 
allotted to a Bench of which he is a member, where the amount of the 
claim does not exceed twenty-five thousand rupees. 
26. (1) A Claims Tribunal may, after giving the parties to the ap- 15 
plication an opportunity of being heard, pass such orders thereon as it 
may think fit, confirming, modifying or annulling the decision or order 
against whiCh such application has been made or may remand the case 
to the Corporation by which such decision or order was made, with 
such directions as the Claims Tribunal may think fit, for fresh ad- 20 
judication or decision, as the case may be, of the claim. after taking 
additional evidence, if necessary, or may grant such relief as may be 
just and proper in the circumstances of the case. 
(2) A Claims Tribunal shall send a copy of every order passed by it 
under sub-section (1), to the parties to the application. 25 
(3) An order passed by j1.he Claims Tribunal under sub-section (1) 
shall, subject to the decision of the Appellate Claims Tribunal, if any, be 
final. 
27. (1) The Central Government shall, as soon as may be after the 
appointed day, by notification, constitute an Appellate Tribunal, to be 30 
called the Appellate Claims Tribunal, consisttng of 88 many judicial and 
technical members, not being less than three, as it may think 8t, for 
deciding appeals preferred under section 28. 
(2) A judicial member of an Appellate Claims Tribunal shall be a 
person who has, for not less than: ten years, held a judicial office in the 95 
territory of India or l .. , or has been, a member of the Indian Legal Service, 
and i- holding, or has held, for not less than three years, a post not below 
a post in Grade I of that Service; and a technical member of an Appellate 
Claims Tribunal shall be a person who is or has been an officer of a 
rank not below that of a Joint Secrci:ary to the Government of India or 40 
of anequival .. nt rank under a State Government or an Insurance cor· 
poration or the Board. 
(3) The Centrul Government shall appoint one of the members 01 the 
Appellate Claims Tribunal to be the President thereof. 
(4) The Central Government may appomt one or more members o' 45 
the Appellate Claims Tribunal to be the Vice-President, or, 8S the case . 
DUly be, Vice.PrC!lidents, thereof. 

15 
(5) The Viee-President of the Appellate Claims Tribunal shan ezer-
eise 'Sueh of the power,; tIlnd perform such of the functions of the Presi-
dent of the Appellate Claims Tribunal as may be delegated to him by 
the President of thnt Tribunal by a general or special order in writing. 
5 (6) Any vaeaney in the membership of the Appellate Claims Tribunal 
10 
shall be filled up by the Central Government as lOOn as practicable. 
28. (1) Any person aggrieved by an order passed by a Claims Tri-
bunal under sub-'Section (1) of section 26 may prefer an appeal to th!e 
Appellate Claims Tribunal against such order. 
(2) Every memorandum of appeal to the Appellate Claims Tribunal 
shall be in 'Such form, be verified in such manner and be accompanied 
by such fee, not exceeding five hundred rupees, as may be prescribed 
on a graded scale depending on the value of the claim.. 
(3) Every appeal under this section shall be filed within sixty days 
15 trom the date on which the order sought to be appealed against was 
communicated to the appellant: 
Provided that the Appellate Claims TribUnal may admit an appeal 
after the expiry of the aforesaid period of sixty days if it i'8 satiSfted 
that the appellant was prevented by sufficient cause from preferring 
10 the appeal within the said period. 
29. (1) The Appellate Claims Tribunal may, after giving the parties 
to the appeal a reasonable opportunity of being heard, pass such orders 
thereon 3S it may think fit, c(lnfirming, modifying or annulling the order 
appealed a~ainst or may remand the case to the Claims Tribunal which 
15 had passed such order. with such directions to the Claims Tribunal as 
the Apoellate Claims Tribunal may think fit, for fresh adjudication of 
the claim, after taking additional evidence, if necessary. 
(2) The Appellate Claim'S Tribunal shall send a COpy of every order 
passed by it under sub-section (1). to the parties to the appeal. 
30 (3) Everv order passed under sub-section (1), other than an order 
remandin~ the case to the Claims Tribunal, shall be final and shall 
not be called in q';1estion in any court except by wav of a petition 
under article 32, or article 136, Or article 226. of the Constitution. 
Appeals to 
tho 
AppeUato 
Claims 
Tribunal. 
0rcI0r of 
the 
APJ?OlIate CJaims 
Tribunal. 
38. (1) The powers and functions of the Appellate Claims Tribunal 
35 may be exercised and discharged hy Benches constituted by the Presi·, 
dent of the Appellatp Claims Tribunal from amongst the members 
thereof: 
Benches 
of the 
Appellat~ 
Claims 
Tribunal 
Provided that tne President of the Appellate Claims Tribunal. or 
any other member of such Tribunal authorised in this behalf by the 
40 President of th'3't Tribunal, may, sitting' singly. di'Spose of any appeal 
which has been all'otted to a Bench of which he is a member. where 
the claim involved in such appeal does not exceed fifty thou<;and rupees. 

Power 
of Cen-
tral Gov-
ernment 
to coneti-
tute 
Service 
Matters 
Tribunals. 
18 
(Z) Subject to the provisions of sub-sectioD (1) , and sub-eecti01l 
(3), a Bench shall consist of not less than one juC!icial member and Dot 
less than one technical member. 
(3) Where, before or after the hearing of an appeal, a Bench whe-
ther consisting of a single member or more than one member, is 5 
satisfied that such appeal involves-
(a) a substantial question of law of general importance, or 
(b) a question which is likely to affect the interests of any 
Corporation or the dissolved Corporation or the policy-holders 
generally, 10 
it may either of its own motion or on the application of any of the 
parties, draw up a statement of the facts of the case and the point 
which, in its opinion, involtTes any such question and tefex- such appeal, 
together with such statement, to the President of the Appellate Clalmw 
Tribunal with a request to him to constitute a Special Bench for hear- 15 
lng the appeal, and on receipt of such reference, the President of the 
Appellate Claims Tribunal shall constitute a Special Bench, which shaD 
consist of not less than three members, of whom not less than one 'Shan 
be a judicial member and not less than one shall be a technical mem- 20 
ber. 
(4) The Special Bench, after hearing the parties if they appear and 
desire to be heard, shall decide the appeal SCI referred to it, and shan 
transmit a copy of its order to the Bench by which the reference was 
made to it. 
(5) The CO'Sts (if any) consequent on a reference for the decision 25 
of the Special Bench shall be the costs in the case. 
31. (1) The 'Central Govemment shall, as soon as may he after the 
appointed day, by notification, constitute as many Service Matters Tri-
bunals all it may deem neeessar\v for dealing with the applications made 
under section 32 for the redressal of the grievances relating to IIervke go 
matters. . , f I 
(2) A Service Matte", Tribunal may consist of one mem.1ter, or 
where the Central Government is of opinion that such Trlhunal shan 
consist of more than one member, such number of members, not heing 
less than three, as fhl" Central Govemment may think ftt to appoint. 35 
(3) Where a Service Matters Tribunal consists of one mem1ter, that 
mem1ter shall he a person who is holding, or bas h~ld, for not less than 
seven years, R jlldiMal ofllce in the territory of India or Is, or h8~ been, a 
member of the Indian Lepl Servlce~ and is holding, or has held, a post 
not helow a 'Post in Grade n of that Service, and where the Santee 40 
Matters Tribunal con!lllst~ of more than one member, not Ids than one of 
the memben of such Trlllunal!llhal11Je a penon who Is quallfted 88 atore-
said and the remalnini member or memben "hall be appointed fJ40lD 
amort~t wervlng ofRt'er!ll who have hAd ~rience In dealing with servlee 
matte"" being officerll! of a rank not below that of a Director to the Gov- 45 
emment of India 01' of an equivalent rank under a State Government 01' 
"n inllurance corporation or the Board. 

l' 
(4) Whe", the number of members of a Service Matten Tribunal is 
more· th.., 'one, the Central Government shan appoint one of those 
members to be thE! President of that Tribunal, who shall preside over 
the meetings of that Tribunal, and in the alfsence of the President, the 
5 senlormost memlJer or that Tribunal shall preside over its meetings. 
(5) The Central Govemlment shall, from time to time, define, by 
notification, the territorial IimHs within which a Service Matters Tri-
blDlal shall exerdse its jurisdiction, and where two or more 
ServIce Matters Tribunals have jurisdiction over the same territorial 
10 limits, the CentJ'al Govel'lUDe1it shall also provide, by notification, the 
distribution or aDocatton of work to be done by each of them. 
(6) Ally vacaney In the membership of a Service .Matters Tribunal 
shall be filled up by the Central Government as soon as practicable. 
3Z. (1) In this section,-
(a) "service matter", in relation to an employee of It Corpora-
tion, or of the Board, means any matter arising out of the terms and 
conditions of his service; 
(b) "grievance with respect to a service ,matter", in relation 
to an employee of a Corporation or of the Board. means a ~Ie-
110 vance of 'Such employee to the effect that he has not been dealt 
wIth in regard to that service ma1:tler in conformity with the terms 
and conditions of his service: 
(e) "terms and conditions of service", in relation to an em-
plovee of a Corporation or of the Board, means the terms and con-
25 dttions of servit'e. specified bv anv rule, regulation 0" orde.,- made 
, under this Act, for tlie time being in force, and app'icahle to him. 
(!) An employee of a Corporation or of the Board, ag~ieved by-
(a) any decision or order of a Corporation or the Board reject-
ing his I:lpplication or representation for the redressal of his grlev-
30 ance with respect to any serviee matter, or 
(b) the omission or failure of a Corporation or the Board to 
~ve Its decision in relation to any application or representation 
made by him for the redressal of his grievance with respect to any 
service matter, 
35 may make an application to the Service Matters Tribunal. having 
juri'sdietton, for the red'ressal of his grievance with respect to that ser-
vice matter: '.' , 
Provided that no application for the redre'Ssal of any grievance with 
~t to a service matter shall be entertained by the Service Matters 
40 Tribunal until the applicant has exhausted all the remedies available 
to him under the rules, regulations Or orders relating to the terms and 
conditions of his service, for the time being in force, for the redres~"l of 
such grievance,: 
Provided further that the Service Matters Tribunal may. if it is 
45 satisfied that the applicant was prevented by sufficient cause from ex-
hausting all the remedies available to him undm- such rules. regulatfons 
or orders, entertain the' application for the redressa} of such grie,'ance 
even though the applicant had 'lot exhausted all such remedies. 
~ 
of tho 
pteyance 
with rea-
pect to 
-.ice 
matters. 

8enche~ 
of s.-rnc:e 
Matten 
Tribuaa1. 
II 
(3) An application, under sub-section (2), for·the redresaal of the 
grievance of an employee of a Corporation or of the Board with JJ!Spect 
to a service matter shall be made,-
(a) in the case of a decision or order referred to in clause (a) 
of that sub-section, within a period of ninety days from the date on 5 
which the decision of the Corporation or Board rejecting his appli-
cation or representation, as the case may be, was communicated to 
the applicant, 
(b) in the case of any omission or failure referred to in clause 
(b) of that sub-section, within a period of ninety days, computed 10 
from the date of expiry of the period of six months from the date 
on which the application or representation was submitted by him 
to the Corporation or the Board, as the case may be, for the redressal 
of his grievance: 
Provided that the Service Matters TriDunal may admit any such 15 
application after the expiry of the said period of ninety days, it it is 
satisfied that the a"Pplicant was prevented by suftlclent cause from 
making the application within the said period: 
Provided further that where a person who had, before the appointed 
day, flIed with the dissolved Corporation, any application for the re-!ZO 
dressal ot a grievance with respect to a service matter, and the dis-
solwd Corporation had not communicated to such person its decision 
on such application for a period of not less than six months from the 
date on which the application was fUed by him, such person may, 
within ninety days from the appointed day, make an application under 25 
this sub-section to the Service Mat~rs Tribunal having jurisdiction for 
the redressa1 of his grievance.' 
(4) An application under sub-section (Z) shall be made in IUch 
form be verified in such manner and shall be accompanied by such fee, 
not exceedin~ one hundred rupees, as may be prescribed on a graded 30 
scale depend~nJ! on the nature of the grievance. 
(5) NothinJ! contained in this section shall empower any person to 
make any application under sub-section (2)-
(a) if on the date on which the application is made, the insti-
tution or commencement of anv suit or other legal proceeding re- 35 
latin~ to the service matter is barred by any law of limitation for 
the time being in force; or 
(b) jf any suit or other legal proceeding had been instituted or 
commenCE'!d in any court, whether before or after the appointed day, 
with resp:.>ct to an." service matter, unless such suit or other legal 40 
proceedin~ i'S w:thdrawn before the expiry of the period ot limitation 
as aforesaid. 
33. The powers lmd functions of a Service Matters Tribunal may 
be exercised and discharged by Benches constituted b the President 
of that Tribunal from amongst the m~mbers of such Tri~unal: 45 
Provided that the President of the Service Matters Tribunal or any 
other member of such Tribunal authorised in this behalf by the Pr8f. 
deRt of that Tribunal, may, sitting singly, dispose of any· applicatton 

5 ,f 1980. 
45 or .860. 
• • , 19'74· 
i9 
which has been allotted to a Bench of which he is a member, if the sUb-
ject-matter of such application does not relate to reduction in rank, 
suspension, removal or dismissal from service. 
34. (1) A Service Matters Tribunal may, after giving the parties to 
5 the application a reasonable opportunity of being heard, pass such or-
ders thereon as it thinks fit, confirming, modifying or annulling the de-
cision or order against which such application has been made or may 
remand the case to the Corporation or the Board which passed such 
decision or order with such direction as that Tribunal may think fit, for 
10 fresh adjudication or decision, as the case may be after taking addi-
tlonal evidence, if necessary, or may by order grant such relief as may 
be just and proper in the circumstances of the case. 
(2) A Service Matters Tribunal shall send a copy of every order 
passed by it under sub-section (1), to the parties to the application. 
15 (3) Every order passed under tpis section by a Service Matters Tri-
bunal shall be final and ahaJl not be called in question in any court 
except by way of a petition under article 32., or article 136, or article 
~ij, of the Constitution. 
110 
CHAPTER VII 
PROVISIONS APPLICABLE TO ALL TRIBUNALS 
35. (1) For the purposes of discharging its functiOns, every Tribunal 
constituted under thJS Act, (whether it is a Claims Tribunal or the Ap-
pellate Claims Tribunal or a Service Matters Tribunal) shall have the 
same powers as are', vested in a civil court under the Code of Civil Pro-
25 cedure, 1908, while trying a suit, in respect of ,the following matters, 
namely:-
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any witness 
and examining him on oath; 
(b) discovery anq inspection of any document or other material 
30 object producible as evidence; 
(c) compelling the production of books of accounts and other 
documents; 
(d) reception of evidence on affidavits; and 
(e) issuing of any commission for the examination of any wit-
ness. 
(2) Subject to the provisions of this Act and the rules made there-
under, every Tribunal refermd to in sub-section (1), shall have power 
to regulate its own procedure and the procedure of the Benches thereof 
in all matters arising out of the exercise of its powers or of the dis-
40 charge of its functions, inCluding the places at which it or its Benches 
shall hold its, or their, sittings. 
36. Every proceeding before a Tribunal constituted under this Act, 
(whether it is a Claims Tribunal or the Appellate Claims Tribunal or a 
Service Matters Tribunal), shall be deemed to be a judicial proceeding 
45 within the meaning of sections 193 and 228, and for the purposes of 
section 196, of the Indian Penal Code; and every such Tribunal shall be 
deemed to be a civil court fOr the purposes of section 195 and Chapter 
XXVI of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 19'13 . 
Ordora III 
Service 
Mutan 
TnlJuuaJI. 
PoWOI'I III 
Tribunals 
to OIlforce 
attondanco 
of witncBles 
and to r('gu_ 
late their 
own proce-
dure. 
Prooaodinp 
bofore 
Tribunals 
to be judi· 
cial pro-
ceodinp 
for cartain 
pw'pOIa. 

ttr~ure 
where the 
members cr 
• TribuDaI 
difl'c:r in theIr 
opinion. 
M.-bod 01 
dIWmiDa-
tloa 01 
equjWeDt 
nak. 
31, Where a cJ.aim o~ an appeal or an application, relating to a·GieyaDIIU 
with res.pect to a service matter baa been heard by a Claims TribUQal, or 
the Appellate Claims Tribunal, or a Service. Mattera TribUQal, as ~ecase 
may be, or any Bench thereof, consisting of more than one member and 
the -members differ in their opinion on any point, the decision on such 5 
point shall, where there is a majority, be according to the opinion of such 
majority, and where there is no majority and the members are equally 
divided in their opinion, they shall draw up a statement of -the facts of 
the case .:md the point or pOints on which they difter in their opinion and 
make a rc.ference of tthe claim or of the appeal or of the application 10 
relatint to the service matter, as the case may be, to the President of 
8UCh Tribunal, and on receipt of such reference, the President of tbe 
concerned Tribunal shall arrange for the hearing of such point or points 
by one or more of the other members of that Tribunal, and such! 
point or points, or the appeal, shall be decided 8CCQrding ~ the 15 
opinion of the majority of the members of the concerned Tribunal who 
have heard the claim or appeal, or, as the case may be., relating to the 
grievance with ~t to the service matter, including those who had 
first heard it. 
38. In determining, for the purposes of sections 22, 27 and 31, whether 20 
an officer of a State Government or of an insurance corporation or of ,the 
Board holds any rank equivalent to that of a Joint Secretary Or Director 
to the Government of India, regard shall be had to the scale of pay of 
the post held by that officer under the State Government or the insurance 
corporation or the Board,. as the case may be. 25 
39. (1) Subject to such conditions and limitations as may be pres-
cribed, the costs of and incidental to all claims, appeals or applications, 
filed under this Act shall be in the discretion of the Tribunal (whether it 
is a Claims Tribunal or the Appellate Claims Tribunal or a Service 
Matters Tribunal), in which such claim, appeal or application is filed and 30 
the Tribunal shall have full power to determine by whom and to what 
extent ~ch costs are to be paid, and to glveaU-necessary directions for 
the purposes aforesaid, and the fact that the Tribunal has no jurisdic-
tion to deal with the claim or application or hear the appeal shall be no 
bar to the exercise of such powers. 35 
(2) Where any such Tribunal directs that any costs shall not folloy 
the event, the Tribunal shall state its reasons in writing. 
CHAPTER VIII 
FINANCE, ACCOUNTs AND AUDIT 
Pudi 
Corpora-
ti ... 
of 40. Every Corporation shall have its own Fund and aU its receipts 40 
shall be credited thereto and all payments of the Corporation shall be 
made therefrom. 
41. (1) The accounts of every Cor.poration and the accounts of the 
Board shall be audited by auditors duly quaWied to act as audlto1"ll of 
companies under the law for the time being in force relating to com-
panies, and ,the auditors shall be appointed by the Corporation whose 45 
accounts are to be so audited, Or the Board as the case rna be with th . 'y, e prevIOUS approval of the Central Government and shall receive 
such remun~ration from the concerned Corporati~n, or the Board as 
the Central Government ,may tlx. ' 50 

• 
21 
(2) Every auditor in the performance of hi~ duties shall have at all 
reasonable times access to the books, accounts and other documents of 
the concerned Corporation or, as the case may be, of the Board. 
(3) The auditors shall submit their report to the Corporation or, as 
5 tbe cue may be, to the Board, by which tm!y were appointed, and shall 
als., forward a copy of their report to the Central Government. 
42. Every Corporation shall, once at least in every two years, cause 
an investigation to be made by actuaries into the financial condition of 
the life insurance business of the Corporation, including a valuation of 
10 the liabilities of the Corporation in respect thereto, and submit the re-
port of the actuaries to the Central Government. 
43, (1) Every Corporation and the Board shall, as soon as may be, 
after the end of each financial year, prepare and submit to the Central 
Government i:n such form as may be prescribed a report giving an ac-
15 count Of its activities during the previous financial year and shall also 
give an account of the activities, if any, which are likely to be under-
taken by it in the next financial year. 
(2) Every Corporation and the Board shall, in relation to its func-
Uons under this Act, furnish to the Central Government such reports, 
20 returns, statistics, accounts and other information as the Central Gov-
ernment may, from time to time, require . 
.u. If as a result of any investigation undertaken by a Corporation 
under section 42, any surplus emerges, ninety-five per cent. of such sur-
plua or 8uch higher percentage thereof as the Central Government may 
Q5 approve, shall be allocated to or reserved for the life insurance policy-
holders ot the Corporation and, after meeting the liabilities of the Cor-
poration, it any, rt".he remainder shall be paid to the Central Government 
or, it that Government so directs, be utilised for such purposes and in 
lIUeh manner as that Government may determine. 
So 065. H, for any financial year, profits accrue from any business (other 
than lite insurance business) carried on by a Corporation, then, after 
making provision for reserws and other matters for which provision is 
neceaary or expedient, the balance of such profits shall be paid to the 
Central Government. 
95 46. The Cent.ral Government shall caUse the report of ,the auditors 
under section 41', the report of the actuaries under section 42 and the 
report under section 43 giving an account of the activities of every Cor .. 
poration and of the Board to be laid before both HOuse5 of Parliament 
as soon as may be after each such report h; received by the Central 
40 Government. 
CHAPTER IX 
MISCELLANEOUS 
47. Except as otherwise expressly provided in this Act: on and from 
the appointed day, no person, other than a Corporation, shall carry en 
45 life insurance business in India. 
ACluarial 
vatullio ... 
Annual 
rcpon e( 
activities 
of Corpora-
tions an. 
th!'" Board. 
Surplus 
from lif. 
insul'8llCO 
busm.s 
how to be 
utilised. 
ProDi'! ~ 
any busiDIe. 
(other tbaa 
life 
iDSUI'aIlaI 
business) 
how to be 
utilised. 
Ropotts lit 
bo laid 
Wore 
Parliament. 
Corpora. 
tions to 
haw 
,.xclulive' 
privilac. 
of cArr)'ing 
"n liCe 
insuranCe 
qusineal. 

Exooptions 
in tho cue 
of lifo 
insuraIlQO 
businosl in 
respect of 
persons. 
ord nanly 
rosidina 
outside 
India. 
Powers of 
Corpora-
tioDi to 
have 
official 
seals in 
certain 
cases. 
Policies of 
life insuran~ 
to be 
luarantccd 
by Central 
Govern-
ment. 
liQuida-
tion· 
Penalty 
for 
:rTr:' 
iDl\Jl"8DCO 
businou 
in con-
travention 
of tho 
provisions 
of this Act. 
Penalty 
for 
withhold-
iDa 
property, 
1tC. 
• 
22 
48. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 47 or in the 
Insurance Act, the Central Government may, by order, permit any per-
son who has made an apphcatlon in that behalf, to carryon life msur-
ance business in india m respect of tne lives of persons ordlnarily 
resldent outside IndIa, subject to such restrictions and contiHions as 5 may be specitled m the order and any such order shall be deemed to 
have etlect as if It were a certrlicate of regIstl'ation issued by the 
ContrOller to sUCh person under seC.lon 3 of the 1nS'urance Act m respect 
ot tuat class of bUSiness. ..u, 
(2) Nothing in sub-section (1) shall authorise any persOIl who is 10 
permIt.ed to carryon lite msurance busmess of the nature refened to 
In l.hilt sUb-sectlOn, to UlSure .ne hte 01 any person orcunarily re~dent 
ouc:s,ue 1nola, uurmg any penod of ms tempOl'dry reSidence m India. 
49. Evet'y Corporal.lon may have for use in any Div.sional Oftice, 
lhu,ucn urn.:e or omer oItu.'e or .In any othce o·utslc.1e lmtla, an OtliClal 15 
seal wnH.:n ImaI1 De a 1acsl.lnue 01 tne common seal of the Corporation, 
\Viln [de aOUHlon on Its tace 01 tne name 01 toe DIViS.lonal Office, Branch 
Utllce or orner otfice or any office outs.de !nwa, where it is to be used, 
'and any such otilcial seal may be attixed .0 any deed or document to 
wmcn the CorporatIOn is a party. 20 
SO. The sums assured by all polides of life iDsUl1lDce issued by, or trans-
ferred to or vested in, a Corporation including any bODU:ies declared in 
respect thereof, whether before or after the appointed day, shall be 
guaranteed as to payment in cash by the Central Government. 
51. No provision of law relating to the winding up of companies or 25 
corporations shall apply to a Corporation established under tms Act, 
and such CorporaLlon shall not be placed in liquidation save by order 
of the Central Government and in such manner as that Government may 
direct. . '1I<"t'::' 
5~. If any person carries on life insurance business in India in contra- 30 
ventI on of the provisions of this Act, he shall be punishable with 
impflsonment for a term which may extend to three years, or with fine 
which may extend to ten thousand rupees, or with both, and where such 
contravention is a con.inuing one, with further fine which shall not be 
less than one thousand rupees, for every day, after the first, during 
which such contravention continues. 35 
~ -; 
53, If any person wilfully withholds or fails to deliver to a Corpora-
tion as required by the provisions of the First Schedule, any property 
or any books, documents or other papers which may be in his possession 
or unlawfully retains possession of any property which has been trans-
ferred to and vested in any Corporation under this Act or wilfully 40 
applies. any such property to purposes other than those expressed in or 
aut~orlsed by. this Act, he shall, on the complaint of the Corporation, be 
punIshable WIth imprisonment for a term which may extend to one 
year, or with -fine, or with both. 
rt4. (1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a 
company, every person who, at the time the offence was committed, 
was In charge of, and was responsible to, the company for the conduct 
of the business of the company, as well as the company, shall be deemed 
45 

to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against 
and punished accordingly: 
Provided ~hat nothing contained in this sub-section shall render any 
such person liable to any punishment provided in this Act, if he proves 
5 that the offence was committed without his knowledge or that he had 
exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence. 
(2) Notwi 'hstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), where 
any offence under this Act has been committed by a company and it is 
proved that the offence has been committed with the consent or conni-
10 vance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of, any director, 
manager, secretary or other officer of the company, such director, 
manager, secretary or other officer shall also be deemed to be guilty of 
that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished 
accordingly. 
It) Explanation.-For the purposes of tm. Hction,-
(a) "company" means any body corporate and includes a firm 
or other association of individuals; and 
(b) "director", in relation to a firm, means a partner in the 
firm. 
2l> 55. No civil CO'ilrt shall have jurisdiction to entertain any suit or 
other legal proceeding or to adjudicate upon any matter which a Service 
Matters Tribunal is empowered by this Act to adjudicate upon. 
56. Any decision given or order passed or made (including any order 
for costs made under section 39), by a Claims Tribunal, or the Appellate 
25 Claims Tribunal, Or a Service Matters Tribunal may be enforced in the 
same manner and to the same extent by any civil court within the local 
limits of whose jurisdiction,-
(a) the Head Office of the Corporation against which such 
decision or order is to be enforced, is located, or, where such decision 
30 or order is to be enforced in relation to any claim arising within 
the area for which there is a Branch Office or other office of the 
concerned Corporation, such Branch Office or other office is located; 
or 
(b) the office of the Board against which such decision or order 
35 is to be enforced, is located; or 
(c) the place at which the person against whom such decision 
or order is to be enforced, actually and voluntarily resides or 
carries on business or personally works for gam, or owns any 
property, 
40 a. 11 it were a decree passed, Or order made, by such court. 
57. (1) Save as otherwise provided elsewhere in this Act, the follow-
i'Ag sections of the Insurance Act shall, so far as may be, apply to every 
Corporation as they apply to any other insurer, namely:-
Sections 2, 2B, 18, 26, 33, 38, 39, 41, 45, 46, 50, 52, !lOA, 110B, 
.. 5 HOC and 119. 
(2) The Central Government shall, as soon as may be after the 
appointed day, by notification, direct that the following sections o~ the 
Bar of 
iurildlctiOD 
or ctYIl 
COIl1'II. 
Enforce -
ment of 
decilfoDS 
and orders 
of Tribunals. 
AppllcadoD 
ortbe 
JDlU1'1DC8 
Act. 

DcductioR 
of 
incomo-wx 
ROt to be 
made on 
interest or 
dividwlld. 
Act not ... 
apply ill 
~n 
CGe!!. 
Insurance Act shall apply to every Corporation subject to such cone-
tions and modifications as may be specified in the notification, namely:-
Sections 20, 10, 11, 13, 14, 15, 20, 21, 22, 23, 25; 27A, 28A. 40; 
40A, 40B, 43, 44, 51, 102 to l06, 107 to 110, 111, 113, 114 and USA 
(3) Section 42 of the Insurance Act shall have eft'ect in relation to 5 
the issue to any individual of a licence to act as an insurance agent for 
the purpose of soliciting or procuring life insurance bllliness for a 
Corporation rubject to the condition that the powers exercisable by the 
Controller under sub-section (1) thereof may also be exercised on behalf 
of the Controller, by every Corporation. 10 
(4) The Central Government may, by notification, direct that all or 
any of the provisions of the Insurance Act other than those specifted 
in sUb-section (1), or sub-section (2), shall apply to every Corporation 
subje(;t to such conditions and modifications as may be specified in the 
notification. 15 
(5) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, nothing contained in the 
Insurance Act shall apply to a Corporation. 
58. Notwithstanding anything {lontainea in section 193 or section 1M 
of the Income-~ax Act, 1961, no deduction of income-tax shall be made 13 Qflgir 
on any interest or dividend payable to a Corporation in respect of any 10 
securities or shareI' owned by it or in which it has full beneficial interest. 
59. Nothing contained in this Act shall apply in relation to-
(a) the scheme, run by the Central Government, known as the 
Post Office Insurance Fund; 
(b) any insurer to whom the Insurance Act does not apply by 85 
reason of the provisions contained in section 2E thereof; 
(e) any approved superannuation fund as defined in clause (a) 
of section 58N of the Indian. Income-tax Act, 1922, being a fund in 11 ., I'll 
existence on the date (hereinafter referred to as the specified date) 
on which the dissolved Corporation was established; So 
(d) an~ scheme in existence on the specified date or any 
scheme framed after the specified date with the approval of the 
Central Government. as the case may be, whereby. in consideratloD 
of certain compulsory deduc~ions made by Government from the 
salaries of its employees as part of the conditions of service, the pay- 35 
ment of money is assured by Government on the death Of the emp-
loyee concerned or on the happening of any contingencv dependent on his life; . 
\ 
~e) any Family Pension Scheme framed unde!" the Coal Minee 
Provldent Fund, Family Pension and Bonus Schemes Act 1MB or 
the Employees' Provident Funds and Miscellaneous Provisions Act 4-0 46 of 2941. 
1952, for the purpose of providing famUy pension and life a~ 
beneftts to the employees covered by the said Scheme' 19 of ltD.. 
(1) any scheme Of small savings run by the C;ntraI Govern-
ment wbereunder payment is assured by that Government on 
death of the person subscribing to the scheme or on the the 45 
of a~y ~ontin.gency as the Central Government may b happeti1l nmctt speCIfy In thIS behalf. .' Y no CIa 011, 

115 
80. No act or proceeding of a Corporation or of the Board or of any 
Committ~ of any Corporation or of the Board or of a Claims Tribunal, 
the Appellate Clabns Tribunal, or a Service Matters Tribunal, shall be 
invalid or called in question merely by reason of the existence of any 
.5 vacancy therein or any defect in the constitution thereof. 
61. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against 
any member, Executive Director, or employee of a Corporation or of 
the Board for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be 
done under this Act. 
10 62. Every employee of a Corporation or of the Board or of a Claims 
Tribunal or the Appellate Claims Tribunal or a Service Matters Tribunal 
shall be deemed tp be a public servant for the purposes of Chapter IX 
45 .r atiII. of the Indian Penal Code. 
20 
63. (1) No person who is, on or after the appointed day,-
(4) an employee of the Government; or 
(b) a holder of the office of Chainnan or Director or of any 
other office in, or an employee of. a statutOry corporation or a 
Government company; or 
(c) the spouse of an employee referred to in clause (a) or 
claUSe (b), or, as the case may be, of the holder of an office referred 
to in clause (b), 
shall be eligible for the issue of, or shall accept, any licence to act as 
an insurance agent, and any such licence, if issued, shall be void. 
(2) The licence issued, after the appointed day, to a person to act as 
25 an insurance agent shall become void upon such person becoming, after 
the issue of such licence,-
(i) an employee of the nature referred to in clause (a) or 
clause (b) of sub-section (1), or 
(ii) the holder of an office of the nature referred to in clause 
30 (b) of that sub-section: 
Provided that the Hcence to act as an insurance agent issued to a 
person who becomes, after such iSsue, the spouse of such employee or of 
the holder of such office shall become void on the expiry of thn!e months 
from the date on which such person becomes the spouse of such emp-
35 loyee or the holder of such office. 
(3) EVery insurance agent Who immediately before the appointed 
day was, and continues to be on the expiry ot three ,months from that 
day. an employee of the nature referred to in clause (a) or clause (b) 
of sub-section (1), or the holder of an office of the nature refened to in 
40 clause (b) of that sub-section, or the spouse of any such employee or 
ot tlie holder of any such office shall, on the expiry of three months 
from the appointed day, cease to be an insurance agent. 
ExpIanation.-For the purpo'Ses of this section.-
(i) "employee of a statutory corporation" includes any person 
45 employed for any of the purposes of the Act by or under whIch 
such corporation is established or constituted; 
Dofectl in 
CODititudOll 
of a Cor-
poratioDor 
tboBoard or 
of any tri-
bunal DOl to 
invalidate 
acta or 
~. 
Profll&:do8 
of ac:doD 
taba aacIIr 
tho Act· 
DiIcaualI6-
cadOa for 
appoinlmeD' a. illlUfUlCe 
IIICnt. 

Emplo,.. 
no& .. tab 
"'",patt 
ia 
politics. 
(ii) "Government company" meaus a Government company., 
within the meaning of section 617 of the Companies Act, 1958; 
(iii) "'Statutory corporation" means a corporation establiahed 
01' constituted by or under a Central, Provincial or State Act. 
64. (1) No person who is- 5 
(a) an employee of a Corporation or of the Board Or of a Clafm'S 
Tribunal or the Appellate Claims Tribunal or a SeMett Mattera 
Tribunal; or 
(b) a member of a Corporation or of the Board. or 
(c) a member of a Claims Tribunal or the Appellate Claims 10 
Tribunal or a Service Matters Tribunal, 
shall be a member of, or be otherwise associated with, any political 
party or any organisation which takes part in politics nor shall he take 
part in, subscribe in aid of, or assist in any manner, any political move-
ment or activity. 15 
(2) If any question arises whether a party is a political party or 
whether any organisation takes part in politics or whether any move-
ment Or activity falls within the 'Scope of sub-section (1), the decision 
of the Central GO'''ernment thereon shall be final. 
(3) No such person as is referred to in sub-section (1) ~hall canvU5 110 
or otherwise interfere with or Use his influence in connection with, or 
take part in, an election to any Legislature or local authority: 
Provided that-
(i) such person qualified to vote at 'such election may exercise 
his right to vote, but where he does so, he shall give no indication 25 
of the manner in which he proposes to vote or has voted; 
(ii) such person shall not be deemed to have contravened the 
provisions of this section by reason only that he assists in the conduct 
of an ele<>tion in the due performance of a duty imposed on him 
by or under any law for the time being in force. go 
(4) The provisions of sub-sections (1), (2) and (3) shall be deemed 
to form a part of the conditions of service of the persons speciftecl in 
clause (a), clause (b) and clause (c) of sub-section (1) and any contra-
vention by any such person of any provision of SUb-section (1), or, as 
the case may be, sub-section (3), shall be deemed to be a breach of the 35 
terms and conditions of such service and shall be dealt with accordingly. 
ExpIanati.on I.-The display by such person on his person, vehicle or 
reSidence, of any electoral symbol shall amount to using his 1nfllMlllce in 
connection with an election within the meaning of this section. 
Explanation H.-For the purposes of this section, "Legislature" 40 
means--
(i) either House of Parliament , 
(ii,) the Legislative Assembly of a State, or in the case of a 
~tate having a Legislative Councit, either House of the Legislature 
of that State, 45 
1 of 1956. 

flO orl96!J. 
27 
(iii) Legislative Assembly of a Union ~rritory constituted 
under the Government of Union Territories Act 1963 , , , 
(iv) the Metropolitan Council of Delhi constituted under 
section 3 of the Delhi Administration Act, 1966, or 
(v) District Councils and Regional Councils in the States of 
Assam and Meghalaya and in the Union territory of Mizoram as 
provided in the Sixth Schedule to the Constitution, 
.. the case may be. 
65. (1) The Central Goverrunent may, by notification, make rules to = ,. 
10 carry out the provisions of this Act. rules. 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generalit.y of the 
foregoing powers, such rules may provide for all Or any of the following 
matters, namely:--
(a) the term of office of the Chairman and other members cI a 
15 Corporation, as required by sub-section (1) of section 7, and the 
salaries and allowances which the Chairman of a Corporation shall 
be entitled to receive and the conditions of his service in respect of 
leave, penSion, provident fund and other matters and the allowances 
which the other members of a Corporation shall be entitled to 
20 receive, as required by sub-section (4) of section 7; 
(b) the matters specified under sub·section (1) of section 9 sub· 
ject to which each Corporation shall carryon life insurance business 
and the conditions subject to which investment of its funds shall be 
made by a Corporation, as required by clause (b) of sub-section (2) 
25 of section 9: 
30 
35 
(c) the fees and allowances to be paid to the members of a Com-
mittee constituted under sub-section (4) of section 13 for attending 
its meetings or for any other work; 
(d) the appointment of Secretary and other officera and em-
ployees, by a Corporation to enable it to discharge its functions, as 
requirei by sub-section (3) of section 14 and the terms and conditions 
of service of the Executive Directors, Secretary and other officers 
and employees of a Corporation, as required by sub-section (4) of 
section 14; 
(8) the term of office of a member of the Board, and the 'Salaries 
and allowances which a whole-time member of the Board shall be 
entitled to receive and the conditions of his service, as required by 
sub-sections (1) and. (5) of section ·16; 
(/) the fees and allowances to be paid to members of Committe. 
(other than the members of a Corporation or of the Board) for attend-
ing meetings and for attending to other work, as required by sub-
section (2) of section 17; 

~H 
(g) the times and places at which the Board shall meet and the 
~edure in regard to the transaction of business at its meetings 
which shall be observed by the Board, as required by sub-section (l) 
of section 18; 
(h) the terms and conditions of service of Secretary and otlier 5 
officers and employees of the Board, as required by sub-section (2) 
of section 19; 
(i) the manner in which the Board shall review the functioning 
of a Corporation and the service which the Board shall render to a 
Corporation, as required by sub-section (1) of section 20; 10 
(j) the functions, other than those specified in sub-section (2) of 
section 20, which may be performed by the Board, as required by 
sub-section (2) of section 20; 
(k) the matters subject to which payment of an amount deter-
mined by the Central Government shall be made by a Corporation 15 
to the !:Soard, as reqwred by suo-section (1) of sect.lon 21; 
(l) the form in whlch an appllcation under sub-~tion (1) of 
section 24 shall be made to the Claims TnbWUll and the manner in 
which such applicatlOn shall be verified and the fee wluch shall 
accompany such app!lcatJon, as required by sub-section (2) of section 20 
~; , . '. ,., ,.~,.,~-, ... 
(m) the form in which an appeal shall ~ filed to the Appellate 
Claims Tribunal, the nupmer in which the memorandum of such 
appeal shall be verified and the fee which shall accompany such 
memorandum of appeal, as required by sub-section (2) of section 28; !l5 
(n) the form in which an application shall be made to the Service 
MatU!rs Tribunal, the manner in which 'Such application shall be 
verified and the fee which shall accompany such application, as re-
qUIred by sub-section (4) of section 32; , 
(0) ,the matters subject to' which every Tri.bunal 8hall bani So 
power to regulate its own procedure and the procedure of the 
Benches thereof, including the places at which it or its Benches 
shall held its, or their, sittings, as required by sub-section (2) of 
seQtion 35; . 
(P) the conditions and limitations subject to which costs may 35 
be awarded by any Tribunal, as required by 8ub-section (1) of 
section 39; 
(q) the form in which a report giving an account of its activi-
ties during the previous financial year shall be submitted by a Cor-
poration and the Board, as required by sub-section (1) of section 43; 40 
(r) the terms and conditions of work of the insurance agents 
of a Corporation including those who become insurance &genjts of 
a Corporation on the appointed day, as required by sub-section (3) 
of section 57 of this Act, read with section 42 of the Insurance Act; 
. (8) such other matters as are required to be, or may be, pre~ 45 
crJbed. _ 
(3) The power to make rules conferred by sub-section (2) shall 
include power- . 
(i) to give retrospective effect to the terms and conditions of 
service of the emllloyees or the terms and conditions of work of in- 50 
surance agents under such rules; 

(ii) to amend by way of addition, variation or repeal such terms 
and conditions of service or work with retrospective ef!ect. 
from a date not earlier than the appointed day . 
... (1) Every Corporation may, with the previous approval of the 
S Central Government, by notification, make regulations, not inconsistent 
with the provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder, ~o pro-
vide for all matters for which provision is expedient for the purpose 
of giving effect to the provisions of this Act. 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the 
10 foregoing power, such regulations may provide for all or any of the 
following matters, namely:-
20 
(a) the powers and functions of a Corporation which may be 
delegated to the officers in charge of its Divisional Offices and Branch 
Offices; 
(b) the method of recruitment of employees and insurance 
agents of a Corporation; 
(c) the manner in which the Fund of a Corporation shall be 
maintained; 
(d) the maintenance of separate funds and accounts at each of 
the Divisional Offices and Branch Ofllces of a Corporation; 
(e) the jurisdiction of each Divisional Office and Branch Offic. 
of a Corporation; 
. <I> the conduct of business at meetings of a CO.rporation; 
(g) the formation of Committees of a Corporation and the 
delegation of powers and functions of the Corporation to such Com-
mittees, and the conduqt of business at meetings of such Committees; 
(h) the form and manner in which policies of life insurance 
may be issued and contracts binding on a Corporation may be 
executed; 
(i) the classification of policies of life insurance, whether issued 
by a Corporation or transferred to a Corporation from the diuolved 
Corporation, for ,the purpose of declaring di1ferential bonU8el, 
wherever necessary; 
(j) the manner in which and the intervals within which th. 
accounts of various Divisional Offices and Branch Offices of a Cor· 
poration may be inspected and their accoun ts audited; 
(k) the conditions subject to which any payment may be made 
bya Corporation. 
(3) 'The power conferred by this Act to make rules in relation to the 
40 D1a~S in respect of which regulations could be made under the Life 
Insurance Act shall be deemed, fOr t~ purposes of this Act. to carry 
with it the powers to amend, with retrospective effect from a day not 
earlier {than the appointed day, the regulations, if any, made under the 
Life Insurance Act and in force immediately before the appointed day, 
45 aDd such regulations,as so amended, shall have effect accordingly. 
Power to 
make 
repiatiOlll. 

NotUlc:a-
tiona, 
rub and 
regulations 
to be laid 
before 
Parliament. 
Act to over-
ride all other 
enactment., 
etc. 
Power to 
relDOve 
cIiJIcuItiea. 
, 
30 
&7. Every notification made under IUb-oaection (.2) t or aub-sectioil 
(4) t of section fJ7, every rule made: UDder section 65, and every ftlWa-
tion made under section 66. shall be laid, as soon as may' be after ~t iI 
made t before each House of Parli&ment,while it is in leSlion, for a-total 
period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or iD. two 5 
or more su.ccessive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the· .e .... 
immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforeuid, 
b()tth Houses agree in making any modification in the notification, rule 
or regulation or both Houses agree that the notifi.cation, rule or resuJa-
tion should not be made, the noWication, rule or reiUlation Ihall u..r.- 10 
after have effect only in such modified form or be of no effectt as the 
case may be; so, however. that any such modification or annulmen~ ahall 
be without preju.dice to th~ validity of anything previously done .\lDder 
that notification, rule or regulajtion. 
GS. The provisions of this Act and. the niles made thereunder 1hall 15 
have effect notwithstand.ing anything contained in /the lndust.rial Dill-
putes Actt 1947 or in any other enactment (other than this Act) foII.the •• eI.",. 
time being in force, or any judgment, decree or order of any cowi, 
tribunal or other authority or any agreement t aettlement, award or otlwr 
instrument for the time being in force. so 
69. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of 
tilis Act, the Central Government may, by order, not incons1steDt witA 
the provisions of this Act, remove the diftlculty: 
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of a 
period of two years from the appointed day. 8.5 
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid,u lOOn ulBIlJ 
be after it is made, before each House of Parliament. 
70. Notwithstanding the repeal of the Life Insurance Act, by _boo 
section (1) of section 3t-
(a) anything done or any action taken under the Aet 10 .. SO 
pealed; ,Qt. "Ik 
(b) any sums due to, or payable by, \he diIIolved Corporation, 
immediately before jUle appointed day; 
(c) any contract or agreement entel1ed into, or alTl.lllIL_t 
made, by the dissolved. Corporation, and in force immediately befon 35 
the appointed day; 
(d) any rules made under the Life Irwuranee Act, anel in foree 
immediately before the appointed day; 
(e) any regulations or any other proviliolll with r .. pect to the 
terms and conditions of service of employees and the iinu ael fO 
conditions of work of insurance agents of the dissolved Corporation, 
as in force immediately before the appointed day; 
(1) any other regulation" u in force immediately before tbI 
appointed day, . 
~hall, inti so far as ththey are relatable to a zonal oftlce of the dissolved 45 
orpora on, and e officers, employees and agents in, or attached to 
such office, be deemed, without prejudice to the provisions of the nnt 
Schedule, to have been done or taken, o~, as the cue may be due to or 
i-ayable by, Or entered into, or made by. the corresponding Co~ra.. 
lon, and ~v~~ such rule, regulation, contract, agreement or arrangement • 
:~al1~u until It IS duly altered under this Act, have effect notwithstandin, 5 
y J dgment, decree or order of any court Or tribu.at and llotwithsta1l4-

140.1147. 
31 
in, anything contained in the Indultrial Dilput .. Act, ID47 or any other 
law or any agreement, se~tlement, award or other instrument for the 
time being in force. 
E,rplanation.-For the purpol'Jes ot this Act, unless the context other-
.5 wise requires, "corresponding Corporation", in relation to a zonal oftlce 
of the dissolved Corporation, means the Corporation which has 
it. Head Offi.ce at the place at which that zonal office was located imme-
diately before the appointed day. 
10 THE FIRST SCHEDULI! 
(See section 3) 
TRANSFER OF THE CAPITAL, THE OI'FICERS AND 0'l"HZR 1lMPLOY!:I:B, AND 'mil 
AII8IlTS AND LIABILITIES, OF THE DISSOLVED CORPORATION AND omER MA'l"l'ERSi 
1. In this Schedule, unless the context other~ise requires,-
(0) "corresponding Corporation" has the meaning assigned to it 
15 in the Ezplanatlion to section 70: 
(b) "paragraph" means a paragraph of this Schedule; 
(c) "sub-paragraph" means a sub-paragraph of a paragraph: 
Cd) "zonal oftlce" means a zonal oftlce established under sub-
Rction (2) of section 1& of the Life Insurance Act and include. divt-
20 .ional offices, branches and other offices in each zone. 
2. Ou.t of ,the capitBlofrupees five crores provided by the Central 
Government to the dissolved Corporation, there shall stand transterred. 
on the appointed day, to each ot the Corporations, a sum of rupees one 
erore. 
1,5 3. (1) Subject to the other provisions ot this Schedule, every ofticer 
So 
or other employee of the dissolved Corporation,-
(a) who was employed immediately betore the appointed day in 
a zonal office, shall become on and from that day, an oftlcer or other 
employee, as the case may be, ot the corresponding Corporation; 
(b) who was employed immediately before the appo~ted day, 
in any office, other than a zonal office, shall become, on and from 
the ,appointed day, an officer or other employee, as the case may be, 
ot such Corporation, as the Central Government may, by gene-
ral or special I order published in 'the Oftlcial Gazette, specify, 
and until any order is made with respect (to any such offtcer or 
other employee, he shall be deemed to have become, on and from 
the appointed day, an officer or other employee of the Board. 
(2) An order under clause (b) of sub-paragraph (1) may be made 
Definiti onl. 
Capital 
provided 
by Central 
Govern_ 
mentto 
the dil-
60lved 
Corpora-
tion to 
be trans-
ferI"ed'to 
the 
Corpora-
tions. 
Alloea! ion 0 f 
officers and 
other em-
ployees of 
the dillolved 
Corporation. 

J2 
with retrospective effect from a date not earlier than the appointed 
day, 
(3) In making an order under clause (b) of sub-paragraph (1) 
for the purpose of allocating any officer or employee to anyone of the 
Corporations, regard 'Shall be had to the need ,for the efficient discharge 5 
of its functions by such Corporation and the public. interest and other 
relevant matters,' 
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in the foregoing sub-para-
graphs, it shall be open to any officer or other employee of ,the dissolved 
Corporation to opt in favour of not being an officer or other employee 10 
of the concerned Corporation by giving one month's notice of such 
option to, such Corporation: 
Provided that such notice shall be given,-, ' 
(a) before the e""Piry of three months from the appointed day, or 
(b) where such ofticer or other employee is an oftlcer or other 15 
employee referred to in clause (b) of sub-paragraph (1). within 
three months from the date on which an order, applicable to him, 
is made under that clause, 
(5) The option exercised under sub-paragraph (4) by an oftlcer or 
other employee shall take effect on the expiry of the period of notice of one 20 
month, but· the takjn~ effect of such option shall not prejudicially affect 
any disciplinary or other proceedings which may be pending against him 
on the date on which the notice was given, or which may be taken against 
IUch officer or other employee in respect of anything done or omlltted to 
be done by him before his option had taken eflect, II!,> 
(6) An otftcer or other employee who exercises the option referred 
to in sub-paragraph (4), shall- . 
(a) be entitled to the payment of an amount equivalent to the 
salary and allowances which he would have drawn for a period of 
three mor1ths if he had continued in service for that period, from SO 
the date on which his option takes effect, but where he would have 
continued in service for a period of less than three months: such 
amount shall be equivalent to the salary and allowances which he 
would have drawn for the period for which he would have continued .... 
in lervice; s." 
(b) be paid, by way of gratuity, an amount calcuiated in accord 
ance with the rules which would have applied in his case if the Life 
Insurance Act had not been repealed and he had retired fPOm service 
on the date on which his option took effect, and for this purpose the 
requirement as to the minimum period of service which sliould have 40 
been rendered for becoming entitled to gratuity under those rules 
sha1.l not apply and such gratuity shall be payable on the 'basis of 
the b~ic pay drawn by him immediately before the da., on which 
his optIon took effect; , 
(e) be entitled to such other terminal benefits other than gra- 45 
tuity, as would have been payable to him if th~ Life Insurance . 
Act had not been repealed and he had retired from service on the 
date on which his option took effect: 

33 
Provided that in the case of any ofticer or other employee against 
whom any disciplinary proceeding is pendini immediately before the 
appointet3 day, or against whom a disciplinary proceeding may be taken 
thereafter, the paymen t of salary, allowances, ifatuity or other terminal 
5 benefits under this paragraph shall be subject to the result of the said 
proceedings. 
4. (1) On the appoimed day, the rights and liabilities of the dissolved 
Corporation in respect of the policies of life insurance issued by It, and in 
force immediately before the appointed day, which were being serviced 
10 by a zonal office shall subject to the other provisions of this Schedule, 
stand transferred to, ~nd shall vest in, the corresponding Corporation. 
(2) Save as otherwise provided in sub-paragraph (1), the assets and 
liabilities of the dissolved Corporation, as on the day immediately before 
the appointed day, shall be allocated amongst the col't"eSpOnding 
15 Corporations in such manner and to 'Such extent as the Central Govern-
ment, having regard to the recommendation made by the Committee 
constituted under sub-paragraph (3), may, by order published in the 
Official Gazette, determine and such order may, provide for the retransfer 
to a corresponding Corporation of any assets and liabilities which dnd 
10 been previously allocated to any other corresponding Corporation under 
any provisional order made under sub-paragraph, (5). 
(3) The Central Government shall constitute a Committee conlistlng 
of not less than three and not more than ftve persons who, in its opinion, 
have special expertise in the matter of evaluation and allocation of asset. 
2~ and liabilities of bodies corporate, for the purpose of evaluating and re-
commending the allocation of the assets and liabilities of the dissolved 
Corporation amongst the corresponding Corporations in accordance with 
the provisions of sub-paragraph (4). 
(4) The Committee shall-
3(; (a) determine the value of the assets of the diMolved Corpora-
tion; and in determining such value, the Committee shall have due 
regard to the net .yield from loans and investments, 
(b) determine, in accordance with the actuarial principles, the 
liabilities in· respect of the life insurance policies, which, by virtue 
~i of this Act, stand transferred to, and vested in, each corresponding 
Corporation, •. .. 
and on such determination, make a recommendation to the Central 
Government for the allocation, in an equf/table manner, of such assets 
amongst the corresponding Corporations, having regard to the liabilities 
-4-0 which, by virtue of this Act, stand tran!9ferred to, and vested in, each 
correspondinf,t Corporation: 
Provided that the allocation of the assets and liabilities of the dis-
solved Corpor~ons amongst the corresponding Corporations shall be so 
made as ~o ensure that immovable properties are allocated, as far as 
45 practicable, on "as is where is" basis and such allocation shall be 10 
made as to ensure that 'ihe deficiency. if any, in the value of any immov-
able property allocated to a corresponding Corporation Is made goOd by 
the allocation to it of other aSllletR of thP. dissolved Corporation, 
Transfer 01 
a'~l"tI and 
liabilitil"1 of 
the dillOl-
ved Corpora-
tion. 

".,.--_ ..... ".' , .. - -... 
34 
(5) The Central Government may. it it conaiden neceelary or ex-
pedient so to do for the efficient transaction of business of the corre .. 
ponding Corporations, pending the making of an order under sub-para-
graph (2), by a provisional order published in the OfBcial Gazette, 
allocate amongst the corresponding Corporations the assets and liabilities 5 
of the dissolved Corporation referred to in sub-paragraph (2), and such 
provisional order shall cease to have effect 'on and from the date of 
publication in the Official Gazette of the order made 'Under lUb-para-
graph (2), ex~ as respects things done or omitted to be done under 
IUch prOvisional order. 10 
(6) Any person aggrieved by the order made by the Central Govern-
ment under sub-paragraph (2) may, within thirty days from the date 
on which the order is published in the Oftlcial Gazette, make a repreeen-
tation Ito the Central Government for the review of the order on any 
of the grounds specified in sub-rule (1) of rule 1 of Order XLVII of the 15 
5 ef.goB. First Schedule to the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, and on receipt of 
such representation the Central Government shall, after givin~ the 
person making the representation an opportunity of being heard, dis-
pose of the representation as expeditiously as possible, and where. on 
such review, the Central Government is of opinion that it is necessary ~o 
so to do, it may modify I the order made by it under sub-paragraph (2): 
and pubUsh the order as so modified in the Offtcial Gazette. 
'(7) All transactIons and other acts which immediately before the 
appointed day could have been entered into or done by a zonal of!lce 
in relation to any assets. tiabtUties, business Or any other matter of, ~5 
or pertaining to, the dissolved Corporation, may, on and from that day, 
be entered into or done in respect -f 'SUch assets. Uabilities, business 
or other matter by the corresponding Corporation as if such assets. 
liabilities, business or other matter were. by virtue of this sub-paragraph, 
the assets., liabilities, business or other matteT of. or pertaining to, the 30 
eorresponding Corporation. 
(8) All agreements. arrangements. contracts and covenants entered 
into and in force immediatelv before the appointed day. bv any office of 
the dissolved Corporation, other than a zonal office, and all transactions 
entered into, and in force. immediately before the appointed day per- 35 
taining to any office, other than the zonal office, and all assets. liabilities. 
business or any, other matter of. Or pertaining to. any office of the dis-
solved Corporation. other than a zonal oftlce. shall be deemed, on and 
from the appointed day. to have been entered into or made bv 'Such cor-
responding Corporation and shall become. on and from that day, the 40 
assets, Uabilities, business or any other matter, as the case may be. of 
such a corresponding Corporation, as the Central Government may, bv 
order ,direct. 
(9) No suit. appeal, application. eftcution or other legal proceeding 
by. or agai'n'St. the dissolved Corporation which is pendin~ immediately 45 
before the appointed day shall abate or be discontinued or be in any 
way 'Pl'ejudicially affected by reason Of the transfer of the ri ~hts, assets 
and UabiUtiesof the dissolved Corporation to the corresponding Corpo-
ration or of anything contained in this Act and f!Very such suit. appeal, 
application, exeeution or other leA'al proceeding may be continued, SO 
prosecuted or enforced by or against Ithe corresponding Corporation to 
which such rights, assets and liabilities have been tranllff'rred and 
vested in under this Act. 

kzp14nation.-For the PUl1POSes of this sub-paragraph, "legal proceed-
ing" includes any proceeding before an Arbitrator or before any tribunal 
constituted under the Life Insurance Act or any other law for the time 
being in force. 
5 (10) The business of the dissolved Corporation outside India, imme-
diately before the appointed day, and the assets, rights, liabilities and 
obligations of the dissolved Corporation in relation to such business and 
the officers, other employees and insurance agents, if any, employed by 
the dissolwd Corporation in connection with such business, immediately 
10 before the appointed day, and all other matters relating to the said 
business shall, in relation to the Branch specified in column 1 of the 
Table below become the assets, rights, liabilities and obligations or 
business, or, as the case may be, officers, other employees and insurance 
agents of the Corporation speci.fted against its name in the correspond-
J 5 ing entry in column 2 of the said Table: 
110 
1 
1. Loudon Branch 
l. Mauritius Branch 
3. Fiji Branch 
---------
TABLE 
2 
The Northern Life Insurance Corporation 
of India. 
The Western Life Insurance Corporatioll 
of India. 
The Central Life Insurance Corporation 
of India. 
(11) If, according to the laws of any country outside India, the pro-
viaions of this Schedule and of any scheme made thereunder are not 
115 effective to transfer to, and vest in, a Corporation specified· in column 
2 of the Table under, sub-paragraph (10), any asset situated in that country 
or liability incurred therein which formed immediately before the 
appointed day, a part of the business of the dissolved Corporation, the 
atfairs of the dissolved Corporation in relation to such a:;set or liability 
30 shall, on and from the appointed day, stand entrusted to such officer of 
such Corporation (.eing a Corporation mentioned in the said Table), 
as the Central Government may, by notification, appoint in this behalf, 
and the officer so appointed may exercise all powers and do all acts and 
things as may be required by the laws of such country for the purpose 
35 of effec~vely tr~sferrin~ or vesting such ass~ts or liabilities in the 
CorporatIon of which he IS an officer and may eIther himself or through 
any person authorised by him in this behalf realise such asset and 
discharge such liability for and on behalf of 'Such Corporation. 
i. (1) The rights and liabilities of the dissolved Corporation in 
40 respect of a policy of life insurance which stand transferred to,- and 
vested in, under sub-paragraph (1) of paragraph 4 to a corresponding 
Corporation, shall be the rights and liabilities, respectively, of such 
cOJ'll'espon~g iCorporation an.d/ such .corresponding Corporation .11 
exercise such rights, or, as the case may be, shall be liable in respect 
45 of such policy of life insurance to the same extent and in the same manner 
as the dissolved Corporation was entitled to exercise such rights, or, as 
the case may be, liable, and shall do aU such acts and things in respect 
of such policy of life insurance as the dissolved Corporation 'Would have 
been required to do in respect thereof if this Act had not been passed. 
50 (2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-paragraph (1) of 
this paragraph, or in sub-paragraph (1) of paragraph 4. the correspond-
in, Corporation to which the liability in respect of a policy of life in-
Effect 
of the 
transfer 
to the 
corres_ 
pondin, 
Corpora-
tionof 
policiew 
of life 
insurance 
.issued by 
the dis-
solved 
Corpora-
ti •. 

'J'raDIfer or 
liaaurance 
~.of the 
diuoyled 
Corporation. 
S6 
surance stands transferred to, and vested in. under this Act. shall, if the 
holder of such policy of life insurance makes. within six months from the 
appointed day, an application to such Corporation for the transfer of the 
liability in respect of such policy of life insurance to any other Corpora-
tion established under this Act. transfer such liability to such other Cor- 5 
poration and S".Jch other Corporation shall be bound to accept Buch 
transfer: 
Provided that the beneftts admissible to an insurance agent in re-
lation to the policy of life insurance so transferred, 'Shall continue to be 
admissible to him and the corresponding Corporation to which the 10 
policy of life insurance i8 80 transferred shall be ;Uable to make .uch 
benefits available to that insurance agent. 
(3) The option exercised by a policy-holder by making an applica-
tion under sub-paragraph (2), shall be final. 
6. (1) Subject to the other provisions of this paragraph, every 15 
person Who immediately before ·the appointed day is an insurance agent 
of the dissolved Corporation shall, on and from the appointed day, 
become an insurance agent of the corresponding Cor;poration in relation 
to the zonal office in the branch whereof the records of his work as an 
inSurance agent are maintained immediately before the said day, and 20 
shall continue to function as such insurance agent on the same tenns 
and conditions as would have been applicable to him if this Act had not 
been passed and shall continue to do so unless and until his appointment 
iii such insurance ugent of such corresponding Corporation is terminated 
or until such terms and conditions of hi. work as an insurance agent liS 
are duly altered 'Under this Act. 
(2) The period of work rendered by an insurance agent in the dis-
solved Corporation shall be counted towards the I period of his work in 
the corresponding Corporation Of which he becomes an insurance agent 
under sub.,paragraph (1) in the same manner as it would have been 30 
counted in the dissolved Corporation if this Act had not been passed. 
(3) An insurance agent of the dissolved Corporation shall not be 
entitled to claim any compensation by reason of his becoming, bY virtue 
of the provisions of sub-paragraph (1), an insurance agent of the C0rre8-
ponding Corporation or by reason ot any alteration of his terms and 35 
conditions of work as provided in that sub-paragraph and DO such 
cl~im shall be entertained by any court, tribunal o·r other authority. 
THE SECOND SCHEDULE 
(See section 9) 
'I'm: ZONIS AND DnutONS WITHIN THE ZoNES IN WHICH Dn'ENSlYJ: 
DEVELOPMENT OF un: INSURANCE BUSINESS JS TO • MAD! 
BY THE CORPORATIONS 
._-------_. - ---
NalDO of tbe Corporation Zone Divi.ion wilbir: 
____ . _ . __________ ... _______ ..... __________ .. !~e Z~ _______ _ 
I II III ... ------~-----.. -.------.----.-~-----... -.------.-.--.--. -.-.-.--... --- ----. __ ... __ .--
1. The Central LiFe 
Imurance Corporatiol. 
ot'lndia 
Kanpur Kanpur 
Luclcoow 
Aara Meerut 
Indore 
Jabalpur 
Varanui _____________ . ___ Rai~. _________ _ 
45 
50 

3'1 
Namo or tho Corporation Zone Divisions within 
the Zone 
-.~----
I II III 
2. The Eastern Lifo Calculi a Calc:uUa 
5 1l1lU1'lDCC Corporation 
or India. AsanlOl 
CuUIck 
Oaubati 
JaJpaisuri 
J llllllbedpur 
10 MazafI'arpul" 
Pama 
Silchar. 
3. Tho Northern Lifo Delhi Dc1hi 
Insurance Corporation 
15 of India. Ajmer 
Cbandiprh 
lulhlAdur 
laipur. 
4. 'Tho Southem Lifo Madra~ Madras 
20 InsUI'IIIlCD Corpora&ioD 
or India. Baaaa10ftl 
Coimbatoro 
Hyderabad 
Madurai 
25 MasuJipatn,m 
TriYaDdrum 
Udupi 
'l'buQavur 
DhanrId 
go lCo:r.bikode 
Vukhapatnam 
Cuddapah. 
5. 1110 Western Lifo Bomba)' Bonlba~' 
35 laaurance CorporatiOn Ahmeda"d or India. 
Naapur 
N ... ill 
Pune 
40 Rai1cot 
sa..,· 
Sural 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The life insurance busineSs in India was nationalised in 1956 to 
provide absolute security to the policy-holders and to spread insurance 
much more widely and in particular to .the rural areas. Since nationa-
lisation, the Life Insurance Corporation has a fairly impressive record 
of extending insurance services to ·the community. At the end of 1955 
the individual assurance business in force was 48 lakh policies. It has 
now increased to well over 245 lakh policies at the end of March, 1983. 
Similarly. the sum assured has increased from Rs. 1,220 Clores to Rs. 26,000 
crores. Group insurance business which was negligible at the time of 
nationalisation has increased to provide cover to over 70 lakh lives and 
the sum assured 'Under these schemes is Rs. &,613. crores. The life fund 
also has increased from Rs. 380 crores to Rs. 8,600 crores. 
2. The Corporation over the years has grown considerably in 'Size 
and it has,' therefore, been decided in the interest of operational em.-
ciency, and, in order to strengthen the industry's ability to meet the 
challenges of the future, to re-structure the existing Life Insurance 
Corporation into more manageable units. It is expected that this will 
result in more effective spread of insurance into the rural area'S where 
only limited headway has been made so far. 
3. The Bill provides for the re-structuring of the Corporation into five 
independent units with a co-ordinating body to provide supervision and 
guidance on matters of common interest. This reorganisation is also 
expected to impart a greater degree of dynamism into the working of 
the industry and improve the quality of service rendered to the policy-
holders. 
4. On the establishment of the five independent units, the assets and 
liabilities of the Life Insurance Corporation of India would be equitably 
distributed amongst these units on the basis of actuarial valuation thereof 
made by a Committee of Experts. Persons employed in any Zone of 
the erstwhile Corporation would be so employed in the unit established 
for that Zone that they are not disturbed. Persons employed in the 
Central Office of the erstwhile Corporation would, however, be distribut-
ed among the Life. Insurance Board and the different units having 
regard to the administrative requirements of the Board and of luch 
units. 
5. The Bill further provides for 'Setting up of Claims Tribunals, 
Appellate Claims Tribunals and Service Matters Tribunals far speedy 
settlements of disputes relating to life insurance claims of policy-holders 
li<nd service matters of the employees. 
6. The Notes on clauses appended to the Bill explain in detail the 
various ,provi'Sions thereof. 
NEW DELHl; PRANAB MUKHERJD. 
The 2!7th .4.ugu.st, 1983. 

39 
PRESIDENT'S RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLE 117 OF THE 
CONSTITUTION OF INDIIL 
[Copy of letter No. F.4(3) IIns-llII83, dated the ,26th August, 1983 
from Shri Pranab Kumar Mukherjee, Minister of Finance to the 
Secretary, Lok Sabha]. , 
The President, having been informed of the subject matter of the 
proposed Life Insurance Corporations Bill, 1983, recommends the intro-
duction of the Bill in Lok Sabha under clause (1) of article 117, and its 
consideration under clause (3) of article 117 of the Constitution of India. 
The above said recommendation was made by the President on the 
25th August, 1983. 

Notes on dause. 
• Clause 2.-This clause defines the expressions used in the Bill. 
Clause 3.-This clause provides for the dissolution of the Life Insur-
ance Corporation of India established under section 3 of the Life Insur-
ance Corporation Act, 1956 (31 of 1956), and the repeal of the aforesaid 
Act. The clause also provides that the capital of the dissolved Corpo-
ration. its officers, employees and insurance agents as well as its rights, 
liabilities and obligations shall be dealt with in accordance with the First 
Schedule. . 
Clause 4.-This clause provides for the establishment of new Life 
Insurance Corporations with head offices at Kanpur, Calcutta, Delhi, 
Madras and Bombay. 
Clause 5.-This clause provides for the authorised capital and the 
paid-up capital of each of the new Corporations. 
Clause 6.-This clause provides for the constitution of the new 
Corporations, the maximum number of members of each Corporation 
and the conditions to be satisfied by the members. 
Clause 7.-This clause provides for the term of office and conditions 
of service of the Chairman and other members of the new Corporations, 
excluding e:r offiCio members. Their terra of office will not be less than 
three years and they will be eligible for reappointment. The cla".lse 
also provides for the filling up of a casual vacancy of a member or in the 
office of the Chairman. 
Clause 8.-This dause provides for the disqualifications and removal 
of members and also the termination of the appointment of the Chair-
man and his reSignation of office. 
Clause 9.-This clause defines the functions and powers of the new 
Corporations and provides that each Corporation shall be primarily res-
ponsible for the intensive development of life insurance business within 
the Zone, that is to say the area, assigned to it for this purpose. The 
clause also empowers the Central Government to isNe directions to the 
new Corporations in matters of policy involving public interest. 
'Clause lO.-This clause provides for conditions which each )lew 
Corporation may impose to protect its ,investments and for the appoint-
ment of its nominee on Boards of Directors of the assisted concerns. The 
clause also provides for indemnity for these nominees. 
Clause H.-This clause provides for establishment of Divisional 
Offices, Branches and other offices by the new Corporations. 
Clause l2.-This clause provides that the Chairman of a new Corpo-
ration-shall be the Managing Director thereof and shall also be the PresI-
dent of each of the Committees constituted. in tenns of clause 13. 
-, , .. 
" 

41 
Clause 13.-This clause provides for the constitution of an Executive 
Committee, an Investment Committee and such other Committees as 
each new Corporation may dt!cide. 
CLause 14.-This clause provides that each new Corporation may 
appoint Executive Directors, Secretary and other officers and employees 
according to its requirement. 
Clause 15.-This clause provides for the constitution of the Life 
Insurance Board with its office at New Delhi. The Board will consist 
of the Chairman of each new Corporation, ex officio, and other members, 
not exceeding 11. One of the members of the Board shall be appointed 
its Chairman. 
Clause 16.-This clause provides for the conditions of service and the 
term of office of the mp.mbers of the Life Insurance Board, other than 
ex officio members. 
CLause 17.-This clause provides for appointment of Committees by 
the Life Illsurance Board for different purposes and the fees and allow-
ances payable to members (other than the members of a new Corpora-
tion and the Board) of the Committees. 
Clause lB.-This clause provides for meetings of the Life Insurance 
Board and Committees thereof and the procedure to be followed at the 
meetings of the Board and the Committees. 
Clause 19.-This clause provides for the appointment of Secretary 
and other officers and employees of the Life Insurance Board and the 
terms and conditions of their service. 
Clause 20.- This cl8'USe provides for the functions of the Life Insur-
&nce Board. The Board will co-ordinate the activities of the new Corpo-
rations, review their performance and render advice to the new Corpo-
rations in matters of common interest, including actuarial matters. 
Clause 2,1.-This clause provides for the finances of the Life Insur-
ance Board. 
Clause 22.-This clause provides for the establishment of Claims 
Tribunals and qualifications of the members of the Tribunals. 
Clauses 23 and 24.-These clauses provide for the scope of the refer-
ences to the Claims Tribunals. No suit or other legal proceeding will lie 
in a civil court in respect of any matter pending before, or decided 
by, a Claims Tribunal or the Appellate Claims Tribunal. 
Clause 25.-This clause provides for the procedure of Claims Tribu-
nals. A claim not exceeding Rs. 25,000 may be disposea of by a single-
Bench Tribunal. 
Clause 26.-This clause provides for the procedure for hearing cases 
by the Claims Tribunals. The order passed by the Claims Tribunal 
will, subject to the decision of the Appellate Claims Tribunal, be final. 
Clause 27.-This clause provides for the constitution of an Appellate 
Claims Tribunal. The clause also defines the qualifications of the 
members of the Appellate Claims Tribunal and provides for appoint-
ment of President and Vice-President (s) of the Appellate Claims 
Tribunal 

42 
Clause 28.-This clause defines the scope of the appeals to the 
Appellate Claims Tribunal and the time-limit within which the appeals 
may be filed. 
Clause 29.- This clause provides for the procedure to be followed by 
the Appellate Claims Tribunal for hearing the concerned parties and 
the service of the orders passed by the Appellate Claims Tribunal. 
Clause 30.-This clau"e provides for the procedure of the Appellate 
Claims Tribunal regarding allocation of work and disposal of appeals. 
The c!au<;e also provides that a claim not exceeding Rs. 50,000 may be 
disposed of by a single-Bench of the Appellate Claims Tril1unal. 
. Clauses 31 and 32.-These clauses provide for the establishmen~ of 
Service Matters Tribunals, the qualifications of their members and the 
scope of applications which the employees of the new Corporations or 
thf! Life Insurance Board may make to these Tribunals. 
Clauses 33 and 34.-These clauses provide for the procedure to be 
followed by Service Matters Tribunals and the service of orders passed 
by such Tribunals. 
Clauses 35 and 36.-These clauses define the authority of the Tribu-
nals. Every Tribunal shall have 'he same powers as are vested in a 
civil co'Urt in connection with oral and documentary evidence, shall 
have power to regulate its own procedure and every proceeding before 
a Tribunal shall be deemed to be a judicial proceeding. 
Clause 37.-This clause provides for the procedure where the mem-
bers of a Tribunal differ in their opinion. 
Clause 38.-This clause provides for the method of determinatir·n 0' 
equivalent ranks for the purpose of appoin~ment as members of :1 
Tribunal. 
Clause 39.-This clause deals with costs awarded by a Tribunal. 
Clause 40.-This clause provides fOr the establishment of a Fund by 
every new Corporation for crediting all receipt.q and debiting all pay-
ments of the Corporation thereto. 
Clause 41.-This clause provides for appointment of auditors by 
every new Corporation and the Life Insurance Board and the manner 
in which they will submit their reports. 
Clause 42.-This clause provides for actuarial valuations of the new 
Corporations once at least in every two years. The report of the 
ac~uaries will be submitted to the Central Government. 
Clause 43.-This clause provid~s for the submission by every new 
Corporation and the Life Insurance Board to the Central Government 
of the annual reports of their activities annually. The clause also 
provides that the new Corporations and the Life Insurance Board will 
fur?ish to the Central Government other reports and returns, etc., 
whlch the Central Government may, from time to time, reqUire . 
. Cla1L8P. 44.-This claUSe provides for the manner in which the surplus 
dlsclosed by the actuarial valuation of the life insurance business of every 
new Corporation shall be disposed of nine~y-fi.ve per cent. of the surpllll 

43 
will be allocated to the policy-holders, and the balance will be paid to 
the Central Government or will be utilised for such purposes and in 
such manner as the Central Government may determine. 
Clause 45.-This clause provides for the payment to the Central 
Government of the profits of the new Corporations accruing from busi-
ness other than life insurance business. 
Clause 46.-This clause provides that the report of the auditors on the 
annual acco'unts and the report on the actuarial valuation of the new 
Corporations will be laid before Parliament. The clause further provides 
that the reports on the activities of the new Corpora~ions and the Life 
Insurance Board will also be laid before Parliament. 
Clause 47.-This clause provide::; that the new Corporations will, 
subject to the exceptions laid down in the proposed legisla'Jon, have 
exclusive privilege of carrying on life insurance business in India. 
Clause 48.-This clause provides for permission being granted to any 
person to carryon life insurance business in India in respect of lives 
of persons ordinarily resident outside India. 
Claw;e 49.-This clause provides for the use of an official seal by 
the various offices of a new Corporation. 
Clause 50.-This clause provides for guarantee by the Central Gov-
ernment as to the payment of sums assured and vested bonuses under 
life insurance policies on the registers of the new Corporations. 
Clause 51.-This clause provides that a new Corporation shall not be 
placed in liquidation save by an order of the Central Government. 
Clause 52.-This clause provides for penalties for carrying on 'life 
insurance business in India in contravention of the proposed legislation. 
Clause sa.-This clause provides for ~nalties for withholding of 
property, etc., from the new Corporations on their establishment. 
Clause 54.-This clause contains the usual prOVision relating to 
punishment of offences by companies. 
Clause 55.-This clause provides that the jurisdiction of civil courts 
will be barred in a matter which a Service Matters Tribunal is em-
powered to entertain and adjudicate upon. 
Clause 56.-This clause provides for enforcement of the decisions and 
orders of the Tribunals . 
. Clause 57.-This clause provides for the application of the various pro-
visions of the Insurance Act, 1938 (4 of 1938) to the new Corporations. 
Clause sa.-This clause seeks to provide that no deductioll of tax 
wU 1 be made at source under section 193 or section 194 of the Income-
tax Act, 1961 (43 of 19(1), in respect of any interest or dividend payable 
to a new Corporation on any securities or shares owned by it or in 
which it has full, beneficial interest. . 
Clause 59.-This clause provides for exemption to certain funds and 
orgal1isations from the provisions of the proposed legislation to enable 
them to run schemes involving contingencies of life and death., 

Clause •. -This clause provides that the proceedinp ofa new Corpo-
ration, the Life Insurance Boud or a Tribunal will not be called in 
question merely by reason of the existence of any vacancy theretn or 
any defect in the constitution thereof. 
Clause SI.-This clause provides protection to members, Executive 
Directors or employees of the new Corporations and the Life Insurance 
Board for anything done in good faith or intended to be done under the 
proposed legislation. 
CLause 82.-This clause provides that the employees of the new 
CorporEltions, the Life Insurance Board and the Tribunals shall be 
deemed to be public servants. 
Clau.se sa.-This clause provides for the disqualifications for being 
eligible for the issue of licence to act as insurance agents and for 
annulment of any such licence if issued contravening the provision. 
Clause 64.-This clause provides that the employees of a new Corpo~ 
ration or of the Life Insurance Board or of a Tribunal, the members of 
a new Corporation or of the Life Insurance Board and the members of 
a Tribunal shall not take active part in politics. 
Clause 65.-This clause confers on the Central Government the power 
to make rules to carry out the provisions of the Bill. 
Clause 66.-This clause confers on every new Co~ration power to 
make regulations, not inconsistent with the provisIOns of the proposed 
legislation and the rules made thereunder, with the previous approval 
of the Central Government. 
Clause 67.-This clause provides that the notifications made under 
clause 57, rules made under clause 65 and regulations made under clause 
66 shall be laid before Parliament. 
Clause 68.-This clause provides for the provisions of the proposed 
legislation and the rules made thereunder to overri~ all other enact~ 
ments, etc. 
Clause 69.-This clause provides for removal of diftlculties. 
Clause 70.-This clause provides that notwithstanding the repeal of 
the Life Insurance Corporation Act, 1958, the actions, dues and 
contracts of the dissolved Corporation shall devolve on the correspond-
ing new Corporations. The clause also provides that the rules and 
regulations made under the aforesaid Act shall remain in force until 
they are duly altered. 
The FirB1; Schedule: 
Paragraph I.-This paragraph defines the expressions used in the First 
Schedule. 
Paragraph 2.-This paragraph provides for the manner in which the 
capital of the dissolved Corporation will be transferred 
to the new Corporations. 
Paragraph 3.-This paragraph provides for the allocation of the oftlcen 
and other employees of the dlssolved Corporation to the 

new Corporations which would come into being on the 
appointed day. The paragraph also provides for pro-
tecting the emoluments of the officers and other 
employees and an option that they can exercise 
in favour of not being an officer or other employee of 
the concerned corresponding Corporation by ;giving a 
month's notice. 
Paragraph 4.-This paragraph provides for the distribution of assets and 
liabilities of the dissolved Corporation and the allocation 
• 
of the same amongst the corresponding new Corpora-
tions in an equitable manner in accordance with 
actuarial principles. It also provides for the protection 
of all transactions, agreements, arrangements, contracts, 
etc., of the dissolved Corporation ·to continue as if 
they had been entered into by the corresponding new 
Corporations. Sub-paragraph (to) of this paragraph 
prov.ides for the distribution of the foreign branc.hes of 
the dissolved Corporation. 
Paragrap1t 5.-This paragraph provides for the rights and Uabilities of 
the dissolved Corporation in respect of life imrilrance 
policies transferred to the corresponding new Corpora-
tions and a one-time option to the policy-holders to 
obtain transfer of their policies to the new Corporation 
of their choice. 
Parngraph 6.-This paragraph provides for the continuance of the insur-
ance agents in the corresponding new Corporations on 
the same terms and conditions as would have been 
applicable to them if the proposed legislation had not 
been passed. 
The Second Schedule.-This Schedule specifies, the Zones, that is to 
say the area, referred to in clause 9 wherein intensive development of 
life insurance business would be the primary responsibility of the res-
pective new Corporations. 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Clause of the Bill provides that the authorised capital of each of 
the new Corporations shall be Rs. 5 crores and that the paid-up capital 
of each Corporation shall initially be Rs. 1 crore, to be increased subse-
quently if the circumstances so warrant. The initial paid-up capital of 
each new Corporation will be S'Ubscribed oy the Central Government 
out of the capital amount of Rs. 5 crores, provided to the dissolved 
Corporation. Immediately, therefore, no fresh outlay is involved. 
2. Clauses 22 and 27 of the Bill provide for the establishment of 
Claims Tribunals and an Appellate Claims Tribunal to deal with disputes 
relating to life inS'urance claims. Further, clause 31 provides for estab-
lishment of Service Matters Tribunals to deal with grievances relating 
to service matters oi employees. To start with, it is proposed to establish 
five Claims Tribunals and five Service Matters Tribunals besides the 
Appellate Claims Tribunal. The estimated non-recurring expenditure on 
account of the establishment of these Tribunals is of the order of Rs. 30 
lakhs and the estimated recurring expenditure is of the order of Rs. 42 
lakhs per annum. 
3. The establishment of the new Corporations and supervision and 
control over their affairs in terms of the various clauses of the Bill 
would place' additional burden of administration on ~he Insurance 
Divi!,ion of the Department of Economic Affairs. To ensure that added 
responsibilities of the Division are discharged satisfactorily and smoothly, 
some marginal additions would have to be made to the existing strength 
1)£ officers and s~aff. The estimated recurring expenaiture is likely to be 
of the order of Rs. lakhs per annum. 
4. In terms of clause 50, all contracts for assurance on the registers 
of the new operating units, including those transferred from the Corpo-
ration, will be guaranteed as to payment by the Central Government. It 
is unlikely that this guarantee will lead to any liability in fact. 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 57 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to apply 
certain provisions of the Insurance Act, 1938 (4 of 1938), by notification 
in the Official Gazette, to every Corporation established under the 
proposed legislation, subject to such conditions and modifications as 
may be specified in that notification. 
2. Clause 65 of the Bill empowers the Central Government, by noti-
fication in the Official Gazette: to make rules to carry out the provisions 
of the proposed legislation. Sub-clause (2) of this clause enumerates 
in detail the matters with respect to which rules may be made undier 
this clause. These matters relate, inter alia, the terrr. of office and 
conditions of service of the Chairman and other members of a Corpora-
tion, the matters subject to which investment of its funds shall be made 
by a Corporation, the fees and allowances to be paid to the members of 
a Committee constituted under the proposed legislation. t~e terms and 
conditions of service of the Executive Directors, Secretary and other 
officers and employees of a Corporation, the terms and conditions of 'Ser-
vice of a member of the Board, the times and places at which the Board 
shall meet and the procedure in regard to the transaction of business 
at its meetings which shall be observed by the Board, the terms and 
conditions of service of Secretary and other officers and employees of 
the Hoard, the manner in which the Board shall review the functioning 
of a Corporation and the service which the Board shall render to a 
Corporation, the o~her functions to be performed by the Board, the 
matters subject to which payment of an amount determined by the 
Central Government sfiall be made by a Corporation to the Board, the 
form in which an application or appeal shall be made to a Tribunal 
constituted under the proposed legislation and the fee which 
shall accompany such application or appeal, the matters subject to 
which a Tribunal constituted under the proposed legislation shall have 
power to regulate its own procedure, the conditions and limitations 
subject to which costs may be awarded by any Tribunal constituted 
under the proposed legislation, the form in which a report giving an 
account of its activities during the previous financial year shall be 
submitted by a Corporation and the Board to the Central Government 
and the terms and conditions of i work of the insurance agents of a 
Corporation. The power to make rules conferred by clause 6iS includes 
power to give retrospective effect to the terms ~d conditions of service 
of the employees or the terms and conditions of work of insurance 
agents and to amend by way of addition, variation or repeal such terms 
and conditions of service or, work with retrospeptive effect, from a date 
not earlier than the date of commencement of the proposed legislation. 
3. Clause 66 of the Bill empowers every Corporation established 
under the proposed legislation to make regulations, with the previous 
4'1 

~Ipproval of the Central Government, by notification in the 
Official Gazette not inconsistent with the provisions of the pro-
posed legislation and the rules made thereunder, to provide for 
all such residuary matters for which provision is expedient for 
the purpose of giving effect to the provisions of the proposed legis-
lation. These matters, inter alia, relate to the powers and functions of 
a Corporation which may be delegated to the officers in charge of its 
Divisional Offices and Branch Offices, the nrethod of recruitment of 
employees and insurance agents, the manner in which the Fund of a 
Corporation shall be maintained, the maintenance of separate funds 
and accounts at Divisional Offices and Branch Offices, the jurisdiction 
of Divisional Offices and Branch Offices, the conduct of business at 
meetings of a Corporation, the formation of Committees of a Corpora-
tion, the delegation of powers and functions to such Committees and 
the conduct of business at meetings of such Committees, the form and 
manner in which policies of life insurance may be issued and contracts 
may be executed, the classification of policies of life insurance for the 
purpose of declaring diftlerential bonuses wherever necessary, the 
manner in which and the intervals within which the accounta of 
Divisional Offices and Branch Offices ·may be inspected and their 
accounts audited, and the conditions subject to which any payment may 
be made by a Corporation. 
4. As the matters with respect to which rules or regulations may 
be made under clause 65 Or clause 66 pertain to matters of procedure or 
detail, the delegation of legislative power is of normal character. 
5. Clause 67 of the Bill provides the usual formula for laying of the 
said notifications, rules and regulations, as soon as they are made, before 
each House of Parliament. 
6. Clause 69 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to 
remove by order, not inconsisten~ with the provisions of the Bill. any 
difficulty which may arise in giving effect to the provisions of the pro-
posed legislation. This is by way of abundant caution and for covering 
difficulties which i~ is not practicable to visualise at this stage. It has, 
however, been provffiided that no such order shall be made after the 
expiry "f a period of two years from the commencement of the prop'Jsed 
legislation. It has also been provided that a copy of every such order 
made shall be laid before each House of Parliament. 

LOK SABRA 
-.-
• 
BILL 
to provide. with a view to the more effective realisation of the objectivei 
of nationalisation of Life insurance business, for the dissolution of the 
Life Insurance Corporation of India and for the establishment of a 
• number of corporations for the more efficient carrying on of the 
said business and for matters connected therewith or incidental 
thereto. 
(Shrt Pranab Kumar Mukherjee, 
MiniiteT of Finance.) 