As INTRODUCED IN Lok SABHA

, * 3 DEC 1999

Bill No. 109 of 1999

| CONTRACT LABOUR (REGULATION AND ABOLITION)
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 1999
By
‘Suet Basupes Acuaria, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Contract Labour (Regulation and Abolition) Act, 1970.
Beit enacted by Parliament in the Fiftieth Year of the Republic of India as follows: —

1, This Act may be called the Contract Labour (Regulation and Abolition) Shortitle.
nendment) Act, 1999.

2. In section 1 of the Contract Labour (Regulation and Abolition) Act, 1970 Amendment of
inafter referred to as the principal Act), in sub-section (4), io 1

(0) in clause (a), for the word "twenty", the word "ten" shall be substituted;
(ii) in clause (b), for the word "twenty", the word "ten" shall be substituted;

(iii) in the proviso, for the word "twenty", the word "ten" shall be
substituted.


Substitution of
‘new section for
section9,
Principal
employertobe
deemed to be

the employer
incase of non-

Amendment of
section 20.
Insertion of
new sections,

21810 210.

Hours of work
‘and weekly
rest,

Overtime
allowance,

Leave.

section 22.

section 23,

z

3. For section 9,of the principal Act, the following section shall be |
namely:—

“9. Notwithstanding anything contained in section 7 or section 8, if any princi
employer employs any contract labour,—

(0 without making an application for registration of his establishment
accordance with section 7;

(i) even after the registration of his establishment has been revoked ut
section 8; and

(iii) without the contractor or contractors, engaged by him, as the case may
obtaining licence under section 12,

he shall be deemed to have employed directly the workmen employed by the concern
contractor or contractors, as the case may be.”.

4. In section 20 of the principal Act, in sub-section (J), for the words and figures "
section 19”, the words, figures and letters “scction 19, section 21A, section 21B or secti
210" shall be substituted.

5. After section 21 of the principal Act, the following sections shall be insert
namely:—

“21A. (1) No workman shall be required to work more than nine hours a day
forty eight hours a week, as the case may be,

(2) No workman shall be required to work more than six days in a week,

21B. A workman who is required to work beyond nine hours a day or forty
eight hours a week, as the case may be, shall be paid overtime allowances at.
double the ordinary rates of wages payable to him.

216, Every workman to which this Act applies shall be entitled to,—

(@ annual leave with full pay at the rate of one day for every twenty working
days to be accumulated to a maximum of forty-five days in a year and such leave
shall be credited twice on the 30th June and 31st December each year;

2) casual leave with full pay at the rate of ten days a year;

(ii) sick leave at half the average pay for fourteen days in a year to be
accumulated to a maximum of forty-two days and shall be credited twice on the
30th June and 31st December each year; and

(iv) festival holidays for twelve days in a year to be selected in consultation
with the workers and in keeping in view the principal festivals in the area concerned".
6. In section 22 of the principal Act,—

@ in sub-section (J), for the words “for a term which may extend to three
months, or with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees”, the words “for a
term which may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to ten thousand
rupees” shall be substituted; and

(i) in sub-section (2), for the words “for a term which may extend to three
months, or with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees”, the words “for a
term which may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to ten thousand
Tupees” shall be substituted.

7. In section 23 of the principal Act, for the words “a term which may extend to three
months, or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees”, the words “a term which

may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to twenty thousand rupees” shall
be substituted.



3

8. In section 24 of the principal Act, for the words “a term which may extend to
months, or with fine which may extend to one thousand Tupees”, the words “a term

| may extend to six months or with fine which may extend to twenty thousand rupees”
| be substituted.

9. In section 27 of the principal Act, for the words “three months”, the words “six

ths” and in the proviso thereof, for the words “six months”, the' words “one year”
Il be substituted.

10. In section 29 of the principal Act, after sub-section (2), the following sub-section
Il be added, namely:—

“(3) The principal employer shall cause to submit such registers and records
as prescribed in sub-sections (1) and (2) to the appropriate authorities, within a time
limit, as may be prescribed.

11. In section 35 of the principal Act, in sub-section (/), for clause (m), the following
shall be substituted, namely:—

“(m) the form of registers and records to be maintained by principal employers
and contractors and their submission to the appropriate authority.”.

Amendment of
section 24,

Amendment of
section 27,

Amendment of
section 29.

section 35.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

‘The Contract labourers are the most exploited lot in the country. They are an unorg:
section who work at the mercy of the employers. They do not have any protection fro
labour welfare authorities as they are thinly spread over almost the entire working sect
the absence of an effective law enforcing agency, the contractors have a field day. The [
Act has some glaring lacunae which give contractors scope to exploit them. In order to p
some of those lacunae, it is imperative to amend the Contract Lahour (Regulation and
lition) Act, 1970,

Hence this Bill.

New Deut, BASUDEB ACHARI
October 25, 1999.


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 2 of the Bill provides that the Act will apply to every establishment in which
workmen are employed instead of twenty as at present. As such more establishments
will come under the purview of this Act and some expenditure will be involved in
viding canteen, rest-room, etc. facilities to workers, Clause 5 provides for payment of
ertime allowances. It also provides for annual feave, casual leave with full pay and sick
¢ at half the average pay to workmen. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would invoive
xpenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. An annual recurring expenditure of
bout rupees twenty lakh is likely to be incurred from the Consolidated Fund of India.

‘A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees ten lakh is aiso likely to be involved.


Short title,
extent,
‘commence-
ment and
application.

Effect of non-
registration,

Liability of
principal
employer in
certain cases,

Obstructions,

ANNEXURE

EXTRACT FROM THE ConTRACT LABOUR (REGULATION AND ApoLition) Acr, 1970
* *

1, (J) This Act may be called the Contract Labour (Regulation and | A

(2) It extends to the whole of India.

(3) It shall come into force on such date a:
cation in the Official Gazette,
provisions of this Act.

(4) It applies—

's the Central Government may, by notil
appoint and different dates may be appointed for differ

(a) to every establishment in which twenty or more workmen are employed
were employed on any day of the preceding twelve months as contract labour;

(b) to every contractor who employs or who employed on any day of tf
preceding twelve months twenty or more workmen :

Provided that the appropriate Government may, after giving not less than 1
months’ notice of its intention so to do, by notification

in the Official Gazette, apply
the provisions of this Act to any establishment or contr:

actor employing such num
of workinen less than twenty as may be specified in the notification,

* * * * *

9. No principal employer of an establishment, to which this Act applies, shall—

(a) in the case of an establishment required to be registered under section 7,

but which has not.been registered within the time fixed for the Purpose under th:
section,

(6) in the case of an establishment the registration in respect of which
been revoked under section 8,

employ contract labour in the establishment after the expiry of the period referred

to in clause (a) or after the revocation of registration referred to in clause (b), as th
case may be.

* * * * * *

20. (J) If any amenity required to be Provided under section 16, section 17,
section 18 or section 19 for the benefit of the contract labour employed in an establishm
is not provided by the contractor within the time prescribed therefor, such amenity shall
be provided by the principal employer within such time as may be piescribed,

* * * * *

*

22. (1) Whoever obstructs an inspector in the discharge of his duties under this Act
or refuses or wilfully neglects to afford the inspector any reasonable facility for making
any inspection, examination, inquiry or investigation authorised by or under this Act in
relation to an establishment to which, or a contractor to whom, this Act applies, shall be

punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three months, or with fine
which may extend to five hundred Tupees or with both.

before or being examined by an inspector acting in pursuance of his duties under shis Act,
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three months, of
with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees, ot with both,

* + * * *


23. Whoever contravenes any provision of this Act or of any rules made thereunder

prohibiting, restricting or regulating the employment of contract labour, or contravenes

y coridition of a licence granted under this Act, shall be punishable wi imprisonment
oF a term which may extend to three months, or with fine which may extend to one
sand rupees, or with both and in the case of a continuing contravention with an
litional fine which may extend to one hundred rupees for every day during which such
tontravention continues after conviction for the first such contravention.

24. If any person contravenes any of the provisions of this Act or any rules made
hereunder for which no other penalty is elsewhere provided, he shall be punishable with

isonment for a term which may extend to three months, or with fine which may
d to one thousand rupees, or with both.

* * * * * अं

27. No court shall take cognizance of an offence punishable under this Act unless
ie complaint thereof is made within three months from the date on which the alleged
mmission of the offence came to the knowledge of an inspector:

Provided that where the offence consists of disobeying a written order made by an
Spector, complaint thereof may be made within six months of the date on which the
snce is alleged to have been committed,

* * * * * %

29. (1) Every principal employer and every contractor shall maintain such registers
ecords giving such particulars of contract labour employed, the nature of work

ed by the contract labour, the rates of wages paid to the contract labour and such
er particulars in such form as may be prescribed.

(2) Every principal employer and every contractor shall keep exhibited in such manner
ay be prescribed within the premises of the establishment where the contract labour is
iployed, notices in the prescribed form containing Particulars about the hours of work,
lure of duty and such other information as may be prescribed.
* * * * * *
35. (/) The appropriate Government may, subject to the condition of previous
tion, make rules for carrying out the Purposes of this Act.
(2) In particutar, and without Prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power,
les may proyide for all or any of the following matters, namel:

* * * *

*

(m) the form of registers and records to be maintained by principal employers
10 contractors :

* * * *

Contravention
of provisions
regarding
employment
of contract
labour.

Other offences.

Limitation of
prosecutions.

Registers and
other records to
be maintained,

Power to make
tules,


LOK SABHA

A
BILL
further to amend the Contract Labour (Regulation and Abolition) Act, |

(Shri Basudeb Acharia, M.P)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—1763ALS—29-11-1999, is