As INTRODUCED IN Lolt SABRA ON 
5 DEC 1961 
~ No. 10' of 1968 
THE ESSENTIAL SERVICES MAINTENANCE BILL, 1968 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the maintenance of certain essential services and the 
normal life of the community. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Nineteenth Year of the 
Republic of India as follows:-
1. (1) This Act may be called the Essential Services Maintenance Short tide extent and Act, 1968. 4uatioa. 
$ (2) It extends to the whole of India: 
Provided that it shall not apply to the State of Jammu and 
Kashmir except to the extent to which the provisions of this Act 
relate to Union employees. 
(3) It shall cease to have effect on the expiry ot five years from 
10 the date of commencement of this Act except as respects things done 
or omitted to be done before such cesser of operation of this Act, 
10 of 1897' and section 6 of the General Clauses Act, 1897, shall apply upon 

DCftDltlons. 
2 
such cesser of operation of this Act as if it had then been repealed 
by a Central Act. 
2. (1) In this Act,-
(a) "essential service" means-
(i) any postal, telegraph or telephone service; 
(ii) any railway service or any other transport service 
for the carriage of passengers or goods by land, water or 
air: 
s 
(iii) any service connected with the operation or main-
tenance of aerodromes, or with the operation, repair or 10 
maintenance of aircraft; 
(iv) any service connected with the loading, unloading, 
movement or storage of goods in any port; 
(v) any service connected with the clearance of goods 
or passengers through the customs or with the prevention IS 
of smuggling; 
(vi) any service in any mint or security press; 
(vii) any service in any defence establishment of the 
Government of India; 
(viii) any service in connection with the affairs of the 20 
Union, not being a service specified in any of the foregoing 
sub-clauses; 
(ix) any other service connected with matters with 
respect to which Parliament has power to make laws and 
which the Central Government being of opinion that strikes 2S 
therein would prejudicially affect the maintenance of any 
public utility service, the public safety or the maintenance 
of supplies and services necessary for the life of the com-
munity or would result in the infliction of grave hardship 
on the community, may, by notification in the Oftlcial30 
Gazette, declare to be an essential service for the purposes 
of this Act; 
(b) "strike" means the cessation of work by a body of 
persons employed in any essential service acting in combination 
or a concerted refusal or a refusal under a common under- 3S 
standing of any number of persons who are or have been so 
employed to continue to work or to accept employment, and 
includes-
(i) refusal to work overtime where such work is neces-
sary for the maintenance of any essential service; . 40 

8 
(ii) any other conduct which is likely to result in, ot 
results in, cessation or substantial retardation of work in 
any essential service. 
(2) Every notification issued under sub-clause (iz) of clause (0) 
5 of sub-section (1) shall be laid, as soon as may be, after it is issued 
before each House of Parliament while it is in session for a total 
period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in 
Awo successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session in 
which it is so laid or the session immediately following, both Houses 
10 agree in making any modification in the notification or both Houses 
agree that the notification should not be issued, the notification 
shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no 
effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification 
or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything 
I S previously done under or by virtue of that notification. 
3. (1) If the Central Government is satisfied that in the public po~ ,to 
interest it is necessary or expedient so to do, it may, by general or ft:1bt 
special Order, prohibit strikes in any essential service specified in certain employ-the Order. mean. 
20 (2) An Order made under .sub-section (1) shall be published in 
such manner as the Central Government considers best calculated 
to bring it to the notice of the persons affected by the Orq.er. 
(3) An Order made under sub-section (1) shall be in force for 
six months only, but the Central Government may, by a like Order, 
25 extend it for any period not exceeding six months if it is satisfied 
that in the public interest it is necessary or expedient so to do. 
(4) Upon the issue of an Order under sub-section (1) ,-
(a) no person employed in any essential service to which 
the Order relates shall go or remain on strike; 
30 (b) any strike declared or conunenced, whether before or 
after the issue of the Order, by persons employed in any such 
service shall be illegal. 
4. Any person who conunences a strike -which is illegal under PeDlltJ tor 
this Act or goes or remains on, or otherwise takes part in, any such i11~pl 
3S strike shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may Itnbl. 
extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to two hundred 
rupees, or with both, 
S. Any person who instigates, or incites other persons to take PeDaltJ for 
part in, or otherwise acts in furtherance of, a strike which is illegal inatipton, 
40 under this Act shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term etc-

which may extend to one year, or with fine which may extend to 
one thousand rupees, or with both. 
P~lty for 6. Any person who knowingly expends or supplies any money in 
r~~ ~n- furtherance or support of a strike which is illegal under this Act 
ill!:l shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend S 
str kes. to one year, or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, 
or with both. 
Pewer t. 
arrest 
without 
warrant. 
Act to 
over ride 
other laws. 
Repeal and 
savina· 
7. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1898, any police officer may arrest without warrant any s .r 111911. 
person who is reasonably suspected of having committed any offence 10 
under this Act. 
8. The provisions of this Act and of any Order issued thereunder 
shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith 
contained in the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, or in any other law 14 of 1947. 
for the time being in force. IS 
9. (1) The Essential Services Maintenance Ordinance, 1968, is 9.r 1968· 
hereby repealed. 
(2) NotwIthstanding such repeal, anything done or any action 
taken under the said Ordinance shall be deemed to have been done 
or taken under this Act, as if this Act had come into force on the 2. 
13th day of September, 1968. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Bill seeks to replace the Essential Services Maintenance 
Ordinance, 1968, by a temporary Act. It has always been the 
endeavour of Government to provide comprehensive and positive 
arrangements for the consideration of the legitimate problems and 
grievances ot its employees. Nevertheless, in the prevailing circum-
stances, Government consider that they should continue to have 
powers to meet any situation which may be created by attempts 
similar to those made on the eve of the 19th September and to ensure 
the maintenance of essential services and the normal life of the com-
munity. 
~. The Bill is only an enabling measure. It defines "essential 
service" which, inter alia, includes any service declared as such by 
notification by the Central Government. The Bill makes suitable 
provisions for the laying of such notifications before Parliament. 
The Bill authorises the Central Government to prohibit strikes in 
essential services and declares prohibited strikes to be illegal and 
provides for penalties for persons participating in such strikes as well 
as for persons instigating and financing such strikes. 
NEW DELHI; Y. B. CHAVAN. 
The 29th November, 1968. 
5 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Item (a) of clause 2(1) of the Bill seeks to define "essential 
service". Sub-items (i) to (viii) of this item enumerate certai!O. 
essential services. As it is not possible to enumerate all essential 
services, sub-item (ix) of this item empowers the Central Govem-
ment to declare by notification in the Official Gazette certain other 
services also to be essential services for the purposes of the proposed 
legislation. The sub-item clearly brings out the criteria on the basis 
of which any service mky be declareti thereunder to be an essential 
service. Thus a service cannot be declated to be an essential service 
under the said sub-item (ix), unless the service is connected with 
matters with respect to which Parliament has ,power to make laws 
and unless the Central Government is of opinion that strikes there-
in would prejudicially affect the maintenance of any public utility 
service, the public safety or the maintenance of supplies anti ser-
vices necessary for the life of the community or would result in the 
infliction of grave hardship on the community. Under clause 2 (2) 
of the Bill, any notification under the said sub-item (ix) has to be 
laid before Parliament in the same way as rules made under an en-
actment. In the circumstances, the delegation of legislative power 
is of a normal character. • 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the maintenance of certain essential services and 
the normal life of the community. 
(Shri Y. B. Chavan, Minister 
of Home Affairs). 