1
Short title and
extent.
THE AGRICULTURAL WORKERS (EMPLOYMENT,
CONDITIONS OF SERVICE AND WELFARE) BILL, 2014
By
SHRI ADHIR RANJAN CHOWDHURY, M.P.
A
BILL
to protect the interests of agricultural workers and for matters connected
therewith
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-fifth Year of the Republic of India as
follows: —
1. (1) This Act may be called the Agricultural Workers (Employment, Conditions
of  Service and Welfare) Act, 2014.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
Bill No. 109 of  2014
TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "agricultural workers" means a person who follows one or more of the
following agricultural occupations in the capacity of labourer on hire or in
exchange whether in cash or in kind or partly in cash and partly in kind:—
(i) farming, including the cultivation and tillage of soil;
(ii) dairy farming;
(iii) pisciculture;
(iv) production, cultivation, growing and harvesting of any
horticulture, floriculture commodity;
(v) raising of livestock, bee-keeping or poultry;
(vi) any practice performed on a farm as incidental to, or in
conjunction with, the farm  operations (including any forestry or timbering
operations and the preparation for market and delivery to storage or to
market or to carriage for transportation of farm products); and
(vii) growing fodder or thatching grass or for grazing cattle; and
(b) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3.  The Central Government shall establish an Agricultural Workers Welfare
Board (hereinafter referred to as Board) to protect the interests of agricultural
workers in the country.
4. (1) The Board shall consist of a Chairperson and twenty other members.
(2) The Chairperson of the Board shall be elected by the members of the Board.
(3) The members of the Board shall be chosen by agricultural workers in such
manner as may be prescribed.
(4) The Chairperson and other members of the Board shall hold office for a
period of five years.
(5) The salary and allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of
service of the Chairperson and members of the Board shall be such as may be prescribed.
(6) The Headquarters of the Board shall be at New Delhi.
5. The Board shall—
(i) lay down broad guidelines for welfare of agricultural workers;
(ii) provide employment to agricultural workers during off season period
or during natural calamities with such wages as may be prescribed;
 ( iii) provide financial assistance to agricultural workers in case
employment is not provided to them; and
(iv) establish committees at State level with such composition, as may be
prescribed, to monitor the implementation of guidelines laid down by the Board
for welfare of agricultural workers.
6. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament
by law in this behalf, provide requisite funds for carrying out the purposes of this
Act.
7. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make
rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is
made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of
Establishment of
Agricultural
Workers Welfare
Board.
Central
Government to
provide funds.
Definitions.
Chairperson and
other members
of Board.
Functions of
Board.
Power to make
rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or
the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in
the rule or both the Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may
be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice
to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
5

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
There are about 320 million workers in the country, out of whom 20 million are
agricultural workers. Floods and droughts play havoc in the lives of agricultural
workers. The use of pesticides and chemical fertilizers also cause serious health
hazards to the agricultural workers. Their jobs are at the mercy of the land owners and
there is no security of employment. It is, therefore, necessary that the agricultural
workers are fully protected and the benefits available to industrial workers in the
country are also provided to agricultural labourers.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; ADHIR RANJAN CHOWDHURY
July 14, 2014.
4

FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for establishment of Agricultural Workers Welfare
Board to protect the interests of agricultural workers in the country. Clause 5 provides
for employment and assistance to agricultural workers during off season period.
Clause 6 provides for supply of requisite funds by the Central Government to implement
the provisions of the Bill. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from
the Consolidated Fund of India. It is likely to involve an annual recurring expenditure
of about rupees three hundred crore from the Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees one crore is also likely to be
involved.
5

6
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 7 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying
out the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the
delegation of legislative power is of a normal character.

LOK  SABHA
—————
A
BILL
to protect the interests of agricultural workers and for matters connected
therewith
—————
(Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—2564LS(S3)—31-10-2014.