art 1N Lok SaBHA

TUN 999

Bill No. 10 of 1998

THE REPRESENTATION OF THE PEOPLE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1998
By
SHRI PRABHU DAYAL KATHERIA, M.P,
A
BILL
Jurther to amend the Representation of the People Act, 1951.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Forty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as
foliows:—

1. This Act may be called the Representation of the People (Amendment) Act.
1998.

2 After section 8A of the Representation of the People Act, 1951, the following
section shall be inserted, namely:—

“8B. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act or any other law for the
time being in force, any person, who has been convicted of indulging in any criminal
activities or supporting or promoting the cause of any Criminal activities or abetting any
criminal activities or, who is convicted of Promoting or supporting or abetting those
persons who indulge in anti-national activities, shall be disqualified.

Short title

आला of new
seution SB

of criminal
conviction, ete


Explanation.—For the purposes of this section “criminal activities” means and
includes such criminal activity the punishment for which is not less than six months.

(2) If any political party knowingly fields any such person, as is referred to in sub-
section (1), to contest election, the recognition or registration, as the case may be, of that
Political party shall be withdrawn by the Election Commission.

(3) The Election Commission shall cause to investigate whether any of the
candidates who are contesting the election belongs to a category of persons referred
to in sub-section (1).”.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

In the recent years it has been observed that candidates with criminal background
who themselves indulge or support persons involved in anti-national activities, have been
contesting elections both to Parliament and State Legislatures. Due to this, the whole
Political system has been criminalised. These candidates belong to certain political par-
ties, which, without being aware of their criminal background, give tickets to them for
contesting elections to Parliament and State Assemblies. Money power, muscle power
and corrupt means play important role.

It is, therefore, proposed that no candidate with a criminal background should be
allowed to contest any election. Any party, which knowingly gives tickets to such candi-
dates, should be de-registered/de-recognised. Such a step would cleanse the political
system of its evils.

Hence this Bill.

New Detui; PRABHU DAYAL KATHERIA
March 31, 1998


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 2 of the Bill provides that the Election Commission shall cause to investigate
whether any of the candidates who are contesting election have been convicted or indulging
in any criminal activities, etc. The process of such investigation of contesting candidates
may require the Election Commission to appoint some staff for the purpose. The Bill,
therefore, if enacted would involv expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is
estimated that an annual recurring expenditure to the tune of rupees two lakh would be
involved out of the Consolidated Fund of India

No non-recurring expenditure is likely to be involved.


LOK SABHA

BILL

further to amend the Representation of the People Act, 1951,

(Shri Prabhu Dayal Katheria, M. P)

MGIP(PLU)MAND—3e4l S—21.4.99,