'2 of 1962. 
r 
l 
As INTRODUCED IN Lox SABRA ON 
1 8 FEB 1969. 
Bm No. 10 of ._ 
THE CUSTOMS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1969 
A 
BILL 
• further to amend the CustOm8 Act, 1962. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twentieth Year of the Republic 
or .India as follows:-
1. (1) This Act may be called the Customs (Amendmel'lt) Act, 1969. 
(2) It extends to the whole of India. 
Short 
title, 
ez1IeD,t 
5 (3) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 3rt1. 
January, 1969. 
day of and aom-
mence-
mem. 
10 
2. After Chapter IV of the Customs Act, 1962 (hereinafter referred In8ertion 
to as the principal Act), the following Chapters shall be inserted, of DeW 
el ~~ nam y:- TVA. 1ft 
'CHAPTER IVA and IVC. 
DzTBconON OF ILLEGALLY IMPORTED GOODS AND PRBV!:NTlON OF THE DISPOSAL 
THEREOF 
llA. In this Chapter, unless the context otherwise requires,- Deftni-
(4) ''illegal import" means the import of any goods in tions. 
contravention of the provisions of this Act or any other law for 
the time being in force; 
(b) liiutimated place" means a place intimated under sub-
section (1), sub-section (2) or sub-section (3), as the case may 
be, of section lle; 

Power of 
Central 
Govern-
ment 
to notllY 
lOods. 
Pencma 
poueuina 
not1Aed 
IGOda to 
intimate 
the place 
of Itorap, 
etc. 
(c) "not1fled date", in reletion to goods o~ any tleecrtptton, 
means the date on which the notification in relation to such 
goods il illUed under section UB; 
(d) "notified goods" means goods specified in the notifica-
tion issued under section llB. 5 
11B. If, having regard to the magnitude of the illegal import of 
goods of any class or description, the Central Government is satisfied 
that it is expelClient in the public interest to take special meaSUl'8ll 
for the purpose of checking the illegal import, circulation or disposal 
of such goods, or facilitating the detection of such goods, it may, by 10 
notification in the Official Gazette, specify goods of such clus or 
deecription. 
lIC. (1) Every person who owns, possesses or contJols, on the 
notified date, any notified goods, shall, within seven days from that 
tlate, deliver to the proper officer a statement (in such form, in such 15 
manner and containing such particulars as may be specified by rulea 
made in this behalf) in relation to the notified goods owned, possessed. 
or controlled by him and the place where such goods are kept or 
stored. 
(2) Every person who acquires, after the notifieti date, any ~o 
notifted goods, shall, before making such acquisition, deliver to the 
proper officer an· intimation containing the particulars of the plaee 
where such goods are proposed to be kept or stored after such 
acquiaitionand shall, immediately on such acquisition, deliver to the 
proper oftlcer a atatement (in .8U~h form, in such manner and con·. 2S 
taming such particulars as may be specified by rUles made in this 
behalf) in relation to the notified goods acquiretl by him: 
Provided that a person who has delivered a statement, whether 
under IUb-seetion (1) or lUb-seetion (2). in relation t!> any notified 
goods, owned, possessed, controDeti or acquired by him, shall not be '30 
required to deliver any further statement in relation to any notified 
goods acquired by him, after the date of delivery of the said state-
ment, so long al the not~ goods 10 acquired are kept or stored at 
the intimated place. 
(3) If any person intends to shift any notified goods to any place 35 
other than the intimated place, he shall, before taking out such 
goods from the intimated place, deliver to the proper ofticer an 
intimation containing the particulars of the place to which such goatis 
are proposed to be sh1fted. 
(4) No person Jhall, after the expiry of seven days from the 40 
notified date, keep or store any notified goods at any place other than 
the intimated place. 
(5) Where any notifted goods have been sold or transferreti, 
such goods shall not be taken from one place to another unless they 
are accompanied by the voucher referred to in section UF. 4S 
(5) No nottfled goods (other than those which have been sold 
or transferred) shall be taken from one place to another unless they 
are accompanied by a transport voucher (in such form ami eontain~ 
ing such particulars as may be specified by rules made in this behalf) 
prepared. by the pe1'IOn8 owning, poBselSing or controlling such gooda. 50 

5 
IS 
20 
2S 
30 
35 
11D. No person shall acquire (except by gift or succession, from Precau~ 
any other individual in India), after thenotifted date, any notified tions to 
~"'- be taken 
• ...--- by person; 
(i) unless such goods are accompanied by,- acquiring 
notified 
(4) the voucher referred to in section llF or the memo- gooda. 
randum referred to in sub-section (2) of sectwn HG, as the 
case may be, or 
<,b) in the case of a person who haa himaelf imported 
any goods, any evidence showing clearance of such goods by 
the Customs AuthOrities; and 
(ii) unless he has taken, before acquirinj such goods from 
a person other than a tiealer having a 1lxed place of business, 
such reasonable steps as may be specified by rules made in this 
behalf, to ensure that the goods so acquu-ed by him are not goods 
which have been illegally imported. 
HE. (1) Every person who, on or after the notified date, owns, Persons 
possesses, controls or acquires any notified goods shall maintain (in possessing 
such form and in such manner as may be specified by rules made in n°odstifted . . go to this behalf) a true and complete account of such goods and shall, as maintain 
often as he acquires or parts with any notified goods, make an entry accounts. 
in the said account in relation to such acquisition or parting with, 
and shall also state therein the particulars of the person from whom 
such goods have been acquired or in whose favour luch goods have 
been partetl. with, as the case may be, and such account shall be 
kept, elong with the goods, at the place of storage of the notified 
goods to which such accounts relate: 
Provided that it shall not be necessary to maintain separately 
accounts in the form and manner apecifted by rules made in this 
behalf in the case of a person who is already maintaining accounts 
which contain the particulars specified by the said rules. 
(2) Every person who owns, possesses or controls any noti1ieti 
goods and who uses any such goods for the manufacture of any 
other goods, shall maintain (in such form, in such manner and 
containing such particulars as may be specified by rules made in this 
behalf) a true and complete account of the notified goods so Uied 
by him and shall keep such account at the intimated place. 
UF. On and from the notified date, no person shall sell or other- Sale . .te. 
wise transfer any notified goods, unless every transaction in relation of notift8d 
to the sale or transfer of such goods is evidenced by a voucher in I~d. to be 
such form. and containing such particulars as may be specified by byeVldenced vou-
rules made in this behalf. ehers. 
lIG. (1) Nothing in sections lIC, llE anti llF shall apply to any SeCtions 
notified goods which are- lIe, llE 
. ~dl~ 
(4) In personal use of the person by whom they are owned, not to lIP-
possessed or controlled, or ply to··· 
.~jn 
(b) kept in the residentIal premises of a person for 1u. penon.J 
penonal use. u.. 

Power of 
Central 
Qoyem.-
ment to 
speejfy 
fOOcII. 
Penon,; 
J)MIe8Iinl 
specl6ed 
IOOclI to 
intimate 
the place 
of storaae. 
etc:. 
(2) If any person, who is in possession of any noWied goods 
referred. to in sub~section (1), sells, or otherwise transfers for a 
valuable eonsideration, any such goods, he shall issue to the purchaser 
or traDlderee, as the case may be, a memorantlum containing such 
particulars as may be specified. by rules made in this behalf and DO 5 
such goods shall be taken from one place to another weBS they are 
accompanied by the said memorandum. 
CHAPl'ER IVB 
PREVENTION OR DETENTION O}O' ILLilGAL EXPORT OF ClOODS 
llH. In this Chapter, unless the context otherwise requires,- 10 
(a) "illegal export" means the export of any goods in contra-
vention of the provisions of this Act or any other law for. the 
time being in force; 
(b) "intimated place" means a place intimated under 8ub~ 
section (1), sub-section (2) or sUIb-section (3), as the case may IS 
be, of section llJ; 
(c) "specified area" includes the Indian customs waters, and 
such inland area, not exceeding fifty kilometres in width from 
any coast or other border of India, as the Central Government 
may, having regard to the vulnerability of that area to smug- 20 
sling, by notification in the Offtcial Gazette, specify in this I 
behalf: 
Provided that where a part of any village, town or city 
falls within a specified area, the whole 01 such village, town or 
city shall, notwithstanding that the whole of it· is not within lS 
fifty kilometres from any coast or other border of India, be 
deemed to be included in such specified area; 
(d) "specified date", in relation to specified goods, means th .. 
'date on which any notification is issued under section l1~I in 
t&lation to those goods in any specified: area; 30 
(e) "specified goods" means goods of any description speci-
fied in the notification issu~ under section 11-1 in relation to a 
specified area. 
11-1. If, having regard to the magnitude of the illegal export ot 
goods of any class or desCription, the Central Government is satisfied 
that it is expedient in the public interest to take special measures 3S 
for the purpose of checking the illegal export or facilitating the 
detection of goods which are likely to be illegally exported, it Inay 
by notification in the Official Gazette, specify goods of such class or 
description. 40 
llJ. (1) Every person who owns, poSsesses or controls, on the 
specified date, any specified goods, the market price of whicn 
exceeds fifteen thousand rupees shall, within seven days from that 
date, deliver to the proper officer an intimation containing the 
particulars of the place where such goods are kept or stored within 4S 
the specified are ... 

5 
10 
lO 
35 
45 
6 
. . (2) !very person who acquires (within the specified area), 
;after. the speeifled date, any specified goods,-
(i) the market price of which, or 
(Ii) the market price of which together with the market 
price of any specified goods of the same class or description, if 
any, owned, possessed or controlled by him on the date of such 
acquisition, 
exceeds ~een thousand rupees shall, before malting such acquisi-
tion, dell"er to the proper officer an intimation containing the 
particulars of the place where such goods are proposed to be kept 
Qr stored after such acquisition: 
Provided that a person who has delivered an intimation, whether 
under sub-section (1) or sub-section (2), in relation to any specified 
goods, owned, possessed, controlled or acquired by him, shall not be 
requirE!'d to deliver any further intimation so long as the specified 
goods are kept or stored at the intimated place. 
(3) If any person intends to shift any specified goods to which 
sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) applies, to any place other than 
the intimated place, he shall, before taking out such goods from the 
intimated place, deliver to the proper officer an intimatt>n contam-
i. the particulars of the place to which such goods are proposerd 
to be shifted. 
(4) No person shall, after the expiry of seven days from the 
specified date, keep or store any specified goods to which sub-sec-
tion (1) or sub-section (2) applies, at any plaee other than the 
intimated place. 
11K. (1) No specified goods shall be transported from, into or Tranalport 
within any spec1fiftl area or loaded on any animal or conveyance in of speclft-
such area, unless they are accompanied by a transport voucher (in :: ~ 
such fonn and eontaining such particulars as may be specified by covered by 
rules made in this behalf) prepared by the person owning, possessing, YOU4IherB. 
controlling or selling such goods: 
Provided that no transport voucher shall be necessary for the 
transport,. within a village, town or city, of any specified gooda the 
market price of which, on the date of transport, does not exceed 
one thousand rupees. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), 
where the Central Government, after considering the nature of any 
specified goods, the time, mode, route anti the market price of the 
goods intended to be transported, the purpose of the transportation 
and the wlnerability of the specified area with regard to the illegal 
export of such goods, is satisfied that it is expedient in the public 
interest so to do, it may,-
(i) by notification in the Official Gazette, specify goods of 
such class or description and of a market price exceeding such 
sum as that Government may notify; and different sums in 
relation to the specified. goods of the same ciall or description, 
or difterent claases or descriptions, may be notified for the same 
apecified area or for difterent speoifted areu, IIld 

Persons 
possessing 
specUleci 
goods to 
maintain 
aocounta. 
step, 
to be 
taken 
by per-
sona seli 
ing or 
transfer-
ring any 
specifled 
goeM.. 
6 
(ii) diJkt that no person shaU transport any goods so 
specified unless the. transport voucher in relation to them has 
been countersigned by the proper officer. 
IlL. (1) Every person who, on or after tile specified date, owns, 
possesses or controls, within a specified ares, any specified gooda of S 
a market price exceedmg fifteen thousand rupees, shall mamtain 
(in such fonn and in suah manner as may be specified by rules made 
in this behalf) a true and complete account of such goods and shall, 
as often as he acquires or parts With any specified goods, make an 
entry in the said account in relation to such acquisition or parting 10 
with, and shall also state therein the particulars of the person from 
whom such goods have been acquired or in whose favour such goods 
have been parted with, as the case may be, and such account ahall 
be kept, along with the goods, at the place of storage of the specified 
goods to which such accounts relate: IS 
Provided that it shall not be necessary to maintain separately 
accounts in the form and manner specified by rules nuape in this 
behalf in the case of a person who is already maintaining accounts 
which contain the particulars specified by the said rules. 
(2) Every person who owns, possesses or controls any specified ;lO 
goods to which the provisions of sub-section (1) apply, and who uses 
any such goods for the manufacture of any other gootis, shall· main-
tain (in such form, in such manner and containing such particulars 
as may be specified by rules made in this behalf) a true and complete 
account of the specified goods so used by him and shall keep such Z5 
account at the intimated place. 
(3) If at any time, on a verification made by a proper oftlcer, it 
is found that any specified goods owned, possessed or controlled by 
a person are lesser in quantity than the stock of such goods as shown, 
at the time of such verification, in the -accounts referred to in sub.. 30 
section (1), read with the accounts referred to in sub-section (2), it 
shall be presumed, unless the contrary is proved, that such goods, 
to the extent that they are lesser than the stock shown in the said 
accounts, have been illegally exported and that the person. owning, 
poSle68ing or controlling such goods has been concerned with the 35 
illegal export thereof. 
11M. Except where he receives payment by cheque dawn by the 
purchaser, every person who sells or otherwise transfers within any 
specified area, any specified goods, shall obtain, on his copy of the 
sale or transfer voucher, the signature and full postal address of the 40 
person to whom such sale or transfer is made and shall also take such 
other reasonable steps as may be specified by rules made in thiB 
behalf to ensure that the purchaser or transferee, as the case may be, 
is not a fictitious person, and if he omits or fails to take such steps, 
it shall be presumed, unless the contrary is proved, that such goods 4S 
have been illegally exported and the person who had sold or other-
wise transferred such goods had been concerned in such illepl export: 
Provided that nothing in this seetion shall apply to petty sale. 
of any spect1letl goods if the aggregate Market price obtained by luch 
petty sales, macie in the course of 'a day, does not exceed two So 
thou.and and five hundred rupeee. 

5 
JO 
, 
Bl:plAMtion.-In this section "petty .. le" means ... le at a prioe 
which does not exeed one thousand rupees. 
CHAPTER rvc 
~ -TO EXEMPT FROM THE PROVISIONS OF 
CJurrus IVA AND IVB . 
UN. If the Central Government is satis1ied that it is necessary ~ ... 
in the public interest so to do, it may, by notification in the Oftldal exempt. 
Gazette, exempt generally, either absolutely or subject to such condi-
tions as may be specified in the notification, goods of any class or 
cJeleription from all or any of the provisions of Chapter IVA or 
Chapter IVD.'. 
3. Afief section 106 of the principal Act, the following section shall lnaert.ion 
be inae~",llamely:- of .. ., ~ 
106A 
"106A. Any proper officer authorised in this behalf by the Power to 
15 Collector of Customs may, for the purpose of ascertaining whether inspect. 
or not the requirements of this Act have been complied with, at I.ny 
reasonable time, enter a~ place intimated under Chapter IVA or 
Chapter !VB, as the ease may be, anti inspect the goods kept or 
stonll therein and reqtlire any person found therein, who is for the 
ao time being in charge thereof, to produce to him for his inspection 
the aeeounts maintained under the said Chapter IV A or Chapter 
!VB, as the case may be, and to furni,sh to him Mlch other infonna-
tion as he may reasonably require for the purpose of ascertaining 
whether or not such goods have been iJliegally imported. exportetl or 
~5 are likely to be illegally exported.". 
t. In section 111 of the principal An, after clause' (0), the following Amend· 
claulle shall be inserted, namely: _ meat of 
eeetion 
"(,,) any notified goods in relation to which any provisions of 111. 
Chapter TVA or of any rule made under this Act for carrying out the 
30 the purposes of that Chapter have been contravened.". 
S. In sectfOtl. 113 of the principal Act, after clause (k), the following Amend. 
claUle shall be inserted namely: - meat of , ~~ 
,. (l) any specift~ goods in relation to which any provisions of 113. 
Chapter !VB or of any rule matle under this Act for carrying out the 
35 purpoHs of that Chapter have been contravened.". 
e. Tn section- 151 of the principal Act, after the ftgures "11", the figures Amend-
and letters "UB, llH,n-I. -1lK, UN" shall be inserted. ment or 
section 
159. 
1 of 1981. 7. (1) The Customs (Amendment) Ordinance, 1969, is h~by repeal- Repeal . and ~. . 
40 (2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken 
un\:Ier the principal Act, as amended by the said OrdiDance, shall be 
deemed to have been done or taken under the corresponding provisions 
of the principal Act as amended by this Act. 
saVlng, 

STATEMENT Oll' OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Bill is in replacement of the Customs (Amendment) Ordinance, 
1969 issued on the 3rd January, 1969. 
Because of large scale smuggling of silver out of the country and of 
various consumer articles into the country, it has become necessary to 
make additional provisions in the Customs Act, 1962 80 that smuggl~ 
goods and attempts at smuggling can be effectively and expeditioua11 
dealt with. The object of the provisions of the Bill is to prevent BlDUI-
gling by facilitating the detection and confiscation of goods smuggled into 
the country and goods sought to be smuggled out of the country. The 
Notes on clauses explain the various provisions contained in the Bill. 
NEW Dl:LHI; MORARJI R. DESAI. 
'the 7th FehnUlry. 1969. 
PRESIDENT'S REeOMMENDATION U»JDER ARTICLE 117 OF THE 
CONSTITUTION OF INDIA 
[Copy of letter No. Z/5/68-Cus.VI, dated the 10th February, l.969 
from Shri Morarji Desai, Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Finance 
to the Secretary, Lok Sabha.] 
l'he President having been informed of the subject matter of the 
Customs (Amendment) Bill, 1969, namely, to amend the Customs Act, 
1962, 80 as to provide f~ confiscation of goods smuggled or attempted 
to be smuggled and to ~power the Central Government to take steps 
for exercising better control over goods being illegally imported and those 
likely to be illegally exported, has recommended, under clauses (1) and 
(3) of article 117 of the Constitution, the said Bill for introduction in and 
consideration by the Lok Sabha. 
8 j , 
~., .. ' 

No .. Oft. 8U!usa. 
Clause 1 provides for retrospective effect from the date of promulgation 
of the Ordinance so that aetton already taken under the Ordinance is not 
required to be taken again. 
CZa'UBe 2 seeks to introduce new sections llA to llN:-
Section llA defines the various expressions used in Chapter IVA. 
Section llB empowers the Central Government to notify goods 
to which these provisions will apply when it is satisfied that the mag-
nitude of smuggling in such goods is such that it is expedient to take 
special measures. 
Section llC provides that all persons possessing notified goodJ or 
the notified date will have to deliver a statement within seven days 
to the proper officer of customs indicating the place of storage and 
such particulars of the goods as may be specified under the Rules. 
Those who acquire such goods afterwards for the first time will also 
have to furnish similar information, the intimation in respect of the 
place of storage being delivered to the customs otRcer in advance anti 
the particulars of the goods being furnished immediately on acquisi-
tion. The section also provides that transport of goods from one place 
to another shall be either under cover of a voucher referred to in sec-
tion llF or by a transport voucher. 
Section llD provides that no person shall acquire, except by gift 
or succession, any notified goods unless they are accompanied by a 
sale voucher or evidence of clearance through the customs. Further, 
where the purchase is made from a person not having a fixed place of 
business the purchaser is also required to take such reasonable steps 
as may be speCified by rules to ensure that the goods acquired by 
him are not smuggled goods. 
Section lIE provides that all persons possessing notified goods 
will have to maintain accounts in the prescribed form and such 
accounts shall be kept along with the goods. 
Section 11F provides that sale, transfer, etc., of notified goods 
shall be evidenced by a voucher. 
Section llG provides that the regulatory provisiorul contained in 
section llC, llE and llF will not apply to goods in personal use or 
goods kept in residential premises of a person for his personal use. 
But if such goods are sold a sale memo shall be issued. 
Section 1lH defines the various expressions used in Chapter !VB. 
The regulatory provisions are to apply within the specified area which 
will not exceed 50 kilometres in width from the coast or land border 
of India. ,4 i 

10 
Section 11-1 empowers the Central Government to specify goods 
to which the regulatory provisions will apply on being satisfied that 
the magnitude of smuggling out of such goods is such that it is expedi-
ent to take special measures. 
Section 11J provides that persons possessing specifiea goods of • 
market price exceeding Rs. 15,000 will have to intimate the particulars 
of the place of storage to the proper officer of customs and those who 
acquire goods of such market price afterwards will have to intimate 
the place of storage in advance. 
Section 11K provides that whenever any specified goods are trans-
ported frdm, into and within any specified area they shall be .accom-
panied by a transport voucher prepared by the person seIJing the 
goods or possessing the goods. In order to avoid hardship, transport 
of goods of a market price not exceeding Rs. 1,000 has been exempted. 
The section also empowers the Central Government to specify that in 
certain circumstances transport vouchers concerning goods of a market 
price exceeding a specified sum shall have to be countersigned by the 
proper officer of customs. The intention is that where the time, place, 
mode, etc. of transport is suspicious the officer of customs should know 
beforehand about such transport. 
Section llL requires that any person possessing goods of a market 
price exceeding Rs. 15,000 shall maintain accounts in the prescribed 
form. The exemption limit has been set high enough to avoid any 
inconvenience to middle class or petty traders. The section also pro-
vides that where the stock of goods is less than the balance shown in 
the books the shortfall shall be presumed to have been smuggled out 
unless the contrary is proved. 
Section 11M provides that except where the seller receives pay-
ment by cheque drawn by the purchaser he will take such reasonable 
steps as may be specified in the rules to ensure that the purchaser is 
not a fictitious person and if he fails to take such steps it shall be 
presumed that the goods have been smuggled out. The intention is 
that a person should not be able to account for the goods that he has 
smuggled by showing sales to fictitious persons and it should be difti-
cult to make purchases for smuggling. In order that no inconvenience 
is caused, petty sales the aggregate market price of which in a day 
does not exceed Rs. 2,600 have been exempted from its provision. 
Section 11N empowers the Central Government to exempt goods 
of any specified deSCription from the provisions of Chapter IVA or 
Chapter !VB. The il'ltention is that should the application of these 
provisions cause any inconvenience necessary exemption may be 
issued. 
Clause 3 empowers the proper officer of customs to inspect the storage 
premises where notified or specified goods are kept and to check the 
accounts. .' -, 
Cltluse 4 provides that any notified goods in relation to which any pro-
visions of Chapter IVA or of any rules have been contravened. shall be 
li&ble to confiscation. 

it 
Clause 5 provides that any specified goods in relation to which any pro-
visions of Chapter !VB or of any rules have been contravened, shall be 
liable to confiscation. 
Clause 6 provides that Notifications issued under sections lIB, 11-1, 
11K and llN shall be placed before Parliament. Provision already exists 
under section 159 that all rules made shall be placed before Parliament. 
Clause 7 provides for validation of all actions taken under the Customs 
(Amendment) Ordinance, 1969. 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
The purpose of the Bill is to make additional provisions in the Customs 
Act, 1962, with a view to preventing the smuggling of goods by facilitating 
the detection and confiscation of smuggled goods into the country and 
goods Bought to be smuggled out of the country. The provisions made in 
the Bill include, under certain circumstances, the furnishing of intimations 
and statements with regard to places of storage, issue of vouchers relating 
to sale and transport, maintenance of accounts by persons possessing noti-
fied goods or specified goods, etc. Although there is no particular -clause 
in the Bill which would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund 
of India, enforcement of the provisions of the Bill, as a whole, would in-
volve extra work on the part of officers of customs who are already em-
ployed for the prevention of illegal import and export of goods in general. 
It will, therefore, be necessary to strengthen the existing staff in the 
varlou. customs formations. It is estimated that an extra expenditure of-
(a) RI. 70,000 for the rem (lining part of the current financial 
year, and 
(b) Re. 8,00,000 for a full year, may have to be incurred for the 
enforcement of the proviSions of the Bill. 
The Bill would not involve any non-recurring expenditure. 
12 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 2 of the Bill seeks to insert three new Chapters, namely Chap-
ters IVA, IVB and Ive (containing sections 11A to 11G, 11H to 11M, and 
UN, respectively) in the Customs Act, 1962. 
2. Propoaed section lIB seeks to empower the Central Government 
to notify goods of any clan or description in relation to which the 
provisions of Chapter tv A should be complied with. 
3. Proposed section llH seeks to empower the Central Government to 
.peci.ty-
(a) export goods in relatdon to which the provisions of Chapter 
IVB should be complied with, and 
(b) a belt within which the possession, sale, transfer or tran,tport 
of any specified export goods would be regulated by the provisiona of 
Chapter IVB. 
4. Proposed section 11K seeks to empower the Central Government to 
specify export goods of any class or description which shall not be trans-
ported from, into or within the specified area unless they are accompanied 
by a transport voucher countersigned by the proper officer. 
5. Proposed section UN empowers the Central Government to exempt 
good, of any class or description from all or any of the provisions of Chap-
ter IVA or Chapter !VB. 
6. Proposed sections 11C, lIE, llF, llG, 11J, 11K and IlL seek to em-
power the Central Government to specify, by rules made in this behalf, 
the form and manner in which,-
(a) the statement containing the particulars of the place of .tor-
a,_ of notified or specified goods, as the case may be, shall be prepared; 
(b) accounts shall be maintained by a person owning, possessing 
or controlling any notified or specified goods, as the case may be; 
(c) the voucher showing the sale, transfer, delivery or other dis-
poaal of any notified goods (which are not in personal use) shall be 
prepared; 
(d) the memorandum. shOWing the sale of notified goods which 
are in personal use or are kept in any residential premises for perso-
nal use, shall be prepared; 
(e) the transit or transport voucher, as the case may be, in rela-
tion to specified goods shall be maintained. 
7. Proposed sections 11D and 11M seek to empower the Central Gov-
ernment to specify reasonable steps which should be taken by a ~on 
11 

14 
who acquires any notift.ed or specified goods, as the case may he, to enaure 
that they are not illegally imported goods or are not intended to be ille-
gally exported. 
8. The matters in respect of which notifications or rules can be made 
by the Central Government are matters of procedure and detail and it is 
hardly possible to provide for them in the Act itself. The delegation of 
the legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character. 

• 
ANNEXURE 
EXTRACT FlOM THE CUSTOMS ACT, 1962 
(52 OF 1962) 
• • • • 
159. Every rule made under this Act and every notification issue\:l Rules and 
under sections 11, 14, 25, 43, 66, 69, 70, 74, 75, 76, 98, 101 and 123 shall be certain 
laid as soon as may be after it is made or issued before each House of ~otifiC:; 
Parliament while it is in session for a total period of thirty days which b;~aid 
may be compriseti in one session or in two successive sessions, and if, before 
before the expiry of the session in which it is so laid or the session ParUa-
immediately following, both Houses agree in making any modification in ment. 
the rule or notification or both Houses agree that the rule should not be 
made or the notification should not be issued, the rule or notification 
shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, 
as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment 
shall be without prejutlice to the validity of anything previously dune 
under that rule or notification. 
• • • • • 
15 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Customs Act, 1962 
(Shri Morar.J; Desai, 
Deputy Prime Minlst". and 
Minister of Finance.) 