Bill No. 16 of 1961 
THE FINANCE BILL, 1961 
(As INTRODUCED IN LOIC SABHA 
ON 28TH FEBRUARY, 1961) 

LOK SABRA 
CORRICENDA 
to 
THE FINANCE BILL, 1961 
(AS introduced in Lok Sabha) 
1. Page ¥.I:, line 1,-
for "ag ement" ~ "agreement" 
2. Page 13, line 37,-
for "1 tmes" ~ "i tems" 
3. Page 15, line 23,-
~ at the end 
4. Page 18, line 14,-
II." , 
for "nominor" read "no minor". 
5. Page 18, line 24,-
~ at the end 
6 • Page 24, line 39,-
".11 , 
for "whieh" ~ "which" 
7. Page 24, line 46,-
for "view" ~ "view" 
8. Correct line numbers on Pages 2 to 6, 9 to 12, 
14, 25, 26, 29, 31 and 33. 
NEW DELHI· . » 
March 4, 196~1~~~~~~~ 
Phalguna 13, 1882 (Saka) 

11 of 1822. 
Bill No. 10 of 1961 
THE FINANCE BILL, 1961 
(As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA) 
A 
BILL 
to give effect to the financial proposals of the Central Government 
for the financial year 1961-62. 
BE it enacted by Parliamellt in the Twelfth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
1. (1) This Act may be called the Finance Act, 1961. Short title 
and com-
(2) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, sections 3 to 10 inclu- mencemeDt. 
5 live shall be deemed to have come into force on the first day of April, 
1961. 
2. (1) Subject to the provisions of sub-sections (2), (3) and (4), Income-tu' 
for the year beginning on the 1st day of April, 1961,- and super-
• (a) income-tax shall be charged at the rates specified in tax. 
10 Part I of the First Schedule, and, in the cases to which Para-
graphs A, Band C of that Part apply, shall be increased by a 
surcharge for purposes of the Union and a special surcharge, 
calculated in either case i~ the manner provided therein; and 
IS 
• 20 
(b) super-tax shall, for the purposes of section 55 of the 
Indian Income-tax Act, 1922 (hereinafter referred to as the 
Income-tax Act), be charged at the rates specified in Part n of 
the First Schedule, and, in the cases to which Paragraphs A, B 
and C of that Part apply, shall be increased by a surcharge for 
purposes of the Union and a special surcharge, calculated in 
either case in the manner provided therein. 
(2) In making any assessment for the year ending on the 31st 
day of March, 1962,-
(a) where the total income of an assessee, not being a 
company, includes any income chargeable under the head 

2 
"Salaries", the income-tax payable by the assessee on that part 
of his total income which consists of such inclusion shall 
be an amount bearing to the total amount of income-tax payable 
according to the rates applicable under thE operation of the 
Finance Act, 1960, on his total income the same proportion as the 5 
amount of such inclusion Qears to his total income; 
(b) where the total income of an assessee, not being a com-
11 of 1980. 
pany, includes any income chargeable under the head "Salaries" 
on which super-tax has been or might have been deducted under 
the provisions of sub-section (2) of section 18 of the Income-tax 10 
Act, the super-tax payable by the assessee on that portion of his 
total income which consists of such inclusion shall be an amount 
bearing to the total amount of super-tax payable according to 
the rates applicable under the operation of the Finance Act, 1960, 
on his total income the same proportion as the amount of such 15 
inclusion bears to his total income. 13 of 1880. 
(3) In making any assessment for the year ending on the 31st 
day of March, 1962, where the total income of a company, other than 
the Life Insurance Corporation of India established under the Life 
Insurance Corporation Act, 1956, includes any profits and gaiM from 20 
life insurance business, the super-tax payable by it shan be the 31 of 1958-
aggregate of the tax calculated-
(i) on the amount of profits and gains from life insurance 
business so included, at the rate applicable to the Life 1ns1U'.!lee 
Corporation of India in accordance with Paragraph E of Part II 25 
of the First Schedule; and 
(ii) on the remaining part of its total income, at the rate 
applicable to the company on its total income. • 
(4) In cases to which section 17 of the Income-tax Act applies 
the tax chargeable shall be determined as provided in that section, 30 
and with reference to the rates imposed by sub-section (1). 
(5) In cases in, which tax has to be deducted under section 18 of 
the Income-tax Act at the prescribed rates, the deduction shall be 
made at the rates specified in Part III of the First Schedule. 
(6) For the purposes of this section, and of the rates of tax 35 
imposed thereby, the expression "total income" means total income 
as determined for the purposes of income-tax or super-tax, as the • 
case may be, in accordance with the provisions of the Income-tax 
Act, and the expression "earned income" has th~ meaniDI l18igned 
to it in clause (6AA) of section 2 of that Act. 40 
s t i 

s 
10 
I 
3. In section 4 of the Income-tax Act, in sUb-section (3) ,-
(i) ~fter clause 
namely:-
(ii), the following clause shall be inserted, 
",(Ha) Any income of an association or institution 
established in India having as its object the control, super-
vision, regulation or encouragement in India of the games 
of cricket, hockey, football, tennis or such other games 
or I!ports as the Central Government may specify in this 
Ibehalf from time to time by notification in the Ofticial 
G~ette: 
Provided that-
(i) the association or institution applies its income, 
or accumulates it for application, solely to the objects 
for which it is established; 
IS (ii) no part of the income of the association or insti-
tution is distributed in any manner to its members except 
as grants to any association or institution affiliated to it; 
and 
(iii) the association or institution is, for the time 
20 being, approved for the purpose of this clause by the 
Central Government by general or special order."; 
(ii) in clause (riva) , for the second provis'), the following 
provisos shall be inserted, namely:-
'Provided further that in the case of a person referred 
2S to in this clause whose contract of service was approved by 
the Central Government before the commencement of his 
• 
35 
• 
40 
service, this clause shan have effect as if for the words "during 
the financial year in which he arrived in India and the finan-
cial year next following", the words "during the thirty-six 
months commencing from the date of his arrival in India" 
had been substituted and as if the proviso immediately pre-
ceding had been omitted: 
Provided also that where a person referred to in the pro-
~sp imm~iately preceding continues to remain in employ-
,m.ent . in India after the expiry of the thirty-six months 
commencing from the date of his arrival in India and the tax 
on his income chargeable under the head "Salaries" is paid 
by the employer to the Central Government, the tax so paid 
by the employer for a period not exceeding twenty-four 
,months following the expiry of the said thirty-six months 
shall not be included in his total income.'; 
(iii) in clause (xvi), after the words "International Bank for 
Reconstruction and Development", the words "or under a loan 
• 
Amendment 
. of section 4-

Amendment 
of section 7. 
Amendment 
or section 9. 
Amendment 
of section 10. 
4 
a~~ement between the Central Government and the Develop-
ment Loan Fund of the United States of America," shall be 
inserted and after the words "under a loan agreement with the 
said Bank", the words "or Fund, as the case may be," shall be 
inserted. S 
4. In section 7 of the Income-tax Act, in the proviso to Explana-
tion 2, after the words "a Central, State or Provincial Act", the words, 
letters and figures "or any payment of retiring gratuity received after 
the 1st day of June, 1953 under the New Pension Code applicable to 
the members of the Defence Services" shall be inserted and shall be 10 
deemed always to have been inserted. 
5. In section 9, in sub-section (2), after the third proviso, the 
following proviso and Explanation shall be inserted, namely:-
"Provided further that in respect of a building the erection 
of which is begun and completed after the 1st day of April, 1961, 
the annual value for a period of three years from the date of such IS 
completion shall be reduced by a sum equal to the aggregate of-
(a) in respect of any residential unit (comprised in the 
building) whose annual value does not exceed six hundred 
rupees, by the amount thereof; and 
(b) in respect of any residential unit (comprised in the ~ 
building) whose annual value exceeds six hundred rupees, 
by an amount of six hundred rupees, 
so, however, that the income in respect of any residential unit 
shall in no case be a loss. 
Explanation.- Where a residential unit is in the occupation 2S 
of the owner for the purposes of his own residence, and the annUal 
value thereof is computed in accordance with the first proviso, 
such computation will be made as if the fourth proviso had been 
omitted.". 
I. In section 10, in sub-section (2),- 30 
(i) in clause (vi), after the words "in the case of machinery 
or plant, to twenty per cent. of the cost thereof to the assessee:" 
and before the proviso, the following paragraph shall be inserted, 
namely:-
"and where the buildings have been newly erected after 3S 
the 31st day of March, 1961, such buildings being used solely" 
for the purpose of residence of persons employed in the busi-
ness and drawing remuneration not exceeding two hundred 
rupees per mensem, a sum (which shall not be deductible in 
determining the written down value) equal to twenty per 40 

s 
10 
20 
30 
35 
I 
cent. of the actual cost of the building to the assessee in 
respect of the previous year of erection of the building:"; 
(ii) in clause (vib) ,-
(I) for sub-clause (i) and sub-clause (ii), the followin, 
aub-clauses shall be inserted, namely:-
"(i) in the case of a ship acquired after the 31st day 
of December, 1957, forty per cent. and in the case of a 
ship acquired before the 1st day of January, 1958, twenty-
five per cent. of the actual cost of the ship to the assessee; 
and 
(ii) in the case of machinery or plant installed 
before the 1st day of April, 1961, twenty-five per cent. 
and in the case of machinery or plant installed after the 
31st day of March, 1961, twenty per cent. of the actual 
cost of the machinery or plant to the assessee."; 
(2) in the first proviso, after the words "any person 
other than the Government", the words "or for any considera-
tion not connected with any amalgamation or succession 
referred to in clause (vic)" shall be inserted; 
(iii) after clause (vib) , the following clause shall be inserted, 
namely:-
'(vic) (i) where in a scheme of amalgamation, a com-
pany (hereinafter in this sub-clause referred to as the prede-
·cessor) sells or otherwise transfers to the company formed 
in pursuance of the predecessor's amalgamation with that 
company (hereinafter in this sub-clause referred to as the 
successor) any ship, machinery or plant in respect of which 
development rebate has been allowed to the predecessor 
under clause (vib) ,-
• 
(I) the successor shall continue to fulfil the condi-
tions mentioned in the first proviso to clause (vib) in 
respect of the reserve created by the predecessor and in 
respect of the period within which such ship, machinery 
or plant shall not be sold or otherwise transferred and in 
default of any of these conditions, the provisions of sub-
section (11) of section 35 shall apply to the successor as 
it would have applied to the predecessor had it committed 
the default; 

6 
(2) the balance of development rebate, if any, still 
. outstanding to the predecessor in respect of such ship, 
machinery or plant shall be allowed to the successor in 
accordance with Explanations I and II of clause (vib) , 
so, however, that the total period for which the balance 5 
of development rebate shall be carried forward in the 
assessments of the predecessor and the successor shall 
not exceed the period of eight years specified in Explana-
tion I to clause (vib) and the successor shall be treated 
as the assessee in respect of such ship, machinery or 10 
plant lor the purposes of clause (vib) and this sub-clause; 
Explanation.-For the purposes of this sub-clause, 
"amalgamation" means the merger of two companies 
(each of which is hereinafter in this Explanation refer-
red to as the amalgamating company) to form one com- 15 
pany (hereinafter in this Explanation referred to as the 
amalgamated company) in such a manner that-
(a) all the property of the amalgamating com-
panies immediately before the amalgamation becomes 
the property of the amalgamated company by virtue 20 
of the amalgamation; 
(b) all the liabilities of the amalgamating com-
panies immediately before the amalgamation become 
the liabilities of the amalgamated company by virtue 
of the amalgamation; and 25 
(c) all the shareholders of the amalg8lQating 
companies immediately before the amalgamation 
become shareholders of the amalgamated company 
by virtue of the amalgamation, 
otherwise than as a result of the acquisition of property 30 
of one company by another company pursuant to the 
purchase of such property by the other company or as a 
re$Ult of the distribution of such property to the other 
company after the winding up of the company; 
(ii) where a firm is succeeded to by a private company, 
as defined in the Companies Act, 1956, in the business carried 35 
on by it as a result of which the firm sells or otherwise 
transfers to the private company any ship, machinery or plant, 
the provisions of sub-clause (i) of this clause shall, so far as 
may be, apply to the firm and the company; 40 
1 of 195ft. 

7 
E3:Planatio7t..-The provisions of this sub-clause shall 
apply only where-
(a) all the property of the firm before the succes-
sion becomes the property of the company; 
S (b) all the liabilities of the firm immediately before 
the succession become the liabilities of the company; and 
(c) all the partners of the firm. immediately before 
the succession become shareholders of the company;'; 
(iv) after clause (xiv), the following clause shall be insert-' 
10 ed, namely:-
"(xiva) in respect of any special reserve created by • 
financial corporation which is engaged in providing long term. 
finance for industrial development in India, an amount not 
exceeding ten per cent. of the total income carried to such 
IS reserve account: 
Provided that, the corporation is for the time being 
approved by the Central Government for the purposes of this 
clause: 
Provided further that where the aggregate of the amounts 
20 carried to such reserve account from time to time exceeds 
the paid-up share capital (excluding the amounts capitalised 
from reserves) of the corporatioo. no allowance under this 
clause shall be made in respect of such excess;"; . 
(v) in clause (xv), the following provisos shall be inserted, 
25 namely:-
"Provided that no expenditure in the nature of entertain-
• ment expenditure shall be allowed in the case of an assessee 
other than a company: 
Provided further that in the case of a company, no expen-
30 diture in the nature of entertainment expenditure shall be 
allowed which exceeds the aggregate amount computed as 
hereunder-
3S . 
• 
(i) on the first Rs. 10,00,000 of the 
profits and gains of the business [com-
puted before making any allowance 
under clause (vib) or in respect of 
entertainment expenditure] a.t the rate of 
1 % or Rs. 5,000 
whichever is 
higher. 

.. 
(ii) on the next Rs. 40,00,000 of the 
profits and gains of the business 
(computed in the manner aforesaid) 
(iii) on the next Rs. 1,20,00,000 of 
the profits and gains of the business 
(computed in the manner aforesaid) 
(iv) on the balance of the profits 
and gains of the business (computed in 
the manner aforesaid) 
'1. In section 15C of the Income-tax Act,-
at the rate of 
f% 
at the rate of 
1% 
nil.". 
(a) in sub-section (1), after the word "undertaking" wher-
ever it occurs, the w(\rds "or hotel" shall be inserted; 
s 
10 
(b) after sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be IS 
inserted, namely:-
"(2A) This section applies to any hotel which-
(a) starts functioning on or after the first day of 
April, 1961 and is not formed by the splitting up, or the 
reconstruction of. business already in existence or by the 2C 
transfer to , new business of building, machinery or 
plant previously used in any other busines,.s; 
(b) is owned and run by a company registered in the 
taxable territories with a paid-up capital of not less than 
five hundred thousand rupees; 25 
o 
(c) is run in premises which are owned by the 
comp8!\Y; 
(d) has such number and types of guest rooms and 
provides such amenities as may be prescribed, having 
regard to the population and the tourist importance of 30 
the place in which the hotel is located; and 
(e) is for the time being approved for the purposes 
of this sub-section by the Central Government."; 
(e) in sub-sections (3) and (5), after the WOMS "industrial 
undertaking", the words "or a hotel" shall be inserted; 3' 
(d) in sub-section (4),-
(i) after the words "industrial undertaldng", the wozU : 
"or a hotel" shall be inserted; 

S 
9 
(ii) the following Explanatio7\ shall be inserted, 
namely:-
"Explanation.-The amount of dividend in respect of 
which the tax is not payable under this sub-section shall 
be computed in accordance with such rules as may be 
made in this behalf by the Central Board of Revenue."; 
(e) in sub-section (6), for the words "shall apply", the words 
"shall, in relation to an industrial undertaking, apply" shall be 
substituted; 
10 (1) after sub-section (6), the following sub-section shall be 
inserted, namely:-
"(7) The provisions of this section shall, in relation to a 
hotel, apply to the assessment for the financial year next 
following the previous year in which the hotel start. 
IS functioning and for the four assessments immediately 
succeeding." . 
8. In section 23A of the Income-tax Act, in sub-section (1) ,- ~~ 
(a) in clause (ii), the word "or" shall be added at the end; 23A. 
and 
20 (b) after clause (ii), the following clause shall be inserted 
and shall be deemed to have been inserted with effect from the 
1st day of April, 1960, namely:-
• 
"(iii) that at least 75 per cent. of the share capital of the 
company is throughout the previous year beneficially held 
by an institution or fund established in the taxable territories 
for a charitable purpose the income whereof is exempt under 
clause (i) of sub-section (3) of section 4;" . 
•. In section 3'5 of the Income-tax Act, in sub-section (11) ,- AmencimeDI 
of section 3', 
(a) in clause (i), after the words "other than the Govern-
30 ment", the words "or for any consideration not connected with 
any amalgamation or succession referred to in clause (vic) of 
sub-section (2) of section 10", shall be inserted; 
• 
3S 
(b) the following Explanation shaUbe inserted, namely:-
"Explanatton.-For the purposes of this sub-section, a 
successor referred to in sub-clause (i) or sub-clause (ii) of 
clause (vic) of sub-section (2) of section 10 shall be deemed 
to be the assessee even in respect of an allowance by way of 
development rebate made to the predecessor, and any tax 
~)'~ ... 
• 

Amendment 
of section 
HA. 
Amendment 
of Arl32 
of 11134. 
Amendment 
of Act 1 
of IIMII. 
Amendment 
of Act 1 
of 1944. 
10 
restlltmg from the recomputation of the total income for any 
previous year of the predecessor shall be payable by the 
successor .... 
10. In section 56A of the Income-tax Act, in clause (i) of sub-section 
(1), after item (20), the following item shall be inserted, namely:- S 
"(21) Refractories;". 
11. The Indian Tariff Act, 1934 (hereinafter referred to 'as the 
Tariff Act), shall be amended in the manner specified in 'the Second 
Schedule. 
12. In the Indian Tariff (Amendment) Act, 1949, in seCtions 4 and 10 
5, for the 'figUres "1961", the figures 4'1962" shall be Substituted. 
13. Tn the First Schedllle to the Central Excises and Salt Act, 
19M,-
(a) in Item No.2, for the entry in the third column, the 
entry "Fifty-five rupees per quintal" shall be substituted; IS 
(b) in Item No. 4,-
'(1) under "I. Unmanufactured tobacco-"-
(.) for sub-item (I), the following 
sub-item shall be SUbstituted, 
namely:-
"(I) Ifftue cured and used in 
the manufacture of cigarettes. 
(ia) in sul>-item (4), for the entry in 
the third column, the entry 
"Two rupees" shall be subMi-
tuted; 
(m) in sub-item (s), for the entry in 
the third column, the entry 
"ODe rupee and fourteen naye 
paise"shall be subStituted; 
(iv) in sub-item (8), for the entry in 
the third column, the entry 
"Twenty-two naye paise" shall 
be substituted j 
20 
Tworwees and fifty 
naye paise." j 
(2) under "II. Manufactured tdbacco.-"- 35 
('l for sub-item (I), the following 
sub-item shall be substituted, 
namely:-
"(I) Clprs and cheroots of which ,Per hundred. 
the value- 40 

10 
IS 
20 
25 
3S 
11 
(ia) exceeds Rs. IS a hundred, but Nine rupeee. 
does not exceed Rs. 2S a 
hundred. 
(ii,) exceeds Rs. S a hundred, but Three rupees. 
does not exceed Rs. IS a 
hundred. 
(iv) exceeds Rs. I '2S a hundred, Seventy-five naye 
but does not exceed Rs. S a paise."; 
hundred. 
(ii) in sub-item (2),-
(A) for sub-items (2) (i), (2) (ii), (2) (iii) and 
(2) (iv), the following shall be substituted, namely:-
"(I) exceeds RB. 35 a thousand. 
(i.) exceeds Rs. 30 a thousand, 
but does not exceed Rs. 35 a 
thousand. 
(ii.) exceeds Rs. 25 a thousand, but 
docs not exceed Rs. 30 a thou-
sand. 
Twenty-three rupees 
and seventy-five 
naye paise. 
Twelve rupees and 
seventy-five naye 
paise. 
Eleven rupees and 
fifty naye paise." j 
(B) sub-items (2)(v), (2)(vi), (2)(vii), (2) (viii) 
and (2) (ix) shall, respectively, be re-numbered as 
sub-item~ (2)(iv), (2)(v), (2)(vi), (2)(vH) and 
(2) (viii); 
(c) in Item No.7, for the entry in the third column, the 
entry "Ninety-five rupees and fifty-five naye paise per kilolitre 
at JU~een degrees of centigrade thermometer" shall be substi-
tut~d; . . 
(4,) in lteD! No.9, for the entry in the third column, the 
entry "Sixteen per cent. ad valorem plus ninety-two rupees and 
ten. ;o.8ye paise per metric tonne" shall be substituted; 
(8) in Item No. 13, for the entry in the third column, the 
~ "'l'wen~y rupees per quintal" shall be substituted; 
(I) in IteJXJ. No. 14, for the entries in the third column against 
each of the sub-items specified below, the following entries as 
are set out in the corresponding column against that sub-item 
Ihall be substituted, namely:- ' , .. 
" I (~) (a) 
(n) 
Nineteen rupees and seventy-five 
naye paise per quintal. 
Seventy naye paise per kilosram. 
\.\\ 

(2) 
(3) 
(i) 
(i.) 
(ii., 
(iv) 
(4) 
(., 
(ia) 
(ii.) 
(s) 
II 
III 
(.) 
(is) 
12 
Seventeen rupees and twenty-
five naye paise per quintal. 
Seventeen rupees and twenty-five 
naye paise per quintal. S 
Twenty-nine rupees and fifty 
naye paise per quintal. 
Forty-two naye paise per litre. 
Ninety-eight naye paise per live. 
Seventy naye paise per kilogram. 
Seventeen rupees and twenty-
five naye paise per quintal. 
10 
Fifty-six naye paise per litre. 
Seventeen rupees and twenty- 15 
five naye paise per quintal, if 
sold by wetght; 
Fifty-six naye paise per litre, if 
sold by volume. 
Twenty-eight naye paise per litre. 
Eighteen naye paise per litre. 
One rupee and forty naye paise 
20 
per litre. 25 
Fifty naye paise per kilogram, if 
sold by weight; 
Eighty-five naye paise per litre, if 
sold by volume. ; 
(g) after Item No. 14, the following Items shall be inserted, name1y:- 30 
"J4-\. SODA ASH Two rupees per quintal. 
J4B. CAUSTIC SODA-
(.) if in a solid form 
(i., ifin lye 
Four rupees per quintal. 
Four rupees per quintal on the 
basis ~;. of hundred per cent. 35 
strength of caustic soda. 

14C. GLYCERINE. Seventeen rupees per quintal. 
14D. DYES DERIVEQ FROM Fifteen per cent. ad fJalorem. 
COAL TAR AND COAL 
TAR DERIVATIVES, 
S USED IN ANY DYEING 
PROCESS, ALL SORTS. 
I4B. PATENT OR PROPRIE- Ten per cent. ad fJalorem. 
TARY MEDICINES AS 
DEFINED IN CLAUSE 
10 (d) OF SECTION 3 OF 
THE DRUGS ACT, 1940 
(23 OF 1940), NOT CON-
TAINING ALCOHOL. 
20 
f, 
3S 
• 
14F. COSMETICS AND TOI- Twenty-five per cent. ad flalorIm!' j 
LET PREPARATIONS, 
NAMELY:-
(.) Face cream and snow. 
(il) Face powder. 
(iiI) Talcum powder. 
(ifl) Hair lotion, cream and 
pomade. 
(h) after Item No. IS, under the heading Chemical., the followiDg 
Items shall be inserted, namely:-
ICISA. PLASTICS, ALL SORTS, Twenty per cent. ad flalorIm. 
NAMELY:-
(.)' Moulding powders, gra-
nules and Bakes (ther-
mosetting and thenno-
plastic). 
(il) Polyethylene films, lay-
Battubingsand P.V.C. 
sheets (that is to say, 
Polyvinyl Chloride 
sheets). 
ISB. CELLOPHANE. Twenty per cent. ad fJalorem." ; 
(.) in Item No. 17, for the entries in the third column against sub-
itmes (I), (2), (4), (5), (6), (7), (8), (9) and (10), the entries "Fifty naye 
paise per kilogram", "One rupee per kilogram", "Thirty-five naye paise 
per kilogram", "Fifteen naye paise per kilogram", "Thirty-five naye 
paise per kilogram", "Thirty-five naye paise per kilogram", "Thirty-five 
naye paise per kilogram". "Fifty naye paise per kilogram" and "Fifty 
naye paise per kilogram" shall, respectively, be substituted; 

U) after Item No. 18, the following Items shall be inserted, !18IDely:-
'ISA. COTTON TWIST, 
YARN AND THREAD, 
ALL SORTS, in or in rela-
tion to the manufacture of S 
which any process is ordi-
narily carried on with the aid' 
of power-
(I) of 3S or more counts ; Fifteen naye paise per kilogram. 
(2) of less than 3S counts. Ten naye paise per idiogram. 10 
Explanation.-For multiple-fold yam, "count" means the count of 
the basic single yam. 
18B. WOOLLEN YARN, ALL 
SORTS INCLUDING 
KNITrING WOOL, in or 
in relation to the manufac-
ture of which any process is 
ordinarily carried on with 
the aid of power-
(I) worsted yam; 
(2) others. 
.. 
Ten per cent. ad valorem. 
Five per cent. ad valorem.'; 
(k) after Item No. 23, the following Items shall be inserted, namely:-
"23A. GLASS AND GLASS-
WARE-
• (I) Sheet glass and Plate Ten per cent. ad valorem. 
glass. I' 
(2) Laboratory glassware. Five per cent. ad valorem. 
(3) Glass shells, glass Ten per cent. lid valor"". 
~bes and chimneys for 
ps and lanterns. 
(4) Other fclassWare includ- Fifteen pet cent. ad valor"". 
ing tab eware. 
23B. CHINAW ARB AND 
PORCELAINWARE, ALL 
SORTS,-
(I) Tableware. Fifteen per cent. ad valor.",. 
(2) Sanitaryware. Fifteen per cent. ad ",alor"". 
(3) Glazed tiles. Ten per cent. ad vaWr"'" 
(4) Not otherwise specified. Ten per cent. ad WIkw-." ; 
IS 
2S 
30 
3S 

S 
10 
IS 
• 
11 
(l) U\:er Item No. 26, the following Items shall be insertOd. bameiy: -
"z6A. COPPER AND COPPER 
ALLOYS CONTAINING 
NOT LESS THAN FIFTY 
PER CENT. BY WEIGHT 
OFCOPPER,-
(I) Manufactures, the follow- Three hundred rupees per metric 
ing, namely, plates, tonne. 
sheets, circles, strips and 
foils in any fonn or size. 
(2) Pipes and tubes. Ten~per cent . .a ~. 
26B. ZINC,-
(I) Manufactures, the follow- Three hundred rupees per metric 
ing, namely, plates, tonne. 
sheets, circles, strips and 
foils in any fonn or size. 
(2) Pipes and tubes. Ten per cent. ad fJQ/o,em."; 
(I"') inltem No. 27, after su~Item (6), the foUoWin; sub-itein shall 
be inserted, namely:-
U(e) Pipes and tubes. Ten per cein.ad fIiJIor,m." ; 
(n) after Item No. 29, the following Item shall be inserted, 
name1y:-
"29A. AIR CONDITIONING Twep.ty per cent. ad fJIIlo"m." 
MACHINERY, ALL SORTS. 
(0) after Item No. 33, the following Item shall be inserted, namely:-
"33A. WIRELESS RECEIVING Twenty per cent. ad fJaIor.",."; 
SETS, ALL SORTS, IN-
CLUDING TRANSIS-
TOR SETS AND RADIQ-
dAAMS, WITH OR 
WITHOUT LOUD-
SPEAKER. 
(P) in Item No. 38, for the entry in the third column, the entry 
"Sixty-five naye paise for every 1,000 matches or fraction thereof" shall be 
3S substituted; 
(q) after Item No. 39, the following Item shall be inserted, name1y:-
• "40. REFRIGERATORS AND Twenty per cent. ad fJaIorem.". 
PARTS THEREOF, SUCH 
AS ARE SPECIALLY DE-
SIGNED FOR USE WITH 
REFRIGERATORS. 
'1'> 

Amendment 
of Act '1. 01 
1958. 
Amencilnent 
01 Act 58 of 
191'1. 
16 
14. In the Central Sales Tax Act, 1956, in section 14,-
(i) in item (iia), for the figures "12", the figures 1119" shall be 
substituted; 
(ii) in item (vii), for the figures and letter "12A", the figures 
1122" shall be substituted; 5 
(iii) in item (viii), for the figure "8", the figure "I" shall be 
substituted; 
(iv) in item (i,r), for the figure 119", the figure 114" shall be 
substituted ; 
(v) in item (x), for the figures and letter 1112B", the figures 10 
"21" shall be substituted; 
(vi) after item (x), the following item shall be inserted and 
shall be deemed to have been inserted with effect from the 1st 
day of March, 1961, namely:-
"(xi) silk fabrics, as defined in Item 20 of the First IS 
Schedule to the Central Excises and Salt Act, 1944". 
15. In the Additional Duties of Excise (Goods of Special Import-
ance) Act, 1'957,-
(a) in clause (c) of section 2,-
(i) after the words "cotton fabrics", the words "silk fab- 20 
rics" shall be inserted; 
(ii) after the figures "19", the figures "20" shall be 
inserted; 
(b) in' sub-section (1) of section 3, after the words "cotton 
fabrics", the words "silk fabrics" shall be inserted; 2S 
(e) in the First Schedule,-
(1) in Item No. 4,'-::' 
(i) under "I. Unmanufactured tobacco", for sub-
item (1), the following sub-item shall be substituted; 
namely:- 30 
"(1) if flue cured and used in the 
manufacture of cigarettes. Nil"; 
(2) under "II. Manufactured tobacco"-
(A) for sub-item (1), the following sub-item shall 
be substituted, namely: - 3S 
"(I) Ci~rs and·cheroots·of which --. 
the value-
(a1 exceeds Rs. 25 a hundred:' 
Per hundred. • 
Three ,ruoees and 
~:ty-five naye 40 

1 ef 1944. 
18 of 1931. 
. . 1'1 
S 
10 
IS 
20 
30 
35 
• 40 
(i.) exceeds Rs. IS a hundred, but 
does not exceed Rs. 2S a hun-
dred. 
Two rupees and twen-
ty-five naye paise. 
(i;'1 exceeds RI. 5 a hundred, but Seventy-five naye 
does not exceed Rs. IS a hun- paise. 
dred. 
(it') exceeds Rs. I '25 a hundred, Fifteen naye paise." ; 
but does not exceed Rs. S a 
hundred. 
(B) in sub-item (2), for sub-items (2)(i) and (2)(ii), the 
following shall be substituted, namely:-
"(2)(i) exceeds Rs. 35 a thouslJnd. Seven rupees and se-
venty naye paise." ; 
(C) the sub-items (2) (iii), (2) (iv), (2) (v), (2) (vi), 
(2) (vii), (2) (viii) and (2) (ix) shall, respectively, be re-
numbered as sub-items (2) (ii), (2) (iii), (2) (iv), (2) (v). 
(2) (vi), (2) (vii) and (2) (viii); 
(3) after Item No. 19, the following Item shall be inser-
ted, namely:-
"20. SILK FABRICS. 
(d) in the Second Schedule, in Part 111,-
Thirty naye 
paise per 
square metre."; 
(i) in clause (a) of paragraph 5, after the words "cotton 
fabrics", the words "silk fabrics" shall be inserted; and 
(ii) in the proviso to paragraph 6, after the words "cotton 
fabrics", the words "silk fabrics" shall be inserted. 
16. In Schedule I to the Indian Stamp Act, 1899, in entry 47,- :r:~~ent 
(a) in sub-entry A(I) (i), in the first column, the words of 1899. 
• "fifteen naye paise or" shall be omitted; and 
(h) in sub-entry E, in the second column, the following 
proviso shall be inserted, namely:-
"Provided that if the total amount of duty payable is not 
a multiple of five naye paise, the total amount shall be 
rounded off to the next higher multiple of five naye paise .... 
n. For the year beginning on the first day of April, 1961, no duty DiScMftinalU-
.' anceolt under the Central Excises and Salt Act, 1944 or the TarIff Act shall duty. 
be levied in respect of salt manufactured in, or imported into, India. 
Declaration under the Pro1)i.<;ional Collection of Ta:res Act, 1931 . 
It is hereby declared that it is expedient in the public interest that 
the provisions of clauses 11, 12. 13 and 15 of this Bill shall have 
immediate effect under the Provisional Collection of Taxes Act, 1931. 
2009(B)LS-3· 
• 

THE FIRST SCHEDULE 
(See section 2) 
PART I 
Income-tax and surcharges on income-tax 
Paragraph A 
(i) In the case of every individual who is married and every 
Hindu undivided family whose total income does not exceed Rs. 20,000 
in either case-
Rates of Income-tax 
5 
Where the individual hal no Where the individual ha~ 
chUd wholly or maiDly de- one child wholly or mainly 
pendent on him or Where the dependent on him or where 
Hindu undivided &mily has the H,ndu undivided fami-
nominor coparcener. Iy haa one minor coparcener. 
Where the individual hlR 10 
more than one child wholly 
RI. RI. 
(I) On the fint 3,000 of total 3.300 of total 1 
Income. Income. 
(2) On the aext 2.000 .. 1.100 .. 
(3) On the next 2.500 .. 2,500 .0 
(4) On the next 2,500 
" 2,500 .. 
(5) On the next 2.500 II 2.~00 II 
(~) On the DeEt 2,500 .. 2,500 .. 
(7) On the nat $,000 
" 5,000 .. 
or mainly dependent on 
him or where the Hindu 
undivided family hal more 15 
than one minor coparcener. 
Ra. 
3.600 ohotal Nil 
income. 
10400 .. 3% 
2.500 .. 6% 20 
2.500 II 9% 
2.500 " 11% 
2,500 .. 14% 
5,000 .. 18% 
(ii) In the case of every individual who is not married and every 25 
individual or Hindu undivided family whose total income in either 
case exceeds Rs. 20,000 and in the case of every unregistered firm 
or other association of persons, not being a case to which any other 
Paragraph of this Part applies:-
RL 
(I) On the fint 1,000 of total income tv;l 
(2) On the next 4,000 
" .. '3% 
(3) On the next 2,500 .. .. 6% 
(<t) On the next 2.500 II II 9% 
30 
(5) On the next 2,500 
" .. n% .35 
(6) On the next 2.500 .. II 14% 
(7) On the next 5,con .. " 18% 
(8) On the balance of total iIlcome 25%: 
18 

19 
Provided that for the purposes of this Paragraph---
(i) no income-tax shall be payable on a total income which 
doe.> not exceed the limit specified below; 
(ii) the income-tax payable shall in no case exceed half the 
5 amount by which the total income exceeds the said limit; 
10 
15 
20 
(iii) the income-tax payable by an individual who is married 
or a Hindu undivided famHy whose total income exceeds in 
either case Rs. 20,000 shall not exceed the aggregate of-
(a) the income-tax which would have been payable if 
the total income had been Rs. 20,000; 
(b) half the amount by which the total income exceeds 
Rs. 20,000; 
The limit aforesaid shall be-
(i) Rs. 6,000 ill the case of every Hindu undivided family 
which as at the end of the previous year satisfies either of the 
following conditions, namely:-
(a) that it has at least two members entitled to claim 
partition who are not less than eighteen years of age; or 
(b) that it has at least two members entitled to claim 
partition who are not lineally descended one from the other 
and who are not lineally descended from any other living 
member of the family; 
(ii) Rs. 3,000 in every other case. ' 
Surcharges on income-tax 
25 The amount of income-tax computed at the rates hereinbefore 
specified shall be increased by the aggregate of the surcharges 
calculated as under:-
3S 
40 
(a) A surcharge for purposes of the Union equal to the 
sum of-
• 
(i) five per cent. of the amount of income-tax; and 
(ii) where the earned income included in the total 
income exceeds Rs. 1,00,000, ten per cent. of the difference 
between the amount of income-tax which would have been 
payable on the whole of the earned income included in the 
total income if such earned income had been the total income 
and the amount of income-tax payable on a total income 
of Rs. 1,00,000; 
(b) A special surcharge at fifteen per cent. of the difference 
between the amount of income-tax on the total income and the 
amount of income-tax on the whole of the earned income, if any, 

included in the total income if such earned income had been the 
total income: 
Provided that-
(i) no surcharge for purposes of the Union shall be payable 
where the total income does not exceed the limit specified below; S 
(ii) no special surcharge shall be payable in the case of an 
assessee whose total income does not include any income from 
dividend on ordinary shares if his total income does not exceed 
the limit specified below, and where the total income includes 
any dividends on ordinary shares, such limit shall be increased 10 
by Rs. 1,500 or the amount of the said dividends, whichever is 
less: 
Provided further that-
(a) where the total income includes any dividends on 
ordinary shares, the surcharge for purposes of the Union and IS 
the special surcharge shall not in each case exceed half the 
amount by which the total income exceeds the respective 1imits 
applicable in either case; 
(b) the surcharge for purposes of the Union and the special 
surcharge, both together, shall not exceed half. the amount by 20 
which the total income exceeds the limit specified below; 
The limit aforesaid shall be-
(i) Rs. 15,000 in the case of every Hindu undivided family 
which satisfies as at the end of the previous year either of the 
following conditions, namely:- 2S 
(a) that it has at least two members entitled to claim 
partition who are not less than eighteen years of age; or 
(b) that it has at least two members entitled to claim 
partition who are not lineally descended one from the other 
and who are not lineally descended from any other living 30 
member of the family; 
(ii) Rs. 7,500 in every other case. 
Exptanation.-For the purposes of this Paragraph, in the case of 
every Hindu undivided family governed by the Mitakshara law, 
a son shall be deemed to be entitled to claim partition of the 35 
coparcenary property against his father, or grand-father notwith-
ltandinl any custom to the contrary. 

5 
Paragraph B 
In the case of every local authority,-
Rate of income-tax 
On the whole of the total income 
Surcharge on income-tax 
30% 
The amount of income-tax computed at the rate hereinbefore 
specified shall be increased by a surcharge for purposes of the Union 
of 5 per cent. of the amount of income-tax. 
Paragraph C 
10 In every case in which under the provisions of the Income-tax 
Act, income-tax is to be charged at the maximum rate,-
Rate of income-tax 
On the whole of the total income 
Surcharges on income-tax 
.. 25% 
IS The amount of income-tax computed at the rate hereinbefore 
specified shall be increased by the aggregate of the surcharges 
calculated as under:-
(a) a surcharge for purposes of the Union of five per cent. 
of the amount of income-tax; and 
20 (b) a special surcharge of fifteen per cent. of the amount 
of income-tax. 
• Paragraph D 
In the case of every company,-
Rate of income-tax 
On the whole of the total income 
Paragraph E 
In the case of every registered firm,-
Rates of inccnne-tax 
• (1) On the first Rs. 40,000 of total income 
30 (2) On the next Rs. 35,000 of total income 
(3) On the next Rs. 75,000 -of total income 
(4) On the balance of total income . 
.. 20% 
Nil 
5% 
6% 
99' 

, .... 22 
PART II 
Super-tax and 8Urcharges on 8Uper-tczz 
Paragraph A 
In the case of every individual, Hindu undivided family, 
unregistered firm and other association of persons, not being a case 5 
to which any other Paragrap\l of this Part applies,-
Rates of super-tax 
(1) On the first Rs. 20,000 of total income 
(2) On the next Rs. 5,000 of total income 
(3) On the next Rs. 5,000 of total income 
(4) On the next Rs. 10,000 of total income 
(5) On the next Rs. 10,000 of total income 
(6) On the next Rs. 10,000 of total income 
(7) On the next Rs. 10,000 of total income 
(8) On the balance of total income 
Surcharges on super-tax 
Nil 
5% 
15% 
20% 
30ro 
35% 
40% 
.. 45% 
The amount of super-tax computed at the rates hereinbefore 
specified shall be increased by the aggregate of the surcharges 
calculated as under:-
10 
IS 
(a) A surcharge for purposes of the Union equal to the sum 20 
of-
(i) five per cent. of the amount of super-tax; and 
(ii) where the earned income included in the total 
income exceeds Rs. 1,00,000, ten per cent. of the difference 
between the amount of super-tax which would have been 25 
payable on the whole of the earned income included in. the 
total income, if such earned income had been the total 
income and the amount of super-tax payable on a total 
income of Rs. 1,00,000; 
(b) A special surcharge at fifteen per cent. of the di1ference 30 
between the amount of super-tax on the total income and the 
amount of super-tax on the whole of the earned income, if any, 
included in the total income, if such earned income had been 
the total income. 
Paragraph B 
In the case of every local authority,-
Rate of Buper-taz 
On the whole of the total income •. 11% 

s 
10 
IS 
20 
23 
Surcharge on super-tax 
The amount of super-tax computed at the rate hereinbefore 
specified shall be increased by a surcharge for purposes of the Union 
of 121 per cent. of the amount of super-tax. 
Paragraph C 
In the case of every association of persons being a co-operative 
society as defined in clause (SB) of section 2 of the Income-tax Act,-
Rates of super-tax 
(1) On the first Rs. 25,000 of total income 
(2) OR the balance of total income 
Surcharge on super-tax 
Nil 
16% 
The amount of super-tax computed at the rates hereinbefore 
specified shall be increased by a surcharge for purposes of the Union 
of 121 per cent. of the amount of super-tax. 
Paragraph D 
In the case of every company, other than the Life Insurance Cor-
poration of India established under the Life Insurance Corporation 
Act, 1956,-
Rates of super-tax 
On the whole of the total income 
Provided that-
55%: 
(i) a rebate at the rate of 45 per cent. on so much of the total 
income as consists of dividends from a subsidiary Indian com-
pany formed and registered before the 1st day of April, 1961; at 
25 the rate of 40 per cent. on so much of the total income as consists 
of dividends from any other Indian company formed and regis-
tered on or after the 1st day of April, 1959; and at the rate of 35 
per cent. on the balance of the total income shall be allowed in 
the case of any company which-
30 
• 
3S 
(a) in respect of its pr:'lilts liable to tax under the In-
come-tax Act for the year ending on the 31st day of March, 
1962. has made the prescribed arrangements for the declara-
tion and payment within India of the dividends payable out 
of such profits in accordance with the provisions of sub-sec-
tion (3D) of section 18 of that Act; and 
• 
"'1 

24 
(b) is such a company as is referred to in sub-section 
(9) of section 23A of the Income-tax Act with a total in-
come not exceeding Rs. 25,000; 
(ii) a rebate at the rate of 45 per cent. on so much of the 
total income as consists of dividends from a subsidiary Indian 5 
company formed and registered before the 1st day of April, 1961; 
at the rate of 35 per cent. on so much of the total income as con-
sists of dividends from any other Indian company formed and 
registered on or after the 1st day of April, 1959; and at the rate 
of 30 per cent. on the balance of the total income shall be allowed 10 
in the case of any Indian company which satisfies condition (a) 
but not condition (b) of the preceding clause; 
(iii) a rebate at the rate of 45 per cent. on so much of the 
total income as consists of dividends from a subsidiary Indian 
company formed and registered before the 1st day of April, 1961; IS 
at the- rate of 22 per cent. on so much of the total income as con-
sists (:F dividends from an Indian company, not being a subsidiary, 
formc.i and registered on or after the 1st day of April, 1959 and 
before the 1st day of April, 1961; at the rate of 35 per cent. on so 
much of the total income as consists of dividends from any Indian 20 
company formed and registered on or after the 1st day of April, 
1961; at the rate of 25 per cent. on so much of the total income as 
consists of royalties received from an Indian concern in pursuance 
of an agreement made by it with the Indian concern on or after 
the 1 st day of April, 1961 and which has been approved by the 25 
Central Government in this behalf; and at the rate of 12 per cent. 
on the balance of the total income shall be allowed in the case of 
any company not entitled to a rebate under either of the preced-
ing clauses: 
Provided further that-
(i) the amount of the rebate under clause (i) or clause 
(ii) of the preceding proviso shall be reduced by the sum, if any, 
equal to the amount or the aggregate of the amounts, as the case 
may be, computed as hereunder:-
(a) on the Bgf,Tegate of the 51U1l1 computed ill the manner at the rate ot ioo% 35 
pfovided in clause (i) of the IIl"cond p~oviso to 
P;'rAgraph D of Part II of the First Schedule to the 
Finano.:e A.:t. 1960 al reduced hy the amoWlt, if any. 
whieh is deemed to hwe been taken Into account, in 
~C4'ordance with clause (ii) of the laid proviso, for the 
purpose of reducinl the rebate mentioned in clause (i) 
of the said proviso to nil ; and . 
• 
(;) on' the amount representing the face value of any at the rate of 121% 
bonus shares or the amount of any bonus issued 
to Itt shareholden during tbe previous year with a 
viC1f to iDcrealin, the paid-u,p cepi~l; 
. ' • 
40 
45 
13 of 1960. 

11 of 1956. 
25 
(ii) where the sum arrived at in accordance with clause (i) 
of this proviso exceeds the amount of the rebate arrived at in 
accordance with clause (i) or clause (ii), as the case may be, of 
the preceding proviso, only so much of the amounts of reduction 
5 mentioned in sub-clauses (a) and (b) of clause (i) of this pro-
viso as is sufficient, in that order, to reduce the rebate to nil shall 
be deemed to have been taken into account for the purpose: 
Provided further that the super-tax payable by a company, the 
total income of which exceeds rupees twenty-five thousand, shall not 
10 exceed the aggregate of-
(a) the super-tax which would have been payable by the 
company if its total income had been rupees twenty-five 
thousand; and 
(b) half the amount by which its total income exceeds 
IS rupees twenty-five thousand. 
Explanation.-For the purposes of this Paragraph, where any 
portion of the profits and gains of a company is not included in its 
total income by reason of such portion being agricultural income, the 
amount representing the face value of any bonus shares and the 
20 amount of any bonus issued to its shareholders shall each be deemed 
to be such proportion thereof as the average of the total income of 
the company in the five previous years in which the company has 
been in receipt of taxable income immediately preceding the rele-
vant previous year bears to the average of its total profits and gains 
(excluding capital receipts) for the preceding five years aforesaid, 
2S reduced by such allowances as may be admissible under the Income-
tax Act which have not been taken into account by the company in 
its profit and loss accounts for the preceding five years aforesaid. 
Paragraph E 
30 In the case of the Life Insurance Corporation of India established 
under the Life Insurance Corporation Act, 1956,-
3S 
Rate of super-tax 
On the whole of its profits and gains from life 
insurance business 
PART III 
.. 22·5% 
• Rates for deduction of tax under section 18 of the Income-tax Act 
at the prescribed rates 
In every case in which under the provisions of section 18 of the 
Income-tax Act, tax is to be deducted at the presoribed rates. 
2009 (B) L.S.--4 . 
• 

26 
deduction shall be made from the income subject to deduction at the 
following rates:-
I. In the cue 01. • J'erIOD other 
thaD • CDmPIIDY-
Rate of 
income-
tim 
( .. , Jn eftI'J cue, OD the 25% 
whole iDaxne (ezcludinl 
iDtereat payable OD any 
aecarity of the Central 
GogemmeDt luued or 
dec:Iarecl to be incame-
tax free),1Dd 
(6) in 1dd1tion, where the 
penon il ODe whom the 
penon responsible for 
paylq the income baa no 
I'aIOD to believe to be 
reaident in the taable 
territoriea, OD the whole 
income. 
2. In the cue of a company-
(a) in every cue-
Income-tax 
Rates of 
surcharges 
Surcharge Specla1 
for surcharge 
purposel 
of the 
UmoD 
3'75% 
Ci) OD the whole Income (excluding interest payable on any 
IeCUlity of the Centtal Government issued or declared to 
be income-ID free); and 
Cia) OD the whole income (ezcluding dividends payable by an 
Incfim company referred to in section 56A of the 
Income-to Act); and 
(6) in addition, where the company is neither 4n Indian com-
PllDY nor a comPIIDY which baa made the pre!lCl'ibed 
arraqementl for the declaration and payment of divi-
dends within Inc:Ua,-
(a) OD the income from dividends (excludinl dividends 
payable by any of itl subsidiary Indian companies 
formed and resistered before the lit day of April, 
196x, or by an Indian com{JIDY referred to in section 
SM of the Income-to: Act)-
(x) on dividendi payable by an Indian company, not 
beina a IUblidlary, formed and reglltered on or 
after the lit day of April, 1959 and before the 
lit day of April, 1961 • • • • • 
(2) on dlvidends payable by any Indian company 
formed and I'CIiatered on or after the ;Ut day of 
ApriJ, 1961 , , , , , , , 
(3) 011 any other dividendi 
(i') OIl the Income from royalties payable by an Indian 
concern In purauance of an agreement which is made by 
It with the Indian concern on or after the lit day of 
April, x96x and which has been approved by the 
c:mttal Gcm:mmeat in this behalf, . • • 
(iii') _., other Income, not beiDa income from dividend •• 
Super-tax 
Rate of Rates of 
IUper-ta: surcharges 5 
10 
15 
20 
Super-to: and 8ur-
charges on super-
tax in accordanc e 
with the provisions 
of clause (b) of sub-
section (1) of section 25 
17 of the Income-
tax Act. 
Rate of , Rate of 
inco~e- s:r- 30 
35 
• 4C 
45 
so 
10% 
33% 55 

s 
10 
15 
20 
30 
3S • 
27 
rHE SECOND SCHEDULE 
(See section 11) 
PART I 
In the First Schedule to the Tariff Act,-
• 
(i) in Item No. 8(2), for the entries in the fourth and sixth 
columns, the entries "50 per cent. ad valorem" and "40 per cent. 
ad valorem", respectively, shall be substituted; 
(ii) in Item No. 9(3), for the entries in the fourth and sixth, 
columns, the entries "100 per cent. ad valorem" and "921 pel: 
cent. ad valorem", respectively, shan be substituted; 
(iii) in Item No. 9(5), for the entries in the fourth and sixth 
columns, the entries "Rs. 3,07 per kilogram" and "Rs. 3,00 per 
kilogram", respectively, shall be substituted; 
(iv) in Item No. 12(4), in the third column, the word 
"Revenue" shall be inserted, and for the entry in the fourth 
column, the entry "50 per cent. ad valorem" shall be substituted; 
(v) in Item No. 22(3), for the entries in the fourth column 
against sub-items (a) and (b), the entries "Rs. 23'50 per litre" 
and "Rs. 14·70 per litre", respectively, shall be substituted; 
(vi) in Item No. 22(4),-
(1) for the entry in the fourth column against sub-item 
(a), the entry "Rs. 44·00 per litre of the strength of London 
proof or 170 per cent. ad valorem, whichever is higher" shall 
be substituted; 
(2) for the entry in the fourth column against sub-item 
(b) (i), the entry "Rs. 58·70 per litre or 170 per cent . 
ad valorem, whichever is higher, plus the excise duty for 
the time being leviable on like articles if produced or manu-
factured in India, and where such duty is leviable at different 
rates, the highest duty" shall be substituted; 
(3) for the entry in the fourth column against SUb-item 
(b) (ii). the entry "Rs. 44·00 per litre of the strength of 
London proof or 170 per cent. ad valorem, whichever is 
higher, plus the excise duty for the time being leviable on 
like articles if produced or manufactured in India, and 
where such duty is leviable at different rates, the highest 
duty" shall be substituted; 
(vii) in Items Nos. 22(5) (b) (i) and 22(5)(b)(U), in each 
of the entries in the fourth, fifth and sixth columns. the words 

"plus the excise duty for the time being leviable on like articles 
if produced or manufactured in India, and where such duty is 
leviable at different rates, the highest duty" shall be added at 
the end; 
(viii) in Item No. 24(3), fol' the entries in the fourth and S 
sixth columns, the entry "Rs. 33·00 per kilogram" shall be 
substituted; 
(ix) in Item No. 28A, in each of the entries in the fourth, 
fifth and sixth columns, the words "plus the excise duty for the 
tiJ;ne being leviable on like articles if produced or manufactured 10 
in India, and where such duty is leviable at different rates, the 
highest duty" shall be added at the end; 
(oX) in Items Nos. 28(3) and 39, for the entry against each 
of them in the fourth column, the entry "10 per cent. ad valorem" 
~hall be substituted; IS 
(xi) in Items Nos. 28(4), 28(14), 28(30), 28(34), 30(1), 30(13), 
30(15), 30(16), 47(3), 47(4), 47(5), 47(6), 48(3), 48(7), 48(8), 
48(9) and 70(1), in the entry against each of them in the fourth 
column, the words "plus the excise duty for the time being 
leviable on like articles if produced or manufactured in India, 20 
and where such duty is leviable at different rates, the highest 
duty" shall be added at the end; 
(xii) in Items Nos. 28(8) and 66(b), for the entry against 
each of them in the fourth column, the entry "50 per cent. 
ad valorem plus the excise duty for the time being leviable on 2S 
like articles if produced or manufactured in India, and where 
such duty is leviable at different rates, the highest duty" shall 
be substituted; . 
(xiii) in Item No. 30, for the figures "40" and "~O" in the 
fourth and fifth columns, the figures "50" and "40", respectively, 30 
shall be substituted; 
(xiv) in Items Nos. 31, 31(2), 31(3), 45(b)~ 45 (c) and 7l(b), 
for the entry against each of them in the fourth column, the 
entry "75 per cent. ad valorem" shall be substituted; 
(.xv) in Item No. 31(1), for the entries in the fourth and 3S 
sixth columns, the entries "75 per cent. ad valO'7'em" and "65 per 
cent. ad valorem", respectively, shall be substituted; 
. (.xvi) in Items Nos. 39(1), 39(2), 39(3), 40, 63(28) and 87, 
for the entry against each of them in the fourth column, the 
-entry "50 per cent. ad valorem" shall be substituted; 40 

10 
IS 
20 
(zvii) in Item No. 44, for the figures "40" in the fourth 
column, the figures "50" shall be substituted; 
(zviii) in Items Nos. 45(a), 53, 80 and 81, for the entry 
against each of them in the fourth column, the entry "100 per 
cent. ad valorem" shall be substituted; 
(N) in Items Nos. 72, 72(1), 72(2) and 72(3), for the entry 
against each of them in the fourth column, the entry "15 per cent. 
ad valorem" shall be substituted; 
(xx) in Items Nos. 73, 73(1) and 77, for the entries against 
each of them in the fourth and fifth columns, the eritries "50 per 
cent. ad valorem" and "40 per cent. ad valorem", respectively, 
shall be substituted; 
(xxi) in Items Nos. 73(21), 73(22) and 75(19), for the entry 
against each of them in the fourth column, the following entry 
shall be substituted, namely:-
"The excise duty for the time being leviable on like 
articles if produced or manufactured in India .. and where 
such duty is leviable at different rates, the highest duty; 
and the duty so leviable shall be in addition to the duty 
which would have been levied if this entry had not been 
inserted."; 
(xxii) in Items Nos. 74(2) and 74(3), for the entry against 
'!ach of them in the fourth column, the entry "25 per cent 
ad valorem" shall be substituted; and 
25 • (xxiii) in Item No. 75(1), for the figures "75" in the fourth 
column, the figures "100" shall be substituted. 

~ 
• 
PART II 
, Item Name of Article Nature of Staodard rate of duty 
No. duts' 
I 2 3 .. 
10 In the First Schedule to the Tariff Act,-
(i) after Item No. 12(4), the following Item ahall be inserted, namely :-
.. 1z(4A) Malt • . Revenue 100 per cent. ad valorem • 
(ia) a..fter Item No. 59(6), the following Item shall be inserted, namely :-
.. 59 (7) 
IS 
China and Porcdainware, all 
sorts,-
(I) Tableware. 
(2) Sanitaryware. 
(3) Glazed tiles. 
ReYenue The aci&e duty for the time 
being leviable on like articles 
if produced or manufactured in 
India, and where such duty is 
leviable at different rates, the 
highest duty ; and the duty so 
leviable shall be in addition to 
the duty which would have been 
levied if this entry had not beeu 
inserted. 
(4) Not otherwise specified. 
20 
(iii) after Item No. 60(8), the following Item shall be inserted, namely :-
2S • 60(9) Glass and glassware,- Revenue The acise duty for the time 
(I) Sheet glass and Plate glass. being leviable on like articles 
(2) Laboratory glassware. if produced or manufactured in 
(~Glass shells, g\8S8 globes India, and where such duty i~ 
and chimneys for lamps and leviable at different rates, 
30 lanterns. the highest duty ; and the duty 
Plefe.entW rate of 
duty if the Irticle 
ilth~or man of 
The United A British 
Kingdom Colon, 
S 6 
.. .. 
Dundon of 
proteCriye 
rateI of 
duty 
7 
" . , 
". , 
.. 
$!-

• 
(4) Other glassware including 
tabkwatt. 
• 
~. 
10 leviable shall be in addition 
to the duty which would bne 
been levied if this entry had 
not been inserted • 
3S (ill) after Item No. 63(14), the following Item shall be inserted, namely :-
.. 63(14A) High carbon steel stripa of thick- Preferential 
aas • S mID. or below. Revenue. 
so per cent. ad fJilifJl'mL 
(II) after Item No. 64(S), the following Item shall be inserted, nam~y :-
40 c. 64(6) Copper and copper alloys con- Revenue The excise duty. for the time being 
taining not less than fifty per leviable on like articles if pro-
4S 
cent. by weight of copper- duced or manufac:tured in India, 
and where such duty is leviable 
(I) Manufactures, the foUowiDg. at different rates, the highest 
namely, plates, sheet9, dr- ::., ; and the duty so leviable 
cles, strips and foUa in any be in addition to the duty 
form or size. which would have been levied 
(2) Pipes and tube&. if this cotty bad not been in-
serted. 
(In) after Item No. 68(4), the following Item shall be inserted, namely :-
50 .. 68(5) zmc.;.- . . • • . Revenue The acise duty for the time 
(I) Manufactures, the foUowina, being leviable on like articles 
D8IIJely. plates. sheetJ, circles, if produced or manufactured in 
I1ripI and [oiJa in any form or India, and where such duty it 
size. leviable at different rates, 
55 the hiF.est duty: and the duty 
(2) Pipes and tubes. 10 ICVJable shall be in addition 
to the duty which would haft 
been levied if this entry bad 
not been interted. 
40 per ceat. 
GIl WIlDrMr. 
n. 
• 
. ; 
\1'\ 

5 
10 
I 2 3 4 
(vi.) after Item No.72(40), the following Item shall be inserted, namely :-
.- 72(·41) Itefrigemon md ~ thereof, 
IIUdl u are specially designed 
for use with ttfrigeraton ; and 
air conditioning macbinery, all 
. .u. 
Revenu~ The excise duty for the time 
being leviable on like artidea 
if produced or manufactured in 
India. and where such duty is 
leviable at differrnt rates, the 
highest duty ; and the duty 10 
leviable shall be in addition to 
the duty which would have been 
levied if this entry had not been 
inserted. 
(mi) after Item No. 73(4), the following Item shall be inserted, namely :-
15 • 73l4A) Wirelesa receiving sets, all 1Orta, Revenue The excise dun' for the time beina 
iDcluding transistor sets and leviable on like articles if pro-
radiograms, with or without duced or manufactured in 1Ddia, 
loudspeaker. and where such duty it leviable 
at different rates, the highest 
duty : and tilt duty so leviable 
20 shah be in addition to the duty 
which would ha* bceo levied 
if this entry had not been insert· 
ed. 
(i%) after Item No. 73(22), the following Item shall be inserted, namely :-
25 • 73(23) Nichrome and other electrical Revenue 100 per cent. ad oaIorem. 
reaistllDc:e wires and strips. 
.30 
(x) after Item No. 82(5), the following Item shall be inserted, namely : 
tb(6) (A) Plastics, all 1Orts- Revenue The excise d~ty for the time 
(.) MoaldinK P!Jwden, panules being leviable on like articles 
lind flakes (tbermoeetting and it produoed or manu&aured in 
thermoplutic). India, and where such dUfy is 
-----------
s 6 7 
., 

I § t 
3S 40 45 
(iI) 
polyethylene 
filma, 
Iayftat 
• 
tubiDgI 
and 
P.V.C 
sheets 
(that 
II 
to 
.,. 
Polyvinyl 
Chloride 
abeeta). 
(B) 
Cellophane 
Revenue 
leviable 
at 
different 
rates, 
the 
highest 
duty 
; and 
the 
duty 
10 
leviable 
shall 
be 
in 
addition 
to 
the 
duty 
which 
would 
have 
been 
levied 
if 
this 
entry 
bad 
not 
been 
inserted. 
The 
acise 
duty 
for 
the 
time 
being 
leviable 
on 
like 
articles 
if 
pro-
duced 
or 
manufactured 
in 
India, 
and 
when: 
such 
duty 
is 
leviable 
at 
cWlerent 
rates, 
the 
hirhest 
:!fi ; and 
the 
duty 
10 
leviable 
be 
in 
addition 
to 
the 
duty 
which 
would 
have 
been 
levied 
if 
this 
CDtry 
bad 
DOt 
been 
in· 
aerted. 
L. 
" 
rl~ ~'~. 
-: 
t ;..1J' 
.: 
'" \ 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The object of this Bill is to give effect to the financial proposals of 
the Central Government for the next financial year and to provide 
for certain connected matters. The Notes on Clauses explain the 
various provisions contained in the Bill. 
MORARJI DESAI. 
NEW DELHI; 
The 28th Fe'fJruary, 1961. 
• 
• 

Notes on Clauses 
Clause 2 prescribes the rates of income-tax and super-tax f~ 
purposes of assessment for the financial year 1961-62 and for deduc-
tion of tax at source from interest on securities, dividends etc., during 
the same year. In the cases of assessees other than companies, the 
only change is that the rate of surcharge on earned income above 
RI. 1 lakh has been raised from 5 per cent. to 10 per cent. of· the 
amount of income-tax and super-tax. 
In the ease of companies,-
(i) the rate of income-tax is the same as in the last year, 
i.e., 20 per cent. for all companies; 
(ii) the effective rate of super-tax applicable to income 
other than dividends of an Indian company in which the public 
are substantially interested and whose total income does not 
exceed Rs. 25,000 and of any other Indian company also remains 
the sam~ as in thp last year, i.e., 20 per cent. and 25 per cent. 
respectively; 
(iii) the effective rate of super-tax applicable to income, 
other than dividends and certain royalties, of such foreign com-
panies as do not declare their dividends in India continues to 
remain the S8IIle as in the last year, i.e., 43 per cent.; 
(iv) The etfeetive'rates of super-tax on dividends received 
by a company (Indian or foreign) from an Indian company 
formed and relistereci before the 1st Aprfi, 1961 will be the same 
as for the financial year 1960-61. In the case of dividends payable 
b3' an Indian company formed and registered on or after the 1st 
April, 1961, the effective rates of super-tax have been fixed at 
15 per cent. in the case of an Ittdian company in which the public 
are substantially interested and whose income does not exceed 
Rs. 25,000. and at 20 per cent. in the case of all other compalJies, 
Indian or foreign.; 
(v) the effective rate of super-tax on royalties received by 
a foreign company (which does not declare dividends in India) 
from an Indian CODCem in pursuance of an agreement made by 
the former with the Indian concern on or after the 1st Apn1, 1961 
which haa been approved by the Central Government, has been 
hed at 30 per cent; 
35 
s> 

(vi) the effective rate at which super-tax is payable with 
reference to bonus issues has been reduced from 30 per cent. to 
121 per cent. 
The rates for deduction of tax at source remain the same as in the 
financial year 1960-61 except that in the case of dividends and certain 
royalties payable to foreign companies which do not declare their 
dividends in India, the rates have been fixed at the rates correspond-
ing to those mentioned in (iv) and (v) above. 
Clause 3 makes the follOwing amendments to sub-section (3) of 
section 4 of the Income-tax Act:-
Sub-clause (i) inserts a new clause (iia) to provide for 
exemption from tax in the case of the income of an association 
or institution established in India wholly for controlling, super-
vising, regulating or encouraging in India the games of cricket, 
hockey, football. tennis and such other games or sports as 
may be specified by the Central Government from time to time 
in the Ofticial Gazette. 
Sub-clause (ii) amends clause (xiva) to secure that the 
exemption from tax in respect of the salary received by a 
foreign technician whose contract of service has been approved 
by the Central Government will be available for a period of 36 
months from the date of his arrival in India and that if for a 
further period not exceeding twenty four months, the tax in 
respect of his salary is paid to the Central Government by hi. 
employer, such tax shall not be treated as a part of the techni-
cian's total income. 
Sub-clause (iii) amends clause (xvi) to extend to the 
Development Loan Fund of the United States of America the 
exemption available at present to the International Bank for 
Reconstruction and Development, in respect of interest received 
from an industrial undertaking or financial corporation, in 
certain circumstances. 
Clause 4 amends section 7 of the Income-tax Act to provide 
exemption from tax in respect of retiring gratuity received after 
the 1st June, 1953 by the members of Defence Services under the 
New Pension Code. 
Clause 5 amends section 9 of the Income-tax Act to provide that 
in respect of a building erected on or after the 1st day of April, 1961 
and which is let on rent to tenants, the annual value of each resijien-
tial unit shall be reduced by the amount of its annual value or Rs. 600, 
whichever is less, for a period of three years from the completion of 
the building. '. ·:S!~ 

Clause 6 makes the following amendments in sub-section (2) at 
section 10 of the Income-tax Act:-
Sub-clause (i) amends clause (vi) to secure that in respect 
of buildings erected after the 31st March, 1961 by an employer for 
the residence of persons employed in the business carried on by 
him and receiving remuneration not exceeding Rs. 200 per month, 
an initial depreciation of 20 per cent. of the actual cost of the 
buildings will be allowed for the year of their erection. 
Sub-clause (ii) makes an amendment to clause (vib) to 
secure that in respect of new plant or machinery installed on or 
after the 1st April, 1961, the development rebate will be 
admissible at the rate of 20 per cent. of the actual cost thereof. 
In the case of new ships, however, the existing rate of 40 per cent. 
remains unchanged. 
Sub-clause (iii) inserts a new clause (vic) to provide that 
subject to certain conditions where a company is amalgamated 
with another company or where a firm is converted into a private 
company and ship, machinery or plant on which development 
rebate is admissible to the predecessor is transferred by the 
predecessor to the successor, the development rebate already 
allowed in respect of the asset transferred will not be withdrawn 
and any unutilised portion of the development rebate shall be 
available to the successor. 
Sub-clause (iv) inserts a new clause (xiva) to enable an 
approved financial corporation engaged in providing long term 
finance for industrial development to claim as a deduction from 
its taxable profits, amounts appropriated to a special reserve 
account, not exceeding 10 per cent. of the total income till the 
amount carried to the reserve account equals the paid-up capital • of the corporation. 
Sub-clause (v) amends clause (xv) to provide that no 
allowance on account of expenses for entertainment shall be 
made in the case of an assessee other than a company and. 
further, that in the case of companies, the amount allowable 
shall be restricted to certain specified limits. 
Clause 7 extends the benefit of the five year tax holiday at 
present enjoyed by new industrial undertakings under section 15C 
to new hotels which start functioning on or after the 1st April, 1961 
a~ satisfy certain conditions and also amends sub-section (4) to 
enable the Central Board of Revenue to prescribe rules for computing 
the amount of the dividend exempt under the said sub-section 

• 
Clause 8 amends section 2SA of the Income-tax Act to secure 
that the provisions of that section shall not be applicable to a com-
pany in which at least 75 per cent. of the share capital is held by 
charitable institutions or funds income whereof is exempt under 
clause (i) of sub-section (3) of section 4 of the Income-tax Act. 
Clause 9 makes amendments to section 35 of the Income-tax 
Act, consequential to the amendments proposed in sub-clause (iii) 
of clause 6. 
Clause 10 amends section 56A of the Income-tax Act by extending 
the application of that section to the dividends paid by an Indian 
company engaged in the manufacture of refractories. . 
Clause 11 read with the Second Schedule seeks to increase the 
import duties on certain items. The principal changes are:-
(i) the duty on betelnuts is proposed to be increased by 
approximately 36%; 
(ii) the duty on tobacco, unmanufactured, is proposed to be 
increased by approximately 50%; 
(iii) the duty on textile manufactures, not otherwise specifi-
ed, is proposed to be raised from 50% to 100%; 
(iv) the duty on iron and steel manufactures, not otherwise 
specified, is proposed to be raised from 35% to 50%; 
(v) the duty on certain items of machinery and their 
component parts is proposed to be raised from 10% to 15%; 
(vi) the duty on electrical as well as certain non-electrical 
instruments, apparatus and appliances is proposed to be increas-
ed by 25% to 33%; 
(vii) the duty on certain railway materials is proposed to 
be raised from 20% to 25%; • 
(viii) increases in duty are proposed on the residuary tarift 
item "All other articles not otherwise specified" and on various 
. other less important articles; 
(ix) on a number of articles on which Central excise dutie& 
have been imposed or are being levied at present. provtsiClll is 
being made for the levy of a countervailing import duty. This 
is necessary in .order that the indigenous producer or m8DU-
facturer of these articles is not placed at a disadvantage in 
comparison with the importer. 
Clause 12 seeks to maintain for another year the statu. qv.o eln 
regard to commitments under the General Agreement on Tariffs aDd 
Trade. 

C1Cl1.lMl 18-
Sub-clause (a) proposes an increase in the rate of excise 
duty on coffee. 
Sub-clause (b) (1) seeks to substitute the existing rates of 
excise duty on flue cured tobacco used in the manufacture of 
cigarettes by a single flat rate of duty and also proposes an 
increase in the rates of duty on certain forms of other than flue 
cured tobacco and on stalks. 
Sub-clause (b) (2) proposes an increase in the rates of duty 
on certain high priced cigarettes and also seeks to rationalise the 
rates of duty on cigars and cheroots. 
Sub-clause (c) seeks to increase the rate of excise duty on 
kerosene. 
Sub-clause (d) proposes an increase in the rate of excise 
duty on diesel oil not otherwise specified. 
Sub-clause (e) proposes an increase in the excise duty on 
vegetable product. 
Sub-clause (f) proposes an increase in the rates of excise 
duties on pigments, colours, paints, enamels, varnishes, blacks 
and cellulose lacquers. 
Sub-clause (g) proposes to levy an excise duty on soda ash, 
caustic soda, glycerine, coal tar dyes, patent or proprietary 
medicines not containing alcohol and certain cosmetics and toilet 
preparations. 
Sub-clause (tb.) proposes to levy an excise duty on plastics 
and on cellophane . 
• Sub-clause (i) proposes an increase in the rates of duty on 
all varieties of paper except printing and writing paper. 
Sub-clause (j) proposes to levy an excise duty on cotton 
yarn and woollen yam. 
Sub-clause (k) proposes to levy an excise duty on glass and 
glassware and china and porcelainware. 
Sub-clause (1) proposes to levy an excise duty on certain 
manufactures of copper and its alloys and of zinc. 
Sub-clause (m) seeks to levy an excise duty on aluminium 
.pipes and tubes. 
Sub-clause (n) proposes to levy an excise duty on air condi-
tioning machinery. 
SUb-clause (0) proposes to levy an excise duty on wirelell 
receiving sets . 
• 

· .to:. 
Sub-clause (p) proposes an increase in the permissible 1..imit 
of the excise duty on matches ·from 57 to 65 nP per 1000 matches 
or fraction thereof. 
Sub-clause (q) proposes to levy an excise duty on refrigera-
tors and parts thereof. 
Clause 14 seeks to make certain amendments in the Central 
Sales Tax Act, 1956 consequent on the proposal to levy an additional 
duty of excise in lieu of sales tax on silk fabrics. 
Clause 15 proposes to levy an additional duty of excise in lieu 
of sales tax on silk fabrics and seeks to make consequential amend-
ments in the Additional Duties of Excise (Goods of Special 
Importance) Act, 1957. It also seeks to make certain changes in the 
rates of additional excise duty on cigars and cheroots and on 
cigarettes. 
Clause 16 seeks to make certain amendments to the entry relating 
to policies of insurance in Schedule I to the Indian Stamp Act, 1899, 
in order to remove certain difficulties which have arisen as a result 
of the decimalisation of the stamp duty. 
Clause 17, like section 23 of the Finance Act, 1960 provides that 
salt shall be duty free for another year. 

• 
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
The Bill seeks to levy new excise duties on-
1. Soda ash 
2. Caustic soda 
3. Glycerine 
4. Coal tar dyes. 
5. Cosmetics and toilet preparations 
6. Patent or proprietary medicines 
7. Plastics 
8. Cellophane 
9. Cotton yam 
10. Woollen yam 
11. China and porcelainware. 
12. Glass and glassware 
13. Copper and alloys of copper 
14. Zinc 
15. Aluminium pipes and tubes 
~6. Wireless receiving sets 
17. Air conditioning machinery 
18. Refrigerators 
• 
These levies wUl necessitate the employment of some additic)Jlal std. 
The increase in staff together with incidental exPenses of administra-
tion is estimated to cost Rs. 10·55 lakhs per annum. " 
I. Volume of work: 
There are about 800 units which are now to be brought under 
QXcise control. 
II. Requirement of personnel and finance: 
A.. Officers-
For the field organisation 
No. 
Assistant Collectors 
Supenntendents-
Qass I . 
Class II 
4 
6 
Annual 
emolummts 
Cost 
Its. Its. 
:1 x 8,880 
4 x 8,880 
6 x 7,°56 

42 
No. Annual COil 
• emoluments 
Rs. Rs. 
B. Staff-
Deputy Superintendents (Executive) 40 40 x 5,77~ 2.,31,000 
Inspectors 60 60 X 3,746 2.,24,760 
Sub-Inspectors . . . 60 60 X 1,832 1,09,920 
Dy. Superintendents (Ministerial) 2. 2 X 4,710 9>420 
Head aerks 10 10 X 3,746 370460 
Upper Division Clerks . 28 28 Y. 2.,548 71,344 
Lower Division Clerks . 30 30 X 1,804 54,120 
Stenotypists . 12 12 X 2,044 24,528 
C. Incidental expenses including Class 
IV staff, contingencies. etc. 1040,000 
TOTAL Ra. 9,98,168 
or Rs. 10'00 lakhs. 
For lhe Office of lhe Cmlral Board of Reo,""e 
.\. Officers-
Under Secretary 
Section Officer 
B. SWf-
Assistants . 
Stenographer . 
Upper Division Clerk . 
Lower Division Clerks . 
C. Incidental expenses including aass 
IV staff, contingencies, etc. 
TOTAL • 
J 
I 
4 
1 
I 
.. 
I X 13,140 
J x 7,800 
.. X 3,864 
I x 3,864 
I x 2,548 
4 x 1,804 
RI. 
13,140 
7,800 
15,456 
3,864 
2,548 
7,216 
5,000 
55,024, 
or Rs. 55,000'00 
~ r 
GMGlPND-L. S. I-aoo9 (B) L. S.-1-3-61-1715. 

LOKSABHA 
A 
BILL 
to give effect to the financial proposals of the Central 
Government for the financial year 1961-62. 
The President has, in pursuance of clauses (1) and (3) of 
article II7 and clause (1) of article 274 of the Constitution of 
India, recommended to the Lok Sa bha, the introduction and 
consideration of the Bill. 
M. N.'KAUL, 
Secretary. 
(Shri Morarji Desai. 
,Ministe1' of F.inance.) 