.. 
As INTRODt7CI'J) IN LOK SABHA ON 
BOl No. 10 of 1_ 
THE MUSLIM WOMEN (PROTECTION OF RIGHTS ON 
DIVORCE) BILL, 1986 
A 
BJLL 
to pT.otect the rights oj Muslim women who h(lve been dWoTced by, or 
have obtained divorce from, their husb(lnds and to provide for 
matters connected therewith or incidental thereto. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty-seventh Year of the Republic 
of India 39 fol1ows:-~ 
• 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Muslim Women (Protection of Short title 
Rights on Divorce) Act, 1986. and extent. 
S (2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and 
Kashmir, 
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,- Definitions; 
(a) "divorced woman" means a Muslim woman who was married 
according to Muslim law, and has been divorced" by, or has obtained. 
10 divorce from, her husband in accordance with Muslim law; 
(b) "iddat period" means, in the case of a divorced woman,-
(i) three menstrual courses after the date of divorce, if she is 
sUbject to menstruation; 

Mohr or 
other pro-
pertiC5 Of. 
Muslim 
woman to 
be liven to 
her at the 
time of 
divorce. 
• 
z 
(ii) three lunar months after her divorce, if she is not 'Subject 
to menstruation; and 
(iii) if she is enceinte, at the time of her, divorce, the pe.riod 
bt!tween the divorce and the delivery of her child or the termina~ 
tion of her pregnancy, whichever is earlier; 5. 
(c) "Magistrate" means a Magistrate of the First class exercising 
jurisdiction under the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 in the area : of 1874-
where the divorced woman resides. 
3. U) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the 
time being in force, a divorced woman shall be entitled to-. 
(a) a reasonable and fair pro.vision and maintenance· to be made 
and paid to her within the iddat period by her former husband; 
(b) where she herself maintains the children barn to her before 
10 
or after her divorce, a reasonable and fair prOVision and mainien~ 
ance to be made and paid by her former husband for a period of two 15 
years from the respective dates of birth of 'Such children; 
(c) an amount equal to the sum of mahr or dower agreed to be 
paid to her at the time of her marriage according to Muslim law; and 
(d) all the properties given to her before or at the time of marriage 
or after her marriage by her relativ.es or friends or the husband or 120 
any relatives of the husband or his friends. 
(2) Where a reasonable and fair provision and maintenance or the 
amount of mahr or dower due has not been made or paid or the properties 
referred to in clause (d) of sub-section (1) have not been delivered to a 
divorced woman on her divorce, she or anyone duly authorised by her 125 
may, on her behalf, make an. application to a Magistrate for an order for 
payment of such provision and maintenance, mahr or dower or the deli-
very of properties, as the case may be. 
(3) Where an application has. ~een made under sub-section (2) by a 
divorced woman, the Magistrate may, H he i'B satisfied that- 30 
(a) her husband having· sufficient means, has failed or neglected 
to make or pay her within the iddat period a reasons able and fair 
provision and maintenance for her and the children; or 
(b) the amount equal to the 9um of mahr or dower bas not been 
paid or that the properties referred to in clause (d) of sub-section (1) :15 
have not been delivered to her, 
make an order, within one month of the date of the filing of the applica-
tion, directing her former husband to pay such reasonable and fair pro-
vision and maintenance to the diverced woman as he may determine as 
fit and proper having regard to the needs of the divorced. woman, the 4') 
standard of life enjoyed by her during her marriage and the means of her 
fanner husband or, as the case may be. for the payment of such m4h,. or 
dower or the deliv~ of such properties referred to in clause (d) of sub-
section (1) to the divorced woman: 
Pro"ided that if the Magistrate ftndo; it impracticable to c1ispose of 45 
the application within the said period, he may, for reasons to be recorded 
, by him. dispose "f the application after the said period. 

:2 of 1974. 
J 
(4) If any person .gail'lst whom an order.has been made under sub-
aection (3) faUI without auftlcieDt caU8e to comply With the order. the 
Maptra.te may iuue a warrant for levying the amount. ef maintenance 
or mahT or dower due in the manner provided for levying iDes under the 
5 Code oI Criminal Procedwe, lW1~ and may sentenoe such penon.. for the 
whole or part of any amount remaining unpaid after the execution of the 
warrant. to imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year or 
until payment if sooner made, subject to such person being heard 
in defence and the said sentence being imposed according to the provi-
10 sions of the said Code. 
4. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the foregoing provisions 
of this Act or in any other law for the time being in force; where a ~gis­
trate is satIsfied that a divorced woman has not re-married and is not 
able to maintain herself after the iddat period, he may make an order 
15 directing such of her relatives as would be entitled to inherit her property 
on her death according to Muslim law to pay such reasonable and fair 
maintenElnce to her as he may determine fit and proper, having regard to 
the needs of the divorced woman, the standard of life enjoyed by her 
during her marriage and the means of such relatives and suCh I\1ain-
20 tenance shall be payable by such relatives in the proportions in which 
they would inherit her property and at such periods as he ~ay specify 
in his order:' . 
Provided that if any such relative is unable to pay his or hel: share 
of the maintenance ordered by the Magistrate on the ground of his or 
25 her not having the means to pay the same, the Magistrate may, on proof 
of such inability being furnir.hed to him, order that the share of such 
relatives in the maintenance ordered by him be paid by such of the other 
relatives as may appear to the Magistrate to have the means of paying 
the same in such proportions as the Magistrate may think fit to order. 
(2) Where a divorced woman is unable to maintain herself 
30 and she has no relatives as mentioned in sub-section (1) or such 
relatives or anyone of them have not enough means to pay the main-
tenance ordered by the Magistrate or the other relatives have not the 
means to pay the shares of those relatives whose shares have been order-
ed by the Magistrate to be paid by such other relatives under the proviso 
35 to sub-section (1), the Magistrate may, by order, direct the State Wakf 
',29 of 1954. Board established under section 9 of the Wakf Act, 1954, or under any 
other law for the time being in force in a State, functioning in the area 
in which the woman resides, to pay such maintenance as determined by 
him under sub-seCtion (1) or, as the case may be. to pay the shares of 
40 tlu4!h of the relatives who are unable to pay, at such periods as he may 
specify in his order. 
S. (1) The Central Government may. by notification in the Official 
Gazette. make rules for carrying out the . purposes of this Act. 
(~) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid. as soon as may be 
45 after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, 
for a total period. of thirty daY' which may be compried in one session 
or in two or more successive sessions, and jJ, before the expiry of the 
session immediately following the session or the successive seSsions afore-
said, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both 
50 Pfcm8eS agree that the rule should not be made,' the nile shall thereafter 
have effect· only in such modified fonn or be of DO effect, as the case may 
be; so., however, that any such modification Or annulment shan be with-
out prejudice to the validity of anything previously done unaer that rule. 
Power to 
make 
rulet. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS , 
The Supreme Court, in Mohd. Ahmed Khan VB. Shah B4M Begum 
"'Rd others (.A.I.R. 1985 S.C. 945), has held that although the Muslim law 
limits the husband's liability to provide for maintenance of the divorced 
wife to the period of iddat, it does not contemplate or countenance the 
situation envisaged by section 125 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 
1973. The Court held that it would be incorrect and unjust to extend 
the above principle of Muslim law to cues in which the divorced wife 
is unable to maintain herself. The Court, therefore, came to the con-
clusion that if the divorced wife is able to maintain herself, the husband's 
liability ceases with the expiration of the period of iddat, but if she is 
unable to maintain herself after the period of iddat, she is entitled to 
have recourse to section 125 of the Code of Criminal Procedure. 
2. This decision has led. to some controversy as to the obligation of 
the Muslim husband to pay maintenance to the divorced wife. Oppor-
tunity has, therefore, been taken to specify the rights which a Muslim 
divorced woman is entitled to at the time ot divorce and to protect her 
interests. The Bill accordingly provides for the following, among other 
things, namely:-
(1(1.) a Muslim divorced woman shall be entitled to a reasonable 
and rair provision and maintenance within the period of iddat by her 
fonner husband and in case she maintains the children born 
to her before or after her divorce, such reasonable· provision and 
. maintenance would be extended to a period of two years from the dates 
of birth of the children. She will also be entitled to mM.1' or dower 
and all the properties given to her by her relatives, friends, husband 
and the husband's relatives. If the above benefits are not given to her 
at the time of divorce, she is entitled to apply to the M'.aptrate for an 
order directing her former husband to provide for such maintenance. 
the payment of mtZh,. or dower or the deUvery of the properties; 
(b) where a Muslim divorced woman is unable to maintain her-
self after the oeriod of idda.t, the Magistrate is empowered to make 
an order f~r the payment of maintenance by her relatives who would 
be entitled to inherit her property on her death according to Muslim 
law in the proportions in which they would inherit her property. If 
any one of such relatives is unable to pay his or her share on the 
ground of his or her not having the means to pay, the Magistrate 
would direct the other relatives who have sufficient means to pay 
the shares of these relatives also. But where a divorced woman has 
no relatives or such relatives or anyone of them has not .enough 
means' to pay the maintenance or the other relatives who have been 
asked to pay the shares of the defaulting relatives also do not have 
the means to pay the shares of the defaulting relatives, the Magiostrate 
would order the State Wakf Board. to 'Pay the maintenance ordered 
by him or the shares of the relatives who are unable to pay. 
3. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects. 
,., 
NEW D!urI; 
The 19th Febf'ua'tI, 1986. A. K. SEN. 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 5 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules 
for carrying out the provisions of the Bill. Such pow~ would enable the 
Central Government to make rules with 'regard to matters of procedure 
'and administrative detail, which is not practicable to provide for in the 
Bill itself. The delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal 
character. 
5 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
to protect the rights of Muslim women who have been divorced by, or 
hav" obtained divorce from, their husbands and to pro~de for 
matters connected therewith or incidental thereto. 
(Shri A. K. Sen, Minmer of lAw and Justice) 
• 