Dill NO.IG ofl~~J 
:.r~ 0 . ............ , •••••• , .. 
THE INDUSTRIAL DISPUTES 
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 1957 
[As INTRODUCBD IN LoK SABRA) 

Bill No. 10 of 1'5.7 
THE INDUSTRIAL DISPUTES (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1957. 
(As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABRA) 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Industrial Disp.tl.te$ Aot, 1947. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Eighth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
1. (1) This Act may be called the Industrial Disputes (Amend- Short title ment) Act, 1957. and com-
mencement. 
5 (2) Section 2 shall be deemed to have come into force on 
the 10th day of March, 1957, and section 3 on the 1st day of 
December, 1956. 
of 15147. 2. In section 2 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, (hereinafter Amendment 
referred to as the principal Act), for clause (r), the following clause of section z. 
10 shall be substituted, namely:-
"(r) 'Tribunel' means an Industrial Tribunal constituted 
under section 7A and includes an ,Industrial Tribunal constituted 
before the 10th day of March, 1957, urlder this Act;". 
3. For section 25FF of the principal Act, the following sections Substitution 
IS shall be substituted, namely:- ti~n~~~r =: 
tion zSFF. 
20 
"25FF. Where the ownership or management of an under- Compensa-
taking is transferred, whether by agreement or by operation of tion t~ work-. men In case 
law, from the employer in relation to that undertakmg to a ot ranster 
new employer every workman who has been in continuous ser- ~f undertak 
.' •• logS. 
vice for not less than one year in that undertaking nnmediately 

Compensa-
tion to work-
men in case 
of closing 
down of un-
dcrtalciDi l . 
2 
before such transfer shall be entitled to notice and compensa-
tion in accordance with the provisions of section 25F, as if the 
workman had been retrenched: 
Provided that nothing in this section shall apply to a work-
man in any case where there has been a change of employers by 5 
reason of the transfer, if-
(a) the service of the workman has not been interrupted 
by such transfer; 
(b) the terms and conditions of service applicable to 
the workman after such transfer are not in any way less 10 
favourable to the workman than those applicable to him 
immediately before the transfer; and 
(c) the new employer is, under the terms of such transfer 
or otherwise, legally liable to pay to the workman, in the 
event of his retrenchment, compensation on the basis that IS 
his service has been continuous and has not been interrupted 
by the transfer. 
25FFF. (1) Where en undertaking is closed down for any 
reason whatsoever, every workman who has been in continuous 
service for not less than one year in that undertaking immedia- 20 
tely before such closure shall, subject to the provisions of sub-
section (2), be entitled to notice and compensation in accordance 
with the provisions of section 25F, as if the workman had been 
retrenched: 
Provided that where the undertaking is closed down on 25 
account of unavoidable circumstances beyond the control of the 
employer, the compensation to be paid to the workman under 
clause (b) of section 25F shall not exceed his average pay for 
three months. 
Explanation..-An undertaking which is closed down by 30 
reason merely of financial losses or accumulation of undisposed 
of •. tocks shall not be deemed to' have been closed down on 
account of unavoidable circumstances beyond the control of the 
employer within the meaning of the proviso to this sub-section. 
(2) Where any undertaking set-up for the construction of 35 
buildings, bridges, roads, canals, dams or other construction 
works is closed down on aceount of the completion of the work 
within two years from the date on which the undertaking had 
been set-up, no workman employed therein shall be entitled to 

3 
any compensation under clause (b) of section 25F, but if the 
construction work is not so completed within two years, he shall 
be entitled to notice and compensation under that section for 
every completed year of service or any part thereof in excess of 
six months, excluding therefrom the first two years of his' ser-
vice in that undertaking.". 
4. The Industrial Disputes (Amendment) Ordinance, 1957 is Repeal of 
hereby repealed.. Ordinance 4 of I9S7 • 
• 

• 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
In a judgment delivered on the 27th November, 1956, the Supreme 
Court held that no retrenchment compensation was payable under 
section 25F of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, to workmen whose 
services were terminated by an employer on a real and bona fide 
closure of business, or when termination occurred as a result of trans-
fer of ownership from one employer to another. Since then, a num-
ber of under1lakings have closed down or put up notices of closure for 
one reason or another. This has led and is likely to lead to a large 
number of workmen being rendered unemployed without any com-
pensation. In order to meet the situation which was causing har~- -c. 
ship to workmen, it was considered necessary to take immediate 
action and the Industrial Disputes (Amendment) Ordinance, 1957 
(4 of 1957), was promulgated with retrospective effect from 1st 
December, 1956. 
2. The Ordinance provides that compensation would be payable 
to workmen whose services are terminated on account of the transfer 
or closure of undertakings. In the case of transfer of an undertaking, 
however, if the workman is re-employed on terms and conditions 
which are not less favourable to him, he will not be entitled to any 
compensation. This was the position which existed prior to the deci-
sion of the Supreme Court. In the case of closure· of business on 
accoun't of circumstances beyond the control of the employer, the 
maximum compensation payable to workmen has been limited to his 
average pay for three months. If the undertaking is engaged in any 
construction work and it is closed down within two years on account 
of the completion of its work, no compensation would be payable to 
workmen employed therein. 
3. This Bill seeks to replace the Ordinance by an Act of Parlia-
ment. Opportunity has been taken to amend the definition of "Tri-
bunal" as inserted by the Industrial Disputes (Amendment and Mis-
cellaneous Provisions) Act, 1956 (36 of 1956). The amendment is 
merely formal and clarificatory. 
NEW DI:Lm; 
The 10th Ma.y, 1957. 
G. L. NANDA. 

DcfiDitiODI. 
ANNEXURE 
EXTRAC'l'S nOM THE INDUSTRIAL DISPUTES ACT, 1947 
No. 14 OF 1947. 
• • • • 
2. In this Act, unless there is anything repugnant h the subject 
or context,-
• • • • 
(,.) "Tribunal" means an Industrial Tribunal constituted 
under section 7A; 
• • • • 
Special pro- 25FF. Notwithstanding anything contained in section 25F, no 
v,ilioD rell- workman shall be entitled to compensation under that section by 
tlDg to work-men employ- reason merely of the fact that there has been a change bf employers 
cd!D under- in any case where the ownership or management of the undertaking 
~!~:'are in which he is employed is transferred, whether by agreement or by 
transferred. operation of law, from one employer to another: 
Provided that-
(a) the service of the workman lies not been interrupted by 
reason of the transfer; 
(b) the tenns and conditions of service applicable to the 
workman after such transfer are not in any way less favourable 
to the workman than those applicable to him immediately before 
the transfer; and 
(c) the employer to whom the ownership or management of 
the undertaking is so transferred is, under the terms of the trans-
fer or otherwise, legally liable to pay to the workman, in the 
event of his retrenchment, compensation on the basis that his 
service has been continuous and has not been interrupted by 
the transfer. 
5 
GlPND-LS III Shift-2 M of Law 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 
(Shn' Gulzarilal Nanda, 
Minister of Labour & Employment 
and Planning.) 