1. 
• 
...... ~ "'" -,.- . J...,.,,__ i:. ____ 4.1rrr. 
CORRIGENDA 
to . '. . .. .. 
THE FI }TANCE BILL, 1965 
. -. '. .: " i' _~ • :..A(; 
(A~ introduced in Lok Sabha) 
lfid-p:fl.:l~ ,~\fj:th ,'l.fna .. numbSrs"7 .- ",:0· - _._- ---......-: 
Page 25, l:'.1".e ~.~," 
.' •• I~ . , • ::,I 
2. Page 31, line 7.- -. "! . ' :.~. ~ \,,2 0:2 ... q • ~ I 
3. Pag9 31, line 19~-
4. Page 36 t li~.e 40,-
,-: .. _ -. r 
.!2! "cnar~e~b~e" !.!~ "chargeable" 
5. Page 41, line 35 , -
after "in which" insert " " , 
6. Page ~7, line 27,-
7. Page ~a, li~a ~5,-
insert" " , 
a~~er It S lioL'..Se" insert It rt , 
8. Page 49, :ine ~3,-
for "d~-;3:1:" . .:ntslI ~ '~dependantsn 
for "depandor. .... s" !~ad:·ltdependants" 
10. Page 49, line: ~:O,-
after IrAct'~ insert 
11. Page 50, l1n~ 0,-
fer "C.:: !e!lci. "70. 11 
12. Page 51, line 17,-
It " , 
for lIwhiah li re9.d I:which" -- -......-
13. Page 54, line 10,-
.!2!: "1959 rI! ~ '1959'" 
14. Page 54; 11n9 13 7 -
for "1suned" read "issued" - -
15. Page 54, 11n~ 3J,-
for :1 192~ ~" !..~~ '1922,1 I 
.9I 
. ---. 
. ". 
P.T.O. 

for" 8.10,000" read "Rs.10,OOOtr -
21. Page 65, 11ne ~8,­
!g! .. oe'f !.!.!!2 "be" 
22. Page 66, 11ne 22,-
before "where" inE;ert "(2)" 
23. Page 69, 11ne 2,-
....... ..,:,1 
(1) !..2£ "at the rate" ~ "at sllch rate"; and 
(11) after "rates" insert "a.s ara". 
24. Page 78, line 3,-
!.sE. If (n1 tro11ne stone)" ~ "(n1 tro1ime stone)" 
25. PRge 92, line 8,-
for nwor~.shlprt ~ "worship" 
26. Corre~t 11ne numbers on pages 1, 3, 7 to 0, 11, 15, 16, 
43, 50, 58, 60, 61, 70 to 72. 
NEW DELHI; 
March 5., 1965 
Pfialguna 14, 1886 tsaka) 

As DrTIlODUCJ:D IN Lox SOMA 
ON 2'7'1'11 FUll1UY, 1865. 
• 
Bill No. 10 of IH5. 
• 
THE FINANCE BILL, 1965 
A 
BILL 
to give effect to the financial proposals of the Central Government 
for the financial year 1965-66. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixteenth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
1. (1) This Act may be called the Finance Act, 1965. Short title 
(2) Save as otherwise provided..in this Act, sections ~ 67 and =~=~t. 
, 69 to 74 shall be deemed to have come into force on the 1st day of 
April, 1965, and section 68 shall be deemed to have come into force 
on the 1st day of March, 1965. 
Z. (11 Subjet:!t.. to the provisions of sub-sections (2), (3), (4) and Incom. 
(5), for the assessment year commencing on the 1st day of April, tax. 
10 1965, income-tax shall be charged at the rates specified in Part I of 
the First Schedule and, in the cases to which Paragraphs ~ B, C 
and D of that Part apply, shall be increased by a surcharge for 
purposes of the Union calculated in either case in the manner 
provided therein. . 
I (2) In making any assessment for the assessment year commencing 
5 on the 1st day of April, 1965, where the total income of an assessee, 
not being a company, includes any income chargeable under the head 
2248 (B) LS-l 

2 
"Salaries", the income-tax payable by the assessee on that part of h~ 
total income which consists of such inclusion shall be an amount 
bearin~ to the total amount of income-tax and super-tax payable 
accordin~ to the rates applicable under the operation of the Finance 
Act, 1964, on his total income the same proportion as the amount of S .. of 1984. 
such inclusion bears to his total income. . 
(3) In making any assessment for the assessment year comrr.enr-
ing on the 1st day of April, 1965, where the total income of a company, 
other than the Life Insurance Corporation of India established under 
the Life Insurance Corporation Act, 1956, includes any profits and 10 31 of 1958. 
gains from life insurance business, the income-tax payable bv it shall :j 
be the aggregate of the income-tax c~lculated-
(i) on the amount of profits and gains from life insurance 
business so included, at the rate applicable to the Life Insurance 
Corporation of India in accordance with Paragraph E of Part I IS 
of the First Schedule; and 
(ii) on the remaining part of its total income, at the rate 
applicable to the company on its total income. 
. 43 of 1961. (4) In cases to whlch Chapter XII of the Income-tax Act, 1961 
(hereinafter referred to as the Income-tax Act) appUes, the tax 20 
chargeable shall be determined as provided in that Chapter, aqd with 
reference to the rates imposed by sup-section (1,' or the rates as \ 
specified in that Chapter. as the case may be . • 
(5) (a) In respect of any assessment for the assessment year 
(.'ommencing on the 1st day of April, 1965---- 25 
(i) an vsessee being an Indian company or any other com-
pany which has made the prescribed arrangements for the 
declaration and payment of dividends within India or an assessee 
(other than a company) whose total income includes any profits 
and gains derived from the export of any goods or merchandise 30 
out of India, shall be entitled to a deduction, from the amount 
of income-tax with which he is chargeable, of an amount equal 
to the income-tax calculated at one-tenth of the average rate of 
income-tax on the amount of such profits and gains included in 
the total income; 35 
(ii) where an assessee of the type referred to in sub-clause (i) 
engaged in the manufacture of any articles in an industry 
specified in the First Schedule to the Industries (Development 
and Regulation) Act. 1951. has during the previous year exported 
such articles out of India, he shall be entitled, in addition to the 40 
deduction of income-tax referred to in sub-clause (i), to a further 
deduction, from the amount of income-tax with which he is 
chargeable for the assessment year, of an amo~nt equal to the 
income-tax calculated at the average rate of lDcome-tax on an 
amount equal to two per cent. of the sale proceeds receivable by .. , 
him in respect of such ~xport; 
(iii) where an assessee of the type r~ferr~d to ~ sub-clause (~) 
engaged in the manufacture of any articles m an mdustry speCI-
fied in the said First Schedule has, during the previous year, sold 
such articles to any other person in India who himself has '0 
exported them out of India and evidence is produced before the 
Income-tax Officer of such articles having been so exported, 
650t 1951. .. 

"5 of 1951 
3 
the assessee shall\ be entitled to a deduction, from the amount of 
income-tax with which he is chargeable for the assessment year, 
of .an amount equal to the income-tax calculated at the average 
rate of income-tax on a sum equal to two per cent. of the sale 
S proceeds receivable by him in respect of such articles from the 
exporter. 
(b) The total of the deductions under this sub-section shall in no 
case exceed the amount of income-tax otherwise payable by the 
assessee. 
10 (c) Nc»hing contained in sub-clause (ii) and sub-clause (iii) 01 
20 
clause (a) shall apply,-
(i) in relation to--
(1) fuels, 
(2) fertilisers, 
(3) photographic raw film and 'paper, 
(4) textiles (including those dyed, printed or otherwiSe 
processed) made wholly or in part of jute. including jute 
twine and rope, 
(5) newsprint, 
(6) pulp-wood pulp, mechanical, chemical, including 
dissolving pulp, 
(7) sugar, 
(8) vegetable oils and vanaspathi, 
(9) cement and gypsum products, 
(10) arms and ammunition, and 
(11) cigarettes, 
respectively specified in items 2, 18, 20, 23(2), 24(2), 2.(:5), 25, 
28, 35, 37 and 38 of the First Schedule to the Industries (Develop-
ment and Regulation) Act, 1951; or 
~(ii) in relation to textiles specified in items 23(1), 23(3), 23(4) 
and 23(5) of that Schedule where such textiles have been exported 
before the 1st day of March, 1964. 
(d) The amount of· any profits and gains derived from the export 
of any goods or merchandise out of India in respect of which dedue-
35 tion of income-tax is admissible under sub-clause (i) of clause la) 
shall be computed in accordance with the rules made by the Central 
Board of Direct Taxes in this behalf. 
(6) In cases in which tax has to be deducted under sections 193 
to 195 of the Income-tax Act at the rates in force, the deduction 
40 shall be made at the rates lpecified in Part n of the First Scb.c(lille. 

.. ~ 
(7) For the purpOli4!S of this section, and of the rates of income-tax 
impoted thereby, and pf section 3-
(i) the expressions "assessment year", "average I'ate of 
incom~tax", "non~resident", "partner", and Cltotal income" have, 
unless the context otherwise requires, the meanings respectivel)" S 
assigned to them under clauses (9), (10), (30), (23) and (45) c;r 
section 2 of the Income-tax Act: -
(ii) the expression "earned income" means any income ot an 
assessee who is an individual, Hindu undivided family, unregis-
tered firm or other association of persons er body of individuals, 10 
whether incorporat~d or not, not being a company, a local 
authority, a registered firm or a finn assessed under clause (b) of 
section 183 of the said Act-
(4) which is chargeable under the head "Salaries"; or -. .., 
(b) which is chargeable under the head "Profits and gains IS 
ot business or profession" where the business or profession 
i. carried on by the assessee or, in the case of a finn, wher ~ 
the assessee is a partner actively engaged in the conduct of 
the business or profession; or 
(c) which is chargeable under the head uIncome from 20 
other sources" if it is immediately derived from personal 
exertion or represents a pension or superannuation or other 
allowance given to the assessee in respect of the past 
services of any deceased person, or which is chargeable under 
that head under clause (ia) of sub-section (2) of section 56 25 
of the Income-tax Act; and 
includes any such income which, though it is the income of 
another person, is included in the assessee's income under the 
provisions of the Income-tax Act, but does not include any such 
income on which income-tax is not payable under clause (iii). or 30 
clause (v) of section 86 of that Act or which is exempted from 
. tax under a notificatton issued under sectten 60 of the Indian 
Income-tax Act, 1922, as continued in force by clause (l) of 11 of 1922 
sub-section (2) of section 297 of the Income-tax Act; 
(iii) the expression "unearned income" means income which 35 
is not "earned income". 
3. (1) Save as otherwise provided in Chapter XXIIA of the 
Income-tax Act, annuity deposit for the assessment year commencing 
011 the lit day of April, 1965 shall be made by every person to whom 
the provisions of that Chapter apply at the rates specified in the 40 
Second Schedule, 
, 
• 

s 
• 
(2) For the purposes of this section and the Second Schedule, 
the expressions "adjusted total income", "annuity deposit" and 
"depositor" have the meanings respectively assigned to them under 
clauSes (1), (5) and (6) of section 280B of the Income-tu Act. 
4. In section 2 of the Income-tax Act,-- AmeDci-
mentot 
(i) in clause (7), for the words "income-tax or 
the words "any tax" shall be substituted; 
super-tax", MCtlon 2. 
(ii) clause (11) shall be omitted; 
(iii) in clause (18) ,-
10 (i) in sub-clause (b) (i), for the words and brackets 
"held by, the Government or a corporation established by a 
Central, State or Provincial Act or the public (not being a 
director, or a company to ~hich this clause does not apply) ", 
the following shall be substituted, namely:-
15 IIheld by-
(a) the Government, or 
(b) a corporation established by a Central, State or 
Provincial Act, or 
(c) any company to which this clause applies or any 
.20 subsidiary company of such company where such subsi-
diary company fulfils the conditions laid down in 
clause (b) of section 108 (hereinafter in this clause 
referred to as the subsidiary company), or 
(d) the public (not being a director, or a company to 
25 which this clause does not apply)"; 
(ii) in' clause (i) of Explanation 1, after the word 
"applies", the words "or the subsidiary company of such 
company" shall be inserted; 
(iv) in clause (22), after sub-clause (i), the following 
30 sub-clause shall be inserted, namely:-
"(ia) a distribution made in accordance with s~b­
clause (c) or sub-clause (d) in so far as such distribution 
is attributable to the capitalised profits of the company 
representing bonus shares allotted to its equity shareholders 
35 after the 31st day of March, 1964;"; 
(v) in clause (30), the figures "113" shall be omitted; 
(vi) for clause (43), the follOWing clauses shan be substi-
luted, namely :-
'(43) "tax" in rfilation to the assessment year COlD-
40 mencing on the 1st day of April. 1965, and any subsequent 
-. -. ··.c . .aa.u 

8 
aHe'ment year means income-tax chargeaQI, under the 
provisions of this Act. and in relation to any other assess-
ment year income-tax and super-tax chargeable under the 
provisions of this Act prior to the aforesaid date; 
(43A) "tax credit certificate" means a tax credit 5 
certificate granted to any person in accordance with the 
provisions of Chapter XXIIB and any scheme made there-
under;'; 
(vii) clause (46) shall be omitted. 
5. In section 8 of the Income-tax Act.-· 10 
(i) for the words "For the purposes of inclusion in the total 
income of an assessee, any dividend", the words, brackets and 
letter "For the purposes of inclusion in the total income of an 
assessee,-
(a) any dividend" shall be substituted; IS 
(ii) the following clause shall be inserted at the end, 
namely:-
., (b) any interim dividend paid by a company shall be 
deemed to be the income of the previous year~ln which the 
amount of such dividend is unconditionally made available 2.0 
by the company to the member who is entitled to it.". 
6. In section 10 of the Income-tax Act,-
(i) after clause (4), the following clause shall be inserted, 
namely:-
"(4A) in the case of a non-resident, any income from 2S 
interest on moneys standing to his credit in a non-resident 
account in any bank in India in accordance with the Foreign 
... 
Exchange Regulation Act. 1947. and any rures made there- 7 of 1M7. 
under;"; 
(ii) in sub-clause (vii) (a) of clause (6),-
(a) after the words "such person continues'" the words, 
figure and letters "with the approval of Lhe Central Govern-
ment obtained before the 1 st day of October of the relevant 
assessment year" shall be inserted; 
(b) for the words "twenty-four months", the wor<W 35 
"sixty months" shall be sub~tituted; 

s 
10 
IS 
20 
• (iii) for clause (13), the following clause shall be substi-
tuted, namely:-
"(13) any payment from an approved superannuation 
.. _.- fund mad~ . 
(i) on the death of a beneficiary; or 
(ii) to an employee in lieu of or in commutation of 
an annuity on his retirement at or after a specified age 
or on his becoming incapacitated prior to such retire-
ment; or 
(iii) by way of refund of contributions on the death 
of a ben.eficiary; or 
(iv) by way of refund 8f contributions to an em-
ployee on his leaving the service in connection with 
which the fund is established otherwise than by retire-
ment at or after a specified age or on his becoming in-
capaCitated prior to such retirement, to the extent to 
which such payment does not exceed the contributions 
made prior to the commencement of this Act and any 
interest thereon;"; 
·W 
(iv) after clause (27), the following clause shall be inserted, 
namely:-
"(28) in the case of any p~on granted a tax credit 
certificate, any amount adjusted or paid to him in respect 
of such certificate under the provisions of Chapter XXIIB 
25 and any scheme made thereunder.". 
30 
35 
'I. In section 18 of the Income-tax Act, in clause (i) of sub-section 
(1), after the word "Government", the words, figures and letters 
"not being interest payable under section 280D in respect of any 
annuity deposit made under Chapter XXIIA u shall be inserted. 
8. In section 33 of the Income-tax Act,-
Amend-
ment of 
section 18. 
Amend-
ment of 
(i) in sub-section (1), for clause (iii), the following clause section 38. 
shall be subs~ituted, namely:-
"(iii) in the case· of machinery or plant installed after 
the 31st day of March, 1961-
(a) where the machinery or plant is installed after 
the 31st day of March, 1963 and before the 1st day of 
April, 1966 for the purposes of business of mining coal, 
thirty-five per cent. of the actual cost of the machinery 
or plant to the assessee, 
(b) where the machinery or plant is installed 
before the lst day of April, 1965 for the purposes of any 
other b\1siness, twenty per cent., . 

Inaertion 
olD .. 
section 
33A. 
Develop-
ment 
allowance. 
I 
(c) where the"machinery or plant is inatalled after 
the 31st day of March, 1965-
(A) for the purposes of business of construction, 
manufacture or production of any ODe or more of 
the articles or things specified in the list in the Fifth ~ S 
Schedule, twenty-five per cent. of the actual cost of 
the machinery or plant to the assessee, and 
"'-(B) for the purposes of any other business,-
(a) twenty per cent. of the actual cost of the 
machinery or plant to the assessee, where it is 10 
installed before the 1st day of April, 1967; and 
(b) fifteen' per cent. of such cost, in any other 
case ". , , 
(ii) in sub-section (2), for the words, brackets, figures and 
letter "any allowance under sub-section (1) or sub-section (lA)", IS 
wherever they occur, the words, brackets, figures and letters "any 
allowance under sub-section (1) or sub-section (1A) of thiI 
section or sub-section (1) of section 33A" shall be substituted; 
(iii) after sub-section (5), the following sub-section shall be 
inserted, namely:- 20 
"(6) Notwithstaqding anything contained in the fore-
going provisions of this section, no deduction by way of 
development rebate shall be allowed in respect of any 
machinery or plant installed after the 31st day of March, 
1965 in any office premises or any residential accommodation, 
including any accommodation in the nature of a guest-house.". 2S 
9. Aft~r section 33 of the In~ome-tax Act, the following section 
shall be inserted, namely:-
'33A. (1) In respect of planting of tea bushes on any land in 
India owned by an assessee who carries on business of growing 
and manufacturing tea in India, a sum by way of development 30 
allowance. equivalent to-
(i) where tea bushes have been planted on any land 
not planted at any time with tea bushes or on any land which 
had been previously abandoned, forty per cent. of the actual 
cost of planting; and 3; 

S 
10 
IS 
20 
30 
35 
(ii) where tea bushes are planted In replacement of tea 
bushes that have died or have become permanently useless 
on any land already planted, twenty per cent of the actual 
cost of planting, 
shall, subject to the provisions of this section, be allowed as a 
ded,uction in respect of the third succeeding previous year next 
following the previous year in which the land is prepared for 
planting or replanting, as the case may be: 
Provided that no deduction under clause (i) shall be allowed 
unless the planting has commenced after the 31st day of March, 
1965, and no deduction shall be allowed under clause (ii) unless 
the planting has commenced after the 31st day C?f March, 1965, 
and been completed before the 1st day of April, 1970. 
(2) Where the total income of the assessee assessable for the 
assessment year relevant to the third succeeding previous year 
next following the previous year in which the land has been 
prepared [the total income for this purpose being computed 
after making the allowance under sub-section (1) or sub-section 
(lA) or clause (ii) of sub-section (2) of section 33 but without 
making any allowance under sub-section (1) of this section] Is 
nil or is less than the full amount of the development allowance 
calculated at the rates specified in sub-secti9n (1)-
(i) the sum to be allowed by way of development 
allowance for that assessment year under sub-section (1) 
shall be only such amount as is sufficient to reduce the said 
total income to nil.' and 
(ii) the amount of the development allowance, to the 
extent to which it has not been allowed as aforesaid, shall 
be carried forward to the following assessment year, and the 
development allowance to be allowed for the following 
assessment year shall be such amount as is sufficient to reduce 
the total income of the assessee assessable for that assess-
ment year, computed in the manner aforesaid, to nil, and 
the balance of the development allowance, if any, still out-
standing shall be carried forward to the followine assessment 
year and so on, so however, that no portion of the develo~ 
ment allowance shall be carried forward for more than eight 
assessment years immediately succeeding the assessment 
year in which the deduction was first allowable. 
E.rplanation.-Where for any assessment year develop-
ment allowance is to be allowed in accordance with the 
prOvisions of sub-section (2) in respect of more than .one 
2248 (B) LS-2. 

-' 
10 
previous year, and the total income of the assessee assessabie 
for that assessment year [the total income for this purpose 
being computed after making the allowance under sub-
section (1) or sub-section (lA) or clause (ii) of sub-section 
(2) of section 33 but without making any allowance under 5 
sub-section (1) of this section] is less than the amount of 
the development allowance due to be made in respect of 
that assessment year, the following procedure shall be 
followed, namely :-
(i) the allowance under clause (ii) of sub-section (2) 10 
of this section shall be made before any allowance under 
clause (i) of that sub-section is made; and 
(ii) where an allowance has to be made under clause 
(ii) of sub-section (2) of this section in respect of 
amounts carried forward from more than one assessment I, 
year, the amount carried forward from an earlier 
assessment year shall be allowed before any amount 
carried forward from a later assessment year. 
(3) The deduction under sub-section (1) shall be allowed 
only if the following conditions are fulfilled, namely: - 20 
(i) the partictilars prescribed in thIs behalf have been 
furnished by the assessee; 
(ii) an amount equal to seventy-five per cent. of the 
development' allowance to be actually allowed is debited to 
the profit and loss account of the relevant previous year and 25 
credited to a reserve account to be utilised by the assessee 
during a period of eight years next following for the purposes 
of the business of the undertaking, other than-
(a) for distribution by w~y of dividends or profits; 
~ 30 
(b) for remittance outside India as profits or for the 
creation of any asset outside India; and 
(iii) such other conditions as may be prescribed. 
(4) If any such land is sold or otherwise transferred by the 
. assessee to any person at any time before the expiry of eight 35 
years from the end of the previous year in which the deduction 
under su~ction (l) was allowed, any allowance under this 
. section shall be deemed to have been wrongly. made for the pur-
poses of this Act, and the provisions of sub-section (SA) of section 
'155 Ihall aPply accordingly:' 4° 

s 
10 
.11 
" Provided that this sub-~ion, shall~o~ apply- • 
(i) wh~re the land is sold or otherwise transtmed by 
the assessee to the Government, a local authority, a corpo-
ration' establish~ by a Central, State or Provincial Act or a 
Government company as defined in section 617 of the Com-
panies Act, 1956; or 
(ii) where the sale or transfer of the land is made in 
connection with the amalgamation or succession referred to 
in sub-section (5) or sub-section (6). 
(5) Where in a scheme of amalgamation, a company (here-
inafter in this sub-section referred to as the predecessor) sells or 
,oth~ise ,transfers to the company formed ~ pursuance of the 
predecessor's amalgamation with, that company ,(hereinafter in 
this sub-section referred to as the successor) any land in respect 
of which development allowance haa been allowed to the pre-
deCessor under sub-section (1) ,-
, 
(a) the successor shall continue to fulftl the conditions 
mentioned in sub-section (3) in respect of the reserve created 
by the predecessor and in respect of the period within which 
such land shall not be sold or otherwise transferred and in 
default of any of these conditions, the provisions of sub-
s~tion(5A) of section 155 shall, apply to the successor as 
they woUld have applied to the predecessor had it committed 
the default; 
(b) the balance of development allowance, if any, stfll 
outstanding to the predecessor in respect of such land shall 
be allowed to the successor in accordance with the provisions 
of sub-section (2), so however, that the total period· for 
which the balance of development allowance shall be carried"> ,> 
forward in the assessments of the predecessor and the 
successor shall not exceed the period of eight years apecl4ed 
in ,sub-section (2) and the successor shall be treated as the 
asseaee in respect of 'such la!ld' 'for the purposea of this 
section. 
EzplaMtion.-For the purpoaes of tbia sub-lecttcm, ~amalp­
mation" shall have the meaning assigned to it in the .!zp~ 
to sub-section (3) of aection 33. 
(6) Where a firm is succeeded to by a company In the busID_, 
carried on by it as a result of which the firm sells or otherwlle 
transfers to the company any land on which development allow-
ance has been allowed, the provialons of claU8fll (4) ~ > (b) of 
> > 

'0 
Amend.. 
ment of 
eec:doG M. 
12 
lUb-eectton' (5) ihall, 10 0 far as may be, apply to the ftrm. and 
the company. 
Ezplanation.-The provisions of this sub-section shall apply 
if the conditions laid down in the Ezplanaticm to sub-eection (4) 
of section 33 are fu1ft11ed. 5 
0(7) For the purposes of this section, "actual cost of planting" 
means the aggregatf! of-
(i) the cost of preparing the land; 
(ii) the cost of seeds, cutting and nurseries; 
(iii) the cost of planting and replanting; and 10 
(iv) the cost of up-keep thereof for the previous year in 
which the land has been prepared and the three successive 
previous years next following such previous year, 
reduced by that portion of the cost, if any, as has been met 
'directly or indirectly by any other person or authority: IS 
Provided that where such cost exceeds twelve thousand five 
hundred rupees per hectare in respect of land situate in a hilly 
area or exceeds ten thousand rupees per hectare in any other 
area, then the excess shall be ignored. 
(8) The Board may, having regard to the elevation and 20 
topography, by general or special order, declare any areas to be 
hiUy areas for the purposes of this section and such order shall 
not be questioned before any court of law or any other authority.'. 
10. In section 34 of th~ Income-tax Act, in the Ezplanation to 
clause '(i) of sub-section (2), for the words, brackets and figures "is 25 
'transferred by a company to a subsidiary company, then, if the 
'conditions of clause (iv) of section 47 are satisfied", the following 
"ilhan be substituted, namely:-
"is transferred by a holding ~ompany to its subsidiary 
eompany or by a subsidiary company to its holding co;-pany, 30 
then. if the conditions of clause (iv) or, as the case may be, of 
clause (v) of section 47 are satisfied". 
Ameft4.. 11. In section 38 of the Ineome-tax Act, In sub-s~ctfon (1), after mat of IeCUon 38.elause (viii), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:-
"(ix) any expenditure bona fide in~rred by a company for 3' 
the purpose of, promoting family planning amongst tts em-
ployees: 

Provided that where such expenditure or any part thereot 
is of a capital nature, one-fifth of such expenditure·lhall:be • 
deducted for the previous year in which it was incurred; and 
the ba lance thereof shall be deducted in equal instalments for 
, each of the four immediately succeeding previous years.". 
12. In section 37 of the Income-tax Act, in clause (i) of 8ub-section AmeDdt -t Men 0 
. (2), after the word and figures Usection 33", the words, ftgures and section 3'1. 
letter "or section 33A" shall be inserted. 
13. In section 40 of the Income-tax Act, 
10 clause (e) ,-
(a) in the proviso-
in sub-clause (iii) of Amend-
ment of 
section fO. 
(i) after the words, brackets and figure "in sub-clause 
(;.)", the words, brackets and figures "orany··payment of 
tax referred to in sub-clause (vii)" shall be inserted; 
I, (ii) after the words, brackets and figures 4'clause (iv) 
or clause· (11) ", the words, brackets and: figures i'or any ex-
penditure referred to in clause (ix)" shan be inserted.; 
(b) after the proviso, the following proviso shall be. insert-
ed, namely:-
'Provided further that nothing in this sub-clause shaD 
apply to any expenditure which results directly or indirect-
. ly in the provision of any benefit or amenity or perquisite 
to an employee whose income chargeable 1,Ulderthe head 
"Salaries" is seven thousand five hundred rupees or le1111.', 
15 14. In section 43 of the Income-tax Act, in' ·!:xplGnatiOft. . 8 to clause .tm.t6-
(1) and Explanation. 2 to clause (6), for the words, brackets and :no143. 
figures "is transferred by a company-to· its subsidiary ·company. 
then, if the conditions of clause (iv) of ·eecttan 47aresaf:iafted", the 
following shall be substituted, n~e1y :-
"is transferred ·by . a holding eompany ··to ,Its IUbsfcUary 
company or by a subsidiary company to· its ·holdingeompany, 
then, if the conditions of clause (iv) or, .. the "'may be. of 
clause (v) of section 47 are satlsfted". 

14 
Am_d- 15. In section 47 of the Income-tax Act, after clause (it,), the 
:~~ .'7. following clause shall be inserted, namely:-
InsertiOD 
of new 
section. 
MA. 
Relief of 
tax on 
capital 
laiDs in 
certain 
ca8M. 
" (v) any transfer of a capital asset by a subsidiary company 
to the holding company H-
(a) the whole of the share capital of the subsidiary com- 5 
pany is held by the holding company, and 
(b) the holding company is an Indian company.". 
16. In section 49 of the Income-tax Act,-
(i) in sub-clause (e) of clause (iii), after the word, brackets 
and figures "clause (iv)", the words, brackets and ftgure "or 10 
clause (v)" shall be inserted; ... 
(ii) at the end, the following Explanation shall be added, 
namely:-
tE:cplanation.-In this section the expression "previous 
owner of the property" in relation to any capital asset 15 
owned by an assessee means the last previous owner of the 
capital asset who acquired it by a mode of acquisition other 
than that referred to in clause (i) or clause (ii) or clause 
. (iii) of this section.'. 
17. After section 54 of the Income-tax Act, the following section 20 
shall be inserted, namely:-
'MA. (1) Where in the case of an assessee, being an indivi-
dual who is not a citizen of India or being a company which is 
not an Indian company, a capital gain arises from the transfer 
of a capital asset, being shares in an Indian company, and the 25 
assessee has, within a period of two years from the date' of such 
transfer, re-invested the full value of the consideration or any 
part th~reof received or accruing as a result of such transfer in 
an investment approved by the Central Government in this 
behalf. (hereinafter in this section referred to as the approved 30 
i~vestment), the assessee shall, subject to the provisions of sub-
section (3), be entitled to a credit of a ~m calculated in accor~, 
anee with the provisions of sub-section (2). . . 
(2) The amount to be given as credit under sub-section 
(1) shall be a sum which bears to the amount of income-tax 35 
payable by the assessee on the income chargeable under the 
head "Capital gains" arising from the transfer referred to In 
sub-section (1) the same proportion as the amount invested in 
the approved investment as reduced by the cost of acquisition 
[as ascertained for the purposes of clause (ii) of section 48] 40 
of the transferred shares bears to the capital gains aris~nl from 
lOch transfer. . 

[0 
16 
(3) The amount of credit so calculated shan be liven in the 
following manner, namely:-
(a) u the approved investment is made by the assessee 
within the period of two years aforesaid and before the com-
pletion of the assessment in respect of the year in 'which 
the income arising from such transfer is chargeable to tax, 
the amount of the credit shall, on the assessee making a 
claim in this behalf in the prescribed form and in the 
prescribed manner, be adjusted against the tax payable by 
the assessee in respect of that assessment year, and 
(b) if the approved investment is made by the assessee 
within the period of two years aforesaid but after the 
assessment for the relevant year is made, the amount of the 
credit shall, on the assessee making a claim in the prescribed 
form and in the prescribed manner be deemed to be refund 
due to the assessee under Chapter XIX and all the provisions 
of this Act shall apply accordingly.'. 
18. In section 56 of the Income-tax Act, in sub-section (2), after Amend. 
clause (i), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:- =:O:~. 
ao ,e (ia) income referred to in sub-clause (viii) of clause (24) 
)S 
of section 2;". 
19. After section 69A of the Income-tax Act, the following InaertiOD 
section shall be inserted under the sub-heading n Aggregation of :!ct~:: 
Income", namely:- 698. 
"6gB. iWhere in any financial year the assessee baa made in- Amount of 
vestments or is found to be the owner of any bullion, j-ewellen 1Ilven-
or other valuable article, and the Income-tax Officer finds th~t :;,~n~3;c", 
the amount expended on makin.g such investments or in ac. disclosed in 
" " h bull" . 11 h books ot qUlrmg suc lon, Jewe ery or ot er valuable article ex- account. 
ceeds the amount recorded in this behalf in the books of ac. 
count maintained by the assessee for any source of income, and, 
the assessee offers no explanation about such excess amount or 
the ,explanation offered by him is not, in the opinion of the 
Income-tax Officer, satisfactory, the excess amount may be 
'deemed to be the income of the assessee for such financial 
year.". 

.~ f; 
V\1·~·· 
ii. After sect~n 80 of the Income-tax Act. the following chapter 
and sections shall be inserted, namely:-.. 
'CHAPTER VIA 
DEDUCTIONS TO BE MADE IN COMPUTING TOTAL INCOME 
BOA. (1) In computing the total income ()f an assessee there , 
shall be deducted, in accordance with and subject to the pro-
visions of this section, an amount equal to fifty per cent. of the 
aggregate of the sums I:»pecified in sub-section (2). 
(2) The sums referred to in sub-section (1) shall be the 
following, namely.:- 10 
(a) where the assessee is an individual, any sums paid 
in the previous year by the assessee out of his income 
chargeable to tax-
(i) to effect or to keep in force an insurance on the 
life of the assessee or on the life of the wife or husband IS 
ot the assessee; or 
(ii) to effect or to keep in force a contract {or a 
deferred annuity on the lile of the assessee or on the 
life of the wife or husband of the assessee; or 
(iii) as a contribution to any prOvident fund to 20 
which the Provident Funds Act, 1925 applies; 19 of 192! 
(b) where the assessee is a Hindu undivided family, 
any sums paid in the previous year by the assessee out 
of its income chargeable to tax, to effect or to J:teep in force 
an insurance on the life of any male member of the family 25 
or of the wife of any such member; 
(c) any sum deducted in the previous year from the 
salary payable by or on behalf of the Government to any 
individual, being a sum deducted in accordance with the 
conditions of his service, for the purpose of securing to hml 30 
a deferred annuity or m~king provision for .. qis wife 01 
children, in so far as the sum so deducted does not exceed 
one-fifth of the salary; 
(d) if the assessee is an employee participating in a 
recognized provident fund, his own contributions to his indivi-
dual account in the fund in the previous year, to the extent 35 
provided in rule 7 of Part A of the Fourth Schedule; 
(e) if the assessee is an employee participating in an 
_pproved superannuation fund, any sum paid in the previous 
year by him by way of contribution towards the super- 40 
annuation fund; 

l' 
<f) where the assesse~, is an individual, any sums depo-
sited, in the previous year by the assessee out of his income 
chargeable to tax, in a ten-year account or a fifteen-year 
account under the Post Office Savings Bank (Cumulative 
Time Deposits) Rules, 1959, as amended from time to time. 
(3) The provisions of clauses (a) and (b) of sub-section (2) 
shall apply only to so much of any premium or other payment 
made on a policy other than a contract for a deferred annuity 
as is not in excess of ten per cent. of the actual capital IWI1 
10 assured. 
15 
20 
53 
Explanation.-In calculating any such capital sum, DO 
account shall be taken-
(i) of the value of any premiums agreed to be retum~ 
or 
(ii) of any benefit by way of bonus or otherwise over 
and above the sum actually assured, which is to be or may 
be receiv-ed under the policy by any person. 
(4) The aggregate of the sums referred to in sub-section 
(2), which qualifies for the purposes of computing the deduction 
referred to in sub-section (1), shall not exceed-
(i) in the case of an individual' being an author, play-
wright, artist, musician or a-etor, such percentage of his total 
income, as computed before making any deduction under 
this Chapter and before deduction of any amount of annuity 
deposit under section 2800, or such amount, as ~y be 
prescribed: 
Provided that such individual has effected an insurance 
referred to in sub-clause (i) of clause (a) of sub-sectign (2) 
prior to the 1st day of March, 1964 and has paid any sum 
in the previous year to keep in force such insurance; 
(ii) in the case of any other individual [including an 
authQr, play-wright, artist,~lDusician or actor to whom the . 
provisions of clause (i) do not apply], twenty-five per cent. 
of the total income, as computed before making any deduc-
tion under this Chapter and before deductio.n of any amount 
of annuity deposit under section 2800, or twelve thousand 
five hundred rupees, whichever is less; 
(iii) in the case of a Hindu undivided family, twenty-five 
per cent. of its total income, as computed before making any 
deduction under this Chapter and before deduction of any 
amount of annuity deposit under section 2800, or twenty-five 
thousand rupees, whichever is less. 
2248 (B) L.S.-3. 

I 
.1 
II a 
C 
~ 
DeducUon 
I 
in respect 
ofmedlcal 
1 treatment. 
I etc •• of 
handI-
capped 
I peI'IODa. 
! 
~~ 18 
(5) If the total income of the assessee includes any incom~ 
chargeable under the head "Salaries", the deduction under sub-
section (1) shall be made in computing the income under that head, 
and if there is no income chargeable under that head, or if the 
amount required to be deducted exceeds such income, the whole S 
or the balance of the amount required to be deducted shall be 
allowed as a deduction in computing earned income chargeable 
under any other head, and, if there is no earned income chargeable 
under any other head or the whole or the balance of the amount 
required to be deducted exceeds such earned income, the whole 10 
or the balance of the amount required to be deducted shall be 
allowed as a deduction in computing any other income under 
any head. 
,(6) This section shall apply in respect of-
(i) the assessment year commencjng on the 1st day of IS 
April, 1966 and any subsequent assessment year, in the case 
of an assessee whose total income includes any income 
chargeable under the head "Salaries" from which tax is 
deducted, Or deductible, at source in accordance with the 
provisions of section 192; and 20 
(ii) the assessment year commencing on the 1st day of 
April, 1965 and any subsequent ass~ssment year, in the ~ 
of any other assessee. 
SOB. (1) Where an assessee who is resident in India, being 
an individual or Hindu undivided family, who has, during the 2S 
previOUS year, incurred out of his or its income chargeable to 
income-tax, . any expenditure for the medical treatment (includ-
ing nursing) of a person who-
(a) is a relative of the individual, or, as the case may 
be, is a member of the Hindu undivided family and is not 30 
dependent on any person other than such individual or Hindu 
undivided family for his support o~ maintenance, and . _', 
(b) is suffering from a physical or mental disability 
which is certified by a registered medical practitioner to 
have the e1fect of reducing considerably such person's 3S 
capacity for normal work or engaging in a gainful employ-
ment (hereinafter in this section referred to as handicapped 
dependant) , 
me assessee shall, subject to the provisions of this section, be 
allowed a deduction of the amount specified in sub-section (2) 40 
in the computation of his total income in respect of the previoul 
year. 

S 
10 
IS 
20 
30 
3S 
19 
(2) The deduction under sub-section (1) shall be-
(i) in a case where the handicapped dependant has been 
admitted in a hospital or a nursing home or any medical 
institution for a period of one hundred and eighty-two days 
or more during the pr,evious year and fees and charges for 
his medical treatment (including nursing) are payable to 
such hospital or nursing home or medical institution, as the 
case may be, a sum of two thousand four hundred rupees, or 
(ii) in any other case, a sum of six hundred rupees, 
as reduced, in either case, by an amount equal to the income, 
if any, of the handicapped dependant in respect of the previous 
year : 
Provided that where the assessee has, during the previous 
year, incurred expenditure on more than one handicapoed 
de~ndant, the deduction under sub-section (1) shall be allowed 
only with reference to one such handicapped dependant as may 
be chosen by the assessee. 
(3) If the total income of the assessee includes any earned 
income', the allowance referred to in sub-section (1) shall be 
made in computing the earned income chargeable under any 
head, and if there is no such income -er the amount of the allow-
ance exceeds such income, the whole or the balance of mlch 
amount. as the case may be, shall be allowed as a deduction 
in computing the assessee's unearned income chargeable under 
any head. 
(4) Nothing contained in this section shall apply in a casp 
where the assessee,'s total income in respect of the previous year 
3S computed before making any deduction under this Chapter 
and before deduction of any amount of annuity deposit under 
section 2800 exceeds twenty thousand rupees or where the 
income of the .handicapped dependant. in respect of the previous 
year exceeds two thousand four hundred rupees, or as the case 
may be, six hundred rupees. 
ROC. (1) Where in the ca«;e of an aSRessee, beinlt an Relief 
individu;tl who is a citizen of India and is resident in Tndia, :~~l.o 
his Rhare in the' income of a registered firm which renders for ri . secu nr profeRslonal s~nrfce as chartered accountant, solicitor, lawver, retirement 
architect, or such other professional service as may be notified annuities. 
in this behalf by the Central Government in the Oftlcial Gazette 
ie; charg~Able to tax and he has paid out of his income chargeable 
to tax a premium (by whatever name called) in any previous 

5' 20 
year under an amiuity contract for. the time being approved by 
the Commissioner as having for its main object the provision 
for the individual of a life annuity in old age (hereinafter in 
this section referred to as qualifying premium) , then the assessee 
shall, subject to the provisions of this section, be allowed a 5 
deduction of the amount of the qualifying premium in the 
computation of his total income in respect of the previous year: 
Provided that the amount which may be 10 deducted ~ha11 
110t exceed the sum of five thousand rupees or one-tenth of his 
total income for that year, whichever is less: 10-
Provided further that any annuity payable to the individual 
shall be deemed to be his earned income to the extent to which 
it is attributable to the amount in respect of which deduction 
h3s been allowed under this section and chargeable to tax 
accordingly. IS 
E.rplanation.-For the purposes of the first proviso. "total 
income" means the total income computed in accordance with 
the provisions of this Act, before making any deduction under 
this ChapteT and before deduction of any amount of annuity ~I 
deposit under section 2800 but excluding any income which 20 
would otherwise be included in his total income under the 
provisions of section 64. 
(2) Subject to sub-section (3) and any rules made by the 
Board in this behalf, the Commissioner shall not approve a 
contract unless he is satisfied that it does not- 25 
(a) provide for the payment durin(! the life of the 
individual of any sum except sums payable by way of annuity 
to the individual; or 
(b) provide for the annuity payable to the individual to 
eommence before he attains the age of fifty-eight or after 30 
he attains the age of sixty-eight; or 
(e) provide for the payment of any other sums except 
sums payable by way of annuity to the individual's widow 
or widower and any sums which. in the event of no annuity 
becoming payable either to the individual or to· a widow or 35 
widower of thp individual. are payable to the individual's 
legal representative, by w~v of return of premiums, by way 
of reasonable interest on premiums and by way of bonus out 
of profits; or 
'(d) provide for the payment of Annuity, if any, payable 40 
to a widow or widower of the individu~l to be of a greater 
annual amount than that paid or payable to the individual; or 

(e) provide for the payment of any annuity otherwise 
than for the life of the annuitant; 
and that It does fnclud~ a provision that no annuity payable 
under It shall be capable in whole or in part of surrender, 
S commutation or assignment. 
(3) The Commissioner may, if he thinks ftt, and subject to 
any conditions the Board may, by rules, prescribe and subject 
to any conditions he thinks proper to impose, approve a contract 
notwithstanding that the contract provides for one or more ot 
10 ·the following matters, that is to say,-
(a) for the payment after the individual's death of an 
annui~ to a dependant other than the widow or widower 
of the individual; 
(b) for the payment to the individual of an annuity 
15 commencing before he attains the age of fifty-efght, If the 
ann':lity is payable on his becoming incapable through 
infirmity of mind or body of being actively engaged in his 
profession or any profession of a similar nature for which 
he is trained or fttted; 
20 (c) for the annuity payable to any person to continue 
for a specifted ,term (not exceeding Mn years), notwith.crtand. 
ing his death within that term; 
(d) in the case of an annuity which is to continue for 
such specifted term, for the annuity to be assignable by wiD. 
25 (4) The foregoing provisions of this section shan apply In 
relation to a contribution (by whatever name called) to D fund 
approved by the Commission~r as they apply in relatlon to any 
premium under AD. annuity contract so approved provided the 
fund satisftes also the conditions set out below and any nther 
30 conditions which the Board may. by rules. prescribe. namely:-
(a) the fund shall be a fund established in India under 
an irrevocable trust for the benefit of individuals enpged 
in any profession referred to in sub-section (1); 
(b) the fun~ shall have for its sole purpose the provisinn 
35 of annuities for individuals engaged in such profession on 
attaining a specified age or on their becoming incapacitated 
prior to attaining such age. or for the widow, children or 
dependants of such persons on their death; 
(c) an annuities, pensions and other benefits granted 
.\0 from the fund shan be payable only in India. ________ . 

(5) The Commissioner DiBy, at any time, after giving a 
reasonable opportund~ of sho~g cause agaburt the proposed 
withdrawal to the persons by and to whom premiums are payable 
under any contract for the time being approved under this section, 
or to the trustees of any fund so approved, withdraw the approval 5 
(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-sections (1) 
and (4), no deduction under this section shall be. aDowed in the 
case of any individual-
(i) whose total income includes unearned income of 
more than ten thousand rupees; or 10 
(ii) who is entitled to any pension or participating In 
any pension or superannuation scheme. 
(7) The allowance under this section shan be made hi com-
puting the earned income of the assessee included in the total 
income, so however, that the allowance shall not in any cue IS 
exc~d the amount of the income computed under the head 
"Profits and gains of business or profession". 
(8) Any annuity payable under an approved contract referred 
to in sub-section (1) or from any fund referred to In SUb-aeetiOD 
(4), to a person other than the individual who pays the premium 20 
or makes the contribution lifld any interest on premiums or 
bonus out of profits payable to such person, shan be deemed to 
be his unearned income to the extent it is attributable to the 
amount of deduction allowed under sub-section (1) and charge-
able to tax accordingly. 25 
(9) Where any payment by way of annuity or otherwise is 
made by a person to whom premiums or contributions are payable 
under sub-section (1) or sub-section (4), such person shall, 
subject to any rules made by the Board in this behalf, deduct 
from the total amount so paid during any financial year, tax at 30 
such pate or rates in force...a that year as would be applicable 
to such amount, if it were the total income and shall pay the 
amount so deducted to the credit of the Central Government 
within the prescribed time and in such manner as the Board may 
direct and the provisions of section 201 shall, so far as may be, 35 
apply to s~ch person if he does not deduct, or after deducting 
fails to pay, such tax. 
(10) Where a deduction under this section is claimed and 
allowed for any assessment year in respect of any payment, relief 
shall not be given in respect of it unds- any other provision ot 40 
this Act for the same or a later assessment year 'Dor (In the case 

of. paymmt under an annuity contract) in respect of any other 
premium or consideration for an annuity under the same contract. 
(ll) (4) The Board may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, make rules .for carrying out the purposes of this section. 
(b) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of 
the forel0ing power, such rules may-
(i) prescribe the statements and other information to 
be submitted along with an application for approval; , 
(ii) prescribe the returns, statements, particulars or 
" information which the Income-tax Officer may require from 
a person by and to whom premiums or contributions are 
payable under this section; 
(iii) provide for the assessment by way of penalty of 
any consideration received by an individual for an assign-
J S ment of, or creation of a charge upon, any annuity or other 
sum receivable by him under any contract or from any fund 
approved for the time being under this section; and 
(iu) provide for securing such further control over the 
approval granted under this section and administration 01 
funds approved under this section as it may deem requisite: 
I~ 
SOD. In this Chapter- Detlni-
(i) "relative" in relation to an individual means- tioDi. 
, 3 0 
(a) the mother, father, husband or wife of the 
individual, or 
(b) a son, daughter, brother, sister, nephew or n.iece 
oS the individual, or 
(c) a grandson or grand-daughter of the individual, 
or 
(d) the spouse of any person referred to in sub-....... claUse (b); 
(ii) "income" in relation to a han.dicapped dependant 
means the aggregate income of such person from all sourcesj 
(iii) the expressions "earned income" and "unearned 
income" shan have the meanings respectively assigned to 
35 them in the Finance Act of the relevant year.'. 
11. In section 84 of the Income-tax Act, in sub-section (6), for the 
word, figures and letter "Chapter XI-D", the word and figures 
"Chapter XI" shall be lubltituted. 
Amend-
ment of 
MCtionlN. 

lmertion 
of new 
aeetion 
85A. 
~T" Deduetion 
. oftazOD 
Inter-
corporate 
dlvlciend •. 
Amend-
ment of section 86. 
Insertion 
of new 
aection 
B6A. 
Deduction 
from tax 
OD certain HCUl'lt1eL 
D. After sectWIP 85 of the Income-tax Act, the followina section 
shall be inserted, namely :-
"S5A. Where the total income of an assessee being a com· 
pany includes any income by way of dividends received by it 
from an Indian company or a company which has made the S 
prescribed arrangements for the declaration and payment 01 
dividends (including dividends on preference shares) within India, 
the assessee shall be entiUed to a deduction from the income-tax 
with which it is chargeable on its total income for any assessment 
year of so much of the amount of income-tax calculated at the 10 
average rate of income-tax on the income so included as exceeds 
an amount of twenty-five per cent. thereof: 
Provided that in the case of a company which has not 
made the prescribed arrangements for the declaration and pay-
ment of dividends within India and whose total income include& IS 
any income by way of dividends received by it from an Indian 
company which is not such a company as is referred to in sec· 
tion 108 and which is wholly or mainly engaged in the business 
of generation or distribution of electricity or of construction, 
manufacture or production of anyone or more of the articles or :!o 
things specified in the list in paragraph 2 of the Third Schedule 
to the Companies (Profits) Surtax Act, 1964, the amount of 7 of 1964. 
income-tax deductible under this section shall be so much of the 
amount of income-tax calculated at the average rate of income-
tax on the income so included as exceeds an amount of fifteen 25 
per cent. thereot 
Explanation.-For the purpos~s of this section, a company 
shall be deemed to be mainly engaged in the business of genera· 
tion or distribution of electricity or of construction, manufacture 
or prodUction of an)' one or more of the articles or things speciJied 30 
in. the list in paragraph 2 of the Third Schedule to the Companies 
(Profits) Surtax Act, 1964, if the income attributable to any of 
the aforesai~ctivities included in its total income for the 
previous year is not less than fifty-one per cent. of such total 
income.". 35 
23. In section 86 of the Income-tax Act, clauses (i) and (ii) shall 
be omitted. 
24. In Chapter VII of the Income-tax Act, after section 86, the 
following section shall be inserted, namely:-
"86A. Where there is included in the total income of an 40 
assessee-
(i) the interest due on any security of the Central Gov-
ernment issued or declared to be income-tax free, or 
7 of 1964. 

• . . 
(ii) the interest due on any security of a State Govern-
ment .issued income-tax free, the ir,come-tax whereon ia 
payable by the State Government, 
. - . the assessee shan be entitled to a deduction from the amount 
" 5 ,pf income-tax with which he is chargeable on his total income, 
of an· amount equal to the income-tax calculated on the amount 
10 .inclu~ed at the average rate of income-tax or at the rate ot 
tW'enty-five per cent., whichever is less.". 
15. In section 87 ~f the Income-tax Act,- ... . . ~t ~ 
10 (i) in sub-section (4), the words, figures and letter "together IeCtiOI1I'7. 
"!Vjth the amount of super-tax deductible under section 99A" 
shall be omitted; 
(ii) after sub-section (4), the following sub-section- shall be 
inserted, namely:-
15 '(5) This section shall not apply in respect of-
20: -. 
(i) the assesmen t year commencing on the 1st day 
of April, 1966 and any subsequent assessment year, in 
the case of an assessee whose total income includes any 
income chargeable under the head "Salaries" from 
which tax is deducted, or deductible, at source ill 
accordance with the provisions o~ section 192; and 
30 
. " 
(ii) the assessment year commencing on the lst 
day of April, 1965 and any subsequent assessment year 
in' the case of any other assessee.'. 
26. In section 88 of the Income-tax Act,- Amend-
(i) in sub-section (1), for the words "of an amount equal =~ ... 
to the income-~x calculated at the average rate of income-tax 
on any sums paid by him in the preYious year", the' follOWing 
shall be substituted, namely:-
"(a) where the assessee is a company, of an amount 
·equal to the income-tax calculated at the average' rate ot 
income-tax or at the rate of twenty-five per cent., whichever 
is less, and 
," 
~. " 1) . .',', , . 
. . (b) i~ the case of any other assessee, of an amount equal 
35 .. }~ th~ income-tax calculated at the average rate of income-
fax, " 
on any sums paid by the assessee in the previous year"; 
, (ii) in sub-section (3), after the first proviso, tlie fellowtac 
proviso shall be inserted, namely:-
,~o "Provided further that where any .ucla IUIIW paid 
ciurinl any previous year rel.Tot to tile •• , IS went ,ear 
2248(B):r..S..-4 ... 

Amend-
meat of 
section 90. 
Amend~ 
ment of 
section 91. 
Amend-
ment of 
Chapter 
Xl 
Amend-
ment of 
section 104. 
~. 
commencing on the 1st. day of April, 1965 or any subsequent 
asseSSDient year include any donation referred to in 1Ub-
section (6), and such sums exceed the limit of two hundred 
thousand rupees specified in the first proviso, then such limit 
shall be raised to cover that portion of the donation which S 
is equal to the difference between such sums and the said 
limit, so however, that the limit so raised shall Dot exceed 
ten per cent. of the assessee's total income as reclueed as 
aforesaid or five hundred thousand rupees, whichever is 
less :"; 10 
(iii) in sub-section (4), the words and ftgures "together with 
the amount of super-tax deductible under section 100" shall 1M! 
omitted; 
(iv) in sub-section (6) ,-
(a) for the words "any temple, mosque, gurdwara, 15 
church or any other place", the words "any such temple, 
mosque, gurdwara, church or other place" shan be, aDd Iba1l 
be deemed always. to have been, substituted; 
(b) after the words "artistic importance", the words 
"or to be a place of public worship of renown throughout ~ 
any State or States" shall be inserted. 
27. In section 90 of the Income-tax Act, in clause (a), the brackets 
and words "(including super-tax)" shall be omitted. 
!S. In section 91 of the Income-tax Act, in clause (i) of the 
Explanation., the words "and super-tax" shall be omitted. 25 
29. In Chapter 'xI of the Income-tax Act,-
(i) for the heading "SUPER-TAX", the heading "Almm:OXAL 
INCOME-TAX ON UNDISTmltrfm PROPITS" shall be substituted; 
iii) sub-headings "A-.s:GeneraZ", "B.-17lC:OlM. fonnJ"I1 pcrt 
of total income on which no super-teu: is p4114ble", "C.-Rebete of 30 
supeT-tax"~d "D.-Additi07l41 super-tax Oft undimibuted pro-. 
ff,ts" and sections 95 to 103 (both inclusive) shall be omitted. 
30. In section 104 of the Income-tax Act, in sub-seGtion (1),-
(i) for the word "super-tax", the word "income-taX" shan 
be substituted; 35 
(U)fn clause (a) ,the word "and" shall be omitted; 

(iii) for the brackets, letter and words" (b) thirty-seven per 
cent. in the case of any other company", the following shall be 
IUbstituted, namely:-
"(b) thirty-seven per cent __ in the caSe of a trading 
" company, and ' 
10 
(c) twenty-five per cent. in the case of any other 
company". 
11. In section 109 of the Income-tax Act,-
(i) in sub-clause (a) of clause (i). the words "and super-
tax" shall be omitted and for the words "any super-tax", the 
words "any income-tax" shall be substituted; 
(ii) after clause (ii), the following clause shall be inserted, 
namely:-
'(iicz) "trading company" means a company whose bus i-
IS ness consists wholly or mainly in dealing in goods or mer-
chandise manufactured, produced or processed by a person 
other than that company and whose incomeattriltutable to 
such business included in its total income is not less than 
flfty-one per cent. of the amount of such total income;'; 
20 tai) in clause (iii), to sub-clause (4) (4), the following proviso 
shall be added, namely:-
'Provided that in the case of such company, not 
being a trading company, sub-clause (a) shall have effect as 
if for the word "exceed", the words "exceed twice the 
25 amount of" were substituted.'. 
U. For section 110 of the Income-tax Act, the following section 
shall be substituted, namely:-
"110. Where there is included in the total income of an 
aaessee any income on which no income-tax is payable under 
30 the provisions of this Act, the assessee shall be entitled to a 
deduction, from the amount of income-tax with which h .... 
chargeable on his total income, of an amoUBt equal to the 
income-tax calculated at the average rate of income-tax on the 
amount on which no income-tax is payable.". 
Amend-
ment of 
aec:t1on lot. 
SUbatitu-, 
tiono.fnew 
seetlon for 
~onll0~' 
Deter-
mination 
of tax 
where total ' 
ineeme 
includes 
income on 
which no 
taxis 
payable. 
3S 13. In section 111 of the Income-tax Act, for the words "income- Amend-
tax and lUper-tax", the word "tax" shall be substituted. =~:~1l, 
14. In sectism 112 of the Income-tax Act,- Amend-
(i) in clause (i), for the word "income-tax", the word "tax" ment of 
shall be substituted; section 112. 

Omission 
of Hction 
113. 
Amend-
ment of 
MCtion 114. 
28 
(ii) clause (ii) shall be omitted; 
(iii) in clause (iii), for the words "income-tax and· super-
tax", the word "tax". shall be substituted. 
35. Section 113 of the Income-tax Act shall be omitted. 
36. In section 114 of the Income-tax Act,- 5 
(i) the words "and super-tax", wherever they occur, shall 
he omitted; 
(ii) in clause (b)-
(a) in sub-clause (i), the words "and the average rate 
of super-tax: respectively" shall be omitted; 10 
(b) in sub-clause (ii), after the second proviso, the 
following proviso shan be ipserted, namely:-
"Provided further~hat the amount of income-tax so 
calculated in respect otthe capital gains relating to bonus 
shares, if any, chargeable under sub-section (2)'8f section 15 
45, shall be reduced by an amount equal to ten per cent. 
of the face value of such bonus shares or the amount of 
income-tax so calculated, whichever is less."; and 
(c) the words "and three-fourths of the average rate of 
super-tax respectively", "and one-half of the average rate o~ 20 
super-tax respectively" and "and average rate of super-tax" 
shall be omitted. 
Sm-tiN- 37. For section 115 of the Income-tax Act, the following section 
tiou·ofuew shall be substituted, namely:-MCtion for 
MdioD 115. 
Tax on 
c:r!~ I In cue of 
oompanl •. 
'115. Where the total income of a company includes any 25 
income chargeable under the head "Capital gains" (whether such l" 
gains relate to short-term capital assets or to other capi~al assets), 
the income-tax payable-by it -shall be the aggregate of-
(i) the amount of income-tax calculated at the rate of 
twelve and a half per cent. on the amount of capital gains 30 
relating to bonus shares, if any, chargeable under sub-sectiOn ... 
(2) of section 45 as reduced by an amount equal to ten per. 
cent. of the face value of such bonus shares; so howe~r, 
that the reduction shall in no case exceed the amoUht of 
income-tax so calculated; 35 
(ii) the amount of income-tax ca1c~ated on the amount 
ot. capital gains relating to capital assets other than 

1 of IH8. 
• 
short-term capital assets included in the total income-
(a) at the rate of Corty per cent. on 80 much of the 
amo~t of such capital gains as relate to buildings or 
lands or any rights in buildings or lands; and 
S (b) at the rate of thirty per cent. on the balance 
. of such capital gains, if any [excluding capital gains, 
if any, referred to in clause (i)]; and 
(iii) the amount of income-tax with which it would have 
been chargeable had its total income been reduced by the 
10 amount of capital gains referred to in clauses (i) and (iO.'. 
38. In section 131 of the Income-tax Act, after the words "Appellate ~::tD~f 
Assistant CQmmissioner'\ the words "Inspecting Assistant Commis- .ecUoD 131. 
sioner" shall be inserted. 
IS 
2.0 
3S 
40 
39. In section 155 !Jf the Income-tax Act,-
(i) after sub-section (5), the following sub-section shall be 
inserted, namely:-
"(SA) Where an allowance by way of development 
allowance has been made wholly or partly to an assessee in 
respect of the cost of planting in any area in any assessment 
year und2r section 33A and subsequently-
(i) at any time before the expiry of eight years from 
the end of the previous year in which such allowance 
was made, the land is sold or otherwise transferred by 
the assessee to any person other than the Government, 
a local authority, a corporation established by a Central, 
State or Provincial Act or a Government company as 
defined in section 617 of the Companies Act, 1956, or in 
connection with any amalgamation or succession referred 
to in sub-section (5) or sub-section (6) of section 33A; 
or 
(ii) at any ~ime b.efore the expiry of the eight years 
referred to in sub-section (3) of section 33A, the assessee 
utilises the amount credited to the reserve account under 
clause (ii) of that sub-section-
(a) for distribution by way of dividends or 
profits; or 
(b) for remittance outside India as profits or 
for the creation of any asset outside India; or 
(c) for any other purpose which is .not a pur-
pose of the business of the undertaking, 
Amend-
ment of 
section 155. 

Amend· ment of 
section 164. 
10 
the development allowance originally allowed shall be 
deemed to have been wrongly allowed, and the Income-
tax Officer may, notwithstanding anything contained in 
-- - this Act,· recompute the total income of the assessee {or 
the relevant previous year and make the necessary S 
amendment; and the provisions of section 154 shall, 80 
far as may be, apply thereto, the period of four years 
specified in sub-section (7) of that section being reckoned 
from the eBd of the previous year in which the sale or 
transfer took place or the money was so utilised."; 10 
(ii) in sulwection (7), for the words "the super-tax", the 
words "the tax" shan be substituted. 
co. In section 164 of the Income-tax Act, the words "or total world • income" shall be omitted. 
Am end- 41. In section 178 of thp Income-tax Act, for sub-sections (3) and IS 
ment of section 178. (4), the iollowing sub-sections shall be substituted, namely:-
"(3) The liquidator-
(4) shall not, without the leave of the Commis&ioner, 
part with any of the assets of the company or the properUes 
in his hands until he has been notified by the Income-tax 20 
Officer under sub-section (2); and 
(b) on being so notified, shall set aside an aJ80UDt eq~ 
to the amount notified and, until he so sets aside such 
amount, shall not part with any of the assets of the company 
or the properties in his hands: 2S 
Pro'nded that nothinli( cont'1ined in this sub-section !lhall 
debar the liquidator from partin~with such assets or properti~ 
for the purpose of the payment of the tax payable by the 
company or for m~kiny any payment to secured creditors whose 
debts are entitled under law to priority of payment over debts 30 
due to Government on the date of liquidation or for meeting 
such costs and expenses of the winding up of the company as 
are in the' opinion of the Commissioner reasonable. ' .... 
(4) If the liquidator fails to give the notice in accordance with 
sub-section (1) or fails to set aside the amou,nt as required by sub- 3S 
section (3) or part.; with any of the assets of the company or thl!' 
properties in hi$ hands in contravention of the provisions of that 
sub-section, he shall be personally liable for the payment of the 
tax which the compaTJ~· would be liable to pay: 
Provided that if the amount of any tax payable by the com- 40 
paLY is notified under SUb-s~ction (2), the personal liability of the 
liquidator under this ~ub-section shall be to the extent of such 
&mOunt". 

31 
a. In section 181 of the lncome-tax Act, after the words "tax free", Amelld-
ment of iG-
~t- the followin~ words s~al1 be inserted. namely: - teetioD III. 
"at such rate not exceedin~ twenty-five per cent. as may be 
notified by the Central Government in the Official Gazette from 
5 time to time.". 
10 
G. In section 191 of the Income-tax Act, the brackets and figure Am_d-
meat of "(1)'~ and sub-secti~n 2) slJ,all be omitted. ledloa 181. 
"- In section 192 or the Income-tax Act,-
(i) in sub-section (1), the words "and super-tax" and the 
words "and average rate of super-tax respectively" shall 'b~ 
omitted; 
(ii) sub-seeb~r. (2) shall be omitted; 
(iii) in sub-section (3), the words, brackets and fig~re "~r 
sub-section (2)" shall be omitted; 
Amend-
ment v! 
section. 19~. 
IS (iv) in sub-section (5), for the words "income-tax and sUfler-
tax", the word "tax" shall be substi~uted; 
(v) in the ExpZaflation, the words, brackets and figure "sub-
section (2), and in'~ shall be omitted. 
45. In section 193 of the. Income-tax Act, the words "and super- Amend-
20 tax" shan be omitted. ment ot ftoBi1 
~ . section b,.., 
30 
ta. In section 194 of the Income-tax Act, the words "and super-tax" Amend-
ment ~f 
and the words "or the total world income" shall be omitted. seetlon UM. 
47. In section 195 of the Income-tax Act, in sub-section (1), the Amend-
ment -01 words "and super-tax", wherever they occur, shall be omitted. IedlaD III. 
•. In section 197 of the Income-tax Act,-
(i) in sub-section (1) ,-
(a) the words "or super-tax", wherever they occur, and 
the words "or the total world income" shall be oplitted; 
(b) in clause (b), for the word "super-tax", the word 
"income-tax" shall be substituted; 
(ii) in sub-section (2), the words uand super-tax" shall be 
omitted; 
(iii) in sub-section (3) ,-
(a) for the words and flgures "sections 84 and 101". the 
Amend-
ment ot 
section u". 
35 word and flgures "section 84" shall be substituted: 
(b) the words, brackets and figures "and sub-section 
(2) ef section 101" shall be omitted; 

32 
(c) for the words and figures "sections 85 and 101 "_ the 
word and figures "section 85~' shall be substituted. 
Amend- 49. In section 199 bf the Income-tax Act, for the words "income-ment of sec:tiOD 189. tax or .super-tax, as the case may be", the word "tax" shall be subs-
tituted. 
50. In section 203 of the Income-tax Act, for the words "income-
tax or super-tax", wherever they occur, the word "tax" shall be 
substituted. 
5 
Amend- 51. In section 206 of the Income-tax Act, in clause (c) of sub-ment of sec:tion 201. section (1), the words "and super-tax" shall be omit~ed. 1'0 
Amend-
mentof 
sectiOD" 
Amend-
mentof 
sectlcma 
211 to 217, 
220, 243 
andM4. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 228. 
52. In section 209 of the Income-tax Act,-
(i) in clause (a),-
(a) in sub-clauses (ii) and (iii), the words "and super-
tax", wherever they occur, shall be omitted; 
(b) in sub-clause (iv), the words "and super-tax" and IS 
the brackets and letter "(b)" shall be omitted; 
(ii) clause (b) shall be omitted; 
(iii) in the Explanation, for the words, brackets and letters 
"clauses (a) and (b)", the word. brackets and letter c4clause 
(a)" shall be substituted. 20 
53. In sections 213 to 217, 220, 243 and 244 of the Income-tax Act, 
{or the words "four per cent.", the words usix per cent.". shall, be 
substituted. 
54. In section 226 of the Income-tax Act, for sub-section (5), the 
following sub-sedion shall be substituted, namely:- 2S 
"(5) The Income-tax Officer may, if so authorised, by the 
Commissioner'by general or speciai order, recover any an"ears of 
tax due from a.."'l assessee by distraint and sale !l{ bis ,movable 
property in the manner laid down in the Third Schedule.". 
55. In section 235 c! the Income-tax Act. for clause (~), th~ 30 
followin~ clause shall l:c substituted. namely:-
.. (b) where the shareholder-, 
(i) is not a company, the amount of income-tax payable 
by him ~der thih Act but not exceedinJ( income-tax calcu-
lated at the r"te of twenty-Ive per .ent.. and 35 

33 
(ii) is a company, twenty-five per'cent., 
on that portion of the dividend which is attributable to the profit.;; 
of the company as~essed to agricultural income-tax,". 
56. In section 236 of the Income-tax Act, in clause (iii) of Explana-
5 tion 2, for the words and figures "sections 88 and 100", the word and 
figures "section 88" shaH be substituted. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 238. 
57. In section 236A of the Income-tax Act, in sub-section (2). for Amend-ment of the word "super-tax". the word ··tax" shall be substituted. sectiOl'l 
236A 
58. After section 276 of the Income-tax Act, the following section InsertiOD 
10 shall be inserted, namely: - ~!e~::' 
15 
"276A. If a person, without reasonable cause or excuse,-
(i) fails to give the notice in accordance with sub-section 
(1) of section 178; or 
(ii) fails to set aside the amount as required by sub-
section (3) of that section; or 
(iii) parts with any of the assets of the company or the 
propert.ies in hjs hands in contravention of the provisions of 
the aforesaid ~~ub-section, 
he shall be punishable with rigorous imprisonment for a term 
276A. 
Failure to 
comply 
with. the • 
provisions 
of sub-
sections 
(1) and • 
(3) of . 
section 1 '1a. 
2. which may exten.~ to two years: 
Provided that in the absence of special and adequate reasons 
to the contrary to be recorded in the judgment of the court, such 
imprisonment shCll1 not be for less than six months.". 
59. In section 279-of the Income-tax Act, in sub-section (1), after Amend-
25 the word and figures "section 276", the words. figures and letter "er ~ti~;k.. 
section 276A" shall be inserted. 
60. In section 280P of the Income-tax Act, the words "and super- Amend-ment of tax" shall be omitted. section 
280P. 
61. In section 28CX of the Income-tax Act, in sub-section (2'. the Amend-ment of 30 hrackets and words "(but not super-tax)" shall be omitted. section 
280X. 
2248 (B) LS-5 

meeni-
tiona. 
~u:credit 
ieertiftcates 
to certain 
_uity 
pare-.,clders. 
Ii 
n. After sect~on 280X of the Incom~tax Act, the following 
Chapter and sections shall be inserted, namely:-
'CHAPTER XXIIB 
TAX CREDIT CERTJ:nCATES 
280Y. In this Chapter,- S 
(a) "eligible issue of capital" means an issue of ordinary 
shares specified as such ill the scheme; 
(b) "public company" means a public company as 
defined in section 3 of the Companies Act, 1956; 
(e) "scheme" means a scheme made under this Chapter; 10 
(d) "urban area" means any area which the CentraJ 
Government may, having regard to the population, concen· 
tration of indust.ries, need for proper planning of the area 
and other relevant factors, by general or special order, 
declare to be an urban area for the purposes of this Chapter. 15 
280Z. (1) An individual shall be granted a tax credit certifi-
cate if he by himself or some other person on his behalf has 
subscribed to, and made payments in respect of, any eligible 
issue of capital. 
(2) A Hindu undivided family sHAll also be granted a tax 20 
credit certificate if any person has subscribed to, and made 
payments in respect of, any eligible issue of capital on behalf of 
that Hindu undivided family. 
(3) A tax credit certificate granted under the provisions of 
this section shall be for the amount or the aggregate of the ~S 
amounts computed as hereunder with reference to the capital 
so subscribed and paid: 
(i) On the first Rs. 15,000 
of the amount paid in the finan-
cial year ' 
(ii) On the next Rs. 10,000 
of the amount paid in the fin-
ancial year 
(iii) On the next Rs. 10,000 
of the amount paid in the 
financial year 
(iv) On the balance of the 
amount paid in the financiaJ 
year 
.. -2t the rate of 5 per cent.; 30 
at the rate of 3 per cent.; 
35 
at the rate of 2 per cent.; 
. . Nil. 

, . 
, 
11 of 1.22. 
• t 
Ezplanation.-For the purposes of ,this section, a payment 
shall be treated as having been made to the extent to which and 
on the date on which the amount of the said payment has been 
credited to the share capital account-of the company. 
(4) A tax credit certificate for the amount specified in sub-
section (3) shall be gra_nted to an individual or Hindu undivided 
family in respect 01-
(a) the financial year in which payment by way of 
subscription to an eligible issue of capital was made, and 
JO (b) each of the three financial years following that year: 
20 
3S 
Provided that the capital. continues to be held by or on 
behalf of the individual or on behalf of the Hindu undivided 
family, as the case may be, until the end of the relevant financial 
year: 
Provided further that where any part of the capital in respect 
of which a tax credit certificate had been granted in a financial 
year (hereinafter referred to as the earlier financial ye~r) is 
sold, transferred or otherwise disposed of in a subsequent finan-
cial year, the tax credit certificate to be granted with reference 
to the remaining capital in respeot of the said subsequent 
financial year or any financial year following that year shall be 
for such amount as bears to tt\e amount for which the tax: creciit 
certificate was granted in .the earlier financial year the same 
proportion as the amount of the remaining capital as on the 
31st day of March of the subsequent financial year bears to the 
total amount of the capital with reference to which the tax credit 
certificate was granted in the earlier financial year. 
(5) The amount shown on a tax credit certificate granted 
to an indjvidual or Hindu undivided family shall, on the certifi-
cate being produced before the Income-tax Officer, be adjusted 
against any existing liability of such individual or Hindu un .. 
divided family under the In,;l.Uln Income-tax Act, 1922, or this Act, 
or any such liability arising within the period of twelve months 
from the date on which the certificate was produced before the 
Income-tax Officer, and where the amount of such certificate 
exceeds such liability, or where there is no such liability, the 
excess or the whole of such amount, as the case may be, shall, 
notwithstanding anything contained in Chapter XIX, be deemed, 
on the date of the expiry of the said period of twelve mon!hs, 
to be refund due to such individual or Hindu undivided family, 
as the case may be, under that Chapter and the provisions of thll 
Act ,shall apply -accordingly. 

Tax credit 
certificates 
for shifting 
ofindus-, 
trial . 
under-taking 
from urban 
U"eL 
36 
(6) The Central Government may specify in a scheme any 
issue of ,"Ordinary shares by a public company as eligible issue 
of capital. 
(7) In specify.ing any issue of ordinary shares as eligible 
issue of capital, the Central Government shall have regard to S 
the following facton, namely =-
(a) the total amount of the capital issued; 
,b) tile terms and conditions subject to which the capital 
is issued; 
(c) the trade or business in which the company con ... 10 
cemed is engaged; 
(d) the purposes for which the issue is being made; 
(e) any other relevant factor. 
280ZA. (1) If any public company owning an industrial 
undertaking situate in an urban area shifts, with the prior IS 
approval of the Board, such undertaking to any area (not being 
the area in which such undertaking is situate), it shall be granted 
a tax credit certificate. 
(2) The tax credit certificate to be granted under sub-section 
(1) shall be for an amount computed in the following manner 20 
with reference to the amount of the tax payable by the company 
on its inCbme chargeable under' the head "Capital gains" arising 
from the transfer of capital assets being buildings or lands or 
any rights in buildings or lands used for the purposes of the 
business of the said undertaking in the urban area, effected in the 25 
course of or in consequence of the shifting of such industrial 
undertaking, namely:-
(a) the amount of expenditure incurred by the company 
ln~ 
(i) acquiring lands or constructing buildings for the 30 
",&urposes of the business of the company in the area to 
. which the undertaking is shifted, and .. 
(ii) shifting its machinery or plant and other e1!ects 
and transferring its establishment to such area, . 
within a period of three years, from the date of the approval 35 
referred to in sub-section (1), or such further period as the 
Board may allow, shall first be ascertained; 
(b) the amoWlt of the tax credit certificate shall bear to 
the amount of tax payable by the company on its income 
,.:nargeabie under tbe head "Capital gains" as aforesaid, the 40 

5 
U at 1922. 
10 
15 
20 
tof 1.56. 
30 
35 
I ' 
, , 
of 1151. 
:~ .. 
;j7 
same proportiod as the amount of expenditure ascertained 
under clause (a) bears to the amount of the said income: 
Provided that the amount of the tax credit certificate shall 
in no case exceed the amount of the tax aforesaid 
(3) The amount shown on a tax credit certificate granted to 
a public compal"ly tinder sub-section (1) shall, on the certificate 
bein~ produced before the Income-tax Officer, be adjusted against 
any existing liability of the company under the Indian Income-
tax Act, 1922, or this Act, or any such liability aris~ng within the 
perjt'd of twelve months from the date on which the certificate 
was produced before the Income-tax Officer, and where the 
amount of such certificate exceeds such liability, or where there 
is no such liability, the excess or the whole of such amount, as 
the case may be, shall, notwithstanding anything contained in 
Cbap~r XIX, be deemed, on the date of the expiry of the said 
period of twelve months, to be refund due to such company under 
that Chapter and the provisions of this Act shall apply accord-
ingly. 
(4) Where a capital asset, being building or land, or any right 
in building or land, acquired or, as the case may be, constructed 
in the area to which the undertaking of the company is shifted, 
is transferred by the company within a period of five years from 
the date of acquisition or, as the case may be, the date of com-
pletion of construction to any person other than the Go,,-rnment, 
a local authority, a corporation established by a Central, State or 
Provincial Act or a Government company as defined in section 
617 of the Companies Act. 1956, an amount equal to one-half of 
the amount for which a tax credit certificate has been granted to 
the company under sub-section (1) shall be deemed to be tax due 
from the company on the thirtieth day following the date of 
transfer under a notice of demand isfued under section 156, and 
all the provisions of this Act shall apply accordingly. 
Explanation.-Any land or building used for the residence of 
persons employed in the business of the company or for the use 
of such persons as a hospital, creche, school, canteen; library, 
recreational centre, shelter, rest-room or lunch-room shall, for 
the purposes of this section, be deemed to be land Or building 
used for the purposes of the business of the company. 
280ZB. (1) Where any company engaged in the manufac-
ture or production of any of the articles mentioned in the First 
Schedule to the Industries (Development and Regulation) Act, 
1951-
(i) is liable to pay any tax for the assessment year 
commencing on the 1st day of April, 1965 (hereinafter re-
Taxeredil 
cerUfteate 
tocertalD 
manufae-
turin, 
eompanJ .. 
In certain e .... 

31 
• ferred to as the base year) and anyone or m~e of the five 
assessment years next following that year under the Income-
tax Act and the Companies (Profits) Surtax Act, 1964; or 7 of 1114. 
(ii) is not liable to pay any tax for the base year but 
becomes so liable for any succeeding year (hereinafter S 
referred to as the succeeding base year) under the aforesaid 
Acts and also for anyone or more of the assessment years 
following that year, not being an assessment year commenc-
ing after the 1st day of April, 1970, 
and the aggregate of such tax for any such succeeding year 10 
exceeds-
(a) in the case referred to in clause (i), the aggregate 
tax payable for the base year; 
(b) ill the case referred to in clause (ii), the aggregate 
tax payable for the succeeding base year, IS 
then the company shall be granted a tax credit certificate for 
an amount equal to twenty per cent. of such excess: 
Provided that the amount of the tax credit certificate shall 
not for any assessment year exceed ten per cent. of such aggregate 
tax: payable by the company for that year. 20' 
(2) The amount shown OIl a tax credit certificate granted to 
any company under the provisions of sub-section (1) shall, on 
the certificate being produced before. the Income-tax Officer, be 
adjusted against any existing liability of such company under 
the Indian Income-tax Act, 1922, or this Act, or any such liability 25 11 e.f 182Z. 
arising within a period of twelve months from the date on which 
the certificate was produced before the Income-tax ·Officer and 
where the amount of such certificate exceeds such liability, or 
where there is no suoh liability, the excess or the whole of such 
amount, as the case may be, shall, notwithstanding anything 30 
contained in Chapter XIX, be deemed, on the date of the expiry 
of the said period of twel~ months, to be refUftd due to such 
company under that·Chapter and the provisions of this Act shall 
apply accordingly: 
Provided that the adjustment or refund, as the case may be, 35 
under this sub-section shall be only for such amount, not 
exceeding the amount of the certificate, as is used within such 
period as may be specified in the scheme lor repayment of loans 
taken by the company from any financial institutions notified 
in this behalf by the Central Government or for redemption of 40 
its debentures. ... 

7 of 1947. 
89 
Ezpla~tion.-The amount of Income-tax payable by the com-
pany for any assessment year for the purposes of this section 
shan be computed after making allowance for any relief, rebate 
or deduction in respect of income-tax to which the company is 
S ... - entitled under the provisions of this Act or the annUal Finance 
Act after deducting from such amount of income-tax the amount, 
if any, by which the rebate of income-tax admissible to the com-
pany under the provisions of the annual Finance Act is, under 
the provisions of the said Act, reduced with reference to the 
10 face value of any bonus shares or the amount of any bonus 
issued by the company to its shareholders during the previous 
year or any previous year' prior to that year or with reference 
to any amount of dividends declared or distributed by it during 
the previous year or any previous year prior to that year.' 
15 
20 
2f>QZC. (1) A person who exports any goods or merchandise 
out of India after the 28th day of February, 1965, and receives 
the sale proceeds thereof in India in accordance with the Foreign 
Exchange Regulation Act, 1947, and the rules made thereunder, 
shall be gr:mted a tax credit certificate for an amount calculated 
at a rate not exceeding fifteen per cent. on the amount of such 
sale proceeds. 
(2) The goods or merchandise in respect of which a tax 
credit certificate may-be granted under suJJ.section (1) and the • rate at which the amount of such certificate shall be calculated 
25 shall be such as may be specified in the scheme: 
Provided that different rates may be specified in respect of 
different goods or merchandise. 
(3) In specifying the goods or merchandise and the rates, 
the Central Government shall have regard to the following fac-
30 tors, namely:-
3S 
(a) the cost of manufacture or production of such goods 
or merchandise and prices of similar goods in the foreign 
markets;.. .--. 
(b) the need to develop foreign markets for such goods 
or merchandise; 
(c) any other relevant factor. 
(4) The amount shown on a tax credit certificate granted 
to any person under this section shall, 011 the certificate being 
produced before the Income-tax Officer, be adjusted against any 
existing liability of that person under the Indian Income-tax Act, 
1922, 0:1" this Act, or any such liability arising within the period of 
Tax credit 
certificate 
in relation 
to exports. 

Tax credit 
certlftcates 
in r~lation 
to 
increased 
production 
of certain 
Roodl. 
40 
twelve months from the date on which the certificate was pro-
duced before the Income-tax Oftlcer and where the amount of 
such certificate exceeds such liability, or where there is no such 
liability, the excess or the whole of such amount, as the case 
may be, shall, notwithstanding anything contained in Chapter S 
XIX, be deemed, on the date of the expiry of the said period, to 
be refund due to such person under that Chapter and the 
provisions of this Act shall apply accordingly. 
280ZD. (1) A person who, during any financial year com-
mencing on the 1st day of April, 1965, or any subsequent finan- 10-
cial year (not being a year commencing after the 1st day of 
April, 1969), manufactures or produces any goods, shall be granted 
a tax credit certificate for an amount calculated at a rate not 
exceeding twenty-five per cent. of the amount by which the 
duty of excise paid by him in ~the relevant financial year on such IS 
goods exceeds the duty so paid by him, in the base year. 
(2) The goods in respect of which a tax credit certificate 
may be granted under sub-section (1) and the rate at which the 
amount of such certificate shall be calculated shall be such as 
may be specified in the scheme: 
Provided that different rates may be specified in respect of 
different goods. 
(3) In specifying the goods and the rates under sub-section 
(1), the Central Government shall have regard to the following 
20-
factors, namely:- 2S· 
(a) the need for stimulating industrial output; 
(b) -the need fOl' financial assistance ~industrial under-
takings engaged in the manufacture or production of such 
goods; 
(c) any other relevant factor. 30 
(4) The amount shown on a tax credit certificate granted to 
any person under the provisions of sub-section (1) shall, on the 
certificate being produced before the Income-tax Officer, be ad-
justed against any existing liability of such person under the 
Indian Income-tax Act, 1922, or this Act, or any such liability 3S 11 of 192. 

1 of 1144. 
10 
1$ 
20 
30 
arising within a period of twelve months from the date on which 
the eettiftcate was produced before the Income-tax OfBcer and 
where the amount of such certiftc~te exceeds such Uability, or 
where there is no such liability, the excess or the whole of such 
. amount, as the case may be, shaU, notwithstanding anything con- _. _ 
taiDed in Chapter XIX, be deemed, on the date of the expiry of the 
said period of twelve months, to be refund due to such persOll 
under that Chapter and the provisiOns of this Act shall apply 
accordingly: 
. 
Provided that the adjustment or refund, as the case may be, 
under this sub-section shall be only for such amount, not exceed-
ing the amount of the certificate, as is used within such perioCi 
as may be specified in the scheme for repayment of loans taken 
by the person from any financial institutions notified in this 
behalf by the Central Government or, in the cue of a company, 
also for redemption of its debentures. 
(5) In this section-
(a) "base year" in relation to an existfng undertaking 
which manufactures or produces the goods referred to in 
sub-section (1), means the ftnancial year commencing on the 
1st day of April. 1964 and in relation to any other undertak-
ing, the ftnancial year in which such undertaldng begins to 
manufacture or produce such goods; 
(b) "duty of excise" means the duty of excise leviable 
under the Central Excises and Salt Act, 1944. 
2S0ZE. (1) The Central Government shall. by notiftcation In ~c:n:t 
the Official Gazette. frame one Or more scheme or schemes to be Ichem.':. 
caJlpd tax credit certificate scheme or schemes in relation to tax 
credit certificates to be granted under this Chapter. 
(2) A scheme harned under sub-section (1) may provide 
for- I . . --.-.-. 
(a) the form and manner in which. and the autl10rity to 
which. applications for the grant of tax credit certificates 
shall be made; 
35 (b) the form in which. and the intervals at which. and 
the authority by which. such certiftcates shan be issued; 
(c) the veriftcation of any Information or particulars 
furnished. or contained In any appUcation made, by or on 
behalf of any person entitled to tRX credit eertifteatea; 
40 (d') the determination of the ri~hts, and obli~ations of 8. 
person to whom such certificate has been granted and the 
2248 {B)LS-I 

'T' 
'Amend-mmt of " I'Int , Sc1ledule. 
• 
ci.rcumat·nces in which any right in or title to the laid 
,certUlcate may be trllDlferred to or devolve on 8Df other 
penon by succession or otherwise' , 
(e) the determination of the rights and obligations of 
pen.ons who jointly subscribe to an eligible issue of capital; S-
(n the determination of the rights and obligations of per-
SOllli who subscribe to an eligible issUe of capital, on behalf, 
or for the benefit, of any other person; 
(g) the appointment of any officer of Government or of 
the Reserve Bank of India to exercise any rights Or perform 10 
any duties in connection with the grant of the said certificates; 
(h) the goods or merchandise and the rate or rates for 
the purposes of section 280ZC and Section 280ZD; 
(i) any other matter which may be necessary or proper 
for 'the e1!ectlve implementation of the provisions of this IS 
Chapter or the scheme. 
(3) The Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette. add to, amend, vary or rescind any scheme made 
unde r this section. 
(4) Any scheme made under this section shall be laid, as soon ao 
as n-.ay be, after it is made, before each House of Parliament 
while it is in session {or a total period of thirty days which may 
be comprised in one ~ion or in two successive sessions. and if, 
before the expiry of the session in which it is 80 laid Or tht.~ 
session immediately following, both Houses agree in making any S 
modification in any provision of th~ scheme or both Houses agree 2 
that any provision in the scheme should not be made, that 
provision of the scheme shan thereafter have effect only in such 
modified form ,or be of no effect, as the case may be; so however 
that any such modification or annulment shall be without 30 
prejudic~ to the validity of anything previously done under that 
provision.'. 
63. In section 294 of the Income-tax Act, ~he words "or super-tax" 
shall be omi tted. ~ .' 
64. In s~ction 295 of the Income-tax Act, in clause (e) of sub- 3S 
section .(2), after the words, brackets and figures uclauae (i) of sub-
section (3) of section 87", the words, bl'ackets; figures and letter "or 
clause (i) of sub-aection (4) of section 80A, as th~ case may be," 
shall be inserted. 
65. In the First Schedule to the. Income--t&x Aet,' in rule 3, In 40 
clause (c), for the words "but DO tncom~tax shall be payable on 
the k%1nu~l average of tbe amount of Nch iJltelWt". the wol'ds "but 
," ~.. . .. 

s 
10 
• ·.Jft .... ~ . ..., 
the asSessee shall be entitled to a deduction from the amount of 
income-tax with which he is chargeable on his total income, of an 
amount calculated at -the rate of twenty-five per cent. on the annual '. 
average of the amount of such interest" Ihall be substituted. 
II. In the Fourth Schedule to the Income-tax Act,-
(a) in Part A,-
(i) in rule 6, the words "and super-tax" shall 
omitted; 
be 
(ti) to rule 7, the followinR' proviso shall be added, 
namely:-
'Provided that in respect of an assessment year com-
mencing on the 1st day of April, 1966 and any subse-
quent assessment year, this rule shall have et!ect as if 
for the words beginning with "from the amount of 
income-tax" and ending with the words "at the average 
rate of income-tax on", the words, figures and letter 
"under section BOA computed with reference to" were 
substituted'; 
Ammd· 
mmtof. Fourtll • 
Sebectule. 
20 -
(iii) in sub-rule (1) of rule 9, for the words. "income-
tax and super-tax", wherever they occur, the word "tax" 
shall be substituted; 
25 
35 
(iv) in sub-rule (3) of rule 11, the words "ana super-
tax" shall be omitted; 
(11) in clause (d) of sub-rule (1) of rule 15, fox'_ the 
words "income-tax and super-tax", the word "tax" shall be 
substituted; 
(b) in Part B,-
(i) in rule 5, the words "and super-tax" shall be 
omitted; 
(ii) in rule 6,-
(a) for the words "income-tax and super-tax", 
wherever they occur, the word "tax" shall be substi-
tuted; 
(b) after the words "paid to an employee during his 
life time,", the words, brackets and figures "in circum-
stances other than those referred to in clause (13) of 
section 10" shall be inserted; 
(iii) in clause (e) of sub-rule (1) of rulell, for the 
words uincome-tax and super-tax", ~he word "tax" shall be 
substit.uted; 

IDIertiOD of __ 
Icheclule. 
(c) in Part C, in rule 7, the words "and super-tax" shall be 
omitted. 
81. Arter the Fourth Schedule to the Income-tax Act, the followina 
Schedule .hall be inserted, namely :-
'THE FIFTH SCHEDULE 
rSee section 33(1) (iii) (c)] 
List of articles and things 
(1) Iron and steel (metal), ferro-alloys and special steels. 
(2) Aluminium, copper, lead and zinc (metals). 
s 
(3) Industrial machinery specified under the heading "8. Indus- 10 
trial machinery", sub-heading "A. Major items of specialised 
equipment used in specific industries", of the First Schedule to 
the Industries (Development and Regulation) Act, 1951. 8S of 1951. 
(4) BoUers and steam generating plants, steam engines and tur-
bines and internal combustion engines. IS 
(5) Equipment for the generation and transmission of electricity 
including transformers, cables and transmis.c;ion towers. 
(6) Machine tools, precision tools (including cutting tools and 
small tools), dies and jigs. 
(1) Tractors and earth-moving machinery. 20 
(8) Steel castings and forgings and malleable iron and steel 
castings. 
(9) Cement 
(18) Fertilisers, namely, ammonium sulphate, ammonium SUlphate 
nitrate (double salt), ammonium nitrate, calcium ammonium 25 
nitrate (nitrolime stone), ammonium chloride, super phosphate, 
urea and complex fertilisers of synthetic origin containjng both 
nitrogen and phosphorus, such as ammonium phosphates, 
ammonium sulphate phosphate and ammonium nitro phosphate. 
. (11) Paper and pulp. 30 
(12) Electronic equipment, namely, radar equipment, computers, 
electronic accountiag and business machines, electronic com-
munication eqUipment, electronic control instruments and basic 
components, such as valves, transistors, resistors, condensors, 
coils, magnetic materials and micro wave components. 3$ 
(13) Petrochemicals including corresponding products manufac-
tured from other basic raw materials like calcium carhide, 
ethyl alcohol or hydrocarbons from other sources. 
(14) Shlpi. 
. ... 

; 
(15) Component parts of the articles mentioned in items Nos. (3), 
(4), (5) and (7), ~hat is to say, such parts as are essential for 
the working of the machinery referred to in the items aforesaid 
and have been given for that purpose some ~pecial shape or 
S quality which would not be essential for their use for any other 
purpose and are in complete finished form and ready for fit-
ment.'. 
88. (1) Where any person makes a declaration in accordance with Voluntary 
sub-section (2) in respect of the amount representing income- ~= 
10 (a) which he has failed to disclose in a return of income for 
any assessment year filed by him before the 1st day of March, 
11 of 1922. 1965 under the Indian Income-tax Act, 1922 or the Income-tax 
43 of 1961. Act, 1961, or 
(b) which has escaped assessment for any assess~nt year 
for which an assessment has been made before the 1st day of 
MarCh, 1965 under either of the said Acts, or 
(c) for the assessment of which no proceeding under either 
of the said Acu; has beer. taken before the 1st day of March, 1965, 
he shall, notwithstandin~ anything contained in the said A~ts, be 
20 charged income-tax at the rate -specified in sub-sectioa. (3) in respect 
of the amount so declared if he,-
(i) either pays the amount of income-tax as computed at 
the said rate, or 
(ii) furnishes adequate security for the payment thereof and 
undertakes to pay such income-tax within a period, not exceeding 
'six months, from the date of the declaration as may be specified 
by him therein. 
(2) The declaration shall be made to the Commissioner, and shall 
specify the period required to be specified under clause (ii) of sub-
30 section (1), contain the name, address and signature of the person 
making the declaration and also full information in respect or the 
following matters, namely:-
3' 
(a) Whether he was assessed to income-tax or not and, jf 
assessed, the name of the Income-tax Circle in which he wu 
assessed. 
(b) The ammnt o( income declared, giving where available, 
details of the financial year or years in which the income was 
earned and the amount pertaining to each such year. 
(c) Whether the amount declared is represented by C&lh (in-
cludina bank deposits), bullion, inveltments in sharet, debt. due 

a . 
• 
from other persona, commodities, or any other assets, and the 
name in which it is held and location thereof: 
..--- .. ---Provided that the declaration shall be of no effect unless it is 
made after the 28th day of February, 1965 and before the lst day of 
JUDe, 1965. 5 
(3) The rate of income-tax chargeable in respect of the amount 
referred to in sub-section (1) shall be sixty per cent. of such amount: 
Provided that if before the 1st day of April, 1965, the tax on the 
amount declared is paid by the declarant at the rate of fifty-seven 
per cellt of such amount, he shall not be liable to pay any further 10 
tax on such amount. 
(4) A person shall not be considered to have furnished adequate 
security for the payment of the tax for the purposes of sub-section (1) 
unless the payment is e,uaranteed by a scheduled bank or the person 
makes an assignment, in favour of the president of India, of any IS 
security of the Central Government. 
Explanation.-For the purposes of this sub-section, where an 
assignment of Government securities is made in favour of the 
President, the amount covered by such assignment shall be the 
market value of the securities on the date of the assignment. 20 
(5) Any amount d incrme-tax paid in pursuance of a declaration 
made under this section shall not be refundable in any circumitances, 
and no person who has lI'o.d~ the declaration shall be entitled, in res-
pect of any amounLso d£'c1ared or any amount of tax so paid, to 
reopen any assessment or reassessment made under the Indian 1S 
Income-tax Act, 1922, or the Income-tax Act, 1961, or the Excess 11 of 1922. 
Profits Tax Act, 1940, tU the Business Profits 1Tax Act, 1947, or the 43 of 1981. 
Super Profits Tax Act, 1963, or the Companies (Profits) Surtax Act, H5 of 1940. 
1964, or claim any set off or relief in any appeal, reference, revision 21 of 1947. 
or other proceeding in relation to any such assessment or 30 14 of 1963. 
reassessment. 7 of 1884. 
(6) (a) Any amount declared by any person under this section 
in respect of which the tax referred to in sub-section (3) is paid 
shall not be included in his total income for any assessment under 
any of the Acts mentioned in sub-section (5) if he credits in the 35 
books of account, if any, maintained by him for any source of income 
or in any other record, the amount declared as reduced by the tax 
paid thereon under this section. 

(&) A credit made under clauae (4) .hall be intimated to the 
·Income--lax: OfIlcer. 
(7) (4) The Commiisioner shall grant a certificate to every person 
who has made a declaration under this section and paid the income-
• tax under this section. . 
(b) The certificate shCfll set forth the particulars of the amount 
stated in the declaration. the amount of income-tax paid in respect of 
the same and the date of payment. 
(8) (a) All particula!"s contained in any declaration made under 
10 the t' . IS sec IOn or record of any proceeding under this section shall bt! 
treated as confidential and, notwithstanding anything contained in 
any law for the time bein~ in force. no court shall be entitled to 
requi!'~ any public servant to produce before it any such declaration 
or record or any part thereof or to give evidence before it in respect 
15 thereof. 
(b) No public sen'ant shall disclose any particulars contained in 
any ~uch declaration or record except to any officer employed in the 
execution of any of the Acts mentioned in sub-section (5) 01." to any 
offtcp.r appointed by the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India or 
20 the Board to audit inc0me-tax receipts or refunds. 
(9) Any payment of income-tax under this section shall be made 
by depositin~ the amount to the credit of the Central Government at 
a Government treasury or sub-treasury. or at any branch of the 
Reserve Bank of India. Or at any branch of the State Bank of Incn. or 
2' at any of its agencies conducting Government treasury business. 
(10) In this section,-
I(i) "Board" mean~ the Central Board of Direct Taxes con-
54 of 1.81. stituted under the C~ntral Boards of Revenue Act. 1963; 
43 of liSI. 30 
35 
(ii) "Commissioner" means the Commissioner of Income-tax 
appointed under the Income-tax Act. 1961 having for the time 
being jurisdiction for the purposes of that Act over the person 
who makes a declaration under this section. 
st. In the Estate Duty Act. 1953,- Amend-
ment of 
(i) in sE('tion9. in sub-section (1),"101." the words "two y@'Irs", t::3~4 of 
the words "one year" shan be' substituted; 
(it) in ~ectlOn 10.-
fa) in the proviso. for the words "two years". the words 
"one year" shall be substituted; 
(b) aftel the proviso; the followin~ proviso shall be 
inserted. namely:-
"Provided further that a house or part thereof taken 
under any "gif.t made to the spouse, son, daughter, 

48 
-,"J brother or sis~r, shall not be deemed to pass on the 
donor's death by reason only of the residence therein 
I'lf the donor ex.cept where a right of residence therein 
is reserved or secured directly or indirectly to the donor 
under the relevant disposition Or under any collateral S 
disposition." ; 
(iii) in sub-section (2) of section 11,-
(a) for the wordR "two years", wherever they occur, the 
'Words "one year" shan be substituted; 
(b) after the first proviso. the following proviso shall to 
be inserted. namely:-
"Provid?d further that where> the disposition or 
determination of an interest limited to cease on the 
death in a house or part thereof was effected or sui!wed 
in favour of thp ~oom:~. son. dau~hter. brother or sister, IS 
then. the di!;position or determination shall. notwith· 
standin~ the residence therein of the person who imme-
diately before the disposition or determination had the 
interest. be deemed to be pxcepted by this sub-section 
Savp where a right cf re!;idence therein is reserved or 20 
secured dirp.ctlv or indirectly to such person under the 
re'c"an t dbpo!;ition or under any collateral disposition."; 
(iv) in sub-section (1) of section 12,-
(a) in the proviso, for the words "two years", the words 
"one vpar" shall be substituted; 2S 
(b) after the proviso and before the E:rplanation, the 
followin~ proviso shall be inserted. namely:-
"Provided further that a house or part thereof 
comprised in such ~ett1ement made' in favour of the 
spouse. son. dau~hter. brother or sister. shall not be 30 
deemed to pass on the' settlor's death by reason only of 
the residence therein of the settlor except where a right 
of residence is reserved or secured directly or indirectly to 
t.he settlor under the ~ settlement or under -any collateral 
disposition."; 3S 
(v) in section 22.-
((f) for the words "two y\!ars'·. the wOl"ds "one y\!ar" 
~hal1 b~ substituted; 
(b) for the proviso, the fonowin~ proviso shall be sub-
stftut\!d. namely: - 40 
"Provided that a house or part thereof hf"ld by the 
d\!C\!ased as trusteoe for another ·~rson under a disposi. 

s 
10 
IS 
20 
1 of 1922. 
of 1961. 
25 
30 
35 
~ 
lisa. 40 
tion made by him in favour of the spouse, so~ daughter, 
brother or sister, shall not be deemed to be included 
in the property passing on the death of the deceased 
by reason only of the residence therein of the deceased 
except where a riih t of residence therein is reserved 
Or secured directly or indirectly to the deceased under 
the relevant disposition or under any collateral disposi-
tion."; 
(vi) after section 29, the follOwing section shall be inserted, 
namely:-
"29A. Estate duty shall not be payable in respect of-
(4) any pension accruing or arising on the death of 
the deceased to his widow or other dependents under 
the revised Pension Rules of the Central Government 
or under any similar scheme of a State Government, a 
local authority or a corporation established by a Central, 
State or Provincial Act, or under the New Pension Code 
applicable to the members of the Defence Services; or 
(b) any annuity or pension payable to such widow 
or dependents from-
(i) a superannuation fund appro~ under the 
Indian Income-tax Act, 1922, or the Income-tax Act, 
1961, to the extent to which the amount of such 
annuity or pension does not exceed the equivalent 
of fifteen thousand rupees per annum, or 
(ii) a superannuation or pension fund established 
by such international organisations as the Central 
Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, specify in this behalf."; 
(vii) in section 33, in sub-section (1),-
_ (4) in clause (b), fQr the words "two yeatll", the worda 
"one year" shall be substituted; 
(b) after clause (n), the following clause shall be 
inserted, namely:-
" (0) property taken under any gift made by the 
deceased to the spouse, son, daughter, brother or sister, 
beyond a period of five years before his death: 
Provided that the property is either chargeable to 
gift-tax under the Gift-tax Act, 1958, or is not chargeable 
d ti 5 of that Act for any assessment year un er sec on 964 " 
commencing after the 31st day of March, 1 ;; 
2248 (B) LS-7 
Exemption 
of pen-
sions, etc., 
in certain cases. 

Amend-
ment of 
Act 27 of 
1857. 
50 
(viii) in section 34, in clause (a) of sub-section' (1), for the 
word, brackets and letter "and (n) ", the brackets, letters and 
word" (n) and (0)" shall be substituted; .-
(iz) in section 46, in sub-section (2) for the words "two " , years, the words "one year" shall be substituted. S 
10. In the Wealth-tax Act 1957-, , 
(i) in sub-section (1) of section 5, after clause (xix), the 
following clause shall be inserted, namely:-
"(xx) the value of any equity shares subscribed and 
paid for by the assessee where such shares form part of the 10 
initial issue of equity share capital made after the 28th day 
of February, 1965 by a company of the type referred to in 
clause (d) of section 45, for a period of five successive assess-
ment years commencing with the assessment year next 
following .the date of such issue;"; IS 
(ii) for Part I of the Schedule, the following Part shall be 
:';'..lbstituted, namely:-
'PART I 
Paragraph A 
: l) In the case of every individual:-
(i) on the first rupees one lakh of net wealth 
(ii) on the next rupees four lakhs of net wealth 
(iii) on the next rupees five lakhs of net wealth 
(iv) on the next rupees ten lakhs of net wealth 
(v) on the balance of net wealth 
(b) In the case of every Hindu undivided family:-
(i) on the first rupees two lakhs of net wealth 
(ii) on the next rupees three lakhs of net wealth 
(iii) on the next rupees five la.ldfs\)f net wealth 
(iv) on the next rupees ten lakhs of net wealth 
(v) on the balance of net wealth 
20 
Rate of ta .. r 
Nil 
0·5% 
1·0% 
2·0% 25 
2'5% 
Nil 
0'5% 
1·0% 30 
2·0% 
2·5% 
(c) In addition, in the case of every individual and Hindu un-
divided family, where the net wealth of the individual or Hindu 
undivided family includes the value of any asset, being building or 35 
land (other than business premises), or any right in such building 
or land, situated in any area falling in Category A or Category B 
or Category C or Category D specified in rule 2 of Paragraph B. tax 
at the following rate or rates computed with reference to the value of 
such assets determined in accordance with rule 1 of the said 40 
Paragraph B :-

S 
10 
15 
20 
2S 
51 
(i) where the total value of such 
assets as determined under Para-
graph B does not exceed rupees 
two lakhs . . . . Nil. 
(n) where the total value of such 
assets as determined under Para-
graph B exceeds rupees two 
lakhs but does not exceed rupees 
seven lakhs 
(iii) where the total value of such 
assets as determined under Para-
graph B exceeds rupees seven 
1akhs but does not exceed rupees 
twelve 1akhs 
(itI) where the total value of such 
assets as determined under Para-
graph B exceeds rupees twelve 
lakhs but does not exceed rupees 
seventeen lakhs 
(v) where the total value of such 
assets as determined under Para-
graph B exceeds rupees seventeen 
lakhs 
1 % of the amount by 
which the total valua 
of such assets 88 so 
determined exceeds 
rupees two Iakha. 
Rs. 5,000 plw 2% of 
the amount by which the 
total value of such 
assets as 80 determined 
exceeds rupees seven 
lakhs. 
Rs. 15,000 plus 3% of 
the amount by which the 
total value of such 
assets as 80 determined 
exceeds rupees twelve 
lakhs. 
Rs. 30,000 plus 4 % of 
the amount by which the 
total value of such 
assets as 80 determined 
exceeds1.rupees seventeen 
lakhs. 
Explanation.-For the purposes of this Part "business premises" 
means any building or land or part of such building or land, or any 
30 right in building 'Or land or part thereof, o.wned by the assessee and 
used throughout the previous year for the purposes of his business 
or profession, and includes any iJuilding used for thc",\>urpose of 
residence of persons employed in the business or any building used 
for the welfare of such persons as a hospital, creche, school, canteen, 
3S library, recreational centre, shelter, rest-room or lunch-room. 
Paragraph B 
Rut~ l.-Tht: total value of assets for the purposes of clause (c) 
of Paragraph A shall be determined as being the aggregate amount 
by which the value of such. assets, i~cluded i.n the n.e~ wea~th .of the 
4~ individual or Hindu undiVIded family, WhICh are Sltuated m any 

82 
area falling in the category specified in columr, 1 hereunder exceeds 
the amount specified there against in column 2;-
Category~of area 
(I) 
Amount 
.... 
(2) 
---~-------------------------------------------------
A 
B 
c 
D 
Rs. 5,00,000 
The amount: by -; which th:I!,~ue of such assets situated in any area fj . in Category 
A falls short of RI. 5,00,000, or an amount 
of Rs. 4,00,000, whichever is less. 
5 
The amount by which the aggregate of 10 
the ... value of such assets situated in any 
area falling in Category A or Category B 
falls short of Rs. 5,00,000, or in a case 
where there is DO such asset situated in an 
area falling in Category A, the amount by 15 
which the value of such usets situated 
in any area fallina in Category B falls 
short of Rs. 4,00,000, or an amount of 
Rs. 3,00,000, whichever is less. 
The amount by which the aggregate of the 20 
value of such assets situated in any area 
falling in Category A or Category B or 
Category C falls short of Rs. 5,00,000, 
or, in a case where there is no such asset 
situated in an area falling in Category A, 25 
the amount by which the aggregate of the 
value of such assets situated in any area 
falling in Category B or Category C falls 
short of Rs. 4,00,000, or, in a case where 
there is no such. asset situated in an area 30 
falling)n Ca~ A or Category B, the 
amount by which the value of suc:b, assets 
situated in.,any area...falling in Category C 
falls short of Rs. 3,00,000, or an 
amount of Ra. 2,00,000, whichever is 3S 
less. 
Rule 2.- For the purposes of this Part, all cities and towns in 
India, the population of which, including the popUlation of the 
contiguous municipalities and cantonments according to the census 
held in the year 1961- 40 
(I) exceeds sixteen lakhs shall be treated as falling in 
Category Ai 

~ 
\ 
S 
10 
13 of 1961. 
20 
2S 
~l of 1922. 
3S 
43 of 1881. 
, • , 
lu) exceeds eight !akhs but does not exceed sixteen lakhs 
shall be treated as falling in Category B; 
(it;,) ~xc€eds four lakhs but does not exceed eight lakhs 
shall be treated as falling in Category C; and 
(i-v) exceeds one lakh but does not exceed four lakhs shall 
he treated as falling in Category D.'. 
71. In the Gift-tax Act, 1958,- Amend-mentot 
l i) in ~;ection 5, in sub-section (1), after clause (v), the Act 18 of 1958. following clause shall be inserted, namely:-
"(va) (i) to such temple, mosque, gurdwara, church or 
other place as has been notifted by the Central Government 
for the purposes of sub-section (6) of section 88 of the 
Income-tax Act. 1961: or 
(It) by way of settlement on trust, of property the 
income from which, according to the deed of settlement, 
is to be used exclusively in connection with the temple, 
mosque, gurdwara, church or other place specified therein 
and noti1ied. as aforesaid'''' , , 
!, it) in Chapter IV, after section 18, the following section 
sha II be inserted, namely:-
"18A. Where any stamp duty has been paid under any 
law relating to stamp duty in force in any State on an 
instrument of gift of property in respect of which the gift-tax 
payable exceeds one' thousand rupees, the assessee shall be 
entitJE:d to a deduction from the gift-tax payable by him of 
cln a~nount equal to the stamp duty so paid or one-half of the 
surll by which the gift-tax payable, before making the 
deduction under this section, exceeds one thousand rupees, 
whichever is less.". 
Credit tor 
ltampduty 
paid on 
instrument at lift. 
72. In the Preference Shares (Regulation of Dividends) Act, 1960,- Amend-
... F • ment at 
(i) in section 2,- Act S3 of 1980. 
{a) in clause (b), for the words, brackets, figures and 
letters "clause (7 A) of section 2 of the Indian Income-tax Act, 
1922 and includes a company referred to in sub-clause (ii) of 
clause (SA)", the following shall be substituted, namely:-
"claus~ (26) of section 2 of the Income-tax Act, 1961 
ana includes a company referred to in sub-clause (ii) of 
dause (17)"; 
(b) in clau'3e (c), the words, figures and letters "having 
been issued and subscribed for before the 1st day of April, 
1960" shall be omitted; 

Deduction 
of income-
tax. 
(c) in clause (d), for the words and figures "Indian 
Income-tax Act, 1922", the words and figures "Income-tax Act. 11 of 1922, 
1961" shall be substituted; 43 of 1961. 
(ii) in section 3,-, 
(a) in sub-section (1) and in sub-section (3), after th~ 5 
words "preference share of a company", the words, figures 
and letters "issued and subscribed for before the 1st April, 
1960" shall be inserted; 
(b) in sub-section (2), after the words, figures and letters 
"after the 31st March, 1959", the words, figures and letters 10 
"and before the 1st April, 1960" shall be inserted; 
(c) in sub-section (4), after the words "preference share", 
the words, figures and letters "isuued and subscribed for 
before the 1st April, 1960" shalll be inserted; 
(d) in sub-section (6),- IS 
(i) after the words "in this section", the words, figure 
and letter "and section 4A" shall be inserted; 
(ii) for the words, brackets, figures and letter "sub-
section (3D) of section 18 of the Indian Income-tax Act, 
1922", the words and figures "section 194 of the Income- 20 11 of 1922, 
tax Act, 1961" shall be substituted; 43 of 1961. 
(iii) in section 4,-
(a) for the words "Where any preference share has been 
issued b} a company any portion of the profits and gains of 
which", the following shall be substituted, namely:- 25 
"Where any preference share of a company has been 
issued and subscribed for before the 1st April, 1960, and 
any portion of the profits and gains of the company"; 
(b) for the words and figures "Indian ~come-tax Act, 11 of 1922. 
1922", the words and figures "Income-tax A~t, 1961" shall be 30 43 of 1961. 
substituted; 
(iv) after section 4, the followin~ section shall be inserted. 
'namely:-
"4A. Where the stipulated dividend in respect of a pre-
ference share of a company-, 35 
(a) is specified to be subject to income-tax and D 
deduction is made therefrom on account of the income-
tax payable by the company, or 
(b) is being paid subject to a deduction therefrom on 
account of the ~come-tax payable by the company, not- 40 

43 of \\ldL. 
55 
withstanding the absence of any speciftcatioti that the 
dividend would be subject to income-tax, 
such deduction shall in no case exceed twenty-five per cent. 
of the stipulated dividend."; 
s (v) in section 6, for the words "this Act", the words and figures 
10 
"section 3 or section 4" shall be substituted. 
73. In section 32 of the Unit Trust Act, 1963,-
ment of 
(i) in sub-section (1), for clause (b), the following clause shall Act 52 of 
be substituted, namely: _ 1983. 
'(b) where in the case of a unit holder, being an indivi-
dual, the total income for any previous year as computed 
under the Income-tax Act, 1961 before including therein the 
amount of qualifying dividend-
(i) does not exceed a sum of twenty thousand rupees, 
IS the qualifying dividend shall not be included in comput-
ing the total income of the unit holder for that year; 
(ii) exceeds a sum of twenty thousand rupees, the 
qualifying dividend shall be included in computing the 
total income of the unit holder for that year, but he shalJ 
20 be entitled to a deduction from the amount of income-tax 
payable by him of a sum calculated at the rate of twenty-
five per cent. on such qualifying dividend. 
Explanation.-In this section, "qualifying dividend" means, 
where the income received by a unit holder from the Trust in 
2S respect of units does not exceed one thousand rupees, such 
income, and where such income exceeds one thousand rupees, a 
sum of one thousand rupees.'; 
(ii) in sub-section (2),-
-.. (a) in clause (a):-the word "and'~ shall be omitted; 
30 (b) in clause (b), after the word "individual", the words 
"who is resident; and" shall be inserted; 
(c) after clause (b), the following clause shall be inserted, 
namely:-
"(c) deduction of income-tax shall be made by the 
35 Trust from the income distributed by it to a unit holder 
being an individual who is not resident in India at the 
rate of fifteen per cent. of such income.". 

Amend-
ment of 
Act '1 of 
18M. 
58 
'C. In the Companies -(Profits) Surtax Act, 1964,---
(i) in section 18, the words "and super-tax" shall be 
omitted; 
(ii) in the First Schedule,-
(a) in clause (xii) of rule 1, the words "and super-tax" 5 
shall be omitted; 
(b) in clause (i) of rule 2, the words "and super-tax·', 
where vel" they occur, shall be omitted, and for the word 
"super-tax" occurring in sub-clause (b), the word "income-
tax" shall be substituted; 10 
(iii) in the Third Schedule,-
(a) in Paragraph 1.-
(i) in the first proviso, for the words "of manufat 'me 
or production of anyone Or more of the articles", the 
words "of construction, manufacture or production or IS 
anyone or more of the articles or things" shall be 
substituted; 
(ii) in the second proviso, for the words "of manu-
facture or production of any article", the words "of 
construction, manufacture or production of any article 20 
or thing" shall be substituted; 
(iii) after the second proviso, the following proviso 
shall be in~erted, namely:-
"Provided further that where in the case of an 
Indian company or a company which has made 2S 
the prescribed arrangements for the declaration and 
payment of dividends within India-
(i) which is such a company as is referred 
to in section 108 of the Income-tax Act, and 
(ii) whose paid up share capital (subs- 30 
crib81band paid for in cash) as on the last day 
of the previous year, is not less than twenty-
five per cent. of the amount of the capital as 
computed under the Second Schedule to this 
Act, 35 
the aggregate of-
(a) the amount of income-tax payable by 
the company in respect of its total income of the 
previous year under the provisions of the 
Income-tax Act after making allowance for 40 
any relief, rebate or deduction in respect of 

income-tax to which the com[lany is entitled 
under the provisions of the snid Act or the 
annual Finance Act after deducting from-such 
amount of income-tax the amount, if any, by 
which the rebate of income-tax admissible to 
the company Ullder the provisions of the annual 
Finance Act is, under the provisions of the said 
Act, reduced with reference to the face value of 
any bonus shares or the amount of any bonus 
10 issued by the company to its shareholders 
during the previous year or any previous year 
prior to that year; and 
{b) the amount of surtax computed in 
accordance with the foregoing provisions of this 
15 Paragraph, 
exceeds the amount calculated at seventy per cent. 
of the total income of the company, the amount of 
such excess shan be deducted from the amount of 
surtax referred to in clause (b) above and the 
20 balance shall be the amount of the surtax payable 
by the company."; 
(b)- for Paragraph 2, the following ~aragraph shall be 
substituted, namely:-
'2. The list of articles and thin~s referred to in 
2S Paragraph 1 shan be as follows:-
8S of 19S1. 3S 
40 
(1) Iron and steel (metal), ferro-alloys and 
special steels. 
(2) AlUminium, copper, lead and zinc (metals). 
(3) Coal, lignite, iron ore, bauxite, manganese 
ore, dolomite, limestone, magnesite and mineral oil. 
(4) Industrial machinery ~pecified under the 
(-~heading "8. Industrial machinery", sub-beading "A. 
Major items of speCialised equipment used in specific 
industries", of the First Schedule to the Industries 
(Development and Regulation) Act, 1951. 
(5) Boilers and steam generating plants, steam 
engines and turbines and internal .combustion 
engines. 
(6) Flame and drip proof motors. 
(7) Equipment for the generation and trans-
mission of electricity including transformers, cables 
and transmission towers. 

(8) Machine tools, precision tools (including 
cutting tools and small tools}, dies and jigs. 
(9) Tractors and earth-moving machinery. 
(10) Steel castings and forgings and malleable 
iron and steel castings. S 
(11) Cement and refractories. 
(12) Fertilisers, namely, ammc;mium sulphate, 
ammonium sulphate nitrate (double salt), ammo-
nium nitrate, calcium ammonium nitrate (nitrolime 
stone), ammonium chloride, super phosphate, urea 10 
and complex fertilisers of synthetic origin containing 
both nitrogen and phosphorous, such as ammonium 
phosphates, ammonium sulphate phosphate and 
ammonium nitro phosphate. 
(13) Paper and pulp. IS 
(14) Tea. 
(15) Electronic equipment, namely, radar 
equipment, computers, electronic accounting and 
business machines, electronic communication 
equipment, electronic control instruments and basic 20 
components, such as valves, transistors, resistors, 
condensors, coils, magnetic materials and micro 
wave components. 
(16) Petrochemicals including corresponding 
products manufactured from other basic raw 25 
materials like calcium carbide, ethyl alcohol or 
hydrocarbons from other sources. 
(17) Ships. 
(18) Component parts of the articles mentioned 
in items Nos. (4), (5), (7) and (9), that is to say, 30 
such parts as are essential for the working of the 
machinery referred to in the items aforesaid and have 
beensiven for that purpolie..:.;some special shape or 
quality which would not be" essential for their use 
for any other purpose and are in complete finished 35 
form and ready for fitment.'. 
75. The Indian Tariff Act, 1934 (hereinafter referred to as the 
Tariff Act) shall be amended in the manner specified in the Third 
Schedule. Amend-
ment of 
Act 32 
of 1934. 76. (1) In the case of goods chargeable with a duty of customs 
which is specified in the First Schedule to- the Tariff Act as amended 40 
Surcharge by thi~ Act or any subsequent Act of P.,-liament, or in that Schedule 
~ ~~~. read with any notiftcation of the ('entral Gove~nment for the time 

10 of 1897. 
• 
S2 of 1962. 
being in force, there shall be lMied and collected as an addition to, 
and in the same manner as, the total amount so chargeable, a sum 
equal to 10 per cent. of such amount: 
Provided that in CO~p~ting the total amount so chargeable, any 
S duty chargeable under section 2A of the Tarift Act or section 77 
of this Act shall not be included. 
(2) Sub-section (1) shall cease to have effect after the 31st day 
of March, 1966 except as respects things done or omitted to be done 
before such cesser; and section 6 of the General Clauses Act, 1897 
10 shall apply upon such cesser as if the said sub-section had then been 
repealed by a Central Act. 
77. (1) With a view to regulating, or bringing greater economy in, lteauIatory 
imports there shall be levied and collected, with e1fect from such ~. 
date, and at such rate, as may be specified in this behalf by the Central 
15 Government. by notification in the Oftlclal Gazette, on all or any of 
the goods mentioned in the First Schedule to the Tariff Act as 
amencied by this Act or any subsequent Act of. Parliament, a 
regulatory duty of customs not exceeding-
(4) 25 per cent. of the rate, if any, specified in the 
2{' said First Schedule read with any notification issued under 
section 3A or sub-section (1) of section oi of the Tariff Act; or 
(b) 10 per cent. of the value of the goods as determined 
in accordance with the provisions of section 14 of the Customs 
Act, 1962, 
2S whichever is higher: 
Provided that different dates and different rates may be specified 
by the Central Government for different kinds of goods. 
(2) Sub-section (1) shall cease to have effect after the 15th day 
of May, 1966 except as respects things done or omitted to be done 
10 of 1897. 30 before such cesser; and section, ~ of the General Clauses Act, 1897 
shall apply upon such cesser as Ii the said sub-section had then been 
repealed by a Central Act. 
(3) The regulatory duty of customs leviable under this section 
in respect of any goods referred to in sub-section (1) shall be in 
addition to any other duty of customs chargeable on such goods under 
35 S2 of 1.62. the Customs Act, 1962. 
S2 of 1962. (4) The provisions of the Customs Act, 1962 and the rules and 
regulations made thereunder, including those relating to refunds and 
exemptions from duties, shall, as far as may be, apply in relation to 
40 the levy and collectinn of the regulatory duty of customs leviable 

Amend-
ment of 
Act 1·of 
1949. 
Amend-
ment of 
Act 1 of 
1944. 
under this section in respect *' any goods as they apply in relation 
to the levy and collection of the duties of customs on such goods 
under that .Act or those rules and regu!atiol'lS. 
(5) EVf!!rY notiftcation issued under sub-section (1) shaU, as soon 
as may be after it is issued, be placed before each House of Parliament. 
(6) All regulatory duties of customs levied under sub-section (1) 5 
of section 58 of the Finance Act, 1964, shall, subject to any no tift- 5 of 1814. 
cation issued under section 25 of the Customa Act, 1962 read with 52 ef 1862. 
sub-aection (4) of the said section 58, continue to have effect UDtil 
the other provisions of this section come into force. 
78. In the Indian Tariff (Amendment) Act, 1949, in sections 4 and 5, 10 
fJJr the figures "1965", the figures "1966" shall be substituted. 
71. In the Central Excises and Salt Act, 1944 (hereinafter referred 
to as the Central Excises Act), in the First Schedule,-
(a) in Item No.4, under "II. Manu.factured tobacco-", for 
sub-item (2), the following sub-item shall be substituted, 'S 
namely:-
"(2) Cigarettes .. One hundred per cent. ad valorem."; 
(b) in Item No. 26, for the entry in the third column, the 
entry "Sixty rupees per m&tric tonne." shall be substituted; 
(c) in Item No. 26A, for the entries in the third column 20 
against sub-items (1) and (Z), the entries "One thousand rupees 
per metric tonne.'~ and "One thousand and five hundred rupees 
per metric tonne." shall, respectively, be substituted; 
(d) in Item No. 26AA,-
(i) for the entry in the third column against each of 2S 
t.he sub-items (i) and (ia), the entry "Forty-five rupees per 
metric tonne plus the excise duty for the time being leviable 
on steel ingots." shall be substituted; 
(ii) for sub-ite~(ii) and (iii), the following sub-items 
shall be substituted, namely: - 30 
" (ii) Plates and sheets (including un-
coated plates and sheets intend-
. ed fOl' t;inn"laand forms 8uch 
as l'ldges, c nnels, ram water 
pipes and their fittmgs ma~e 
from plates or sheets, but not 
including plates and sheets after 
tinning), and hoops, ~ sorts, 
other than akelp and stnps. 
(iii) Skelp and strips 
Three . hundred rupees per 
metrIc tonne plus the 
excise duty for the time 
being leviable OD ateel 
ingots. 35 
Three hundred rupees per 40 
metric tonne plus the 
• 

s 
10 
20 
(,) in Item No. 27,-
(i) for the entry in the second 
a>lumn against sub-item (b), 
the entry "Manufactures, the 
f011o~, namely, plates, 
sheets, circles and strips in any 
form. or size, Dot otherwise speci-
fied." shall be substituted ; 
(ii) for the entry in the second 
column against sub-item (c), 
the entry "Pipes and tubes, 
other than extruded pipes and 
tubes." shall be substituted ; 
excise duty for me time 
being leviable on steel 
ingots." ; 
(iii) after sub-item (c), the following 
sub-item shall be inserted, 
namely:-
"(d) Extruded shapes and Ten per cent. ad valor_" ; 
sections including extru-
ded pipes and tubes. 
(f) in Item No. 28, for the entry in the third column, the 
entry "Three hundred and seventy-five rupees per metric tonne.;' 
25 shall be substituted. 
88. (1) When goods of~he description mentioned in this section Special 
chargeable with a duty of excise under the' Central Excises Act (as :;.%e~ 
amended by this Act or any subsequent Act of Parliament) read ~ 
with any notification for the time being in force issued by the Cen· g 
30 tral Government in relation to the duty so chargeable, are assessed 
to duty, there shall be levied and col1ected-
3S 
(a) as respects goods comprised in Items Nos. 6, 8, 9, 14D, 
22A, 23A except sub-item (1) thereof., 23B, 28, 29, sub-items (2) 
and (3) of Item No. 31 and Item No. 32 of the First Schedule to 
the Central Excises Act, a special duty of excise equal to 10 per 
.. cent. of the total a~unt so chargeable on such goods; 
(b) as respects goods comprised in Items Nos. 2, 3(1), sub-
items I, II(2) and II(3) of Item No.4, Items Nos. 13, 14, 14F, 
15. 15A, 15B, 16, 16A, 17, 18A(2), 21, 22, 23, 23A(I), TI, 30, 
31(1), 33, sub-items .(1), (3a) and (4) of Item No. 34 and Item 
No. 37 of that Schedule, a special duty of excise equal to 20 per' 
cent. of the total amount so chargeable on such goods; and 
(c) as respects goods' comprised in Items Nos. 41I(1), 18, 
18A(1), 18B, 20, 29A, 33A, sub-items (2) and (3) of Item No. 34 
and radiograms comprised in Item No. 37A of that Schedule, a 
special duty of excise equal to 33i per cent. of the total amount 
so chargeable on such goods. ' 

Be,wa-
tory duty 
of exciae. 
82 
(2) Sub-section \1) shall cease to have effect after the 31st day 
of March, 1966, except as respects things done or omitted to be done 
before such cesser; and section 6 of the General Clauses Act, 1897 
shall apply upon such cesser as if the said sub-section had then been 
repealed by a Central Act. S 
(3) The duties of excise referred to in sub-section (1) in respect 
of the goods specified therein shall be in addition to the duties of 
excise chargeable On such goods under the Central Excises Act or 
any other law for the time being in force and such special duties 
shall be' levied for purposes of the Union and the proceeds thereof 10 
shall not be distributed among the States. 
(4) The provisions ot the Central Excises Act and the rules made 
thereunder, includirlg those relating to refunds and exemptions 
from duties, shall, as far as may be, apply in relation to the levy and 
collection of the duty of excise leviable under this section in respect IS 
of any goods as they apply in relation to· the levy and collection of 
the duties of excise on such goods under that Act or those rules. 
II. (1) With a view to regulating or bringing greater economy 
in consumption, there shall be levied and collected, with effect from 
such date, and at such rate, as may be specified in this behalf by the 20 
Central Government by IlQtification in the Offici!JI Gazette, on all or 
any of the goods mentioned if.!. the First Schedule to the Central 
Excises Act as amended by this Act or any subsequent Act of Par-
liament, a regulatory duty of excise which shall not exceed 15 per 
cent. of the value of the goods as determined in accordance with the 2S 
provisions of section 4 of the Central Excises Act: 
Provided that different dates and differerlt rates may be speci-
fied by the Central Government for different kinds of goods. 
(2) Sub-section (1) shall cease to have effect after the 15th day 
of May, 1966, except as respects things done or omitted to be done 30 
, 
10 of 1897. 
before such cesser; and .. section 6 of the Genw l Clauses Act, 1897 10 of 1897. 
shall apply upon such cesser as if the said sub-section had then 
been repe'aled by a Central Act. 
(3) The duties of excise referred to in sub-section (1) in respect 
of the goods specified therein shall be in addition to the duties of 35 
'excise chargeable on such goods under the Central Excises Act or 
any other law for the time being in force and such regulatory duties 
shall be levied for purposes of the Union and the proceeds thereof 
shall not be distributed among the States. 
(4) The provisions of the Central Excises Act and the rules made 40 
thereunder, including those relating to refunds and exemptions 
from duties, shall, as far as may be, apply in relation to the levy and 

83 
collection of the regulatory duty of excise le\liable under this sec-
tion in respect of any goods as they apply in relation to the levy 
and collection of the duties of excise on such goods under that Act 
or those rules . 
I -, 
. : S (5) Every notification issued under sub-section (1) shall, as soon 
\ 
as may be after it is issued, be placed before each House of Parlia-
ment. 
(6) All regulatory duties of excise levied under sub-section (1) 
" of 11M. of section 62 of the Finance Act, 1964, shall, subject to any rAotmca-
r 
I 
I 
I 
~--\ 
16 of 1931. 
10 tion issued under rule 8 of the Central Excise Rules, 1944, read with 
sub-section (4) of the said section, continue to. have effect until the 
other provisions of this section come into force. 
82. For the year beginning on the 1st day of April, 1965, no duty Disconti-
nuance of under the Central Excises Act, or the Tariff Act shall be levied in salt duty. 
IS respect of salt manufactured in, or imported into, India. 
83. In the First Schedule to the Additional Duties of Excise 
(Goods of Special Importance) Act, 1957, in Item No.4, under "II. 
Manufactured tobacco", for sub-item (2), the followir,g sub-item 
shall be· substituted, namely:-
20 "(2) Cigarettes Twenty-five per cent. ad valorem". 
~ 
Declaration under the Provisional Collection of TClZes Act, 1931 
It is hereby declared that it is expedient in the public interest 
that the provisions of clauses 75, 76, 77 (6), 78, 79, 80, 81 (6) and 83 
of this Bill shall have immediate e1!ect under the Provisional 
2S Collection of Taxes Act, 1931. 
Amend-
ment of 
Act 58 of 
1957. 

(See section 2) 
PART I 
Income-tax and surcharge on income-tax 
Po.!,o.gro.ph A 
In the case of every individual or Hindu undivided family or 
unregistered firm or other association of persons or body of indivi-
duals, whether incorporated or not, or every artificial juridical 
person referred to in sub-clause (vii) of clause (31) of section 2 
of the Income-tax Act, not being a case to which any other Paragraph 10 
of this Part applies-
Rates of income-tax 
(r) where the total income does not 5 per cent. of the total. inmme. 
exceed Rs. 5,000 
(2) where the total income exceeds Rs. 250 pM 10 per cent. of IS 
Rs. 5,000 but does not exceed the amount by which the total 
Rs. 10,000 income exceeds Rs. 5,000. 
(3) where the total income exceeds Ra. '150 plus 15 per a:Dt. of 
r s. 10,000 but does not exceed the amount by which the total 
Rs. 15,000 income exceed. Ra. 10,000. 20 
(4) where the total income exceeds Rs. I,SCO plus 20 per cent. of 
RI. 15,000 but does not exceed the amount by which the total 
Ra. 20,000 inaxne exceeds Ra. 15,000. 
(5) where the total income exceeds Ra. 2,500 plus 30 per cent. of 
Ra. 20,000 but does not exceed the amount by which the total 25 
Ra. 25,000 income exceeds RI. 20,000. 
(6) where the total income 
Ra. 25,00<1 but does not 
Rs. 30 ,000 
exceeds Ra. 4,000 plus 40 per cent. of 
exc8:'lf the amount by which the total 
income exceeds Ra. 25,000. 
(7) where the total income exceeds Rs. 6,000 plus 50 per cent. of 30 
Rs. 30,000 but does not exceed the amount by which the total 
Rs. so,ooo income exceeds Ra. 30,000. 
(8) where the total income 
Rs. so,ooo but does not 
Rs. 70,000 
exceeds Ra. 16,000 plus 60 per cent. of 
exceed the amount hy which the total 
income exceeds RI. 50 ,000. 35 
(9) where the total income excaeds RS.28,000 plus 6S per cent. of 
Rs. 70,000 the amoLlIlt by which the total 
incOI:le ~xceed8 Rs. 70,000: 
64 

Provided that for t4e purposes of this Paragraph, in the case ot 
• person, not being a nen-resident-
(i) no income-tax shall be payable on a total income .~~t 
exceeding the following limit, namely:-
5 (a) Rs. 6,000 in the case of every Hindu undivided 
10 
IS 
20 
25 
family which as at the end of the previous year satisfies 
either of the following two conditions, namely:-
(i) that it has at least two members entitled to 
claim partition who are not less than eighteen years of 
age; or 
(ii) that it has at least two members entitled to 
claim partition who are not lineally descended one from 
the other and who are not lineally descended from any 
other living member of the family; 
(b) Rs. 3,000 in every other case; 
(ii) in the case of an individual or a Hindu undivided family, 
the income-tax computed at the rate hereinbefore specified shall 
De reduced by so much of the amount specified hereunder, as does 
not t:xceed the amount of income-tax so computed:-
(a) Rs. 100 in the case of an unmarried individual; 
(b) Rs. 175 i!\ the case of a married individual who has 
no child wholly or mainly dependent on 
him or a Hindu undivided family which has 
no minor coparcener; 
(c) Rs. 195 in the case of a married individual who has 
one child wholly or mainly dependent on 
him or a Hindu undivided family which has 
one minor coparcener wholly or mainly 
supported from the income of such family; 
30 (d) Rs. 215 in the case of a married individual who has 
",:lPore than one child wholly or mainly 
dependent on him or a Hindu undivided 
family which has more than one minor 
coparcener wholly or mainly supported from 
35 the income of such family; 
(iii) where the total income is twenty thousand rupees or 
less, the income-tax payable shall not exceed forty per cent. of the 
amount by which the total income exceeds the limit specified 
in sub-clause (a) or, as the case may be, sub-clause (b) of clause 
40 (i) of this proviso. 
22~ (B) LS-9 

~1 _N SUTcMTge em iracome-tcaz 
The amount of income-tax computed in accordance with the 
preced41g provisions of this Paragraph shall be increased by. a 
surcharge for purposes of the Unton, which shan be equal to the 
aggregate of the sums computed as hereunqer: - S 
(4) where-
(i) in the case of an individual or a Hindu undivided 
family, the amount of unearned income, not being income 
by way of interest on any security of the Central or State 
Government, included in the total income, or 10 
(ii) in any other case, the amount of unearned income 
included in the total income 
exceeds Rs. 15,000, 
a sum calculated on the difference between the amount of income-tax 
computed in respect of the income referred to in sub-clause (i) or, 15 
~ the case may be, su1H:lause (ii) , if such income had been the 
total income and the amount of income-tax computed in respect of 
an income of Rs. 15,000 if it had been the total income, at the 
following rate, namely:-
(I) where the amount of the difference 20 per cent. of the amount of 20 
does not exceed Its. 14,500, r such difference . ... .-
I~) where the amount of the difference Rs. 2,900 plus 25 per cent. of the 
exceeds RI. 14,500 amount by which the difference 
aforesaid exceeds RI. 14,500. 
(b) where---
(i) in the case of an individual or a Hindu undivided 
family, the earned income and income by way of interest 
on any security of the Central or State Government included 
in the total income, or 
(ii) in any other case, the earned income included in the 30 
total inc3me 
exceeds Rs. 1 lakh, 
a sum calculated on the amount of the difference between the income-
tax computed in respect of the income referred to in sub-clause (i) 
or, as the case may be, .sub-clause (ii) , if such income had been the 3S 
total incQme and the income-tax ,computed in respect of a total 
income of Rs. 1 lakh, at the following ra~e, namely:-
. 
(I) where the amount of the difference 
.does not exceed Rs. 65,000 
5 per cent. of the amount of such 
difference. 

715 
(2) where the amount of the differeoce Rs. 3.a,0 piau 10 per ceDt. of the 
aceeds RI. 65;G111O but doee DOt exceed amount by wh1c:h the ctifl'tieDCC 
Rs. 1,30,000 aforesaid exceeds Ra. 65,000. 
(3) where the amount of the 
S exceeds RI. 1,30,000 
dift'~ _ Rs. 9.150 Ilw IS per cent. of the 
amount .by whic:h the differ-
ence aforesaid exceeds 
RI. 1.30.000. 
Para.grtlph B 
In the case of every association of persons being a co-operative 
10 society lIS defined in clause (19) of section 2 of the Income-tax Act,-
Rtltes of income-ttJ.% 
(I) where the totaQincome does DOt exceed , per cent. of the total income. 
IU. 5,000 
(2) where the total income exceeds Rs. 250 plw 10 per cent. of the 
15 Rs. 5,000 but does not 
Rs. 10,000 
exceed amount by which the total 
income exceeds RI. "oco. 
(3) where the total income 
Rs. 10,000 but does not 
Rs. 15,000 
exceeds Its. 750 plus IS per cent. of the 
exceed amount by which the total 
income exceeds Ra. 10,000. 
20 C-4) where the total income 
Rs. 15,000 but does not 
Rs. 20,000 
exceeds Rs. 1,500 plus 20 per cent. 
exceed of the amount by which the 
total income c:xceeds Ra. I~OOO. 
(5) where the total..i.i income exceeds Rs. 2,500 plus 25 per cent. of 
Rs. 20,000 but does not exceed the amount by which the 
25 Rs. 25,000 total income excecda Rs. 20,000. 
30 
(6) where the 
Rs. 2S,''VlO 
total income exceeds Rs. 3,750 plus 41 per cent. 
of the amowu by which the 
total income excacls 
Ra. 25,000. 
Surcharge on income-ta.% 
Where the total income exceeds Rs. 25,000, the amount of income-
tax on such total income computed at the rates hereinbefore specifted 
shall be increased by a surcharge for purposes of the. Union of Ii 
per cent. of the'':'atnount of the difference between the income-tax 
35 so computed and the income-tax computed in respect of a total 
income of Rs. 25,000. 
Paragraph C 
-In the case of every registered ftrm,-
Rates of income-tax 
40 (I) where the total income does not exceed 
Rs. 2S,000 
NiL 

• 
(2) where the total income 
Ra. 25,000 but does not 
Ra. 50,000 
exceeds 6 ~._ cent. of the amount 
exceed by "'which the total income 
exceeds RI. 25,000. 
(3) where the total income exceed& 
RI. 50,000 but does not exceed 
Its. 1,00,000 
Rs. 1,500 plus 8 per cent. of the 5 
amount by which the total 
income exceeds Rs. SO,ooo. 
(~) where the total income exceeds 
lla. 1.00,000 
I 
Rs. 5,500 plus u per cent. of 
the amount by which the total 
income exceeds Rs. 1,00,000. 
Surcharge on income-tax 10 
The amount of income-tax computed at the rates hereinbefore 
specified shan be increased by a surcharge for purposes of the Union 
of twenty per cent. of the amount of income-tax: 
Provided that in the case of a registered firm whose total income 
includes income derived from a profession carried on by it and the 15 
income so included is not less than fUtY-One per cent. of such total 
income, the amount of surcharge for purposes of the Union computed 
at the rate hereinbefore specified shall be reduced by one-half of such 
amount. 
Paragraph D 
IR the case of every local authority,-
Rate of income-tax 
On the whole of the total income 
Surcharge on income-tax 
45 per cent. 
The amount of income-tax computed at the rate herein- 25 
"before specified shall be increased by a surcharge for purposes 
of the Union of ten per cent. of the amount of income-tax. 
Paragraph E 
In the case of the Life Insurance Corporation of India establish-
ed under the Life Insurance Corporation Act, 1956,- 30 31 of 1158-
• . .Rate of income-tu": 
On the whC'le of its profits and gains 
from life insurance business 
Paragraph F 
47'5 per cent. 
ID the case of every company, other than the Life Insurance Cor- 3S 
poration of India established under the Life Insurance Corporation 
Act, 1156,- 31 of 11M. 
Kate of income-tax 
On the whole of the total income 10 per cent.: 

10 
15 
20 
35 
Provided that a rebate shall be allowed in the case of sucia 
companies on such- 'income at the rate or rates specUled here-
under:-
I. In the case of a company 
which-
(a) in respect ofits income 
liable to income-tax 
under the Income-tax 
Act for the assessment 
year commencing on 
the 1st day of April, 
1965, has made the 
prescribed arrange-
ments for the declara-
tion and payment 
within India of the 
dividends payable out 
of such income in 
accordance with the 
provisions of section 
194 of that Act; and 
(b) is slich a company as ia 
referred to in section 
roS of the Income-tax 
Act,-
Income on which 
rebate is to be 
allowed 
Rate of 
rebate 
(i) where the total on the whole of the total 
income does not income 37 0 5 per cenL 
exceed Rio 25,000 
(ii) where the total 
income excelds 
Rio 25,000 
(a) on so much of the 
total income as consists 
of profits and gains at-
tributable to the busi-
ness of generation or 
distribution of elec-
tricity or of construc-
tion, manufacture or 
production of anyone 
or more of the articles 
or things specified in 
the list in Part III of 
this Schedule 0 3S per cent. 

II. In the case of a company 
wbich-
(a) satisfies condition (a) 
ef item I hereinabove, 
and 
(b) is not such a company 
81 is referred to in 
eection 108 of the 
Income-tax Act,-
(i) in the case of a 
company which is 
wholly or mainly 
engaged in the busi-
ness of generation 
or distribution of 
electricity or any 
other form of power 
or in the construC-
tion of ships or in 
the manuiacture or 
processing of goods 
or in mining 
Income on which 
rebate is to be 
allowed 
(.) OIl the balance of the 
Rate",:of 
rebate 
total income 30 per cent. 5 
(a) on 10 much of the 
total income as 
consists of profits and 
gains attributable to the 
business of generation 
or distributi0n of elec-
tricity or of construc-
tion, manufacture or 
production of anyone 
or more of the 
articles or things speci-
fied in the list in Part 
III of this Schedule-
10 
15 
20 
(i) on so much of the 
profits and gains 
aforesaid as do not 
exceed Rs. 10 lakhs 35 per cent. 30 
(ii) on the balance of 
the profits and 
gains aforesaid . 26 per cent. 
(b) on any income other 
than the profits and 
~ referred to' in 
(a) hereinabove-
35 
(i) on so much of such 
income as, together 40 
with the profits 
and pins referred 
to in (a) herein-
above, does not 
exceed Rs. 10 lakhs 30 per cent. 45 
(ii) on the balance of 
such income . 20 per cent.. 
~.----.--------------------------------------------~ 

5 
10 
IS 
20 
35 
45 
(ii) in any other case 
III. In the case of a company 
which in respect of its 
income liable to income-
tax under the Income-tax 
Act for the assessment 
year commencing on the 
1st da,. of April, 1965, 
has not made the pres-
cribed arrangements for 
the d~tion and pay-
ment within India of the 
dividends payable out of 
such income in accord-
ance with the pro-
visions of section 194 of 
that Act 
71 
Income on which 
rebate is to be 
allowed 
(a) on 10 much of the total 
income as consists of 
profits and gains attti-
bu~b~ to ~ buane. 
of aeneration or dis-
tribution of electricity 
or of construction, 
manufacture or pro-
duction of anyone or 
more of -the articles or 
thin specified in the 
list f: Part III of this 
Rate of 
rebate 
Schedule 26 per cent. 
( b) on the balance of the 
total income 20 per cent. 
(a) on so much of the total 
income as consists of 
royalties received from 
an Indian concern in 
pursuance of an agree-
ment made. by it with 
the Indian concern on 
or after the 1st day of 
April, 1961 and which 
has been approved by 
the Central Oovernment 
(b) on so much of the total 
income as consists of 
fees for rendering tech-
nical services received 
from an Indian concern 
in pursuance of an 
agreement made by it 
with the Indian con-
cern after the 29th day 
of February, 1964 and 
which has been approv-
ed by the Central 
30 per cent. 
Government. 30 per cent. 
(c) on the balance of the 
total income IS per cent.: 

72 
Provided further that-
(i) the amount of rebate arrived at under the preceding 
proviso in the case of a company referred to in item I or item 
. II of that proviso shall be reduced by the sum, if any, equal to 
the amount or the aggregate of the amounts, as the case may S 
be, computed as hereunder:-
at the rate of 100 per 
cent. 
(a) on the aggregate of the sums computed in 
the manner provided in clause (i) of the second 
proviso to Paragraph D of Part II of the 
First Schedule to the Finance Act, 1964 
as reduced by the amount, if any, which 
is deemed to have been taken into account, 
in accordance with clause (n) of the said 
proviso, for the purpose of reducing the rebate 
mentioned in clause (i) of the said proviso to 
nil; 
)0 5.11964. 
(b) on the amount representing the face value of 
any bonus shares or the amount of any bonus 
issued to its shareholders during the previous 
year with a view to increasing the paid-up 
capital except where such bonus shares or 
bonus have been issued wholly out E>f the 
share premium account of the company after 
the 31st day of March, 1964 ; 
and 
(c) in addition, in the case of-
(i) a company as is referred to in section loS 
of the Income-tax Act, or 
(ii) a company as is referred to in clause (iii) 
of sub-section (2) or sub-section (4) of 
section 104 of the said Act, or 
(iii) such a company as is exempt from 
the operation of section 104 of the 
said Act by a notification issued under 
the provisions of sub-section (3) of that 
section, 
which has declared or distributed to its share-
holders during the previous year any dividends 
other than dividends on preference shares-
(A) in the case of a company which since the date 
of the commencement of its activities has 
declared or distributed any dividends for 
the first time during the previous year or any 
one of the foUr previous years immediately 
preceding such previous year-' 
at the rate of 12· S 
per cent. 
on that part of the dividends other than divi- at the rate of 7·5 per 
dends on preference shares which exceeds ten cent. 
per cent. of the paid-up equity capital 
IS 
20 
30 
3S 
.. 

73 
(B) in any other case-
on the whole amount of the dividends other 
than dividends on preference shares 
at the rate of 7 . S per 
cent. ; 
(ii) where the sum arrived at in accordance with clause (i) 
S of this proviso exceeds the amount of the rebate arrived at 
under the preceding proviso, only so much of the amounts of 
reduction mentioned in sub-clauses (4), (b) and (c) of clause 
(i) of this proviso as is sufficient, in that order, to reduce the 
rebate to nil shall be deemed to have been taken into account 
10 for the purpose: 
Provided further that the income-tax payable by a company, as 
is referred to in section 108 of the Income-tax Act, and the total 
income of which exceeds Rs. 25,000, shall not exceed the aggregate 
of-
IS (a) the income-tax which would have been payable by the 
company if its total income had been Rs. 25,000 (the income of 
Rs. 25,000 for this purpose being computed as if such income 
included income from various sources in the same proportion as 
the total income of the company); and 
20 (b) eighty per cent. of the amount by which its total income 
elKceeds Rs. 25,000. 
Explanation I.-For the purposes of this Paragraph, a company 
shall be deemed to be mainly engaged in the business of generation 
or distribution of electricity or any other form of power or in the 
25 construction of ships or in the manufacture or processing of goods 
or in mining, if the income attributable to any of the aforesaid acti-
vities included in its total income for the previous year is not less 
than fifty-one per cent. of such total income. 
ExpZanation 2.-For the purposes of this Paragraph, where a part 
30 of the income of a company is not included in its total income 
becaUse it is agricultural income, the amount declared or distributed 
as dividends (other than dividends on preference shares), the 
amount representing the face value of any bonus shares and the 
amount of any bonus issued to its shareholders shall each be deemed 
35 to be such proportion thereof as the sum specified in clause (a) bears 
to the sum specified in clause (b), such sums being-
(a) the average amount of the total income of the company 
in the five previous years in which it has been in receipt of tax-
able income immediately preceding the relevant previous year; 
~o and 

.,. 
(b) the average amount of the total profits and gains (ex-
cluding capital receipts) of the company for the five previous 
years referred to in clause (CI) reduced by such allowances as 
may be admissible under the Income-tax Act but which have 
Dot been taken into account by the company in its profit and 5 
loss accounts for the said five previous yea~s. 
Ezplanaticm 3.-For the purpose of sub-clause (b) of clause (i) 
of the aecond proviso, "share pre~um account" means an account 
ferming a separate and identifiable part of the reserves of a company 
to which has been transferred. a sum equal to the aggregate amount 10 
or value of the premiums on shares issued by the company. 
EzplClnation 4.-For the removal of doubts it is hereby declared 
that where any dividends were declared by the company before the 
commencement of the previous year and are distributed by it during 
that year, no reduction in the rebate shall be made under sub-clause 15 
(c) of clause (i) of the second proviso in respect of such dividends. 
PART II 
Rates fOT deduction of tax at SOUTce in certain cases 
In every case in which under the provisions of sections 193 to 195 _. 
of the Income-tax Act, tax is to be deducted at the mte8 in force, 20 
deduction shall be made from the income subject to deduction, at the 
following rates:-
Income-tax 
I. In the case of a person other than a 
company-
(a) where the person is resident-
Rate of 
income-tax 
on the whole income (excluding 18 per cent. 
interest payable on any security 
of the Central Government 
issued or declared to be income-
tax free, and interest payable on 
any security of a State Govern-
ment issued income-tax free, the 
income-tax whereon is payable 
by the State Government) ; 
Rate of 
surcharge 
2 per cent. 
25 
35 

'II 
(6) where the person is not resident 
S in India-
10 
15 
(i) on the whole income (excluding 
interest payable on any security 
of the Central Government 
issued or declared to be iname-
tax free, and int~t payable 
on any secunty of a 
State Government issued in-
oome-tax free, the inoome-tax 
whereon is payable by the State 
Government) ; 
Income-tax 
Rate of 
income-tax 
Rate of 
surcharae 
Income-tax at 2S per cent. and 
surcharge at S per cent. of the 
amount of the inoome 
or 
income-tax and surcharge OD 
income-tax in respect of the 
income at the rates prescribed 
in Paragraph A of Pan I of 
this Schedule, if such 
income had been the total 
income, 
(whichever is higher. 
20 (ii) on the income from interest 12·5 per cent. 2·5 per cent. 
payable on any security of the 
Central Government issued or 
declared to be income-tax free, 
and interest payable on any 
25 security of a State Government 
issued income-tax free, the 
income-tax whereon is payable 
by the State Government 
2. In the case of a company-
30 (a) where the company is either an 
Indian company or a company 
which has made the prescribed 
arrangements for the declaration 
and paymenf of dividends within 
35 India,- ' 
on the whole income (excluding 
interest payable on any security 
of the Central Government 
issued or declared to be income-
tax free, and interest payable on 
any security of a State Govern-
ment issued income-tax free, the 
income-tax whereon is payable 
by the State Government) ; 20 per cent. Nil. " 

78 
(b) where the company is neither an 
Indian company nor a company 
which has made the prescribed 
arrangements for the declaration 
and payment of dividends within 
India,-
(i) on the income from dividends 
payable by an Indian com-
pany which is not such a 
company as is referred to in 
section 108 of the Income-tax 
Act and which is wholly or 
mainly engaged in the busi-
ness cjf generation or distri-
bution of electricity or of 
construction, manufacture or 
production of anyone or more 
of the articles or things spe-
cified in the list in Part III 
Income-tax 
Rate of 
income-tax 
of this Schedule ; 15 per cent. 
(ii) on the income from dividends 
payable by any other Indian 
company or any 'compaliy 
which has made the prescribed 
arrangements for the declara .. 
tion and payment of dividends 
within India; 25 per cent. 
(iii): on the income from royalties 
payable by an Indian concern 
in pursuance of an agreement 
which is made by it with the 
Indian concern on or after 
the 1St day of April, 
1961, and which has been 
appt'Ovcd by the Central.: 
Government ; 50 per cent. 
(iv) on the income from fees for 
rendering technical services 
received from an Indian con-
cern in pursuance of an agree-
ment made by it with the 
Indian concern after the 29th 
day of February, 1964 and 
which has been approved1ty 
the Central Government ; 50 per cent. 
Rate of 
surclwJe 
Nil. 
NiL 
Nil. 
Nil. 
5 
10 
15 
20 
30 
35 
45 

S 
10 
IS 
77 
Income-tax 
Rate of 
income-tax 
Rate of 
surcharge 
( 'V) on the income from interest 
payable on any security of the 
Centtal Government issued or 
declared to be income-tax 
free, and interest payable on 
any security of a State Gov-
ernment issued income-tax 
free, the income-tax whereon 
is payable by the State 
Government ; and • -40 per cent. 
('Vi) on any other income . 6S per cent. 
PART III 
List of articles and things 
(1) Iron and steel (metal), ferro-alloys and special steels. 
(2) Aluminium, copper, lead and zinc (metals). 
'NiL 
Nil. 
(3) Coal, lignite, iron ore, bau'xite, manganese ore, dolomite, lime-
20 stone, magnesite and mineral oil. 
(4) Industrial machinery specified under the heading "8. Indus-
trial machinery", sub-heading IIA. Major items of specialised 
eqUipment used in specific industries", of the First Schedule to 
IS of 1.51. the Industries (Development and Regulation) Act, 1951. 
25 (5) Boilers and steam generating plants, steam engines and tur-
bines and internal combustion engines. 
(6) Flame and drip proof motors. 
-. 
(7) Equipment for the generation and transmission of electricity 
including transformers, cables and transmission towers. 
30 (8) Machine tools, precision tools (including cutting tools and 
small tools), dies and jigs. 
(9) Tractors and earth-moving machinery. 
(10) Steel castings and forgings and malleable iron and steel 
castings. 
9S (11) Cement and refractories. 

'II 
(12) Fertilisers, namely, ammomum_aulphate, ammonium sulphate 
nitrate (double salt), ammonium nitrate, calcium ammonium 
nitrate (nitroline stone), ammonium chloride, super phos-
phate, urea and complex fertilisers of synthetic origin contain-
ing both nitrogen and phosphorus, such as ammonium ph08- S 
phates, ammonium sulphate phosphate and ammonium nitro 
phosphate. 
(13) Paper and pulp. 
(14) Tea. 
(15) Electronic equipment, namely, radar eqUipment, computers, 10 
electronic accounting and business machines, electronic com-
munication equipment, electronic control instruments and 
basic components, such as valves, tranaistors, resistors, conden-
sors, coils, magnetic materials and micro wave components. 
(16) Petrochemicals including corresponding products manufac- IS 
tured from other basic raw materials like calcium carbide, 
ethyl alcohol or hydrocarbons from other sources. 
(17) Ships. 
(13) Component parts of the articles mentioned in items Nos. (4), 
(5), (7) and (9), that is to say. such parts as are essential for 20 
the working of the machinery referred to in the items aforesaid 
and have been given for that pwpose some special shape or 
quality which would not be essential for their use for any other 
purpose and are in complete finished form and ready for 
fttment. 25 
THE SECOND SCHEDULE 
(See section 3) 
Rates of Annuity Deposits 
(i) In the case of any depositor whose total income does not 
exceed Rs. 15,000 Nil. 30 
(ii) In the caSe of any depositor whose total income exceeds 
Rs. 15,000 but does not exceed Rs. 20,000-
5 per cent. of the adjusted total income: 
Provided that the annuity deposit to be made shall in· no case 
exceed half the amount by which the total income exceeds Rs. 15,000. 3S 
(iii) In the c:ue of a depositor whose total income exceeds 
Rs. 20,000 but does not exceed Rs. 40,000-
76 per cent. of the adjusted total income: 

5 
110 
Provided that the annuity deposit to be made aball in no cue 
exceed the aggregate of the followine luma, nuaeb':-
(4) an amount calculated at five per cent. on so much of the 
adj usted total income .as does not exceed Rs. 20,000; 
(b) one-half Qf the amount by which the total income 
exceeds RI. 20,000. 
(iv) In the case of a depositor whose total income exceeds 
Rs .. 40,000 but does not exceed Rs. 70,000-
10 per cent. of the adjusted total income: 
10 Provided that the annuity deposit to be made ahall in no case 
IS 
exceed the aggregate of the following sums, namely:-
(4) an amount calculated at sev~ and a half per cent. on 
so much of the adjusted total income as does not exceed 
Rs.4O,000; 
(b) one-half of the amount by which the total income exceeds 
Rs.40,000. 
(v) In the case of a depositor whose total income exceeds 
Rs. 70,000-
12. per cent. of the adjusted total income: 
20 Provided that the annuity deposit to be, made shall in no case 
25 
35 
exceed the aggregate of th~ following sums, namely:-
(a) an amount calculated at ten per cent. on so much of 
the adjusted total income as dews not exceed Rs. 70,000; 
(b) one-half of the amount by which the total income 
exceeds Rs. 70,000. 
Explanation.-In this Schedule, "total income" means total in-
come computed in the manner laid down in the Income-tax Act 
without making any allowance under section 2800 of that Act. 
THE THIRD SCHEDULE 
(S ee section 75) 
PART I 
In the Fi.rst Schedule to the T.a.ri1f Act,-
(i) in Item No. 30, for the figures "60" and "50" in the fourth 
and fifth columns, the figures al75" and "65" shall, respectively, 
be substituted; 
(ii) in Items Nos. 31, 31 (2). 31 (3) and 31 (5), for the entry 
against each of them in the fourth column. the entry "100 per 
cent. ad valorem" shall be substituted; 
(iii) in Item No. 31 (1), for the figures "75" and "65" in the 
fourth and sixth columns, the figures "100" and u90" shall, 
respectively, be substituted; 

It\ 
Item 
Ne. 
I 
10 
(iv) in Item No. 44, for the figures u50" in the fourth colwnn, 
the figures "75" shall be substituted; 
(v) in .I_t~m No. 46 (3), for the figures "26" in the fourth 
column, the figures "50" shall be substituted; 
(vi) in Item No. 47 (2), for the entry in the fourth column, 5 
the entry "Rs. 10·25 per kilogram or 75 per cent. ad valorem, 
whichever is higher" shall be substituted; 
(vii) in Item No. 63 (10) ,-
(I) for the entry in the fourth column against sub-item 
(i), the entry "Rs. 305·00 per tonne" shall be substituted; 10 
(2) for the entry in the fourth column against sub-item 
(ii). the entry "Rs. 325'00 per tonne" shall be substituted; 
and 
(viii) in Item No. 63 (20A) , for the figures "30" in the fourth 
column, the figures "100" shall be substituted. I5 
PART II 
Name of Nature Standard Preferential rate of Duration 
article of rate of dU:h if the article of pro-
duty duty is e produce or tective 
manufacture of rates of 20 
.... duty 
The A 
United British 
Kingdom Colony 
3 .. S 6 7 25 
In the First Schedule to the Tariff Act, in SECTION VI, after Item 
No. 28A, the following Item shall be inserted. namely:-
"28B Sodium Prefe- looper 90 per 90 per " . . . 
hydrosul- rential cent. cent. cent. 
phite Revenue ad "aID- ad "alo- ad "alo-.,,,,, r.", rem 
--. 

STATEMENT OF OBJEcrs AND REASONS 
The object of-the Bill is to give effect to the financial proposals 
of the Central Government for the financial year 1965-88 and to 
provide for certain connected matters. The Bill, inter cllia~ proposes 
the grant of tax credit certificates for certain purposes. This is 
being done with a view to stimulating industrial output 81'1d 
investment in new equity issues and for the purpose of facilitating 
dispersal of existing industries from urban areas to other areas for 
relieving congestion. The Notes on clauses explain the various 
provisions contained in the Bill. 
NEW DEIJiI; T. T. KRISHNAMACHARI. 
The 27th FebrulLTY 1965 
PRESIDENT'S RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLES 117 AND 
274 OF THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA 
[Copy of Letter No. F~3 (16)-B/65, dated thtr 27th February, 1965 
from Shri T .. T. Krishnamachari, Minister of Finance to the Secretary, 
Lok Sabha.] . ~. I !ill 
The President having been informed of the subject matter of the 
proposed Bill, recommends under article 117 (1) and (3) read with 
article 274 (1) of the Constitution of India, the introduction of the 
Finance Bill, 1965 to the Lok Sabha and also recommends to the Lot 
Sabha the consideration of the Bill. 
• • • • 
81 
2248 (B) LS-ll 

Note. On clause, 
ClcIuse 2 prescribes the rates of income-tax and surcharge on: 
income-tax (wherever leviable) for the assessment year 1965-66 for 
income other than capital gains, and also the rates at which income-
tax and surcharge (where leviable) are to be dcduded at source from. 
interest on securities, dividends and other income during the financial· 
year 196fMJ6. As the provision relatinR to the charge of super-tax. 
Us been removed from the Income-tax Act, 1961 under various 
amendments to that Act incorporated in this Bill, no levy of super-
tax has been prescribed for the assessment year 1965-66. The element 
of super-tax has, however, been integrated in the new rate structure 
of income-tax prescribed in the Bill. 
In the rate schedule of income-tax for individuals, Hindu undivided. 
families, unregistered fhms and associations of persons etc., the 
income slabs have been regraded and the' rates of tax for the first and 
the top slabs, as well as for several intermediary slabs of income,. 
llave been reduced from thOSe applicable for the assessment year 
1964-65. Unlike under the rate schedules of income-tax for the 
assessment year 1964-65, which contain an initial slab of income free 
of income-tax, the rate schedule for the assessment year 1965-66 does 
not contain. any iDitial-slab of income eXelllpt from income-tax. 
However, in the case of individuals and Hindu undivided families-. • (other than non-residents) J provision has been made for reduction' 
of the tax calculated on the total income by a specified amount of tax 
relief on' account of personal allowances. The amount of this tax re-
lief has been calculated at the rate of income-tax on the first slab of 
income on various amounts of personal allowances, which are higher 
than the initial slabs of income exempt from income-tax in the case· 
of individuals and Hindu undivided families under the Finance Act, 
1964. The amount of unearned income not liable tlJ surcharge for the 
assessment year 1965-66 is Rs. 15,000 as compared with Rs. 10,000 
under the Finance Act,. 1964. Further, the rates of surcharge on the 
income-tax on unearned income fot 1965-66 have been prescribed on 
the basis of slabs of such income (instead of for ranges of unearned 
income as under the Finance Act, 1964), and the tax on the first slab 
of unearned income of Rs. 15,000 is free of surcharge in all cases. The 
rates of surcharge on the tax on the next slab of unearned incon:te of 
Rs. 35,000, i.e., up to Rs. 50,000, is 20 per cent., and on the balance it is 
25 per cent. In the case of individuals and Hindu undivided families, 
interest on Government securities is free from the surcharge in res-
pect of unearned income, but it is liable to the surcharge leviable in 
82 

83 11'1 
respect of earned income. As regards surcharge on the tax on earned 
income, the first slab of such income upto Rs. 1 lakh remajns free of 
surcharge as under the Finance Act, 1964, but the rate for the next 
slab of Rs. 1 lakh upto Rs. 2 lakhs has been fixed at 5 per cent. (in-
stead of 10 per cent. as under the Finance Act, 1964), on the next 
Rs. 1 lakh upto Rs. 3 lakhs, it is 10 per cent., and for the balance of 
the earned income, it is 15 per cent. 
Non-residents as well as assessees who are resident but not 
ordinarily resident in India will be charged to tax for the assessment 
year 1965-66 on their income assessable in India in the same manner 
as resident assessees, but non-residents will not be entitled to any 
tax relief on account of personal allowances. 
The effect of all these changes is that the incidence of tax on 
personal income at all levels will be lower than what it was for the 
assp.ssment year 1964-65 . 
. In the case of registered firms, the rates of income-tax are the 
same as for the assessment year 1964-65. The general rate of sur-
charge on income-~ is 20 per cent., but in the case of a registered 
'firm whose income· from profession is 51 per cent. or more of its 
total income, the surcharge will be reduced by one-half. 
In the case of, co-operative societie __ a separate rate schedule of 
income-tax has been prescribed, because in their case super-tax was 
charge.l under tM Finance Act, 1964 at a concessional rate. In their 
case, a single surcharge on income-tax will be levied in respect of 
income exceeding Rs. 25,000 at a uniform rate of 61 per cent., instead 
-of three surcharges leviable under the Finance Act, 1964, viz., the 
surcharge on income-tax on unearned income and earned income, 
:and surcharg~ on super-tax. 
In th~case of companies, the rate of income-tax (as consolidated 
with super-tax) has been fixed at 80 per cent. (made up of pre-
integration income-tax, 25 per cent. plus super-tax 55 per cent.), 
but this is subj~ct to vario~s rebate~'6n different types of income, 
corresponding to the rebates of super-tax admissible under the 
Finance Act, 1964. In the case of companies in which the public are 
not substantiaUy interested and which are wholly or mainly engaged 
in the business of manufacture or production of goods or con-
struction o! ships or in mining Or the generation or distribution of 
electricity. the rate of tax on the first Rs. 10 lakhs of their income 
has been fi.'"(ed at 50 per cent., and on the balance of the income it 
will b~ 60 per cent. (Under the Finance Act, 1964, the rate of tax 
.c>n the first Rs. 2 lakhs of the income of companies of the above 
ca tegory whose total income did not exceed Rs. 5 1akhs was 50 per 

-cent.; aDd on the balance, it was..JSO per cent.). In the case of aU 
other compame!IJ, the rates of income-tax are the same as for the 
&l8eS8meut year 1964-M.' . 
';file special rebate of tax provided under the Finance Act, 1964 OD 
income derived by companies (other than those which do not declare-
their dividends in India) from the manufacture or production of 
specified articles of priority and basic industries, equivalent to 10 per 
cent. of the normal tax, is being continued' for the assessment year 
1965-66. The area of this benefit has been enlarged by the addition 
of several new items in the list of such articles. which is contained 
ill Part m of the First Schedule to the Bill. 
The rates at which tax is to be deducted at source from the income' 
of D04-residents during the financial year 1965-66 has been fixed at 
30 per cent, or the amount of income-tax and surcharge on income-
tax calculated on the whole of the income liable to such deduction 
at the rates prescribed in the rate schedule of income-tax in 
Paragraph A of Part I of the First Schedule to the Bill, whicheve1' 
~ higheT. This compares with the rate for deduction of tax at 
sourCe at 48·375 per cent (subject to a higher deduction on account of 
super-tax 'where the income attracts super-tax in accordance with 
the rate schedule applicable to resident assessees at a rate higher 
than 19 per cent.) which was presCIi.l?ed under the Finance Act, 1964. 
In the case of resident assessees and companies, the rate for deduc.;.. 
. tion of tax at source for the financial year 1965-66 is the same as 
for the financial year 1964-65. 
The b~is and the quantum of tax rebates in relation to exports' 
for the assessment year 1965-66 are the same as for the assessment 
year 1964-65. 
Clause 3 prescribes the rates at which annuity deposits in respect 
of the assessment ye'ar 1965-!>6 and advance annuity deposits for the 
financial year 1965-66 will be required to be made by individuals" 
Hindu undivided families, unregistered firms, associations of persorj,s,. 
~ ...; 
etc. under the provisions of Chapter-XXIIA of the Income-tax Act. 
Sub-cLause (i) of clause 4 seeks to amend clause (7) of section 2' 
of the Income-tax Act. This amendment is consequential to the 
,amendment under clause 29 of the Bill. 
Sub-clause (ii) of clause 4 seeks to omit clause (11) of section 2' 
of the Income-tax Act. This omission is consequential to the amend-
ment under clause 29 of the Bill 
Sub-clause (iii) of clause 4 seeks to amend clause (18) of section 2 
of the Income-tax Act and clause (i) of Explanation 1 to that clause .. 

II f:, 
The effect of' ibis amendment will be that a company whose equity 
mares t.o the extent of not less than 50 per cent (40 per cent. in the 
case of an industrial company) are held by another company in which 
lhe public are substantially interested or by a 100 per cent subsidiary 
of such a company will be regarde4 as a company in which the pub lie 
are &ubstantially interested. if it satisfies other conditions of section. 
2 (18). Further, in ascertaining whether the affairs of the company 
or the shares carrying more than 50 per cent. of its total voting 
power were at no time during the relevant previous year controlled 
or held by five or less persons, no account will be taken of a company 
in which the public are substantially interested or a 100 per cent 
lubsidiary of such a company which holds not less than 50 per cent 
(or 40 per cent. as the case may be) of the equity shares of the ftrst- . 
mentioned company. . 
Sub-clause (iv) of clause 4 seeks to amend clause (22) of section 2 
of the Income-tax Act. The effect of the amendment would be that 
thE distribution received by the shareholder of a company on the· 
reduction of its capital or on its liquidation would, to the extent such 
distribution is attributable to the capitalised profits of the company 
from which bonus shares have been issued by it to its equity 
shareholdt!:s after 31st March, 1964, would not be chargeable to tax in 
the hands of *e shareholder as his dividend income. 
Sub-clause (v) of clause 4 seeks to amend clause (30) of section 2 
of the Income-tax Act. This amendment is consequential to the 
amendment under clause 35 of the Bill. 
Sub-clause (vi) of clause 4 seeks to amend clause (43) of section 2 
of the Income-tax Act. This amendment is consequential to the amend-· 
ment under clause 29 of the Bill. 
Further, this sub-clause seeks to insert a new clause (43A) in 
section 2 of the Income-tax Act to define a "tax credit certificate'" 
to mean a tax credit certificate granted to any person in accordance 
w:th the provisions of Chapter XXIIB of the Act and any scheme 
made thereunder. 
Sub-clause (vii) of clause 4 seeks to omit clause (46) of section % 
of the Income-tax Act. This amendment is consequential to the 
amendment under clause 35 of the Bill. 
Clause 5 seeks to amend section 8 of the Income-tax Act to secure . 
that an interim dividend paid by a company shall be deemed to be 
the income of the previous year in which the amount of such 
dividend is unconditionally made available by the company to the 
member who is entitled to it. This amendment secures that the year 

86 
. of taxability of the interim dividend will be determined withou\ 
regard to the method of accounting followed by the assessee. . 
Sub-clause (i) of clause 6 seeks to insert a new clause (4A) .in-
section 10 of the Income-tax Act to secure that in the case of a 
non-resident, any income from interest on moneys standing to his 
credit in a non-resident account in any bank in India in accordance 
with the Foreign Exchange Regulation Act, 1947 and the rules made 
thereunder will be excluded in computin~ the total income of the 
non-resident. 
Sub-clause (ii) of clause 6 seeks to amend sub-clause (vii) (a) of 
clause 6 of section 10 of the Income-tax Act. The effect of this 
amendment will be that a foreign technician having specialised 
know ledge and experience in constructional or manufacturing 
operations or in mining or in the generation or distribution of power 
who is now exempt from tax on his salary for a period of 36 months 
'from the date of his arrival in India and from further tax on the 
tax paid by his employer on his salary for the following 24 months, 
· will henceforward be entitled to exemption from tax on the tax 
. paid by his employer for a period of 60 months following the expiry 
of the initial period of 36 months, provided that the approval of the 
· Central Government is obtained to his continuing to remain in em-
. ployment Tn India for the extended period. 
Sub-clause (iii) of clause 6 seeks to amend clause (13) of section 
'10 of the Income-tax Act to secure that any payment from aD 
approved superannuation fund by way of refund of contributions 
· ,to an employee on his leaving the service in connection with wbicb 
the fund is established, otherwise than by retirement at or after a 
· specified age or on his becoming incapacitated prior to such retire-
ment will be excluded in the computation of his total income to the 
-extent to which such payment does not exceed the contributions 
· .made prior to the commencement of the Income-tax Act, 1961 and 
any interest thereon. .. 
Sub-cla-use (iv) of clause 6 seeks to insert a new clause (28) 
in section 10 of the Income-tax Act to the effect that in the case 
o{ any person who is granted a tax credit certificate, any amount 
adjusted or paid to him in respect of such certificate under the 
pl'ovlshms of Chapter XXIIB proposed to be introduced in the Act 
by clause 62 of the Bill will not be included in the computation 
~f his total income. 
Clause 7 seeks to amend section 18 of the Income-tax Act to 
· exclude from the head of income "Interest on securities" the interest 

eleJ?:l~nt included in an annuity payable under section 280D of the" 
Income-tax Act. 
Sub-clause (i) of clause 8 seeks to amend sub-section (1) of 
section 33 of the Income-tax Act. The effect of this amendmen twill ' 
be that in the case of machinery or plant installed after 31st March, 
1965 for purposes of the business of construction or manufacture or 
production of anyone or more of the articles specified in the list in·, 
the Fifth Schedule proposed to be inserted in the Income-tax Act 
by clause 67 of the Bill, development rebate will be admissible at 
the rate of 25 per cent. of the actual cost, and in the case of any 
other machinery or plant installed after 31st March, 1965, develop--
ment rebate will be allowed at 20 per cent. of the actual cost, and· 
where it is installed after 31st March, 1967, at 15· per cent. of such· 
cost. 
Sub-clausc! (ii) of clause 8 seeks to amend sub-section (2) of; 
section 33. These amendments are consequential to the amendment 
sought to be made by clause 'D of the Bill. 
Sub-clause (iii) of clause 8 seeks to insert a new sub-section (6)" 
in section 33 of the Income-tax Act. The effect of this amendment 
will be that no development rebate will be admissible in respect of 
machitJery or plant installed after 31st ,March, 1965 in any o1llce' 
premises or in any residential accommodation, including guest houses. 
Clause 9 seeks to insert a new section 33A in the Income-tax Act. 
Under this st"ction, a deduction by way of development allowance' 
equivalt:!nt to 40 per cent. of the actual cost of planting of tea in· 
new areas and 20 per cent. of the actual cost of planting in replace-
ment of bushes in existing areas will be made in computing income-
from a business of growing or manufacturing tea in India subject 
to certain limits and conditions, which are broadly similar to those 
in existence in respect of the deduction of development rebate in 
respect of machinery or plant. The actual cost of planting for ... the' 
purposes of the development allowance will include cost of prepar-
ing the land, cost of seeds, cuttings and nurserjes and also the cost 
of upkeep of the area for a period of 4 years including the previous 
year in which the land was prepared. The actual cost of planting 
for the purpose of this allowance will be subject to a ceiling of 
Rs. 12,5~0 per hectare if the land is in a hilly area and Rs. 10,000 
per hectare if the land is in any other area. These figures are ap-
proximately equivalent to Rs. 5,000 per acre and Rs. 4,000 per acre 
respectively. The development allowance will be admissible in res-
pect of the expenditure on planting commenced after 31st March,. 

88 
. INS and, in respect of planting in Jeplacement of bushes in an exist· 
: Jag area where the planting has commenced after 31st March, 1965 
and is completed before 1st April, 1970. The allowance will be made 
in computing the income assessable for the assessment year relevant 
to the third succeeding previous year next follOwing the previous 
year in which the land has been prepared. 
Clause 10 seeks to amend section 34 of the Income-tax Act. This 
amendment is consequential to the amendment of section 47 sought 
to be made by clause 15 of the Bill. 
Clause 11 seeks to insert a new clause in sub-section 0) of sec-
tion 36 of the Income-tax Act. Under this provision, any expendi-
ture bonn fide incurred by a company for the purpose of promoting 
family planning amongst its employees will be allowed as a deduction 
in computing the compallY's income under the head "Profits and 
gains of bUiiiness or profession". Where the expenditure in this 
respect is of a capital nature, one-fifth of such expenditure will be 
deducted in the previous year in which it was incurred and in each 
of the four immediately succeeding previous years. 
Clause 12 seeks to make certain amendments to section 37 of the 
Income-tax Act which are consequential to the insertion of a new 
section 33A in the Income-tax Act under clause 9 of the Bill. 
Clause 13 seeks to make certlftn amendments to sub-clause (iii) 
of clau::ie (c) of section 40 of. the Income-tax Act. The effect of one 
of these amendments would be that the expenditure incurred by 
companies in providing any benefit or amenity or perquisite to their 
employees whose income chargeable under the head "Salaries" does 
not exceed Rs. 7,500 would not be taken into account for the purposes 
of tr ... e aforesaid provision. The effect of the other amendment would 
be that in coml=utlng the expenditure incurred by a company in pro-
viding any benefit, amenity or perquisite to its employees for the 
purposes of the aforesaid provision, the perquisite represented by 
the tax paid by the company on the salary income of a foreign techni-
cian in its" employment [whichtr exempt from tax in the hands tlf 
the technician under section 10 (6) (vii) of the Act], and any expen-
. diture incurred by a company for promoting family planning amongst 
its employees, would also not be taken into account. 
Clause 14 seeks to amend section 43 of the Income-tax Act. This 
amendment is consequential to the amendment of section 47 of the 
Act sought to be made by clause 15 of the Bill. 
Clause 15 seeks to amend section 47 of the Income-tax Act by 
the insertion of a new clause (11). The effect of this amendment 
. will be that any transfer of a capital asset by a subsidiary company 

'f. 89 I~ 
, ' 
to the holding company will Dot be treated u a transfer for purpos. 
of the chargeabUity to tax under the head "Capital gains" under 
section 45 where the subsidiary company is a 100 per cent. subsidiary 
of the holding company and the latter 'is an Indian company: 
Suli-claUlc (i) of clause 16 seeks ,to amend clause (iii) of section 
49 of the Income-tax. Act. This amendment is consequential to the 
amendment to section 47 under clause 15 of the Bill. 
Sub-clause (ii) of clause 16 seeks te insert an Explanation at the· 
end of section 49 of the Income-tax Act. The effect of this provision" 
will be that where a capital asset became the property of the assessee 
on any distribution of assets on the total or partial partition of:.' 
Hindu undivided family or under a Rift or will Qr under successi~ 
inheritance, devolution, etc., the cost 'of acquisition of the asset to 
the previous owner of the property will mean the cost of acquisitiOn 
to the last previous o~r who acquired it otherwise than by any of 
the modes of acquisition specified in the section. ": , 
Clause 17 seeks to insert a new section 54A in the Income.-~' 
Act. Under this section, an individual who is net a citizen of 1Dc:f:i&'. 
or a company which is not an Indian company transferring, '.mY 
shares held by him or it in an Indian company and becoming liabie 
to pay tax on the capital lains arising out of such transfer will bi 
entitled .to a credit of the whole or part of- .the tax so payable .. 
proportion to the amount of the proceeds of the transfer as reduced 
by the cost of acquisition of the transferred shares, which are re;. 
invested in any of the approved investments within a period of two 
years from the date of the transfer of the shares. 
Clause 18 seeks to insert a new clause (ia) in sub-section (2) Of 
section 56 of the Income-tax Act to secure that an annuity ~ue ~ 
the commuted value of any annuity paid under section 289D of ~ 
Income-tax Act will be chargeable to tax under the head "Income 
from other sources". 
Clause 19 seeks to insert a new section 69B in the income-tO: 
Act. The effect of this amendment will be that where in any ~ , , 
cial year, the assessee has made any investment or is found to be 
the owner of any.bullion, jewellery or other valuable article and 
the Income-tax Officer finds that the amount expended on makil)g 
such investment or in acquiring such bullion, jewelle17 or other 
valuable article exceeds the amount recorded in this behalf in the 
books of account maintained by the assessee for any source of in-
come, the excess amount may be deemed to be the income of the 
assessee for such financial year unless he is able to offer satisfacto!'f 
explanation for the same. 
2248 (B) LS-12 ~ 

( 
90 
CZauae 20 seeks to introduce a new Chapter VIA in the Income-
tu Act containing provisions relating to dedUctions to-be made in 
QOmputing the total income. 
Under section 80A of the proposed Chapter, an individual or Hindu 
undivided family will be entitled to a deduction of an amount equal 
to 50 per cent. of the aggregate of the qualifying sums in respect 
of payments towards life insurance premia, contributions to provi-
dent funds and superannuation funds and deposits in certain cumu-
lative time deposit accounts in the post oftice eic. This provision 
will replace the existing provision in section 87 of the Act relating 
to the allowance of rebate in respect of such sums and will come 
into effect from the assessment year 1966-67 in the case of assessees 
whose total income assessable for the assessment year 1965-66 in-
eludes any income chargeable under the head "Salaries" from which 
tax is deducted or deductible at source in accordance with the pro-
visions of section 192, and from the assessment year 1965-66 in the 
case of other assessees. The monetary limit of the qualifying amount 
in respect of the sums referred to above will be Rs. 12,500 in the case 
of an individual and Rs. 25,000 in the case of a Hindu undivided 
family, as against the existing monetary limit of Rs. 10,000 in the 
ease of an individual and Rs. 20,000 in the case of a Hindu undivided 
family for the purpose of rebate of tax. 
Under the new section 80B, an individual or a Hindu undivided 
family resident in India will be entitled to a deduction .lof a speclfted 
IUDl in the computation of the total income where expenditure has 
been incurred by him or it on the medical treatment (including 
nursing) of a physically or mentally disabled person who is a rela-
tive of the individual or is a member of the Hindu undivided family 
and is dependent on the individual or the Hindu undivided family for 
his support. The deduction will be admissible only where the total 
income oI the individual or the Hindu undivided family as computed 
before making any deduction under this Chapter and before deduct-
ing any annuity deposit under section 2800 does not exceed Rs. 20,000 
and will be reduced in either ('Jise by the income, if 8py, of the dis-
abled dependant. 
The new section aoc provides for relief subject to certain condi-
tions in respect of premiums paid by partners. of registered firms of 
chartered accountants, architects, solicitors or lawyers, under an 
approved contract, or contributions made to an approved fund, for 
the purpose of securing retirement annuities in old age. 
The relief will be by way of deduction of the amount of the pre-
miums not exceeding one-tenth of the total income of the individual 

81 
10r the year (subject to certain adjustments) or Rs. 5,000, whichever 
:is less, in computing.Qis total income. 
The annuity when reCeived will be trea,ted as earned income to 
'.the extent to which it is attributable to the amount of deduction 
.allowed under this section, and charged to tax accordingly. 
The approval of annuity contracts and funds will be given by the 
<=ommissioner subject te certain rules and conditions. 
The new section 80D contains definition of certain terms used in 
:this Chapter. 
Clause 21 seeks to amend section 84 of the Income-tax Act. This 
.amendment is consequential to the amendment under clause 29 of the 
Bill. 
Clause 22 seeks to insert a new section 85A in the Income-tax 
.Act to secure that income from dividends received by one company 
:from another Indian company or a company which has made the 
prescribed arrangements for the declaration or payment of dividends 
within India will bear income-tax at the rate of 25 per cent. Further, 
1n the case of a company which has not made the prescribed arrange.. 
ment for the declaration and payment of dividends within India and 
which receives dividend from an Indi'an company in which the pubUc 
.are not substantially interested and which is wholly or mainly 
-engaged in certsln priority industries, the income from dividends will 
bear income-tax at the rate of 15 per cent. 
• 
Clause 23 seeks to amend section 86 of the Income-tax Act. This 
.amendment is consequential to the amendment to the Income-tax 
Act under clause 24 of the Bill. 
Clause 24 seeks to introduce a new section 86A in Chapter vn of 
the Income-tax Act. Under the new section, income from interest 
~n securities issued income-tax free by the Central Government or 
by any State Government on which income-tax is payable by the 
'State Government, which is included in the total income 9f an 
.agsessee will qualify for: a rebate of income-tax calculated thereon 
:at the average rate of income-tax or at the rate of 25 per cent which-
-ever is less. This amendment is consequential to the amendment 
.under clause 29 of the Bill. 
Clause 25 seeks to amend section 87 of _the Income-tax Act. The 
amendment sought to be made by sub-claUse (i) is consequential to 
the amendment under clause 29 of the Bill, while that sought to be 
mad~ by sub-clause (ii)' is consequential to the introduction of De1lj 
section 80A in the Act under clause 20 of the Bill. ' 

Clauae 26 seeks to amend section 88 of the Income-tax Act The 
'amendMents tD 'Sub.:clauie (i) and sub-clause (iii) are consequential 
to the amendment under clause 29 of the Bill. The effect of the 
amendments under sub-clause (ii) and sub-clause (iv) will be that the 
assessee will be entitled to a rebate of tax in' respect of donations 
given for the renovation or repair of any temple, mosque, gurdwara, 
church or other place which is notified by the Central Government 
in the Official Gazette to be a place of public workship of renown 
throughout any State or States. At present the rebate of tax is avail-
able o~y where the temple, mosque, etc. is notified by the Central 
Government to be of historic, archaeological or artistic importance. 
The monetary limit upto which such donations will quality for the 
rebate is also sought to be raised from Rs. 2 lakhs to Rs. 5 lakhs. 
Clauses 27 and 28 seek to amend sections 90 and 91 respectively of 
the Income-tax Act. These amendments are consequential to the 
amendment under clause 29 of the Bill. 
Cla.1J8e 29 seeks to amend Chapter XI of the Income-tax Act which 
contains provisions relating to charge of super-tax. These amend-
ments I:teek to remove the charge of super-tax and consequentially, to 
omit the provisioIUt relating to rebate or relief in respect of super-tax, 
and to substitute the levy of super-tax on the undistributed profits 
of certain companies by the levy of income-tax thereon. Chapter XI 
will hereafter contain only the provisions relating to charge of 
additional income-tax ~ith reference to the undistributed income of 
certain companjes, 
Clause 30 seeks to amend section 104 of the Income-tax Act. The 
amendment in sub-clause (i) is consequential to the amendment 
under clause 29 of the Bill. The amendment in sub-clause (iii) 
secures thlt a non-trading company (o~ler than an investment com-
pany) which is liable to the additional income-tax on undistributed 
income will pay such tax at 25 per cent. of the undistributed income. 
while a ~ding company will p~l. such tax at 37 per cent. 
The amendment in sub-clause (ii) is consequential to the amend-
ment in sub-clause (iii). 
CZa.use 31 seeks to amend section 109 of the Income-tax Act. The 
amendment in sub-clause. (iii) secures that in the case of a non-
trading company which is liable to the additional income-tax on 
undistributed income at the rate of 25 per cent. under the .amendmen~ 
iflclause 30, the statutory percentage Qf distributable income will 
tinue to be 60 per cent. until the accumulated profits and reserves 
~the company exceed twice the aggregate of the paid-up capital 

93 
and loan capital, which, is the property of the share-holders, or 
·twice the value of the fixed assets, whichever is greater. 
The amendment in sub-clause (ii) gives the definition of "trading 
.company" and the amendment in sub-clause (i) is consequenu.I 19 
-the amendmen-; in claUSe 29 of the Bill. . 
Clauses 32 to 34 seek to amend certain provisions of the Incom~ 
-tax Act in consequence of the amendment under clause 29 91· the 
Bill. 
Clause 35 seeks to omit section 113 of the Income-tax Act. Th~ 
.effect of this omission will be that a non-resident assessee, not. being 
a company, will be chargeable to tax on his total income at the 
.average rate of tax applicable to such income. 
Clause 36 seeks to amend section 114 of the Income-tax Act. Sub-
·clause (ii) (b) seeks to introduce a second proviso in sub-clause (ii)· 
.of clause (b) of section 114. This proviso will have the effect of 
'reducinJ!! the tax calculated on the capital gains relating to bonus 
:shares chargeable under sub-section (2) of section 45 by an amount 
.equal to 10 par cent. of the face value of the bonus shares or ~e 
amount of income-tax so calculated, whichever is less. 
The rest of the amendments sought to be made by this clause 
.are consequential to the amendment under clause 29 of the Bill. 
Clause 37 seeks to substitute section 115 of the Income-tax Act by 
.a new section. Under the new section, the income-tax calculated in 
the case of a company on its income under the head "Capital gains:' 
relatin~ to bonus sh:ares chargeable under sub-section (2) of section 
45 will be reduced by an amount equal to 10 per cent. of the face 
value of the bonus shares or the amount of income-tax so calculated, 
whicheve~ is less. The remainin~ changes from the existing provi-
sions of section 115 are consequential to the amendment under clause 
29 of the Bill. 
Cl.ause 38 seeks to amend section 131 of the Income-tax Act to 
confer on the Inspecting Assistatlt Commissioner of income-tax the 
powers of discovery ~d inspection, enforcing attendance of any 
person, including any officer of a banking company, and examining 
him on oath, compelling production of books of acco~t and other 
documents and is~~g commissions. At present ~ese p~wers are 
.available to the Income-tax 'Officer, Appellate Assistant Commis-
sioner and Commissioner under this section and also to the Appellate 
"Tribunai . under the ot~er provisions of the Act. 
Clause 39 seek~ to amend section 155 of ~e Income-tax Act. The 
:amendme:lt undef sub-cla~e(i) is consequential to the introduction 

94 
• of the !l'!W section 33A in the Income-tax Act under clause 9 of the-
. ~11l. The amendment in sub-clause (ii) is consequential to the-
amendment under clause 29 of the Bill. .--
Clause 40 seeks to amend section 164 of the Income-tax Act. This: 
amendment is consequential to the amendment under clause 3~ 
of the Bill. 
ClaU.lt! 41 seeks to amend section 178 of the Income-tax Act. The' 
effect of these amendments will be that the liquidator of a company 
who is under a statutory obligation to notify the Income-tax Officer 
of his appointment within 30 days of his becoming the liquidator, will 
be debarred from partin~ with the assets of the company and 
properties in his hands until he is notified by the Income-tax Officer 
of the amount which will be sufficient to provide for any tax which: 
is then, or is likely thereafter to become, payable by the company' 
except with the previous approval of the Commissioner and for ar 
specific purpose, namely payment af the tax payable by the com-
pany, payments to secured creditors whose debts are entitled under 
law to priority of payment over debts due to Government on the-
date of liquidation and meeting such costs and expenses of the-
winding up of the company as are, in the opinion of the Commissioner r 
reasonable. If the liquidator either fails to notify the IncolJle-tax: 
Officer of his appointment within the time specified or fails to set 
aside the amount intimated to him by the Income-tax Officer as: 
being sufficient to provide for the tax liability of the company or parts: 
with any of the assets of the company or property in his hands ill' 
contravention of the above provisiOns, he shall be personally liable-
for the payment of the tax which the company would be liable to 
payor,. as the case may be, the amount intimated to him by the-
Income-tax Officer. 
Clauses 42 to 52 seek to amend the provisiOns of the Income-tax 
Act in consequenCe of the amendment under clause 29 or clause 35 of.' 
the Bill. l 
Clause 53 seeks to amend sections 213 to 217, 220, 243 and 244 of the· 
Income-tax Act to secure that the rate of interest chargeable ODt 
delayed payments of tax and the interest payable by Gov~rnment on. 
delayed refunds will be six per cent as against the existing rate of 
4 per ce~t. per annum. 
C1- 54 seeks to amend sub-section (5) of section 226 of the: ""use .. f In ._-Income-tax Act to secure that the CommuWloner 0 come-WIA may 
. th rise by general or special order the recovery of my. arrears o! 
:: d:e from an assessee by distraint aDd sale of}8 fmmovable~ 
property. 

Clauses 55 to 57 seek to make amendments to the Income-tax Act 
which are consequentia.! On the amendment under clause 29 of the 
Bill. 
Clause 58 seeks to introduce a new section 276A in the Income-tu 
Act to provide that a person who is apPointed as liquidator of • 
company and who fails to give notice of his appointment to tile 
Income-tax Officer as required by section 178( 1) or fails to set aside 
the amount which is intimated to him by the Income-tax Ofticeru . 
bein~ sufficient to cover the tax liabilities of the company as required' 
by section 178(3) or parts with any of the assets of the company or 
the properties in his hands in contravention of the provisions of 
section 178(3) shall be punishable with rigorous imprisonment. The 
term of such imprisonment is subject to maximum of two years and 
a minimum of six months as in sections 277 and 278. 
Clause 59 seeks to amend section 279 of the Income-tax Act. ThU 
amendment is consequential on the insertion of the new section 276A 
under clause 58 of the Bill. 
Clauses 60 and 61 seek to make amendments to the Income-tax 
Act which are consequential on the amendment under clause 29 of 
the Bill. 
Clause 62 seeks to introdu~ a new Chapter XXIIB in the Income-
tax Act to provide for the grant of tax credit certificates for different 
purposes. 
New section 280Z in this Chapter provides for the grant of a tax 
credit certificate to an individual or Hindu undivided family iD. 
respect of amounts subscribed and paid by him or it to an eligible 
issue of capital by a public company. The amount of the tax credit 
certificate will be calculated at graded rates witlr reference to the 
total amount paid during a financial year by the individual or Hindu 
undivided family and will be limited to a maximum of Rs. 1,250 
which is reached when the total payment is Rs. 35,000. A tax credi.~ 
certificate for the amount so' calculated will be granted for the 
financial year in .wbich the payment is first made and for each of 
the three following financial years subject to the condition that the 
relevant shares are held by the individual or Hindu undivided famUy 
till the end of the respective financial years, and proportionately 
reduced if the whole or part of such shares are sold during any of 
these three years. • 
New section 280ZA provides for the grant of a tax credit certificate 
to a public company which shifts, with the prior approval of the 
Central Board of Direct Taxes, its industrial undertaking from aD 

88 
a.. 
~ban area (to be notified by the Central Government) to any other 
area, and in~ liability for payment of tax on the 'Capital gains' 
derived from the sale of lands and buildings (or any rights therein) 
used for the purposes of its business in the urban area~ The amount 
. of the. tax credit certiftcate will be calculated as a prop~rtion of the 
tax payable on the 'Capital pins', which the expenditure incurred 
by the company in acquiring lands or constructing buildings for the 
purposes of. its business in the area and on the shifting of Its 
. machinery or plant and other effects and transferring its establish-
i,ment to such area, within a period of three years from the date of 
the Board's approval to the shifting, bears to the 'Capital gains' 
derived from the sale of its lands and buildings in the urban area as 
~ed above. . If the investment in lands and buildings in the new 
area, including the expenditure on shifting, _ as stated above, equals 
or exceeds such 'Capital gains', the tax credit certificate will be 
granted for the whole of the amount of the tax payable on the 
'Capital gains'. The period of three years may be extended by the 
Board in suitable cases. If the company transfers the lands or 
buildings in the new area within !l period of five years to a person, 
other than Government or a public sector corporation, an amount 
equal to one-half of the amount of the tax credit certificate will be 
taken back from the company. 
New section 280ZB provide.-for the grant of a tax credit certificate 
to a company engaged in the manufacture o.r production of specified 
articles, where the company is liable to pay for any of the five assess-
ment years, 1966-67 to 1970-71, an aggregate amount of income-tax 
and sur-tax in excess of the corresponding amount which it is liable 
to pay for the base year, namely, assessment year 1965-66. The 
amount of the tax credit certificate will be calculated at 20 per cent. 
of such excess for each of the five years mentioned above. In the 
case of a company which is not liable to pay any tax for the assess-
ment year 1965-66, but becomes so liable for any but the last of the 
. following five years mentioned above, such year will be treated as 
the 'base year' .for that company, and the tax credit certificate will 
be granted for 20 per cent. of the excess of the aggregate tax which 
it becomes liable to pay for any subsequent assessment year (within 
the five-year period mentioned above) over the aggregate tax of such 
'base year'. The amount of the tax credit certificate for any year 
will not,in any case, exceed ten per cent .. of the aggregate tax for 
that year. 
An 'amount equal to the amount of the tax credit certificate 
. . . t d under this section should be utilised by the company for 
I gran e fr fin'a1 th yment Of loans taken by the company' om any anCI e ,repa '. 

8'1 I;.,~ 
Institutions to be notified in thiS ~ by the Central Government 
()r for redemption of its debentures. to enable it to have the benefit 
()f the tax credit certificate. 
New section 280ZC provides for the grant of a tax credit -certificate 
to any person who exports any goods or merchandise out of India 
af~er 28th February, 1965 and receives the sale proceeds thereof in 
India through recognised fereign exchange channels. The amount of 
the tax credit certificate will be calculated with reference ~ to the 
amount of such proceeds at the rate which will be specified in this 
behalf in the scheme to be made by the Central Government for 
this purpose. The rate will in no case ~ceed 15 per cent 
New section 280ZD provides for the grant of a tax credit certificate 
to any person' who manufactures or produces any goods for an 
"amount calculated with reference to the excess amount of duty of 
Central excise on such goods which he pays in any of the financial 
years 1965-66 to 1969-70 over the amount of such duty which he has 
paid on such goods during the base year. The rate at which the 
amount of the certificate is to be calculated will be specified in the 
scheme, but it shall not exceed 25 per cent. of the excess stated above. 
'The b~:;e year lor this purpose is the financial year 1964-65, but in 
the case cf an undertaking which was not in production during that 
year, it wjl be any subsequent financial year in which it begins .. " 
productiur.. 
An amount equal to the amount of the tax credit certificate grant-
ed under this section should be utilised by the person for the repay-
ment of loans taken by the person from any financial institutions 
to be notified in this behalf by the Central Government (including 
in the case of a company the redemption of its debentures) to enable 
it to have the benefit of the certificate. 
The amount shown on a tax credit certificate granted to any 
persOn under the above sections will be adjusted against any existing 
liability 4 such person under the Indian Income-tax Act, 1922 or the 
Income-ta~ Act, 1961 or any such liability arising within a period of 
twelve montl?s from the date on which the certificate is preduced 
before the Income~tax Officer, and the amount, if any, remainlng after 
such adjustment will be refunded ~o the person on the expirY of that 
period. 
The "Central Government has been empowered to frame a scheme 
or schemes making detailed provisions for the implementation of 
the provisions relating to grant of tax credit certificates for vu:tous 
purpose!. The scheme will, inteT alia, contain provisions as to the 

\~. 
.l.. 
88 
manner in which and the authority by whom the certiftcate will be 
issued. . 
Clause 63 seeks to amend section 294-of the Income-tax Act. This 
ame~dment is consequential to the amendment under clause 29 of 
the Bill. 
C~use 64 seeks to amend section 295 of the Income-tax Act. This 
amendment is consequential to the insertion of a new section aOA 
in the Act under clause 20 of the Bill. 
Clause 65 seeks to amend Rule 3 of the First Schedule to the 
Income-tax Act. This amendment is consequential on the amend-
ment under clause 29 of the Bill. 
Clause 66 seeks to amend the Fourth Schedule to the Income-tax 
Act. One of the amendments seeks to provide that no tax: should 
be deducted at source under rule 6 of Part B, from a payment which 
Is exempt under section 10(13) of the Income-tax Act. The rest 
of the amendments are consequential to the amendments under 
clause 20 or clause 29 of the Bill. 
Clause 67 seeks to introduce a new Fifth Schedule in the Income-
tax Act, specifying the list of articles and things for the purposes 
of the allowance of development rebate on machinery or plant at 
.. the enhanced rate of, 25 per, cent. prescribed under the amendment 
to the Income-tax Act in clause 8. 
Clause 68 seeks to make a provision for voluntary disclosures ot 
income which a person has failed to disclose in a return of income 
for any assessment year filed by him before 1st March, 1965 under 
the Indian Income-tax Act, 1922 or the Income-tax Act, 1961, or which 
has escaped assessment for any assessment year for which an assess· 
ment has been made before 1st March, 1965 under either of the said 
Acts or fQr the assessment of which no proceedings under either of 
the said Acts have been taken before 1st March, 1965. Such dis· 
closures may be made any time during the months of March, April 
.~ and May, 1965, but not thereafter. The ·amount declared under this 
provision will be charged to income-tax at the rate of 60 per cent, 
but if the tax is paid during the month of March, 1965 at the rate 
of 57 per cent. of the declared amount, there will be no further lia-
bility to tax in respect of that amount. The tax on the amount 
declared may be paid any time during a period of six months from 
the date of declaration, provided the payment is guaranteed by a 
scheduled bank or Central Government securities sufBcient to cover 
the amount of tax are assigned to the President of India for this 
purpose. The securities will be taken at their market value on the 
date of assignment. 

99 - -
The declaration under this section should be made to the Com-
mIssioner and should, inter alia, contain particulars of the year or 
years in which the income was earned, and the form in which the-
declared amount is held and the location of the relevant assets. 
Where an amount is declared under this section and the tax there--
on is paid, the balance may be credited by the declarant to his books" 
of account or other record, and if he does so, the amount declared' 
.mall not be included in his total income for any assessment under· 
the Indian Income-tax Act, 1922 or the Income-tax Act, 1961 or tne-
Excess Profits Tax Act, 1940, or the Business Profits Tax Act, 1947, 
or the Super Profits Tax Act, 1963 or the Companies (Profits) Surtax 
Act, 1964. 
Full secrecy will be ensured in respect of the particulars con-
tained in any declaration or record of any proceedings under this 
section. 
Clause 69 seeks to amend the Estate Duty Act, 1953. 
Sub-clauses (i), (ii) (a), (iii) (a), (iv) (a) and (v) (a) respectively 
seek to reduce the period specified in sections 9, 10, 11, 12 and 2Z 
for the inclusion in his estate of property gifted by the deceased 
durin,~ hft life time from two 'years to one year. Sub-clause (iz) 
seeks to make a similar amendment in section 46(2) in respect of 
debts or incumbrances repaid or discharged by the deceased where 
but for the repayment or discharge the liability would have beeD 
precluded from deduction in the computation of the net principaJ 
value of his estate. 
Sub-clauses (ii)(b), (iii)(b), (iv)(b) and (v)(b) respectively 
seek to amend sectiOns 10, 11, 12 and 22 to secure that where the 
deceased had lived in a house or part thereof which he had gifted.,. 
or otherwise disposed of, in favour of the spouse, son, daughter,. 
brother-w sister, and there is no right of residence reserved qr-
secured to him under the relevant disposition or under any collateral 
disposition, the property will not be included in his estate. 
Sub-clatUe (1:i) seeks to insert a new section 29A in the Estate-
Duty Act to secure that estate duty shall not be attracted in respect 
of any pension payable on the death of an employee to his widow 
or other dependants under the relevant pension rules of the Central 
Government, a State Government, a local authority or a public seCtor 
corporation or in respect of any annuity or pension payable to the 
widow>or dependants of the employee from a superannuation fund" 
approved under the Indian Inc~me-tax Act, 1922 or the Income-tax 
Act, 1961 or from a superannuation or pension fund estabUshed by' 

100 
. . 
Snternational organisations to be notifled by the Centr.al Government. 
'There will be a limit of Rs. 15,000 per annum on the annuity or pen-
. alon payable out of an approved. superannuation' fund. which quali-
fles for this exemption: - -. . 
Sub-clawe (vii)(b) seeks to insert a new clause (0) in section 
.33(1) of the Estate Duty Act to secure that property gifted by the 
deceased to the spouse, son, daughter, brother or sister, will not be 
.uicluded in the estate of the donor if he dies after five Years from 
the date of the gift, provided that the property is' either chargeable 
to gift-:tax under the Gift-tax Act, 1958, or is not chargeable under 
section 5 of that Act for the assessment year 1964-65 or any subse-
.quent assessment year. 
The . amendments in sub-clauses (vii)(a) and (viii) are conse-
quential to the amendments in the other sub-clauses. 
Clause 70 seeks to amend the Wealth-tax Act, 1957. 
Sub-clause (i) seeks to introduce a new clause (xx) in sub-section 
(1) of section 5 of the Wealth-tax Act to secure that where the assessee 
is the owner of any shares subscribed and paid for by him and such 
shares form part of the initial issue 01. the equity share capital made 
after the 28th February, 1965 by a company established with the 
·ob_ct of carrying on an industrial undertaking in India, the value 
()f such shares shall not be chargeabte to wealth-tax for a period of 
.five successive assessment years commencing with the assessment 
year next following the date of such issue. 
Sub-clause (ii) seeks to amend Part I of the Schedule to the 
Wealth-tax Act to secure the levy of an additional wealth-tax on 
.assets, being buildings or lands other than business premises or 
.any right in such buildings or lands, situated in areas with a popula-
tion exceeding 1 lakh, included in the net wealth of an individual or 
,a Hindu undivided family at graded rates on the slab system. This 
.additional wealth-tax will be calculated at the specified rates on the 
tettl value of such assets which exceeds certain initial exempt emounts 
prescribed having regard to the population of the area in which the 
.assets are situated. 
Clause 71 seeks to ~mend the Gift-tax Act. 
. . 
Sub-clause (i) seeks to insert a new clause (va) in section 5(1) of 
the Gift-tax Act. to secure exemptioQfrom gift-tax ·to a aift made to 
a temple, .mosque, gurdwara,-. church or other place which has 
bean notified by . the Central Government for the purposes of section 
'8S( 6) o! the 'Income-tax Act or a gift of property by way of settle-
ment on' trust .where-the income from property is,. ~ccordiOg to the 

101 132 
deed of ~ttlement, to be used exclusively in conne~on with sucb 
a temple, etc. 
Sub-cZause (ii) seeks to introduce a new section l8A in· Chapter IX 
of the Gift-tax Act to- Secure that where any stamp duty has been 
paid on an instrument of gift of property in respect of which the 
gift-tax payable exceeds Rs .. 1,000, the assessee shall be entitled 
to a deduction from the gift-tax payable by hUn of ~ .amount equal 
to the stamp duty so paid subject to a mufmum of one-haH of the- . 
sum by which the aift-tax payable before ~nJ:( the deduction for 
stamp duty exceeds Rs. 1,000'. .-.. 
Clause 72 seeks to introduce a new section 4A in the Preference 
Shares (Regulation of Dividends) Act. 1960, and to make some con-
sequential amendments to ~rtain other provisions of that Act. The-
new sect~on 4A referred to above seeks to provide that in respect or 
preference shares, the stipulated dividend on which is subject to a 
deduction by the company concerned of the income-tax payable by 
it, the company shall not make a deduction in excess of 25 per cent~ 
of the amount of the stipulated dividend on such shares,-25 per. cent_ 
bein~ the existing rate at which income-tax is chargeable oD. 
companies: 
The other amendments under this clause are consequential tc) 
the amendments to the Income-tax Act, 1961 under clause 29 of the-
Bill. 
Clause 73 seeks to amend section 32 of the Unit Trust of India 
Act, 1963. 
These amendments are 'consequential to the amendment to the-
Incon~e-tax Act (under clause 29 of the Bill) relating to the removal 
of the charge of super-tax. Under one of the existing provisions, 
of the aforesaid section, an individual unit holder is allowed to 
deduct the qualifying amount of the dividend received on the units 
(viz., dividends not exceedinl{ a sum of Rs. 1,000) from his total 
income, normally, for the ~purpose of income-tax only and not for 
super-tax. The deduction is allowed both for in~e-tax and super-
tax, only where the individual's income would not at~ract super-tax 
but for the inclusion therein of the amount of qdalifyinl{ dividend.. 
With the integration of super-tax with ,income-tax, a deduction of' 
the amount of the qualifying dividend would, however, result in a 
tax relief in respect of the element of super-tax also. The proposed 
amendment, therefore, secures that on the integration of super-tax. 
with in~ome-tax, the tax relief in terms of the consolidated income--
tax would be limited to what the individual would be entitled to 
un~er the existing provisions of the aforesaid Act. 

102 
Under another existing provision in section 32 of the afo~said Act, 
Individuals are exempt from deduction of income-tax at source ·from 
the dividends paid to them by the Unit Trust. When super-tax gets 
4ntegrated into income-tax, the e~ect of the existing provision 
would be that non-residents would be exempt from the deduction of 
the element .of super-tax also, fro~ the dividends Mceived by them 
from the Unit Trust of India. To avoid this position, it is sought to 
amend the relevant provision to provide that in the case of non-
resident individuals, income-tax shall be deducted at source from the 
dividends received by th~m on the units, at the rate of 15 per cent. 
Clause 74 seeks to amend certain provisions of the Companies 
(Profits) Surtax Act, 1964. 
Sub-clauses (i) and (ii).-The amendments under these sub-clauses 
are consequential to the amendments to the Income-tax Act, under 
clause 29 of the Bill, relating to the removal of the charge of super-
tax. . I t I ~ ; J •. ~: 
Sub-clause (iii)(,,) introduces a provision limiting the aggregate 
amount of income-tax and surtax on companies of certain categories 
to 70 per cent. of their total income. If the aggregate amount of 
5uch tax liability is found to be in excess of the aforesaid limit, the 
surtax otherwise payable by the company will be reduced by the 
excess amount. For the purpose of this provision, income-tax will 
include the amount. of income-tu I payable by the co.pany with 
reference to the amount of the dividends declared or distributed 
by it in respect of its equi~y capital, but . will not include the 
income-tax payable by it with reference to bonus shares or boRUS 
issued by it to its shareholders in any year. 
Sub-clause (iii)(b) adds certain new items to the list of articles 
in paragraph 2 of the Third Schedule to the Companies (Profits) 
'Surtax Act the profits derived from the production or manufacture . , 
of which qualify for a rebate of surtax. 
Clause 75 read with the Third Schedule, seeks to increase the ,-
basic import· duties on certain ifems. The changes are:-
(i) the duty on certain paints, colours and painters' mate-
rials is propose'ci to be raised by 15% ad valo,.em; 
(ii) the duty on essential oils, certain varieties of 
.perfumery and paper is proposed to be raised by 25% ad 
'.valorem; 
(iii) the basic customs duty on raw cotton is pro~sed t~ 
be raised from 26 Paise per kiloil"am to 50 ·Paise per kilogram, 

103 
(iv) the duty on art sillfyarn and thread is proposed to be 
raised by about 20% ad valo'rem; 
(v) the duty on steel tinplates is proposed to be raised by 
about 18% ad v4lorem; 
",-(in) the duty on stainless steel plates and sheets is proposed 
to be raised by 70% ad valorem; and 
(vii) the duty on sodium. hydrosulphite is proposed to be 
. raised by 60% ad valorem. 
Cl4uae 76 seeks to continue up to the 31st day of March, 1966 the 
existing surcharge on customs duties. 
Clause 77-
Sub-clau.ses (1) to (5) seek to provide for levy of regulatory 
duty of customs up to the 15th day of May, 1966 on a flexible 
basis within the specified ceiling rates, for regulating or bringing 
greater economy in imports. 
Suo-clause (6) seeks to continue up to the passing of this 
Act the regulatory duties of customs levied under the Finance 
Act, 1964 read with notifications issued under that Act and the 
Customs Act, 1962. 
Clause 78 seeks to maintain for another year the status quo in 
regard to commitments under the General Aireement on Tariffs 
and Trade. 
Clause 79-
Sub-clause (a) seeks to substitute an ad valorem rate for 
the existing specific rates of duty on cigarettes; 
Sub-clause (b) seeks to raise the rate of duty on steel ingots; 
Sub-clause (c) seeks to raise the rates of duty on copper 
and copper alloys and their manufactures; 
Sub-clause (d) seeks to raise the rates of duty On certain 
'Iron or Steel prodl1cts and also to mo.". the existing tarift 
classification. 
Sub-clause (e) seeks to revise the tarift classification of 
certain manufactures of aluminium; and 
Sub-clause (I) seeks to raise the rate of duty on tin plate 
and tinned sheets. 
Clause 80 seeks to continue up to the 31st day of March, 1966 the 
existing special duties of excise. 

I CZauae 81-
I I. . ..... ' ',J." 
Sub-clause, (1) to (5) seek to provide for levy of regulatory-
d~ty of ex;cise \lp to the 15th day of :May, 1966 on a flexible basis 
within the specified ceilinJ rates, for regulating or bringing. 
greater economy in consumption. 
Sub-clause (6) seeks to continue up to the passing of this ,Act. 
the regulatory duties of excise levied tinder the Finance Act. 
1964 read with any exempijon ~otiftcation. 
Clause 82 like section 63 of the Finance Act, 1964 provides that 
salt shall be duty free for another year. 
ClcIuse 83 seeks to substitute ad valOTem rate for the existing:: 
~t: rates of duty ~n cig~ettes in the Additional Duties of: 
Excise (Goods of Special Iuiportance) Act, 1957. 

FINANCIAlt MEMORANDUM 
INCOME-TAX AND OTIID DIDCT TAXIS 
Some of the provisions contained in the Finance Bill, 1965 will 
result in an increase in the work load on the Income-tax Department. 
Instances of these provisions are the levy of the additional wealth-tax 
on immovable property in certain areas, introduction of a deme 
of voluntary discloaur.es, grant of tax credit certiftcates for certain 
purposes and generally an- increase in the number of asses&eel expect-
ed during the financial year 1965-66 due to various measures adopted 
In this behalf. 
The aforesaid measures will necessitate the employment of an 
additional number of officers and other staff. The expenditure on 
this account together with the incidental expenses on administration 
is estimated at about Rs. 16·50 lakhs as indicated herein below:-
Number Annual Coat 
emolumeDts 
Ra. 
I. Offiurs: 
Commiaaionen of Income-tax 3 3 x Ra. 23,800 68,.400 
A .. iltUlt Commiaaioncn .. ~ .. 10 10 X Ra. It: 1:3t,ooo Income-tu 0fIicen (Claaa I) 28 28 x Ra. ,000 1.6 .0010 
II. Stt1/!: 
Inspectors 21 21 X as. 3,060 64.260 
SupervisoR 17 17 X Ra. Ss040 8S,680 
HeIIdderb 45 45 x Ra. 3,060 l.3l·3 OO 
StCDopapbcn . 13 13 x Ra. 2.964 3.S32 
Upper Division Clerks . 178 178 X Ra. 2,964 .5,27,.592 
Sten~~_ 28 28 x Ra. 2.364 66.192 
Lower 'vislon Oerb . 96 96 x Ra. 2,124 2.03,904 
III. Irr&idalal ",p.nm : 
Incidental apenaes includiq CJua 
IV ad 1.,50,000 
TOTAL -1. 16,,53,860 . 
or say Ra. 16,50,oao 
Clause 53, which amends among others, sections 214, 243 and 244 
provides for the increase of interest from four per cent. to six per 
cent. The exact amount of interest payable by the Central Govern-
ment as a result of this amendment cannot be foreseen at the present. 
105 
2248 (B) LS-lt 

MEMORANDUM ~.~ING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
New section 280ZE proposed to be inserted by clause 62 empowers 
the Cen.tral Government to frame one or more schemes to be called 
,tax eredit eertiftcate ;sCheme drsclreiJies in relation to taX ciedit 
certifteates to be «ranted Under Chapter XXIIB. The various iD:atten 
which amODg others may be providedform any such achem:e have 
been specifted in clauses (4) to (i) of sub-section (2) of th8t sedion. 
'Such matters, mter alia, relate to the form and manner ill which, and 
the authority to which, applications.for 'Such CertfftcateS may be 
made, the authority by which such 'c:ertiftcates may be griilted, the. 
determination of the rights and obligations of persons to wh'omsuch 
certificates have been granted, etc. 
ClauSe 2 (5) (d), proposed new sections 33A, 80A and SOC empower 
the Board to make ruleS in relation to the matters specified therein. 
The aforesaid matters are matters of procedure and administrative 
detail It is hardly practicable for these matters of detail or 
procedure to be pl'O\tided in the Bill itself. The delegation of legis-
lative power is thus of a normal character . 
. .... 
108 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
to give effect to the financial proposals of the Central 
Govt:rnment for the financial year 1965-66. 
(Shri T. T. KrishNlmoduni, 
Minister of Finance.) 