Bill No. Ie fit if'tt 
THE INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT BANK OF INOlA 
BILL,19 64 
CLAuni 
1. 
2. 
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
Short title, extent and commencement. 
Definitions. 
CHAPrER II 
) 
\. 
• 
EsTABLISIDO:NT 01' 'flU INDUSTRIAL DEvELOPMENT BANK. OF hmIA 
AND CAPITAL THEREOF 
S. Establishment and incorporation of Industrial Development 
Bank of India. 
4. Authorised and issued capital. 
CHAPTER III 
MANAGEMENT OF THE DEvELOPMENT BAMe 
5. Management: 
6. Board of Directors. 
7. Executive Committee and other committees. 
8. Fees and allowances of direotors and memben of Mm-
mlttees: 
CHAPTER IV 
BusINJaS or THE DEVa.oPMENT BANK 
9. Business of Development Bank. 
10. Loans by Central Government. 
11. Borrowings and acceptance of deposits by Development 
~aftk. 
12. Loe'ns in foreill'l curren.~. 
18. Gnnta, donations, etc., to Development Bank. 

CLA~ 
H 
CHAPrER V 
DEVELOPMENT AsSISTANCE FuND 
14. Development Assistance Fund. 
15. Credits to Developmertt Assistance Fund. 
16. Utilisation of Development Assistance Fund. 
17. Debits to Development Assistance Fund. 
18. Accounts and audit of Development Assistance Fund. 
19. Liquidation of Development Assistance Fund . 
• CHAPI'ER VI 
GENERAL FUND, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT 
20. General Fund. 
21. Preparation of accounts and balance-sheet. 
22. Disposal of profits accruing to General Fund. 
23. Audit. 
24. Saving. 
CHAPTER VII 
TRANsFER OF BUSINESS OF REFINANCE CORPORATION I'OllINDUST.RY 
25. Transfer of assets and liabilities of Refinance Corporation 
for Industry.' 
CHAPTER VIII 
MISCELLANEOUS 
26. Staft of Development Bank. 
27. Delegation of powers. 
28. Returns: 
29. Obligation as to fidelity and secrecy. 
30. Defects in appointments not to invalidate acts, etc. 
31. Indemnity of directors. 
J2. Protection of action taken under this Act. 
33. Act 18 of 1891 to apply in relation to Development Bank. 
34. Act 10 of 1949 not to apply to Development Bank. 

iii 
CLAUBa 
35. Act 43 of 1961 and Act 14 of 1963 not to apply to Develop-
ment Bank. 
36. Liquidation of Development Bank. 
37. Power to make regulations. 
38. Amendment of certain enactments. 
THE FIRST SCHEDULE. 
THE SECOND SCHEDULE. 

BIll" •. 10" 1t!1 
TIm INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT BANK OF INDIA 
BIIL,I964 
• 
BILL 
to e6t4blilh the InduaiTiGl Development Bank of India for promding 
credU and other facilities for the development of industf'JI and 
for m4tterB connected therewith and further to amend certain 
~. 
BE it euacted by Parliament in the FIfteenth Year of the 
Republic of India as follows:-
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
5 1. (1) This Act may be called the Industrial Development Bank Short 
of India Act, 1964. title, 
extent aDd 
(2) It ex1ends to the whole of Intia. commence-
ment. 
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central govern-
ment may, by notiftcation in the Ofticial Gezette, appOint and differ-
10 ent dates may be appointed for different provisions of this Act. 
Z. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,- Definitions. 
(a) "Board" metn'ls the Board of Directors of the Develop-
ment Bank; 
(b) "Development Bank" means the Industrial Develop-
15 ment Bank of India establtshed under section S; 
(c) "industrial concern" means any concern engaged or to 
be engaged in the manufacture, preservation or processing of 
goods or in shipping or in mining or in the hotel industry or in 
the transport of passengers or goods by road or by water or by 
2.0 *' at in the generation or distribution of electricity or any other 
form of power. 

Eatabliah-
mentand 
incorpora-
tiono! 
Industrial 
Develop-
ment 
Beak 
of India. 
ExplaMtion.-The expression "processing of goods" includes 
any art or process for producing, preparing or making an article 
by lubjecting any material to a manual, mechanical, chemical, 
electrical or any other like operation; 
(d) "Industrial Finance Corporation" means the Industrial $ 
Finance C.orporation of India established under the Industrial 
Finance ClJrporation Act, 1948; 
(p) "prescribed" means prescribed by regulations made 
under this Act;' 
1~ of 1948. 
(f) "Reserve Bank" means the Reserve Bank of In,dia con- 10 f 
stituted under the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934;. 20 1934. 
(g) "scheduled bank" means a bank for the time being in-
cluded in the Second Schedule to \he Reserve Bank of India Act, 
1~; 2~1*. 
(h) "State co-operative bank" has the same meaning as in IS 
the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934; 2 of 1934. , . .,.. 
(i) "State Financial Corporation" means a financial corpo- ;c' 
ration established under section 3 or section 3A of the State 
Financial Corporation Act, 1951 and includes the Madras Indus-
trial Investment Corporation Limited. ' 20 83 of 1951. 
CHAPl'ER II 
ESTABLISHMENT OF THE INDUSTRIAL DEvELoPMENT BANK OF INDIA AND 
CAPITAL THI:llEOF 
3. (1) With effect from such date as the Central Government may, 
by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint, there shall be eatab- 25 
lished for the purposes of this Act a corporation to be known as the 
Industrial Development Bank of India. 
(2) The Development Bank shall be a body corporate with the 
name aforesaid having perpetual succession and a common seal with 
power, subject to the provisions of this Act, to acquire, hold and 30 
dispose of property and to contract, and may, by that ~e, tUe or 
be sued. 
(3) The head office of the Development Bank shall be at Bombay 
or at such other place as the Reserve Bank may, by notification in 
the Official Gazette, specify. 
35 (4) The Development Bank may establish offices, branches or 
agencies at any other place in or outside India. 

, , 
4. (1)' The authorised capital of the Deve10pment Sank shail be Authoriled 
fifty crores of rupees: and issued 
capital 
Provided that the Reserve Bank may, with the previous approval 
of the Central Government, increase the said capital up to one hun-
S <ired crores of rupees. 
(2) The issUed capital of the Development Bank shail, in the first 
instance, be ten crores of rupees, but the Reserve Bank may, with 
the previous approval of the Central Government, increase the 
issued capital from time to time up to such amount as it thinks fit. 
10 (3) The issued capital of the Development Bank shall be wholly 
subscribed by the Reserve Bank. 
CHAPl'ER m 
MANAGDIENT QF THE DEVELOPMENT BANJt 
IS 5. (1) The general superintendence, direction and management Manage-
of the affairs and business of the Development Bank shall vest in 8 ment. 
Board of Directors, which may exercise all powers and do all acts 
and things which may be exercised ClII' done ,by the Development 
Bank. 
20 (2) Save as otherwise provided in regulations made under this 
Act, the chairman and in his absence the vice-chainnan shall also 
have powers Of general superintendence, direction and management 
of the affairs and business of the Development Bank and may exer-
cise all powers and do all acts and things which may be exercised 
or done by the Development Bank. 
25, (3) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Board in discharg-
ing its functions shall act on business principles with due regard to 
public interest. .,." 
6, U) The Board shall consist of such persons as for the time be- Board of 
ing hold office as directors on ,the Central Board of the Reserve Director •. 
30 Bank. 
(2) The Governor of the Reserve Bank shall be the chairman 
and a Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank nominated hy that bank 
in this behalf shall be the vice-chairman of the Board. 
(3) The Board shall meet at such times and places and shall 
• 3S observe such rules of procedure in regard to the transaction of buei-
ness at its meetings as may be prescribed. 
(4) The chairman or, if for any reason he is unable to attend a 
meetina of the Board, the vice-chairman. or, in the event of 'both the 

Executive 
Committee 
and other 
chatrman and fIhe vice-chairman bem, unable to attend the meettng. 
any other director nominated by the chairman in this behalf, aball 
preside at the meeting. 
(5) All questions which come up before any meeting of the !)oard 
shall be decided by a majority of votes of the directors preaent and 5 
voting, and in the event of an equality of votes, the chairman Or in 
his absence, the viee-ehainnan, or in the abaenee ot both t1l&e elaair-
man and the vice-chairman, the person pNliding, Ihall have. 
second or casting 'VOte. 
(6) Save as provided in sub-section (5), every director of the 10 
Board shan have one vote. 
7. (1) The Board may constitute an Executive Committee consist-
ing of such number of directors as may be prescribed. 
(2) The Executive Committee shall clifJcba:rfe IJUCb functions .. 
may be prescribed or as may be delegated to it by the Board. J S 
(3) The Board may constitute such other oommitteea whetbel' 
consisting wholly of directors or wholly ofoth .. penoIJ.I or partly of. 
directors and partly of other persoM for such putpole or ~ 
as it may think fit. 
(4) The Executive Committee or any other eommittee eonaUtut- ao 
ed under this section shall meet at such tlmea and plaees aJlId sIJaD 
observe such rules of procedure in regard to the tranaactloft fJf. bUl .. 
ness at its meetings as may be prHCrfbed. 
8. The directors and the memDer& of a committee Ithall be paid 
Fees md such fees and allowances as may be prescribed for attending the 2$ 
~l~~_ces meetings of the Board or of any committee constituted bl punllt8Dce 
ton and of this Act and for attending to any other .ork of the Deft!op-
members ment Bank: 
ofeom-
mitteet. Provided that no fees shall be payable to any dtn!etOll' or member 
who is an officer of the Government or to the Governor or a ~ 30 
Governor of the Reserve Bank or any officer of that bank. 
CHAPTER IV 
BUSINF.S8 or THE DEVELOPMENT BMfK 
t. (1) The Development Bank may carry on and transact BAy of 
BUliness ot tU foUowing kinds of business, namely : - " Develop-
ment Bank. (a) granting loans and advarrees to-
(i) the Industrial Finance Corp« .. kJft, BA1 Stat. rin-
. aneial Corporation or any othft flnaac'-l ilJlUtUtioa whWa 

5 
10 
20 
35 
S 
may be notiAed by the Central Government in this behalf, by 
way of refinance of any loans or advances granted to indus-
trial concerns by such Corporation or institution which are 
repayable on the expiry of not less than three years and not 
more than twenty-five years; 
(ii) any scheduled bank or State co-operative bank, by 
way of refinance of any loans or advances granted to indus-
trial concerns by such bank which are repayable on the 
expiry of not less than three years and not more than ten 
years; 
(iii) any scheduled bank Or State co-operative !bank or 
the Industrial Finance Corporation or any State Financial 
Corporation or any other financial institution which may be 
notified by the Central Government in this behalf, by way 
of refinance of any loans or advances granted to industrial 
concerns or group of industrial concerns by such bank or 
iIllstitution which are for the purpose of, or in connection 
with, the export of capital goods, commodities or merchan-
dise from India and are repayable on the expiry of not leu 
than six months and not more than ten years; 
(b) subject to such conditions as may be prescribed, accept-
ing, discounting or re-discounting bills of exchange and promis-
sory notes of industrial concerns; 
(c) subscribing to or purchasing stocks, shares, bonds or 
debentures of the Industrial Finance Corporation, any State 
Financial COO'pOration Or any other financial institution which 
maybe notified by the Central Government in this behalf; 
(J.) granting loan. and advances to any industrial concern 
or su'bscribing to, or purchasing, or underwriting the issue of, 
stocks, shares. bonds or debentures of any industrial concern: 
Provided that nothing contained in this clause shall be deem-
ed to preclude the Development Bank from granting loans or 
.advances to, or subscribing to debentures of, an industrial con-
cern. which may at the option of the Development Bank be con-
vertible into stocks or shares of that concern within the period 
the loan, advance or debenture is repayable; 
(e) guaranteeing deferred payments due from any industrial 
concern; 
(f) guaranteeing-
(i) loans raised by industrial concerns which are Boated 
in the public market; and 

6 
(n) loans raised by industrial eoI'ICems.ftoaMlny sche-
duled bank or State co-.operative bank or the Industrial Fin-
ance Corporation or any State Financial Corporation or any 
other financial institution whic::h may be nGti1ied by the Cen-
tral Government in thisbehalf~ S 
(g) guaranteeing the obligations -&f any scheduled bank or 
State :co-operative hank or -the lrulustriat Ftrumee Corporation or 
any State Financial Corporation or any othel' ftnan.eial institution. 
which may be notified by the Central Govemmentin tbis behalf, 
arising out of, or in connection with, underwriting the .issue of 10 
stocks, shares, bonds or debentures of any in~ustrial concern; 
{11,) undertaking research and SU'I"V~ys for evaluating or 
dealing with marketing or investment. and undertaking and car-
rying :OIl techao-ecoAOM:ie studies in eormeetioR with the develop-
meat of industry; t~ 
(i) providing technical and administrat4ve assistance to any 
industrial concern or any person for promotion, manapment or 
expansion of any industry; 
(;) planning, promoting 8Jld developing industries to fill up 
gaps in the industrial structure in India; 20 
(k) forming or conducting of subsidiaries for carryine out 
its functio~s; 
(l) performing functions I entrusted to, or required of, the 
Devewpment Bank by this Act or by any other law fOf the time 
beint in force; 25 
(m) doing any other kind of business which the Central 
Govemment, on the Tecommendation of the Reserve Bank, may 
authorile; 
(n) generally doing such other acts and tlaings as may be 
incidental to, or consequential upon, the exercise of iUl powers or 30 
the discharge of its duties under this Act or anr other law for- the 
time being in force including sale or transfer' of any .of its usets. 
(2) 'nle Development Bank may receive in consideration of any 
of the services mentioned in sUb-section (1) such commission, 
brokerage, intel.'etlt, remuneratiGn or fees as may be agreed upon. 3' 
(3) The Development Bank shall not grant any loan or advance 
or other financial accommodation on the security of its own bonds or 
Hbentuna. 

1 
10. TIl. CeIIt .... l GovemmeDt ..... y, ...... ."...,. ........ Loua "" 
by PAI'I1amMlt ,." .... w. ba tJda ,W-If, aelvuCe to the »wehr ....... Central 
Bank- Govern-
s 
(a) 8.D. intere.t free loan of ten crores of rupees, repayable 
in 8ft ... equal annual instalments, cOJDJQencinc on the .pto of 
a period of fifteen yean from the date of the. receipt of the loan; 
and 
(b) IAIClb furdler aums of moaey ),y 'way -of ... Oft such 
term. ad ·aoactitioaa as may H apeed upea: 
ment. 
10 Provided that the Central Government may, on a refIIl-t 
being made to It by the Development Bank, Increase the number 
«If ....... or ..... the IftDoUDt of oymsta1ment Or *ry the 
date 8ft ..,WeIt .".,. Inltalmeltt is PaYable under 6ase (a). 
11. (1) The Development Bank may, for the purpose of carrying Borrowing. 
t 'ts f t' d thO Act and accept-IS QU 1 Unc lOns un er IS ,- anee ot 
20 
30 
35 ' 
(Cl) issue and sell bonds and debentUTes with or without the deposits by 
guarantee of the Central Government; Develop-mentBank. 
(b) borrow money from the Reserve Bank-
(i) repayable on demand or on the expiry of fixed 
periods not exceeding ninety days from the date on which 
the money-is 90 borrowed against the security of stocks, 
funds and securities (other than immovable property) in 
which a trustee is authorised to invest trust money by any 
law for th~ time being in force in India; 
(ii) against bills of exchange or promissory notes aris-
ing out of bona fide commercial or trade transactions, bearing 
two or more good signatures and maturing within five years 
from the date 'M the borrowing; 
(iii) out of the National Industrial Credit (Long Term 
Operatiom) Fund established under section 46C of the Re-
serve Bank of lndia Act, 1934 for any of the purposes speci-
fied in that section; , 
(c) borrow money from .such other aq.thority, organisation 
or institution in India as may be generally or specially approved 
by the Central Government; 
(d) accept deposits repaya,ble after the expiry of a period 
which shall not be less than twelve months from the date of the 
making of the deposit on such terms as may generally or special-
ly be approved by the:Reserve ·Bank. 

Loans in 
foreign 
currency. 
Grants, 
donations, 
etc., to 
Develop-
mentBank. 
Develop-
ment 
Assistance 
Fund. 
Credits to 
Develop-
ment 
Assistance 
Fund 
8 
(Z) The Central Government may, on a request htng made to it 
by the Development Bank, guarantee the bonis and debentUres l..-aed 
by that bank as to the repayment of principal and the payment of 
interest at such rate as may be bed by that Government. 
12. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the. Foreign Ex- S 
change Regulation Act, 1947 or in any other enactment for the time T of 1847. 
being in force relating to forei~ exchange, the Development Bank 
may. for the purpose of granting loans and advances under this Act, 
borrow, with the previous consent of the Central Govemment, forei~ 
currency from any bank or ftnanciallnsUtution in any foreign country 10 
or otherwise. 
(2) The Central Govemment may, where necessary. guarantee 
any loan taken by the Develooment Bank under tlUb-lIeCtlen (1) Olr 
any part thereof as to th1! reoavment of principal and the payment of 
interest and other incidental charges. '$ 
(.1) All loans and advances out of foreign currency borrowed 
under sub-section (1) shall be ~anted by the Development Bank in 
Indian currency and shall be repayable in Indian currency. 
(4) Any loss or proflt accruing in connection with any borrowing 
of foreign currency under sub-section (1) for the purpose of grant- 20 
ing loans and advances or its repayment en account of any fluctua-
tions in the rates of exchange shall be reimbursed by. or paid to, the 
recipients of such loans and advances. 
13. The Development Bank may receive gifts grants donations 
or benefactions from Government or any other source. 2$ 
CHAPTER V 
DEvELOPMENT AssISTANCE FUND 
14. With effect from such date as the Central Govemment may, 
by notiftcation in the Ofticial Gazette, appoint, the Development Bank 
shall establish a special fund to be called the Development Assist- 30 
ance Fund. 
15. To the Development Assistance Fund. shall be credtted-
(a) all amounts received for the purposes of that fund by 
way of loans, gifts, granta, donations or benefactions from Gov. 
ernment or any other source; 3S 
(b) repayments or recoveries in respect of loans, advances 
or other facilities granted from the fund; 

• 
(c) income or proflts from investments made from the fund; 
and 
(d) income accruing or arising to the fund, by way of inter· 
est or otherwise, on account of the application of the fund in Be-
S cordance with the provisions of section 16. 
16. (1) Where the Development Bank considers it necessary or Utilisation 
desirable so to do, it may, subject to the provisions of sub-sections of Deve-
(2) and (3), disburse or spend from the Development Assistance ~;s~~ce 
Fund any amount on account or in consequence of the grant of any J'und. 
10 loan or ad.vance, or on account or in consequence of entering into any 
arrangement, under clause (d) or clause (e) or clause (f) or clause 
(g) of sub-section (1) of section 9: 
Provided that before granting any such loan or advance to an 
industrial concern or entering into any such arrangement with or 
15 in relation to an industrial concern, the Development Bank shall ob-
tain the prior approval of the Central Government. 
(2) Before seeking the approval of the Central Government under 
sub-section (1), the Development Bank shall satisfy itself that bank-
ing or other financial institutions or other agencies are not likely to 
30 grant such loan or advance to the industrial concern or to enter into 
any such arrangement with or in relation to the industrial concern 
in the ordinary course of business. 
(3) The Central Government, before giving its approval, shall 
satisfy itself that such loan, advance or arrangement is necessary as 
2, a matter of priority in the interests of the industrial development 
of the country. 
(4) For the removal of doubts it is hereby declared that nothing 
contained in this section shall be deemed to preclude the Develop-
ment Bank from granting any loan or advance or from entering into 
30 any arrangement under clause (d) or clause (e) or clause <I) or 
clause (g) of sub-section (1) of section 9 without the approval of 
the Central Goverrunent, if no amount in respect thereof is to be dis-
bursed or spent from the Development Assistance Fund. 
17. (1) To the Development Assistance Fund shall be debited--
I 
Debita to 
Develop-
(a) such amOWlts as may from time to time be disbursed or ment 
spent under sub-eections (1) to (3) of section 16; Msistanee 
Fund. 
('b) such amounts as may be required for discharging the 
llabUiUes in respect of loans 'received for the purposes of that 
fundi 

Accounts 
andaudtt 
of Deve-
lopment 
Assistance 
Fund. 
Liquida-
tionof 
Develop-
ment 
A.8istance 
Fund 
10 
(c) any 10815 arisi.D.g on aceount of investment. maa.: oot of 
that fund; and 
(d.) such expenditure arising out of, or in connection with, 
the administration Ill'ld application of the fWld as may be deter-
mined by the Board: . 
(2) No amount shall be debited. to the Development Assistance 
Fund except as provided for in sub-section (1). 
18. (1) The balance-sheet and accounts of the Development 
Assistance Fund shall be prepared in such form and manner as may 
be prescribed.. ' 10 
(2) The Board shall cause the books and accounts of the fun. 
to be closed and balanced as. on the 30th day of June each year. 
(3) The fund shall be audited by one or more auditors appoint-
ed by the Reserve Bank under section 23 who shall make a separate 
report thereon. IS 
(4) The prOVisions of sub-sections (2), (3), (4) and (6) of 
section 23 shall, so far as may be, apply in relation to the audit of 
the Development Assistance Fund. 
(5) The Development Bank shall furnish to the Central Gov-
ernment and the Reserve Bank within four months from the date 20 
QIl which the accounts of the fund are closed and balanced, a copy 
of the balance-sheet and accounts together with a copy of the 
auditors' report and a report on the operat.ion of the fund during the 
relevant year and the Deftlopment Bank shall cause to be pUblished 
in the Omcial Gazette copies of the said balance-sheet, accounts and 35 
reports. 
1 •. The Development Assistance Fund shall not be closed or 
wound up save by order of the Central Government and in such 
manner as that Government may direct. . 
CHAPTER VI 
GENERAL FUND, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT . 
General 10. All receipts of the Development Bank· other than tboee which 
J'wld. are to be credited to the .Development AIsiatance FUlld UDd&r thil 
Act shall be credited to a fund to be . called the General Fund and 
all payments by the Development Bank, other than those which are 
to be debited to the Development Alltltanee Fund, shall be made out 
o! the Geaeral Fund. 3' 

u 
ti. (l) n. "8"= ebeet aDGl lIOCO\mia 01 the. Development Bank Prepare-
shall be prepared in such fonn and manner as meybe prescribed. tion of accounts 
(2) The Board shall cause the books and accounts of the Deve- and 
lopment Bank to be closed. and balanced as OD the 30th day of June balance 
• S each year. . sheet. 
Zl. (1) The Development Bank may establish a reserve fund to Dispoaal 
which may· be transferred such sums as that bank may deem fit out of profits 
of the annual profits acCFUing to the General Fund. accruing tf. General 
(2) After making provision for bad and doubtful debts, deprte- Fund. 
10 ciation of assets and for all other matters for which provision is ne-
cnsary or expedient or which is \llually provided for by bankers 
and for the reserve fund referred to in sub-aection (1), the Deve-
lopment Bank shall transfer the balance of the net profits to the 
Reserve Bank. 
IS 23. (1) The accounts ·of the Development Bank &hall be audited Audit 
by auditors duly qualified to act as auditors under 6ub-section (1) of 
section 226 of the Compa.nieJ AI:rt. 1956 who shall be appointed by 
the Reserve Bank for such term and on such remuneration as the 
Reserve Bank may fix. 
20 (2) The auditors ~ be supplied with a copy of the aDIlual 
balanee-sheet of the Development Bank and it shall be their duty to 
examine it together with the acco~ts and voucher.s relating thereto 
and they shall have a list delivered to them of ali books kept by the 
Development Bank and shali at ail reasonable times have a,ccess to 
~S the books, accounts, vouchers and other documentAS of the Develop-
me:1t Bank. 
(3) The auditors may, in relation to such accounts, examine any 
di:rector or any officer or other employee of the Development Bank 
and shall be entitled to require from the Board or officers or other 
30 employees of the Development Bank such information and explana-
tion as they may think necessary for the performance of their duties. 
(4) The auditors shall make a repon to the Development Bank 
upon the annual balance-sheet and accounts examined by them and 
in every sUch report they shall state whether in their opinion the 
3' bala~ce-6heet is a full and fair balance-sheet con~iningall necessax: 
partIculars and properly drawn up so as· to exhIbit" a true and faIr 
view of· the' state 'Of affairs of the Development Bank and in case 
they had called for any explanation or inforniation from the Board 
or any officer or other employee of the Development Bank whether 
040 it has been given and whether it·is satisfactorY' 

Savin,. 
11 
(5) The Development Bank shall furnish to the Relerve Bank 
within four months from the date on whioh its accOuntll are closed 
and balanced, a copy of its balance-sheet and accounts together with 
a copy of the auditors' report and a report of the working of the 
])evelopment Bank during the relevant year, and the Development S 
Bank shall cause to be published in the Official Gazette copies of the 
said balance-sheet, accounts and reports. 
(6) Without prejudice to anythina contained in the preceding 
sub-sections, the Central Government may at any time appoint the 
Comptroller and Auditor-General of Imlia to examine and report 10 
upon the accounts of the Development Bank and any expenditure 
incurred by him in connection with such examination and report 
shall be payable by the Development Bank to the Comptroller and 
Auditor-General of India. 
%4. Save as otherwise provided in Bub-section (4) of section 18, r$ 
nothing contained in this Chapter shall apply t6 the Development 
A6sistance Fund. 
CHAPI'ER VII 
TRANSFER OF BUSINESS OF REnNANCE CORPORATION J'OR lNDU8nrY 
Transfer 25. (1) On such date as tile Central Gover~t may, by noti- 20 
of assets tication in the Official Gazette, appoint, the entire undertaking of 
and liabili- the Refinance Corporation for Industry, Limited (hereinafter in this 
ties of Chapter referred to as "the company") including all business, pro-
~~~c_e perty, assets and liabilities, rights, interests, privileges, anci obliga-
tion for tions of whatever nature, shall stand transferred to and vest in the 2S 
Industry. Development Bank. 
(2) As compensation for the transfer of the undertaking of the 
company to the Development Bank under sub-section (l), the Deve-
lopment Bank shall pay in cash to the company an amount equal to 
the total paid-up capital of the company for the purpose of being 
distributed to the shareholders of the company in proportion to 3~ 
their contribution to such paid-up capital. 
(3) All contracts, deeds, bonds, agreements, powers of attorney, 
grants of legal representation and other instruments of whatever 
nature subsisting or having effect immediately before the date refer-
red to in sU8-section (1) and to which the company is a party or 35 
which are in favour of that company shall be of full force and e1fect 
against or in favour of the Development Bank, as the case may be. 
and may be enforced or acted upon as fully and et!ectually .. jf 

i3 
instead of the company theDeftl~rrt Bank had been a party 
thereto or as if they had been. wuef;i in favour of the Development 
Bank. 
. (4) If 011 the date refe1'red to in sub-Jection (1) jUly suit, appeal 
S or other legal proceec:lingof whatever aature, is pending by or 
against the company, the same shall not abate, be discontmued or 
be in any way prejudicially affected by reason .of the transfer to ,the 
Development Bank of the undertaking of the company w: of anything 
contained in this Act, but the suit, appecUor other proceedine may 
10 be continued, prosecuted and enforced by or a~t the Develop-
ment Bank. 
(5) The Central Government may appoint, whether ()J1 or after 
the date referred to in aub..aeetion (l',·a fNitable person to take 
ov .. tlIe management of the.company tor the purpose of. witlding up 
I, its dairs and distributing its asaet. and mnultaDeou9ly with such 
appointment the Cea.tral Government May isslle directiODB to be 
followed by the person in the management of the company fOF the 
purpose aforesaid and thereupon-
(4) the provisiOftS of the Companies Act, ·1956 or any other 
law for the time being in foree or any 1nstrmnent having eftect 
'by virtue of any such Act or other law, in so far as they are 
inconsistent with such directio~, shall cea# to apply to, QI' in 
relation to, the company;· ( 
(b) aU persons in C'harge of the management, including any 
pel'8M1 holdin« .oftlee as manager or director, of the company im-
mediately before the issue of such directions, shan be deemed 
to have vacated their office as such; and 
(c) the pel'SOIl appointed to take .over the management 01 
the compa.oy .slvtll, in .acoQ.l"dance with those dW:ectious., take aU 
such steps as may be nec.easary to f-.dlit"1h~ ~ up of its 
.. .nEW'S and .tbe. distPbJltion of its AiS8tS. 
(6) The Central Gov.ernment, when satisfied that nothing further 
req1li.i7cs ·to be d.6D.e .in01lder to wind up the diaira of the . COOlpey, 
may •. by «cler ill Wl'itm" idi!'eet that as frmn 8u~ .date .s may be· 
3S speeified ~hS'eiDf the ctompan,- 1Jhall stand ,tlissolV'f:!lli and tftereapGlll 
any such direction shall have dect ·accordingly . 
• (7) The :pr.oviBions .of :this.section shall-haveeftect notwitbstand.-
irW .a.Q~ .co;oWned in the Companies Act., l,9Pi·.pr any .otlJ.ei' law 
'or any instrument baving force by virtue of such Act or ~er law. 
, ,. 

14 
CHAPTER VIII 
MISCELLANEOUS 
Staft of 26. (1) The Development Bank may appoint such number of oM-
Develop- cera and employees as it considers necessary or desirable for the 
ment Bank. efficient performance of its functions and detennine the terms and 5 
oondiCons of their appointment and service. 
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions of sUb-section (1), it 
shall be lawful for the Development Bank to utilise, and for the 
Reserve Bank to make available the services of, such staft of the 
Reserve Bank on such terms and conditions as may be agreed upon 10 
between the Development Bank and the Reserve Bank. 
Dele,ation 21. The Board may, by general or special order, delegate to any 
of powers. committee of directors constituted under section 7 or to any director 
or to any otlicer or other employ\!e of the Development Bank, sub-
ject to such conditions and limitations, if any, as may be specified 15 
in the order, such of its powers and duties under this Act as it may 
deem necessary. 
Returns. 28. The Development Bank shall furnish, from time to time, to 
Obllption 
as toMe. 
lity cd 
secrecy. 
J)efeetl in 
appoint.-
menta not 
tolnvall-
date acta, 
etc. 
the Central Government and the Reserve Bank such returns as the 
Central Government or, as the case may be, the Reserve Bank, may 20 
require. 
29. (1) The Development Bank shall not, except as otherwise re-
quired by this Act or any other law, divulge any information relat-
ing to, or to the affairs of, its constituents except in circumstances 
in which it is, in accordance with the law or practice and usage 25 
customary among bankers, necessary or appropriate for the Develop-
ment Bank to divulge such information. 
(2) Every director, member of a committee, auditor or officer or 
uther employee of the Deve10pment Bank or of the Reserve Bank, 
whose services are utilised by the Development Bank under the pro- 30 
visions of this Act, ahall, before entering upon his duties, make R 
. declaration of fidelity and secrecy in the form set out in the First 
Schedule to this Act. 
30. (1) No act or proceeding of the Board or of any committee of 
th'e Development Bank shall be questioned on the ground merely of 35 
the existp.nce of any vacancy in, or defect in the constitution of the , 
Board or the committee, as the case may be. 
(2) No act done by any person acting in good faith as a director 
shall be deem-ed to be invalid merely on the ground that he was dis-
qualified to be a director or that there was any other defect in btl 40 
appointment. 

IS 
31. (1) Every director shall be indemnified by the Development Indemnlt,' 
Bank against all losses and expenses incurred by him in, or in rela- of dir ... 
tion to, the discharge of his duties, except such as are caused by his tor •. 
own wilful act or default. 
S (2) A director shall not be responsible for any other director or 
for any officer or other employee of the Development Bank or for 
any loss or expenses resulting to the Development Bank from the 
insufficiency or deficiency of the value of, or title to, any property 
or security acquired or taken on behalf of the Development Bank or 
10 the insolvency or wrongful act of any debtor or any person under 
obligation to the Development Bank or anything done in good faith 
in the execution of the duties of his office or in relation thereto. 
32. No suit or other legal proceeding shall lie against the Deve- otProt~ioll .. acUon lopment Bank or any dIrector or any officer or other employee of the taken 
IS Development Bank or any other person authorised by the Develop- under tlu. 
ment Bank to discharge any functions under this Act for any loss or Act. 
damage caused or likely to be caused by anything which is in good 
faith done or intended to' be done in pursuance of this Act or any 
other law or provision having the force of law. 
20 33. The Bankers' Books Evidence Act, 1891 shall apply in relation Act 18 of 
to the Development Bank as if it were a bank as defined in section 1891 to 
2 of that Act. apply in relation t. 
Develop-
mentBank. 
34. Nothing contained in the Banking Companies Act, 1949, except Act 10 of 
section 34A thereof, shall apply to the Development Bank. 1949 not to 
apply to 
Develop-
mentBank. 
25 35. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in the Act 43 of 
Income-tax Act, 1961, the Super Profits Tax Act, 1963 or in any other 1961 and 
enactment for the time being in force relating to income-tax, super- Act 14 of 
t -- oth . fi . 1963 not to ax or super p,vuts tax, or any er tax on mcome, pro ts or gams, apply to 
the Development Bank shall not be liable to pay income-tax, super- Develop-
30 tax, super profits tax or any other tax in respect of- ment Bank. 
(a) any income, profits or gains accruing or arising to the 
Development Assistance Fund or any amount received in that 
fund; and 
(b) any income, profits or gains derived Of any amount re-
3S ceived by the Pevelopment Bank. 

16 
'~' 'M. No provision of law relating to the winding, up of eompen:iee 
~ or corporations shall apply to the Development Bank and the neve-
ment Bank. lopment Bank shan nat be placed in Uquidation save by order of the 
Central Government and in such manner as it may direct. 
Power to 37. (1) The Board may,' with the previous approval of the Reserve S 
::::. rqu- Bank, make regulations not inconsistmt with 'this Act to provide for 
t. 
I' 
,., .. 
. all matters for which provision is necessary or expedient for the pur-
po~ of giving effect to the provisions of this Act~ 
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the' 
fOregoing power. such regulations tnay provide ftlr- 10 
(a) the times and places of the meetings of the Board or of 
,any' committee cOJilStituted under this Act and the proc:e<iUJ;:e to 
be followed at auch meetings including the quorum necessarY for 
the transaction of business; 
(b) the Constitution and functions of the Executive Conurdt- IS 
tee; 
(c) the fees and. allowances tha.t may be paid to the direc-
tors and the members of a committee; 
(d) ,the conditions which the Devf!lopment Binkmay im-
pose in granting loans or adv~ or· enter1ngtwto any other 20 
arrangements; 
(e) the conditions on which the Development Bank may ac-
cept, discount or rediscount bills of exchange or promissory 
note8; ~, 
(f) the investment (whetber by way of deposit hi 'baub or 2S 
otherwise) of the amounts in the Development Assistance Fund 
or the General Fund which are not for the time being required 
for the transaction of business; 
, (g) the form and manner in which the balance-sheets. and , 
the accounta of the Development Assi.uu~ce Fund and the Deve-'30 
lopment Bank shall be prepared; 
)j " (h) the forms of returns and statements required under this 
~ 0, ~ 
(i), the duties and conduct, salaries, allowances and condi-
tions of service of officers and other employees of the Develop- 3S 
ment Bank; 
(j) the establishment and maintenance of provident or other 
benefit funds tor officers and other employees of the Development 
Bank; 

17 
(k) generally, the eft\cient conduct of the affairs of the 
Development Bank; and 
(1) any other matter which is to be, or may be, prescribed. 
(3) Any regulation which may be made by the Board under this 
~ Act may be made by the Reserve Bank within three months of the 
establishment of the Development Bank; and any regulation so made 
may be altered and ·rescinded by the Board in the exercise of its 
powers under this Act. 
38. The enactments specified in Parts I to IV of the Second Sche- Amend-
10 dule to this Act shall be amended in the manner directed in the first ment of 
column thereof and such amendments shall take effect on the dates certatin enac -specified in the ~ond column of that Schedule. menta. 
IS 
THE FIRS'I1 SCHEDULE 
[See section 29(2)] 
Declaration of fidelity and secrecy 
I .............. do hereby declare that I will faithfully, truly and 
to the best of my skill and ability execute and perform the duties re-
quired of me as director, member of ........ committee, auditor, offi-
cer or other employee (as the case may be) of the Industrial Deve-
30 lopment Bank of India and which properly relate to the office or posI-
tion held by me in or in relation to the said Development Bank. 
I further declare that I will not communicate or allow to be com-
municated to any person not legally entitled thereto any infonnation 
relating to the affairs of the Industrial Development Bank of India 
25 or to the affairs of any person having any dealing with the said Deve-
lopment Bank, nor will I allow any such person to inspect or have 
access to any books or documents belonging to or in the possession 
of the said Development Bank and relating to the bWliness of the 
said Development Bank or the business of any person having any 
.30 dealing with the said Development Bank. 
Signed befewe me, 

THE SECOND SCHEDULE 
(Su section 38) 
Amendment of certain ,nactmmls 
PART I 
AMENDMENTs TO THE RBsBRVB BANK OP INDIA ACT, 1934 (2 OF 1934) S 
Amendments 
(I) 
I. In section 2, after clause (bbb), insert the 
following clause, namely :-
'(bbbb) "Development Bank" means the 
Industrial Development Bank of India 
established under the Industrial Deve-
lopment Bank of India Act, 1964;' 
2. In section S-
(a) in sub-section (1),-
(i) in clause (a), for the word "three'" 
substitute the words "not more tban 
four"; 
(iO in clause (c), for the word "six", sub-
stitute the word "ten"; 
(b) in sub-section (4), omit the words, brac-
kets and figure "subject to the proviSions 
of sub-section (6)"; 
(e) omit sub-section (6). 
3. In sub-section (2) of section 13, for the 
words "three Directors", substitute the 
wOrds "four Directors". 
4. In section 17-
(a) after clause (4F), insert the following 
clauses, namely:-
"(4G) the making ofloans and advances 
to, and the purchasing of bonds 
and debentures of, the Develop-
ment Bank out of the National 
Indu~trial Credit (Long Term 
Operations) Fund established 
under section 46C; 
18 
Date on which amendmenta 
shall take effect. . 
(2) 
The date of establishment of 
the Development Bank. 
-Do-
-Do-
-00-
10 
IS 
20 
35 

19 
Amendments 
(I) 
(.fII) the making to the Development 
Bank of loans and advances-
(a) repayable on demand or on the ex-
piry offixed periodo; not exceed-
Ing ninety days, from the date of 
such loan!or advunce against the 
10 security. of stocks, fund and 
securitiesi( other than immovable 
property) in which a trustee is 
authorised to invest trust money 
by any law for the time being in 
1 S force in India; or 
as 
30 
(b) against the security of bills of 
exchange or promissory notes, 
arising out of bona fide commer-
cial or trade transactions bearing 
two or more good signatures and 
maturing within five years from 
the date of such loan or 1ldvan-
ces;"j 
(b) in clause (8A), after the wordS, "the 
Deposit Insurance Corporation", insen 
the words "the Development Bank". 
s. After section 46B, insen the following sec-
tion, namely:- -
"46C. (1) The Bank shall establish and 
maintain a Fund to be known as the 
National IndU8trial Credit (Long Term 
Operations) Fund to which shall be 
credited-
(a) an initial sum often crores of rupees 
35 by the Bank; 
(b) such further sums of money as the 
Bank may contribute every year: 
Provided that the annual contribution 
during each of the five years 
commencing with the year end-
ing on the 30th day of June, I96S 
shall not be less than five crores 
of rupees: 
Provided funher that the Central 
4S Government may, if the circum-
stances so require, authorise the 
Bank to reduce the said I sum r of 
five crores of rupees...tn &DYorye&r. 
Date on which amendments 
shall take effect. 
(2) 
The date of establishment of 
the Development Bank. 
National 
Industrial 
Credit 
(Lona Term 
()peratJon.) 
Fund. 

Amendments 
(.2) The amount in the said fund shall 
be applied by the Bank only to the 
following objects, namely :-
(a) the making to the Development 
Bank of loans and advances for 
the purpose of the purchase of, 
or subscription to, stocks, shares. 
bonds or debentures iasued by the 
Industrial Finance Corporation 
established under the Industrial 
Finance Corporation Act, 1948, 
a State Financial Corporation es-
tablished under the State Finan-
cial Corporations Act, 1951, or 
any other financial institution 
which may be notified by the 
Central Government in this 
~h~.orfurthefu~of~ 
other business 0 the Develop-
ment Bank; 
(b) the purchasing of bonds and de-
bentures issued by the Develop-
ment Bank.". 
PART U 
Date on which amendments 
IhaU tIIke effect. 
(2) 
AMBNDMIHT T-O THB INDUSTRIAL DISPUTES Acc, 1~7 (14 OIl J947) 
Amendment Date on which amendment 
5 
10 
sba1l tab effea. 30 
(I) (2) 
m section 2, in clause (bb), after the words "and The dale of e8tllbijtbllltllt of 
includes", insert the words "the Industrial the Develop.D:lltal: Beak. 
Development Bank of India,". 
PARTIU 
AMBNDMI!NTS TO THE INDUSTRIM. FtlOMCI ColIJGaATlCDr ~~ 1948 
(IS OF l~) . 
Amendments Da~ on wbich amendments 
shiU take effect. 
35 
(I) (2~ 40 
I. In section 2, after clause (b), insert the 
following clause, namely :-
'ebb) "Development Bank" meaa the in-
dustrial Development Bank at India 
established under the Indunrial :De-
velopment Bank of India Ad, 1964;'. 
The date of atabtishment of 
the ~dopou:at .a.nIt. 

Amendments 
(I) 
2. In section 4,-
21 
Date on which amendments 
shall take effect. 
(2) 
S (a) omit sub-sections (s) and (6); and 
The date appointed by the 
Central Government un-
der sub-section (1) of sec-
tion 4A of the Industrial 
Finance Corporation Act, 
1948 as inserted by this 
Act. 
(b) in sub-section (7), for the words "the 
Central Government, the Reserve 
Bank", substitute the words "the De-
10 velopment Bank". 
15 
20 
30 
35 
45 
3. After section 4, insert the following section, The date of establishment of 
namely ;- the Development Bank. 
"¢. (1) On such date as the Central 
Government may, by notification in 
the Official Gazette, appoint-
(a) all shares of the Corporation held 
by the Central Government and 
the Reserve Bank shall stand trans-
ferred to and vest in the Develop-
ment Bank and as compensation 
therefor the De¥elopment Bank shall 
pay to the Central Government and 
to the Reserve Bank respectively the 
face value of the shares held by that 
Government and by tha t Bank; 
(b) the capital issued by the Corpora-
tion shall be increased by such 
number of shares as the Central 
Government may specify in this 
behalf and all such shares shall 
stand allotted to and be subscribed 
by the Development Bank, so 
however that after such increase 
the Development Bank holdS not 
less than fifty per cent. of the 
paid-up capital of the Corporation. 
~2) If and when the remaining shares 
10 the capital of the Corporation, or 
any part thereof, are issued, such 
further shares shall be offered to the 
holders of the shares of the Corpo-
ration in proportion, as nearly as 
circuD,1stances admit, to the capital 
paid-up on those shares at the date of 
such fUrther issue: 
Provided that if any such shares remain 
unallotted, they shall be subscribed for by 
the Development Bank.". 
Transfer of 
ahara and 
mc:reuc of 
capital. 

,-
Amendments Date on which amendments 
shall take effect. 
(I) (2) 
-.- ,.- ---- -----. 
4· In section 6~- The date 
(4) in sub-section (3), for the words "the Central 
appointed by the 
Government 
5· 
central Government". substitute the 
wQrds "the Development Bank"; 
(b) for sub-section (4), substitute the 
following sub-~ection, namely:-J 
" (4) If any dispute arises between the 
Development Bank and the Board 
as to whether a question is or is 
not a question of policy, the dispute 
shall be referred to the Central 
Government whose decision there-
on shall be final."; 
(c) in sub-section (j), for the words "laid 
down by the Central Government", 
substitute the words "given by the 
Development Bank."; 
In section 10,-
(a) in sub-section (1)-
(i) in clause (a), for the words" the 
Board", substitute the words 
"the Development_Bank"; 
(ii) in clause (aa), for the words" the 
central Government". substitute 
the words "the Development 
Bank"; 
(iii) in clause (b), for the words ''the 
Central Board of the Reserve 
Bank", substitute the words 
''the Central Government"; 
(it') in clause (d), for the words ·'the 
Central Government, the Reserve 
Bank", substitute the words ''the 
Development Bank"; 
(b) after sub-section (1) insert the follow-
ing sub-section, namely:-
"(2) On the date appointed under 
sub-section (1) of section 4A, the Direc-
tors holding office under clause (44) or 
clause (b) immediately before the said 
date shall be deemed to have vacated 
their offices as such .... 
under sub-section (1) of 
section4A of the Industrial 
Finance Corporation Act, 
1948 as inserted by this Act. 
Do. 
5 
10 
IS 
20 
30 
35 
45 

.. 
Amendments 
(I) 
Date on which amendment 
shall take effect. 
(2) 
-----------------------------
S 
10 
6. In section loA. in sub-section (1), for 
the wordS" by tbe Board ". substitute the 
words " by the Development Bank". . 
7. In section II, in the proviso to sub-
section (4). insert at the end the words 
"or of the Development Bank". 
8. In section 13. in sub-section (1), after the 
I S words "The Central Government may", 
insert the words "after consultation with 
the Development Bank". 
9. In section 13A, for the words "with 
the Board", substitute the words :'''with 
20 the Development Bank". 
10. In section 17, in sub-section (6), for the 
words "the Central Government or the 
Reserve Bank", substitute the words 
"the Development Bank or the Central 
2S Government". 
II. In section 18, for the words "the Central 
Government". substitute the words "the 
Development Bank". 
12. In section 21, in sub-section (4), after 
30 the words "borrow money from the 
Central Government", insert the words 
"or the Development Bank" and after 
the words "borrowed by the Corporation 
from the Central Government", insert 
35 the words "and the Development Bank". 
45 
50 
13. In section 23, in sub-section (1)-
(a) in clause (h), for the. words "the 
Central Government", substitute 
the words "the Development Bank"; 
(b) after clause (i), insert the following 
clause, namely:- .. 
H(ii) acquiring with the approval of the 
Development Bank the under-
taking including the business, assets 
and liabilities of any institution 
the principal object of which is the 
promotion or development of in-
dustry in India, or the grant of 
financial assistance for such pro-
motion or development;". 
The date appointed by the 
Cenual Government un-
der sub-section (1) of 
section .fA of tbe Industrial 
Finance Corporation Act, 
1948 as inserted by this 
Act. 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 

Special 
raerve 
fODd. 
Amendments 
(I) 
Date on which amendments 
shall tab effect. 
(2) 
In section 24,- The date appointed by the 
(.1 (or the words "one crore", Central Government under S 
wherever they occur, substitute sub-section (I) of section 
the words "two crores"; 4A of the Industrial 
(i,) for the words "the Central Finance Corporation 
Government". substitute Act, 1948, as inserted 
the words "the Development by this Act. 10 
Bank". 
IS. For section 32A, substitute the following 
section, namely:-
"32A. (1) AU dividends accruing on the 
shares of the Corporation held by the 
Central Government and the Reserve 
Bank immediately before the date ap-
pointed by the Central Government 
under sub-section (1) of section 4A 
in respect of any completed accountinf 
period, whether declared or not, shal 
be credited to a special reserve fund. 
(.I) All dividends accruing to the Develop-
ment Bank shall, instead of being paid 
to it, be also credited to the said fund 
until the aggregate of the sums credited 
to the fund under sub-section (1) and 
this sub-section exceeds one crore of 
rupees.· .. 
(3) The Central Government, the Reserve 
Bank and the Development Bank only 
shall have claims to the said fund.". 
16. In section 34.-
(II) in sub-section (1)-
(,) for the words "the Central Govern-
ment in consultation with the Com-
ptroller and Auditor-General of 
India", substitute the words ''the 
Development Bank"; 
(ii) for the words "the Central Govern-
ment", where they occur for the 
lecond time, substitute the words 
''the Development Bank"; 
(b) in 8~b-section (4), for the words "the 
Comptroller and Auditor-General of 
India", substitute the words "the Deve-
lopment Bank"; 
(c) omit Sub-section (s) ; 
Do. 
IS 
20 
30 
Do. 
3S 
4S 

5 
10 
IS 
20 
30 
3S 
40 
45 
25 
Amendments 
(d) for sub-section (6), substitute the 
following sub-section, namely :-
"(6) Without prejudice to anything. 
contained in the preceding sub-
sections, the Central Government 
may, at any time, a~point the 
Comptroller and Auditor General 
of India to examine ~d rep on 
upon the accounts of the Corpora-
tion and any expenditure incurred 
by him in connection with such 
examination and repon shall be 
payable by the Corporation to the 
Comptroller and Auditor-General 
of India.". 
Date on which amendments 
shall take effect. 
(2) 
17. In section 35- The date appointed by the 
(a) in sub-section (2), for the words 
"Central Government", at both p!aces 
where they occur, sub3titute the words 
"Development Bank"; 
(b) in sub-section (3), for the words "and 
the Reserve Bank", substitute the.words 
"the Reserve Bank and the Develop-
ment Bank". 
18. Re-number section 36 as sub-section (1) 
thereof, and-
(a) in sub-section (1) as so re-numbered, 
for the words "other than the Central 
Government and the Reaerve Bank", 
substitute the words "other than the 
Development Bank"; 
(b) after sub-section (1) as so re-numbered, 
insen the following SUb-sections, 
namely:-
"(2) After the acquisition of the shares 
as provided by sub-section (I), 
the Central Government shall 
transfer the shares to the Deve-
lopment Bank on that bank paying 
an amount e.qual to the 
amount paid by the Central 
Government for such acqUisition. 
Central Government under 
sub~8ection (1) of section 
4A of the Industrial Finance 
Corporation Act, 1948 as 
insened by this Act. 
Do. 

Amendments 
.. 1 
(I) 
(3) After the transfer of the shares by 
the Central Government to the De-
velopment Bank under sub-section 
(2), the Central Government may 
direct by notification in the Official 
Gazette that with effect from 
such date as may be specified in the 
notification the entire undertaking 
of the Corporation, including all 
business, property, assets and lia-
bilities, rights (including the right 
to recover loans and advances gran-
ted by the Corporation in accord-
ance with the provisions of this 
Act), interests, privileges and obli-
gations of whatever nature, shaH 
stand transferred to and vest in the 
Development Bank. 
(4) Por the purpose of giving effect to 
the transfer of the undertaking of 
the Corporation to the Develop-
mentBank, the Central Govern-
m::nt shall, hy ord~r in writing 
frame a scheme providing for all 
matters for which provision isne-
cessary, and the scheme so framed 
shall be binding upon the Corpora-
tion, its 'creditors and employees 
and the Development Bank and 
shall have effect notwithstanding 
anything to the contrary contained 
in any law for the time being in 
force or in any contract or other 
instrument. 
(5) The provisions of this section shall 
have effect notwithstanding any-
thing contained in this Act or any 
other law or any instrument having 
force by virtue of such Act or other 
law.". 
19. After section 40A. insert the following sec-
tion, namely :-
Removal of "40B. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving 
difllcultiea. effect to the provisions of this Act, the 
Central Government may, by order 
published in the Official Gazette, make 
such provisions not inconsistent with 
Date on which amendments 
shall take effect 
(2) 
s 
10 
20 
25 
30 
3S 
The date appointed by the 
. Central Government under 45 
sub-section (I) of tection 
4A of the Industrial 
Finance Corporation 
Act, 1948 as inserted 
by this Act. So 

5 
10 
15 
20 
20. 
Amendments 
(I) 
the purposes Oflhis Act as appear to it 
necessary or expedient for removing 
the difficulty. 
(.2) An order under sub-section (1) may 
be made 80 as to have retrospective 
effect froUl a date not earlier tban 
the date appointed under sub-sec~ 
tion (1) of section 4A.". 
Date on which amendmen ts 
~hall take effect. 
(2) 
In section 42, in sub-section (1), after the The date appointed by the 
words "The Central Government may", the Central Government 
insert the words "in consultation with under sub-section (1), 
the Development Bank". of section 4A of the In-
dustrial Finance Corpora-
tion Act 1948, as inserted 
by this Act. 
21. In section 43, in sub-section (1), for the 
words "the Reserve Bank", substitute 
the words "the Development Bank". 
Do. 
----------------- --_ .. -,,_. __ ... 
PART IV 
AMENDMENT TO THB BANKING CoMPANII!S Acr, 1949 
(10 Of 1949) 
Amendment Date on which amendment 
shall take effect 
(2) 
In section 34A, in Sub-section (3), after the The date of establishment of" 
word • 'includes" , insert the words ''the In- the Development Bank. 
30 dustrial Development Bank of India, ". 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The existing arrangements for the provision of credit for the ex-
pansion or development of industry are not adequate in relation to the 
needs of the various enterprises or projects. It is proposed, therefore, 
to establish a new institution, to be known as the Industrial Deve-
lopment Bank of India. It will be a wholly-owned subsidiary of the 
Reserve Bank of India and will be managed by a Board of Directors, 
consisting of persons who are for the time being members of the 
Central Board of the Reserve Bank. 
2. The Industrial Development Bank of India will be able to co-
ordinate the activities of all the institutions which are or may be 
concerned with the provision of finance for industrial development. 
It will be in a position to provide refinance to these institutions or to 
grant direct loans to industrial concerns or to promote and develop 
key industries, as circumstances may require. 
3. The provisions of the Bill are explained in detail in the notes 
on clauses. 
T. T. KRISHNAMACHARI. 
NEW DELHI; 
The 18th February, 1964. 
RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLES 117 AND 274 OF THE 
CO~~ONOFIND~ 
[Copy of letter No. F. 2 (102) Corp./63, dated. the 21st February, 
1964 from Shri T. T. Krishnamachari, Minister of Finance to the 
Secretary, Lok Sabh8l]. 
The Vice-President discharging the functions of the President 
having been informed of the subject matter of the proposed Indus-
trial Development Bank of India Bill, 1964, recommends the introduc-
tion of the Bill in the Lok Sabha under clause (1) of article 117 and 
clause (1) of article 274 and its consideration under clause (3) of 
article 117 of the Constitution. ! 
21 

CZauae 2 provides for the definition of the expressions used jn the! 
BilL The proposed definition of an industrial concem is :teaSOnabl,Y 
wide and will include all industrial units or enterprises, wbefher they 
are La the pivate 'or the public sector 8lld whether or not th'!'Y -are 
inool;pora~ UDder the Co~es Act or under any other:law. 
Clause 3 provides for the establishment of the Industrial Develop-
ment Bank of India and its branches and agencies. 
Clause 4 provides for the share capital and ownershipdl ,the In-
dustrial DevelQpment Bank. Like the Industrial Development Bank 
of Canada, it will be a whoUy-owned subsidiaxy of the central bank 
of _the country. Its authorised capital will be Rs. 50 crores, but may 
be i.ncreased to Rs. 100 crores with the previous approval of the Cen-
tral Govellnment. The issued capital will be initially lb. 10 crotes, 
but :may be increased from time to time with the previous approval 
of the Central Govenunent. 
Clauses 5 and 6 provide for the managemeut M.the JniuIdrial 
Development Bank. It is proposed (on the analogy of the provision 
in seetion 3 of the lrlduatr-ial Development Bank Act, ::IJ9M:oi'Canada) 
that the Bow ,of Directors shoUlNi CJUDliBt of persons who ,are, fer 
the time hemg, directors 'of the -Central Board aftbe .tReIerve .Bank. 
The-Governor 9f the Deserve .Bauk will-he the chairman of tbeBouci 
Of 'Dift!etors -an.da Deputy Governor·of 1he Reserve BaDk ,of ·IaGia 
nomhufted by 'that bank, wID be 'thevme-chaimIaD flftlle Boatd. 
Clause 7 .provides for the constitution ot executive and other earn-
miUees lor carrying out -any functions or duties which may be dele-
gated or allotted to them by the Board of Directors. 
Clause 9 provides for the business which the new institution is 
expected to transact. It will,like the Kftditanstalt m iWeIt 'G8I!JllBny 
and the Media Credito in ltaIy,reftnance long 'or ,medium term loaDS 
granted by other financial institutions or banks. The long term loans 
refinanced by the new institution are expected to be 'repaid within a 
period of twenty-flve 'years and -medium 'term loaM are expaeted ,to 
be repaid wrthin a period df ten ye8'l'fl. 1f industrial 'concerns nqWre 
financial accommodation, in connection with the .eqMBt at 'capital 
goods or other commodfties on deferretlpayment terms and .thegnnt 
of credit 'facilities to the importers df ,.uch goods er !colJllDOdjtiel 
:18 

outside India, the Industrial Development Bank will be able to l1'ant 
the necessary accommodation, for periods up to ten years, but subject 
to the exchange control regulations governing such exports. 
Short term loans, granted. ·fora period of less than three years for 
financing the normal requirements of industrial concerns or for a 
period of less than six months for financing exports, will not be 
refinanced. by the Industrial Development Bank. 
W'nere loans or other accommodation may not be available to any 
industrial concern from the existing financial institutions or from the 
commercial banking system, the Industrial Development Bank will 
assist the concern by granting loans directly to it or by subscribing 
to the issue of shares, bonds or debentures by it or by guaranteeing 
its obligations. 
No special provision has been made as regards the nature or types 
of security against which refinance or direct assistance, as the case 
may be, can be granted. Apart from being able to exercise Bome 
degree of discretion in regard to these matters, the Industrial Deve-
lopment Bank will be able to accept or discount the bills of industrial 
concerns, arising out of bona fide commercial or trade transaetions, 
either directly, or when such bills are presented through scheduled 
or state co-operative banks. ~ 
The Industrial Development Bank will underwrite new issues, 
particularly in cases in which facilities for this purpose may not 
normally be available. It can provide technical or administrative 
assistance to industrial concerns, and undertake research or techno-
economic studies and surveys, on its own initiative or otherwise, with 
a view to promoting the establishment of new enterprises. Like tha 
Japanese Development Bank, the Industrial Development Bank of 
India will be able to develop key industries which are important from 
the point of view of future industrial growth or the overall needs of 
the economy. 
The industrial Development Bank will be in a position to form 
subsidiaries for any or all of these purposes. 
Clauses 10 to 12 provide for the grant of loans by the Central 
Government to, and borrowing from other sources by, the Industrial 
Development Bank. The Central Government will be authorised to 
grant an interest-free loan of Rs. 10 crores to the Industrial Deve--
lopment Bank, when it is established. The loan, if granted, will be 
repayable in easy instaIme~ts, after a period of fifteen years. The 
income accruing to the Industrial Development Bank from the utili-
sation of the funds attributable to.this loan will enable it to meet ita 

expenses, until such time as its earnings or income from other re-
sources are adequate to meet its normal or average expenditure. The 
Central Government will, apart from this initial loan, grant to the 
Industrial Development Bank such other loans as may be necessary 
from time to time on the usual terms and conditions. 
Like all financial institutions, the Industrial Development Bank 
will be able to borrow from the market on its own bonds or deben-
tures. The bonds or debentures will not be guaranteed by the Cen-
tral Government, if such a guarantee is not considered necessary. 
Normal banking accommodation for periods up to ninety days will be 
available to the new institution from the Reserve Bank on the usual 
terms and conditions. The Industrial Development Bank will, in 
addition, be entitled to loans and advances from the l'teserve Bank, 
on the security of the commercial or trade bills of industrial COD.-
cerns maturing within five years, which are held in the portfolio of 
the Industrial Development Bank (vide aiso the notes on clause 9). 
The Reserve Bank will establish a new fund, to be known as the 
National Industrial Credit (Long-term Operations) Fund, to which 
allocations will be made from out of the surplus profits of the Re-
serve Bank before they are transferred to the Central Government. 
Loans from this fund will be granted to the Industrial Development 
Bank for enabling it (a) to acquire shares in other financial insti-
tutions which may be concerned with the grant of credit for indus:' 
trial purposes, or (b) to subscribe to the bonds or debentures of such 
.institutions, or (c) to finance the Industrial Development BaDk's own 
'businell. .• 
' .... The .Industrial Pevelopment Bank will be able to borroW amounts 
.i~ foreign currenc~es on such terms and conditions 'as may be ap. 
J?~oyed by the C~ntral Goy~~ent.. '... . . . 
. .. ..' .. . ".' '. ',,' .. ", . . " 
.' Clause 13' enablelf the InduStriil DeVelopment.Ba11l to'reeeiw IlftY 
. amount' from any source otherwise than by way of loans. . , 
Clauses 14 to 19 relate to the pr~vision for the grant of dassfistanth~e ,. 
to industry from another special fund which will be create or IS 
purpo~_ In other countries, where development banks have been 
estabtfshed, it Is not unusual for Governments to place at the dis-
posal of these banks counterpart, trust or other funds for supplement-
ing the resources which may otherwise be available to them. The 
Development Assistance Fund in this case will be created with an 
appropriate initial contribution from the Central Government and 
will be credited from time to time with such further sums as may 
be necessary, having regard to the qemands of Indian industry. The 

i2 
ftmd wm be managed by the Industrial Development Bank and will 
h utntsed f<)r granting asststance to essential industrial enterpriaea. 
1ft circumstances in which, on' purely commercial considerationa or 
i:h the light of the standards or criteria which are normally followed, 
loans are not likely to be granted to these enterprises by banks or 
other financial institutions. The industries which are likely to be 
assisted will be those which, for various reasons, such as the heavy 
investment which may be involved or the anticipated' rate of return 
on capital, may not be able to obtain funds or resources in the usual 
course, but may nevertheless be of such importance that special pro-
vision for assisting them will be justified. 
The accounts of the. Development Assistance Fund will be main .. 
1:IIiDed sepa.ndlely, and a report on the operations of this fund will be 
Mlbmitted to· the Central Government. 
Cl'a:uses 20 to 24 provide for the mainten8nee of' aceounts in rei'-
peet of all transactions other than those relating to the Development 
AasiBtaDce Fund, the creation of a g~neral, reserve fund, the 'Prepa-
ntioD at the aaDual balance-sheet and profit and loss accounts of the 
Development Bank in respect of these oth.er transactions, and the 
aw.U.t aDd publicatiGn of the balance-sheet and accounts. 11te proftts 
of the Ind.usbial Development Bank, after making provision for bad 
aad, doubtful. debts, depreciation, reserves and other appropriations 
w.ill. 1M tranlf.erred to the Reserve Bank. 
cta.we. 25 provide far the transfer to the Industrial DevetOpment 
Bank at any later stage, if this is considered necessary, of the UftCIew-
taking and business of the Refinance Corporation for Industry; 1'IdB 
. JMti.tutioa. wlUch wu. established iD June 1958 has been refinancing 
'lJ'eC'U11"'P4erm loana, granted.. to medium-sized enterprises by ~er­
clal banks, State ~rative banks and State Flnancfal CotpOJattons. 
It will eontinue to carry on this business, even after the tn4ust:rfa1 
~ 4i&- B-* .. he-..abUahad, bWI if in the, lidat of any 
further d:eftdopua::nts .. for administrative or other reasons. it be-
comes necessary for the business of refinancing of industrial credit to 
be undertaken mainly or solely by the Industrial DeftJlgpmen.t Bank, 
the shares of the Reserve Bank, the Life lDsurance Corperati4la, the 
State Bank and' other commercial banks in the Reftnuce Cot'pora~ 
tion for Industry will be taken over Dy the Industrial Development 
Bank, on the payment of eompensation equal flo the £Me value gf 
these shares. 
Claue:s 26 to 34 Pl'OYide for the staff of the Industrial Develop-
ment Bank, tM eelegation of powers, obligFltions as to secrecy,the 
iDdeD&1dty of Girectors. aDd other matters for which provfsibn ill 
\W\lally ma.de in similar enactments. 

~ 
. CZ4use' 35 provides for the exemption of the Industrial Develop-
ment Bank from income and other direct taxes. 
CleJuae 38 prcwides f« amendments to the Resetw Bank of lndi8 
Act, 1914, the lodustrial Disputes Act, 1947, the mdustrial Finance 
COl1pOratlon Act, 1948 and the Banking Companies Act, lBa 
The amendments to the Reserve Bank of India Act are main1¥ 
conaequential. The Reserve Bank will be enabled to subscribe to 
the share capital of the Industrial Development Bank, to create the 
National Industrial Credit (Long-term Operations) Fund and to 
grant to the Industrial Development Bank Donnal banking accom-
modation or special loans for periods up to five years on the security 
of trade or commercial bills. In view of the incorporation of the In-
dustrial Development Bank as a wholly-owned subsidiary of the 
Reserve Bank· and the other responsibilities which hav.e recently 
been entrusted to the Reserve Bank, it is proposed! that the IlIlIIlber 
of direet:ors on the Central Board of the RIeserve- BaDk shouW be 
mcreesed frem 15 to 20, by the appointment of an' addi:tioDal DeJ)1lt, 
Governor (who may become the vice-chairman of tize. 1Bd\lllkial 
Development Bank) and the nomination of four additional non-oftl-
cia! directors under clause (c) of sub-section (1) of section 8 of the 
Reserve Bank of India Act. 
The amendment to the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 is intended 
to make it clear that the appropriate Government in relation to any 
industrial disputes involving the Industrial Development Bank will 
be the Central Government. 
'The amendments to the Industrial Finance Corporation Act, 1948 
are intended (a) to facWtatethe transfer at par value of the shares 
now held in the Corporation by the Reserve Bank and the Central 
Government to the Industrial. Development Bank and to ~ble the 
Industrial Development Barik tei acquire additional shares in the 
Corporation so as to increase its total holdings up to fifty per cent. of 
the paid-up capital of the Corporation, and (b) to provide for c0nse-
quential changes in various provisions relating to the constitution of 
the Board of Directors of the Corporation, the issue or directions to, 
or borrowing by, the Corporation, the special reserve fund and 
accounts and audit. 
The Industrial Finance Corporation will, after it is reconstituted, 
continue to function as an independent institution managed by a 
Board of Directors, consisting of a chairman and two directors 
appointed by the Central Government, four directors nominated by 
the Industrial Development Bank and six directors elected as at 
p~t by the remaintna shareholders. The Corporation's 'POwen 

34 
will be extended so as to enable it to take Qver, with the approval 
of the Industrial Development Bank, any institution concerned with 
the provision of industrial finance. If in the light of any further 
developments, it is considered: necessary or desirable that the Indus-
trial Finance Corporation should become a wholly-owned subsidiary 
of the Industrial DevelopmentBank or be merged in that institution, 
the Central Government will acquire and transfer to the Industrial 
Development Bank the shares in the Industrial Finance Corporation 
(other than those which may already be held by the Industrial Deve-
lopment Bank) on the terms and conditions which are already spe-
cified in section 316 of the Industrial Finance Corporation Act. PrO. 
Vision has been made for the transfer at that stage, if considered 
necessary, of the business and undertaking of the Industrial Finan~ 
Corporation to the Industrial Development Bank. 
The amendment to the Banking Companies Act, 1949 is for thl 
purpose of extending to the Industrial Development Bank the benefit 
of protection against any demand by any tribunal or authority UD-
der the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 for information regardiDI 
inner reserves. 
' ..... 
(...,." •• '''roo .. 
~ "! .• ... .. 
, . 

nNANCIAL MntORANDUM 
Clause 10 of the Bill provides that the Central Government may 
grant an interest-free loan of Rs. 10 crores to the Industrial Deve-
lopment Bank, after it has been established., and that the Government 
may grant to the new institution from time to time such further 
loans as may be necessary. Sub-clause (2) of clause 11 provides that 
the Central Government may in certain circumstances guarantee the 
repayment of principal and the payment of interest in respect of the 
bonds and debentures issued by the Industrial Development Bank 
and sub-clause (2) of clause 12 provides for a similar guarantee, if 
necessary, in respect of any loan raised by the Industrial Develop.-
ment Bank in foreign currencies. Clause 15 provides for the credit 
to the Development Assistance Fund of certain sums which may be 
appropriated for this purpose. 
2. It is expected that a loan of 10 crores will be gnntted to the 
Industrial Development Bank during 1964-65. It i!I not possible at 
this stage to anticipate when or how other loans may have to be 
granted to the new institution or to indicate the amount of the grant. 
which may have to be made for credit to the Devel<Jt)ment Assist8DCe 
I'wu:l. 

imMoitANInw REGARDING bELEGATED LECISLATION 
Clause 19 provides that the Development Assistance Fund which 
WID Be 'tteld'am4 meaged '" fhe lnttdstI iall Development Bank may 
be Wt>Uft:d up,lf necessary, in such 'ftlanneras theCerrtral -Govern-
1M!'l'l't may. direct. Clause 38 makes simflar proviiionas ft'g&rds 'lte 
Industrial Development Bank. 
Clause .37 empowers the BGard 01 Directors of theladustrial 
Development Bank to make r.egWatiODB with the preldeusapproval 
of the Be&erve Bank for matters relating to the constiiution of the 
exeouti¥e ·committee, the tranaaction 01. busiBess by the Board of 
Din!etors ud ,ihe committlees, the fees and. allowances to be paid to 
the Ginetora and members 01. eommittees,. the conditions on wliich 
Joana, awaDCes ~r other financial accommodation m.y be ganted, 
the form and manner in which the baJ.ance.,sheet and accounts are 
to be prepared and for other similar or connected purposes . . 
,Part .Ill 'fiJIf the SecoDd Sehedu1e eIl\POW8rS the Cen1ral Govern,.. 
.eat to brame a auitableacheme, if necessaIl', to provide for the 
vaDder ,of the business and ~ of .the Industrial Finance 
C~n to ·tbe lIDdusirial Development Bank. 
The matters in respect of which power is conferred on the-Qm. 
tral Government or on the Board under clauses 19, 36, 37 and Part 
m of the Second Schedule relate to the day to day administration 
of the Industrial Development Bank or to the implementation of 
the Policy which ~ already embodied in the Bill Rnd the delegation 
of legislative power is of a normal character. 

! 
ANNEXURE 
~ PROM 'l'BI RISDV& BAR or IImIA Ac:r, 1036 
(2 or 1934) 
• • • • • • 
.. (1) The Central Board shall consist of the following Direetors, Com.POli-
namely: - :Dc':ntral 
(a) a Governor and three Deputy GoWJillors to be appoint- Board. and 
ed by the Central Government; . term of 
ofticeot 
DIrector'll. 
(e) lix Directors to be nominated by the Central Govern-
• • • • • • 
ment; and 
• • • • • • 
(4) The Governor and a Deputy Governor shall hold offtce for 
luch term not exceeding five years as the Central Government may 
fix when appointing them, and shall be eligible for re-appolntment. 
A Director nominated under clau8e (c) of sub-section (1) shall, 
subject to the provisions of sub-section (6), hold office for a period 
of four years. 
A Director nominated under clause (d) of sub-section (1) shall 
hold offlce during the pleasure of the Central Government. 
• • • • • • 
(6) Out of the six Directors first nominated under clause (e), of 
sub-section (1), two shall retire at the ~nd of one year, two at the 
end of two years and the last two at the end of three years, the 
Directors 80 to retire being determined by lot. 
• • • • • • 
13. (1) • • • • M'eetiDal 
otthe (2) Any tlm!e Directors may require the Governor to convene a Central 
meeting of the Central Board at any time and the Governor shall Board. 
forthwith convene a meeting accordingly. . 
• • • • • • 
17. The Bank shall be authorised to carry on and transact the Bus~ 
leveral kinds of business hereinafter specified, namely: - ~ mar 
• • • • • tranACt. 
(8A) the purcbue and lale of shares in, or the capital of 
the Agrieu1tural Reftnanee Corporation, the Deposit Insurance 
Corporation, the State Bank or any other bank: or financial tnsU-
tQUon notifted by the Central Government in thJs behalf; ... .. • • • .. . 

• 
ErraAcr PROM TID INQv~, ~ At:r, 1047 .. ' 
(1. cw. 1947) 
• • • • 
~ I; Ia tilt. Act, .... 1 tIlere is anytbiq l'4t~ ill "the< .~c. 
or context,-
Share 
capital 
aDdlhare-
holden. 
• • • 
(bb) "banking company" means a bankiitg company u 
ddWtd ' in, lIIet1on. 5 of the BaakiRg Companies. Aa\ lN9, having 10 of 1M,. 
branches or other establishments in more than one SY1~, ~ 
includ81 the Reserve Bank of India,: the Sta~. Bank ot India 
Q~ NaY ,\J,bsicUary bank as, defined t,n the State Bank of India 
. <S\llW~at'Y BaJlQ) Act, 1959; J' of 1959. 
EIftACTII no~ 'ftIE INDUSTIUAL P'INAKeI: COBI'OIlA'l'ION AI::r-, ltI&8 
(15 or 1948) 
• • • • 
4. (1') • • • 
(5) If any shares referred to iD IU.b sect10n (3) remain. unalloUtd. 
they shall De subscriDed for by .the Central GoveI'!ll1\ent and tbe Re-
serve Ba~ in such proportion as may be agreed on between them: 
Provtded that the Central Oovemmen·t and th .... rve Bauk 
may dispose of the shares subscribed for by'them la pursua~ of 
this sub-section to any scheduled bank, inauP8Dee eompaDY. iDftIt-
ment trust or other like financlal institution or any CCJo-operative bank 
to w~ch abar-eS of the C~poraijonm~ be traNf.eJ1'ed \l.Dder IIU~ 
section (1). ' : 
(~) ~,~,d. wlle!) the r~atni~J Iha~ or any' part . thereof are 
iasq~4" tb., Centr.aJ. Gov~rnmeJlt .rut, th.~ Rese:r,v:e aank wU. Rd 
the W,UtRti.O))l r.efen:~. ~ ~ s"p.-~ctigp (3) of thiJ, 1I(!c;tlQn Illa¥. 
subscribe {9J: ~cP abares in th, IIQ)e, ~opQl'tiol), 41. ~Qr, tb.. &It lMuI. 
and the provt.siol'll of suq.sectiolU <i) and (5) of this aectlQJ1 shall 
alIo apply to such thareI. ! 

'J~ 
(7) Shares of the Corporation shall not be transferable except to 
the Central Government, the Reserve Bank, any scheduled bank, any 
1iis\1ta11ee . Coriipany, wt Inwstment trtMt or ah~ 1>thet like fbWlcial 
tiutitu'tidh at any co-ooperative bank In aecordaDCt 'With theNpl:a-
t10na matl~ m thti bfhaJf. I 
• • • • 
I. (1)· • • • • Mana,,-
(3) In the discharge of its said functions. the Board shall be guid- menl 
eel by such instructions on questions of policy as may be given to 
it by the Centr81 Govetnment. 
(4) If any dispute arises between the Central Government lild 
the Board as to whether a question Is or ~ not a question of policy, 
the decision of the Central Government shall he final. 
«5) ,If ihe Board laiD tio caITy out the instl'UCtions on the question 
>Of potier laid 1l0wn by the Central Government, the Central Govern-
ment shall have the power to supersede the Board and appoint a 
.newBoatd in Us -placet& funetion until a properly constitUted 
Board is set up. The decision of the Central Government as to the 
grounds for superseding the Board shall not be questioned in any 
Court of law. 
• • • • • 
10. (1) The Board of Directors Shall consist of the follOWing, BA~ (if 
namely:- D~. 
(0) a Ohatnaan to 'be BIIPOin~ by the Central Government 
;after comlultation with the Board; 
{.(4) fOUr iDireetora nomiJlateci by the Central Gdyemmentj 
(b) two Directors nominated by the Centr81 Board of the 
Retet\re Bank; 
• • • • • 
(d) two Directors elected iii the presCribed manher by die 
shareholders of the Corporation, other than ·the -Centr81 GCi\P-
ernmeht, the Res~rve Bank, the scheduled banks and co-opera-
tive banks; 
• • • • • 
~A. (J' The CfiaIFftiian (Jf tl'* Board ihtU recf!ivesuc:h salary and Chairman 
allowandS atftay be d~· by the Board with the approyal of the 
,of the CeDtral Government. loud. 
• • • • • 

.., 
U. (1) • • -. • • 'l'ermof 
oftlee and 
retirement (4) Directors shall be paid such fees as may be prescribed far at-
ot Diree-tending the meetings of the Board and, if they are members of the 
tors. Central Committee or any other Committee appointed by the Cor-
poration, far attending meetings of such Committee: 
Provided that nothing in this sub-section shan apply to the Chair-
man or to any other Director who is a servant of the Government. 
• • • • • 
llemovalot 13. (1) The Central Government may at any time remove the 
Chairman -Cbairrnan from office. 
andDiree-
torafrom . ••••• 
Galee. 
Casual 1M. U the Chairman of the Board is by infirmity or otherwise 
vacancyof rendered incapable of carrying out his duties or is absent 011 leave 
Chairman. or otherwise in cireumstances not involving the vacation of his 
Meetfnp 
of Board 
~Com­
mittee. 
Oftleesand 
agencies. 
appointment, the Central Government may, after consultation with 
the Board, appoint another person to act in his place during hiI 
·-absence. 
* • • • • 
17. (1) • • * • • 
(6) If, for any reason, a Director nominated under clause (CJ4) 
or clause (b) of section 10 is unable to attend any meeting of the 
Board, the Central Government or the Reserve Bank, as the case 
may be, may depute any other penon to attend the laid meeting and 
such person shall, for all purposes of the said meeting, be deemed 
to be a Director nominated under clause (04) or clause (b), u the 
case may be, of the said section. 
18. The Corporation shall establish its head office inDelh1 and 
offices in Bombay, Calcutta, Kanpur and Madras, and may, with the 
previous sanction of the Central Government, establish ofB.cea or 
agencies in other places in India. 
• • • • • 
Zl. (1) • • • • • 
(4) The Corporation may also, £,'1' the purpose of carr;yin"out tta 
functions under this Act, borrow money from the Central G0vern-
ment on alch tem8 aDd conditions as may be agreed upon: 
Provided that the total amount borrowed by the Corporation 
from the Central GoVernment under this iUh-lection 8nd from. the 

Reserve Bank under clause ('b) of sub-section (3) together with the 
amount of bonds and debentures issued under sub-section (1) and 
outstanding shall not at any time in the aggregate exceed ten time. 
the amount of the paid-up share capital and the reserve fund of the 
Corporation. : I 
23. (1) The Corporation shall, subject to the provisions of this Businea 
Act. be authorised to carry on and transact the following kinds of which the 
b . el Corpora-USlne8S, nam y:- tionma:y 
• • • • • 
(h) retaining as part of its assets any stock, shares, bonds 
or debentures which it may have to take up in fulftlment of its 
underwriting liabilities, so however that it disposes of the stock, 
shares, bonds, or debentures so acquired as early as practicable 
but in no case, the stocks, shares, bonds or debentures so acquir-
ed shall be retained beyond a period of seven years from the 
date of such acquisition, except with the permission of the Cen-
tral Government; 
(i) granting loans or advances to, or subscribing to deben-
tures of, industrial concerns, repayable within a perted not ex-
ceeding twenty-five years from tbe date on which they are 
granted or subscribed to, as the case maybe: 
Provided that nothing contained in this clause shall be 
deemed to preclude the Corporation from granting loans or 
advances to, or subscribing to debentures of, an industrial con-
cern, which may at the option of the Corporation be convertible 
into stock or shares of that concem within the period the loan, 
advance or debenture is repayable; and 
• • • • • 
transact. 
K. The Corpor~ion shall n~ enter into any arrangement under Limit of 
clauses (a) and (\) of sub-sectlon (1) of section 23 with a single accommo-
industrial concern for an amount exceeding one crore of rupees in dation. 
the aggregate: 
Provided that the aforesaid limit of one crore of rupees may be 
exceeded with the prior approval of the Central Government. 
• • • • • 
32A. (1) All dividends accruing on the shares of the Corporation Special 
held by the Central Government and the Reserve Bank shall, instead reserve 
of being paid to them, be credited to a special reserve fund until fund. 
the aggregate of the sums 80 credited exceeds fifty lakhs of rupeea. 

Audit. 
• 
(~) No sharehold~r of the Corporation other th~ the Centril 
Goveririnent or -the Reserve Bank. shan have any claim to the specia1 
r8erv! -fund i'!fetred to in sub-section "( 1) . 
• • • • • 
M. (1) The affainof the Corporation shall be audited by not Jess 
than twoauditcas duly qualified to act as auditors Of ccmlpa1'deumd8't 
sub-ooction (1) of section 226 of the Companies -A'Ct, -UI6,:~ ,lGf t oflg58. 
whom shall be appointed by the Central Government in consultation 
with the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India and the other 
auditor or auditors elected in the prescribed nwmar by 'the parties 
mentioned in Sub-section (3) .of section 4 and such remuneration as 
the "Cenual Government may fix shall be paid to the auditors by the 
Corporation. 
• • • • • 
'(4)'l'he 'Central Government may in eonsaltatton with the Comp-
trOller -and Auditor-General of India at 1l1lY 'tIme tssuedirectiobs to 
the auditors requiring them to report to it upon the Ildequacy of 
measures taken by the Corporation for the protection of its share-
hold.r~ and creditors or upon the sufficiency -of their procechue in 
~u4iting the ,aftaira of the Corpo~tion,and may at any time 8Diarge 
or extend the scope af the audit or direQt that a diiferent proeedure 
in audit be adopted or direct that any other examination be made by 
the auditors if in its opiDidn the public interelt .so ftqU1res. 
(5) The Corporation shall send a copy of every report of the audi-
tots to the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India at least one 
mo'nth before it is plaeed before the shareholders. 
(6) Notwithstanding anytbingcontained in the precec:linJ sub-
sections, the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India may, either 
of his own motion or On a request received in this behalf from the 
Central Government, undertake such audit and at such times &1 he 
may, consider necessary: 
PJ:oovided tb. wbere the Central Qov.ernment is -reqUir.edto m&1ae 
any payment on account of the guarantee given by it ,1iUlder ,*tiMl 
5 or sub-section (2) of section 21 or sub-section (2) of section Z7, as 
tlfe 'case may oeJ.suCh audit shan be undertaken by the tomptroUer 
and AilifitOr-"Gen'eral of India. ' 
• • • • " 
Re~. 35. (f) '. • • • 
(~ Th~Corporation shall furnish in the prescn'bed. form to the 
O!ntralGovernment and to the Reserve Bank at least onCe In eveI1 
~.ror AI frequently as the Central Government or the ~.rve 'l:laillt 

43. 
may require a statement showing the classification of its loans and 
investments and of loans guaranteed by it and underwriting agree-
ments entered into by it. 
(3) The Corporation shall furnish to the Central Government and 
the Reserve Bank within four months of the close of the financial 
year a statement in the prescribed form of its assets and liabilities 
as at the close of that year together with a profit and loss account for 
the year and a report of the working of the Corporation during the 
year, and copies of the said statement, account and report shall be 
published in the Official Gazette and shan be laid before Parliament. 
38. In the event of the Central Government at any time deciding Acquiai-
to acquire the shares held by shareholders other than the Central lib'on ot b . • area y 
Government· and the Reserve Bank the shareholders shall be paId tbe Central 
for the shares so acquired an amount equal to the paid-up value of Govern-
the shares together with a premium calculated at the rate of one per ment. 
cent. of the paid-up value for every year from the date of issue to the 
date of acquisitiQtl, subject to a maxJmwn of t~ pel\ cent_ 
• • • • • 
ft. (1) The Central Government may make rules not incons,istent Power of 
with the provisions of this Act, to give effect to the provisions of this Central 
Act, and where there is any inconsistency between the rules and the GOv::-
regulations made under this Act the rules shan prevail. ::e rules . 
• • • • • 
43. (1) The Board may, after consultation with the Reserve Bank pow,:::f 
and with the previous sanction of the Central Government, make re- :'::'e r:gu-
gulations not inconsistent with this Act and the rules made there- lations. 
under to provide for all matters for which provision is necessary or 
expedient for the purpose of giving effect to the proviSions of this 
Ac.t. 
• • • * • 
EXTRACT FROM THE BANKING COMPANIES AcT, 1949 (10 OF 1949) 
• • * • • 
MA. (1) • • • • • Production 
ofdoeu-
(3) For thep~, of this section, "banking company" includes menta of 
the Reserve Bank, the State Bank of India and any subsidiary bank confidential 
as defined in the State Bank of India (Subsidiary Banks) Act, 1959. nature . 
• • • • • • 

LOK SABHA 
--
, 
BIU. 
to eatabUsh the Industrial Develcrment Bank of India for 
providing credit and other facilities for the development of 
industry and for matters connected therewith and further 
to amend certwn enactments. 
(Shri T. T. KrishnamacluJri, 
Minister 0/ Finan&e.) 