8m No; 10 of 1956. 
THE AGRICULTURAL PRODUCE (DE-
VELOPMENT AND WAREHOUSING) 
CORPORATIONS Bn.L, 1956. 
(As INTRODUCBD IN LoE SABHA) 

• 
BiU No. 10 of 19_ 
'l1IE AGRICULTURAL PRODUCE (DEVELOPMENT 
AND WAREHOUSING ) CORPORATIONS BILL, 1956 
(As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABRA) 
o A 
BILL 
to provide for the incorporation and regulation of' corporations for 
the purpose oj development and warehousing oj agricultural pro-
duce on co-operaUve prinCiples and for matters connected there-
with. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventh Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
S 1. (1) This Act may be called the Agricultural Produce (Develop- Short title. 
ment and Warehousing) Corporations Act, 1956. ' := 
(2) It .extends to the whole of Indja except th~ State of Jammu 
and Kashmir. 
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Govern-
[0 ment may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
ment. 
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,- De8nltionl 
(a) "agricultural produce" means any of the following 
classes of commodities, namely:-
(i) foodstuffs, including edible oil-seeds; 
IS (ii) cattle fodder, including oil-cakes and other con-
centrates; 
(iii) raw cotton, whether ginned or unginned. and 
cotton seed; 

(iv) raw jute; and 
(v) vegetable oils; 
2 
(b) "appropriate Government" means in relatjon to the 
Board and the Central Warehousing Corporation, the Central 
Government, and in relation to a State Warehousing Corpora- 5 
tion, the State Government; 
(c) "Board" means the National Co-operative Development 
and Warehousing Board established under section 3; 
(d) "Central Warehousing Corporation" means the Central 
Warehousing Corporation established under section 17;· 10 
(e) "Co-operative Society" means a society registered or 
deemed to be registered under the Co-operative Societies Act, • 1912 or under any other law for the time being in force in any 2 of 1912. 
State relating to co-operative societies which is engaged in any 
of the activities specified in sub-section (1) of section 9 and in- IS 
eludes a· co-operative land mortgage Bank; 
(f) "prescribed" means prescrfOed by rules made under this 
Act; 
(g) "recognised association" means an association which is 
for the time being recognised by the Central Government under 20 
section 6 of the Forward Contracts (Regulation) Act, 1952; 74 of 19,2. 
(h) "Reserve Bank" means the Reserve Bank of India con-
stituted under the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934; 2 of 1934. 
(i) "scheduled bank" means a bank for the time be)ng in-
cludeli in the Second Schedule to the Reserve Bank of India Act, 25 
1934; 2 of 1934. 
(j) "State Bank" means the State Bank of India constituted 
under the State Bank of India Act, 1955; 23 of 19!5!5. 
(k) "State Warehousing Corporation" means a Warehous-
ing Corporation for a State established under section. ~8; 30 
(l) "Warehousing Corporation" means a Warehousing Cor-
poration established under this Act; and 
(m) "year" means the financial year. 
CHAPTER II 
THE NATIONAL Co-OPERATIVB DEVRLOPMBNT AND WAREHOUSING BOARD 35 
Establish- 3. (1) With eftect from such date as the Central Government may, 
N~t oflt~_. by notification an the Official Gazette, fix in this /behalf, there atlona """"' operative shan be established at New Delhi a Corporation by the name of the 
Devct1&Pd- National ICO-operatlve Development and Warehousing Board which 
~ an . 
Warehous- shall be a body corporate having perpetual succession and a COM- 40 
ing Board. mon aeaI with power to 'acquire, hold aad dispose of property and 
to contract, and may, In the said name, use and be sued. 

74 of 1952. 
3 
(2) The Board shall consist of the following members, namely:-
(i) ten members representing the Central Goverbment, to 
be nominated by that Government in such manner as may be 
prescribed; 
(ii) the Chairman of the Forward Markets Commission 
established under the Forward Contracts (Regulation) Act, 
1952, ex-otJicio; 
(iii) one representative of the Reserve Bank, nominated by 
the Central Government; 
10 (iv) one representative of the State Bank, nominated by the 
Central .Government; 
(v) seven non-officials, nominated by the Central Govern-
ment. of whom-
(a) one shall b~ a person who has special knowledge of 
IS rural economics; and 
(b) four shall be persons who have experience of co-
operative societies, one being a persol) who has also special 
knowhdge of Co-operative Education. 
(3) A member of the Board- nominated by the Central Govern-
20 ment may be nominated by virtue of office; 
(4) There shall be a Cha;rman and a Vice-Chairman of the Board 
who shall be chosen from among the members of the Board in such 
manner as may be prescribed. 
4. A person shall be disqualified for being chosen as, or for being, Disqualifica-
2S a membeT of the Board who- lion for being a member of 
(i) is, or at any time has been, adjudicated insolvent or has Board. 
suspended payment of his debts or has compounded with his 
creditors; or 
(ii) is or has been convicted of any offence involving moral 
30 turpitude; or 
(iii) is a salaried official of the Board or of a Warehousing 
Corporation. 
S. (1) The term of office of members of the Board and the man- Term 
ner of filling vacancies among members shall be such as may be ~f sit~:ber 
3S prescribed. • of Board. 
(2) Any member of the Board other than an ex-ot!icio member 
may resign his office by giving notice in writing to the Central Go-
vernment, and on such resignation being accepted he shall be deem-
ed to have vacated his office. 

4 
:me:o:fl~: 8. The Central Government may, ~t any time, remove from office 
ber, etc:. any member other than an ex-offic,o member of the Board after 
giving him a reasonable opportunity of showing cause against the 
proposed removal. 
MeetJnJl. _ 7. (1) The Board shall meet at such times and places and shall,S 
etc. of Board. subject to the provisions of sub-sections (2) and (3), observe such 
procedure in regard to transaction of business at its meetings (includ-
ing the quorum at meetings) as may be provided by regulations 
made by the Board under this Act. 
(2) The Chairman or, in his absence, the Vice-Chairman or, in 10 
the absence of both the Chairman and the Vice-Chairman, any mem-
ber chosen by the members present from amongst themselves, shall 
preside at a meeting of the Board. 
(3) All questions at a meeting of the Board shall be deCided by 
a majority of the votes of the members present and voting, and in IS 
the case of equality of votes, the Chairman, or, in his absence, the 
Viae-Chairman, or, in. the absence of both the Chairman and the 
Vice-Chairman, the person presiding shall have a second or casting 
vote. 
Of&c:era and 8. (1) The Central Government shall, in consultation with the 20 
= e::;p- Board, appoint a person to be the Secretary of the Board. 
Board. (2) Subject to such rules as may be made by the Central Go-
vernment in this behalf, the Board may appoint such other officers 
and employees as it considers necessary for the efficient performance 
of its functions. 25 
(3) The methods of appointment, the conditions of service and 
the scales of pay of the officers and other employees of the Board 
shall,-
(a) as respects the Secretary, be such as may be prescribed; 
and 30 
(b) as respects the other officers and employees, be such as 
may debermined by regulations made by the Board under this 
Act. 
PuactiODi of 9. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the functions of the 
Board. Board shaH be to plan and promote programmes for the production, 3S 
processing, marketing, stor~ge, warehousing, export and import. of 
agriculture produce through a co-operative society or a Warehous-
ing Corporation. 
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the 
foregoing provision, the Board may'- 40' 
(a) advance loans or grant subsidies to State Governments 
for 1lnancing co-operative soCieties; 

s 
JO 
5 
(b) provide funds to a State Government or a Warehousing 
Corporation for financing co-operative societies for the purchase 
of agricultural produce on behalf of the Central Government; 
(c) subscribe to the share capital of the Central Warehous-
ing Corporation or advance loans or g"rant subsidies to that 
Corporation or any State Warehousing Corporation; and 
(d) plan and promote programmes through co-operative 
societies for the supply of seeds, manures, fertilisers, agricultural 
implements and other articles for the development of agricul-
tural produce. 
(3) The Board shall so exercise its functions under this section 
as not to interfere with the activities of the All India Khadi and 
Village Industries Board set up by the Central Government. 
18. (1) There shall be an Executive Committee of the Board which Execulive 
IS shall cOllsist of the following members, namely: - Committee 
ofBOIrd. 
(a) the Vice-Chairman of the Board; 
(b) two members nominated 'by the Central Government 
in such manner as may be prescribed, from among the mell\bers 
of the Board referred to in clanse (i) of sub-section (2) of section 
20 3; 
(c) the Chairman of the Forward Markets Commission; 
(d) the representative of the Reserve Bank nominated under 
clause (iii) of sub-section (2) of section 3; 
(e) one member nominated by the Central Government from 
25 among the members of the Board referred to in clause (v) of 
sub-section (2) of section 3. 
(2) (a) The Vice-Chairman of" the Board shall be the Chairman 
of the Executive Committee. 
(b) The Vice-Chairman, of the Executive Committee shall be 
30 nominated in such manner as may be prescribed, from among the 
members referred to in clause (b) ofsu'b-section (1). 
(3) Subject to the general control, direction and superintendence 
of the Board, the Executive Committee shall be competent to deal 
with any matter within the competence of the Board; 
3S (4) The Executive Committee shall meet at such times and at 
such places and shall observe such procedure in regard to transaction 
of business at its meetings (including the quorum at meetings) as 
lnay be provided by regulations made by the Board under this Act. 
(5) The minutes of every meeting of the Executive Committee 
~hall be laid before the Board at its next following meeting. 

6 
Grants b 11. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made 
the Ceniral by Parliameqt by law in this behalf, pay to the Board--
Government 
to Board. (a) a non-recurring grant of five crores of rupees and a 
Board to 
maintain 
tWo fund •• 
Development 
Pund. 
recurring grant in each year of a sum of five crores of rupees 
during the period of five years from the commencement of this s 
Act: 
Provided that the Central Government may increase or 
reduce the amount of such non-recurring grant or the annual 
recurring grant in any year having regard to the actual require-
ments of the Board; 
(b) after the expiration of the salid period of five years, such 
sums as the Central Government may from time to time deem 
necessary to enable the Board to perform its functions under this 
Act. 
10 
12. (1) The Board shall maintain two separate funds, namely: - IS 
(a) the National Co-operative Development Fund (herein-
after referred to as "the Development Fund"); 
(b) the National Warehousing Development Fund (herein-
• after referred to as "the Warehousing Fund"). 
(2) The Board may with the approval of the Central Govern- ~ 
ment, make re-appropriations between the two funds. 
13. (1) To the Development Fund shall be credited-
(a) three-fifths of the annual recurring grant referred to in 
section 11; 
(b) such additional grants as the Central Government may 2S 
make to the Board for the purposes of the Fund; and 
(c) such sums of money as may, from time to time, be realis-
ed out of repayment of loans made from the Fund or from 
interest on loans or dividends on investments made from the 
Fund. 30 
(2) The Development Fund shall be applied for advancing loans 
and granting subsidies to State Governments on such terms and con-
ditions as the Board may deem fit for the purpose of enabling State 
Governments to subscribe to the share capital of co-operative societies 
or for otherwise financing co-operative societies. 3S 
Warehousing 14. (1) To the Warehousing Fund shall be credited-
Fund. 
(a) the non-recurring grant of five crores of rupees and two-
fifths of the annual recurring' grant referred to in section 11; 
(b) such additional grants as the Central Government may 
make to the Board for the purposes of the Fund i 40 

7 
(c) such sums of money as may, from time to time, be 
realised out of loans made from the Fund or from interest on 
loans or dividends on investments made from the Fund. 
(2) The Warehousing Fund shall 'be applied-
S (a) for subscribing to the share capital of the Central 
Warehousing Corporation; 
(b) for advancing loans to State Governments on such terms 
and conditions as the Board may deem fit for the purpose of 
enabling them to subscribe to the share capital of State Ware-
10 housing Corporations; 
(c) for advancing loans and granting subsidies to a Ware-
housing Corporation or to a State Government for the purpose 
of promoting the warehousing and storage of agricultural 
produce. 
IS 15. (1) 'fA,e Board shall furnish to the Central Government at Returns InJ 
such times and in such form and manner as may be prescribed or (cpom. 
as the Central Government may direct, such returns and statements 
and such particulars in regard to the discharge of i~ functions under 
this Act as the Central Government may, from time to time, require. 
20 (2) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-seettion (1), the 
Board shall, as soon as possible, after the end of each year, submit 
to the Central Government a report, in such form .and manner and 
before such date as may be prescri'bed, giving a true and full account 
of its activities, policy and programme during the previous y .... . ,. 
2S (3) A copy of the report received under sub-section (2) shall be 
laid before both Houses of Parliament. 
16. In the discharge of its functions, the Board shall be guided Directions 
by such directions as may be given to it by the Central Government. bGoY Central vernmeut. 
CHAPTER III 
THE CENTRAL W ARBHOUSING CORPORATION 
17. (1) With effect from such date as the Central Government The Central 
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, fix in this behalf, there Warehousing 
shall be es'tablished a Corporation by the name of the Central Corporation. 
Warehousing Corporation which shall be a body corporate having 
3S perpetual succession and a common seal with power to acquire. hold 
and dispose of property and to contract and may, by the said name, 
sue and be sued. 
(2) The head office of the Central Wareqousing Corporation shall 
be at New Delhi. ' 

Share c:apitai 
and share-
holders. 
8 
18. (1) The authorised capital of the Central Warehousing Cot-
poration shall be twenty crores of rupees divided into two hundred 
thousand shares of the f£ce value of one thousand rupees each, of 
which one hundred thousand shares of the total face value of ten 
crores of rupees shall be issued in the first instance, and the re- 5 
maining shares may be issued, with the sanction of the Central 
Government from time to time, as and when the Central Ware-
housing Corporation may deem fit. 
(2) Of the capital issued in the first instance-
(a) the Board shall subscribe for forty thousand shares; 10 
(b) on application made before such date as may be noti-
fied by the Central Government in !the Official Gazette in this 
behalf;-
(i) the State Bank m£,y 
shares; 
subscribe for ten thousand 
IS 
(ii) other scheduled banks may subscribe for twelve 
thousand and five hundred shares; . 
('iii) co-operative societies may subscribe for two thous-
and and five hundred shares; 
(iv) insurance companies, investment trusts and other 20 
classes ~f financial institutions may subscribe for thirty 
thou&:nd shares; and 
(v) recognised associations and joint stock companies 
dealing in agricultural produce may subscribe for five 
thousand shares. 2S 
(3) If any shares referred to in clause (b) of sub-section (2) re-
main unallotted, they may be subscribed for by the Board and the 
State Boak in such proportion as may be agreed upon between them. 
(4) If and when the reme.ining one hundred thousand shares or 
any part thereof are issued, the Board, the State Bank and the 30 
other institutions referred to in sub-section (2) may subscribe for 
such shares in such· proportion as the Board may determine at the 
time of the issue of the shares. 
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, no 
institution belonging to any of th«:; classes referred to in sub-clauSe 3S 
(it), (iii), (iv)or (v) of clause (b) of sub-section (2) shall be entitled 
to subscribe for more than twenty-five per cent. of the share capi-
tal reserved for that class of institution under the said clause. 

• 
9 
(6) Tbe shares of the Central Warehousing Corporation shall 
not be transferable except to the Board, the State Bank, any sche-
duled bank, any insurance company, any investment trust or other 
financial institution or any co-operative society or any recognised 
S association or jOint stock company dealing in agricultural produce, 
in accordance with the regulations made by the Central Ware-
housing Corporation under this Act. 
It. (1) The shares of the Central Warehousing Corporation shall Shares to be guaranteed be guaranteed by the Central Govemment as to the repayment by Central 
10 of the principal aDd tile payment of the annual dividend at such Government and to be minimum rate as may be fixed by the Central Government by noti- trust or 
ftcatlon published in the Oftlcial Gazette at the time of the Issue of approy~ 
the shares. securities. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Acts mentioned 
I~ in this sub-section, the shares of the Central Warehousing Corpo-
ration shall be deemed to be included among the securities enume-
rated in section 20 of the Indian Trusts Act, 1882, and also to be 2 0: 188;. 
approved securities for the purpose of the Insurance Act, 1938 and 4 0 f 11939' . 100 94. 
the Banking Companies Act, 1949. 
20 20. (1) The general superintendence- and management of the ::~~:Jnt 
affairs and business of the Central Warehousing Corporation shall Warehollsing 
vest in a board of directors who, with the assistance of an Execu- Corporation.' 
tive Committee and a managing director, may exercise all the pow-
ers and discharge all the functions which may be exercised or dis-
25 charged by the Central Warehousing Corporation under this Act. 
(2) The directors in discharging their functions under this Act 
shall act on business principles having regard to public interest and 
shall be guided by such instructions on questions of policy as may 
be given to them by the Board. 
30 (3) If any doubt arises as' to whether a question is or is not a 
question of policy, the decision of the Board shall be final. 
35 
21. (1) The board of directors, referred to in section 20, shall Dirtctora. 
consist of the following, namely:-
(a) all members of the Executive Committee of the Board 
referred to in sub-section (l) of section 10; 
(b) two directors, nominated by the Board in 'the prescrib-
ed manner from among the members of the Board other 
than those who are members of the Executive Committee of 
the Board; 

to 
(c) the representative of the State Bank on the. aoard; 
(d) one director to be elected in the prescribed manner 
by each of the following classes of shareholders of the 
Central Warehousing Corporation, namely:-
(i) scheduled banks, 
(ii) co-opera ti ve societies, 
(iii) insurance companies, investment trusts and 
other financial institutions, and 
(iv) recognised associations and joint stock companies 
dealing in agricultural produce; (0 
(e) a managing director, appointed by the Board in 
consultation with the directors referred to in clauses (a) 
to (d). 
(2) The four directors to be elected under clause (d) of sub-sec-
tion (1) may, for the first constitution of the board of directors, be IS 
nominated by the Central Government in consultation with the 
Board in such manner as to give representation to each class of 
institutions (whether they have .become shareholders of the Cor-
poration or not) referred _to in that clause, but a director so nomi-
nated shall hold office only until he is replaced by a director elect- 10 
ed as povided in that clause, and the director so elected shall 
hold office only for so long as the director replaced would have 
held office had he not been replaced. 
(3) If, within the period prescribed in this behalf, or within 
such further period as the Central Government may allow, any 15 
class of institutions referred to in clause (d) of sub-section (1) 
fails to elect a director, the Board may nominate a director- to fill 
the vacancy. 
(4) The Vice-Chairman of the Board shall be the Chairmah 
of the board of directors. 30 
(5) The Vice-Chairman of the Executive Committee of the • 
Board shall be the Vice-Chairman of the board of directors. 
(6) The managing director shall-
(a) be a whole-time officer of the Central Warehousing 
Corporation; 
r ~ 
(b) perform such duties as the Central Warehousing Cor-
poration may by regulations made under this Act entrust or 
delegate to him; and 

u 
(e) receive such salary and allowances as the Central 
Warehousing Corporation may, with the approval of the 
Board, fix. 
(7) The'directors of the Central Warehousing Corporation other 
5 than a ma.naging director shall be entitled to receive by way of 
remuneration such sums as the Central Warehousing Corpora-
tion may, with the approval of the Board, fix: 
Provided that no official director shall be entitled to receive 
any remuneration other than the allowances, if any, admissible to 
10 him under the rules regulating his conditions of service. 
(8) The term of office of, and the manner of filling casual 
vacancies among, the directors shall be such as may be prescribed. 
22. A person shall be disqualified for being chosen as, or for Du' isqfiualifimca-on or 0 ICC 
being. a member of the board of directors of the Central Ware- of Director 
15 housing Corporation who- of the Ce~tr.l Warehousmg 
(i) is found to be a lunatic or becomes of unsound mind; Corponllion. 
or 
(ii) is, or at any time has been, adjudicated insolvent or has 
suspended payment of his debts or has compounded with his 
20 creditors: or 
(iii) is or has been convicted of any offence involving moral 
turpitude; or 
(iv) has been removed or dismissed from the service of Gov-
ernment on a charge of corruption or bribery; or 
(v) except in the case of the managing director, is a salaried 
official of the Board or of the Central Warehousing Corporation 
or any State Warehousing Corporation; or 
(vi) has directly or indirectly any interest in any subsisting 
contract made with, or in any work being done for, the Central 
Warehousing Corporation except as a shareholder (other than a 
director) in any' incorporated company: 
Provided that where any such person is a shareholder. he shaH 
disclose to the Cf'ntral Warehousing Corporation the nature and ex-
tent of shares held by him in such company. 
35 23. (1) The Board may, at any time in consultation with the ~emovill of 
Central Warehousing Corporation and with the previous approval t:o':t~ffice. 
of the Central Government, remove the managing director from 
office after giving him a reasonable opportunity of showing cause 
against the proposed removal. 

12 
(2) The Board of directors may remove from office any director 
who-
(a) is or has become subject to any of the disqualifications 
mentioned in section 22; or 
(b) is absent without leave of the board of directors for more , 
than three consecutive meetings of the board without excuse, 
sufficient in the opinion of the board, to exonerate his absence. 
A~pointment 24. (1) The Central Warehousing Corporation may appoint such 
~ndffi:e~,etc officers and other employees as it considers necessary for the efficient 
con~tions of performance of its functions. 10 lemcc. 
(2) Every person employed by the Central Warehousing Corpora-
tion under this Act shall be subject to such conditions of service and 
shall be entitled to such remuneration as may be determined by 
regulations made by the Corporation under this Act. 
FunctioIll of 25. Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Central Warehousing I~ 
Cenw tralh . Corporation may-are ou8U18 
Corporation. (a) acquire and build godowns and warehouses at such suit-
able places in India as it thinks fit; 
(b) run warehouses for the storage of agricultural produce, 
seeds, manures and fertilizers offered by individuals, co-opera- 20 
tive societies and other institutions; 
(e) arrange facilities for the transport of agricultural produce 
to an~ from warehouses; 
(d) subscribe to the share capital of a State Warehousing 
Corporation; 2, 
(e) act as agent of the Board or of the Government for the 
purposes of the purchase, sale, storage and distribution of agri-
cultural produce, seeds, manures and fertilizers; and 
(f) carry out such other functions as may be prescribed. 
Executive 26. (1) There shall be an Executive Committee of the Central 30 
Committee. Warehousing Corporation which shall consist of~ 
(a) the Chairman and Vice-Chainnan of the board of direc-
tors, 
(b) the managing director. and 
(e) two other directors chosen by the Corporation in the 3$ 
prescribed manner. .. 
(2) The Cairman and the Vice-Chairman of the board of directora 
shall be th~ Chairman and Vice-Chairman respec~ively of the Execu· 
tive Cominittee. 

13._ 
(3) S~bje4,tG-,.~ ge~~tl'~ di:~~~;~nclrtl~~~~ 
of the ~~dof .dir~c.tprJ.~~~tive Cormnitt~~hallbe..,c;o~ 
to deal with any matter withinc..theco~teJ)Ce,o~,th~.:~Il.~al/War~­
housing Corporation. 
S· Z~~ .' (1) The .annl.lt~. g~neral, ~eting of the ,Centf~ W ,arehous.inS.~ectiDI. of 
Corporation (hereinafter referred to as the annual general. ~':' lion. CoIpon-
ing) shall be held every year either at its head office or at any other 
office. -ofthe-CO!'poration within ·three months from the date- on which 
the annual accounts of the Corporation are closed;· and any other· 
10 general· meeting may be ronvened by the directors at any other time. , 
(2) The ~~holc!e.r8.pi'esent at the annuatg~Jl.e.J;'al JIleeUni~ 
be"elltitled to. diScuss. the,lUlllual accwnt~, re}lQf~ of ;·the , dU'~~"., 
on, theworkil\gpf the. Co~PW'etwn duriQ.g .the yeatlund~~~t,~. 
w~ .. as,. the. audito~' rePQ,rt on the ann",at, ba)ance-~e.et.., B.PA. 
IS accounts. 
(8) The,. dif~¢OQi ,of the,Central.W4lrebo.~~g J'::o.rp~4ltiQl\ s~ll, 
on the. requ~Uo.nof one:tW.rQ. of the number of . ~r;:eh.old~ ,pi. the,., 
COI'p;Qration,. call. a sRe,;W.~e~tin& of, the Corporatio.n. 
(4),.; The requisition for a special ,~eeting under· sub-seetion (3)· 
20 shall state the object of the meeting, and must "be: signed by ,the re-., 
quisltionists and.4epositedat the head otlic~. of the. CC)rpQJ;8tiw"and 
mayicollsis.t of several docwnell.ts.in like fonneach .siBned:)Y ODer 
or more requisitiQJl.i$ts. 
(.5) ·If.the,diJz~ of.;the .. C~tratl"Ww:elwuemg,~qw_on do 
2S.IlQtJmlc~withiIl tW.tY~OnEt4IJMS· from, th~uia.te, ()f. Ith~ Jnttl~Uon 
being 80. de~ed;toJ::aq'Mt th~ sPACi.et~~i;tQ be._caJ.led, it~ re-
quisitioni~t~"' or. a ,maiQr·ity of them •. m~. thelIl~elves .cWl ,tl¥! meet-
ing, but in either case the meeting so called shall be held within 
thlJ:'8e.months from the date· of th~ldeposit· of· the,requisition. 
30 (6) The Central Warehousing Corporation shall observe such rules 
31t 
of procedure in regard to the transaction of ·business at its meeUngs 
(including the quorum at meetings) as may be provided by regula-
tlollS made by t~ ,Cel'\t~al W~}tQ"siDg CQrpoJ'ati.on, under., this ~AIct. 
CHAPTER IV 
STATE WAREHOUSING CORPOMT.Icnt&. 
28. (1) The State Government.may. by notifica~n.indh~t01licial State '\Vue-
Gaze..tte and with the approval of the.Central, WarehQus,ipg ,Corpora- =dCIIII. 
tion, establiSh a Warehousing Corporation for the State .u~~r.._s\lch 
name as may be specified in the notification. 
4R~ (2)' A State Warehousing Corporation established under, sub-
section (1) shall be a body corporate by the name,not~ed und.er. that 

14 
sub-section, having perpetual succession and a common seal, with 
power to acquire, hold and dispose of property and to contract, and 
may, by the said name, sue and be sued. 
(3) The head oftlce of a State Warehousing Corporation shall be 
at such place within the State as may be notified in the Ofticial S 
Gazette. 
Share capital 19. (1) The authorised capital of a State Warehousing Corporation 
aad lbare- shall ,be such sum not exceeding two crore!i of rupees as may be laoldcn. 
prescribed, divided into shares of the face value of one hundred 
rupees each, of which such number as may be determined by the 10 
Corporation in consultation with the State Government shall be 
issued in the first instance and the remaining shares may be issued, 
from time to time, as and when the Corporation may deem fit in 
consultation with the Central Warehousing Corporation and with 
the sanction of the State Government. IS 
(2) Of the share capital issued in the first instance, and of any 
subsequent issue of such capital, the Central Warehousing Corpora-
tion shall, in any case where the State Government has subscribed 
for fifty per cent. of such capi~l, subscribe for the remaining fifty 
per cent. of the capital. 20 
Mmapmcnt S'. (l) Tne general superintendence and management of . the 
#~:: affairs of a State Warehousing Corporation shall vest in a board of 
Corporadoo. directors which shan consist of the following, namely:-
. (a) five directors nominated by the Central Warehousing 
Corporation, of whom one shall be nominated in consultation as 
with the State Bank and one at least shall be a non-oftlcial; 
(b) five directors nominated by the State Government; and 
(c) a managing director, appointed by the State Government 
in consultation with the directors referred to in clauses (a) and 
(b) and with the previous approval of the Central Warehousing 30 
Corporation. '." 
. (2) The Chairman of the board of directors shall be appointed 
by the State Government from among the directors of the State 
Warehousing Corporation with the previous approval of the Central 
Warehousing Corporation. SJ 
(3) The managing director shall-
(a) be a whole-time oftlcer of the State Warehousing Cor-
poration; 
(b) perform such duties as the State Warehousing Corpora-
tion may, by regulations made under this Act, entrust or del .. 4tt . 
. late to him; and 

15 
(c) receive such salary and allowances as the State Ware-
housing Corporation may, in consultation with the Central 
Warehousing Corporation: and with the previous approval of 
the State Government, fix. 
S (4) The directors in discharging their functions under this Act 
shall act on business principles having regard to public interest and 
shal~ be guided by such instructions on questions of policy as may 
be given to them by the State Government or the Central Ware-
housing Corporation. 
10 (5) If any doubt arises as to whether a question is or is not a 
question of policy, or, if the State Government and the Central 
Warehousing Corporation give conflicting directions, the matter shall 
be referred to the Board whose decision thereon shall be final. 
(6) The directors of a State Warehousing Corporation, other than 
rS the managing director, shall be entitled to receive by way of remune-
ration such sums as may 'be prescribed: 
Provided that no official director shall be entitled to receive any 
remuneration other than any allowances admissible to him under 
the rules regulating his conditions of service. 
20 (7) The term of office of, and the manner of filling casual vacan· 
cies among, directors shall be such as may be prescribed .. 
31. A person shall be disqualified for being chosen as, or for I?iequ8Wlca-
being, a member of the board of directors of a State Warehousing .~ 
Corporation who- of the 
of the Cor· 
2S (i) is, or at any time has been, adjudicated insolvent or has potation. 
suspended payment of his debts or has. compounded with his 
creditors; ol'! 
(ii) is or has been convicted of any offence involving moral 
turpitude; or! . 
30 (iii) has been removed or dismissed from the service of 
Government on a charge of corruption or bribery; or 
(iv) except in the case of the managing director, is a salaried 
official of the Board or of the Central Warehousing Corporation 
.or a State Warehousing Corporation; or 
35 (v) has directly or indirectly any interest in subsisting 
contract made with, or in any work being done for, the State 
Warehousing Corporation except as a shareholder (other than 
a director) in any incorporated company: 
Provided that where any such person is a shareholder, he shall 
40 disclose to the Warehousing Corporation the nature and extent of 
the shares held by him in such company. 

R,emovalo{ 
Dineton &om oftlcz. 
16 
-32. (1f'I'he State Government may, at' any time, in ~6nsultation 
with the Central Warehousing Corp~tion,'removethema1Ulging 
'director from office after giving him a reasonable opportunity of 
showing cause against the proposed removal. 
(2) The board of directors may remove from office any director 5 
wb~ 
"(4) is or has become subject to any of the disqualifications 
mentioned in section 31; or -
(b) is 'abSent without leave of the board of, directors for 
-mOre 'than , three consecutive meettilgs of the Board Without 10 
, caURrauftlcient, in the opinlon of the board, to exonerate 'his 
"*ence. 
~f':;:::'CDt,!33.(1) A 'State WarehoUSing 'CotpOtation may appoint such 
etc., and , <sMcers ahd' btheretnpl()~es as it considers'nece9sllry'fot'the'effte1ent 
~ioDl performance of its functions. IS 
of eervicc. (2) Every person employed by a State Warehousing Corporation 
under this Act shall be subject to such conditions of service and shall 
be entitled to such remuneration as may be determined by regula-
tions' made by the Corporation under this Act . 
. ~ of, 34. Subject to the provisions of this Act, a State Warehousing 20 
w: ........ Corporation may-
_jIIlA»ll. 
(a) acquire and build god owns and warehouses' at such 
places within the State as it may, in consultation with the Cen-
tral WlU'ehousing Corporation, determine; 
(b) run warehouses in the State for the storage of agricul- 25 
tural produce, seeds, manures and fertilizers; 
(c) subscribe- t~ the share capital of co-opetative societies 
engaged in the storage or warehousing of agricultural produce; 
(d) arrange facilities for the transport of agricultural pro-
duce to and frol'l1 warehouses; 30 
(e) act as an-agent of the Central Warehousing Corporation or 
of the Government for the purposes of the purcl\ase, sale, storage 
and distribution. of agricultural pl"oduce, 'seeds, lhahUres and 
fertilizers; and 
(1) carry out such other functions as'maybeprescrtbed. 
"35. (1) There shall be an E1t~cutiveCl)mmittee of a State 'Ware-
housing Corporation which shall cortsist of-
(a) the Chairman of the ~ .. rd of directors; 
. (b) the managing director; and 
(c) three other directors chosen in the prescribed manner.-· 
35 

"17 
(2) The Chairman of the board of directors shall be the Chairman 
of th~ Eft"C!Uttve 'Cbtnmiitee. ' 
(3) ,:Subject to any. general or special directions as the board of 
directors may, from time to time, give, the Executive Committee 
5 shall be competent to deal with any matter within the competence 
'of the State :Warehousing Corporation . 
. 
'CHAPTBR V 
FINANCE, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT 
36. (1) The Board and every Warehousing Corporation shall pre- Submillion 
10 pare before the commencement of each year a statement of pro- ~ of 
,gramme of, its activities during the forthcoming yearss well as a activitiea and 
financial estimate in respect thereof. :r~. 
(2) A statement prepared under sub-section (1) shall, not later 
than three months before the commencement of each year, be sub-
IS mitted for approval- ' 
(a) in the c«se of the 'Soard, to the Central Government; 
(b) in' the case of the Central Warehousing Corporation, to 
the Board; 
(c) in the ease' of a' State Warehousing Corporation, to the 
lO . €entral , Warehousing ,Corporation and the State Government. 
oJ3'7. (1) A'Warehousing Corporation may, in consultation with the Borrowin, 
'Reserve Bank and with the previous approval of the appropriate ~:=o~ainl 
Government, issue and sell bonds and debentures carrying interest Corporation. 
for the purpose of raising funds: . 
2S Provided, that the total amount of bonds and debentures issued 
and outstanding and of the '-Other borrowings of the Corporation 
.hall'not at any time exceed ten times the amount of the paid up 
"8bre Clt1iial and 'thereSeI've fund of the Corpot1ltion. 
(2) A Wai"ehousing Corporation may, for the purpose of carry-
30 ing out its functions under this Act, borrow money-
(i) from the Reserve Bank,-
(a) repayable on demand or on the expiry of ftxed periods 
not' I~ing ninety 'days from the ,date on which the 
money is so borrowed. 'against securities' of the Central 
!S Gdvertl1'ftent /1r' of any State Government; or 
(b) . 'repayable on the expiry of fixed Tperiods not exceed-
, ~ng ~ighteenmonths from the, date on which the -money is 
. ·Sobottrowed;· against securities' of the Central G<;,we~~nt 
or of any State Government, or any maturity, or 8gai~t 

Deposit 
account. 
Investment 
of funds. 
Dilposal of 
profits. 
18 
. bonds and debentures issued under sub-section (1) by the 
borrowing Warehousing Corporation and guaranteed by the 
appropriate Government and maturing within a perioc:l not 
exceeding eighteen months trom the date on which the 
money is so borrowed: S 
Provided that the amount borrowed under this sub-clause 
shall not at any time exceed, in the aggregate, three ClOre. of 
rupees in the case of the Central Warehousing Corporation and 
fifty Iakhs of rupees in the case of a State Warehousing Corpo-
~oo; ~ 
(ii) from the State Bank, for such periods for which, and 
upon any of the securities against which, it is authorised to 
advance and lend monies, under the prOvisions of the State 
Bank of India Act, 1955. ~3 of 1"5 
(3) Subject to the proviso to sub-section (1), the Central Ware- IS 
housing Corporation may borrow money from the Central Govern-
ment and the Board, and a State Warehousing Corporatioo may 
borrow money from the State Government. the Central Warehous-
ing Corporation and the Board, on such securities and. on such terms 
and conditions as may be agreed upon ·between the borrowin, cor- 20 
poration and the lender. in each case. 
(4) The bonds and debentures of a Warehousing Corporation 
may be guaranteed by the appropriate Government as to the repay-
ment of principal and the payment of interest at such rate as may 
be fixed by the appropriate Government on the recommendation of as 
the board of directors of the Corporation at the time the bonds or 
• debentures are issued. 
38. (1) All moneys belonging to the Board shall be deposited in 
the Reserved Bank or the State Bank. 
(2) All moneys belonging to a Warehousing Corporation shall be 30 . 
deposited in the Reserve Bank or the State Bank or, subject to any 
rules made under this Act, in any scheduled bank or co-operative 
bank .. 
39. A Warehousing Corporation may invest its funds in the 
securities of the Central Government or any State Government. 3S 
40. (1) Every Warehousing Corporation shall establish a reserve 
fund out of its annual net profits. • 
(2) After making provision for bad and 80ubtful debts, depreci-' 
ation on assets and all other matters which are usually provided for 
by companies registered and incorporated under the Indian Com- 40 
panies Act, 1913, a Warehousing Corporation may, out of its net an- 7 of 1913. 
nual profits, declare a dividend: 

19 
Provided that for so long as the reserve fund is less than the paid 
up share capital of the Central Warehousing Corporation and until 
there has been repaid to the Central Government such sum, if anYt 
as that Government may have paid under a guarantee given in pur-
, suance ot sub-section (1) of section 19 or sub-section (4) of section 
37, the rate of such dividend, in the case of the Central Warehous-
ing Corporation, shall not exceed the rate guaranteed by the Central 
Government under sub-section (1) of section 19_ 
U_ (1) The Board shaH maintain proper accounts and other rele- Accounts of 
10 vant records and prepare an annual statement of accounts in such = and 
form as may be prescribed in consultation with the Comptroller and 
Auditor-General of India. -
(2) The accounts of the Board shall be audited annually by the 
Comptroller and Auditor-General of India or any person authorised 
IS by him in this behalf and any expenditure incurred in connection 
with such audit shall be payable by the Board. 
(3) The Comptroller and Auditor-General of India and any person 
authorised by him in connection with the audit of the accounts of 
the Board shall have the same rights, privileges and authority in 
:30 connection with such audit as the Comptroller and Auditor-General 
has in connection with the audit of Government accounts and in 
particular. shall have the right to demand the production of books. 
accounts, connected vouchers and other documents and papers and 
to inspect any office of the Board. 
25 (4) The accounts of the Board as certified by the Comptroller 
and Auditor-General of India or any other person authorised by 
him in this behalf together with an audit report thereon shall be 
forwarded annually to the Central Government and that Govern-
ment shall cause the same to ~ laid before both Houses of ParHa-
30 ment. 
U. (1) Every Warehousing Corporation shall maintain proper Accounta_ 
accounts and other relevant records and prepare an annual state- audit of . 
ment of accounts including the profit and loss account and the =. 
balance-sheet in such form as may be prescribed. 
35 (2) The accounts of a Warehousing Corporation shall be audited 
by not less than two auditors duly qualified to act as auditors of 
companies under sub-section (1) of section 144 of the Indian Com-
7 of 1913. panies Act, 1913. 
(3) The said auditors shall be appointed by the appropriate 
40 Go\t'ernment and the appropriate Government shan appoint one 
such auditor in consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor-
Genea! of India. 

~., 
(4) The auditors shaU ,be .supplied witq a, copy of tile aJ).J1Ual 
baj,ance.:sneet of.;th~, W areb~sU;ag .~orpqrati()n, and it. shall be the.il; 
duty to examine it tog~~r wi~ the- ac,coUJ1ts . and. voucllers, , relatr. 
ing, ther~to. and they shaU hav.e a list delivered to them of aU book.a 
kept ,by the COfpqnl tiooan,d ·shall: at·. aU. reaSQnable times have S 
acc~s .to the books, accQunts and,otber .. do«:umenti of, t~ Co~r~ .. 
tion and may in relation to ,suchaccounU examine any cUrectel' or, 
officer of the Corporatio,ll. 
(5) The auditors shall make a report to the shareholders on .. the 
annual balance-sheet and accounts and in . every such report they 10 
shall state whether in their opinion the balance-sheet is a full and 
fair balance-sheet containing all necessary p~ticulars and, properly 
drawn up to exhibit a true and correct view of the state of affairs· 
o.f. the . Warehousing. COl'pOl'a tionaDd.·, in case ,they had. callecl,~or 
any explanation or informatiOJ). from.' the .. directors, . whethft·· it :ha8I 15 
been· given and whether it is satisfactory .. 
(6) The appropriate Government, on the rec(!)fl'lmendation of the 
Board, may, after consultation with the Comptroller. and Auditor-
General.-of India at any time issue direction&, through the Boud to; 
the auditors requiring them.to report. to the appropriate Govemmeat 20 
upon the adequacy of measures·taken by·a .Wueheu.iI1g.c~ 
tion :for the protection of its shareholders·,and .creditors or. upon the 
su.mcie~ of their proeedUJ!e-m auditing.tbeacoo\:Ultsof.the.CoJ'POrk 
tion and mtiy enlarge or ,elCtenci the scope. of the 8udih)r dire<lt. that. 
a different procedure in audit may; .be!adop.teO, or;dir8A\ . that. IU\Y' 25 
other e:X:anUnatio~ may be made by the ,auelitors if in the op~ion of 
the appropriate Government public interest so requires. 
(7) A WarehousiDg,Corpc)lw,tion!shallsenci'a copY.,e.f, e~re~1i 
of the audit.ors· to the Comp$rollerand Audito.r-Genftr~·of India . ..a~ 
to. tbe . Boaniat leaat on~monthbefQ,1!e ,U is placed betGrethe ,shal;e.- 30 
holders. 
(8) Notwithstanding anything h~reinbefore contained. in this. se-
tion, the Comptroller and Auditor-General of Indi(l m~y, either of 
his own motion or on a request received inAhis b~half from the 
appropriate Government undertake in respect of a Warehou.sing Oor- 35 
poration such audit' and at such time as he may consider necessary: 
Provided that where the Central Government is, ~equir~· to make ' 
any payment on account of the gua,rantee gi\f~n by ~tunder sub-sec- . 
tion (1) of section 19. such audit shall be u~ertaken by the Comp-
troller and Auditor-General of India. 40 
(9) Every audit report under this section. ;shaU be forwarded to 
the appropriate Government and that Go.veniment shaU caqse .the 
same to be laid before both Houses. of Parliam.ent or the LeliJlature 
of the State, as the case may be. 

21 
CHAPTER VI 
MISCELLANEOUS 
43. No act or proceeding of the Board or of a Warehousing Cor- Vacanciets,. . etc. not 0 In-
poratIon shall be invalid by reason only of the existence of any validate acts 
5 vacancy among its members or directors or any defect in the consti- anlnd proceedf th -
. h f IS 0 e tubon t ereo . Board and 
Warehousinl 
Corporation •. 
44. In any meeting of the shareholders of a Warehousing Corpora- Vf0tinh g rights 
• 0 s are-tIon every member shall have one vote in respect of each share held holders. 
by him in the -Corporation. 
10 45. If there is any difference of opinion between the Central ~;::~s 
Warehousing Corporation and a State Warehousing Corporation re- ~~ Ware-
garding their respective functions and powers under this Act, such o,=~ation 
difference shall be referred to the Board whose decision thereon shall BDwd Shute. 
b ft are OUSIDg 
e nal.. Corporation 
IS 46. Every member, auditor and employee of the Bo.d and every ~ec1~det~ 
director, auditor, officer or other employee of a Warehousing Cor- and secrecy. 
poration shall, before entering upon his duties, make a declaration 
of fidelity and secrecy in the form set out in the Schedule. 
47. (1) Every director of a Warehousing Corporation shall be I1~mnity 
20 indemnified by the Corporation concerned against all losses and ex- 0 recton. 
penses incurred in the discharge of his duties except such as are 
caused by his own wilful act or default. 
(2) A director of a Warehousing Corporation shall not be res-
ponsible for any other director or for any officer or other employee 
25 of the Corporation or for any loss or expense resulting to the Corpo-
ration by the insufficiency or deficiency of value of, or title to, any 
property or security acquired or taken on behalf of the Corporation 
in good faith, or by the wrongful act of any person under obligation 
to the Corporation or by anything done in good faith in the execution 
30 of the duties of his office or in relation thereto. . 
48. (1) Whoever. without the consent in writing of a Warehousing Offences. 
Corporation, uses the name of that Corporation in any prospectus or 
advertisement, shall be punishable with imprisonment which may 
extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to one thousand 
35 rupees, or with both. 
(2) No court shall take cognizance of any offence under sub-sec-
tion (1) otherwise than on a complaint in writing by an officer 
authorised in this behalf by the Warehousing Corporation concerned. 
49. For the purposes of the Indian Income-tax Act. 1922, a Ware- Pr~v~8ion. 
40 housing Corporation shall be deemed to be a company within the f~co~~: 
meaning of that Act and shall be liable to income-tax and super-tax and super-
accordingly on its income, profits and gains: tax. 

Dissolution 
of Board. 
Provided that in the case of the Central Warehousing Corporation 
any sum paid by the Central Government under the guarantee given 
in pursuance of sub-section (1) of section 19 or in the case of a 
Warehousing Corporation any sum paid by the Central or a State 
Government under any guarantee given in pursuance of sub-section 5 
(4) of section 37 shall not be treated as income, profits and gains of 
a Warehousing Corporation. and any Interest on the debentures or 
bonds issued by that Corporation out of such sums shall not be 
treated as expenditure incurred by it: 
Provided further that in the case of any sharehol9.er or deb en- 10 
ture-holder 'such portion of a dividend or interest as has been paid 
out of any such sum advanced by the Central Government shall be 
deemed to be his income from interest on securities declared to be 
income-tax free within the meaning of section 8 of that Act. 
50. (1) The Central Government, if it is of opinion that the Board 15 
has failed to £..arry out its functions under this Act or that for any 
other reason iris not necessary to continue the Board. may, by notifi-
cation in the Official Gazette. dissolve the Board from such date as 
may be specified in the notification. 
(2) When the Board is dissolved under sub-section (1) ,- 20 
(a) all members of the Board shall, from the date of dissolu-
tion, vacate their offices as such members; 
, (b) all powers and duties of the Board shall, as from the 
date of dissolution, be exercised and performed by the Central 
Government or such person or persons as the Central Govern- 25 
ment may appoint in this behalf; 
(c) all funds and other property vested in the Board shall 
vest in the Central Government. 
Winding up 51. No provision of law relating to the winding up of companies 
i!gWC~~O:: or corporations shall ,apply to a Warehousing Corporation and any 30 
tions. such Corporation shall not be placed in liquidation save by order of 
the appropriate Government and jn such manner as it may direct. 
Power to 52. (1) The appropriate Government may, by notification in the makc'rulCli. Official Gazette, make rules to carry out the purposes of this Act. 
, (2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, 3S 
such rules may provide for-
(a) the manner in which representatives of the Central Gov-
ernment shall be nominated under clause (i) of sub-section (2) 
of section 3; 
(b) the manner in wl)ich the Chairman and Vice-Chairman 40 
of the Board shall be chosen; 

5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
35 
(c) the term of office of members of the Board and the man-
ner of filling vacancies among them; 
(d) the methods of appointment, the conditions of service 
and the scale of pay of the Secretary to the Board; 
(e) the manner in which the members shall be appointed 
under clause (b) of sub-section (1) of section 10 and the manner 
in which the Vice-Chairman of the Executive Committee shall be 
nominated under clause (b) of sub-section (2) of section 10; 
(f) the returns, statements and other particulars in regard 
to the discharge of its functions to be furnished by the Board to 
the Central Government; 
(g) the form and the manner in which. and the time within 
which, the Board shall furnish to the Central Government re-
turns, statements and other particulars with regard to the 
discharge of its functions; 
(h) the form and the manner in which, and the time within 
which, the Board shall furnish to the Central Government a re-
port of its activities. policy and programme; 
(i) the additional functions which a Warehousing Corpora-
tion may perform; . 
(j) the manner of nomination and election of the directors 
of the Central Warehousing Corporation and the period within 
which such directors shall be nominated or elected; 
(k) the term of office of, and the manner of filling casual 
vacancies among. and the remuneration payable to, the directors 
of a Warehousing Corporation; 
(l) the manner of choosing directors on the Executive Com-
mittee of a Warehousing Corporation; 
(m) the maximum limit of the authorised capital of a State 
Warehousing Corporation; 
(n) the form of the annual statement of accounts and the 
balance-sheet to be prepared by a Warehousing Corporation; 
(0) the deposit of moneys of a Warehousing Corporation in 
a scheduled bank or a co-operative bank; 
(p) the manner of issuing shares of a Warehousing Corpora-
tion, the calls to be made in respect thereof, and all other 
matters incidental to the issue of shares. 
(3) All rules made by the appropriate Government under this 
section shall. as soon as may be after they are made, be laid before 
40 both Houses of Parliament or the Legislature of the State as the case 
may be. 
53. (1) The Board may. with the previous sanction of the Central Power of 
Government, by notification in the Official Gazette, make regulations =r:t re~­
not inconsistent with this Act and the rules made thereunder, to tiona. 

~4 
provide for all matters for which provision is necessary or expedient 
for the purposes of giving effect to the provisions of this Act. 
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the 
foregoing power, such regulations may provide for-
(a) the manner in which meetings of the Board and the 5 
Executive Committee thereof shall be convened, the fees for 
attending such meetings and the. procedure to be followed 
thereat; 
(b) the methods of appointment, the conditions of service 
and the scales of pay of the officers (other than the Secretary) 10 
and other employees of the Bo~rd; 
(c) the duties and conduct of officers and other employees 
of the Board; 
(d) the time when the accounts of a warehousing corpora-
tion may be closed; and 15 
(e) generally the efficient conduct of the affairs of the 
Board. 
(3) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, rescind any regulation which it has sanctioned and there-
upon the regulation shall cease to have effect. 20 
Power of 54. (1) A Warehousing Corporation may, with the previous 
W.rehou~ing sanction of the appropriate Government by notification in the Offi-
~~r:bons cial Gazette, make regulations ndt inconsistent with this Act and 
reauJations. the rules made thereunder to provide for all matters for which 
provision is necesary or expedient for the purposes of giving effect 25 
to the provisions of this Act. 
(2) In par;ticular and without prejudice to the generality of the 
foregoing power, such regulations may provide for-
(a) the conditions of service of, and the remun~ration 
payable to, the officers and other employees of a Warehousing 30 
Corporation; 
(b) the manner in which and the conditions subject to 
which, sha'I'es of the Central Warehousing Corporation may be 
transferred; 
(c) the manner in which meetings of a Warehousing 35 
Corporation and the Executive Committ.ee thereof shall be con-
vened, the fees for attending such meetings, the procedure to be 
followed thereat; 
(d) the duties and conduct of officers and employees of a 
Warehousine Corporation; 

(e) the duties which may be edtrusted or delegated to the 
\ managing director of a Warehousing Corporation; 
of 1934. 
(f> generally, the efficient conduct of the affairs of a Ware-
housing Corporation. 
S (3) The appropriate Government may, by notificdion in the 
Official Gazette, rescind any regulation which it has sanctioned 
and thereupon the regulation shall cease to have effect. 
10 
IS 
20 
2S 
30 
55. In the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934, in section 17, after Amendment 
clause (4B), the following clause shall be inserted, namely: - of the Re-serve Bank 
U(4C) the making to a Warehousing Corporation established of India 
under the Agricultural Produce (Development and Warehous- Act, 1934· 
ing) Corporations Act, 1955 of loans and advances,-
(a) repayable on demand or on the expiry of fixed 
periods not exceeding ninety days, from the date of such 
loan or advance, against securities of the Central Govern-
ment or of any State Government, or 
(b) repayable on the expiry of fixed periods not exceed-
ing eighteen months from the date of such loan or advance, 
against securities of the Central Government or of any 
State Government, of any maturity, or against bonds and 
debentures issued by the Corporation to which the loan or 
advance is made, and. guaranteed by the Centr~l or a State 
Governmedt, and maturing within a period not exceeding 
eighteen months from the date of such loan or advance: 
Provided that the amount of loans and adv~nces granted 
under clause (b) shall not at any time exceed, in the aggregate, 
three crores of rupees in the case of the Central WaTehousing 
Corporation and fifty lakhs of rupees in the case of a State 
Warehousing Corporation." 
THE SCHEDULE 
(See section 46) 
DECLARATION OF FmELITY AND SECRECY 
I. ....................... , ..... declare that I will faithfully, truly and to 
the best of my judgmentt, skill and ability ex~cute and perform the 
3S duties required of me as a director, officer, employee or auditor (as 
the case may be) of the ................................. WarehOusing Corpora-
tion and which properly relate to any office or position in the said 
Corporation held by me. 
I further declare that I will not communicate or allow to be 
40 communicated to any person not legaIIy entitled thereto any in-
formation relating to the affairs of the said Corporation nor will I 

26 
allow any such person to inspect or have access to any books or docu-
ments belonging to, or in the possession of, the Corporation and 
relating to the business of the Corporation. 
Signed before me 
Date. 
Signature ...... , ... '" .................. .. 
Signature. . .. . ... . .... . .. . .. . ........ . .. .. 5 
Signature .... ............................ . 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Bill gives effect to the recommendations of the Rural Credit 
Survey Committee relating to the development and warehousing of 
agricultural produce on co-operative principles which have been 
accepted by the Government. The B:n provides for the constitu-
ti~n of a Central National Co-operative Development and Ware-
housing Board which will be a policy-making and financing body. 
The functions of the Board will generally be to plan and prorrt'Ote 
programmes ~or the production, processing, marketing, storage, 
warehousing and import and export of agricultural produce through 
co-operatlve societies. The Board will be financed by the Central 
Government. 
2. The Bill further provides for the setting up of a Central 
Warehousing Corporation. in order to implement the warehousing 
programme laid down by the Board. The Corporation will have a 
share capital, a part of which will be subscribed for by the Central 
Govemment and the rest by the State Bank, Scheduled Banks, Co-
operative Societies, etc. The shares of the Corporation will be 
guaranteed by the Central Government as to the repayment of the 
principal and the payment of a minimum annual dividend. The 
management of the Corporation shall vest in a Board of Directors 
which will include all members of the Executive Committee of the 
National Co-opera.uve Development and Warehousing Board and a 
Managing Director. The main functions of the Central Warehousing 
Corporation woul'd be to acquire and build godowns and ware-
houses for the storage of agricultural produce at places of all-India 
:mportance, to run warehouses for the storage of agricultural 
produce and to arrange facilities for the transport of agricultural 
produce. 
3. The Bill also empowers every State Government to establish 
within the State a State Warehousing Corporation on the lines of 
the Central Wa,rehousing Corporation. Half of the share capital 
of the State Warehousing Corporation shall be subscribed for by 
the Central Warehousing Corpol"8tion, if the State Government 
provides the remaining half. The board of directors of a State 
Warehousing Corporation will consist of an equal number of 
directors nominated by the Central Warehousing Corporation and 
the State Government and also a managing director appointed 
by the State Government with the previous approval of the Central 
Warehousing Corporation. If any dispute arises between the 
Central Warehousing Corporation and a State Warehousing Cor-
poration regarding their respective functions, the dispute will be 
referred to the Central Board whose decision shall be final, 

28 
4. The Bill provides for financial control and auditing of 
accounts of. the various statutory bodies set up under it. The 
Board and every Warehousing Corporation will submit an annual 
statement of its programme and activi ties as well as financial 
estimates in respect thereof to the appropriate authority. The 
funds of a Warehousing Corporation "re to be invested only in 
the securities of the Central GQvernment or a State Government. 
The accounts of the Board are to be audited by the Comptroller 
and Auditor-General of India. The accounts of a Warehousing 
Corporation are to be audited by qualified auditors appointed by 
the appropriate Gov,ernment and one of the auditors will be ap-
pointed in consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor-General 
of India. Such auditors when asked by the appropriate Govern-
ment would also submit a report to it upon the adequacy of the 
measures taken by a Warehousing Corporation for the protection of 
its shareholders and creditors. A copy of every audit report will 
be laid before both Houses of Parliament or the Legislature ot the 
State, as the case may be. 
A. P. JAIN. 
NEW DELHI; 
The 20th February, 1956. 

29 
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Under clause 11 of the Bill, the Central Government will pay 
~o . the "National Co-opejratji'Ve D~elopmen:t and Warehousing 
Board" a non-recurring grant of five crores of rupees and a total 
recurring grant of not less than twenty-five crores of rupees spread 
over a period of five years. Under clause 12 the National Co-
operative Development and Warehousing Board is to ma:ntain two 
funds, namely, the "National Co-operative Development Fund" and 
the j'National Warehousing Development Fund". The non-recur-
r:ng grant of five crores of rupees will be credited to the Ware-
housing Fund while the recurring grant will be d:vided between 
the two Funds. The Board will be entitled to make re-appropria-
tions between the two Funds. Clause 41 provides that the Board 
shall maintain proper accounts and other relevart records and 
prepare an annual statement of accounts in su~h i:.:·m as may be 
prescribed in consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor-
Gt'neral of India. It also provides for annual audit by the 
Comptroller and Auditor-General of India or any person authorised 
by him and for the accounts of the.Board together with an audit 
report thereon being furnished annually, to the Central Government 
who will cause the same to be laid before both Houses of Parlia' 
ment. 
• 
• 

30 
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 52 of the Bill empowers the appropriate Government to 
make rules to carry out the purposes of the Act. The matters in 
respect of which such rules may be made are specified therein. These 
matters are generally of a routine ch£.facter. They relate to the 
manner of choosing members of the Board or directors of a 
Warehousing Corporation, the term of office of such members or 
directors, the appointment of officers and other employees of the 
Board, etc. Rules may also be made in regard to certain returns, 
reports and other statements to be furnished by the Board, Rules may 
further be made in regard to certain minor financial matters· such as 
the maximum limit of the authorised capital of a State Warehousing 
Corporation,the form of the annual balance-sheet, the investment 
of the moneys of a Warehousing Corporation, etc. The appropriate 
Government may also make rules with respect to the manner of 
issuing shares of a Warehousing Corporation and the calls and other 
incidental matters relating to the issue of shares. All the above 
matters are comparatively of a minor importance and are normally 
the subject-matter of delegated lzgislation. Provision has been made 
that rules made by the appropriate Government shall be laid before 
Parliament or the Legislature of the State, as the case may be. 
Clauses 53 and 54 of the Bill empower the Board and a Ware-
):lousing Corporation to make regulations not inconsistent with the 
provisions of the Act and the rules made thereunder. The power 
of making regulations is mainly restricted to procedural matters, 
such as, the calling of meetings, the fees for attending meetings, etc. 
Regulations may also be made with respect to the delegation of 
powers to the managing director of a Warehousing Corporation, the 
duties and conduct of officers and other employeE:s of the Board or 
a Warehousing Corporation. The Ce*a! Warehousing Corporation 
is further empowered to make regulations regarding the manner in 
which, and the conditions subject ~ which, its shares may be trans-
ferred. The power of making regulations is thus confined to mat-
ters of detail only and all such regulations are to be made with the 
previous sanetion of the appropriate Government. 

LOK SABHA 
A 
. BILL 
to provide for the incorporation and regulation of corporations 
for the purpose of development and warehousing of agri-
cultural produce on co-operative principles and for matters 
connected therewith. 
The President has, in pursuance of clauses (I) and (3) of article 
117 of the Constitution of India, recommen'ded to Lok Sabha 
the introduction and consideration of the Bill. 
• 
M. N. KAUL, 
Secretary • 
(Shri A. P. Jain 
Minister of Food and Agriculture) 