As INTRODUCED IN LoK SABHA

11 FEB 200

Bill No. 10 of 2006

THE FARMERS (WELFARE) BILL, 2006
By
Suri C.K. CHANDRApPAN, M.P.
A
BILL

to provide special facilities for farmers to improve their life, enhance their dignity and
benefit the country through higher agricultural production by way of improving farm
Practices, techniques and allied occupations and for matters connected therewith.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—

1. (1) This Act may be called the Farmers (Welfare) Act, 2006.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.

(3) It shall come into force at once.

2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—

(4) “appropriate Government” means in the cas¢ of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;

(6) “farmer” means middle, small and marginal farmers as defined by the
Planning Commission; and

(c) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under

is Act.

Short title,
extent and
‘commencement.

Definitions.


Facilities to be
provided to
the farmers.

Power to

make rules,

appropriate Government shall—

carrying out the purposes of this Act.

2

3. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in | the

(1) study the requirements of the farmers in the country for the promotion of —
agriculture, including agricultural education, research, and training and establish
well equipped modern agricultural universities at selected centres;

(2) implement a comprehensive crop insurance scheme for all ma jor cro]
grown in every State by taking village as a basic unit and compensation shall be paid _
to the farmers in case of destruction of crop in an area which is thirty-five per centor
more of the totai area under various crops in that village, due to natural calamity,
disease or pest attack;

(3) ensure credit facility to farmers through commercial banks, cooperative banks
or other cooperative credit institutions at an interest rate not exceeding four per cent
per annum:

Provided that the small and marginal farmers shall not be charged any interest on
the loan amount provided to them.

(4) establish agricultural farms in every block, which shall ensure timely and
adequate supply of seeds and saplings to farmers;

(3) establish well-equipped and modern veterinary hospitals in every block to.
assist farmers in animal husbandry;

(6) promote the technique of group farming to encourage better farm management
and farming techniques with a view to make agriculture economically viable;

. (7) take measures to promote agro-based industries such as food processing
industry, dairy industry to enhance farm income;

(8) promote vegetable cultivation, floriculture, pisciculture, poultry farming,
piggery and sericulture in the suitable areas for supplementing farmers’ income;

(9) promote organic farming, use of bio-mass for production of energy and water
conservation techniques for the welfare of farmers;

(10) provide institutional mechanism for efficient marketing and export of farm
produce; and

(11) implement welfare schemes, including pension srheme for farmers who
have attained the age of sixty-five years.

4. The Central Government may, by notification in the official gazette, make rules fo


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

India is predominantly an agrarian country and more than sixty per cent of its people
are directly or indirectly dependent on agriculture for their livelihood.

Agriculture is the biggest economic sector, which contributes greatly to the Gross
National Product, provides employment and livelihood to the maximum number of people. It
sustains the country with food security and provides largest share of raw material to our
industrial sector. Its export earning is also considerable.

But it is unfortunate that this vital sector of our economy is badiy neglected. So are the
people who are engaged in agriculture.

If the country wants to achieve more than ten per cent growth in the Gross Domestic
Product, it is imperative that the agrarian sector of the economy should grow at a faster and
steady rate.

It requires more investment in agriculture. It is also necessary that we must have a
peasantry who are satisfied. They must be treated with dignity and care with a view to realise
their full potential.

The middle, small and marginal farmers who constitute more than ninety per cent of the
entire peasantry in India are to be helped, assisted and trained with a sense of purpose, so
that the country could achieve its long term economic goals.

This Bill seeks to create conditions for achieving these difficult, but attainable, ends.
The Bill, if enacted, will go a long way in fulfilling the Directive Principles enshrined in our
Constitution.

Hence this Bill.

New Deut; i C.K. CHANDRAPPAN
December 3, 2005.


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the establishment of modern. agricultural universities,
implementation of a crop insurance scheme, agricultural farms at block level and modern,
well-equipped veterinary hospitals, etc. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure
from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is likely to involve an annual recurring expenditure
of about rupees two thousand crore from the Consolidated Fund of India. A non-recurring
expenditure of about rupees five hundred crore is also likely to be involved.


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 4 of the Bill empowers the Government to make rules for carrying out the
purposes of the Bill. Since the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.


LOK SABHA

A
BILL
to provide special facilities for farmers to improve their life, enhance their
dignity and benefit the country through higher agricultural production
by way of improving farm practices, techniques and allied occupations
and for matters connected therewith.

(Shri C.K. Chandrappan, M.P)

GIPMRND—5114LS(S-4}—10.02.2006.