vi ages OB :

AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

Bill No. 10 of 2062
TH ENVIRONMENT (PROTECTION)
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 2002

By
‘Supt RAMESH CHENNITHALA, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-third Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. This Act may be called the Environment (Protection) Amendment Act, 2002. nd title
an
‘commencement.
2, It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
5 inthe official Gazette, appoint. ५

3. After section 6 of the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986, the following section Insertion of
shall be inserted, namely: oh section
“6A. The Central Government may on receipt of a representation from affected Power to
persons or a large number of people of the area concerned, relax the norms with a view Tel# norms.
10 to mitigating the hardships caused to any section of the public by, reason of the
implementation of any provision of this Act after taking adequate steps to ensure that
there is no threat to environment.”.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

Tn pursuance of sections 3(2)(v) and 6(2)(e) of the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986,
the Ministry of Environment and Forests have issued notifications and declared the Coastal
stretches of seas, bays etc. up to five hundred metres from the high tide line to low tide line
as Coastal Regulation Zone and prohibited certain construction activities, fish processing
activities, etc. This prohibition has caused deprivation of livelihood to poor persons in the
coastal areas. Demands have been raised by the affected people in the coastal region to
reduce the area of the prohibited zone from five hundred metres to two hundred metres. It
has been found that five hundred metres is too large an area required to protect the
environment in the coastal areas.

The Act does not contain any provision for a review of the notifications issued by the
Government from time to time in the light of experience. It is, therefore, necessary to make 8
provision in the Act itself for providing relaxation in the safety norms oa public demand to
mitigate their hardships.

Hence this Bill.

New जमा; RAMESH CHENNITHALA.
February 4, 2002



ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE ENVIRONMENT (PROTECTION) Act, 1986
(Act No. 29 or 1986)

* * * * * *

6. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules in
respect of all or any of the matters referred to in section 3.

(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality ofthe foregoing power, such
tules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—

(@) the standards of quality of air, water or soil for various areas and Purposes;

(0) the maximum allowable limits of concentration of various environmental
pollutants (including noise) for different areas;

(©) the procedures and safeguards for the handling of hazardous substances;

(7) the prohibition and restrictions on the handling of hazardous substances in
different areas;

(©) the prohibition and restrictions on the location of industries and the carrying
on of processes and operation in different areas;

(0 the procedures and safeguards for the prevention of accidents which may
cause environmental pollution and for providing for remedial measures for such
accidents.

* * * * * . *

Rules to
regulate
environmental
pollution.


+ SABHA

A
BILL
further to amend the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986.

(Shri Ramesh Chennithala, M.P.)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—4945LS—25-2-2002,