THE RENEWABLE ENERGY RESOURCES COMMISSION BILL, 2007
By
SHRI K.S. RAO, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for the setting up of a Commission to exploit renewable energy resources in
the country and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-eighth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Renewable Energy Resources Commission Act, 2007.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force at once.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(i) "appropriate Government" means a State Government or the Central
Government, as the case may be;
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Bill No. 10 of  2007
TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Definitions.
5

2
(ii) "Commission" means the Renewable Energy Resources Commission set up
under section 3 of this Act;
(iii) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act; and
(iv) "renewable energy" means energy obtained from non-conventional sources
such as sunlight, wind, ethanol, jatropha, urban waste, geothermal sources, tides or
waves or any other source from which renewable energy can be obtained.
3. (1) The Central Government shall set up a Commission to be known as the Renewable
Energy Resources Commission.
(2) The Commission shall consist of:—
(i) a Chairman to be appointed by the Central Government having such
qualification as may be prescribed;
(ii) one representative each from every State/Union territory to be nominated by
the State Government/Union territory Administration concerned;
(iii) one representative each from the Planning Commission, Union Ministries of
Power, Water Resources, Rural Development, Urban Development, Finance and
Environment and Forests; and
(iv) the Secretary, Union Ministry of New and Renewable Energy, who shall be,
ex-officio, Secretary to the Commission.
(3) The conditions of service, salaries and allowances of Chairman and other members
of the Commission shall be such as may be prescribed.
4. (1) Every State Government/Union territory Administration shall constitute a
Renewable Energy Resources Commission.
(2) The State/Union territory Commission shall consist of a Chairman and such number
of other members as the State Government/Union territory Administration may deem
necessary to nominate.
5. Every State/Union territory Commission shall, as soon as possible, but not later
than one year from the date of commencement of this Act, identify the exploitable sources of
renewable energy in their respective jurisdictions and send a report thereon to the
Commission.
6. (1) The Commission shall, on receipt of report from the State/Union territory
Commission, depute a team of experts to the State/Union territory to verify and assess the
possibility of exploiting renewable energy resources.
(2) The team of experts shall submit a report to the Commission at the earliest.
(3) The Commission shall, on the basis of the report submitted by the team of experts,
work out the estimated expenditure on the projects relating to exploitation of renewable
energy and send a report thereon to the Central Government.
7. (1) The Central Government and the State Governments shall contribute towards
the expenditure incurred on the projects relating to exploitation of renewable energy in
such ratio as may be prescribed:
Provided that the Central Government shall contribute not less than fifty per cent of
the total expenditure.
8. (1) The projects relating to exploitation of renewable energy shall be completed in a
time bound manner.
Renewable
Energy
Resources
Commission.
Every State
Government/
Union
territory
Administration
to constitute
Renewable
Energy
Resources
Commission.
State
Government
to send
detailed
Report to the
Commission.
Commission
to depute a
team of
experts to the
State/Union
territory.
Central
Government
and State
Government
to contribute
towards the
expenditure.
Projects to be
completed in
a time bound
manner.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
(2) The Central Government shall release funds for the implementation of projects
relating to exploitation of renewable energy after such scrutiny of its progress as it may deem
fit.
9. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for
carrying out the purposes of the Act.
Power to
make rules.5

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
India has a vast resource of natural resources—both renewable and non-renewable. In
the last few decades, the over dependence on fossil fuels for meeting our energy needs have
resulted in many ecological and climatological issues including global warming. All over the
world there is a shift towards greater use of renewable energy sources as they are not only
available in abundance but also considered to be non-polluting in comparison to fossil fuels.
All over world, more than twenty percent of energy requirements are being met through
renewable energy sources. In our country, the dependence on fossil fuels is not at all good
for our economy as we have to import more than fifty percent of our petroleum requirements.
In the coming years, with the acceleration of industrialization and rising demand of energy
from our people, demand for power is going to increase manifold and the situation may
worsen if immediate steps are not taken to promote exploitation of renewable energy
resources. It is proposed to constitute a Renewable Energy Resources Commission with a
view to give fillip to the exploitation of renewable energy resources.
The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
N
EW DELHI; K.S. RAO.
November 8, 2006
4
SERVER 3 \ BILL 2004 \ LS \95LS.

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the setting up of a Renewable Energy Resources
Commission. Clause 4 provides that similar Commissions shall be constituted in every State/
Union territory. Clause 6 provides that the Commission shall send a team of experts to the
State/Union territory with a view to verify the report sent by the State/Union territory and
assess the possibility of exploitation of renewable energy resources. While the expenditure
relating to States shall be borne out of the consolidated funds of the respective States, the
expenditure in respect of Union territories shall be borne out of the Consolidated Fund of
India. Clause 7 provides that the Central Government shall contribute to the expenditure
incurred on the projects relating to exploitation of renewable energy in such ratio as may be
prescribed. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, is likely to involve expenditure from the Consolidated
Fund of India. It is estimated that an annual recurring expenditure of about rupees ten
thousand crore will be involved.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees five thousand crore is also likely to be
involved.
5

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGA TED LEGISLATION
Clause 9 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to frame rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.
6

LOK  SABHA
—————
A
BILL
to provide for the setting up of a Commission to exploit renewable energy resources in the
country and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
—————
(Shri K.S. Rao, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—95LS(S3)—08.02.2007.