‘AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

49 १0४ 288

Bill No. 10 of 2001

THE NATIONAL COMMISSION FOR DISASTER MANAGEMENT BILL, 2001
By
‘Suri SusHi-KuMar SHINDE, M.P.
A
BILL

to provide for constitution of a Commission for Management of National Disasters and
for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-second Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—

1. (1) This Act may be called the National Commission for Disaster Management
Act, 2001.

5 (2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force immediately.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, —

(a) “Commission” means the National Commission for Disaster Management
constituted under section 3 of this Act;

10 (b) “disaster” means a natural disaster arising from an earthquake, cyclonic
storm, floods, famines, droughts and such other calamities affecting a large area,
mass of population, or those causing massive devastation or epidemics and includes
the devastation caused by big fires including jungle fires or any other calamity so
proclaimed by a notification by the Central Government or the Commission;

15 (०) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act.

Short title,
extent and


Constitution of
‘a National

Disaster
Management.

Functions of the

2
3. (1) The Central Government shall by notification in the Official Gazette

constitute a Commission to be known as the National Commission for Disaster
Management.

(2) The Commission shall consist of the following: —

(i) Union Minister of Agriculture who shall be the ex-officio Chairman of the
Commission;

(ii) Union Ministers of Environment and Forests, Health and Family Welfare, Social
Justice and Empowerment;

(iii) two members of Lok Sabha to be nominated by the Speaker, Lok Sabha;

(iv) one member of Council of States to be nominated by the Chairman of Council
of States;

(२) Chief Ministers of States and Chief Administrators of Union territories;
(vi) a representative of Indian Red Cross Society;
(vii) a Member-Secretary to be appointed by the Central Government.
4. (7) The Commission shall carry out all or any of the following functions:-—

(a) to lay down a National Policy for Disaster Management, subject to approval
of Parliament;

(b) to provide for schemes and plans for management of national disasters and
calamities, including a mechanism for forewarning and measures to be taken in
anticipation of such calamities and damage control measures to minimize and miti-
gate the destruction-and devastations resulting therefrom;

(c) to provide for management of relief and rehabilitation of the victims;
(d) to create and maintain a Disaster Management Fund;

(०) to over-see and supervise the work relating to disaster management and to
issue guidelines in connection therewith from time to time; and

(f) to provide for any other matter incidental to aforesaid functions.
(2) The Commission shall have the powers to regulate the functions enumerated in

sub-section (/) and for matters connected therewith.

5, The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules

10 carry out the purposes of this Act.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

Cyclones, Earthquakes, Floods, Droughts and other natural calamities have been
causing massive devastations and disasters, without any forecast or warning. Cyclones are
followed by Super-cyclones and earthquakes of great and greater intensity hit different
parts of the country with immeasurable severity. Earthquake befell Latur. While the trauma
of Latur was still fresh and the victims had yet to be resettled, there comes the devastation
earthquake of Gujarat, turning several towns, cities and villages in and around Bhuj into
heaps of rubble. Rough estimates put the casualties at over a lakh.

Floods and droughts hit different parts of the country perennially with ever increasing
severity, with magnitude often beyond measure.

These calamities which often strike with stunning effects, bring a number of
calamities in their trial. There is never a dearth of will to help and rescue the victims.
Hundreds of thousands of crores of aid may flow. struck-loads even train loads of relief
material, food, medicines, clothes and tents may come and yet the aid often fails to reach
those for whom it is meant; and at times may reach rather too late.

‘On the other hand, there is no dearth of vultures in human form, in this land of Gods
and saints, who feast on the dead. The press is rife with reports of criminals and unscrupu-
lous elements robbing and looting the victims of their beldngings.

Despite all the will, money, resources and aid flowing freely from all over the world
the relief fails to reach the victims and may often be too late. Need is there for a well oiled
coordinated mechanism to come into play instantaneously.

The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.

New ऐशओआ; SUSHIL KUMAR SHINDE
February 6, 2001.


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the setting up of a National Commission for Disaster
Management, and Clause 4 envisages setting up of a Disaster Management Fund. The
Bill, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is likely

to involve a recurring expenditure of rupees two crore per annum from the Consolidated
Fund of India.

A non-recurring expenditure of the tune of rupees five hundred crore is also likely to
be involved.



MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 5 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules to carry out
the purposes of the Bill. The rules to be made will relate to matters of detail only and as
such the delegation of legislative power is of a normal character.


LOK SABHA

A
BILL

to provide for constitution of a Commission for Management of National Disasters and
for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.

(Shri Sushil Kumar Shinde, M.P.)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—6370LS—16-02-2001.