amy

Bill No. 10 of 2004

THE PREVENTION OF TERRORISM (REPEAL) BILL, 2004
By 4
‘Suri C.K. Chanprapran, M.P.
A
BILL
to repeal the Prevention of Terrorism Act, 2002.
Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-fifth Year of the Republic of India as follows:— — Short title

id extent.
1. (1) This Act may be called the Prevention of Terrorism (Repeal) Act, 2004. oer
(2) Itextends to the whole of India.
2. The Prevention of Terrorism Act, 2002 is hereby repealed. Repeal of the
Prevention:
i of Terrorism
Act, 2002.
(Act No, 15
of 2002).
3. Notwithstanding such repeal,— Savings.

(J) All offences committed under the repealed Act shall continue to be governed by
: if that Act had not been repealed; and


(2) Every Review Committee constituted under section 60 of the repealed Act shall
continue to perform the functions in relation to the repealed Act as if that Act had not been
repealed:

Provided that the Review Committee shall review all pending cases and issue necessary
directions within a period of six months from the date of commencement of this Act. &


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

The Prevention of Terrorism Act, 2002 (POTA) is a draconian piece of legislation,
which is a slur on our democracy. It was misused and high handedness perpetrated by those
who are in power against their political adversaries with a view to instil fear among them and
ultimately to harass them,

In the wake of unprecedented opposition, unusual methods were adopted by the then
Government to enact this undemocratic legislation, while there was no dearth of laws for
prevention of terrorism.

The legislation did not succeed in achieving its end. Our Parliament was attacked by
terrorists, while this legislation was already in force. Moreover, POTA is known for its misuse
against political adversaries by those in power,

Hence this Bill.

New DeLHt; C.K, CHANDRAPPAN
June 8, 2004,


LOK SABHA

A
BILL
to repeal the Prevention of Terrorism Act, 2002.

(Shri C.K. Chandrappan, M.P)

MGIPMRND—781LS—28.06.2004