1
THE SPECIAL FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE TO THE STATE OF
MADHYA PRADESH BILL, 2013
By
SHRI RAKESH SINGH, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for special financial assistance to the State of Madhya Pradesh for the purpose
of promoting the welfare of the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes and Other
Backward Sections of people and for the development, exploitation and proper
utilization of its resources.
B
E  it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-fourth year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Special Financial Assistance to the State of Madhya
Pradesh Act, 2013.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. There shall be paid such sums of moneys out of the Consolidated Fund of India,
every year, as Parliament may by due appropriation provide, as special financial assistance
to the State of Madhya Pradesh to meet the costs of such schemes of developoment, as may
be undertaken by the State with the approval of the Government of India for the purpose of
promoting the welfare of the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes and Other Backward
Sections of people and for the development, proper utilization and exploitation of the resources
in the State.
3. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other
law to be made by Parliament or for the time being in force.
Short title and
commencement.
Bill No. 10 of  2013
TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Special
financial
assistance to
the State of
Madhya
Pradesh.
Act not in
derogation of
other law.
5
10

2
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
The State of Madhya Pradesh is socially and economically backward. The problems of
poverty, unemployment and literacy are required to be addressed urgently and in a time
bound manner. Measures for proper utilization of resources, welfare of weaker sections in
the region and initiating new development schemes are also required to be implemented in a
time-bound manner. The State of Madhya Pradesh is also facing the problem of naxalite
violence for a number of years. Due to its economic backwardness, the naxalites have found
sympathetic elements specially among the rural population. It is, therefore, necessary that
the Central Government should provide special financial assistance to the State of Madhya
Pradesh for its all-round development including the welfare of weaker sections of the society
and for the development and proper utilization of its vast natural resources. Such a step
would also go a long way in building a strong and vibrant nation.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; RAKESH SINGH
December 12, 2012.

3
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill provides that there shall be paid such sums of moneys out of the
Consolidated Fund of India, every year, as Parliament may by due appropriation provide, as
special financial assistance to the State of Madhya Pradesh to meet the cost of such schemes
of development, as may be undertaken by the State with the approval of Government of
India.
The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of
India for providing special financial assistance to the State of Madhya Pradesh. As the sums
of moneys which will be given to the State of Madhya Pradesh as special financial assistance
by appropriation by law made by Parliament will be known only after the welfare schemes to
be implemented by the State Government with the approval of Government of India are
identified, it is not possible to give the estimates of recurring expenditure, which would be
involved out of the Consolidated Fund of India at this stage.
No non-recurring expenditure is likely to be incurred from the Consolidated Fund of
India.

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for special financial assistance to the State of Madhya Pradesh for the purpose of
promoting the welfare of the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes and Other
Backward Sections of people and for the development, exploitation and
proper utilization of its resources.
————
(Shri Rakesh Singh, M.P. )
GMGIPMRND—4613LS(S3)—08-02-2013.