1
THE PROHIBITION OF INDECENT ADVERTISEMENTS BILL, 2012
By
DR. KIRIT PREMJIBHAI SOLANKI, M.P.
A
BILL
to prohibit indecent advertisements depicting vulgarity, obscenity, violent actions or
horror, which adversely affect the minds of the citizens particularly of the youth and
injure public morality and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-third Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Prohibition of Indecent Advertisements Act, 2012.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Bill No. 10 of  2012
TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "Advertisement" includes any pamphlet, writing, drawing, painting,
photograph, bill, circular, notice, label, poster, hoarding, banner or other document and
also includes any visible representation made through radio, television, cassettes,
slides by means of any light, sound, smoke or gas and publication in print media such
as newspapers, magazines and books;
(b) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(c) "indecent advertisement" means advertisement depicting in any manner, a
horror or vulgar scene or figure form or body of a male or female, whether nude or semi
nude, or any part thereof, which may have the effect of being indecent or derogatory
to or denigrating men or women or any religion or is likely to deprave, corrupt or injure
public morality or which may induce a person to commit any crime or which may cause
road accident;
(d) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. No person shall publish or cause to be published or arrange or take part in the
publication or exhibition of or sticking, writing or painting any advertisement which is indecent
in any form.
4. No person shall produce or cause to be produced, depict, circulate or distribute any
indecent advertisement in any manner.
5. (1) Subject to such rules as may be prescribed, any Police Officer, not below the rank
of Inspector, having jurisdiction in such area may—
(a) enter and search at all reasonable times, any place, in which he has reason to
believe that an offence under this Act has been or is being committed;
(b) seize and confiscate any advertisement which he has reason to believe
contravenes any of the provisions of this Act.
(2) Where any Police Officer seizes or confiscates any advertisement or material relating
thereto under clause (b) of sub-section (1) he shall, as soon as may be, inform the nearest
Magistrate and take his orders as to the custody thereof.
6. Any person who contravenes the provisions of section 3 or section 4 shall be
punishable—
(i) on first conviction with imprisonment for a term of not less than three years
but which may extend to seven years and with fine which shall not be less than thirty
thousand rupees but may extend to fifty thousand rupees; and
(ii) in the event of second or subsequent conviction with imprisonment for a
term of not less than five years but which may extend to ten years and with fine which
shall not be less than fifty thousand rupees but which may extend to one lakh rupees.
7. Where an offence under this Act has been committed by any company, firm or other
association of individuals, every person who, at the time the offence was committed, was in
charge of, and was responsible to, the company for the conduct of the business of the
company, as well as the company, shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be
liable to be proceeded against the punished accordingly.
8. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 an
offence punishable under this Act shall be cognizable and bailable.
Definitions.
Prohibition of
indecent
advertisement.
Prohibition of
production,
depiction,
circulation
and
distribution of
indecent
advertisements.
Power to
enter, search,
seize and
confiscate.
Penalty.
Offences by
Companies.
Offence to be
cognizable
and bailable.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
2 of 1974.

3
9. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other
law for the time being in force regulating any of the matters dealt with in this Act.
10.  (1) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that the provisions of this Act
shall not apply to advertisements which are aimed at educating the general public or a
particular group.
(2) For the purpose of deciding advertisements referred to in sub-section ( 1), the
Central Government shall designate such number of officers, not below the rank of
Joint Secretary, as it may deem fit.
11. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Gazette of India, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of the Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Savings.
Act not to
apply on
certain
advertisements
aimed at
public
education.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Of late every nook and corner of the country is flooded with all sorts of indecent and
vulgar advertisements which are adversely affecting the minds of the people particularly the
youth. The newspapers publish advertisements of cabaret dances, obscene adult films with
sexy and vulgar titles depicting almost nude and compromising photographs of the scenes
of such semi blue films. Magazines are also publishing indecent advertisements of consumer
goods particularly of cosmetic items. The cinema halls are not only showing vulgar, sexy and
violent films but are also displaying photographs of vulgar scenes of films in their show
windows and in large hoardings outside the cinema halls and other places. Posters of such
films are also pasted on every space of the walls everywhere. Advertising agencies are
putting large hoardings of indecent advertisements at important intersection of roads and
particularly on the sides of busy roads. Sometimes, these indecent advertisements on the
roadsides attract the attention of the road users resulting in fatal road accidents. Video
cassettes full of indecent advertisements are sold everywhere. Even audio advertisements
have become vulgar and indecent. Such advertisements are playing havoc with the minds of
the young generation. Attracted with the advertisements, they are committing heinous crimes
of theft, murder, rape, dacoity, etc. They are attracted towards smoking, drinking, etc. which
ultimately lure them to drug addiction. Such indecent advertisements are also injuring public
morality resulting in anger and anguish which became evident when school girls in the
capital blackened the indecent film posters and hoardings. It is, therefore, necessary to
prohibit such indecent advertisements and deterrent punishment for the violators so that the
society is cleansed of such vulgar displays.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; KIRIT PREMJIBHAI SOLANKI
November 22, 2011.
4

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 11 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. The rules will relate to matters of detail only and as such the
delegation of legislative power is of a normal character.
5

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to prohibit indecent advertisements depicting vulgarity, obscenity, violent actions or
horror, which adversely affect the minds of the citizens particularly of the
youth and injure public morality and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Dr. Kirit Premjibhai Solanki, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—4050LS(S3)—05.03.2012.