As intRoDUCED IN Lox SAMA

१५६ ree

Bill No. 10 of 2000

THE RAGPICKING AND OTHER VAGABOND STREET CHILDREN
(REHABILITATION AND WELFARE) BILL, 2000

By

Suri Vicas Mutremwar, M.P.
A
Bu

to provide for welfare measures to be undertaken by the Union and State Governments
for the ragpicking and vagabond street children who subsist on collecting and selling
waste materials from garbage dumps and other places endangering their health and lives
and for their rehabilitation through education, training, vocational education and
guidance and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.

Beitenacted by Parliament in the Fifty-first Year of the Republic of India as follows:—

1. (7) This Act may be called the Ragpicking and other Vagabond Street Children
> (Rehabilitation and Welfare) Act, 2000.

(2) It extends to the whole of India.
| (3) It shall come into force at once. ‘

‘Short title
extent and
‘commencement.


Definitions,

District-wise
register of
ragpicking
and vagabond
street children

Shelters for
orphan
ragpicker and
vagabond
children

Financial
assistance to
the families of
Fagpicking
children,

Duty of
Parents, ete. to
send vagabond
street children
to schools.

‘Schools and
technical

Street Children
Welfare Fund,

Overriding
effect of the

2

2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—

(a) “appropriate Government” means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;

(6) *Child” means a boy or girl who is below the age of eistiteen years;
(c) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;

(४) “ragpicking child” means a child who collects waste papers, plastic items,
glass and metal wastes from garbage dumps, street and public places ete. and sells his
collection for his subsistence;

(©) “vagabond street child” means a child who wanders aimlessly in the streets,
does not go to school due to inability of his parents to afford for his studies,

3. (1) The appropriate Government shall maintain a district-wise register of all
ragpicking and vagabond street children,

(2) The register shall be maintained in such manner and shall contain such information
as may be prescribed,

4. (1) The appropriate Goverament shall establish such number of shelters as it
may deem necessary for boarding and lodging of the orphan and homeless ragpickers
and vagabond street children free of cost.

(2) The facilities in the shelters shall be such as may be prescribed.

5. (1) The family of every ragpicking child which subsists on the efforts of such

hall be given fin ncial assistance by the appropriate Government at such rate
and in such manner as may be prescribed to enable such child to attend school for
studies or training in vocation.

(2) The financial assistance referred to in sub-section (1) shall not be given if the
regpicking child is not sent to school by his family.

6. It shall be the duty of every parent, guardian or head of the family, or manager or
in-charge of the shelters established under section 4 to send every ragpicking and vagabond
Street child to school for getting education or vocational training as per his calibre.

7. (J) The appropriate Government shall open sufficient number of schools and
technical education institutes on the pattern of model schools and industrial training
institutes, respectively, at appropriate places for imparting education and training free
of cost to ragpicking and vagabond street children.

(2) The ragpicking and vagabond street children attending the school and technical
education institutes referred to in sub-section (1) shall be provided with books, writing
materials, clothes including uniform, mid-day meals and other relevant articles free of
cost by the appropriate Goverament,

8. (1) With effect from such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint, there shall be established a Ragpicking and Vagabond
Street Children Welfare Fund, moneys into which shall be given by the Central
Government after due appropriation made by Parliament from time fo time and aleo
by the Government of the States in such proportion and in such manner as may be
prescribed.

(2) The Welfare Fund referred to in sub-section (1) shall be managed by the Central
Government through the Governments of the States in such manner as may be prescribed,

9. The prvisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent
contained therewith in any other law for the time being in force,

10

5

35..,

45


3

| The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any
for the time being in force. ’

11. The Gentral Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
ing out the purposes of this Act.

Act not to be in
derogation of
other laws,

Power to make
rules,


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

There are millions of children particularly in the urban areas of the country who
subsist on ragpicking. They coilect Wwaste-papers, waste plastic material and metal scraps,
etc. thrown by the households and traders in the dustbins or littered in the streets, roads, etc.
and then sell their collections for few Tupees to the Kabadiwallahs every day who thrive on
their labour. These helpless children are paid lowly for their waste collections, Many of the
ragpicking children do this job to support their Poor families as they are unable to get any
other job for various reasons. Many of them are forced to do this job either by the compelling
‘umstances or by their alcohol addict or drug addict parents/guardians. A number of
Fagpicking children are orphans who subsists on this profession. These ragpickers work
under pathetic and unhygenic conditions. They wake up early in the morning and rush to
one dustbin after another full of garbage and ciangerous virus. They collect the refuse from
the stinking garbage dumps and contract dangerous diseases like TB, Hepatitis, Plague,
respiratory diseases and even cancer. Undeterred they carry on this job till they are eliminated
from this cruel world. Many of them though talented remain illiterate and always remain
hand to mouth, They do not even get two square meals and a pair of clothes to wear. ‘They
always live in abject poverty,

Similarly, there are vagabond street children who do nothing except roaming aim-
lessly. They belong to poor families who have no means to send them to schools. Many of
the vagabonds have skill, productivity and ingenuity but they have no means to show it to
the world.

is true that in a welfare State like ours the children must enjoy their childhood.
‘They should get nutritious diet, good education and training and good atmoshphere so
that they may grow as responsible citizens. Since the families of the ragpicking children or
such children themselves cannot afford the luxuries of good diet, education and training,
the State must come forward for the welfare of these helpless children for their proper
development. The Government should establish shelters for such children and open schools
and training institutes for them wherein apart from free education and training they should
be provided dress, books, writing material and other things free of cost so that their future is
shaped well.

Hence this Bill:

New Deuin; VILAS MUTTEMWAR
November 8, 1999, ae


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 3 of the Bill provides for maintenance of district wise register of all
| and vagabond street children. Clause 4 provides for the establishments of
Iters for orphan ragpickers and vagabond street children. Clause 5 provides for
financial assistance to the families of ragpicking children, Clause 7 provides of the

ing of schools and training institutes. Clause 8 provides for the establishment of
gpicking and Vagabond Street Children Welfare Fund. As regards the expenditure

Ived in giving effect to the provisions of the Bill in the States, it shall be borne out
the Consolidated Funds of the respective States. However, in the case of Union
itories, the expenditure shall be met out of the Consolidated Fund of India. The
Central Government may also have to extend financial assistance to the state

jovernments for implementing the provisions of the Bill. The Bill, therefore, if enacted,
‘ill involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a

of rupees one hundred crore is likely to be involved as a recurring expenditure
annum.

‘A sum of rupees one crore is also likely (o be involved as non-recurring expendi-
re.


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 11 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying
out the purposes of the Bill which will relate to matters of detail only. The delegation of
legislative power is, therefore, of normal character.


LOK SABHA.

A

BILL
10 provide for welfare measures to be undertaken by the Union and State Governments for
the ragpicking and vagabond street children who susbsist on collecting and selling
waste material from garbage dumps and other places endangering their health and

lives and for their rehabilitation through education, training, vocational education
and guidance and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.

(Shri Vilas Muttemwar, M.P) 7

MGIP(PLU)MRND—3188LS—02.02.2000.