1
THE HOMELESS PA VEMENT DWELLERS (WELFARE) BILL, 2016
By
SHRI GOPAL CHINAYYA SHETTY, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for the welfare measures to be undertaken by the State for the homeless
citizens living on the pavements of roads, under the bridges, flyovers, bus stops,
railway yards, in parks or under the open sky in any public place in the
Metropolitan cities and other urban areas, and for matters
connected therewith or incidental thereto.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Homeless Pavement Dwellers (Welfare) Act, 2016.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Bill No. 10  of  2016
TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “appropriate Government” means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases the Central Government;
(b) “pavement dweller” includes a person living on the pavement or footpath,
under the bridge, flyover, bus stop, railway station or yard, in park or under the open
sky in any public place in the metros and urban areas; and
(c) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. (1) The Central Government shall, in consultation with State Governments and
Union territory Administrations, as soon as may be, but within one year of the commencement
of this Act, formulate a national welfare policy for the homeless pavement dwellers for being
uniformally implemented across the country.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provisions, the welfare
policy may provide for—
(a) recognition of right of the dwellers to live on pavements without  any
hindrance or interference from any authority of the Government including Police
and civic authorities till alternative shelter is made available to them;
(b) humanitarian approach towards their homelessness and acute poverty by
various Government authorities;
(c) construction of sufficient number of night shelters or Rain Baseras with
basic facilities at conspicuous places;
(d) provision of necessary healthcare with free checkups including diagnostic
ones and medicines through mobile dispensaries;
(e) provision of potable water;
(f) facility of mobile toilets or Sulabh toilets wherever possible with bathing
facility;
(g) facility of bed sheet and Durry once a year on per person basis;
(h) facility of blanket and woollens for each person during winter season;
(i) free food for the dwellers twice a day;
(j) free distribution of mosquito nets to save them from malaria, dengue and
other vector borne diseases;
(k) free education to the children of dwellers with provision of free books,
stationery and other educational materials dresses, shoes and hostel facilities in
deserving cases and vocational training and career counseling for the growth of
such children;
(l) necessary assistance in cash or in kind and advice for self employment of
the dwellers;
(m) withdrawal from begging and other crimes and reforming them in a time
bound manner; and
(n) such other measures as may be deemed necessary for the purposes of this
Act.
(3) It shall be the duty of the appropriate Government to implement the welfare measures
prescribed under this Act in such manner as may be prescribed.
4. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law
in this behalf, provide requisite funds from time to time for carrying out the purposes of
this Act.
Definitions.
Central
Government to
provide
requisite funds.
National
Welfare
policy for
pavement
dwellers.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
5. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central
Government may make such order or give such direction, not inconsistent with the provisions
of this Act, as appears to it to be necessary or expedient for the removal of the difficulty and
the Government of a State shall be guided by such directions and instructions on questions
of policy as may be given to it by the Central Government:
Provided that no order shall be made under this section after the expiry of a period of
two years from the date of commencement of this Act.
6. The provisions of this Act and of rules made thereunder shall have effect
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time
being in force.
7. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or
be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment
shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under the rule.
Power to
remove
difficulty.
Act to have
overriding
effect.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20

4
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Due to population explosion in the country, the problem of homelessness has become
quite acute and has become more severe in the urban areas. This problem is multiplied when
the people from rural areas migrate to urban areas in search of green pastures and pursue
their dreams of better life. But having a roof over their heads remains a distant dream for
most of them. After the hard work of the day, they chose some pavements to sleep during
the night under the open sky. Mumbai is one such Metropolitan city, the financial hub of
the nation, which attracts the people from across the country to try their luck in Bollywood
and in other professions and pavements of Mumbai provide sleeping space to these migrants.
At present millions of people live and subsist on the pavements or footpaths of Mumbai
struggling for basic amenities of two sqaure meals and healthcare by various means. Similar
is the case of other Metropolitans and other urban areas of the rest of the country. These
poverty stricken pavement dwellers face the vagaries of nature particularly during the rainy
and winter seasons. They have no other options but to live in inhuman conditions falling
victims of diseases and many a time lose their lives. In winter alone hundreds of such
pavement dwellers lost their lives due to severe cold in Delhi and other urban areas of
North India.
Ours is a welfare State and it is the duty of the State to protect its citizens who are
poor, homeless and end up on the pavements. The State must implement Welfare measures
for such citizens of the nation.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; GOPAL CHINAYYA SHETTY
December 22, 2015.

5
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the formulation of a national welfare policy for
pavement dwellers. Clause 4 makes it obligatory for the Central Government to provide
requisite funds for carrying out the provisions of the Bill. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will
involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a sum of
rupees fifty thousand crore may involve as recurring expenditure per annum.
A non-recurring expenditure of rupees ten thousand crore may also involve.

6
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 7 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only the delegation of
legislative power is of normal character.

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the welfare measures to be undertaken by the State for the homeless
citizens living on the pavements of roads, under the bridges, flyovers, bus stops,
railway yards, in parks or under the open sky in any public place in
the Metropolitan cities and other urban areas, and for matters
connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Gopal Chinayya Shetty, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—4104L(S3)—12-02-2016.