AS  INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Short title and
commencement.
Amendment
of article 84.
Bill No.  10 of  2018
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT)
BILL,  2018
By
SHRI  ASADUDDIN OWAISI, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2018.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In article 84 of the Constitution, for clause ( b), the following clause shall be
substituted, namely:—
"(b) is, in the case of a seat in the Council of States, not less than twenty-five
years of age and, in the case of a seat in the House of the People, not less than twenty
years of age; and".
5

2
3. In article 173 of the Constitution, for clause (b), the following clause shall be
substituted, namely:—
“(b) is, in the case of a seat in the Legislative Assembly, not less than twenty
years of age and, in the case of a seat in the Legislative Council, not less than
twenty-two years of age; and”.
4. After article 329 of the Constitution, the following article shall be inserted, namely:—
“329A. (1) Save as otherwise provided in this Constitution, no prerequisite or standard
practice or procedure shall be imposed or applied to, discriminatorily or arbitrarily, deny or
abridge the right of any citizen to contest or vote in any election held under this Constitution.
(2) Nothing in this article shall be applicable to any reservation of seats or any provision
made for special representation of certain classes under this Constitution.
Explanation.— Any requirement for a minimum educational qualification for contesting
an election shall be deemed to be prohibited under this article.”.
Amendment
of article 173.
Insertion of
new article
329A.
Right to
contest and
vote.
5
10

3
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
In 1989, the Sixty-First Amendment to the Constitution of India lowered the voting age
from twenty-one years to eighteen years to the House of the People and Legislative Assemblies
of the States. The reason was to include more number of adults and make the democratic
process more inclusive. Inclusive democracy in the true sense would mean not only widening
the voting net but also ensuring a more inclusive electoral contest. A healthy democracy
requires that the pool of contestants reflects the diversity of the electorate. It has even been
argued in a PIL that was filed in the Supreme Court that articles 84 and 173 violate the
Fundamental Right of citizens to choose a profession. The Public Interest Litigation (PIL)
was rejected on the ground that lowering the age of contesting required an amendment to the
Constitution, and the Parliament, not the Supreme Court, had the authority to do it.
Parliamentary democracy is part of the basic structure of this Constitution. An essential
attribute of parliamentary democracy is free and fair elections. The conduct of a free and fair
election cannot be conducted when a major demographic group of citizenry is not eligible to
contest in elections. India’s largest age group is currently prevented from contesting elections,
this despite the fact that young individuals constitute 53.7 per cent. of the total population
of India according to the 2011 census. In this light, it is essential that  young citizens find a
stake in parliamentary democracy and are able to articulate their aspirations and claims in the
State Legislatures and the Parliament.
Most democracies across the world have reduced the minimum age for contesting
elections over the years to either eighteen years or twenty-one years. For example, the
minimum age to contest elections in the United Kingdom (reduced from twenty-one in 2006),
France, Germany, Australia is eighteen years. In Israel and Indonesia it is twenty-one years.
In Iran persons as young as twenty-one can even become the President of the country.
Therefore, while young individuals across the world are enriching their democratic traditions,
barring our youth from contesting in elections is regressive and exclusionary. Moreover, in
order to strengthen the inclusiveness of our electoral democracy it is necessary that a
constitutional protection against discriminatory practices in elections be incorporated.
It has been observed that, increasingly, legislatures have made laws to incorporate
school education as a prerequisite to contesting local elections. Similarly, it has been noted
that under-trial citizens of this country are prevented from exercising their right to vote. This
despite the fact, that they are treated as innocent in the eyes of law.
The Bill, therefore, seeks to amend the Constitution with a view to prevent the dilution
of the constitutional principles of equal citizenship and universal suffrage and to bar any
discriminatory or arbitrary treatment in abridging the right to vote or contest in elections.
The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
N
EW DELHI; ASADUDDIN OWAISI
January 3, 2018.

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
*****
84. A person shall not be qualified to be chosen to fill a seat in Parliament unless he—
(a)* * * * *
(b) is, in the case of a seat in the Council of  States, not less than thirty years of age
and, in the case of a seat in the House of the People, not less than twenty-five years of age;
and”.
*****
173.  A person shall not be qualified to be chosen to fill a seat in Legislature of a State
unless he—
(a)* * * * *
(b) is, in the case of a seat in the Legislative Assembly, not less than twenty-five years
of age and, in the case of a seat in the Legislative Council, not less than thirty years of age;
and
* * * * *
Qualification
for
membership
of
Parliament.
Qualification
for
membership
of the State
Legislature.
4

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Shri Asaduddin Owaisi, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—3628LS(S3)—19-01-2018.