1
THE REPRESENTATION OF THE PEOPLE (AMENDMENT)
BILL, 2011
By
SHRI L. RAJAGOPAL, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Representation of the People Act, 1951.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-second Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Representation of the People (Amendment) Act,
2011.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force with immediate effect.
2.  In section 7 of the Representation of the People Act, 1951 (hereinafter referred to as
the principal Act), after clause (a), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
“(aa) the expression “bandh”, “dharna” and “rasta roko” means use of force,
intimidation or physical or mental coercion aimed at restricting or curtailing free
movement of the people and the vehicles including public transport or closure of
shops, offices or business establishments by use of force;”.
Short title,
extent and
commence-
ment.
Bill No. 10  of  2011
As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Amendment
of section 7.
43 of 1951.
5
10

2
3.  In section 8 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), after clause (c), the following
clause shall be inserted, namely:—
“(d) any law relating to organizing of “bandh”, “dharna” or “rasta roko”.”
4.  After section 29C of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted,
namely:—
“29D. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in
force, if the Commission is satisfied that a political party, recognized either as a National
Party or as a State Party, has organized or given a call for bandh, dharna or rasta roko,
the Commission may, after taking into account all the available facts and circumstances
and after giving the party a reasonable opportunity of showing cause, either suspend,
subject to such terms as the Commission may deem appropriate, or withdraw the
registration and recognition of such party.”
Amendment
of section 8.
Insertion of
new section
29D.
Power of
Commission
to suspend or
withdraw
recognition of
a registered
political party
for organizing
bandh,
dharna or
rasta roko.
5
10

3
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
India is a democratic country and in democracy every citizen has a right to express
his/her point of view. But, at the same time, there are ways and means to ventilate grievances
or points of view. The Indian Constitution does not allow violence or permits anyone to
obstruct freedom of others or prevent others to enjoy their rights or destroy public/private
property. Article 51A(i) imposes a fundamental duty on every citizen of this country to
safeguard public property and to abjure violence.
Political parties, NGOs, individuals and many other organisations now-a-days, resort
to bandhs, dharnas or rasta rokos for each and every  grievance in order to express their
displeasure or discontent against the decisions of the Government. Even though they have
every right to register their protest, unfortunately, individuals and political parties are
going to the extent of forcefully obstructing general public from performing their day-to-
day duties, forcing shopkeepers or business establishments to close their shops/offices or
creating an atmosphere which force public transport  to stay off the roads or prevent
vehicluar traffic from plying on the roads. These kinds of coercive methods are not only
causing a lot of inconvenience to people but also loss to the tune of crores of rupees to  the
Government. The political parties are not concerned about people but about the political
mileage they would get out of such activities.
Over a decade ago, the Supreme Court, in a landmark verdict, held that calls for
bandhs  are ‘‘illegal and unconstitutional’’  means of protest. In 1998, a three-judge bench
headed by the then Chief Justice of India, J.S. V erma upheld a Kerala High Court ruling
banning bandhs. But political parties continue to call for bandhs  thereby disrupting  public
life and trampling on basic Fundamental Rights of citizens who are not participating in
bandhs.
In  September, 2005, the Supreme Court again made its view clear when it directed the
Shiv Sena and the BJP to first pay rupees twenty lakh each as the fine imposed on them by
the Bombay High Court in 2004 for having called a Mumbai bandh the previous year. The
apex court came down on political parties heavily for organizing bandhs and holding society
to ransom.
In view of the above, the Bill seeks to amend the Representation of the People Act,
1951 with a view to disqualify from contesting elections the individuals who give call for  or
participate in bandh, dharna or rasta roko upon conviction and also for deregistration and
derecognition of National or State Parties if they are involved in bandh, dharna or rasta
roko.
The Bill seeks to achieve above objective.
N
EW DELHI; L. RAJAGOPAL
February 3, 2011.

4
ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE REPRESENTATION OF THE PEOPLE ACT, 1951
* * * * * *
PART II
QUALIFICATION AND DISQUALIFICATIONS
* * * * * *
CHAPTER III.— Disqualifications for  membership of Parliament and State Legislatures
7. In this Chapter,—
(a) ‘‘appropraite Government’’  means in relation to any disqualification for
being chosen as or for being a member of either House of Parliament, the Central
Government, and in relation to any disqualification for being chosen as or for being a
member of the Legislative Assembly or Legislative Council of a State, the State
Government;
* * * * * *
8. (1)  A person convicted of an offence punishable under—
* * * * * *
(2)  A person convicted for the contravention of —
(a) * * * *
(b) * * * *
(c)  any provisions of the Dowry Prohibition Act, 1961 (28 of 1961);
and sentenced to imprisonment for not less than six months, shall be disqualified
from the date of such conviction and shall continue to be disqualified for a further
period of six years since his release.
* * * * * *
Definition.
Definition.

GMGIPMRND—6355LS(S3)—25-02-2011.
LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Representation of the People Act, 1951.
————
(Shri L. Rajagopal, M.P.)