1
THE  DISRUPTION  OF  PROCEEDINGS  OF  PARLIAMENT
(DISENTITLEMENT OF DAILY ALLOWANCE TO MEMBERS
AND TERMINATION OF MEMBERSHIP) BILL, 2008
By
SHRI L. RAJAGOPAL, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for disentitlement of daily allowance to members for the day on which the
proceedings of a House of Parliament of which they are members are adjourned
due to disruption caused by a member or a group of members and
termination of membership of a member or a group of members
who disrupts the proceedings of the House and for matters
connected therewith.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as  follows:—
1.  This Act may be called the Disruption of Proceedings of  Parliament  (Disentitlement
of Daily Allowance to Members and Termination of Membership) Act, 2008.
2.  (1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires:—
(i)  “House” means the Council of States or the House of the People, as the case
may be; and
(ii) “Presiding Officer” means the Chairman of the Council of States or the
Speaker of the House of the People, as the case may be.
(2)  Words and expressions used but not defined in this Act and defined in the Salary,
Allowances and Pension of  Members of  Parliament Act, 1954 shall have the same meaning
as assigned to them in that Act.
Short title.
Definitions.
TO BE  INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Bill No. 10  of  2008.
30 of 1954
5
10

2
3.  ( 1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Salary, Allowances and
Pension of Members of Parliament Act, 1954, no member shall be entitled to receive
daily allowance for a day  if proceedings of the House are disrupted by any member
or a group of members, as the case may be, leading to its adjournment for a substantial
part on that day.
(2) Where a House is adjourned for substantial part of the day under
sub-section (1), the Presiding Officer shall, on the last day of the week following that
day, inform the House of the date on which the House was so adjourned.
4. (1) The Presiding Officer of a House may, if  he deems it necessary, identify
a member or a group of members, who, individually or collectively, disregards the
authority of the Chair, or abuse the rules of the House by persistently and wilfully
obstructing the proceedings of the House on second occasion in the same session
and issue a warning to such member or a group of members.
(2) If a member or a group of members so identified under sub-section ( 1),
obstruct the proceedings of the House on third occasion during the same session,
the House may resolve to terminate the membership of such member or a group of
members, as the case may be, on a motion being moved in this behalf.
(3) The membership of a member or a group of members referred to in the
motion shall stand terminated from the day of adoption of the motion by the House.
30 of 1954
Entitlement
of daily
allowance.
Identification
and termina-
tion of
membership.
5
10
15

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
India is the largest democracy in the world and Members of Parliament, being part of
this system, have to play a pivotal role in enhancing the prestige of this institution by
participating in the proceedings in a disciplined and dignified manner. However, of late, it is
being observed that the proceedings of both the Houses of Parliament are disrupted due to
pandemonium and the Houses have to be adjourned for substantial part of the day without
transacting any business. This not only results in loss of precious time of Parliament and
public money but also dents the image of Parliament. Parliamentary democracy is based on
the principle that the Executive is accountable to the legislature and that one of the foremost
duties of Members of Parliament is to exercise vigilant control over the actions of the Executive
through various Parliamentary devices. If the proceedings of either House are disrupted and
Parliament is not permitted to function and transact the listed business on account of
pandemonium, the legislative scrutiny over the Executive is diluted since debates on issues
of public importance are withheld.
In view of this and in order to provide disincentive for disruptions in the Parliament, it
is proposed that no member shall be entitled to receive daily allowance for a day if proceedings
of the House are disrupted by a member or a group of members leading to its adjournment for
a substantial part of the day. Whenever a House is adjourned for substantial part of the day
due to pandemonium created by members, the Presiding Officer shall inform the House of the
date on which the House was so adjourned. It is also proposed that if any member or a group
of members is identified, disrupting the proceedings of the House, on three occasions in the
same session, by the Presiding Officer, the membership of such member or a group of members
shall be terminated on a motion moved and adopted to that effect in the House.
The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
N
EW DELHI; L. RAJAGOPAL
July 30, 2007
3

MGIPMRND— 158LS(S5)—8-02-2008.
LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for disentitlement of daily allowance to members for the day on which the
proceedings of a House of Parliament of which they are members are adjourned
due to disruption caused by a member or a group of members and
termination of membership of a member or a group of members
who disrupts the proceedings of the House and for
matters connected therewith.
————
(Shri L. Rajagopal, M.P.)