1
THE CONSTITUTION (SCHEDULED TRIBES) ORDER
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 2017
By
SHRI BIDYUT BARAN MAHATO, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) Order, 1950.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-eighth Y ear of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) Order (Amendment)
Act, 2017.
(2) It shall come into force on such a date, as the Central Government may, by notification
in the official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and
commencement.
Bill No.  10 of  2017
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5

2
2. In the Schedule to the Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) Order, 1950, in Part XXII.-
Jharkhand, after entry 32, the following entry shall be inserted, namely:—
"32A. Kudmi (Mahato).".
Amendment
of the
Schedule.

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Jharkhand is predominantly a tribal State. It was on account of its tribal identity that
the movement for its creation became a success. There are a large number of tribal people
known as Kudmi (Mahato), who are living in the State but have not been included in the list
of Scheduled Tribes of the State of Jharkhand.
As a result, the persons belonging to the Kurmi/Kudmi tribe are not getting the benefits,
which are otherwise available to the Scheduled Tribes in the State. Even before the
segregation of the State of Jharkhand from the State of Bihar and since India's Independence,
as a result of the oscillating policy adopted by the Government of Jharkhand and the Central
Government, the issue of including Kurmi/Kudmi (Mahato) tribes of Chota Nagpur into the
list of Scheduled Tribes has been lying pending. The State Government of Jharkhand in the
year 2004 recommended to the Central Government for inclusion of Kudmi (Mahato) in the
list of the Scheduled Tribes for the reason that in 1913 and in 1931 the said tribes figured in
the list of Scheduled Tribes. However, with effect from the year 1950 and the year 1952, this
tribe was removed. Reasons for the said removal from the list have not been spelled out.
Keeping in mind the demands being raised to include the said tribe into the list of Scheduled
Tribes, the Central Government should seriously take a relook about the inclusion of this
tribe into the list of Scheduled Tribes.
Nearly about two crore people belonging to Kurmi/Kudmi community are residing in
the district of East Singhbhum, Saraikela Karsawan, West Singhbhum, Ranchi, Hazaribagh,
Dhanbad, Giridih, Bokaro, Ramgarh, Palamu, Godda, Jamtara of State of Jharkhand; district of
Purulia, Bankura, East Midnapur and West Midnapur of State of West Bengal and Mayurbhanj,
Kendujhar, Sundergarh districts of State of Odisha. In Jharkhand alone, about twenty seven
per cent. of the population belongs to Kurmi/Kudmi (Mahato) tribe which is the single
largest population of a particular tribe. In these three States, despite being tribals, they are
not getting the facilities meant for the tribals. Their culture, living standards, way of worship,
social living are similar to those of the tribals. Most of the people belonging to this tribe
reside in forest areas like other tribals. People belonging to this tribe are extremely backward
on social, economical and educational aspects. Sale and purchase of land belonging to the
tribals is being regulated by the Chotanagpur Tenancy Act, 1908 in the State of Jharkhand.
Sale and purchase of land can be undertaken only among the people of same tribes. Keeping
in view, their ways of living, cultural and socio-economic condition, the British had included
the Kurmi/Kudmi (Mahato) tribe of Jharkhand Chota Nagpur into the list of tribes. Under a
well thought out strategy, the Kurmi/Kudmi (Mahato) was not included in the 1950 and 1952
lists of Scheduled Tribes.
Therefore, the Kurmi/Kudmi (Mahato) tribe must be included in the list of Scheduled
Tribes in respect of Jharkhand State.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW D ELHI; BIDYUT BARAN MAHATO
December 2,  2016.
3

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill seeks to include Kudmi (Mahato) Community in the list of Scheduled
Tribes in respect of the State of Jharkhand. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve
additional recurring expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India on account of benefits
to be provided to the persons belonging to this tribe under the ongoing Central Schemes
meant for development of the Scheduled Tribes. At this stage, it is not possible to give the
exact amount to be incurred on this account. However, it is expected that a recurring expenditure
of about rupees five hundred crore will be involved annually.
No non-recurring expenditure will be involved.
4

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION (SCHEDULED TRIBES) ORDER, 1950
(C.O. 22)
******
The Schedule
******
Part XXII.—Jharkhand
******
32. Kol.
******
5

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) Order, 1950.
————
(Shri Bidyut Baran Mahato, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—3995LS(S3)—24.01.2017.