As Intropucep ॥ Lox SABHA

९३ 4० aoe,

Bill No, 110 of 2000

THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2000
By
Sumi Vitas Murtemwar, M.P.
&
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-first Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—

1. This Act may be « 1 the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2000.

2. After article 75 of the Constitution, the following article shall be inserted,
namely:—

"75A. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Constitution, during the
period from the date of announcement of general election to the House of the People
or from the date of dissolution of the House of the People, till the date of constitution
of new House of the People, there shall be a care-taker Government consisting of a
Prime Minister and ten other Ministers, who shall not belong to any Political Party to
aid and advise the President:

Provided that no person against whom any criminal or civil suit has been
initiated or is pending in any court of law, shall be appointed as Prime Minister or a
Minister:

Shortttitle.

Insertion of
new article
SA.

Provision for
caretaker
Government.


namely:

2
Provided further that the Prime Minister and other Ministers shall not contest ensuing

elections to the House of the People.

(2) The Prime Minister shall be appointed by the President from amongst the
former Judges of the Supreme Court. हि

(3) The Ministers shall be appointed by the President from amongst persons
who, in the opinion of the President, possess administrative skills or are involved in
social work,

(4) Such Government shall carry out the day to day affairs of the administration
and shall not take any policy decision or major decision including making
appointments of important positions under the Union or transfer of senior officials,".

3. After article 164 of the Constitution, the following article shall be inserted,

"164A. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Constitution, during
the period from the date of announcement of general election to Legislative Assembly
of a State, or from the date of dissolution of the Legislative Assembly of the State,
till the date of constitution of new Legislative Assembly of the State, there shall be
a care-taker Government of the State, consisting of a Chief Minister and ten other
Ministers, who shall not belong to any political party to aid and advise the Governor:

Provided that no person against whom any criminal or civil suit has been
initiated or is pending in any court of law, shall be appointed as Chief Minister or a
Minister:

Provided further that the Chief Minister and other Ministers shall not contest
ensuing elections to the Legislative Assembly of the State.

(2) The Chief Minister shall be appointed by the Governor from amongst the
former Judges of the High Court.

(3) The Ministers shall be appointed by the Governor from amongst persons
who, in the opinion of the Governor possess administrative skills or are involved in
social work.

(4) Such Government shall carry out the day to day affairs of the administration
and shall not take any policy decision or major decision including making
appointments of important positions under the State Government or transfer of senior
officials in the State.".



STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
In India, democracy is functioning for the last fifty years and there have been twelve

Over administrative interference particularly by ruling party during the elections, To check
the administrative interference during the elections by the party in power, the Election
Commission had proposed a model code of conduct for all the Governments in power. To
Some extent this code of conduct has helped in controlling the misuse of the Government
machinery. But this model code of conduct has no legal validity. India being a vast country,
it would not be possible to control misuse of ‘Government machinery even after this code of
conduct has been formulated by the Election Commission. It is necessary to evolve a perma-
nent solution of all these maladies and to strengthen democratic process in the country.
Therefore, it is now high time that the Constitution ‘was amended for making provision of a
care-taker Government to look after the day to day administration during the period from the
date of announcement of general elections or from the date of dissolution of the House of the
People till the date of constitution of new House of the People, In our neighbouring country
Bangladesh, such experiments are being carried out successfully.

Similar provisions should also be made in case of State Assemblies. The Election
Commission had also recommended that Chief Ministers should resign after the elections
have been declared in the States,

The proposed care-taker Governments in the Centre and States have become neces-
sary to have free and fair elections in the country,

Hence, the Bill.

‘New Dear, VILAS MUTTEMWAR
June 26, 2000.


: LOK SABHA

A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.

(Shri Vilas Muttemwar, MP)

MGIP(PLU)M IND—1601LS—8-7-2000.