BIB No. 110 of 1,6z 
THE PONDICHERRY (ADMINISTRATION) 
BILL,. 1962 
(As INTRODUCED IN LoK SABMA 
ON 19m NOVBMBBR, 1962) 

THE PONDICHERRY (ADMINISTRATION) BILL, 1962 
[As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA] 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the administration of Pondicherry and for matters 
connected therewith. 
• 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirteenth Year of the Repub-
lic of India as follows:- • 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Pondicherry (Administration) Short title. extent and 
Act, 1962. commence-
s 
(2) It extends to the whole of Pondicherry. 
(3) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 16th day of 
August, 1962. 
ment: 
Z. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,- De4nitiona. 
(a) "Administrator" means the Administrator of Pondicherry 
I() appointed by the President under article 239 of the Constituti()ll; 
(b) "appointed day" means the 16th day of August, 1962, 
being the date of entry into force of the Treaty of Cession; 
(c) "former French Establishments" mean the territories 
which immediately before the appointed day were comprised in 
IS the French Establishments in India known as Pondicherry, 
Karikal, Mahe and Yanam; 
(d) "High Court" means the High Court at Madras; 
(e) "law" means any Act, Ordinance, Regulation, rule, order, 
bye.-Iaw, decree or other provision (by whatever name called) 
20 having the force ·of law; 
(f) "Pondicherry" means the Union territory comprising the 
territories of the fonner French Establishments; 

(9) "Treaty,o{ Cession" means the treaty concluded between 
France and India on the 28th day of May, 1956, establishing the 
cession of the French Establishments by France to India in full 
• sovereignty. 
Office,os and 3. Without prejudice to the powers of the Central Government to 5 
rU~~!,>?Bfics appoint from time to t.ime such officers and authorities as may be 
In &~t1on to f h d" . f • Pondicherry. necessary or tea ministration 0 Pendicherry, all courts, tribunals, 
authorities and officers, whether in India or in the former French 
Establishments, who, immediately before the appointed day, were 
exercising lawful functions in connection with the administration of 10 
those Establishments or any part ,thereof, including the Couneil of 
Government and the Representative Assembly, shall unless otherwise 
directed at any time by the Central Government or the Administrator 
in relation to any such court, tribunal, authority or officer, or until 
other provision is made by law, eontinue to exereise in connediOll IS 
with the administration of Pondieherry their respective powers and 
jurisdiction and perform their respective duties and functions in the 
same manner and to the same extent as before the appointed day with 
such altered designation, if any, as that Gove~ent may determine. 
Continuance 4. (1) All laws in force immediately before the appointed day in 20 
of existing the former French Establishments or any part thereof shall continue 
Jaws and be d their adap- to in force in Pon icherry until amended or repealed by a compe-
tat ion. tent Legislature or other competent authority: 
Provided that references in any such law to the President or 
Government of the French Republic shall be construed as references 2S 
to the Central Government, references to the Governor of the French 
Establishments in India, to the Commissioner of the Republic for the 
French Establishments in India, to the Chief Commissioner for the 
French Establishments, to the Chief Commissioner of the State of 
Pondicherry or to the Chief Commissioner, Pondicherry shall be 30 
construed as references to the Administrator of Pondicherry and 
references to the State of Pondicherry shall be construed as references 
to Pondicherry. 
(2) For the purpose of facilitating the application of any such law 
in relation to the administration of Pondicherry and. for the purpose 3 S 
of bringing the provisions of any such law into accord with the provi-
sions of the Constitution, the Central Government may, within three 
years from the appointed day, by order, make such adaptations and 
modifications, whether by way of repeal or amendment, as may be 
necessary or expedient and thereupon every such law shall have effect 40 
subject to the adaptations and modifications so made. 

3 
5. For the avoidance of doubt, it is hereby declared that all pro- Property and 
perty and assets within Pondicherry which, immediately before the lIS.ct~. 
appointed day, vested in the Government of the French Republic 
shall, save as otherwise expressly provided in the Treaty of Cession, 
5 vest in the Union. 
6 Subject to the provisions of the Treaty of Cession, all rights, Rights and 
liabilities and obligations of the Government of the French Republic Obligations. 
in relation to or arising out of the administration . o~ . the former 
French Establishments shall, as from the appointed . day, be the 
10 rights, liabilities and obligations of the Central Government. . 
7. All taxes, duties, cesses and fees which, immediately before the COlltinuance 
appointed day, were being lawfully levied in the former French ~C8.cxi8tina 
Establishments or any part thereof shall continue to be levied in 
Pondicherry and to be applied to the same purposes, until other 
IS provision is made by a competent Legislature or other competent 
authority. 
8. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official ~~~er !~!:~: 
Gazette, extend with such restrictions and modifications as it thinks ments to 
fit, to Pondicherry any enactment which is in force in a State at the Pondicherry. 
20 date of the notification. 
9. As from the 6th day of November, 1962, the jurisdiction of the Bxtcntion Of 
High Court shall extend to Pondicherry. ~c juriadic-. lion of Mad-
ras High 
Court to 
Pondicbcrry • 
10. (1) Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of lurisdiction 
section 9, the High Court shall have, in respect of Pondicherry, all C!o~rt~h 
2S such jurisdiction as under the law in force immediately before the 
appointed day was exercisable in respect of the former French 
Establishments by the Cour de Cassation, the Cour Superieur d' 
Arbitrage and the Conseil d' Etat of France: 
Provided that while determining appeals from deaisions of courts 
30 and tribunals in Pondicherry, the High Court shall, as far as may 
be, follow the same procedure and have the same power to pass any 
judgment, decree or order thereon, as it follows and has while deter-
mining appeals from decisions of courts in the State of Madras. 
(2) All appeals and other proceedings from or in respect of any 
3S judgment, decree or order of any court or tribunal in the fonner 
French Establishments pending immediately before the appointed 
day before the Cour de Cassation or the Cour Superieur d' Arbitrage 
or the Conseil d' Etat of France and all original proceedings in 
relation to those Establishments pendin~ immediately before the 

4 
appointed day before the Conseil d' Etat shall, by virtue of this 
Act, stand transferred to the High Court and shall be disposed 
of by the High Court in the exercise of jurisdiction conferred on it 
by this Act, as if sueh appeals and other proceedings had been 
filed. before the High Court. S 
Explanation.-All appeals and other proceedings filed before the 
appointed day but not transmitted to the Cour de Cassation or the 
CoUl" Superieur d' Arbitrage or the Conseil d' Etat shall be deemed 
to be appeals or proceedings, as the case may be, pending before 
that Court for the purposes of this sub-section. 10 
Advocates 11. N"otwitb&tanding anything contained in the Advocates Act, 
e=: to 1961, but subject to such rules as may be framed. by the High Court, 2, of 1961. 
C:e Hiaht any person who is entitled. to practise before the Tribunal Superieur 
Court. d' Appel at Pondicherry shall be recognised as an advocate entitled 
to practise in the High Court in relation to cases coming before the IS 
High Court from Pondicherry. 
Power of 12. The High Court may, from time to time, make rules, consistent Hip Court to m,ake with this Act, to provide for all or any of the following matters, 
ruJea. namely:-
(a) the translation of any papers filed in the High Court 20 
and the preparation of paper books for hearing all appeals and 
the copying, typing or printing of any such papers or traDslation 
and the recovery ,from the persons at whose instance or on whose 
behalf papers are filed of the expenses thereby incurred; 
(b) the court-fees payable for instituting proceedings in 2S • 
the High Court, the fees to be charged. for processes issued by 
the High Court or by any officer of the court and the amount 
;payable in any proceeding in the High Court in respect of fees 
of the advocate of any party to such proceeding; 
(c) the proc~ure to be fonowed in the High Court; 30 
(d) the approval, admission, enrolment, removal and 8118-
pension of advocates from Pondicherry. 
Validation 13. (1) Every order or decree purported. to have been made by the 
of certain Cour de Cauation, the Cour Superieur d' Arbitrage or the Consen 
~:::.. and d' Etat of France during the period commencing on the first day of 35 
November, 1954, and ending on the appointed day, in any appeal or 
other proceeding from, or in respect of any juqgment, clecree or 
order of any court, tribunal or other authority in the fanner French 
'Establishments shall be deemed to have been. validly made, in 
accordance with law; and shall fur all purposes have effect as if it 40 
were an order Of- a decree made by the High Go\¢ i~ tlle ~¥~r¢se 9t 
t~ ~urisdiction co¢erred by this Act. --

~ 
.(2) Notwithstanding anything contained. in sub-section (1), 
where any decision has been rendered alter the 17th March, 1960, 
by any court in France in any case in which the respondent had 
.l,l0 opportunity to appear for want of service of SWIUnQnS transmitted 
5 through the Administration of the former French Establishments, 
such decision shall be deemed never to have been rendered. and shall 
• be deemed to be pending before the court by which such decision was 
rendered and accordingly stand transferred. to the· High Court or, as 
the case may be, to the court in Pondicherry corresponding to the 
10 court in Frall:ce in which the case shall be deemed. to be pending. 
(3) As soon as may be after the 6th day of November, 1962, the· 
Administrator shall transmit to the High Court or, as the case may 
be, to the corresponding court, the record of ~ery such case as is 
referred to in sub-section (2), together with a certificate that the 
15 summons in that case was not served. on the respondent. 
ao 
25 
30 
3S 
14. (1) The periods of limitation for appeals to the High Court Limitation 
shall be as set out below:- for appeals. 
S. Description of appeal 
No. 
I. Civil Appeal against any judg-
ment or order. 
a. Criminal Appeal against a len-
tence of death. 
3· Criminal Appeal against any 
sentence or order other than 
a sentence of death. 
4· Criminal Appeal asafnst 
order of acquittal. 
an 
S· Labour Appeal under section 
a07 of the French Labour 
Code. I~2. 
6. Labour Appeal under section 
216 of the Frenc~ Labour 
Code, 1952. 
.,. Appeal against a judgment or 
order of the Ad ministrative 
Tribunal at Pondichcrry. 
Period of 
limitation 
90 days 
7 days 
30 days 
90 days 
30 days 
30 days 
90 days 
-------_. 
Time from which period 
begins to run 
The date of the ~ judgment or 
order. 
The date of sentence. 
The date of the .entence or 
order. 
The date of the order of acquittal. 
Tile date of the ju<Jament or 
order. 
The date on which' the report 
and the recommendati On of 
the expert arc communicated 
to the party appealing. 
The date of the judgment or 
order. 
(2) Except in the case of a Criminal Appeal against a sentence 
of death, in computing the period of limitation, the time taken for 
o obtaining a certified copy of the judgment, order, report and recom-
4 ~n4ation, a~pealed aBainst, ~ the case may be, shall be excluded. 

8 
(3) In the case of an appeal preferred by an accused person under 
sentence and in custody, the date on which he lodges the memoran-
dum of appeal with the Superintendent of the Jail in which he is 
detained shall be deemed to be the date of presentation of the appeal 
in the High Court. 5 
(4) Any appeal may be admitted after the period of limitation 
prescribed therefor when the appellant satisfies the Court that he 
had sufficient cause for not preferring the appeal within such period. 
::ins. !If 15. In computing the period of limitation under section 14 or under 
ten!~~:' any other law, any period during which an appeal could not be filed to 
or a proceeding could not be instituted because the jurisdiction of 
the High Court did not extend to Pondicherry shall be excluded. 
Rule of 16. References in any law in force in Pondicherry to the Cour de 
construction. Cassation, the Cour Superieur d' Arbitrage or the Conseil d' Etat 
shall be construed as references to the High Court. 
Power to 
construe 
laWl. 
17. For the purpose of facilitating the application of any law in 
relation to Pondicherry, any court or other authority may construe 
any such law in such manner not affecting the substance, as may be 
necessary or proper to adapt it to the matter before the court or 
15 
other authority. 20 
Etfect of 18. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding 
other laWl. anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law in force 
in Pondicherry. 
Power to 19. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of 
=r:;~ dim- this Act, the Central Government may, by order published in the 2S 
Official Gazette, make any such provisions as appear to it to be 
necessary or expedient for removing the difficulty. 
Repeal and 
.. ving. 
(2) Any order under sub...section (1) may be made so as to be 
retrospective to any date not earlier than the appointed day. 
20. (1) The Pondicherry 
hereby repealed . 
(Administration) Ordinance, 1962, is 30 8 of 196~. 
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action 
taken under the said Ordinance shall be deemed to have been done 
~r taken under this Act. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECtS AND REASONS 
The present Bill seeks to replace the Pondicherry (Administra. 
tion) Ordinance, 1962. That Ordinance was promulgated by the 
President for the administration of the new Union territory compris· 
ing the former French Establishments of Pondicherry, Karikal, Mahe 
and Yanam. These French Establishments became an integral part 
of India from the 16th August, 1962 when the Instruments of Ratifi-
cation in respect of the Treaty of Cession were exchanged between 
the Government of India and the Government of France. 
NEW DELHI; JAWAHARLAL NEHRU. 
The 14th November, 1962. 

The adrAinistration of the French Establishments of PondicherIj, 
Karikal, Mahe and Yanam vested in the Government of India with 
effect from 1st November 1954, following the agreement between the 
Governments of India and France. The two Governments had also 
entered into a treaty in 1956 ceding full sovereignty over these terri-
tories to India. This treaty was to come into force on its ratification. 
The instruments of ratification were exchanged on the 16th of August 
1962. Accordingly, with effect from that date, these Establishments 
have become a part of the Indian Union. 
2. With effect from 1st November 1954, all expenditure connected 
with the administration of these Establishments has been met out of 
the Consolidated Fund of India. In the current year's budget, the 
revenue of these Establishments has been estimated at Rs. 2:31 crores 
and their expenditure at Rs. ~:45 crores. Except in regard to addi-
tional expenditure on administration of Justice, following the exten-
sion of the jurisdiction of Madras High Court to Pondicherry, the 
provisions of the Bill are not likely to result in any significant 
increase in expenditure. 1 
18' 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 12 of the Bill empowers the High Court at Madras to make 
rules regarding the translation of papers filed in the High Court, 
preparation of paper books for filing appeals, court fees payable for 
institution of proceedings, process fees, advocates' fees, the procedure 
in the High Court and the approval, enrolment, suspension and 
removal of advocates from Pondicherry. As these matters pertain 
exclusively to administration of justice, the High Court should 
appropriately deal with them. The delegation of legislative power 
is of a normal character. 
9 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BIll 
to provide for the administration of Pondicherry and for 
matters connected therewith. 
The President bas, in pursuance of clauses (I) and (3) of 
Article 117 of the Constitution of India, recommended 
to Lot Sabha the introduction and oonsideration of 
the-Bill. 
M. N. KAUL, 
Secretary. 
(Shri JlJfDllharltJl Nih"" 
Prime Mi"lster.) 