Bill No. 110 of 2010
THE DIRECT TAXES CODE, 2010
—————
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES
—————
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
CLAUSES
1.  Short title, extent and commencement.
PART A
INCOME-TAX
CHAPTER II
BASIS OF CHARGE
2. Liability to pay, and charge of, income-tax.
3. Scope of total income.
4. Residence in India.
5. Income deemed to accrue in India.
6. Income deemed to be received in the financial year.
7. Dividend income.
8. Total income to include income of any other person.
9. Income of individual to include income of spouse, minor child and others.
10. Income not included in the total income.
11. Persons, entity or funds not liable to income-tax.
CHAPTER III
C
OMPUTATION OF TOTAL INCOME
I.—GENERAL
12. Computation of total income.
13. Classification of sources of income.
14. Computation of income from ordinary sources.
15 Computation of income from special sources.
16. Apportionment of income between spouses governed by Portuguese Civil Code.
17. Avoidance of double taxation.
18. Expenditure not to be allowed as deduction.
19. Amount not deductible where tax is not deducted at source.
II.—H
EADS OF INCOME
A.—Income from employment
20. Income from employment.
21. Computation of income from employment.
22. Scope of gross salary.
23. Deductions from gross salary.
B.—Income from house property
24. Income from house property.
25. Computation of income from house property.
26. Scope of gross rent.
27. Deductions from gross rent.

(ii)
CLAUSES
28. Provision for advance rent received.
29. Provision for arrears of rent received.
C.—Income from business
30. Income from business.
31. Business when treated distinct and separate.
32. Computation of income from business.
33. Gross earnings.
34. Determination of business expenditure.
35. Determination of operating expenditure.
36. Determination of finance charges.
37. Determination of capital allowances.
38. Determination of depreciation.
39. Determination of initial depreciation.
40. Determination of terminal allowance.
41. Deduction for scientific research and development allowance.
42. Computation of profit on transfer of a business capital asset.
43. Special provisions relating to business reorganisation.
44. Meaning of actual cost.
45. Meaning of written down value and adjusted value of assets.
D.—Capital gains
46. Capital gains.
47. Income from certain transfers not to be treated as capital gains.
48. Financial year of taxability.
49. Computation of income from transfer of any investment asset.
50. Full value of consideration.
51. Deduction for cost of acquisition.
52. Indexed cost of acquisition or improvement.
53. Cost of acquisition of an investment asset.
54. Cost of improvement of an investment asset.
55. Relief for rollover of investment asset.
E.—Income from residuary sources
56. Income from residuary sources.
57. Computation of income from residuary sources.
58. Gross residuary income.
59. Deductions from gross residuary income.
III.—A
GGREGATION OF INCOME
60. Aggregation of income under a head of income.
61. Aggregation of income from ordinary sources.
62. Aggregation of income from special sources.
63. Determination of total income.

(iii)
CLAUSES
64. Special provisions relating to business reorganisation or conversion of a company
into a limited liability partnership.
65. Aggregation of losses in case of change in constitution of unincorporated body.
66. Aggregation of losses in the case of certain companies.
67. Aggregation of loss not to be allowed in the case of filing of return after due date.
IV.—T
AX INCENTIVES
68. Deductions from gross total income from ordinary sources.
69. Deduction for savings.
70. Deduction for life insurance.
71. Deduction for health insurance.
72. Deduction for education of children.
73. Limit on deductions under sections  70, 71 and 72.
74. Deduction of interest on loan taken for house property.
75. Deduction of interest on loan taken for higher education.
76. Deduction for medical treatment.
77. Deduction to a person with disability.
78. Deduction for medical treatment and maintenance of a dependant person with
disability.
79. Deduction of contribution or donations to certain funds or non-profit organisations.
80. Deduction for rent paid.
81. Deduction for political contributions.
82. Deduction of income of Investor Protection Fund.
83. Deduction of royalty income of authors.
84. Deduction of royalty on patents.
85. Deduction of income of co-operative society from banking activities.
86. Deduction of income of primary co-operative societies.
V.—M
AINTENANCE OF ACCOUNTS AND OTHER RELATED MATTERS
87. Maintenance of accounts.
88. Audit of accounts and reporting of international transaction.
89. Method of accounting.
CHAPTER IV
SPECIAL PROVISIONS RELATING TO THE COMPUTATION OF TOTAL INCOME OF
NON-PROFIT ORGANISATIONS
90. Applicability of this Chapter.
91. Total income of a non-profit organisation.
92. Computation of total income of a non-profit organisation.
93. Gross receipts of a non-profit organisation.
94. Outgoings of a non-profit organisation.
95. Modes of investment.
96. Deemed income of a non-profit organisation.
97. Use or application of funds or assets for the benefit of interested person.

(iv)
CLAUSES
98. Registration of a non-profit organisation.
99. Maintenance of accounts and tax audit.
100. Anonymous donations.
101. Consequences of conversion of a non-profit organisation.
102. Provisions of this Chapter not to apply in certain cases.
103.  Interpretations in this chapter.
CHAPTER V
COMPUTA TION OF BOOK PROFIT
104. Computation of book profit.
105. Preparation of profit and loss account for computing book profit.
106. Tax credit for tax paid on book profit.
107. Application of other provisions of this Code.
CHAPTER VI
PROVISIONS REATING TO TAX ON  INCOME RECEIVED FROM VENTURE CAPITAL COMPANY
AND VENTURE CAPITAL FUND
108. Tax on income received from venture capital company and venture capital fund.
PART B
DIVIDEND DISTRIBUTUION TAX
CHAPTER VII
SPECIAL PROVISIONS RELATING TO TAX ON DISTRIBUTED PROFITS OF DOMESTICE COMPANIES
109. Tax on distributed profits of domestic companies.
PART C
TAX ON DISTRIBUTED INCOME
CHAPTER VIII
SPECIAL PROVISIONS RELATING TO TAX ON DISTRIBUTED INCOME
110. Tax on income distributed by mutual fund or life insurer.
PART D
BRANCH PROFITS TAX
CHAPTER IX
CHARGE OF BRANCH PROFITS TAX
111.  Tax on branch profits.
PART E
WEALTH-TAX
CHAPTER X
CHARGE OF WEALTH TAX
112. Tax on net wealth.
113. Computation of net wealth.
114.  Net wealth to include certain assets.

(v)
CLAUSES
PART F
PREVENTION OF ABUSE OF THE CODE
CHAPTER XI
SPECIAL PROVISIONS RELATING TO AVOIDANCE OF TAX
115. Disallowance of expenditure having regard to fair market value.
116. Determination of income from international transaction having regard to arm’s
length price.
117. Determination of arm’s length price.
118. Advance pricing agreement.
119. Avoidance of income-tax by transactions resulting in transfer of income to non-
residents.
120. Avoidance of tax by sale and buy-back transaction in security.
121. Avoidance of tax by buy and sale-back transaction in security.
122. Broken period income accruing from a debt instrument.
123. General anti-avoidance rule.
124. Interpretations in this chapter.
125. Presumption of purpose.
PART G
TAX MANAGMENT
CHAPTER XII
TAX ADMINISTRATION AND PROCEDURE
A.—TAX ADMINISTRATION
126. Income-tax authorities.
127. Appointment and control of income-tax authorities.
128. Power of higher authorities.
129. Powers of Board to issue instructions.
130. Jurisdiction of income-tax authorities.
131. Jurisdiction of Assessing Officers.
132. Power to transfer cases.
133. Change of incumbent.
134. Powers regarding discovery and production of evidence.
135. Search and seizure.
136. Power to requisition material taken into custody.
137. Retention and release of books of account or documents seized or requisitioned.
138. Delivery of material belonging to other persons.
139. Retention and application of seized or requisitioned assets.
140. Power to call for information.
141. Power of survey.
142. Power to disclose information in respect of assessee.
143. Proceedings before income-tax authorities to be judicial proceedings.

(vi)
CLAUSES
B.—ASSESSMENT PROCEDURE
144. Self-reporting of tax bases.
145. Tax return preparer.
146. Issue of notice to furnish return.
147. Self-assessment tax.
148. Acknowledgment of return.
149 Processing of return.
150. Notice for inquiry before assessment.
151. Special audit.
152. Determination of value of assets.
153. Determination of arm’s length price.
154. Determination of an impermissible avoidance agreement and consequences thereof.
155. Assessment.
156. Best judgment assessment.
157. Directions by Joint Commissioner for assessment.
158. Direction by Dispute Resolution Panel for assessment.
159. Reopening of assessment.
160. Approval for search assessment.
161. Rectification of mistake.
162. Notice of demand.
163. Time limits for completion of assessment or re-assessments.
C.—PROCEDURE FOR ASSESSMENT IN SPECIAL CASES
164. Representative assessee.
165. Rights and obligations of a representative assessee.
166. Direct assessment or recovery not barred.
167. Remedy against property in case of representative assessee.
168. Assessment upon business reorgainsation.
169. Assessment after partition of a Hindu undivided family.
170. Assessment of non-resident in respect of occasional shipping business.
171. Assessment of persons leaving India.
172. Assessment of an unincorporated body formed for a particular event or purpose.
173. Assessment of persons likely to transfer property to avoid tax.
174. Discontinued business.
175. Assessment of unincorporated body in case of change in its constitution.
176. Assessment on retirement or death of participant.
177. Assessment of a deductor or collector.
D.— APPEALS AND REVISION
178. Appeal to Commissioner (Appeals).
179. Form of appeal and limitation.
180. Procedure in appeal.
181. Powers of Commissioner (Appeals).

(vii)
CLAUSES
182. Appellate Tribunal.
183. Appeals to Appellate Tribunal.
184. S tay of demand by Appellate Tribunal.
185. Orders of Appellate Tribunal.
186. Constitution of Benches and procedure of Appellate Tribunal.
187. Appeal to High Court.
188. Case before High Court to be heard by not less than two Judges.
189. Appeal to Supreme Court.
190. Hearing before Supreme Court.
191. Revision  of orders prejudicial to revenue.
192. Revision of other orders.
CHAPTER XIII
COLLECTION AND RECOVERY OF TAX
A.— DEDUCTION OF TAX AT SOURCE
193. Deduction or collection of tax at source and advance payment.
194. Direct payment.
195. Liabi lity to deduct tax at source.
196. Payment of income and deduction of tax.
197. Certificate for lower or no deduction of tax.
198. Obligation of deductor.
199. Reporting of payments without deduction of tax.
200. No deduction of tax in certain cases.
201. Credit for tax deducted.
B.—COLLECTION OF TAX AT SOURCE
202. Tax collection at source.
203. Credit for tax collected.
204. Interpretations under Sub-Chapters A and B.
C.—ADVANCE TAX
205. Liability to pay advance tax.
D.— TAX CREDIT FOR RELIEF IN RESPECT OF ARREARS OR ADVANCE RECEIPTS
206. Tax relief for arrears of advance receipts.
E.—FOREIGN TAX CREDIT
207. Foreign tax credit.
F.—PAYMENT OF WEALTH-TAX
208. Payment of wealth-tax.
G.—INTEREST P AYABLE TO THE CENTRAL GOVERNMENT
209. Interest for default in furnishing return of tax bases.
210. Interest for default in payment of advance income-tax.
211. Interest for deferment of advance income-tax.
212. Interest on excess refund.

(viii)
CLAUSES
213. Interest payable on demand raised.
214. Interest for failure to deduct or collect or pay tax.
H.—REFUNDS
215. Refunds.
216. Interest on refund.
217. Person entitled to claim refund in certain special cases.
I.—RECOVERY
218. Recovery by Assessing Officer.
219. Recovery by Tax Recovery Officer.
220. Modes of recovery.
221. Tax Recovery Officer by whom recovery is to be effected.
222. Recovery of tax arrear in respect of non-resident from his assets.
223. Recovery in case of a company in liquidation.
224. Liability of manager of a company.
225. Joint and several liability of participants.
226. Recovery through State Government.
227. Recovery of tax in pursuance of agreements with foreign countries or specified
territory.
228. Tax clearance certificate in certain cases.
229. Recovery by suit or under other law not affected.
CHAPTER XIV
PENALTIES
230. Penalty for underreporting of tax bases.
231. Penalty where search has been initiated.
232. Penalty for other defaults.
233. Procedure.
234. Bar of limitation for imposing penalty.
CHAPTER XV
PROSECUTION
235. Chapter not in derogation of any other law.
236. Contravention of any restraint order.
237. Failure to comply with the provisions of clause (d) of sub-section (2) of section 135.
238. Removal, concealment, transfer or delivery of property to thwart tax recovery.
239. Failure to comply with provisions of sub-sections (1) and (3) of section 223.
240. Failure to pay tax deducted or collected at source or to pay dividend or income distri-
bution tax.
241. W ilful attempt to evade tax.
242. Failure to furnish returns of tax bases.
243. Failure to furnish statements and reports.
244. Failure to comply with direction under this Code.

(ix)
CLAUSES
245. False statement in verification.
246. Falsification of books of account or documents.
247. Abetment of false return.
248. Offences by companies, etc.
249. Proof of entries in records or documents.
250. Presumption as to assets and books of account in certain cases.
251. Presumption as to culpable mental state.
252. Prosecution to be instance of Chief Commissioner or Commissioner.
253. Punishment for second and subsequent offences.
254. Offences to be non-cognizable.
255. Disclosure of information by public servants.
CHAPTER XVI
ADV ANCE RULINGS AND DISPUTE RESOULTION
256. Scope of ruling and dispute resolution.
257. Authority for Advance Rulings and Dispute Resolution.
258. Proc edure for advance ruling.
259. Income-tax authority or Appellate Tribunal not to proceed in certain cases.
260. Applicability of advance ruling.
261. Advance Ruling to be void in certain circumstances.
262. Procedure for dispute resolution.
263. S tay of demand by the Authority.
264. Power to rectify a mistake.
265. Powers of Authority.
266. Procedure of Authority.
267. Interpretations in this Chapter.
CHAPTER XVII
SETTLEMENT OF CASES
268. Income-tax Settlement Commission.
269. Jurisdiction and powers of Settlement Commission.
270. Vice-Chairperson to act as Chairperson.
271. Power of Chairperson to transfer cases from one Bench to another.
272. Decision to be by majority.
273. Application for settlement of cases.
274. Additional amount of income-tax.
275. Admission of application.
276.  Further inquiry into the case.
277.  Order of settlement.
278. Payment of tax on settlement.
279. Power of Settlement Commission to order provisional attachment to protect revenue.
280. Revival of proceedings before Assessing Officer.

(x)
CLAUSES
281. Powers of Settlement Commission after admission.
282. Inspection and furnishing of reports.
283. Power of Settlement Commission to grant immunity.
284. Abatement of proceedings before Settlement Commission.
285. Credit for tax paid in case of abatement of proceedings.
286. Recovery of sums due under order of settlement.
287. Order of settlement to be conclusive.
288. Bar on subsequent application.
289. Proceedings to be judicial proceedings.
290. Interpretations in this Chapter.
PART H
GENERAL
CHAPTER XVII
291. Agreement with  foreign countries or specified territory.
292. Permanent account number.
293. Tax account number.
294. Mode of acceptance or repayment of certain loans or deposits.
295. Obligation to furnish annual information return.
296. Certain transfers to be void.
297. Provisional attachment to protect revenue in certain cases.
298. Service of notice generally.
299. Authentications of notices and other documents.
300. Notice deemed to be valid in certain circumstances.
301. Service of notice when family is disrupted or unincorporated body is dissolved.
302. Publication of information respecting assessees in certain cases.
303. Appearance by registered valuer in certain matters.
304. Appearance by authorised representative.
305. Rounding off of  tax bases and tax.
306. Indemnity.
307. Power to tender immunity from prosecution.
308. Cognizance of offences.
309. Section 360 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, and the Probation of Offenders
Act, 1958, not to apply.
310. Return of tax bases not to be invalid on certain grounds.
311. Presumption as to material fund.
312. Bar of suits in civil courts.
313. Power to resind.

(xi)
CLAUSES
PART I
 INTERPRETATIONS AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
CHAPTER XVI
INTERPRETATIONS AND CONSTRUCTIONS
314. Interpretations in this Code.
315. Construction.
CHAPTER XX
 MISCELLANEOUS
316. Power to make rules.
317. Laying of rules, schemes and notifications before Parliament.
318. Repeal and savings.
319. Power to remove difficulties.
THE FIRST SCHEDULE.
THE SECOND  SCHEDULE.
THE THIRD SCHEDULE.
THE FOURTH SCHEDULE.
THE FIFTH SCHEDULE.
THE SIXTH SCHEDULE.
THE SEVENTH SCHEDULE.
THE EIGHTH SCHEDULE.
THE NINTH SCHEDULE.
THE TENTH SCHEDULE.
THE ELEVENTH SCHEDULE.
THE TWELFTH SCHEDULE.
THE THIRTEENTH SCHEDULE.
THE FOURTEENTH  SCHEDULE.
THE FIFTEENTH SCHEDULE.
THE SIXTEENTH SCHEDULE.
THE SEVENTEENTH  SCHEDULE.
THE EIGHTEENTH  SCHEDULE.
THE NINETEENTH  SCHEDULE.
THE TWENTIETH SCHEDULE.
THE TWENTY-FIRST SCHEDULE.
THE TWENTY-SECOND SCHEDULE.

THE DIRECT TAXES CODE, 2010
A
BILL
to consolidate and amend the law relating to direct taxes.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-first Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1.( 1) This Act may be called the Direct Taxes Code, 2010.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) Save as otherwise provided in this Code, it shall come into force on the 1st day of
April, 2012.
PART A
INCOME-TAX
CHAPTER  II
BASIS OF CHARGE
2. (1) In accordance with the provisions of this Code, every person shall be liable to
pay income-tax in respect of his total income of the financial year.
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Liability to
pay, and
charge of,
income-tax.
TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Bill No. 110 of 2010
5
10

2
(2) Subject to the provisions of this Code, income-tax, including additional income-tax,
shall be charged in respect of the total income of a financial year of every person.
(3)  Where the income-tax referred to in sub-section (2) is to be charged in respect of
the income of a period other than the financial year, the income-tax for such period shall be
charged accordingly.
(4)  The income-tax referred to in sub-section (2) shall be charged at the rate specified
in the First Schedule in the manner provided therein.
(5) In respect of the income chargeable under sub-section ( 2), income tax shall be
deducted or collected at source or paid in advance, in accordance with the provisions of this
Code.
(6) The chargeability of income-tax on the income of a financial year under the foregoing
provisions shall be determined in accordance with the provisions of this Code as they stand
on the 1st day of April of that financial year.
3. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Code, the total income of any financial year of
a person, who is a resident, shall include all income from whatever source derived which—
(a)  accrues, or is deemed to accrue, to him in India during the year;
(b)  accrues to him outside India during the year;
(c)  is received, or is deemed to be received, by him, or on his behalf, in India
during the year; or
(d)  is received by him, or on his behalf, outside India during the year.
(2)  Subject to the provisions of this Code, the total income of any financial year of a
person, who is a non-resident, shall include all income from whatever source derived which—
(a)  accrues, or is deemed to accrue, to him in India during the year; or
(b)  is received, or is deemed to be received, by him, or on his behalf, in India
during the year.
(3) Any income which accrues to a resident outside India  during the year, or is
received outside India  during the year by, or on behalf of, such resident, shall be included in
the total income of the resident,  whether or not such income has been charged to tax outside
India.
4. (1) An individual shall be resident in India in any financial year, if he is in India—
(a) for a period, or periods, amounting in all to one hundred and eighty-two days
or more in that year; or
(b) for a period, or periods, amounting in all to— 
 (i) sixty days or more in that year; and
 ( ii) three hundred and sixty-five days or more within the four years
immediately preceding that year.
(2) The provisions of clause ( b) of sub-section ( 1) shall not apply in respect of an
individual who is—
(a) a citizen of India and who leaves India in that year as a member of the crew of
an Indian ship; or
(b) a citizen of India and who leaves India in that year for the purposes of
employment outside India.
(3) A company shall be resident in India in any financial year, if—
(a) it is an Indian company; or
Residence in
India.
Scope of total
income.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
(b) its place of effective management, at any time in the year, is in India.
(4)  Every other person shall be resident in India in any financial year, if the place of
control and management of its affairs, at any time in the year, is situated wholly, or partly, in
India.
5.  (1) The income shall be deemed to accrue in India, if it accrues, whether directly or
indirectly, through or from:
(a) any business connection in India;
(b)  any property in India;
(c) any asset or source of income in India; or
(d) the transfer of a capital asset situated in India.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of sub-section ( 1), the
following income shall be deemed to accrue in India, namely:— 
(a) income from employment, if it is for–
 (i) service rendered in India;
(ii) service rendered outside India by a citizen of India and the income is
receivable from the Government; or
(iii) the rest period, or leave period, which precedes, or succeeds, the
period of service rendered in  India and forms part of the service contract of
employment;
(b) any dividend paid by a domestic company outside India;
(c) any  insurance premium including re-insurance premium accrued from or
payable by any  resident or non-resident in respect of insurance  covering any risk in
India;
(d) interest accrued from or payable by any resident or the Government;
(e) interest accrued from or payable by any non-resident, if the interest is in
respect of any debt incurred  and used for the purposes of—
(i) a business carried on by the non-resident in India; or
(ii)  earning any income  from any source in India;
(f) royalty accrued from or payable by any resident or the Government;
(g) royalty accrued from or payable by a non-resident, if the royalty is for the
purposes of— 
(i) a business carried on by the non-resident in India; or
(ii) earning any income from any source in India;
(h) fees for technical services accrued from or payable by  any resident or the
Government;
(i) fees for technical services accrued from or payable by any non-resident, in
respect of services utilised for the purposes of—
(i) a business carried on by the non-resident in India; or
(ii) earning any income from any source in India;
(j)  transportation charges accrued from or payable by  any resident or the
Government;
Income
deemed to
accrue  in
India.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

4
(k) transportation charges accrued from or payable by any non-resident, if the
transportation charges are in respect of the carriage to, or from, a place in India.
  ( 3) For the purposes of clause ( a) of sub-section ( 1), in the case of a business of
which all the operations are not carried out in India, the income of the business deemed to
accrue in India shall be only such part of the income as is reasonably attributable to the
operations carried out in India.
(4) The income deemed to accrue in India under sub-section (1) shall, in the case of a
non-resident, not include the following, namely:— 
(a)  any income accruing through, or from, operations which are confined to the
purchase of goods in India for the purposes of export out of India;
(b)  interest accrued from or payable by a resident, in respect of any debt incurred
and used for the purposes of—
 (i) a business carried on by the resident outside India; or
(ii) earning any income from any source outside India;
(c)  royalty accrued from or payable by a resident for the purposes of—
(i) a business carried on by the resident outside India; or
(ii) earning any income from any source outside India;
(d) royalty consisting of lump sum consideration accrued from or payment made
by a resident for the transfer of any rights (including the granting of a licence) in
respect of computer software supplied by the non-resident manufacturer, along with a
computer or computer-based equipment, under any scheme approved under the Policy
on Computer Software Export, Software Development and Training, 1986 issued by
the Government of India;
(e) fees for technical services accrued from or payable by a resident, in respect of
services utilised for the purposes of—
(i) a business carried on by the resident outside India; or
(ii) earning any income from any source outside India;
(f)  transportation charges for the carriage by aircraft or ship accrued from or
payable by any resident, if the transportation charges are in respect of the carriage
from a place outside India to another place outside India, except where the  airport or
port of origin of departure of such carriage is in India;
(g) income from transfer, outside India, of any share or interest in a foreign
company unless at any time in twelve months preceeding the transfer, the fair market
value of the assets in India, owned, directly or indirectly, by the company,  represent at
least fifty per cent. of the fair market value of all assets owned by the company;
(h) interest accrued from or payable by a non-resident as referred to in sub-
clause (ii) of clause (e) of sub-section (2), if such interest has not been claimed by the
non-resident as a deduction from his tax bases chargeable in India.
 (5)  The provisions of clauses (c) to (k) of sub-section (2) shall be applicable, whether
or not,—
(a) the payment is made in India;
(b) the services are rendered in India;
(c) the non-resident has a residence or place of business or any business
connection in India; or
(d) the income has accrued in India.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

5
(6) Where the income of a non-resident, in respect of transfer, outside India, of any
share or interest in a foreign company, is deemed to accure in India under clause (d) of sub-
section (1), it shall be computed in accordance with the following formula—
A x B
C
Where A = Income from the transfer computed in accordance with
provisions of this Code as if the transfer was effected in
India;
B = fair market value of the assets in India, owned, directly
or indirectly, by the company;
C = fair market value of all assets owned by the company.
6. The following income shall be deemed to be received in the financial year, namely:—
(a) any contribution made by an employer, in the financial year, to the account of
an employee under a pension fund;
(b) any contribution made by an employer, in the financial year, to the account of
an employee in any other fund;
(c) the annual accretion, in the financial year, to the balance at the credit of any
employee in a fund referred to in clause (b) to the extent it exceeds the limit as may be
prescribed.
7.  For the purposes of inclusion in the total income of an assessee—
(a) any dividend declared, distributed or paid by a company within the meaning
of  item (a) or item (b) or item (c) or item (d) or item (e) of clause (81) of section 314 shall
be deemed to be the income of the financial year in which it is so declared, distributed
or paid, as the case may be;
(b) any interim dividend shall be deemed to be the income of the financial year in
which the amount of such dividend is unconditionally made available by the company
to the member who is entitled to it.
8. (1) The total income of any person, being a transferor, shall include the following,
namely:—
(a) any income accruing to any other person, by virtue of a transfer, whether
revocable or not, without transfer of the asset from which the income accrues; or
(b) any income accruing to any other person, by virtue of a revocable transfer of
an asset.
(2) The provisions of clause (b) of sub-section (1) shall not apply in a case where—
(a) any income accrues from an asset transferred to any trust, if the transfer is
not revocable during the life time of the beneficiary of the trust; or
(b) any income accrues from an asset transferred to any other person, not being
a trust, if the transfer is not revocable during the lifetime of such other person.
(3) In this section,—
(a) a transfer shall be deemed to be revocable if—
(i) it contains any provision for the re-transfer, directly or indirectly, of the
whole or any part of the income or assets to the transferor; or
(ii) it, in any way, gives the transferor a right to re-assume power, directly
or indirectly, over the whole or any part of the income or assets;
(b) a transfer shall include any settlement, trust, covenant, agreement or
arrangement.
Income
deemed to be
received in the
financial year.
Dividend
income.
Total income
to include
income of any
other person.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

6
9. (1) The total income of any individual shall include—
(a) all income which accrues, directly or indirectly,—
(i) to the spouse, by way of salary, commission, fees or any other form of
remuneration, whether in cash or in kind, from a concern in which the individual
has a substantial interest;
(ii) from assets transferred, directly or indirectly, to the spouse by the
individual, otherwise than for adequate consideration, or in connection with an
agreement to live apart;
(iii) from assets transferred, directly or indirectly, to the son’s wife by the
individual, otherwise than for adequate consideration; or
(iv) from assets transferred, directly or indirectly, to any other person by
the individual otherwise than for adequate consideration, to the extent to which
the income from such assets is for the immediate or deferred benefit of the
spouse or son’s wife;
(b) all income which accrues to a minor child (other than a minor child being a
person with disability or person with severe disability) of the individual, other than
income which accrues to the child on account of any—
(i) manual work done by the child; or
(ii) activity involving application of the skill, talent or specialised knowledge
and experience of the child;
(c) all income derived from any converted property or part thereof;
(d) all income derived from any converted property which is received by the
spouse or minor child upon partition of the Hindu undivided family of which the
individual is a member.
  (2)  The provisions of sub-clause (i) of clause (a) of sub-section (1) shall not apply in
relation to any income accruing to the spouse where the spouse possesses technical or
professional qualifications and the income is solely attributable to the application of the
technical or professional knowledge and experience of the spouse.
(3)  The income referred to in sub-clause ( i) of clause ( a) of sub-section ( 1) shall,
notwithstanding  anything contained therein, be included in the total income of the spouse
whose total income (excluding the income referred to in that sub-clause) is higher.
(4)  The Board may prescribe the method for determining the income referred to in sub-
clause (ii) and sub-clause (iii) of clause (a) of sub-section (1).
(5)  The income referred to in clause (b) of sub-section (1) shall be included in the total
income of—
(a) the parent who is the guardian of the minor child; or
(b) the parent whose total income (excluding the income referred to in that
clause) is higher, if both the    parents are guardians of the child.
(6) Where any income referred to in clause (b) of sub-section (1) is once included in
the total income of a parent, any such income arising in the succeeding year shall not be
included in the total income of the other parent, unless the Assessing Officer considers it
necessary to do so after giving an opportunity of being heard to the other parent.
(7) In this section, “property” includes any interest in property whether movable or
immovable, the sale proceeds of such property, in whichever form and where the property, is
converted into any other form of property by any method, such other property.
Income of
individual to
include income
of spouse, minor
child and others.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

7
10. Subject to the provisions of this Code, the total income of a financial year of a
person shall not include  the income enumerated in the Sixth Schedule.
11.  The persons, entity or funds enumerated in the Seventh Schedule shall not be
liable to income-tax under this Code for any financial year, subject to the fulfillment of
conditions specified in the said Schedule.
CHAPTER III
C
OMPOSITION OF TOTAL INCOME
I.— GENERAL
12. (1) The total income of a person shall be computed in accordance with the provisions
of this Chapter.
(2)  Unless otherwise provided in this Code, reference to any accrual, receipt,
expenditure, withdrawal, asset or liability shall be  construed to be  in relation to   the financial
year in respect of which,  and  the person in respect of whom, the income is computed.
 13.For the purposes of computation of total income of any person for any financial
year, income from all sources shall be classified as follows:
A.— Income from ordinary sources.
B.— Income from special sources.
14.   The income from any source, other than a special source, shall be computed under
the class “income from ordinary sources” and such income shall be  classified under the
following heads of income, namely:—
A.— Income from employment.
B.— Income from house property.
C.— Income from business.
D.— Capital gains.
E.— Income from residuary sources.
 15. (1) Every income listed in column (3) of the Table in Part III of the First Schedule
shall be the income from a special source of the person specified in column (2) of the said
Table.
(2) The income from any special source shall be computed under the class “income
from special sources” in accordance with the provisions of the Ninth Schedule.
(3)Notwithstanding anything in sub-section (1), the income referred to therein shall
not be considered as income from a special source, if such income is attributable to the
permanent establishment of a non-resident in India.
16. (1) The income of the husband and wife, governed by the communiao dos bens,
from ordinary sources under each head of income (other than the head “Income from
employment”) and from special sources shall be apportioned equally between the spouses.
 (2) The income so apportioned under sub-section (1) shall be included separately in
the total income of the spouses.
 (3) The income under the head “Income from employment” shall be included in the
total income of the spouse who has actually earned it.
(4) In this section, communiao dos bens refers to the system of community of property
under the Portuguese Civil Code of 1860 as in force in the State of Goa and in the Union
territories of Dadra and Nagar Haveli and Daman and Diu.
Income not
included in the
total income.
Persons,
entity or funds
not liable to
income-tax.
Computation
of total
income.
Classification
of sources of
income.
Computation
of income
from
ordinary
sources.
Computation
of income
from special
sources.
Apportionment
of income
between
spouses
governed by
Portuguese
Civil Code.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

8
17. Subject to the provisions of this Code,—
 (i) any income which is included in the total income of a person for any financial
year shall not be so included again in the total income of such person for the same or
any other financial year.
 (ii) any income which is includible in the total income of any person shall not be
included in the total income of any other person,
except where for the purposes of protecting the interests of revenue, it is necessary to do so.
18. (1) In computing the total income of a person for any financial year, the following
shall not be allowed as a deduction, namely:—
(a) any expenditure, attributable to income which is not included in the total
income under the Sixth Schedule, determined in accordance with such method as may
be prescribed;
(b) any expenditure attributable to any income from special sources;
(c) any expenditure which has been allowed as a deduction in any other financial
year;
(d) any expenditure incurred for an activity which is an offence or which is not
permissible by law;
(e) any provision made for any liability, if it remains unascertained by the end of
the financial year; and
(f) any unexplained expenditure referred to in clause ( q) of sub-section ( 2) of
section 58.
(2)  Any amount allowed as a deduction under any provision of this Code shall not be
allowed as a deduction under any other provision of this Code.
(3)  The provisions of this section shall apply notwithstanding anything in any other
provisions of this Chapter.
19. (1) Any amount on which tax is deductible at source under Chapter XIII during the
financial year shall not be allowed as a deduction in computing the total income if,—
 (a) the tax has not been deducted during the financial year; or
(b) the tax, after such deduction, has not been paid on or before the due date
specified in sub-section (1) of section 144.
 (2) A deduction shall be allowed  in respect of the amount referred to in sub-section (1)
in any subsequent financial year, if—
(a) tax has been deducted during the financial year, but paid in such subsequent
year after the due date specified in sub-section (1) of section 144; or
(b) tax has been deducted and paid in such subsequent financial year.
II. H
EADS OF INCOME
A. - Income from employment
20. The income of a person from employment shall be computed under the head
“Income from employment”.
21. The income computed under the head “Income from employment” shall be the
gross salary as reduced by the aggregate amount of the deductions referred to in section 23.
Avoidance of
double taxation.
Expenditure not
to be allowed as
deduction.
Amount not
deductible where
tax is not
deducted at
source.
Income from
employment.
Computation of
income from
employment.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

9
22. The gross salary shall be the amount of salary due, paid, or allowed, whichever is
earlier, to a person in the financial year by or on behalf of his employer or former employer.
23. (1) The deductions from the gross salary for computation of income from
employment, to the extent included in the gross salary, shall be the following, namely:— 
(a) any sum paid by the employee on account of a tax on employment within the
meaning of clause (2) of article 276 of the Constitution;
(b) any allowance or benefit granted by an employer for journey by an employee
between his residence and office or any other place of work, to such extent as may be
prescribed;
(c) any  allowance or benefit granted by an employer to an employee—
(i) to meet expenses wholly, necessarily and exclusively in the performance
of the duties of an office or employment of profit, as may be prescribed, to the
extent  such expenses are actually incurred for that purpose;
(ii) to meet personal expenses, considering the place of posting or nature
of duties or place of residence, subject to such conditions and limits as may be
prescribed;
(d)  any amount of contribution made by an employer, in the financial year, to the
account of an employee under an approved pension fund  notified by the Central
Government, to the extent it does not exceed ten per cent. of  the salary of the employee;
(e) any amount of contribution made by an employer, in the financial year, to the
account of an employee in an approved superannuation fund;
(f)  any amount of contribution by an employer, in the financial year, to an
account of an employee in an approved provident  fund, to the extent it does not
exceed  twelve per cent. of the salary of the employee;
(g)  any amount of interest credited, in the financial year, on the balance to the
credit of an employee in an approved fund to the extent it does not exceed the amount
of interest payable at the rate notified by the Central Government;
(h)  any allowance provided by an employer to meet the expenditure actually
incurred on payment of rent in respect of residential accommodation occupied by the
employee, to such extent as may be prescribed.
(2)  For the purposes of clauses (d), (f) and (h) of sub-section (1), salary means basic
salary and includes dearness allowance, if the terms of employment so provide.
B.—Income from house property
24. (1) The income from letting of any house property owned by any person shall be
computed under the head “Income from house property”.
(2) The income from any house property shall be computed under this head
notwithstanding that the letting, if any, of the property is in the nature of trade, commerce or
business.
(3) The income from any house property owned by two or more persons having
definite and ascertainable shares shall be computed separately for each such person in
respect of his share.
(4) In a case where the shares of the owners of the house property referred to in sub-
section (3) are not definite and ascertainable, such persons shall be assessed as an association
of persons in respect of such property.
(5) The provisions of this section shall not apply,-
(a) to the house property, or any portion of the house  property, which—
Scope of gross
salary.
Deductions
from gross
salary.
Income from
house
property.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

10
(i) is used by the person as a hospital, hotel, convention centre or cold
storage; and
(ii) forms part of Special Economic Zone,
the income from which is computed under the head “income from business”;
(b) to a house  property which is not ready for use during the financial year.
25. The income from house property shall be the gross rent as reduced by the aggregate
amount of the deductions referred to in section 27.
26.  The gross rent in respect of a house property or any part of the property shall be
the amount of rent received or receivable, directly or indirectly, for the financial year or part
thereof, for which such property is let out.
27. (1) The deductions for the purposes of computation of income from house property
shall be the following, namely:— 
(a) the amount of taxes levied by a local authority in respect of such property, to
the extent the amount is actually  paid by him during the financial year;
(b) a sum equal to twenty per cent. of the gross rent determined under section 26,
towards repair and maintenance of such property;
(c) the amount of any interest,—
(i) on  loan taken for the purposes of  acquisition, construction, repair or
renovation of the property; or
(ii) on  loan taken for the purpose of repayment of the  loan referred to in
sub-clause (i);
(2)The interest referred to in clause (c) of sub-section (1) which pertains to the period
prior to the financial year in which the house property has been acquired or constructed shall
be allowed as deduction in five equal instalments beginning from such financial year.
(3)The interest deductible under sub-section (2) shall be reduced by any part thereof
which has been allowed as deduction under any other provision of this Code.
28. The amount of rent received in advance shall be included in the gross rent of the
financial year to which the rent relates.
29. (1) The amount of rent received in arrears shall be deemed to be the income from
house property of the financial year in which such rent is received.
(2) The arrears of rent referred to in sub-section ( 1) shall be included in the total
income of the person under the head income from house property, whether the person is the
owner of the property in that year or not.
(3) A sum equal to twenty per cent. of the arrears of rent referred to in sub-section (1)
shall be allowed as deduction towards repair and maintenance of the property.
C.—Income from business
30. (1) The income from any business carried on by the assessee at any time during a
financial year shall be computed under the head “Income from business”.
(2) The income of distinct and separate business referred to in section 31 shall be
computed separately for the purposes of sub-section ( 1).
(3) Any income from a business after its discontinuance shall be deemed to be the
income of the recipient in the year of receipt and shall, accordingly, be computed under the
head “Income from business”.
Computation  of
income from
house property.
Scope of gross
rent.
Deductions from
gross rent.
Provision for
advance rent
received.
Provision for
arrears of rent
received.
Income from
business.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

11
31. (1) A business shall be distinct and separate from another business if there is no
interlacing or inter-dependence between  the  businesses.
(2) A business shall be deemed to be distinct and separate from another business, if—
(a) the unit of the business is processing, producing, manufacturing or trading
the same goods as in the other business and such unit is located physically apart from
the other unit;
(b) the unit of the business is processing, producing or manufacturing the same
goods as in the other business and utilises raw material or manufacturing process,
which is different from the raw material or the manufacturing process of the other unit;
 (c) separate books of account are maintained or capable of being maintained, for
the business; or
(d) it is a business in respect of which profits are determined under sub-section
(2) of section 32.
(3) A speculative business shall be deemed to be distinct and separate from any other
business including other speculative business.
32. (1) The income computed under the head “Income from business” shall be the
profits from the business.
(2) The profits from the business of the nature specified in column (2) of the Table
given below shall be computed in accordance with the provisions contained in the Schedule
specified in the corresponding entry in column (3) of the said Table.
T
ABLE
Sl. Nature of Business Schedule
No.
(1) (2) (3)
1. Business of Insurance Eight Schedule
2. Business of operating a qualifying ship Tenth Schedule
3. Business of mineral oil or natural gas Eleventh  Schedule
4. Business of developing of a Special Economic Zone Twelfth  Schedule
Business specified in Paragraph 1 of the Twelfth Schedule
5. Business specified in Paragraph 1 of the Thirteenth Schedule Thirteenth  Schedule
6 Business listed in column ( 2) of the Table in the Fourteenth Schedule
Fourteenth Schedule where income is determined on
presumptive basis
 (3) The profits from any business not referred to in sub-section (2) shall be the gross
earnings from the business as reduced by the amount of business expenditure incurred by
the assessee.
33. (1) The gross earnings referred to in sub-section ( 3) of section 32 shall be the
aggregate of the following, namely:— 
(i) the amount of any accrual or receipt from, or in connection with, the business;
(ii) the value of any benefit or perquisite, whether convertible into money or not,
accrued or received from, or in connection with, the business;
(iii) the value of the inventory of the business, as on the close of the financial
year; and
(iv) any amount received from a business after its discontinuance.
Business when
teated distinct
and separate.
Computation
of income
from business.
Gross earnings.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

12
(2) The accruals or receipts referred to in sub-section (1) shall, without prejudice to the
generality of the provisions of that sub-section, include the following, namely:— 
(i) the amount of any compensation or other payment, accrued or received, for—
(a) termination or modification of terms and conditions relating to
management of business, any business agreement or any agency; or
(b) vesting of the management of any property or business in another
person or the Government;
(ii) any consideration, accrued or received under a non-capital agreement;
(iii) any amount or value of any benefit, whether convertible into money or not,
accrued to, or received by a person, being a trade, professional or similar association,
in respect of specific services performed for its members;
(iv) any consideration on sale of a licence, not being business capital assets,
obtained in connection with the business;
(v) any consideration on transfer of a right or benefit (by whatever name called)
accrued or received under any scheme framed by the Government, local authority or a
corporation established under any law for the time being in force;
(vi) the amount of cash assistance, subsidy or grant (by whatever name called),
received from any person or the Government for, or in connection with, the business
other than to meet any portion of the cost of any business capital asset;
(vii) the amount of any remission, drawback or refund of any tax, duty or cess
(not being a tax under this Code), received or receivable;
(viii) the amount of remuneration (including salary, bonus and commission) or
any interest accrued to, or received by, a participant of a unincorporated body from
such body;
(ix)  any sum received under a keyman insurance policy including the sum
allocated by way of bonus on such policy;
(x) the amount of profit on transfer, demolitation, destroys or discardment of any
business capital asset (other than a business capital asset used for scientific research
and development) computed in accordance with the provisions of section 42;
(xi) any consideration accrued or received on transfer of carbon credits;
(xii) the amount of any benefit accrued to, or received by, the person, or as the
case may be, the successor in business, if—
(a) it is by way of remission or cessation of any trading liability or statutory
liability or it is in respect of any loss or expenditure, including  a unilateral act by
way of writing off such liability in his accounts; and
(b) the trading liability or statutory liability or loss or expenditure has been
allowed as deduction in any financial year;.
(xiii) the amount of  remission or cessation of any liability by way of loan,
deposit, advance or credit;
 (xiv) the amount recovered from a trade debtor in respect of a bad debt or part of
debt which has been allowed as deduction in any financial year under clause ( c) or
clause (d) or clause (e) of sub-section (3) of section 35;
(xv) the amount withdrawn from any special reserve created and maintained
under any provision of this Code or the Income-tax Act, 1961, as its stood before the
commencement of this Code  for which deduction has been allowed, if the amount is
not utilised for the purpose and within the period specified therein;
43 0f 1961.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

13
(xvi) the amount accrued to, or received by, the person from his employees as
their contribution to any fund for their welfare;
(xvii) the amount accrued or received on sale of any business capital asset used
for scientific research and development;
(xviii) any consideration accrued or received in respect of transfer of any  capital
asset self-generated in the course of the business;
(xix) any amount accrued or received on account of the cessation, termination or
forfeiture in respect of agreement entered in the course of the business;
(xx) any amount accrued or received, whether as an advance, security deposit or
otherwise, from the long term leasing, or transfer of—
(a) whole or part of any business asset; or
(b) any interest in a  business asset;
(xxi) any amount  received as reimbursement of any expenditure incurred;
(xxii) any interest accrued to, or received by, a person being a  financial institution.
(xxiii) any payment or aggregate of payments made to a person in a day, in
respect of an expenditure incurred during the financial year or in respect of a liability
incurred and allowed as a deduction in any preceding financial year,—
(a) which has been made otherwise than by an account payee cheque
drawn on a bank or by an account payee bank draft;
(b) which exceeds—
(i) a xum of thirty fire thousand rupees if the payment is made to
transporter for carriage of goods by road; or
(ii) a sum of twenty thousand rupees in any other case; and
(c) which has not been made in such cases and in such circumstances as
may be prescribed.
(xxiv) any amount standing to the credit of the Fund referred to in section 82,
if—
(a) income-tax has not been paid on such amount in any financial year
preceding the relevant financial year; and
(b) the amount is shared during the relevant financial year, either wholly or
in part, with a recognised stock exchange or recognised commodity exchange.
(3) The gross earnings from business shall not include the following, namely:—
(a) any dividend;
(b) any interest other than interest accrued to, or received by, a person being a
financial institution;
(c) any income from letting of  house property which is included under the head
income from hosues propery;
(d) any income from the transfer of an investment assets.
34.  (1) The amount of business expenditure referred to in  sub-section (3) of section
32 shall be the aggregate of the following amounts, namely:—
(a) the operating expenditure referred to in section 35, incurred by the person for
the purposes of the business carried on during the financial year;
(b) finance charges referred to in section 36, incurred by the person for the
purposes of the business carried on during the financial year;
(c) capital allowances referred to in section 37, in respect of the business carried
on by the person during the financial year.
Determination
of business
expenditure.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

14
(2)  The provisions for deduction of capital allowances referred to in sub-section (1)
shall apply, whether or not the person has claimed the deduction in computing the total
income.
(3)  The Assessing Officer may restrict the  amount of deduction under this section to
such amount as he considers appropriate having regard to the use of a business asset if such
asset is not exclusively used for the purposes of the business.
35. (1) The amount of operating expenditure referred to in clause (a) of sub-section (1)
of section 34 shall be the aggregate of—
(a) the amount of expenditure specified in sub-section (2), if—
(i) the expenditure is laid out or expended, wholly and exclusively, for the
purposes of the business; and
(ii) it fulfills other conditions, if any, specified therein; and
(b) the amount of deductions specified in sub-section (3) subject to the fulfillment
of the conditions, if any, specified therein.
(2) The amount of expenditure referred to in clause (a) of sub-section (1) shall be the
amount of expenditure on, or on account of,—
(i) purchase of raw material, stores, spares and consumables, or stock-in-trade;
(ii) rent paid for any premises if it is occupied and used by the person;
(iii) current repairs to buildings if it is occupied and used by the person;
(iv) land revenue, local rates or municipal taxes in respect of premises occupied
and used by the person is actually paid;
(v) current repair of machinery, plant or furniture used by the person;
(vi) current maintenance or repairs of computer software or hardware;
(vii) salary or wages of employees;
(viii) remuneration to any working participant which is in accordance with the
agreement of the unincorporated body and relates to the period falling after the date of
such agreement limited to the extent as may be preseribed;
(ix) any premium paid to effect, or to keep in force, an insurance in respect of,—
(a) any premise occupied and used by the person;
(b) any machinery, plant or furniture used by the person;
(c) stocks or stores belonging to the person;
(d) the health of any employee of the person; and
(e) any other asset owned and used by the person;
(x) any premium paid by the person, being a federal milk co-operative society, to
effect, or to keep in force, an insurance on the life of the cattle owned by a member of
a co-operative society, being a primary society engaged in supplying milk, raised by its
members to such federal milk co-operative society.
(xi) welfare of workmen and staff;
(xii) power and fuel;
(
xiii) freight, clearing and forwarding charge;
Determination
of operating
expenditure.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

15
(xiv) selling expense in the nature of commission, brokerage, discount, or warranty
charge;
(xv) sales promotion including advertisement and publicity;
(xvi) training of employees;
(xvii) conference;
(xviii) use of hotel or boarding and lodging facilities;
(xix) conveyance, tour or travel;
(xx) running or maintenance of motor car or aircraft;
(xxi) postage and telecommunications;
(xxii) audit and such other professional fees;
(xxiii) legal services;
(xxiv) entertainment and provision of hospitality;
(xxv) maintenance of guest-house;
(xxvi) subscription, including entrance fee, to a club or a trade association or the
use of their facilities;
(xxvii) scientific research and development related to the business;
(xxviii) salary to an employee engaged in, or  the purchase of material used in,
scientific research and development, within a period of three years immediately
preceding the commencement of the business;
(xxix) contribution by the person, being an employer, to an approved fund
subject to such limits and conditions, as may be prescribed and to the extent the
amount is actually paid;
(xxx) contribution to any fund, referred to in clause ( xvi) of sub-section (2) of
section 33, to the extent,—
(a) the amount has been received from his employees as their contribution
to the fund; and
(b) it is actually paid;
(xxxi) any head office expenditure by a non-resident, as is attributable to his
business in India, not exceeding an amount equal to one-half per cent. of the total
sales, turnover or gross receipts of business in India;
(xxxii) cost of acquisition of the asset as in the case of the predecessor and cost
of any improvement made thereto and expenditure incurred wholly and exclusively in
connection with the transfer of the asset, by the predecessor, if —
(a) the person is the successor in the business reorganisation;
(b) the asset becomes the property of the person under a scheme of
business reorganisation; and
(c) the asset is sold by the person as a business trading asset;
(xxxiii) cost of acquisition of the asset as in the case of the transferor or the
donor, and cost of any improvement made thereto and expenditure incurred wholly
and exclusively in connection with the transfer of the asset (including the payment of
gift tax, if any), by the transferor or the donor, if —
(a) the person is the transferee or the donee;
(b) the asset becomes the property of the person on the total or partial
partition of a Hindu undivided family or under a gift or will or an irrevocable
trust; and
(c) the asset is sold by the person as a business trading asset;
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

16
(xxxiv) protecting or safeguarding the goodwill of person, which has necessarily
to be preserved for the purpose of his business;
 (xxxv) tax (not being a tax under this Code), duty, cess, royalty or fee, by whatever
name called, under any law for the time being in force, if the amount is actually paid;
(xxxvi) bonus or commission to employees for services rendered if—
(a) the amount would not have been payable to employees as profits or
dividends had it not been paid as bonus or commission; and
(b) the amount is actually paid;
(xxxvii) encashment of leave to the credit of employees, to the extent the amount
is actually paid;
(xxxviii) gratuity to employees on their retirement or on termination of their
employment, to the extent the amount is actually paid;
(xxxix) the purposes of a body corporate constituted or established under a
Central, State or Provincial Act, if—
(a) such purposes are authorised by the said Act;
(b) such body corporate is notified by the Central Government for the
purposes of this clause;
 (xl) the amount paid by a public financial institution by way of contribution to
a credit guarantee fund trust for small industries which is notified by the Central
Government for the purposes of this clause;
(xli) the actual cost of the licence referred to in clause (iv) of sub-section (2) of
section 33, in the year in which the consideration on account of sale forms part of
gross earnings;
(xlii) the actual cost of the right or benefit referred to in clause (v) of sub-section
(2) of section 33, in the year in which the consideration transfer forms part of gross
earnings;
(xliii) the repayment of any advance or security deposit in respect of the long-
term leasing referred to in clause (xx) of sub-section (2) of section 33, in the year in
which such repayment is made;
(xliv) any other operating expenditure not covered under clause ( i) to clause
(xliii).
(3) The amount of deductions referred to in clause (b) of sub-section (1) shall be the
following, namely:—
(a) the value of inventory of the business, as at the beginning of the financial
year;
(b) loss of inventory, or money, on account of theft, robbery, fraud or
embezzlement, occurring in the course of the business, if the inventory, or the money,
is written off in the books of account;
(c) any amount credited to the provision for bad and doubtful debts account,
not exceeding one per cent of the aggregate average advances computed in the
prescribed manner if,—
(i) the person is a financial institution, or a non-banking finance company
as may be notified;
(
ii) the amount is charged to the profit and loss account for the financial
year in accordance with the prudential norms of the Reserve Bank of India in this
regard; and
(iii) the amount of trade debt or part thereof written off as irrecoverable in
the books of the person is debited to the provision for bad and doubtful debts
account;
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

17
(d) the debit balance, if any, on the last day of the financial year, in the provision
for bad and doubtful debts account made under clause ( c), if the balance has been
transferred to the profit and loss account of the financial year;
(e) trade debt or part thereof, if,—
(i) the person is other than a person referred to in sub-clause ( i) of
clause (c); and
(ii) the amount is written off as irrecoverable in the books of the person;
(f) payment during the financial year in discharge of any remitted or ceased
liability which has been included in the gross earnings of any preceding financial year
under clause (xii) or clause (xiii) of sub-section (2) of section 33.
(4) Notwithstanding anything in sub-section ( 2) or sub-section ( 3) the amount of
operating expenditure shall not include the amount of expenditure, being in the nature of, or
on account of, —
(a) personal expenses of the person;
(b) capital expenditure including expenditure in respect of which capital allowance
is allowable under section 37;
(c) finance charges;
(d) any unascertained liability of the person;
(e) remuneration payable to any participant other than a working participant;
(f) any expenditure incurred by a person on advertisement in any souvenir,
brochure, tract, pamphlet or the like published by a political party;
(g) any amount of contribution by an employer during the finanical year to an
approved superannuation fund on account of an employee to the extent it exceeds one
lak rupees;
(h) any tax, interest or penalty payable under this Code or the Income-tax Act,
1961 or the Welath Tax Act, 1957 as they stood before the commencement of this Code;
(i) any amount paid which is eligible for relief of tax under section 207; and
(j) any dividend declared or distributed or paid.
(5) Any amount of expenditure or deduction referred to in sub-section ( 1) or sub-
section (2) or under section 36 or under section 37, if it is in excess of the amount or in breach
of the condition specified therein, shall not be allowed as deduction under clause ( xliv) of
sub-section (2) on the ground that it is laid out or expended, wholly and exclusively, for the
purposes of business.
(6) The deduction in respect of the amount referred to in clauses (iv), (xxx) and clauses
(xxxv
) to ( xxxviii) of sub-section ( 2) shall, notwithstanding anything contained in sub-
section (1), be allowed in the financial year in which the liability has arisen, if it is paid in the
financial year or by the due date of filing return of tax bases of that financial year.
(7) If any deduction is not allowed on account of the provisions of sub-section ( 6),
it shall be allowed in the financial year in which the amount is actually paid.
36. (1) The amount of finance charges referred to in clause ( b) of sub-section (1) of
section 34 shall be—
(a) the amount of interest paid on any capital borrowed or debt incurred;
(b) the amount of interest paid to trade creditors;
(c) the amount of interest paid to any participant, which is in accordance with the
agreement of formation of unincorporated body and relates to the period falling after
the date of such agreement, limited to the extent as may be prescribed;
(d) the amount of any incidental financial charges;
43 of 1961.
27 of 1957.
Determination
of finance
charges.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

18
(e) the proportionate amount of discount or premium payable on any bond or
debenture issued by the person, calculated in the manner as may be prescribed.
(2) The amount of finance charges referred to in sub-section (1) shall not include—
(a) any amount paid in respect of capital borrowed or debt incurred for acquisition
of a capital asset (whether capitalised in the books of account or not) for any period—
(i) in the case of a new business, prior to the date of commencement of
such business; and
(ii) in any other case, prior to the date on which such asset was first put to
use;
(b) any amount of incidental financial charges for issue of convertible debentures
or bonds or share capital; and
(c) any amount of interest referred to in section 23 of Micro, Small and Medium
Enterprises Development Act, 2006.
(3) The amount of interest on any capital borrowed or debt incurred, which is payable
to any financial institution, shall be allowed as a deduction, notwithstanding anyt hing in
sub-section ( 1), in the financial year in which the amount is actually paid or in the
financial year in which the liability has accrued, whichever is later.
(4) Any interest referred to in sub-section (3) which has been converted into a loan or
borrowing shall not be deemed to have been actually paid for the purposes of that sub-
section.
(5) In this section, “capital borrowed” shall include recurring subscriptions received
periodically from shareholders, or subscribers, in a mutual benefit finance company, which
fulfils such conditions as may be prescribed.
 37. (1) The amount of capital allowances referred to in clause (c) of sub-section (1) of
section 34 shall be the aggregate of the amount in respect of,—
(a) depreciation of business capital assets;
(b) initial depreciation of business capital assets;
(c) terminal allowance;
(d) scientific research and development allowance;
(e) deferred revenue expenditure allowance.
(f) deduction of an amount in accordance with such deposit scheme in respect of
the person carrying on business of growing and manufacturing tea or coffee or rubber
in India, as may be prescribed;
(2) The depreciation, initial depreciation or terminal allowance, referred to in sub-
section (1), shall be allowed in respect of any business capital asset if the asset is,—
(a) owned, wholly or partly, by the person; and
(b) used for the purposes of the business of the person.
(3) The condition referred to in clause (a) of sub-section (2) shall not apply in the case
of a business capital asset being a capital expenditure on any building which is held by the
person under a lease or other right of occupancy.
(4) A business capital asset shall be deemed to be owned by the person if he is a lessee
in terms of a financial lease.
(5) The amount of deferred revenue expenditure allowance referred to in clause (e) of
sub-section (1) shall be such amount as computed in accordance with the Twenty-second
Schedule.
38. (1) The amount of depreciation of business capital assets referred to in section 37
shall be the aggregate of the following, namely:—
(a) such percentage of the adjusted value of any block of assets as specified in the
Fifteenth Schedule, in respect of all the business capital assets forming part of the
relevant block of assets specified therein; and
27 of 2006.
Determination
of capital
allowances.
Determination
of depreciation.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50

19
(b) “nil”, in respect of any other business capital asset not forming part of any
block of assets specified in the Fifteenth Schedule.
(2) The depreciation allowance on assets referred to in section 37 shall, notwithstanding
the fact that all business capital assets in any block of assets have ceased to exist by reason
of being demolished, destroyed, discarded or transferred, be allowed to the person in respect
of the block of assets, if the adjusted value of the block of assets is greater than zero.
(3) The deduction under this section in respect of an asset shall be restricted to fifty
per cent. of the sum referred to in sub-section (1) if —
(a) the asset is acquired by the person during the financial year; and
(b) is used for the purposes of business for a period of less than one hundred
and eighty days in the relevant financial year.
(4) The depreciation in respect of any business capital asset, notwithstanding anything
contained in any other provision of this Code, shall not be allowed if,—
(a) the asset does not form part of any block of assets specified in the Fifteenth
Schedule; or
(b) the expenditure incurred for acquiring the asset has been allowed as a
deduction under any provision of this Code.
39. (1) A person shall be allowed, in addition to depreciation, an initial depreciation of
business capital assets if,—
(a) the person is engaged in the business of manufacture or production of any
article or thing;
(b) the asset is a new asset forming part of the class of assets “Machinery and
Plant” specified in the Fifteenth Schedule;
(c) the asset was not used either within or outside India by any other person
before its installation by the person;
 ( d) the asset is not installed in any office premises or any residential
accommodation, including accommodation in the nature of a guest-house;
(e) the asset is not in the nature of any office appliances; and
(f) the whole of the actual cost of the asset is not allowed as a deduction (whether
by way of depreciation or otherwise) in computing the income under the head “Income
from business” of any financial year.
(2) The initial depreciation referred to in sub-section (1),—
(a) shall be an amount equal to twenty per cent. of the actual cost of the asset;
and
(b) shall be allowed in the financial year in which the asset is used for the first
time for the purposes of the business of the person.
(3) The deduction under this section in respect of such asset shall be restricted to fifty
per cent. of the sum referred to in sub-section ( 2), if the asset is used for the purposes of
business for a period of less than one hundred and eighty days in the relevant financial year.
40. (1) A person shall be allowed a terminal allowance in respect of a block of assets,
if,—
(a) the block of assets has ceased to exist by reason of being demolished,
destroyed, discarded or transferred during the financial year; and
(b) the percentage specified in the Fifteenth Schedule for computing
depreciation in respect of the block of assets is zero.
Determination
of initial
depreciation.
Deduction for
terminal
allowance.
5
15
10
20
25
30
35
40

20
(2) The terminal allowance referred to in sub-section (1) shall be computed in accordance
with the formula—
A + B - C
Where
A = the written down value of the block of asset at the beginning of the financial
year;
B = the actual cost of any asset falling within that block, acquired during the
financial year; and
C = the amount accrued or received in respect of the assets which are
demolished, destroyed, discarded or transferred during the financial year together
with the value of the carcass or the scrap, if any.
(3) The terminal allowance referred to in sub-section (1) shall be treated as “nil”, if the
net result of the computation, thereunder, is negative.
41. (1) A company shall be allowed a deduction equal to two hundred per cent. of the
expenditure (not being expenditure in the nature of cost of any land or building) incurred
on,—
(a) creating and maintaining an in-house facility for scientific research and
development; and
(b) carrying out scientific research and development in the in-house facility.
(2) The deduction under sub-section (1) shall be allowed if,—
(a) the company creates and maintains an in-house facility for carrying out
scientific research and development;
(b) the research facility is approved by the Central Government on the basis of
recommendation of the prescribed authority; and
(c) the company enters into an agreement with the prescribed authority for
cooperation in the research and development facility and for audit of the accounts
maintained for such facility.
(3) The approval granted to a predecessor shall be deemed to have been granted to
the successor if the approval is transferred to the successor as a result of a business
reorganisation.
(4) The deduction under this section shall not be allowed to a company in respect of
the expenditure referred to in sub-section (1), if the expenditure is incurred in the course of
its business in the nature of scientific research and development.
(5) The Board may for the purposes of this section, prescribe the nature of business,
conditions and manner as may be considered necessary for grant of approval.
42. (1) The amount of profit, where a business capital asset, which forms part of a
block of assets specified in the Fifteenth Schedule, is transferred discarded, destroyed or
destructed shall be computed in accordancewith the formula-
A-(B+C)
Where A = the amount accrued or received in respect of such asset,
which is transferred, discarded, destroyed or
destructed during the financial year together with the
amount of scrap value, if any;
B = the amount of written down value of such block of
assets at the beginning of the financial year;
Deduction for
scientific
research and
development
al
lowance.
Computation
of proft on
transfer of a
business
capital asset.
5
15
10
20
25
30
35
40
45

21
C = the actual cost of any asset falling within that block of
assets, acquired during the financial year;
(2) The profit referred to in sub-section (1) shall be treated as ‘nil’, if the net
result of the computation, thereunder, is negative.
(3) The amount of profit, where a business capital asset other than that referred
to in sub-section (1) is transferred, discarded, destroyed or destructed, shall be
computed in accordance with the formula-
A-B
Where A = Amount accrued or received in respect of the asset
which is transferred, discarded, destroyed or destructed
during the financial year together with the amount of
scrap value, if any;
B = The actual cost of the asset.
43. (1) The deduction for any capital allowance referred to in section 37 shall, in a case
where business reorganisation has taken place during the financial year, be allowed in
accordance with the provisions of this section.
(2) The amount of deduction allowable to the predecessor shall be determined in
accordance with the formula-
 A x 
B
C
Where
A = the amount of deduction allowable as if the business
reorganisation had not taken place;
B = the number of days comprised in the period beginning
with the first day of the financial year and ending on the
day immediately preceding the date of business
reorganisation;
C =  the total number of days in the financial year in which
the business reorganisation has taken place.
(3) The amount of deduction to the successor shall be determined in accordance
with the formula —
 A x B
C
Where
 A = the amount of deduction allowable as if the business
reorganisation had not taken place;
B= the number of days comprised in the period beginning
with the date of business reorganisation and ending on
the last day of the financial year; and
C = the total number of days in the financial year in which
the business reorganisation has taken place.
44. (1) The actual cost of a business capital asset to the person shall be computed in
accordance with the formula–
A-[B+(C x A)]                   D
Where
A = cost of the business capital asset to the person including
the interest paid on the capital borrowed for acquiring
the asset if such interest is relatable to the  period before
the asset is put to use;
Special provi-
sions relating
to business
reorganisation.
Meaning of
actual cost.
5
15
10
20
25
30
35
40
45
50

22
B = the amount of additional duty leviable under section 3
of the Customs Tariff Act, 1975 or the amount of duty
of excise, in respect of which a claim of credit has been
made and allowed under the Central Excise Rules, 1944;
C = the amount of subsidy, grant or reimbursement (by
whatever name called) received by the assessee, directly
or indirectly, from the Central Government, a State
Government, any authority established under any law
for the time being in force or by any other person in
respect of, or with reference to, any assets including
the relevant asset;
D = cost of all the assets in respect of or with reference to
which the amount ‘C’ is so received.
(2) The Assessing Officer may, notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section
(1), determine, with the prior approval of the Joint Commissioner, the actual cost if -
(a) the assets were business assets at any time before the date of acquisition by
the person; and
(b) the Assessing Officer is satisfied that the main purpose of the transfer of the
assets, directly or indirectly to the person, was the reduction of a liability to income-
tax (by claiming depreciation with reference to an enhanced cost).
(3) The actual cost of the business capital asset to the person shall be the deemed
written down value, if —
(a) the asset is acquired by the person by way of gift or inheritance; or
(b) the asset is converted by the person into a business capital asset in any
financial year; or
(c) the person is transferee holding company or a transferee subsidiary company
in respect of transfer of the asset by subsidiary comapny or the holding company
respectively.
(4) The actual cost of a business capital asset to the person shall, in a case of sale and
buy back transaction of the asset, be the lower of the following, namely:—
(a) the actual price for which the asset is re-acquired by him; or
(b) the deemed written down value.
(5) Where a business capital asset is acquired by the person and subsequently it is
transferred back to the transferor by way of lease, hire or otherwise, the actual cost of the
asset in the hands of the person shall be the written down value of the asset in the hands
of the transferor at the beginning of the financial year in which the acquisition of the asset
by the person has taken place.
(6) Where the person is a non-resident and a business capital asset,having been
acquired by him outside India, is brought by him to India, the actual cost of the asset for the
person shall be the cost of acquisition of the asset by him, as reduced by an amount equal
to the amount of depreciation which would have been allowable, had the asset been used
in India for the purpose of the business of the person since the date of such acquisition.
(7) The actual cost of an asset shall be treated as “nil”, if—
(a) deduction in respect of the cost of the asset has been allowed or is allowable
to the person under the Eleventh Schedule or the Twelfth Schedule or the
Thirteenth Schedule; or
5
15
10
20
25
30
35
40
45

23
(b) deduction in respect of the cost of the asset has been allowed or is allowable
under any of the aforesaid Schedules to any other person and the person has acquired
or received the asset by any of the “special modes of acquisition”.
(8) The Board may, for the purposes of determining the actual cost of a business
capital asset, prescribe—
(a) any other cost which may be included in determining the actual cost; and
(b) the method of determining the actual cost in the circumstances which are not
provided for in this section.
(9) In this section, deemed written down value of a business asset shall be the actual
cost to the person or the previous owner, as the case may be, when he first acquired the asset
as reduced by the aggregate amount of depreciation that would have been allowable to the
person or the previous owner, as the case may be, for the preceding financial year as if the
asset was the only asset in the relevant block of assets.
45. (1) The written down value of any block of assets at the beginning of the financial
year shall be the written down value of the block of assets at the close of the immediately
preceding financial year.
(2) The written down value of the block of assets at the close of the immediately
preceding financial year shall be the adjusted value of the block of assets in the immediately
preceding financial year as reduced by,—
(a) the amount of capital allowance, if any, allowed under section 37 during that
year; and
(b) any expenditure incurred for acquiring the asset to the extent allowed as a
deduction in the financial year under any provision of this Code.
(3) The adjusted value of any block of assets for any financial year shall be computed
in accordance with the formula—
 (A+B) - (C+D+E)
Where
A= the written down value of the block of assets at the beginning of the  financial
year;
B = actual cost of any asset falling within the block, acquired during the financial
year;
C = moneys receivable in respect of any asset falling within the block, which is
sold or discarded or destroyed or destructed during the financial year;
D = amount of the scrap value, if any;
E = the aggregate of the deemed written down value of the assets transferred by
any of the modes referred to in sub-section (3) of section 44.
(4) The adjusted value of anys block of assets under sub-section ( 3) shall be “nil” if
the amount (C+D+E) exceeds the amount (A+B).
(5) The adjusted value of the block of assets, acquired by a successor in a business
reorganisation, for the financial year in which the business reorganisation has taken place
shall be the amount which would have been taken as the adjusted value of the block of
assets as if the business reorganisation had not taken place.
Meaning of
written down
value and ad-
justed value of
assets.
5
15
10
20
25
30
35
40

24
(6) The written down value of the block of assets, acquired by a successor in a
business reorganization, on the last day of the financial year in which the business
reorganisation has taken place shall be determined in accordance with the formula—
A - (B + C)
Where
A = the adjusted value determined under sub-section (5);
B = the amount of deduction allowed to the predecessor under sub-section (2)
of section 43 in respect of the block of assets;
C = the amount of deduction allowed to the successor under sub-section (3) of
section 43 in respect of the block of assets.
(7) Where a block of assets comprises of any asset acquired in any financial year from
a country outside India for the purposes of business and there is variation in liability in
respect of acquisition of the asset after the date of such acquisition, the adjusted value of
the block of assets shall be computed in accordance with the formula—
A+(B-C)-D
Where
A = the adjusted value of such block of assets determined in accordance with
sub-section (3);
B = the amount of liability of the person, expressed in Indian rupees at the time
of making actual payment towards—
(a)  the whole or a part of the cost of the asset; or
(b)  repayment of the whole or a part of the moneys  borrowed by him from
any person in any foreign currency specifically for the purpose of acquiring the
asset;
C = the amount of such liability existing at the time of acquisition of  the asset;
D = the whole or any part of the liability met, directly or indirectly, by any other
person or  authority.
(8) The amount of liability of the person, expressed in Indian rupees at the time of
making payment as referred to in sub-section ( 7), shall, in a case where the person has
entered into a forward contract, be computed with reference to the rate of exchange specified
in such forward contract.
(9) The Board may prescribe
(a) the method of determining the allocation of the written down value or the
adjusted written down value of the assets between the different businesses carried on
by the person; and
(b) the method of determining the written down value or the adjusted written
down value of the block of assets in the circumstances which are not provided for in
this section.
(10) In this section, the deemed written down value shall have the meaning assigned
to it in sub-section (10) of section 44.
D. – Capital gains
46. (1) The income from the transfer of any investment asset shall be computed under
the head “Capital gains”.
Capital gains.
5
15
10
20
25
30
35
40

25
(2) The income under the head “Capital gains” shall, without prejudice to the generality
of the foregoing provisions, include the following, namely:— 
(a) income from the transfer referred to in clause (d) or clause (e) of sub-section
(1) of section 47, if before the expiry of a period of eight years from the date of transfer
of the investment asset,—
(i) the parent company, or its nominee, ceases to hold the whole of the
share capital of the subsidiary company; or
(ii) the investment asset is converted by the transferee into, or treated by
it as, its business trading asset;
(b) the income from the transfer referred to in clause ( f) of sub-section ( 1) of
section 47, if any of the conditions laid down in clause (16) or clause (74) of section
314, as the case may be, is not complied with;
 ( c) the income from the transfer referred to in clause ( j) or clause ( n) of
sub-section (1) of section 47, as the case may be, if any of the conditions laid down in
the said clauses is not complied with;
(d) the amount of withdrawal referred to in sub-section (4) of section 55 to the
extent deduction has been allowed under sub-section (2)  thereof, if the condition laid
down in the said  sub-section (4) is not complied with;
(e) the amount of deposit referred to in sub-section (5) of section 55 to the extent
deduction has been allowed under sub-section (2)  thereof, if the condition laid down
in the said  sub-section (5) is not complied with.
(f) the amount of deduction allowed under sub-section (1) of section 55, if any of
the conditions specified in sub-section (6) of the said section is not complied with.
47. (1) The income from the following transfers shall not be included in the computation
of income under the head “Capital gains” , namely:—
(a) distribution of any investment asset on the total or partial partition of a
Hindu undivided family;
(b) gift, or transfer under an irrevocable trust, of any investment asset, other
than sweat equity share;
(c ) transfer of any investment asset under a will;
(d) transfer of any investment asset by a company to its subsidiary company, if-
(i) the parent company or its nominees hold the whole of the share capital
of the subsidiary company,
(ii) the subsidiary company is an Indian company; and
(iii) the subsidiary company treats the asset as an investment asset;
(e) transfer of any investment asset by a subsidiary company to the holding
company, if—
(i) the whole of the share capital of the subsidiary company is held by the
holding company or its nominees,
(ii) the holding company is an Indian company, and
(iii) the holding company treats the asset as an investment asset;
(f) transfer of any investment asset by a predecessor to a successor in a scheme
under a business reorganisation if the successor is an Indian company;
Income from
certain trans-
fers not to be
treated as capi-
tal gains.
5
15
10
20
25
30
35
40

26
(g) transfer of any investment asset, being shares held in an Indian company, by
an amalgamating foreign company to the amalgamated foreign company, if—
(i) the transfer is effected under a scheme of amalgamation;
(ii) the shareholders holding nor less than three-fourths in value of the
shares of the amalgamating foreign company continue to remain shareholders
of the amalgamated foreign company; and
(iii)  the transfer does not attract tax on capital gains in the country, in
which such amalgamating company is incorporated;
(h) transfer of any investment asset being shares held in an Indian company, by
a demerged foreign company to the resulting foreign company,
if—
(i) the transfer is effected under a scheme of demerger;
(ii)  the shareholders holding  not less than three-fourths in value of the
shares of the demerged foreign company continue to remain shareholders of
the resulting foreign company;
(iii) the transfer does not attract tax on capital gains in the country, in
which such demerged company is incorporated;
(i)  transfer of any investment asset, by a banking company to a banking
institution, if the transfer is effected under a scheme of amalgamation, sanctioned and
brought into force by the Central Government under sub-section (7) of section 45 of
the Banking Regulation Act, 1949;
(j)   transfer of any investment asset by a private company or unlisted public
company to a limited liability partnership or any transfer of a share held in the company
by a shareholder as a result of conversion of the company into a limited liability
partnership in accordance with the provisions of section 56 or section 57 of the
Limited Liability Partnership Act, 2008, if—
(i)   all the assets and liabilities of the company immediately before the
conversion become the assets and liabilities of the limited liability partnership;
(ii)   all the shareholders of the company immediately before the conversion
become the partners of the limited liability partnership and their capital
contribution and profit sharing ratio in the limited liability partnership are in the
same proportion as their shareholding in the company on the date of conversion;
(iii) the shareholders of the company do not receive any consideration or
benefit, directly or indirectly, in any form or manner, other than by way of share
in profit and capital contribution in the limited liability partnership;
(iv) the aggregate of capital contribution by the shareholders of the
company in the limited liability partnership shall not be less than fifty per cent.
of the total capital of the limited liability partnership at any time during the
period of five years from the date of conversion;
(v)   the total sales, turnover or gross receipts in business of the company
in any of the three financial years preceding the financial year in which the
conversion takes place do not exceed sixty lakh rupees;
(vi)  no amount is paid, either directly or indirectly, to any partner out of
the accumulated profits of the company on the date of conversion, for a period
of three years from the said date;
10 of 1949.
6 of 2009.
5
15
10
20
25
30
35
40
45

27
(k) transfer of shares of an amalgamating company by a shareholder under a
scheme of business re-organisation, if—
(i) the transfer is made in consideration of the allotment to the shareholder
of shares in the successor amalgamated company; and
(ii) the successor is neither a non-resident nor a foreign company;
(l)  transfer of shares of a predecessor co-operative bank by a shareholder under
a scheme of business reorganisation, if the transfer is made in consideration of the
allotment to the shareholder of shares in the successor co-operative bank;
(m)   transfer of shares by the resulting company, in a scheme of demerger, to the
shareholders of the demerged company, if the transfer is made in consideration of
demerger of the undertaking;
(n) transfer of any investment asset by a sole proprietary concern to a company,
if —
(i) the sole proprietary concern is succeeded by the company in the
business carried on by it;
(ii)  all the assets and liabilities of the said concern relating to the business
immediately before the succession become the assets and liabilities of the
company;
(iii) the shareholding of the sole proprietor in the company is  not less
than fifty per cent. of the total voting power in the company and continues to
remain the same for a period of five years from the date of succession;
(iv) the sole proprietor does not receive any consideration or benefit,
directly or indirectly, other than by way of allotment of shares in the company;
(o) transfer of any bond or global depository receipt by a non-resident to another
non-resident, if the transfer is made outside India;
(p) transfer of any work of art, archaeological, scientific or art collection, book,
manuscript, drawing, painting, photograph or print, to the Government or a University
or any public museum or institution of national importance or of renown throughout
any State or States and notified by the Central Government;
(q) transfer by way of conversion of any bonds or debentures, debenture-stock
or deposit certificates in any form, of a company into shares or debentures of that
company;
(r)   transfer by way of conversion of foreign exchange convertible bond of a
company into shares or debentures of that company;
(s) transfer of any securities, if—
(i) the transfer is effected under a scheme for lending of any securities;
and
(ii)  the scheme is framed in accordance with the guidelines issued by the
Securities and Exchange Board of India or the Reserve Bank of India;
(t)   transfer of any investment asset, if—
(i) the transferor is a company; and
(ii) the asset of the company is distributed to its shareholders on its
liquidation;
(u) transfer of an investment asset being land of a sick industrial company made
under a scheme sanctioned under section 18 of the Sick Industrial Companies (Special
5
15
10
20
25
30
35
40
45

28
Provisions) Act, 1985 where such company is being managed by its worker
co-operative;
(v) transfer of any investment asset in a transaction of reverse mortgage under
a scheme notified by the Central Government;
(w) transfer of any beneficial interest in a security by a depository.
(2) The reference to the provisions of sections 391 to 394 (both inclusive) of the
Companies Act, 1956 in cluase ( 74) of section 314 shall not apply in case of demergers
referred to in clause (h) of sub-section (1).
(3) The provisions of clause (u) of sub-section (1) shall be applicable in a case where
the transfer is made during the period commencing from the financial year in which the said
company has become a sick industrial company under sub-section (1) of section 17 of the
Sick Industrial Companies (Special Provisions) Act, 1985 and ending with the financial year
during which the entire net worth of such company becomes equal to or exceeds the
accumulated losses.
(4) In clause (i) of sub-section (1), the expressions—“banking company” and “banking
institution” shall have the meaning respectively assigned to them in clause (c) of section 5
and sub-section (15) of section 45 of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949;
(5) In clause (j) of sub-section (1), the expressions  “private company” and “public
unlisted company” shall have the meaning respectively assigned to them in the Limited
Liability Partnership Act, 2008.
(6) In clause (w) of sub-section (1), the expressions “depository” and “security”  shall
have the meaning respectively assigned to them in clauses (e) and (l) of sub-section (1) of
section 2 of the Depositories Act, 1996.
48.  (1) The income from the transfer of an investment asset specified in column (2) of
the Table given below shall be the income of the transferor in the financial year specified in
column (3) of the said Table:
T
ABLE
 FINANCIAL YEAR OF TAXABILITY
Serial Nature of transfer Financial year
number
(1) (2) (3)
1. Transfer referred to in clause ( a) in a case where the investment
(d) or clause (e) of sub-section (1) asset is converted by  the transferee into,
of  section 47 or is treated by it as, business trading
asset, the financial year in which the
investment asset is converted or treated
as a business trading asset;
(b) in  a case where the the parent
company, or its nominees, cease to hold
the whole of the share capital of the subsid-
iary company, the financial year in which
the parent company or its nominees so
cease to hold the whole of the share
capital of the subsidiary company.
Financial year
of taxability.
1 of 1956.
10 of 2009.
6 of 2009.
1 of 1986.
1 of 1986.
10 of 1949.
22 of 1986.
5
15
10
20
25
30
35
40

29
(1) (2) (3)
2. Transfer referred to in clause The financial year in which any of the
(f) of sub-section (1) of section 47 conditions referred to in clause ( 16) or
clause (74), as the case may be, of sec.
tion 314 is not complied with.
3. Transfer referred to in clause The financial year in which any of the
(j) or clause (n) of sub-section conditions specified in the said clauses
(1) of section 47 is not complied with.
4. Transfer— The financial year in which the compen-
(i) by way of compulsory sation, or consideration, as the case may
acquisition under any law for the be, or such compensation or considera-
time being in force, or
(ii) the consideration for which tion enhanced or further enhanced by
was determined or approved by any court, tribunal or other authority, is
the Central Government or the received.
Reserve Bank of India
5. Transfer by way of conversion of The financial year in which such asset,
an investment asset into, or its treatment so converted or treated, is sold  or
as business trading asset otherwise transferred.
6. Transfer by way of— The financial year in which the asset is
(i) contribution of the asset, whether transferred or distributed.
by way of capital or otherwise, to an
unincorporated body, in which the
transferor is, or becomes, a partici-
pant; or
(ii) the distribution of the asset
on account of dissolution of an
unincorporated body.
7. Transfer by way of distribution The financial year in which the money
of money or asset to a participant in or the asset is distributed.
an unincorporated body on account of
his retirement from the body
8. Transfer by way of part performance The financial year in which the posses-
of a contract, referred to in sub-clause (i) sion of the immovable property is allowed
of clause (267) of section 314 to be taken or retained.
9. Transfer by way of any The financial year in which the enjoy-
transaction   enabling the enjoyment ment of the property is enabled.
of any immovable property referred
to in sub-clause (j) of clause (267)
of section 314
10. Transfer by way of slump sale, The financial year in which the trans-
referred to in sub-clause (l) of clause fer took place.
(267) of section 314
11. Transfer by any mode other than The financial year in which the trans-
the modes referred to in serial fer took place.
numbers 1 to 10.
5
15
10
20
25
30
35
40
45

30
(2) Notwithstanding anything  in sub-section (1),—
(a)   any money or asset received under an insurance from an insurer on account
of damage or destruction of an insured asset referred to in sub-clause ( m) of clause
(267) of section 314 shall be deemed to be the income of the recipient of the financial
year in which the money or asset is received;
(b)  any money  or asset received by the participant on account of his retirement
from an  unincorporated body referred to in sub-clause (o) of clause (267) of section
314 shall be deemed to be the income of the recipient of the financial year in which the
money or asset is received;
(c )   any money  or asset received by the shareholder on account of liquidation
or dissolution of a company referred to in sub-clause (h) of clause (267) of section 314
as reduced by the amount assessed as dividend within the meaning of sub-clause (c)
of clause (81) of section 314, shall be deemed to be the income of the recipient of the
financial year in which the money or asset is received;
(d)  any consideration from transfer made by the depository or participant of
any beneficial interest in a security shall be deemed to be the income of the beneficial
owner of the financial year in which such transfer took place;
(e) the amount referred to in clause (d) of sub-section (2) of section 46 shall be
the income of the financial year in which such amount is withdrawn;
(f) the amount referred to in clause (e) of sub-section (2) of section 46 shall be
the income of the third financial year immediately following the financial year in which
the transfer of the original asset is effected.
(g) the amount referred to in clause (f) of sub-section (2) of section 46 shall be
the income of the financial year in which any condition referred to in sub-section (6)
of section 55 is not complied with.
(3) In clause (d) of sub-section (2), “beneficial owner” shall have the same meaning as
assigned to it in clause (a) of sub-section (1) of section 2 of the Depositories Act, 1996 .
49.  (1)  The income from the transfer of any investment asset during the financial year
shall be the full value of the consideration accrued or received as a result of the transfer, as
reduced by the aggregate amount of the deductions referred to in section 51.
 (2)  For the purpose of computation of income from the transfer of an investment
asset, being any beneficial interest in respect of  securities referred to in clause (d) of sub-
section (2) of section  48, the cost of acquisition and the period of holding of such securities
shall be determined on the basis of first-in-first-out method.
50. (1) The full value of the consideration shall be the amount received by, or accruing
to, the transferor, or a person referred to in  sub-section (
2) of section 48, as the case may be,
directly or indirectly, as a result of the transfer of the investment asset.
(2) Notwithstanding anything in sub-section (1), the full value of the consideration, in
the following circumstances, shall be—-
(a) the amount of compensation awarded in the first instance or the consideration
determined or approved in the first instance by the Central Government or the Reserve
Bank of India or the amount by which such compensation or consideration is
enhanced or further enhanced by any court, tribunal or other authority, as the case
may be, if the transfer of the investment asset is by the mode specified in sub-clause
(c) of clause (267) of section 314;
(b) the fair market value of the asset as on the date of the transfer, if the transfer
is by the mode specified in sub-clause (d) of clause (267) of section 314;
(c) the amount recorded in the books of account of the company or  an
Computation
of income
from  transfer
of any invest-
ment asset.
Full value of
consideration.
22 of 1996.
5
15
10
20
25
30
35
40
45

31
unincorporated body as the value of the investment asset, if the transfer of the
investment asset is by the mode specified in sub-clause (f) of clause (267) of section
314;
(d) the fair market value of the asset as on the date of the transfer, if such transfer
is by the mode specified in sub-clause (g) of clause (267) of section 314;
(e) the amount of money, or the fair market value of the asset as on the date of
distribution of such asset, received by a shareholder from a company under liquidation
or dissolution, as reduced by the amount of dividend within the meaning of sub-clause
(c) of clause (81) of section 314, if the transfer is by the mode specified in sub-clause
(h) of clause (267) of section 314;
(f) the amount of money, or the fair market value of the asset as on the date of
distribution of such asset, received by the participant, if the transfer is by the mode
specified in sub-clause (o) of clause (267) of section 314;
(g) the amount of money, or the fair market value of the asset as on the date of the
receipt of  such asset, received under an insurance from an insurer, if the transfer is by
the mode specified in sub-clause (m) of clause (267) of section 314;
(h) the stamp duty value of the asset, being land or building.
 (3) Where the amount of compensation or consideration referred to in clause ( a) of
sub-section ( 2) is subsequently reduced by any court, tribunal or other authority, the
compensation or consideration as so reduced shall be taken to be the full value of
consideration.
(4) Where the enhanced compensation or consideration referred to in clause ( a) of
sub-section (2) is received by any person other than the transferor, the said amount shall be
deemed to be the income of such other person and the provisions of sections 46 to 55 (both
inclusive) shall accordingly apply.
51.   (1) The deductions for the purposes of computation of income from the transfer
of an investment asset shall be the following, namely:— 
(i) the cost of acquisition, if any, of the asset;
(ii) the cost of improvement, if any, of the asset; and
(iii) the amount of expenditure, if any, incurred wholly and exclusively in
connection with the transfer of the asset.
(2) In the case of transfer of an investment asset, being an equity share in a company
or a unit of an equity oriented fund and such transfer is chargeable to securities transaction
tax under Chapter VII of the Finance (No.2) Act, 2004,—
(a) where the asset is held for a period of more than one year,
(i) if the income computed after giving effect to sub-section ( 1) is a
positive income, a deduction amounting to hundred per cent. of the income so
arrived at shall be allowed;
(ii) if the income computed after giving effect to sub-section (1) is a negative
income, hundred per cent. of the income so arrived at shall be reduced from such
income.
(
b) where the asset is held for a period of one year or less,
(i) if the income computed after giving effect to sub-section (1) is a positive
income, a deduction amounting to fifty per cent. of the income so arrived at shall
be allowed;
Deduction for
cost of
acquisitionetc.
5
15
10
20
25
30
35
40
45

32
(ii) if the income computed after giving effect to sub-section ( 1) is a
negative income, fifty per cent. of the income so arrived at shall be reduced from
such income.
(3) If  an investment asset, other than that referred to in sub-section (2) of the section
or sub-section (5) of section 53, is transferred at any time after one year from the end of the
financial year in which the asset is acquired by the person, the deductions for the purposes
of computation of income from the transfer of such asset shall be the following, namely:—
(i) the indexed cost of acquisition, if any, of the asset;
(ii) the indexed cost of improvement, if any, of the asset;
(iii) the amount of expenditure, if any, incurred wholly and exclusively in
connection with the transfer of the asset; and
(iv) the amount of relief for rollover of the asset, as determined under section 55.
52.  (1) The indexed cost of acquisition of an investment asset referred to in clause  (i)
of sub-section ( 3) of section 51 shall be the amount determined in accordance with the
formula—
   B
   C
Where
A  =  the cost of acquisition of the asset;
B  = the Cost Inflation Index for the financial year in which the asset is transferred;
C = the Cost Inflation Index for the financial year in which the asset was acquired
by the person or for the financial year beginning on the 1st day of April 2000, whichever
is later.
 (2) The indexed cost of improvement of an investment asset referred to in clause  (ii)
of sub-section ( 3) of section 51 shall be the amount determined in accordance with the
formula—
B
C
 Where
 A = the cost of improvement of the asset;
 B = the Cost Inflation Index for the financial year in which the asset is transferred;
 C= the Cost Inflation Index for the financial year in which the improvement to
the asset took place or for the financial year beginning on the 1st day of April 2000,
whichever is later.
53. ( 1) Unless otherwise provided, the cost of acquisition of an investment asset,
shall be-
(a) the purchase price of the asset; or
(b) at the option of the person, the fair market value of the asset on the 1st day
of April, 2000, if the asset was acquired by the person before such date.
(2) The cost of acquisition of an investment asset specified in column (2) of the
Seventeenth Schedule, acquired by the mode specified in column (3) of the said Schedule,
shall be the cost specified in column (4) thereof.
A x  —
A x  —
Indexed cost
of acquisition
or improve-
ment.
Cost of
acquisition of
an investment
asset.
5
15
10
20
25
30
35
40

33
(3)The cost of acquisition of an investment asset acquired by  a person by any of the
special modes of acquisition, shall be—
(a) the cost at which the asset was acquired by the previous owner; or
(b) at the option of the person, the fair market value of the asset on the 1st day
of April, 2000, if the asset was acquired by the previous owner or the person before
such date.
(4) The cost of acquisition of an investment asset referred to in clause (h) or clause (i)
or clause (j) of sub-section (2) of section 58 shall be the fair market value or the stamp duty
values as the case may be, which has been taken into account for the purposes of the said
clauses.
(5) The cost of acquisition of an investment asset being an undertaking or division of
a business transferred by way of a slump sale referred to in sub-clause (l) of clause (267) of
section 314 shall be the net worth of such undertaking or division.
(6) The cost of acquisition of an investment asset forming part of a bundle of investment
assets acquired by any participant, on distribution of the asset to him on account of his
retirement from any  unincorporated body, shall be the amount determined in accordance
with the formula—
A  –   (B  +  C)
where,
A= the amount payable to the participant as appearing in the books of account
of the  unincorporated body on the date of distribution;
B= any amount attributable to the change in the value of the bundle of investment
asset on account of revaluation of the bundle, if any, up to the date of distribution; and
C= the cost of acquisition of any other asset, forming part of the bundle acquired
by the participant, on distribution of the asset to him on account of his retirement from
any unincorporated body if the cost of acquisition has been allowed as a deduction
under section  51 in any earlier financial year.
(7) The cost of acquisition of an investment asset shall be “nil”, in relation to—
(a) an investment asset which is self-generated;
(b) the asset which is acquired by way of compulsory acquisition and the
compensation or consideration for such acquisition is enhanced or further enhanced
by any court, Tribunal or other authority; or
(c) the asset where the cost of acquisition to the person or the previous owner,
if any, cannot be determined or ascertained, for any reason.
(8) In sub-section (3), “previous owner” in relation to any investment asset owned by
a person means the last previous owner of the investment asset, who acquired it by a mode
of acquisition other than those referred to in clause (237) of section 314.
54. (1) The cost of improvement of an investment asset shall be any expenditure of a
capital nature incurred in making any additions or alterations to the asset,—
(a) by the person; or
(b) by the previous owner, if the asset is acquired by any special mode of
acquisition.
(2) The cost of improvement of the investment asset, notwithstanding anything in
sub-section (1), where the asset became the property of the person or the previous owner
before the 1st day of April, 2000, shall be any capital expenditure incurred for any addition or
alteration to such asset on or after the 1st day of April, 2000.
Cost of
acquisition of
an investment
asset.
5
15
10
20
25
30
35
40
45

34
(3) The cost of improvement of an investment asset shall, notwithstanding anything
in sub-section (1), be “nil” in relation to—
(a) an investment asset which is self generated;
(b) an investment asset being an undertaking or division transferred by way of
a slump sale referred to in sub-clause (l) of clause (267) of section 314; or
(c) any investment asset if the cost of improvement cannot be determined or
ascertained, for any reason.
 (4)  Any expenditure deductible in computing the income under any other head of
income shall not be taken into account while computing the cost of improvement.
55. (1) An individual or a Hindu undivided family shall be allowed a deduction, in
respect of rollover of any original investment asset referred to in sub-section (3) of section
51, from the capital gain arising from the transfer of the asset in accordance with the provisions
of this section.
(2) The deduction referred to in sub-section (1) shall be computed in accordance with
the formula—
(B+C+D)
A x ————
E
Where
A  =  the amount of capital gains arising from the transfer of the original investment
asset;
B  = the amount invested for purchase or construction of the new asset referred
to in sub-section (6) within a period of one year before the date of transfer of original
investment asset;
C = the amount invested for purchase or construction of the new asset referred
to in sub-section ( 6)  by the end of the financial year in which the transfer of the
original investment asset is effected or six months from the date of transfer, whichever
is later;
D = the amount deposited in an account in any bank by the end of the financial
year in which the transfer of original investment asset is effected for six months from
the date of transfer, whichever is later in accordance with the Capital Gains Deposit
Scheme framed by the Central Government in this behalf;
E = the net consideration received as a result of the transfer of the original
investment asset.
(3) The deduction computed under sub-section ( 2) shall not exceed the amount of
capital gains arising from the transfer of the investment assets.
(4) Any amount withdrawn from an account under the Capital Gains Deposit Scheme
shall be utilised within a period of one month from the end of the month in which the amount
is withdrawn, for the purposes of purchase or construction of the new asset.
(5) The amount deposited in the account under the Capital Gains Deposit Scheme
shall be utilised for the purposes of purchase or construction of the new asset within a
period of three years from the end of the financial year in which the transfer of the original
asset is effected.
(6) The deduction under this section in respect of capital gain arising from the transfer
of an investment asset, specified in column (2) of the Table given below, shall be allowed
with reference to the corresponding new investment asset referred to in column (3) of the
said Table, subject to the fulfilment of conditions specified in column (4) thereof:
Relief for
rollover of
investment
asset.
5
15
10
20
25
30
35
40
45

35
Income from
residuary
sources.
TABLE
ROLLOVER RELIEF
Serial Description of the original Description of the new Conditions
number investment asset investment asset
(1) (2) (3) (4)
1. Agricultural land One or more pieces of ( 1) The original investment
agricultural land. asset was—
(i) an agricultural land
during  two years
immediately preceding the
financial year in which the
asset is transferred; and
(ii) acquired at least one
year before the beginning
of the financial year in
which the transfer of the
asset took place.
2. Any investment asset residential house ( 2) The new asset shall not
be transferred within one year
from the end of the financial
year in which the new asset is
acquired.
(i) the assessee does
not own  more than one
residential house, other
than the new investment
asset, on the date of
transfer of the original
investment asset; and
(ii) the original
investment asset  was
acquired at least one year
before the beginning of
the financial year in which
the transfer of the asset
took place.
(iii) the new asset shall
not be transferred within
one year from the end of
the financial year in which
the new asset is acquired
or constructed.
(7) In this section, “net consideration” means the full value of consideration received
or accruing as a result of the transfer of an investment asset as reduced by any expenditure
incurred wholly or exclusively in connection with such transfer.
E. — Income from residuary sources
56. The income of every kind falling under the class ‘Income from ordinary sources’,
shall be computed under the head “Income from residuary sources”, if it is required to be
5
15
10
20
25
30
35
40
45

36
Computation
of income
from residuary
sources.
Gross residuary
income.
included in computing the income includible under any of the heads of income specified in
items A to D of section 14.
57. The income computed under the head “Income from residuary sources” shall be
the gross residuary income as reduced by the amount of deductions referred to in
section  59.
58.  (1) The gross residuary income shall include all accruals, or receipts, in the nature
of income, which do not form part of —
(a) income from special sources; and
(b) income under any of the heads of income specified in items A to D of
section 14.
(2) The gross residuary income shall, in particular and without prejudice to the
generality of the provisions of sub-section (1), include the following, namely:—
(a) dividends, other than dividends in respect of which dividend distribution
tax has been paid under section 109;
(b) interest, other than interest accrued to, or received by,  financial institutions;
(c) interest received on compensation or on enhanced compensation;
(d) income from the activity of owning and maintaining horses for the purpose
of horse race;
(e) any amount received from  employees as contributions to any fund set up for
their welfare, if the income is not included under the head “Income from business”;
(f) income from machinery, plant or furniture belonging to the person and let on
hire, if the income is not included under the head “Income from business”;
(g) any amount received under a keyman insurance policy including the sum
allocated by way of bonus on such policy, if such income is not included under the
heads “Income from employment” or “Income from business”;
(h) the aggregate of any moneys and the value of any specified property, not
being an immovable property, received for inadequate consideration or without
consideration, by an individual or a Hindu undivided family;
(i) the value of any specified property, being an immovable property received
without consideration by an individual or a Hindu undivided family;
(j) the value of any property being shares of a closely-held company received
for inadequate consideration or without consideration, by a firm or a  company;
(k) the amount of voluntary contribution received by a person, other than an
individual or a Hindu undivided family or a non-profit organisation, from any other
person;
(l) any amount received, or retained, on account of settlement or breach of any
contract, if not included under the head “Income from business”;
(m) any payment or aggregate of payments made to a person in a day, otherwise
than by an account payee cheque drawn on a bank or account payee bank draft,
if—
(i) the payment or aggregate of payments is in respect of any expenditure
referred to in clause (a) of sub-section (1) of section 59;
(ii) the expenditure has been allowed as a deduction in any earlier financial
year on the basis of the liability incurred thereon;
5
15
10
20
25
30
35
40

37
(iii) the payment or aggregate of payments exceeds a sum of twenty
thousand rupees; and
(iv) it has not been incurred in such cases and under such circumstances,
as may be prescribed;
(n) any amount found credited in the books of  the person maintained for the
financial year, if —
(i) the person offers no explanation about the nature and source thereof;
(ii) the person offers an explanation but fails to substantiate the
explanation; or
(iii) the explanation offered by him is, in the opinion of the Assessing
Officer, not satisfactory;
(o) the value of any investment made by the person in the financial year to the
extent for which —
(i) the person offers no explanation about the nature and source of the
investments;
(ii) the person offers an explanation but fails to substantiate the
explanation; or
(iii) the explanation offered by him is, in the opinion of the Assessing
Officer, not satisfactory;
(p)  the value of any money, bullion, jewellery or other valuable article owned by
the person to the extent for which —
(i) the person offers no explanation about the nature and source of
acquisition of the money, bullion, jewellery or other valuable article;
(ii) the person offers an explanation but fails to substantiate the
explanation; or
(iii) the explanation offered by him is, in the opinion of the Assessing
Officer, not satisfactory;
(q)  the amount of any expenditure incurred by the person in the financial year,
if —
(i) the person offers no explanation about the source of such  expenditure
or part thereof;
(ii) the person offers an explanation but fails to substantiate the explana-
tion; or
(iii) the explanation, if any, offered by him is, in the opinion of the Assess-
ing Officer, not satisfactory;
 (r) any amount deemed to be the income under sub-section (5) of section 78;
 (s)  any consideration accrued, or received, in respect of transfer of any busi-
ness asset, which is self-generated, if the consideration is not included under the head
‘‘income from business’’;
(t)  any amount accrued, or received, on account of the cessation, termination or
forfeiture in respect of any agreement entered into by the person, if the amount is not
included under the head ‘income from business’;
5
15
10
20
25
30
35
40

38
 (u) any amount of attributable income of a controlled foreign company to a
resident in accordance with the Twentieth Schedule
(v) any amount received, as advance, security deposit or otherwise, from the
long term leasing, or transfer of whole or part of, or any interest in, any investment
asset;
(w) amount of any benefit accrued to, or received by, the person, if the amount
is not included under the head “Income from business” and if—
(i) it is by way of remission or cessation of any liability including statu-
tory liability or in respect of any loss or expenditure; and
(ii) such liability or loss or expenditure has been allowed as a deduction in
any financial year;
(x) any sum received as family pension;
(y) any  amount including bonus, if any, received or receivable under a life
insurance policy from as insurer on maturity or otherwise.
(3) The amount referred to in clause ( h) or clause ( i) of sub-section ( 2) shall not
include any amount received—
(a) from any relative;
(b) on the occasion of the marriage of the individual;
(c) under a will or by way of inheritance;
(d) in contemplation of death of the payer;
(e) from any local authority; or
(f) from any non-profit organisation.
     (4) In this section,—
(a) ‘‘relative” shall not include any person referred to in sub-clause ( g) of
clause (214) of section 314;
  (b) ‘‘specified property”means—
     (i) immovable property being land or building or both;
    (ii) shares and securities;
    (iii) jewellery;
    (iv) bullion;
     (v) archaeological collections;
    (vi) drawings;
    (vii) paintings;
   (viii) sculptures; or
   (ix) any work of art;
(c) value of any property referred to in clause (h
) or clause (i) or clause (j) of sub-
section (2), as the case may be, shall be—
5
15
10
20
25
30
40

39
(i) the stamp duty value in the case of an immovable property as reduced
by the amount of consideration, if any, paid by the person; and
(ii) the fair market value in the case of any other property as reduced by
the amount of consideration, if any, paid by the person.
(5) The provisions of clause ( j) of sub-section ( 2) shall not apply to any property
received by way of a transaction not regarded as a transfer under clause (f) or clause (g) or
clause (h) or clause (l) or clause (m) of sub-section (1) of section 47.
59. (1) The deductions for the purposes of computation of income from residuary
sources shall be the aggregate of—
(a) the amount of expenditure specified in sub-section (2), if—
(i) the expenditure (not being in the nature of capital expenditure) is laid
out or expended, wholly and exclusively, for the purposes of making or earning
the gross residuary income; and
(ii) it fulfills all other conditions, if any, specified therein; and
(b) the amount of deductions specified in sub-section (3) subject to the fulfilment
of the conditions, if any, specified therein; and
(c) any amount received during the financial year as dividend from a controlled
foreign company as referred to in clause ( u) of sub-section ( 2) of section 58, to the
extent such amount has been included in the total income of the assessee in any
preceding financial year in accordance with the provisions of the said clause.
(2) The amount of expenditure referred to in clause (a) of sub-section (1) shall be the
following, namely:—
(a) any reasonable sum paid by way of remuneration or commission for the purpose
of realising the income referred to in clause (a) or clause (b) of sub-section (2) of section 58;
(b) the amount determined, so far as may be, in accordance with the provisions
of  clause (v) of sub-section (2) of section 35 in respect of the income of the nature
referred to in clause (f) of sub-section (2) of section 58 ;
(c) the amount determined, so far as may be, in accordance with the provisions
of clause ( xxx) of sub-section ( 2) of section  35 in respect of income of the nature
referred to in clause (e
) of sub-section (2) of section 58;
(d) the amount determined, so far as may be, in accordance with the provisions
of section  37 and subject to the provisions of sub-section (3) of section  34 in respect
of income of the nature referred to in clause (f) of sub-section (2) of section 58.
(3) The amount of deduction referred to in clause ( b) of sub-section (1) shall be the
following, namely:—
(a) the amount equal to thirty-three and one-third per cent. of income or fifteen
thousand rupees, whichever is less, in respect of family pension;
(b) the aggregate amount referred to in clause (h) or clause (i) or clause (j) of sub-
section (2) of section 58 to the extent the aggregate does not exceed fifty thousand
rupees; and
(c) the repayment of advance or security deposit from long-term leasing in the
financial year in which such advance or security deposit is re-paid.
(d) the amount included in income under clause (y) of sub-section (2) of section
58 in respect of an insurance policy where—
Deductions
from gross
residuary
income.
5
15
10
20
25
30
35
40

40
(i) the premium paid or payable for any of the years during the term of the
policy does not exceed five per cent. of the capital sum assured; and
(ii) the amount is received only upon completion of original period of
contract of the insurance;
(e) the amount included in income under clause (y) of sub-section (2) of section
58, if tax on distributed income in respect of the insurance policy has been paid by the
insurer under section 110;
(f) The amount of premium paid upto the date of receipts or accruals referred to
in clause (y) of sub-section (2) of section 58 in respect of an insurance policy, other
than a policy referred to in clause (d) and clause (e) of this sub-section, as reduced by
the amount of premium which has already been allowed as a deduction under this
clause in any previous financial year, to the extent such amount has been included as
receipts or accruals under clause (y) of sub-section (2) of section 56.
(4) In the case of the income referred to in clause (c) of sub-section (2) of section 58,
the amount of deduction shall be a sum equal to fifty per cent. of such income and no
deduction shall be allowed under any other clause of this section.
  (5) The following amounts shall not be allowed as a deduction, namely:— 
(a) any amount relating to personal expenses of the person;
(b) any amount  of tax, interest or penalty paid under this Code or the Income-tax
Act, 1961 or the Wealth Tax Act, 1957 as they stood before the commencement of this
code; or
(c) any payment or aggregate of payments made to a person in a day, otherwise
than by an account payee cheque drawn on a bank or account payee bank draft, if—
(i) the payment or aggregate of payments is in respect of any expenditure
referred to in clause (a) of sub-section (1) of section 59;
(ii) the payment or aggregate of payments exceeds a sum of twenty thou-
sand rupees; and
(iii) it has not been incurred in such cases and under such circumstances,
as may be prescribed;
(6)  In this chapter “capital sum assured” in relation to a life insurance policy means
the minimum amount assured under the policy on happening of the insured event at any
time during the term of the policy not taking into account—
(i) the value of any premium agreed to be returned; or
(ii) any benefit, by way of bonus or otherwise, over and above the sum assured,
which is to be received or may be received by any person under the policy.
Deductions from gross residuary income.
III. —A
GGREGA TION OF INCOME
60. (1)  Subject to other provisions of this section, the income from each source falling
under a head of income for a financial year shall be aggregated and the income so aggre-
gated shall be the income from that head for the financial year.
(2)  The income from the transfer of each investment asset during the financial year, as
computed under section 49, shall be aggregated and the net result of such aggregation shall
be the income from the capital gains, for the financial year.
(3)  The income from capital gains shall be aggregated with the unabsorbed preceding
43 of 1961.
27 of 1957.
Aggregation
of income
under a head
of income.
5
20
10
25
30
35
40
15

41
year capital loss, if any, and the net result of such aggregation shall be the current income
under the head “Capital gains”.
(4)  The income under the head “Capital gains” shall be treated as ‘‘ nil’’ if the net
result of aggregation under sub-section ( 3) is negative and the absolute value of the
net result shall be the amount of ‘‘unabsorbed current capital loss’’, for the financial
year.
(5) The income from each business other than speculative business referred to in
sub-section (3) of section 31 shall be aggregated and the income so aggregated shall be the
income from the non-speculative business.
(6) The income from each speculative business shall be aggregated and the income so
aggregated shall be the gross income from the speculative business.
(7) The gross income from the speculative business shall be aggregated with unab-
sorbed preceding year speculative loss, if any, and the  net result of such aggregation shall
be the income from the speculative business.
(8)  The aggregate of from the speculative business shall be treated as nil, if the ‘‘nil’’
result of aggregation in sub-section (7) is negative and the absolute value of the net result of
aggregation shall be the amount of unabsorbed current speculative loss for the financial
year.
(9)   The aggregate of income from the speculative business and income from the non-
speculative business shall be the income under the head “income from business”.
(10) The income from the activity of owning and maintaining horses for the purpose of
horse race shall be aggregated with unabsorbed preceding year horse race loss, and the net
result of such aggregation shall be the income from activity of owning and maintaining horse
race and it shall be taken to be ‘‘nil’’, if the net result of such aggregation is negative  and the
absolute value of net result shall be the amount of unabsorbed current horse race loss for the
financial year.
(11)  The income of every kind referred to in section 58, other than income from
the activity of owning and maintaining horses for the purpose of  horse race, shall be
aggregated with income from the activity of owning and maintaining horse race and
the income so aggregated shall be the income under the head “ income from residuary
sources”.
61. (1)  The current income from ordinary sources shall be the aggregate of—
(a) income under the head ‘‘income from employment’’;
(b) income under the head ‘‘income from house property’’;
(c) income under the head ‘‘income from bussiness’’;
(d) income under the head  ‘‘capital gains’’, and;
(e) income under the head ‘‘income from residuary sources’’.
(2) The current income from ordinary sources shall be aggregated with the unab-
sorbed preceding year loss from the ordinary sources, if any; and the net result of the
aggregation shall be the gross total income from ordinary sources, for the financial year.
(3) The gross total income from ordinary sources, for the financial year, shall be treated
as ‘‘nil’’ if the net result of the aggregation under sub-section ( 2) is negative; and the
absolute value of the net result shall be the amount of unabsorbed current loss from ordinary
sources, for the financial year.
Aggregation
of income
from
ordinary
sources.
5
15
10
20
25
30
35
40
45

42
62. (1) The income from a special source referred to in Part III of the First Schedule
shall be the current income from the special source for the financial year.
(2) The current income from the special source referred to in sub-section (1) shall be
aggregated with the unabsorbed preceding year loss from the special source, if any; and the
income so aggregated shall be the gross total income from the special source, for the finan-
cial year.
(3) Where the gross total income from the special source referred to in sub-section (2)
is negative, such income shall be treated as ‘‘ nil’’and the absolute value of the net result
shall be the amount of unabsorbed current loss from the special sourcefor the financial year.
(4) The gross total income from special source in respect of each special source
computed under sub-sections ( 2) and ( 3) shall be aggregated and the net result of the
aggregation shall be the total income from special sources for the financial year.
Aggregation of income from Special Sources.
63.The total income of a person for any financial year shall be computed in accor-
dance with the formula—
(A - B) + C
Where
A =  the gross total income from ordinary sources for the  financial   year;
B  =    the aggregate amount of deductions allowed  under sub-chapter IV; and
C =  the total income from special sources for the financial year.
64. (1) In a business reorganisation, or on conversion of a company into a limited
liability partnership as referred to in clause (j) of sub-section (1) of section 47—
(a)   the unabsorbed current loss from ordinary sources of the predecessor in
respect of the financial year in which business reorganisation or such conversion has
taken place shall be deemed to be the unabsorbed preceding year loss from ordinary
sources of the successor in respect of the financial year and the provisions of section
61 shall apply accordingly; and
(b)   the unabsorbed current loss from special source of the predecessor  in
respect of the financial year in which business reorganisation or such conversion has
taken place, shall be deemed to be the unabsorbed preceding year loss from that
special source of the successor  in respect of  the financial year, and the provisions of
section 62 shall apply accordingly.
(2)  The provisions of sub-section ( 1) shall not apply  in case of a business
reorganisation if the successor in a business reorganisation does not satisfy the test of
continuity of business, and—
( a)    Where the predecessor is a sole  proprietary concern or unincorporated
body , and
(b) the shareholding of the sole proprietor or the participant, as the case may be,
ceases to be less than fifty per cent. of the total value of the shares of the successor
company at any time during the period of five years immediately succeeding the
financial year in which the business reorganisation takes place.
(3)  In case of the conversion, the provisions of sub-section (1) shall not apply if any
of the conditions, specified in clause (j) of sub-section (1) of section 47 are not fulfilled.
(4)   The total income of the financial year in which, the business reorganisation or the
Aggregation
of income
from special
sources.
Special
provisions
relating to
business
reorganisation
or conversion
of a company
into a Limited
liability
partnership.
Determination
of total
income.
5
15
10
20
25
30
35
40

43
conversion referred to in sub-section (1) took place, and of all the subsequent financial years
shall, notwithstanding anything in this Code, be rectified as if the provisions of this section
had never been given effect to in those financial years, if conditions specified in sub-section
(2) of this section or clause (j) of sub-section (1) of section 47 are not fulfilled at any time
during five financial years immediately succeeding the financial year in which re-organisation
or conversion took place.
65. (1) The amount of unabsorbed current loss from ordinary sources calculated under
sub-section (3) of section 61, for the financial year ending on the date of the retirement, or
death, of a participant, shall be reduced by the amount in proportion of the share of the
retired, or deceased, participant.
(2) The amount so reduced under sub-section ( 1) shall be the unabsorbed preceding
year loss from ordinary sources, for the financial year beginning on the date immediately
following the date of retirement, or death, of a participant for the purposes of sub-section (2)
of section 61.
(3) The amount of unabsorbed current loss from the special source calculated under
sub-section (3) of section 62, for the financial year ending on the date of the retirement, or
death, of a participant, shall be reduced by the amount in proportion of the share of the
retired, or deceased, participant.
(4) The amount so reduced under sub-section (3) shall be the ‘‘unabsorbed preceding
year loss from the special source’’, for the financial year beginning on the date immediately
following the date of retirement, or death, of a participant for the purposes of sub-section
(2) of section 62.
(5) The provisions of this section shall apply notwithstanding anything in any other
provision of this Code.
(6) In this Code, any reference to the unabsorbed preceding year loss from ordinary
sources and unabsorbed preceding year loss from the special source in respect of an unin-
corporated body where a change has occurred in its constitution due to death, or retirement,
of its participant, shall be construed as a reference to the amount so reduced under sub-
section (1) and sub-section (3) respectively.
66. (1) Notwithstanding anything in this Chapter a closely-held company shall not be
allowed to aggregate any unabsorbed preceding year loss from ordinary sources or unab-
sorbed preceding year loss from the special source with the income of the financial year
unless it satisfies the test of continuity of ownership.
(2)  The  closely held company shall satisfy the test of continuity of ownership referred
to in sub-section (1), if the shares of the company beneficially held by persons, carrying not
less than fifty-one per cent. of the voting power on the last day of the financial year immedi-
ately preceding the relevant financial year, are held by the same persons on the last day of
the relevant financial year.
(3) For the purposes of calculating the percentage of voting power under sub-section
(2),—
(a)  any change in the voting power in the relevant financial year due to the
death of a shareholder or on account of transfer of shares by way of gift to any relative
of the donor shareholder shall be ignored;
(b)    any change in the shareholding of an Indian company, which is a subsidiary of a
Aggregation
of losses in
case of
change in
constitution
of unincorpo-
rated body.
Aggregation
of losses in
the case of
certain
companies.
5
15
10
20
25
30
35
40

44
foreign company, as a result of amalgamation or demerger of a foreign company, shall be
ignored, if fifty-one per cent. shareholders of the amalgamating or demerged foreign com-
pany continue to be the shareholders of the amalgamated or the resulting foreign company.
67. Notwithstanding anything in this Code, if the return of tax bases for a finan-
cial year is not furnished by the due date and if the amount of unabsorbed current
loss from ordinary sources, unabsorbed current capital loss, unabsorbed current specu-
lative loss, unabsorbed current horse race loss and unabsorbed current loss from
special source of the said financial year exceeds the corresponding amount of the
immediately preceding financial year then, such respective excess in that year shall
not be taken into account for any of the purposes of this Code for any subsequent
financial years.
IV - T
AX INCENTIVES
68. (1) A person shall be allowed the deductions specified in this Sub-chapter from
his ‘‘gross total income from ordinary sources’’, for the financial year.
(2) The aggregate amount of the deductions under this Sub-chapter shall not exceed
the ‘gross total income from ordinary sources’, for the financial year.
(3) Any sum, which qualifies for a deduction under this Sub-chapter in any financial
year, shall not qualify for deduction—
(a) under any other provision of this Code for the same or any other financial
year; or
(b) in the case of any other person.
(4) The provisions of sub-section ( 3) shall apply whether full deduction of the sum
referred to therein has been allowed or not.
69. (1) A person, being an individual, shall be allowed a deduction for savings in
respect of the aggregate of the sum referred to in sub-section (2)  to the extent of  one lakh
rupees.
(2) The sum referred to in sub-section (1) shall be the  amount paid or deposited by the
person in a financial year as his contribution of any approved fund to an account of the
individual, spouse or any child of such individual.—
70. (1) A person, being an individual or a Hindu undivided family, shall be allowed a
deduction in respect of any sum paid or deposited to effect or keep in force an insurance on
the life of persons specified in sub-section (3).
      ( 2) The insurance referred to in sub-section (1) shall be an insurance where the
premium payable for any of the years during the term of the policy shall not exceed five per
cent. of the capital sum assured.
(3) The person referred to in sub-section (1) shall be—
(a) the individual,spouse or any child of such individual; and
 (b) in case of a Hindu undivided family, any member of such family.
71. (1) A person, being an individual or a Hindu undivided family, shall be
allowed a deduction  in respect of     any sum paid during the financial year to effect,
Deductions
from gross
total income
from ordinary
sources.
19 of 1925.
Deduction for
savings.
Aggregation of
loss not to be
allowed in the
case of filing of
return after due
date.
Deduction
from life
insurance.
Deduction for
health insur-
ance.
5
15
10
20
25
30
35
40

45
or to keep in force, an insurance on the health of persons specified in sub-section (2)
and in addition, in the case of an individual, any contribution made to the Central
Government Health Scheme.
 (2) The person referred to in sub-section (1)  shall be—
(a) the individual, spouse, or any dependant child or parents of such
individual; and
 (b)  in case of a Hindu undivided family, any member of such family.
(3) The insurance  under this section refers to a health insurance scheme framed by
any insurer which is approved by the Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority.
72. (1) A person, being an individual or a Hindu undivided family, shall be allowed a
deduction in respect of any sum paid during the financial year, if the sum is paid—
(a) as tuition fee to any school, college, university or other educational institu-
tion situated within India; and
(b) for the purpose of full time education of any two children of such individual
or Hindu undivided family.
(2) In this section—
(a) tuition fee shall not include any payment towards any development fee or
donation or any payment of similar nature;
(b) full time education shall include education in play school or pre-school.
73. The aggregate amount of deductions under sections 70, 71 and 72 shall not exceed
fifty thousand rupees.
74. (1) A person, being an individual or a Hindu undivided family, shall be allowed a
deduction, in respect of any amount paid or payable by way of interest on loan taken for the
purpose of acquisition, construction, repair or renovation of a house property in the finan-
cial year in which such property is acquired or constructed or any subsequent financial year,
subject to the conditions specified in sub-section ( 2).
(2) The deduction referred to in sub-section (1) shall be allowed if—
      ( a) the house property is owned by the person and not let out during  the
financial year;
      (b) the acquisition or construction of the house property is completed within
a period of three years from the end of the financial year in which the loan was taken;
and
      (c) the person obtains a certificate from the financial institution to whom the
interest is paid or payable on the loan.
(3) The interest referred  to  in sub-section (1) which pertains to  the period   prior to the
financial year in which the house property has been  acquired or constructed shall be
allowed as deduction in five  equal instalments beginning from such financial year.
(4) The interest referred to in sub-section ( 3) shall be reduced by any part thereof
which has been allowed as deduction under any other provision of this Code.
(5) The amount of deduction under this section shall not exceed one lakh and fifty
thousand rupees.
Limit on de-
ductions under
sections 70,
71 and 72.
Deduction of
interest on
loan taken
for house
property.
Deductions for
education of
children.
5
15
10
20
25
30
35
40

46
75. (1) A person, being an individual, shall be allowed a deduction in respect of any amount
paid by him in the financial year by way of interest on loan taken by him from any financial
institution for the purpose of—
(a) pursuing his higher education; or
(b) higher education of his relatives.
(2) The deduction specified in sub-section (1) shall be allowed in the initial financial
year and seven financial years immediately succeeding the initial financial year or until the
interest referred to in sub-section (1) is paid by the person in full, whichever is earlier.
(3) In this section-
(a) “financial institution” means a banking company or any other financial insti-
tution which the Central Government may, by notification, specify in this behalf;
(b) “higher education” means any course of study pursued after passing the
senior secondary examination, or its equivalent, conducted by any board, or univer-
sity, recognised by the Central or State Government or any authority authorised by
the Government so to do;
(c) “initial financial year” means the financial year in which the person begins to
pay the interest on the loan;
(d) “relative” means-
(i) spouse of the individual;
(ii) child of the individual; or
(iii) a student for whom the individual is the legal guardian.
76. (1) A person, being resident individual or  Hindu undivided family, shall be al-
lowed a deduction in respect of any amount paid during the financial year for medical
treatment of the prescribed disease or ailment of any specified person.
(2) The amount of deduction under sub-section (1) shall not exceed—
(a) sixty thousand rupees, if the amount is paid in respect of any specified
person, who is a senior citizen; and
(b) forty thousand rupees, in any other case.
(3) The deduction under this section shall be reduced by the amount received, if any,
under an insurance from an insurer, or reimbursed by an employer, for the medical treatment
of the specified person.
(4) The deduction under this section shall not be allowed unless the person obtains a
certificate in such form as may be prescribed from a specialist working in a Government
hospital.
(5) In this section,—
(a) “specified person” means—
     (i) the individual;
    (ii)   spouse of the individual;
   (iii) any dependant child of the individual;
   (iv) dependant parents of the individual; and
    (v) any member of the Hindu undivided family;
Deduction of
interest on
loan taken for
higher
education.
Deduction for
Medical
treatment,
etc.
5
15
10
20
25
30
35
40

47
(b) “Government hospital” includes—
    (i) a dispensary established and run by a department of the Government
for the medical treatment of government employees and members of their family;
   (ii)    a hospital maintained by a local authority; and
  (iii)  any other hospital with which an agreement has been entered into
by the Government for the treatment of its employees.
77.( 1) A person, being resident individual, shall be allowed a deduction of an amount
specified in sub-section (2), subject to the conditions specified in sub-section ( 3).
(2) The amount of deduction under sub-section (1) shall not exceed—
(a) one lakh rupees, if he is a person with severe disability;
(b) fifty thousand rupees, if he is a person with disability.
(3) The deduction under sub-section ( 1) shall be allowed if the person obtains a
certificate from a medical authority in such  form and manner as may be prescribed and the
certificate remains valid during the relevant financial year or part thereof.
78. (1) A person, being resident individual or Hindu undivided family, shall be allowed
a deduction in respect of —
(a) any expenditure incurred during the financial year for the medical treatment,
nursing or training and rehabilitation of a dependant person with disability; or
(b) any amount paid or deposited during the financial year under a scheme
framed by any insurer and approved by the Board in this behalf, for the maintenance of
a dependant person with disability.
(2) The amount of deduction under sub-section (1) shall not exceed-
(a) one lakh rupees, if the dependant is a person with severe disability; or
(b) fifty thousand rupees, if the dependant is a person with disability.
(3) The deduction in respect of the amount referred to in clause (b) of sub-section (1)
shall be allowed, if the scheme referred to therein provides for payment of annuity or lump
sum amount for the benefit of a dependant person with disability, in the event of the death of
the individual or the member of the Hindu undivided family in whose name subscription to
the scheme has been made.
(4) The deduction under this section shall be allowed if the person, claiming a deduc-
tion under this section, obtains a certificate from a medical authority in such form and manner
as may be prescribed and the certificate remains valid during the relevant financial year or
part thereof.
(5) The amount received by the person under the scheme referred to in clause ( b) of
sub-section ( 1), upon the dependant person with disability, predeceasing him, shall be
deemed to be the income of the person for the financial year in which the amount is received
by him.
(6) In this section, “dependant” means spouse, any child  or parents of the individual,
or any member of the Hindu undivided family, if—
(i) he is mainly dependant on such individual, or Hindu undivided family, for his
support and maintenance; and
(ii) his income in the financial year is less than twenty-four thousand rupees.
Deduction for
medical
treatment
and mainte-
nance of a
dependant
person with
disability.
Deduction to
a person with
disability.
5
15
10
20
25
30
35
40

48
79. (1) A person shall be allowed a deduction of—
(a) one hundred and seventy-five per cent. of the amount of money paid by him
in the financial year as contribution or donation to any person specified in Part I of the
Sixteenth Schedule;
(b) one hundred and twenty-five per cent. of the amount of money paid by him
in the financial year as contribution or donation to any person specified in Part II of
the Sixteenth Schedule;
(c)  one hundred per cent. of the amount of money paid by him in the financial
year as donation to any person specified in Part III of the Sixteenth Schedule;
(d) fifty per cent. of the aggregate of the amount of money actually paid by him
in the financial year as donation to any person specified in Part IV of the Sixteenth
Schedule.
(2) The aggregate of the amount of money referred to in clause (d) of sub-section (1)
shall be limited to ten per cent. of the gross total income from ordinary sources, if the
aggregate exceeds ten per cent. of the gross total income from ordinary sources.
(3) The deduction under this section shall not be allowed in respect of any amount of
money paid to any person referred to in sub-section (1), if—
(a) the amount is laid out or expended during the financial year for any religious
activity; or
(b) any activity of the donee is intended for, or actually benefits, any particular
caste, not being  the Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled Tribes.
(4) The donation to any person specified in Part IV of the Sixteenth Schedule shall be
eligible for deduction under sub-section (1), if the donee obtains the approval of the pre-
scribed authority in accordance with the procedure and subject to such conditions, as may
be prescribed.
(5) The deduction under sub-section (1) shall not be denied to a donor merely on the
consideration that, subsequent to the donation, the donee, being a non-profit organisation,
has ceased to be so.
80. (1) A person, being an individual and not in receipt of any house rent allowance,
shall be allowed a deduction of any expenditure incurred by him in excess of ten per cent. of
his gross total income from ordinary sources towards payment of rent in respect of any
furnished or unfurnished accommodation occupied by him for his own residence.
    (2) The deduction referred to in sub-section (1) shall be allowed up to a maximum of
two thousand rupees per month and shall be subject to such other conditions as may be
prescribed having regard to the area or place in which the accommodation is situated.
    ( 3) The provisions of this section shall not apply to a person if any residential
accommodation is owned by him or by his spouse or minor child in the place where he
ordinarily resides or performs duties of his office or employment or carries on his business.
81. (1) A person shall be allowed a deduction in respect of any contribution made by
him in the financial year to a political party or electoral trust.
       (2) The deduction under sub-section (1) shall not exceed five per cent. of-
(a) the average of the net profit determined in accordance with the provisions of
section 349 and section 350 of the Companies Act, 1956 during the three immediately
Deduction of
contribution or
donations to
certain funds or
non-profit
organisations.
Deduction for
rent paid.
Deduction for
political con-
tributions.
1 of 1956.
5
15
10
20
25
30
35
40

49
preceding financial years, in the case of a company; and
(b) the “gross total income from ordinary sources”, in any other case.
     ( 3) In this section, the word “contribution”, with its grammatical variation, shall
have the same meaning as assigned to it under section 293A of the Companies Act, 1956.
82. ( 1) A person shall be allowed in the financial year a deduction of the amount
specified in sub-section ( 2), if such amount is included in the gross total income from
ordinary sources.
(2) The amount referred to in sub-section (1) shall be the contribution received from
any recognised stock exchange, or recognised commodity exchange, and the members thereof.
(3) The deduction under sub-section (1) shall be allowed if— 
(a) the person is an Investor Protection Fund set up, either jointly or separately,
by recognised stock exchanges or recognised commodity exchanges; and
(b) such Investor Protection Fund is notified by the Central Government.
83. (1) A person, being resident individual,  shall be allowed a deduction of an amount
specified in sub-section (4) in respect of any income referred to in sub-section ( 3), if such
income is included in his gross total income from ordinary sources.
(2) The deduction under sub-section (1) shall be allowed to a person, if he is an author
of any book which is a work of literary, artistic or scientific nature.
(3) The income referred to in sub-section (1) shall be any income derived by the author
by way of—
(a) lumpsum consideration for the assignment or grant of any of his interest in
the copyright of the book referred to in sub-section (2); or
(b) royalty or copyright fees (whether receivable in lumpsum or otherwise) in
respect of the book referred to in sub-section (2).
(4) The amount of deduction under sub-section ( 1) shall be the amount of income
referred to in sub-section (3) to the extent it does not exceed three lakh rupees.
(5) In this section, ‘‘books” shall not include brochures, commentaries, diaries, guides,
journals, magazines, newspapers, pamphlets, tracts and other publications of similar nature
by whatever name called.
84. (1) A person, being resident individual and a patentee, shall be allowed a deduction
of an amount specified in sub-section (3) in respect of any income referred to in sub-section
(2), if such income is included in his ‘gross total income from ordinary sources’.
(2) The income referred to in sub-section ( 1) shall be any income received by the
person by way of royalty in respect of a patent registered on or after the 1st day of April, 2003
under the Patents Act, 1970.
(3) The amount of deduction under sub-section ( 1
) shall be the amount of income
referred to in sub-section (2) to the extent it does not exceed  the amount of royalty allowable
under the terms and conditions of a licence settled by the Controller under the Patents
Act, 1970, if a compulsory licence is granted in respect of any patent under that Actor three
lakh rupees, whichever is lower.
(4) In of this section,—
1 of 1956
Deduction of
income of In-
vestor Protec-
tion Fund.
Deduction of
royalty
income of
authors.
39 of 1970.
39 of 1970.
Deduction of
royalty on
patents.
5
15
10
20
25
30
35
40
45

50
(a) “patent” means a patent (including a patent of addition) granted under the
Patents Act, 1970;
(b) “patentee” means the person, being the true and first inventor of the inven-
tion, whose name is entered on the patent register as the patentee, in accordance with
the Patents Act, 1970, and includes every such person, being the true and first inven-
tor of the invention, where more than one person is registered as patentee under that
Act in respect of that patent;
(c) “patent of addition” shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in clause
(q) of sub-section (1) of section 2 of the Patents Act, 1970;
(d) “patented article” and “patented process” shall have the meanings respec-
tively assigned to them in clause (o) of sub-section (1) of section 2 of the Patents Act,
1970;
(e) “royalty”, in respect of a patent, means consideration (including any lump
sum consideration but excluding any consideration which would be the income of the
recipient chargeable under the head “Capital gains” or consideration for sale of prod-
uct manufactured with the use of patented process or of the patented article for
commercial use) for—
(i) the transfer of all or any rights (including the granting of a licence) in
respect of a patent; or
(ii) the imparting of any information concerning the working of, or the use
of, a patent; or
(iii) the use of any patent;
 (f) “true and first inventor” shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in
clause (y) of sub-section (1) of section 2 of the Patents Act, 1970. Deduction of royalty
on patents.
85. (1) A person, being a primary co-operative society, shall be allowed a deduction to
the extent of profits derived from the business of providing banking, or credit, facility to its
members.
(2) In this section “primary co-operative society” means—
(a) a “primary agricultural credit society” within the meaning of Part V of the
Banking Regulation Act, 1949; or
(b) a “primary co-operative agricultural and rural development bank”, which-
(i) has its area of operation confined to a taluk; and
(ii) is mainly engaged in providing long-term credit for agricultural and
rural development activities.
86. (1) A person, being a primary co-operative society, shall be allowed a deduction in
respect of the aggregate of the amounts referred to in sub-section (2).
(2) The amount referred to in sub-section (1) shall be—
(a) the amount of profits derived from agriculture or agriculture-related activi-
ties; and
(b) the amount of income derived from any other activity, to the extent it does
not exceed one lakh rupees.
(3) In this section,—
(a) “agriculture-related activities” means the following activities, namely:— 
(i) purchase of agricultural implements, seeds, livestock or other articles
39 of 1970.
39 of 1970.
39 of 1970.
39 of 1970.
39 of 1970.
Deduction of
income of co-
operative soci-
ety from bank-
ing activities.
Deduction of
income of pri-
mary Co-op-
erative societ-
ies.
10 of 1949.
5
15
10
20
25
30
35
40
45

51
intended for agriculture for the purpose of supplying them to its members;
(ii) the collective disposal of—
(A) agricultural produce grown by its members; or
(B) dairy or poultry produce produced by its members; and
(iii) fishing or allied activities, that is to say, the catching, curing, process-
ing, preserving, storing or marketing of fish or the purchase of material and
equipment in connection therewith for the purpose of supplying them to its
members;
(b) “primary co-operative society” means a co-operative society whose rules
and bye-laws restrict the voting rights to individuals engaged in agriculture or agricul-
ture-related activities.
V.  -  M
AINTENANCE OF ACCOUNTS AND OTHER RELATED MATTERS
87.  (1) Every person shall keep and maintain such books of account and other docu-
ments as may enable the Assessing Officer to compute his total income in accordance with
the provisions of this Code.
(2) Every person who has entered into an international transaction shall keep and
maintain such information and document in respect thereof, as may be prescribed.
(3) The person referred to in sub-section (1) shall be the following, namely:— 
(a) any person carrying on legal, medical, engineering, architectural profession
or profession of accountancy, technical consultancy, interior decoration or any other
profession as is notified by the Board;
(b) any other person carrying on business, if—
(i) his income from the business exceeds two lakh rupees;
(ii) his total turnover or gross receipts, as the case may be, in the business
exceeds ten lakh rupees in any one of the three financial years immediately
preceding the relevant financial year; or
(iii) the business is newly set-up in any financial year, his income from the
business is likely to exceed two lakh rupees or his total turnover or gross re-
ceipts, as the case may be, in the business is likely to exceed ten lakh rupees,
during such financial year.
(4) The books of account referred to in sub-section (1) shall be the following, namely:—
(a) a cash book;
(b) a journal, if the accounts are maintained according to the mercantile system
of accounting;
(c) a ledger;
(d) register of daily inventory of business trading asset;
(e)  copies of serially numbered bills issued by the person, if the value of the bill
exceeds  two hundred rupees;
(f)  copies or counterfoils of serially numbered receipts issued by the person, if
the value of the bill exceeds two hundred rupees;
(g) original bills or receipts issued to the person in respect of expenditure in-
curred by him, if the amount of the expenditure exceeds two hundred rupees;
(h) payment vouchers prepared and signed by the person in respect of expendi-
Maintenance
of accounts.
5
15
10
20
25
30
35
40

52
ture not exceeding two hundred rupees, if there are no bills or receipts for such
expenditure.
(5) The bills or receipts issued to any person shall contain the name, address and such
other particulars as may be prescribed.
(6) The Board may, having regard to the nature of the business carried on by any
class of persons, prescribe—
(a) any other books of account and documents to be kept and maintained;
(b) the particulars to be contained in the books of account and documents; and
(c) the form and the manner in, and the place at, which the books of account and
other documents shall be kept and maintained.
(7) The Board may prescribe the period for which the books of account and other
documents required to be kept and maintained under this section shall be retained.
Maintenance of accout.
(8) The expression "international transaction" referred to in sub-section (2) shall have
the meaning assigned ot it in clause (17) of section 124.
88. (1) Every person, who is required to keep and maintain books of account under
section 87 shall get his accounts for the financial year audited—
(a)  where the person is carrying on any profession, the gross receipts of the
profession exceed twenty-five  lakh rupees in the financial year;
(b)  where the person is carrying on any business, the total turnover or gross
receipts, as the case may be, of the business exceed one crore  rupees in the financial
year.
(2) The audit of the accounts referred to in sub-section (1) shall be carried out by an
accountant and the report of audit obtained before the due date.
(3) The report of audit referred to in sub-section (2) shall be obtained in the prescribed
form duly signed and verified by such accountant and setting forth such particulars as may
be prescribed.
(4) The provisions of sub-section ( 1) shall not apply to the business where the in-
come therefrom is determined under paragraph 1 of the Fourteenth Schedule.
(5) A person shall be deemed to have complied with the provisions of sub-section (1),
if the person—
(a) gets the accounts of his business audited as required by, or under, any other
law for the time being in force, before the due date; and
(b) obtains by the due date the report of the audit as required under such other law
and a further report by an accountant in the form prescribed under sub-section (3).
(6) A person referred to in sub-section (2) of section 87 shall furnish a report of the
international transaction entered into during the financial year to the Transfer Pricing Of-
ficer on or before the due date specified in sub-clause (c) of clause (86) of section 314.
(7) The report referred in sub-section (6) shall be obtained from an accountant in such
form, duly signed and verified in such manner as may be prescribed.
 89. (1) The income chargeable under the head “Income from business” or “Income
from residuary sources” shall, except as otherwise provided in this section, be computed in
accordance with either cash or mercantile system of accounting regularly employed by the
person.
(2) The Central Government may from time to time notify accounting standards to be
followed by any class of persons or in respect of any class of income.
Audit of
accounts and
reporting of
international
transaction.
Method of
accounting.
5
15
10
20
25
30
35
40
45

53
(3) The valuation of purchase of goods and inventory for the purposes of determining
the income chargeable under the head “Income from business” shall be—
(a) in accordance with the method of accounting regularly employed by the
person; and
(b) further adjusted to include the amount of any tax, duty, cess or fee (by
whatever name called) actually paid or incurred by the  person to bring the goods to
the place of its location and condition as on the date of its valuation.
(4) The value of sale of goods for the purposes of determining the income chargeable
under the head “Income from business” shall be determined—
(a) in accordance with the method of accounting regularly employed by the
person; and
(b) further adjusted to include the amount of any tax, duty, cess or fee (by
whatever name called) leviable on the sale of the goods.
(5) The interest on bad or doubtful debts of any  financial institution shall be included
in the total income  of  the financial year in which the interest is credited to the profit and loss
account of, or is actually received by, the  financial institution, whichever is earlier.
(6) The interest received by a person on compensation or an enhanced compensation
shall be included in the total income of the financial year in which it is received.
(7) In this section,—
(a) any tax, duty, cess or fee (by whatever name called) under any law for the time
being in force, shall include all such payment notwithstanding any right arising as a
consequence to such payment;
(b) “bad or doubtful debts” shall be  such debts as may be prescribed, having
regard to the guidelines issued by the Reserve Bank of India or the National Housing
Bank, as the case may be, in relation to such debts.
CHAPTER  IV
S
PECIAL PROVISIONS RELATING TO THE COMPUTATION OF TOTAL INCOME OF NON-PROFIT
ORGANISATIONS
90.( 1) The provisions of this Chapter shall be applicable to a non-profit organisation,
other than any organisation of public importance, specified in the Seventh Schedule.
(2) The Central Government may, subject to such conditions as may be considered
necessary, notify a person as a non-profit organisation of public importance for the purpose
of the Seventh Schedule.
(3) The provision of this Chapter other than section 95, section 97, section 98, section
99, section 101, section 102 and section 103, shall not apply to a non-profit organization,
being a public religious trust or institution.
91. The total income of a non-profit organisation shall be computed in accordance
with the provisions of this Chapter.
92. ( 1) Subject to the provisions of section 8, the total income of any non-profit
organisation in relation to any charitable activity, during the financial year, shall be the gross
receipts as reduced by the amount of outgoings, computed in accordance with the cash
system of accounting.
(2)    Notwithstanding anything in sub-section ( 1), the total income of a non-profit
Applicability
of this Chap-
ter.
Total income
of a non-
profit
 organisation.
Computation
of total
income of a
non-proft
organisation.
5
15
10
20
25
30
35
40

54
organisation, being a company registered under section 25 of the Companies Act, 1956 in
relation to any charitable activity, during the financial year, shall be the gross receipts as
reduced by the amount of outgoings, computed in accordance with the mercantile system of
accounting.
93.( 1) The gross receipts from any charitable activity shall be the aggregate of the
following, namely:— 
(a) the amount of voluntary contributions received;
(b) any rent received in respect of a property held by the non-profit organisation
consisting of any buildings or lands appurtenant thereto;
(c) the amount of income derived from any business carried on by the non-profit
organisation, if the business is incidental to any charitable activity so carried on;
(d) income from transfer of any capital asset computed in accordance with the
provisions of sections 46 to 54 (both inclusive) where the asset is not used for the
purposes of any charitable activity or any business incidental to such charitable
activity;
(e) full value of consideration on transfer of any capital asset other than the
asset referred to in clause (d);
(f)  the amount of  income received from  investment of its funds or assets;
(g) the amount of any incoming, realisation, proceeds, or subscription received
from any source; and
(h) any amount, which was received in the last month of the immediately preced-
ing financial year and was deposited in a specified deposit account as referred to in
clause (e) of section 94.
(2) The gross receipts referred to in sub-section (1) shall not include—
(a) any loan taken  during the financial year; and
(b) voluntary contributions  received with a specific direction that they shall
form part of the corpus of the non-profit organisation.
94. The amount of outgoings during the financial year for the purpose of computa-
tion of the total income shall be the aggregate of—
(a) the amount paid for any expenditure, not being capital expenditure, incurred
wholly and exclusively for earning or obtaining any receipts referred to in section 93;
(b) the amount paid for any expenditure, incurred for the purposes of carrying
out any charitable activity;
(c) the amount paid for any capital expenditure for the  purposes of any busi-
ness, if the business is incidental to any charitable activity carried on by  the non-
profit organisation;
(d) any amount applied outside India, if—
(i) the amount is applied for an activity which tends to promote interna-
tional welfare in which India is interested; and
(ii) the non-profit organisation is notified by the Central Government in
this behalf;
(e) any amount which is received during the last month of the financial year and
has been deposited on or before the last day of the financial year in a specified deposit
account under such deposit account scheme as may be prescribed; and
Gross receipts
of a non-profit
organisation.
Outgoings of a
non-profit
organisation.
5
15
10
20
25
30
35
40

55
(f)  any amount accumulated or set apart for carrying on any charitable activity—
(i) to the extent of fifteen per cent. of the total income (before giving effect
to the provisions of this clause) or ten per cent. of  the gross receipts, whichever
is higher; and
(ii) invested or deposited in the modes specified in section 95, for a period
not exceeding three years from the end of the financial year.
95. (1) The modes of investing or depositing the money referred to in clause ( f) of
section 94 shall be the following, namely:—
(i) deposit in any account with the Post Office Savings Bank;
(ii) deposit in any account with a scheduled bank;
(iii) investment in any security issued by the Central Government or a
State Government;
(iv) investment in debentures issued by any company or corporation,
guaranteed by the Central Government or by a State Government;
(v) investment or deposit in any public sector company;
(vi) investment in immovable property; or
 (vii) any other mode of investment or deposit as may be prescribed.
(2) The funds or the assets of the non-profit organisation (other than any assets
forming part of its corpus as on the 1st day of June, 1973) shall be invested or held, at any
time during the financial year, in any of the modes referred to in sub-section (1).
96. (1) Any amount referred to in clause ( f) of section 94 shall be deemed to be the
income of the non-profit organisation, if the amount—
(a) is not utilised for the purpose for which it was accumulated or set apart
during the period specified therein; or
(b) ceases to remain invested or deposited in any of the modes  specified in
section 95.
(2) In this section, the amount shall be deemed to be the income of the financial year–
(a) immediately following the expiry of the specified period in a case falling
under clause (a) of sub-section (1); or
(b) in which the amount ceases to remain so invested or deposited in a case
falling under clause (b) of sub-section (1).
97. (1) The funds or the assets of the non-profit organisation shall not be used or
applied, directly or indirectly, for the benefit of an interested person.
(2) Without prejudice to sub-section ( 1), the funds or the assets of the non-profit
organisation shall be deemed to have been used or applied for the benefit of an interested
person, if—
(a) the funds or the assets of the non-profit organisation are, or continue to be,
lent to any interested person, for any period during the financial year, without either
adequate security or adequate interest or both;
(b) the land, building or other asset of the non-profit organisation is, or contin-
ues to be, made available for the use of any interested person, for any period during
the financial year, without charging adequate rent or other compensation;
(c
) any amount is paid by way of salary, allowance or otherwise during the
Modes of in-
vestment.
Deemed in-
come of a
non-profit
organisation.
Use or appli-
cation of
funds or assets
for the benefit
of interested
person.
5
15
10
20
25
30
35
40

56
financial year to any interested person, out of the resources of the non-profit
organisation for services rendered by that person to such organisation and the amount
so paid is in excess of what may be reasonably paid for such services;
(d) the services of the non-profit organisation are made available to any inter-
ested person, during the financial year, without adequate remuneration or other com-
pensation;
(e) any share, security or other property is purchased by or on behalf of the
non-profit organisation from any interested person, during the financial year, for con-
sideration which is more than adequate;
(f) any share, security or other property is sold by or on behalf of the non-profit
organisation to any interested person, during the financial year, for consideration
which is less than adequate;
(g) any fund or asset of the non-profit organisation is diverted during the finan-
cial year in favour of any interested person where the fund or the value of the asset, as
the case may be, or the aggregate of the funds and the value of the assets so diverted
exceeds one thousand rupees; or
(h) any funds of the non-profit organisation are, or continue to remain, invested
for any period during the financial year (not being a period before the 1st day of
January, 1971), in any concern in which any interested person has a substantial inter-
est and such investment exceeds five per cent. of the capital of that concern.
98 .(1) A non-profit organisation shall make an application for its registration in the
prescribed form and manner to the Commissioner.
(2) The provisions of sub-section ( 1) shall not apply to any non-profit organization
which has been granted approval or registration under the Income tax Act, 1961, as it stood
before the commencement of this Code, if the organisation fulfils such conditions as may be
prescribed.
(3)The Commissioner, on receipt of the application for registration of a non-profit
organisation made under sub-section (1), shall call for such documents or information as he
considers necessary in order to satisfy himself about the objects and genuineness of its
activities and may make such further inquiries as may be required.
(4) The Commissioner shall, within a period of six months from the end of the month in
which the application under sub-section (1) was received, pass an order in writing—
(a)   registering the non-profit organisation if he is satisfied about its objects
and the  genuineness of its activities; or
(b)  refusing to register the non-profit organisation if he is not so satisfied, after
giving the organisation an opportunity of being heard.
 (5)  The registration granted under sub-section  (4) shall be valid from the financial
year in which the application under sub-section (1) was made.
 ( 6) Where the Commissioner is satisfied that  the activities of the non-profit
organisation are—
 (i) not genuine; or
(ii) not being carried out in accordance with its objects; or
(iii) not being carried out in accordance with any other law which is applicable
to it or under which it is registered or approved,
he shall pass an order in writing cancelling the registration or withdrawing the approval,
as the case may be, granted under this section or the Income tax Act, 1961, as it stood
Registration
of a non-
profit
organisation.
43 of 1961.
43 of 1961.
5
15
10
20
25
30
35
40

57
before the commencement of this Code, after giving the organisation an opportunity of
being heard.
99. (1) The non-profit organisation shall keep and maintain such books of accounts, in
the manner as may be prescribed.
(2)  The non-profit organisation shall maintain separate books of account in respect of
business incidental to charitable activity.
(3)  The non-profit organisation shall obtain a report of audit in such form as may be
prescribed, from an accountant before the due date of filing of the return of tax bases, if the
gross receipts referred to in section 93 in any financial year exceed five lakh rupees.
100. (1) Where the total income of a non-profit organisation includes any anonymous
donation, the income-tax payable shall be the aggregate of—
(a)  the amount of income-tax calculated at the rate of thirty per cent. on the
aggregate of anonymous donations received in excess of the higher of the following,
namely:—
(i) five per cent. of the total donations received by the non-profit organi-
zation; or
(ii) one lakh rupees; and
 (b) the amount of income-tax with which the non-profit organisation would
have been chargeable had its total income been reduced by the amount of anonymous
donations referred to in clause (a).
(2) The provisions of sub-section (1) shall apply notwithstanding that the anonymous
donation has been made with a specific direction that it shall form part of the corpus of the
non-profit organisation.
  (3) No  outgoings shall be allowed in respect of any anonymous donation received.
 (4) In this section, “anonymous donation” means any voluntary contribution, where
a person receiving such contribution does not maintain a record of the identity indicating the
name and address of the person making such contribution and such other particulars as may
be prescribed.
101. (1) A non-profit organisation shall be liable to income-tax at the rate of thirty per
cent. in respect of its net worth if—
(a) it converts into any form of organisation which does not qualify as a non-
profit organisation;
 (b) it merges with any form of organisation which does not qualify as a non-
profit organisation;
 (c) it fails to transfer upon  dissolution all its assets to any other non-profit
organisation, within  a period of three months from the end of the month in which the
dissolution takes place.
(2) In this section—
(a) net worth  of the non-profit organisation shall be computed as on—
(i) the date of conversion or merger, as the case may be,  in a case falling
under clause (a) or clause (b) of sub-section (1);  and
(ii) the date of dissolution in a case falling under clause  (c) of sub-section (1);
Maintenance
of accounts
and tax audit.
Consequences
of conversion
of a non-
profit
organisation.
Anonymous
donations.
5
15
10
20
25
30
35
40

58
(b) “net worth” of the non-profit organisation means the aggregate value of the
total assets of the non-profit organisation as reduced by the liabilities of such
organisation computed in accordance with such rules of valuation as may be pre-
scribed.
102. (1) The provisions of this Chapter shall not apply to any person who—
(a) holds any business under trust, notwithstanding any specific direction that—
(i) the business shall form part of the corpus of such person; or
(ii) the income from the business shall be applied only for charitable
activity;
(b) fails to comply with the conditions specified in section 97;
(c) ceases to be a non-profit organisation at any time during the financial year,
irrespective of registration granted under sub-section (4) of section 98;
(d) carries on any business if it is not a business incidental to charitable activity.
(2) Without prejudice to sub-section (1), the non-profit organisation which ceases to
be so due to conversion, merger or dissolution as referred to in sub-section ( 1) of section
101 shall be liable to income-tax in respect of its net worth in accordance with that section.
(3) The total income of any person falling under clauses (a), (b), (c) or clause (d) of
sub-section (1)  shall be computed in accordance with the other provisions of  this Code.
103. In this Chapter, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “business incidental to charitable activity” means a business carried on in
the course of the actual carrying out of any charitable activity;
 (b) “charitable activity” means the following activities carried out in India,
namely:—
  (i)  relief of the poor;
(ii) advancement of education;
(iii)  medical relief;
(iv)  preservation of environment (including watersheds, forests and wild-
life);
(v) preservation of monuments or places or objects of artistic or historic
interest; or
(vi)  advancement of any other object of general public utility, not involv-
ing the carrying on of any activity in the nature of trade, commerce or business
or any activity of rendering any service in relation  thereto, for a cess, fee or any
other consideration (irrespective of nature of use, application or retention of the
income from such activity) and where the gross receipts during the financial
year from such activity exceed ten lakh rupees;
(c) “general public” means the body of people at large sufficiently defined by
some common quality of public or impersonal nature;
(d) “interested person” in relation to a non-profit organisation means—
(i) the founder of the organisation or the  settlor of the trust;
(ii) any person whose total contribution to the organisation during     the
financial year exceeds fifty thousand rupees;
(iii
) a member of the Hindu undivided family if the  settlor or founder or
person is  a Hindu undivided family;
Interpretations
in this
Chapter.
Provisions of
this Chapter
not to apply
in certain
cases.
5
15
10
20
25
30
35
40

59
(iv) any manager, by whatever name called, of the organisation or trustee
of the trust;
(v) any relative of the  settlor, founder, member, trustee or manager; or
(vi) any concern in which any of the persons referred to in clauses (i) to (v)
has a substantial interest;
 (e) “trust” includes legal obligation.
CHAPTER  V
COMPUTA TION OF BOOK PROFIT
104. (1) Notwithstanding anything in this Code, where the normal income-tax payable
for a financial year by a company is less than the tax on book profit, the book profit shall be
deemed to be the total income of the company for such financial year and it shall be liable to
income-tax on such total income at the rate specified in Paragraph A of the Second Schedule.
(2) Subject to the provisions of this Chapter, the book profit referred to in sub-section
(1) shall be computed in accordance with the formula—
A+B-(C+D)
Where
A= the net profit, as shown in the profit and loss account for the financial year
prepared in  accordance with  the provisions of section 105;
B = the aggregate of the following amounts, if debited to the profit and loss
account:
(a)   the amount of  any tax paid or payable under this Code, and the
provision therefor;
(b) the amount carried to any reserves, by whatever name called;
(c) the amount set aside as  provision for meeting unascertained liabilities;
(d) the amount by way of provision for  losses of subsidiary companies;
(e) the amount of dividends paid or proposed;
 (f) the amount of depreciation;
(g) the amount of deferred tax and the provision therefor;
(h) the amount set aside as provision for diminution in the value of any
asset;
(i) the amount of any expenditure referred to in clause (a) of sub-section
(1) of section 18;
C = the aggregate of the following amounts:
(a) the amount of depreciation debited to the profit and loss account
(excluding the depreciation on account of revaluation of assets);
(b) the amount withdrawn from the revaluation reserve and credited to the
profit and loss account, to the extent it does not exceed the amount of deprecia-
tion on account of revaluation of  assets referred to in clause (a);
(c) the amount withdrawn from any reserve or provision if any such amount
is credited to the profit and loss account and such amount has been taken into
account for computation of the book profit of any preceding financial year;
(d) the amount of profits of a sick industrial company for any financial year
comprised in the period commencing from the financial year in which the said
company has become a sick industrial company under sub-section (1) of section
17 of the Sick Industrial Companies (Special Provisions) Act, 1985 and ending
Computation
of book
profit.
1 of 1986.
5
15
10
20
25
30
35
40
45

60
with the financial year during which the entire net worth of such company
becomes equal to or exceeds the accumulated losses;
(e) the amount of any income referred to in section 10 read with the Sixth
Schedule, if credited to the profit and loss account;
(f) the amount of deferred tax, if any such amount is credited to the profit
and loss account;
D = the amount of loss brought forward.
(3) In sub-section (2), the loss brought forward shall be—
(i) nil, if such loss brought forward (excluding depreciation) or unabsorbed
depreciation as per books of account, as the case may be is nil;  or
(ii)  the amount of loss brought forward (excluding depreciation) or unabsorbed
depreciation as per books of account, whichever is less, in any other case.
(4) In sub-section ( 2), the amount of tax shall include—
(a) any interest charged or chargeable  under this Code;
(b) any tax on distributed profits under section 109 ;
(c )  any tax on distributed income under section 110;
(d) any tax paid on branch profits under section 111; and
(e) any tax on wealth under section 112.
(5) Every company to which this section applies shall obtain a report in such form as
may be prescribed from an accountant certifying that the book profit has been computed in
accordance with the provisions of this section.
(6) In this Chapter—
(a) “normal income-tax” means the income-tax payable  for a financial year by a
company on its total income in accordance with the provisions other than the provi-
sions of this Chapter;
(b) “tax on book profit” means the amount of tax  computed on book profit at a
rate specified in Paragraph A of the  Second Schedule.
105. (1) Every company shall, for the purposes of section 104, prepare  its profit and
loss account for the relevant financial year in accordance with the provisions of Parts II and
III of Schedule VI to the Companies Act, 1956.
(2) In this section, the accounting policies, the accounting standards adopted for
preparing such accounts including profit and loss account and the method and rates adopted
for calculating the depreciation shall, in the case of a company, be the same as have been
adopted for the purpose of preparing such accounts including profit and loss account laid
by the company at its annual general meeting in accordance with the provisions of section
210 of the Companies Act, 1956.
(3) Where the company has adopted or adopts the financial year under the Companies
Act, 1956, which is different from the financial year under this Code—
(i) the accounting policies;
(ii) the accounting standards adopted for preparing such accounts including
profit and loss account;
(iii) the method and rates adopted for calculating the depreciation,
shall correspond to the accounting policies, accounting standards and the
Preparation
of profit and
loss account
for
computing
book profit.
1 of 1956.
1 of 1956.
1 of 1956.
5
15
10
20
25
30
35
40

61
method and rates for calculating the depreciation which have been adopted for preparing
such accounts including profit and loss account for such financial year or part of such
financial year falling within the relevant financial year.
106.  (1) The credit for tax paid by a company under section 104 shall be allowed to it
in accordance with the provisions of this section.
(2) The tax credit of a financial year to be allowed under sub-section (1) shall be the
excess of tax on book profit over the normal income-tax.
(3) No interest shall be payable on tax credit allowed under sub-section (1).
(4) The amount of tax credit determined under sub-section (2) shall be carried forward
and allowed in accordance with the provisions of sub-sections ( 5) and ( 6) but such carry
forward shall not be allowed beyond the fifteenth financial year immediately succeeding the
financial year  for which tax credit becomes allowable under sub-section (1).
(5) The tax credit shall be allowed  for a financial year in which the normal income-tax
exceeds the tax on book profit  and the credit shall be allowed to the extent of the excess of
the normal income-tax over the tax on book profit, balance of the tax credit, if any, shall be
carried forward.
(6) If the amount of normal income-tax  or the tax on book profit is reduced or increased
as a result of any order passed under this Code, the amount of tax credit allowed under this
section shall also be varied accordingly.
(7) In the case of conversion of a private company or unlisted public company into a
limited liability partnership under the Limited Liability Partnership Act, 2008, the provisions
of this section shall not apply to the successor limited liability partnership.
(8)  In this section, the expressions “private company” and “unlisted public com-
pany” shall have the meaning respectively assigned to them in the Limited Liability Partner-
ship Act, 2008.
107.  Save as otherwise provided in this Chapter, all other provisions of this Code shall
apply to a company referred to in this Chapter.
CHAPTER VI
P
ROVISIONS RELATING TO TAX ON INCOME RECEIVED FROM VENTURE CAPITAL COMPANY AND
VENTURE CAPITAL FUND
 108.  (1) Notwithstanding anything in this Code, any income received by a person out
of investments made in a venture capital company or venture capital fund shall be chargeable
to income-tax in the same manner as if it were the income received by such person had he
made investments directly in the venture capital undertaking.
(2) The venture capital company, the venture capital fund or the  person responsible
for making payment of the income on behalf of such company or fund shall furnish, within
such time as may be prescribed, to the person receiving such income and to the prescribed
income-tax authority, a statement in the prescribed form and  manner, giving details of the
nature of the income paid during the financial year and such other relevant details as may be
prescribed.
(3) The income paid by the venture capital company and the venture capital fund shall
be deemed to be of the same nature and in the same proportion in the hands of the person
receiving such income as it had been received by, or had accrued to, the venture capital
company or the venture capital fund, as the case may be, during the financial year.
(4) The provisions of Part B or Part C of this Code shall not apply to the income paid
by a venture capital company or venture capital fund under this section.
Tax credit
for tax paid
on book
profit.
Application
of other
provisions of
this Code.
6 of 2009.
6 of 2009.
Tax on
income
received from
venture
capital
company and
venture
capital fund.
5
15
10
20
25
30
35
40
45

62
PART  B
DIVIDEND DISTRIBUTION TAX
CHAPTER  VII
SPECIAL PROVISIONS RELATING TO TAX ON DISTRIBUTED PROFITS OF DOMESTIC COMPANIES
109. (1) Every domestic company shall be liable to pay tax on any amount of dividend
declared, distributed or paid (whether interim or otherwise) to its shareholders, whether out
of current or accumulated profits.
(2) The tax on the dividend shall be charged at the rate specified in Paragraph B of the
Second Schedule, on the amount referred to in sub-section (1).
(3) The amount referred to in sub-section ( 1) shall be reduced by the amount of
dividend, if any, received by the domestic company during the financial year, if –
(i) such dividend is received from its subsidiary; and
(ii) the subsidiary has paid tax under this section on such dividend.
(4) The domestic company or the principal officer of such company responsible for
making payment of the dividend, as the case may be, shall be liable to pay the tax on
dividend to the credit of the Central Government within a period of fourteen days from the
date of declaration, distribution or payment of such dividend, whichever is earliest.
(5) No deduction under any other provision of this Code shall be allowed to the
domestic company or a shareholder in respect of the dividend charged to tax or the tax
thereon.
(6) The tax on dividend so paid by the domestic company shall be treated as the final
payment of tax in respect of the dividend declared, distributed or paid and no further credit
shall be claimed by the domestic company or by any other person in respect of the tax so
paid.
(7) If the domestic company or, as the case may be, the principal officer of such
company responsible for making payment of the dividend does not pay the tax in accordance
with the provisions of this section, then, it or he shall be deemed to be an assessee in default
in respect of the tax payable by it or him and  the provisions of this Code relating to the
collection and recovery of tax shall apply.
(8)  If the domestic company or, as the case may be, the principal officer of such
company  fails to pay the whole or any part of the tax on dividend referred to in sub-section
(2), within the time allowed under sub-section (4), then,  it or he  shall be liable to pay simple
interest at the rate of one per cent. for every month on the amount of such tax for the period
beginning on the date immediately after the last date on which such tax was payable and
ending with the date on which the tax is actually paid.
(9) Notwithstanding that no income-tax is payable by a domestic company on its
total income computed in accordance with the provisions of Part A of this Code, the tax on
dividend declared, distributed or paid under sub-section (1) shall be payable by such company.
(10) In this section, —
(a) a company shall be a subsidiary of another company if such other company
holds more than fifty  per cent.  of nominal value of the equity share capital of the
company;
(b)  "dividend" shall not include any payment referred to in  item ( e)  of sub-
clause (I) of clause (81) of section 314.
Tax on
distributed
profits of
domestic
companies.
5
15
10
20
25
30
35
40
45

63
PART  C
TAX ON DISTRIBUTED INCOME
CHAPTER  VIII
SPECIAL PROVISIONS RELATING TO TAX ON DISTRIBUTED INCOME
110. (1) Every mutual fund shall be liable to pay tax on any amount of income distributed
or paid to the unit holders of  equity oriented fund.
(2) Every life insurer shall be liable to pay tax on any amount of income, computed in
the manner prescribed, distributed or paid to the policy holders of an approved equity
oriented life insurance scheme.
(3) The tax on the distributed income shall be charged at the rate specified in Paragraph
C of the Second Schedule, on the amount referred to in sub-sections (1) and (2).
 (4) The mutual fund or the life insurer or the person responsible for making payment
of the distributed income on its behalf, as the case may be, shall be liable to pay tax to the
credit of the Central Government within a period of  fourteen days from the date of distribution
or payment of such income, whichever is earlier.
(5) No deduction under any other provision of this Code shall be allowed to the mutual
fund or, as the case may be, the life insurer in respect of the distributed income charged to tax
or the tax thereon.
(6) The tax on distributed income so paid by the mutual fund  or, as the case may be, the
life insurer shall be treated as the final payment of tax in respect of income distributed or paid
and no further credit shall be claimed by the mutual fund or the life insurer or by any other
person in respect of the tax so paid.
(7) If the mutual fund or the life insurer or the person responsible for making payment
of the distributed income on its behalf, as the case may be, does not pay the tax in accordance
with the provisions of this section, then, it or he shall be deemed to be an assessee in default
in respect of the tax payable by it or him and  the provisions of this Code  relating to the
collection and recovery of tax shall apply.
(8) If the mutual fund or the life insurer or the person responsible for making payment
of distributed income on its behalf, as the case may be, fails to pay the whole or any part of
the tax on distributed income referred to in sub-section (3), within the time allowed under
sub-section (4), then it  or he  shall be liable to pay simple interest at the rate of one per cent.
for every month  on the amount of such tax for the period beginning on the date immediately
after the last date on which such tax was payable and ending with the date on which the tax
is actually paid.
(9) In this section,—
(a) “equity oriented fund” means  a fund where more than sixty-five per cent. of
total proceeds of such fund  are invested by way of equity shares in domestic compa-
nies;
(b) “approved equity oriented life insurance scheme” means—
(i) a life insurance scheme where more than sixty-five per cent. of the total
premia received under such scheme are invested by way of equity shares in
domestic companies; and
(ii) such scheme is approved by the Board in accordance with such guide-
lines as may be prescribed;
(c) the percentage of equity share holding of the mutual fund or the life insurance scheme,
as the case may be, shall be computed with reference to the annual average of the monthly
averages of the opening and closing figures.
Tax on
income
distributed  by
mutual fund or
life insurer.
5
15
10
20
25
30
35
40
45

64
PART D
BRANCH PROFITS TAX
CHAPTER IX
CHARGE OF BRANCH PROFITS TAX
111. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Code, every foreign company shall, in addition
to income-tax payable, be liable to branch profits tax in respect of branch profits of a financial
year.
(2) The branch profits tax shall be charged in respect of the branch profits of a financial
year of every foreign company at the rate specified in Paragraph D of the Second Schedule.
(3) The branch profits referred to in sub-section (1) shall be the  income attributable,
directly or indirectly, to the permanent establishment or an immovable property situated in
India, included in the total income of the foreign company for the financial year, as reduced
by the amount of income-tax payable on such attributable income.
(4) The liability to branch profits tax shall be discharged by payment of pre-paid taxes
in accordance with the provisions of this Code as if the branch profits tax was income-tax.
 (5) The branch profits tax charged under this section shall be collected after allowing
credit for pre-paid taxes, if any, in accordance with the provisions of this Code.
PART  E
W
EALTH-TAX
CHAPTER  X
CHARGE OF WEALTH-TAX
 112. (1) Subject to  the provisions of this Code, every person, other than a non-profit
organisation, shall be liable to pay wealth-tax on the net wealth on the valuation date of a
financial year.
(2) The wealth-tax shall be charged in respect of the net wealth  referred to in sub-
section (1), on the valuation date  of a financial year at the rate specified in Paragraph E of
the Second Schedule in the manner provided therein.
(3) The liability to wealth-tax shall be discharged by payment of pre-paid taxes in
accordance with the provisions of this Code.
(4) The wealth-tax charged under this section shall be collected after allowing credit
for pre-paid taxes, if any, in accordance with the provisions of this Code.
 113. (1) The net wealth of a person referred to in sub-sections (1) and (2)  of section
112 shall be the amount computed in accordance with the formula—
A-B
Where
A =  the aggregate of the value on the valuation date, of all the  specified assets,
wherever located, belonging to the person referred to in this section, computed in
accordance with the provisions of sub-section ( 5);
B  = the aggregate of the value on the valuation date, of all the debts, owed by
the person, which have been incurred in relation to the specified assets.
 (2) The specified assets referred to in sub-section (1) shall be the following, namely:—
(a) any building or land appurtenant thereto (hereinafter referred to as “house”),
used for any purpose;
(b) any farm house situated within twenty-five kilometers from local limits of any
municipality or municipal corporation (by whatever name called) or a Cantonment Board;
(c) any urban land;
Tax on
branch
profits.
Tax on net
wealth.
Computation
of net wealth.
5
15
10
20
25
30
35
40
45

65
(d) motor car, yacht, boat, helicopter and aircraft other than those used by the
assessee in the business of running them on hire or as stock-in-trade;
(e) jewellery, bullion, furniture, utensils or any other article made wholly or partly
of gold, silver, platinum or any other precious metal or any alloy containing one or
more of such precious metals, other than those used by the assessee as stock-in-
trade;
(f) archaeological collections, drawings, paintings, sculptures or any other work
of art;
(g) watch having  value in excess of fifty thousand rupees;
(h) cash in hand, in excess of two lakh rupees, of individuals and Hindu undi-
vided families;
(i) deposit in a bank located outside India, in case of individuals and Hindu
undivided families, and in the case of other persons any such deposit not recorded in
the books of account;
(j) any interest in a foreign trust or any other body located outside India (whether
incorporated or not) other than a foreign company; and
(k) any equity or preference shares held by a resident in a controlled foreign
company, as referred to in the Twentieth Schedule.
(3) The specified assets referred to in sub-section (2) shall not include the following,
namely:— 
 (a ) any one building in the occupation of a Ruler, being a building which
immediately before the commencement of the Constitution (Twenty-sixth Amendment)
Act, 1971, was his official residence by virtue of a declaration by the Central Govern-
ment under paragraph 13 of the Merged States (Taxation Concessions) Order, 1949, or
paragraph 15 of the Part B States (Taxation Concessions) Order, 1950;
(b ) jewellery in the possession of any Ruler, not being his personal property,
which has been recognised as his heirloom-—
(i) by the Central Government before the commencement of the Wealth-tax
Act, 1957, as it stood before the commencement of this Code; or
(ii) by the Board at the time of his first assessment to wealth-tax under the
Wealth-tax Act, 1957, as it stood before the commencement of this Code;
(c ) the value of the assets located outside India, if the person is a non resident;
and
(d ) any one  house or part of a house or one vacant plot of land not exceeding
five hundred square metres of area belonging to an individual or a Hindu undivided
family.
(4) The house referred to in clause (a) of sub-section (2) shall not include the follow-
ing, namely:—
(a) a house meant exclusively for residential purposes allotted by a company to
an employee;
(b) any house for residential or commercial purposes which forms part of stock-
in-trade;
(c) any house which the assessee may occupy for the purposes of   business
carried on by him;
(d) any house that has been let-out for a minimum period of three hundred days
in the financial year;
27 of 1957.
27 of 1957.
5
15
10
20
25
30
35
40
45

66
(e) any house in the nature of commercial establishments or complexes.
(5) The value of any specified asset, other than cash, referred to in sub-section ( 2),
shall be determined in such manner as may be  prescribed.
(6) In this Chapter, “valuation date” means the 31st day of March in the financial year.
 114. (1) The specified assets referred to in sub-section (2)  of section  113 shall be
deemed to be belonging to the person, being an individual, and included in computing his
net wealth   if such assets,  as on the valuation date, are held (whether in the form they were
transferred or otherwise),—
(a) by the spouse of such individual to whom such asset has been transferred
by him, directly or indirectly, otherwise than for adequate consideration or in connec-
tion with an agreement to live apart;
(b) by a minor child, not being a person with disability or person with severe
disability, of such individual;
(c) by a person to whom such asset has been transferred by the individual,
directly or indirectly, otherwise than for adequate consideration for the immediate or
deferred benefit  of the individual or his spouse;
(d) by a trust to whom such asset has been transferred by the individual, if the
transfer is revocable during the life time of the beneficiary of the trust;
(e) by a person, not being a trust, to whom such asset has been transferred by
the individual, if the transfer is revocable during the life time of the person; and
(f) by a Hindu undivided family by way of  any converted property.
(2) The provisions of sub-section (1) shall not apply in respect of such specified asset
as has been acquired by the minor child out of his income referred to in clause (b) of sub-
section (1) of section 9 and which are held by him on the valuation date.
(3) In this section,—
(a) the asset referred to in  clause (b) of   sub-section (1) shall be included in the
net wealth of— 
(i) the parent who is the guardian of the minor child; or
(ii) the parent whose net wealth (excluding the assets referred to in that
clause) is higher, if both the parents are guardians of the child;
(b) a transfer shall be deemed to be revocable if—
(i) it contains any provision for the re-transfer, directly or indirectly, of the
whole or any part of the income or asset to the transferor; or
(ii) it, in any way, gives the transferor a right to re-assume power, directly
or indirectly, over the whole or any part of the income or asset;
(c) the person shall, notwithstanding anything in this Code or in any other law
for the time being in force, be deemed to be the owner of a building or part thereof, if
he is a member of a co-operative society, company or other association of persons and
the building or part thereof is allotted or leased to him under a house building scheme
of the society, company or association, as the case may be;
(d) the holder of an impartible estate shall be deemed to be the individual owner
of all the properties comprised in the estate; and
(e) the value of any assets transferred under an irrevocable transfer shall be
liable to be included in computing the net wealth of the transferor  in the year in which
the power to revoke vests in him.
Net wealth to
include
certain assets.
27 of 1957
27 of 1957
5
15
10
20
25
30
35
40
45

67
PART  F
PREVENTION OF ABUSE OF THE CODE
CHAPTER  XI
SPECIAL PROVISIONS RELATING TO AVOIDANCE OF TAX
 115. (1) A person shall not be allowed a deduction under this Code in respect of so
much of the expenditure, whether capital or revenue in nature, as is considered by the
Assessing Officer to be excessive or unreasonable if—
(a) the payment in respect of the expenditure has been, or is to be, made to any
associated person; and
(b) the expenditure is excessive, or unreasonable, having regard to—
(i) the fair market value of the goods, services or facilities for which the
payment is made;
(ii) the legitimate needs of the business of the person; or
(iii) the benefit derived by, or accruing to, the person therefrom.
 116. (1) The amount of any income, or expense, arising from an international transaction
shall be determined having regard to the arm’s length price.
(2) The allocation or apportionment of, or any contribution to, any cost or expense
incurred or to be incurred in connection with a benefit, service or facility provided or to be
provided to any associated enterprise shall be determined having regard to the arm’s length
price of such benefit, service or facility, as the case may be, if— 
(a) two or more associated enterprises have entered into a mutual agreement or
arrangement for the allocation or apportionment of, or any contribution to, such cost
or expense; and
(b) the benefit, service or facility provided to any one or more associated enter-
prises involves an international transaction.
(3) The provisions of this section shall not apply in a case, if the determination under
sub-section (1), or sub-section (2), has the effect of reducing the income chargeable to tax,
or increasing the loss computed, on the basis of entries made in the books of account in
respect of the financial year in which the international  transaction was entered.
 117. ( 1)The arm’s length price in relation to an international transaction shall be
determined in accordance with  any of the methods as may be prescribed,  being the most
appropriate method.
(2) The most appropriate method referred to in sub-section ( 1) shall be determined
having regard to the nature of transaction, class of transaction, class of associated enterprise
or functions performed by such enterprises or such other relevant factors as may be
prescribed.
(3) The most appropriate method determined under sub-section (2) shall be applied for
determination of arm’s length price in such manner as may be  prescribed .
(4) The arm’s length price shall be— 
(a) the price determined by the most appropriate method, if only one price is
determined by the method; or
(b) the arithmetical mean of the prices determined by the most appropriate method,
if more than one price is determined by the method.
(5) The price at which the international transaction has actually been undertaken shall
be deemed to be the arm’s length price if the variation between the arm’s length price
Disallowance
of
expenditure
having regard
to fair
market
value.
Determination
of income
from
international
transaction
having regard
to arm’s
length price.
Determination
of arm’s
length price.
5
15
10
20
25
30
35
40
45

68
determined under sub-section (4) and the price at which the international transaction has
actually been undertaken does not exceed five per cent. of the latter.
(6) The income of an associated enterprise shall not be recomputed by reason of
determination of arm’s length price in the case of the other associated enterprise.
(7) No deduction under Sub-chapter-IV of Chapter III shall be allowed in respect of
the amount of income by which the total income of the assessee is enhanced after
computation of income under this section.
(8) The determination of arm’s length price shall be subject to safe harbour rules, as
may be prescribed  in this behalf.
118.(1) The Board, with the approval of the Central Government, may enter into an
advance pricing agreement with any person, specifying the manner in which  arm’s length
price is to be determined in relation to an international transaction, to  be entered into by that
person.
(2) The manner of determination of arm’s length price referred to in sub-section (1)
may be any method including one of the prescribed methods, as referred to in sub-section
(1) of section 117, with such adjustments or variations, as may be necessary or expedient so
to do.
(3 ) The arm’s length price of any international transaction, in respect of which the
advance pricing agreement has been entered into, notwithstanding  anything  in this Chapter,
shall be determined in accordance with the advance pricing agreement so entered.
(4 ) The agreement referred to in sub-section (1) shall be valid for such financial years
as specified in the agreement which in no case shall exceed five consecutive financial years.
(5) The advance pricing agreement entered into shall be binding—
(a) only on the person in whose case the agreement has been entered into;
(b) only in respect of the transaction in relation to which the agreement has
been entered into; and
(c) on the Commissioner, and the income-tax authorities subordinate to him,
only in respect of the said person and the said transaction.
(6 ) The agreement referred to in sub-section (1) shall not be binding, if there is any
amendment to the Code having bearing on  the agreement so  entered.
(7 ) The Board may, by order, declare an agreement to be void ab initio, if it finds that
the agreement has been obtained by the person by fraud or misrepresentation of facts.
(8) Upon declaring the agreement void ab initio,  the provisions of this Code shall,
after excluding the period beginning with the date of such agreement and ending with the
date of order under sub-section ( 7 ), apply to the person as if such agreement had never
been entered into.
 (9) For the purposes of this section, the Board may, by notification, frame a Scheme
for advance pricing agreement in respect of an international transaction.
119. (1) The total income of a person shall include all income accruing to any non-
resident, if—
(a) the income accrues by virtue of a transfer of any asset by the person, either
alone or in conjunction with associated operations, directly or indirectly, to the non-
resident;
(b) the person —
(i) acquires any rights by virtue of which he has power to enjoy, whether
forthwith or in the future, such income; or
Advance
pricing
agreement.
Avoidance of
income-tax
by
transactions
resulting in
transfer of
income to
non-residents.
5
15
10
20
25
30
35
40
45

69
(ii) is entitled to receive, or has received, any capital sum, the payment
whereof is in any way connected with the transfer or any associated operations;
and
(c) the income would have been included in the total income of the person, had
the transfer not taken place.
(2) A person shall be deemed to have the power to enjoy the income of a non-resident,
if—
(a) the income is in fact so dealt with by the person so as to be calculated at some
point of time and, whether in the form of income or not, to enure for the benefit of the
person;
(b) the accrual or receipt of the income operates to increase the value to the
person of any assets held by him or for his benefit;
(c) the person receives, or is entitled to receive, at any time any benefit provided,
or to be provided, out of that income, or out of moneys, which are or  shall be available
for the purpose by reason of the effect, or successive effects, of the associated opera-
tions on that income and assets which represent that income;
(d) such person has power by means of the exercise of any power of appoint-
ment or power of revocation or otherwise to obtain for himself, whether with or without
the consent of any other person, the beneficial enjoyment of the income; or
(e) the person is able, in any manner whatsoever and whether directly or indi-
rectly, to control the application of the income.
(3) For determining whether a person has power to enjoy the income, regard shall be
had to— 
(a) the substantial result and effect of the transfer and any associated opera-
tions; and
(b) all benefits which may at any time accrue to such person as a result of the
transfer and any associated operations, irrespective of the nature or form of the ben-
efits.
(4) The provisions of this section shall not apply if the person referred to in sub-
section ( 1) shows to the satisfaction of the Assessing Officer that the transfer and all
associated operations were bona fide commercial transactions and were not designed for the
purpose of avoiding liability to taxation.
 120. The total income of any person shall include any interest accruing from any
security owned by any other person if—
(a) the person undertakes a transaction relating to sale and buy-back of the
security;
(b) the interest accrues to the other person as a result of such transaction; and
(c) the income would have been included in the total income of the person, had
the transfer not taken place.
 121. (1) The transaction relating to buy and sale back of  security under section  120
shall, in the case of the other person referred to therein, be ignored and no account shall be
taken of the transaction in computing the income if the interest accruing to the other person
is not included in his total income by virtue of the provisions of that section.
(2) The loss, if any, arising to a person on account of any buy and sale back transaction
in any security undertaken by him, shall be ignored for the purposes of computing his total
income, if any other income accruing to the person on such security is not included in his
total income.
Avoidance of
tax by sale
and buy-back
transaction
in security.
Avoidance of
tax by buy
and sale back
transaction
in security.
5
15
10
20
25
30
35
40
45

70
(3) The loss, referred to in sub-section ( 2), shall be ignored to the extent such loss
does not exceed the amount of any other income referred to therein.
 122. The income accruing from a debt instrument, transferred by a person at any time
during the financial year, shall not be less than the amount of broken-period income from the
instrument.
 123. (1) Any arrangement entered into by a person may be declared as an impermissible
avoidance arrangement and the consequences, under this Code, of the arrangement may be
determined by—
(a) disregarding, combining or recharacterising any step in, or a part or whole
of, the impermissible avoidance arrangement;
(b) treating the impermissible avoidance arrangement—
(i) as if it had not been entered into or carried out; or
(ii) in such other manner as in the circumstances of the case, the Commis-
sioner deems appropriate for the prevention or diminution of the relevant tax
benefit;
 (c) disregarding any accommodating party or treating any accommodating party
and any other party as one and the same person;
(d ) deeming persons who are connected persons in relation to each other to be
one and the same person;
(e) reallocating, amongst the parties to the arrangement—
(i) any accrual, or receipt, of a capital or revenue nature; or
(ii) any expenditure, deduction, relief or rebate; or
(f ) recharacterising—
(i) any equity into debt or vice versa;
(ii) any accrual, or receipt, of a capital or revenue nature; or
 (iii) any expenditure, deduction, relief or rebate .
(2) The provisions of  sub-section ( 1) may be applied in the alternative for, or in
addition to, any other basis for  determination of tax liability in accordance with such guidelines
as may be prescribed.
(3)  The provisions of this section shall apply subject to such conditions and in the
manner as may be prescribed.
 124. In this  Chapter,—
(1) “accommodating party” means a party to an arrangement who, as a direct or
indirect result of his participation, derives any amount in connection with the
arrangement, which  shall—
(a) be included in his total income which would have otherwise been
included in the total income of another party;
(b) not be included in his total income which would have otherwise been
included in the total income of another party;
(c) be treated as a deductible expenditure, or allowable loss, by the party
which would have otherwise constituted a non-deductible expenditure, or non-
allowable loss, in the hands of another party; or
(d) result in pre-payment by any other party;
Broken-period
income
accruing from
a debt
instrument.
Interpretations
in this
Chapter.
General anti-
avoidance
rule.
5
15
10
20
25
30
35
40

71
(2) “arm’s length price” means a price which is applied, or proposed to be applied,
in a transaction between persons, enterprises or undertakings, other than associated
enterprises, in uncontrolled, unrelated or independent conditions;
(3) “arrangement” means any step in, or a part or whole of, any transaction,
operation, scheme, agreement or understanding, whether enforceable or not, and
includes any of the above  involving the alienation of property;
(4) “asset” includes property, or right, of any kind;
(5) “associated enterprise” in relation to another enterprise, means an enterprise—
(a) which participates, directly or indirectly, or through one or more inter-
mediaries, in the management or control or capital of the other enterprise; or
(b) in respect of which one or more persons who participate, directly or
indirectly, or through one or more intermediaries, in its management or control or
capital, are the same persons who participate, directly or indirectly, or through
one or more intermediaries, in the management or control or capital of the other
enterprise,
and for the purposes of sub-clauses (a) and (b) above, two enterprises, shall be deemed to be
associated enterprises at any time during the financial year, if they are associated with each
other by virtue of—
(i ) one enterprise holding, directly or indirectly, shares carrying  twenty-
six per cent. or more of the voting power in the other enterprise;
(ii ) any person or enterprise holding, directly or indirectly, shares carry-
ing  twenty-six per cent. or more of the voting power in each of such enterprises;
(iii ) a loan advanced by one enterprise to the other enterprise and the
loan constitutes  fifty-one per cent. or more of the book value of the total assets
of the other enterprise;
(iv ) one enterprise guarantees ten per cent. or more of the total borrow-
ings of the other enterprise;
(v) more than one-half of the board of directors, or members, of the gov-
erning board, or one or more executive directors, or executive members, of the
governing board of one enterprise, being appointed by the other enterprise;
(vi ) more than one-half of the directors, or members, of the governing
board, or one or more of the executive directors, or executive members, of the
governing board, of each of the two enterprises, being appointed by the same
person or persons;
(vii ) the manufacture, or processing, of any goods or articles of, or carry-
ing on the business by, one enterprise being wholly dependent on the use of
know-how, patents, copyrights, trade marks, brands, licences, franchises, or any
other business or commercial rights of similar nature, or any data, documenta-
tion, drawing or specification relating to any patent, invention, model, design,
secret formula or process, of which the other enterprise is the owner or in respect
of which the other enterprise has exclusive rights;
(viii) ninety per cent.  or more of the raw materials and consumables
required for the manufacture, or processing, of goods or articles carried out by
one enterprise, being supplied by the other enterprise, or by persons specified
by the other enterprise, and the prices and other conditions relating to the
supply are influenced by such other enterprise;
(ix) the goods or articles manufactured, or processed, by one enterprise,
being sold to the other enterprise or to persons specified by the other enterprise,
and the prices and other conditions relating thereto are influenced by such other
enterprise;
General anti-
avoidance
rule.
5
15
10
20
25
30
35
40
45
50

72
(x)  the services provided, directly or indirectly, by one enterprise to
another enterprise or to persons specified by the other enterprise, and the
amount payable and the other conditions relating thereto are influenced by
such other enterprise;
(xi) one enterprise being controlled by an individual, and the other enter-
prise being also controlled by such individual or his relative, or jointly by such
individual and his relative;
(xii ) one enterprise being controlled by a Hindu undivided family, and the
other enterprise being also controlled by a member of such Hindu undivided
family or by a relative of a member of such Hindu undivided family or jointly by
such member and his relative;
(xiii) one enterprise holding ten per cent., or more, interest in another
enterprise being an unincorporated body;
(xiv) any specific or distinct location of either of the enterprises as may be
prescribed; or
(xv) any other relationship of mutual interest, existing between the two
enterprises, as may be prescribed;
(6) “associated operation” in relation to any transfer means an operation of any
kind effected by the transferor in relation to—
(a) any asset transferred;
(b) any asset representing, directly or indirectly, any asset so transferred;
(c) the income accruing from any asset so transferred; or
(d) any asset representing, directly or indirectly, the accumulation of in-
come accruing from any asset so transferred;
(7) “associated person” in relation to a person, means— 
(a) any relative of the person, if the person is an individual;
(b) any director of the company or any relative of such director, if the
person is a company;
(c) any participant in an unincorporated body or any relative of such
participant, if the person is an unincorporated body;
(d) any member of the Hindu undivided family or any relative of such
member, if the person is a Hindu undivided family;
(e) any individual who has a substantial interest in the business of the
person or any relative of such individual;
(f) a company, unincorporated body or Hindu undivided family having a
substantial interest in the business of the person or any director, participant, or
member of the company, body or family, or any relative of such director, partici-
pant or member;
(g) a company, unincorporated body or Hindu undivided family, whose
director, participant, or member have a substantial interest in the business of the
person; or family or any relative of such director, participant or member;
(h) any other person who carries on a business, if—
(i) the person being an individual, or any relative of such person,
has a substantial interest in the business of that other person; or
(ii) the person being a company, unincorporated body or Hindu
undivided family, or any director, participant or member of such company,
body or family, or any relative of such director, participant or member, has
a substantial interest in the business of that other person;
(8) “benefit” includes a payment of any kind;
(9) “broken period income” shall be calculated as if the income from such
securities had accrued from day to day and been apportioned accordingly for the
broken period;
5
15
10
20
25
30
35
40
45
50

73
(10) “bona fide purpose” shall not include any purpose which—
(a) has created rights or obligations that would not normally be created
between persons dealing at arm’s length; or
(b) would result, directly or indirectly, in the misuse, or abuse, of the
provisions of this Code;
(11) “capital sum” means—
(a) any sum paid by way of a loan or repayment of a loan; or
(b) any other sum paid otherwise than as income, being a sum which is not
paid for full consideration in money or money’s worth;
(12) “connected persons” includes associated persons;
(13) “enterprise” in relation to an international transaction includes—
(a) a person who is, or has been, or is likely to be, engaged in any business,
industrial, commercial, financial, construction, mining, research, investment or any
other similar activity, whether such activity is carried on directly or through one, or
more, of its units, divisions or subsidiaries, wherever located; and
(b) the permanent establishment of the person referred to in sub-clause (a);
(14) “funds” includes—
(a) any cash;
(b) cash equivalents; and
(c) any right, or obligation, to receive, or pay, the cash or cash equivalent;
(15) “impermissible avoidance arrangement” means a step in, or a part or whole
of, an arrangement, whose main purpose is to obtain a tax benefit and it—
(a) creates rights, or obligations, which would not normally be created
between persons dealing at arm’s length;
(b) results, directly or indirectly,  in the misuse, or abuse, of the provisions
of this Code;
(c) lacks commercial substance, in whole or in part; or
(d) is entered into, or carried out, by means, or in a manner, which would
not normally be employed for bona fide purposes;
(16)  “intangible property” includes know-how, patents, goodwill, copyrights,
trade-marks, brand name, licences, franchises, any business or commercial rights,
leasehold interest, exploration and exploitation rights, easement rights, air rights, water
rights, or any other thing that derives its value from its intellectual content instead of
its physical attributes;
(17) “international transaction” means—
(a) a transaction between two or more associated enterprises, either or all
of whom is a non-resident, in the nature of— 
(i) purchase, sale or lease, of tangible or intangible property;
(ii) supply of service;
(iii) lending, or borrowing, money;
(iv) any other transaction, which has a bearing on the income, loss
or asset of any one or more of the enterprises; or
(v) a mutual agreement or arrangement between two or more associ-
ated enterprises for the allocation or apportionment of, or any contribu-
tion to, any cost or expense incurred, or to be incurred, in connection with
a benefit, service or facility provided, or to be provided, to any one or more
of the enterprises;
(b
) a transaction entered into by two or more persons, not being associ-
ated enterprises, if— 
5
15
10
20
25
30
35
40
45

74
(i) the transaction is of the nature referred to in sub-clause (a);
(ii) there exists a prior agreement in relation to the relevant transac-
tion between such other person and the associated enterprise or the
terms of the relevant transaction are determined in substance between
such other person and the associated enterprise; and
(iii) either, or both, of the associated enterprises is a non-resident;
(18) “interest” includes dividend;
 (19) “lacks commercial substance”-a step in, or a part or whole of, an arrangement
shall be deemed to be lacking commercial substance, if—
(a)  it does not have a significant effect upon the business risks, or net
cash flows, of  any party to the arrangement apart from any effect attributable to
the tax benefit that would be obtained but for the provisions of section 123;
(b) the legal substance, or effect, of the  arrangement as a whole is incon-
sistent with, or differs significantly from, the legal form of its individual steps; or
(c) it includes, or involves—
(i) round trip financing without regard to,—
(A) whether or not the round tripped amounts can be traced
to funds transferred to, or received by, any party in connection with
the  arrangement;
(B) the time, or sequence, in which round tripped amounts are
transferred or received; or
(C) the means by, or manner in, which round tripped amounts
are transferred or received;
(ii) an accommodating or tax indifferent party;
(iii) any element that have the effect of offsetting or cancelling
each other; or
(iv) a transaction which is conducted through one or more persons and
disguises the nature, location, source, ownership, or control, of the fund;
(20) “party” means party to the arrangement;
(21) “round trip financing” includes financing in which—
(a) funds are transferred among the parties to the arrangement;  and
(b) the transfer of the funds would—
(i) result, directly or indirectly, in a tax benefit but for the provisions
of section 123; or
(ii) significantly reduce, offset or eliminate any business risk
incurred by any party to the arrangement;
(22)  “safe harbour”, in relation to computation of arm’s length price, means
circumstances in which the income-tax authorities shall accept the transfer price
declared by the assessee;
(23) “similar security” means security which entitles its holder to the same
rights against the same person as to capital and interest and the same remedies for the
enforcement of those rights, irrespective of any difference in the—
(a) total nominal amounts of the respective security;
(b) form in which it is held; or
(c) manner in which it can be transferred;
(24) "substantial interest in the business" a person shall be deemed to have a
substantial interest in the business, if—
(a) in case where the business is carried on by a company, such person is,
at any time during the financial year, the beneficial owner of equity shares
carrying twenty per cent. or more, of the voting power; or
5
15
10
20
25
30
35
40
45
50

75
(b) in any other case, such person is, at any time during the financial year,
beneficially entitled to twenty per cent. or more, of the profits of such business.
 (25) “tax benefit” means—
(a) a reduction, avoidance or deferral of tax or other amount payable under
this Code;
(b) an increase in a refund of tax or other amount under this Code;
(c) a reduction, avoidance or deferral of tax or other amount that would be
payable under this Code but for a tax treaty;
(d) an increase in a refund of tax or other amount under this Code as a
result of a tax treaty; or
(e) a reduction in tax bases including increase in loss,
in the relevant financial year or any other financial year.
(26) “transaction” in relation to an international transaction shall include an
arrangement, understanding or action in concert—
(a) whether or not such arrangement, understanding or action is formal or
in writing; or
(b) whether or not such arrangement, understanding or action is intended
to be enforceable by legal proceeding;
(27) “transaction relating to buy and sale back of  security” means a transaction
where a person buys a security, and sells or transfers the same, or similar, security;
(28) “transaction relating to sale and buy back of  security” means a transaction
where a person, being the owner of any security, sells or transfers the security, and
buys back or re-acquires the same, or similar, security;
(29) “transfer” in relation to any right includes the creation of  a right.
125. (1) An arrangement shall be presumed to have been entered into, or carried out,
for the main purpose of obtaining a tax benefit unless the person obtaining the tax benefit
proves that obtaining the tax benefit was not the main purpose of the arrangement.
(2)An arrangement shall be presumed to have been entered into, or carried out, for the
main purpose of obtaining a tax benefit, if the main purpose of a step in, or part of, the
arrangement is to obtain a tax benefit,  notwithstanding  the fact that the main purpose of the
whole arrangement is  not  to obtain a tax benefit.
PART  G
TAX MANAGEMENT
CHAPTER  XII
TAX ADMINISTRATION AND PROCEDURE
A. - Tax administration
126. There shall be the following classes of income-tax authorities for the purposes
of this Code, namely:—
(a) the Central Board of Direct Taxes constituted under the Central Boards of
Revenue Act, 1963,
(b) Chief Commissioners of Income-tax or Director-Generals of Income-tax,
(c) Commissioners of Income-tax or Directors of Income-tax or Commissioners of
Income-tax (Appeals),
(d) Additional Commissioners of Income-tax or Additional Directors of Income-tax,
(e) Joint Commissioners of Income-tax or Joint Directors of Income-tax,
(f) Deputy Commissioners of Income-tax or Deputy Directors of Income-tax,
(g) Assistant Commissioners of Income-tax or Assistant Directors of Income-tax,
(h) Income-tax Officers,
(i) Tax Recovery Officers,
(j) Inspectors of Income-tax.
Presumption
of purpose.
54 of 1963.
Income-tax
authorities.
5
15
10
20
25
30
35
40
45
50

76
127. ( 1) The Central Government may appoint such persons as it thinks fit to be
income-tax authorities.
 (2) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-section ( 1), and subject to the rules
and orders of the Central Government regulating the conditions of service of persons in
public services and posts, the Central Government may authorise the Board, or a Director-
General, a Chief Commissioner or a Director or a Commissioner to appoint income-tax
authorities below the rank of an Assistant Commissioner.
(3) Subject to the rules and orders of the Central Government regulating the conditions
of service of persons in public services and posts, an income-tax authority authorised in this
behalf by the Board may appoint such executive or ministerial staff as may be necessary to
assist it in the execution of its functions.
(4) The Board may, by notification, direct that any income-tax authority or authorities
specified in the notification shall be subordinate to such other income-tax  authority or
authorities as may be specified in such notification.
128.   Any income-tax authority, above the rank of Assessing Officer, shall have all the
powers that an Assessing Officer has under this Code in relation to the making of inquiries
129. (1) The Board may, from time to time, issue such orders, instructions, directions or
circulars to other income-tax authorities as it may consider expedient or necessary for the
proper administration of this Code.
(2) The Board shall not exercise its powers under sub-section (1) so as to—
(a) require any income-tax authority to make a particular assessment or to dispose
of a particular case in a particular manner;
(b) require the Commissioner of Income-tax (Appeals) to dispose off any matter
before it in a particular manner.
(3) The Board may, without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of sub-section
(1), if it considers expedient or necessary so to do, issue general or special orders in respect
of —
(a) any class of tax bases or class of cases, explaining the principles, specifying
the guidelines or procedures, whether by way of relaxation of  any provision of this
Code or otherwise, to be followed by other income-tax authorities in the work relating
to assessment or collection of revenue including charging of interest or the initiation
of proceedings for the imposition of penalties;
(b) any case or class of cases, for avoiding genuine hardship, authorising any
income-tax authority [other than Commissioner of Income-tax (Appeals)] to admit any
application or claim for any exemption, deduction, refund or any other relief under this
Code after the expiry of the period specified by or under this Code for making the
application or claim and deal with the same on merits in accordance with law;
(c) any case or class of cases, relaxing any requirement or conditions contained
in this Code in relation to grant of any relief , on fulfilment of the following conditions,
namely:—
(i) such relaxation is for avoiding genuine hardship;
(ii) the reasons for exercise of power have been specified in the order;
(iii) the default in complying with such requirement or condition was due
to circumstances beyond the control of the assessee;
(iv) the assessee has complied with such requirement or condition before
Appointment
and control of
income-tax
authorities.
Power of
higher
authorities.
Powers of the
Board to issue
instructions.
5
15
10
20
25
30
35
40
45
50

77
the completion of assessment of the financial year for which the relief is claimed;
and
(v) every order issued under this clause is laid before each House of Parliament.
(4) The orders, instructions, directions and circulars issued by the Board under this
section shall be binding on all other income-tax authorities and other persons employed in
the execution of this Code.
130. (1) The income-tax authorities shall exercise all or any of the powers and perform
all or any of the functions conferred on, or, as the case may be, assigned to such authorities
by or under this Code in accordance with such directions as the Board may issue for the
exercise of the powers and performance of the functions by all or any of those authorities.
 (2) The directions of the Board under sub-section (1) may authorise any other income-
tax authority to issue orders in writing for the exercise of the powers and performance of the
functions by all or any of the other income-tax authorities who are subordinate to it.
(3) In issuing the directions or orders referred to in sub-sections (1) and (2), the Board
or other income-tax authority authorised by it may have regard to any one or more of the
following criteria, namely :—
(a) territorial area;
(b) persons or classes of persons;
(c) incomes or classes of income; and
(d) cases or classes of cases.
(4) Any income-tax authority, being an authority higher in rank, may, if so directed by
the Board, exercise the powers and perform the functions of the income-tax authority lower
in rank and any such direction issued by the Board shall be deemed to be a direction issued
under sub-section ( 1).
 (5) The Board may, by order , authorise any Director General or Director to perform
such functions of any other income-tax authority as may be assigned to him by the Board.
(6) The Chief Commissioner, if authorised by the Board, may direct two or more
Assessing Officers (whether of same rank or not) to exercise and perform the powers and
functions conferred on or assigned to them concurrently and  the Assessing Officer lower in
rank shall follow the directions of the Assessing Officer who is higher in rank.
131. (1) The Assessing Officer who has been vested with jurisdiction over any area,
by virtue of any direction or order issued under section 130, shall, within the limits of such
area, have jurisdiction in respect of —
(a) any person carrying on a business,—
(i) in a case where the business is carried on in more places than one, the
principal place of his business is situate within the area; or
(ii) in any other case, the place at which he carries on his business is
situate within the area; and
(b) any other person residing within the area.
(2) Any dispute relating to jurisdiction of an  Assessing Officer shall be decided by
the Chief Commissioner under whom the Assessing Officer is functioning.
Jurisdiction
of income-
tax authori-
ties.
Jurisdiction of
Assessing
Officers.
5
15
10
20
25
30
35
40

78
(3) Any dispute relating to jurisdiction of the Assessing Officer where it relates to
areas within the jurisdiction of different Chief Commissioners shall be decided by consensus
between the Chief Commissioners and if they are not in agreement, by the Board, or by such
Chief Commissioner as the Board may direct.
(4) No person shall be entitled to question the jurisdiction of an Assessing Officer—
(a) after the expiry of one month from the date on which he was served with the
notice under sub-section (2) of section 150, if the person has furnished a return under
sub-section (1) of section 144 or after the completion of assessment, whichever is
earlier;
(b) after the expiry of the time allowed by the notice under sub-section ( 1) of
section 146 or under sub-section (2) of section 159, if no return has been filed.
(5) Subject to the provisions of sub-section ( 4), where an assessee calls in question
the jurisdiction of an Assessing Officer, then the Assessing Officer shall, if not satisfied with
the correctness of the claim, refer the matter for determination under sub-section (2) before
the assessment is made.
(6) Every Assessing Officer shall have all the powers conferred by, or under, this Code
on an Assessing Officer in respect of the tax bases aceruing or received within the area over
which he has been vested with jurisdiction under section 129, notwithstanding anything  in
this section or in any direction or order issued under section 129.
132. (1) The Chief Commissioner or, as the case may be, the Commissioner may by an
order transfer a case from any Assessing Officer to any other Assessing Officer who are
subordinate to him.
(2) The Chief Commissioner may by an order transfer a case from any Assessing
Officer subordinate to him to any  Assessing Officer subordinate to any other Chief
Commissioner, if both the Chief Commissioners are in agreement with such transfer.
(3) The Board, or the Chief Commissioner as may be authorised by the Board, may by
an order transfer a case from any Assessing Officer subordinate to a Chief Commissioner to
any Assessing Officer subordinate to any other Chief Commissioner, if the Chief
Commissioners are not in agreement with such transfer.
(4) Any order under this section shall be passed after giving the person, whose case is
being transferred, as far as possible an opportunity of being heard in the matter and after
recording the reasons for such transfer.
(5) The provisions of sub-section ( 4) shall not apply if the case is being transferred
from an Assessing Officer to another Assessing Officer located in the same city.
(6) The transfer of a case under this section may be made at any stage of the proceedings,
and it shall not be necessary to reissue any notice already issued by the transferor Assessing
Officer.
(7) In this Chapter, the expression “case” in relation to any person whose name is
specified in any order or direction issued under relevant provisions, means all proceedings
under this Code in respect of any year which –
(i) may be pending on the date of such order or direction;
(ii) may have been completed on or before such date; or
(iii)  may be commenced after such date.
133. (1) The income-tax authority who succeeds another authority as a result of
change in jurisdiction or for any other reason, shall continue the proceeding from the stage
at which it was left by his predecessor.
Power to
transfer
cases.
Change of
 incumbent.
5
15
10
20
25
30
35
40
45

79
(2) The assessee in such a case may be given, an opportunity of being heard if so
requested, before passing any order in his case.
134. ( 1) The  prescribed income-tax authorities and the Dispute Resolution Panel
shall, for the purposes of this Code, have the same powers as are vested in a court under the
Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, while trying a suit in respect of the following matters, namely:—
(a) discovery and inspection;
(b) enforcing the attendance of any person, including any officer of a banking
company and examining him on oath;
(c) compelling the production of books of account and other documents; and
(d) issuing commissions.
(2)  For the purposes of making any inquiry or investigation, the prescribed income-
tax authority shall be vested with the powers referred to in sub-section (1), whether or not
any proceedings is pending before  it.
(3) Any income-tax authority prescribed for the purposes of sub-section ( 1) or sub-
section (2) may, subject to the rules made in this behalf, impound any books of account  or
other documents produced before it and retain them in its custody for such period as it
thinks fit.
(4)  Any income-tax authority below the rank of Joint Commissioner shall not,—
(a) impound any books of account or other documents without recording his
reasons for so doing; or
(b) retain in his custody any such books or documents for a period exceeding
thirty days without obtaining the approval of the Chief Commissioner or the
Commissioner.
135. (1) The Competent Investigating Authority may authorise any Authorised Officer
to carry out search and seizure,  if he has, in consequence of information in his possession,
reason to believe that —
(a) any person to whom a summons or a notice under sub-section (1) of section
131 or sub-section (1) of section 14 of the Income-tax Act, 1961 or under section 37 or
sub-section (4) of section 16 of the Wealth-tax Act, 1957, as they stood before the
commencement of this Code, or under sub-section (1) of section 134 or section 146 or
section 150 of this Code,  was issued, has omitted or failed to furnish the material as
required by such summon or notice;
(b) any person to whom a summons or notice as aforesaid has been or might be
issued will not, or would not, produce or cause to be produced, any material which will
be useful for, or relevant to, any proceeding under the Income-tax Act, 1961or the
Wealth-tax Act, 1957, as they stood before the commencement of this Code, or under
this Code; or
(c) any person is in possession of any material which represents either wholly or
partly the tax bases or property which has not been, or would not be, disclosed for the
purposes of the Income-tax Act, 1961, as they stood before the commencement of this
Powers
regarding
discovery
and
production
of evidence.
Search and
seizure.
43 of 1961.
27 of 1957.
27 of 1957.
5 of 1908.
43 of 1961.
43 of 1961.
5
15
10
20
30
35
40
45

80
or the Wealth-tax Act, 1957, as they stood before the commencement of this Code, or
this Code (hereinafter in this section referred to as the undisclosed tax bases or property).
(2) The Authorised Officer shall, in pursuance to an authorisation issued under
sub-section ( 1), carry out the search and seizure and, for this purpose, have all the
powers to—
(a) enter and search any building, place, vessel, vehicle or aircraft where he has
reason to suspect that any material, referred to in sub-section (1), are kept;
(b) break open the lock of any door, box, locker, safe, almirah or other receptacle
for exercising the powers conferred by clause ( a) where the keys thereof are not
available;
(c) search any person who has got out of, or is about to get into, or is in, the
building, place, vessel, vehicle or aircraft, if the Authorised Officer has reason to
suspect that such person has concealed on  his person any material;
(d) require any person who is found to be in possession or control of any type
of material, being books of account or other document, maintained in the form of
electronic record as defined in clause (t) of sub-section (1) of section 2 of the Information
Technology Act, 2000, to afford the Authorised Officer the necessary facility to inspect
such material;
(e) seize any such material, not being stock-in-trade, found as a result of such
search;
(f) place marks of identification on any material, being books of account or other
documents, or make or cause to be made extracts or copies therefrom;
(g) make a note or an inventory of any such material including stock-in-trade.
(3) A Competent Investigating Authority may exercise the powers of search and seizure
conferred under sub-section (1), if he exercises jurisdiction over the person referred to in
sub-section (1).
(4) The Competent Investigating Authority may also exercise the powers of search
and seizure conferred under sub-section (1), if —
(a) the building, place, vessel, vehicle or aircraft, referred to in sub-section (2), is
located within the area of his jurisdiction irrespective of the fact that he does not have
jurisdiction over the person referred to in sub-section (1); and
(b) he has reason to believe that any delay in getting the authorisation from the
Competent Investigating Authority having jurisdiction over such person may be
prejudicial to the interests of the revenue.
(5) The Competent Investigating Authority may issue a consequential authorisation
to any Authorised Officer to exercise the powers under sub-section ( 2) in respect of any
building, place, vessel, vehicle or aircraft, if he, in consequence of information in his
possession, has reason to suspect that any material in respect of which an authorisation
under sub-section ( 1) has been issued by the same or any other Competent Investigating
Authority are, or is, kept in any such building, place, vessel, vehicle or aircraft.
(6) The Authorised Officer may requisition the services of any police officer or of any
officer of the Central Government, or of both, to assist him for all or any of the purposes
specified in sub-section (2) and it shall be the duty of every such officer to comply with such
requisition.
21 of 2000.
27 of 1957.
5
15
10
20
25
30
35
40

81
 (7) The Authorised Officer may serve an order on the owner or the person, who is in
immediate possession or control of any material, that he shall not remove, part with or
otherwise deal with it except with his prior permission, where in the opinion of the Authorised
Officer—
(a) it is not possible or practicable to take physical possession of such material,
not being stock-in-trade, to a safe place due to its volume, weight or other physical
characteristics (including its dangerous nature) and such action of the Authorised
Officer shall be deemed to be seizure under clause (e) of sub-section (2); or
(b) it is not practicable to seize such material [for reasons other than those
mentioned in clause (a)] and such action of the Authorised Officer shall not be deemed
to be seizure under clause (e) of sub-section (2).
(8) The order under clause (b) of sub-section (7) shall remain in force for a period not
exceeding two months from the end of the month in which the order was served and the
Authorised Officer may take such steps as may be necessary for ensuring compliance with
the order.
(9) The Authorised Officer may, during the course of the search or seizure, examine on
oath any person who is found to be in possession or control of any material and any
statement made by such person during such examination may thereafter be used in evidence
in any proceeding under the Income-tax Act, 1961or the Wealth-tax Act, 1957, as they stood
before the commencement of this Code, or under this Code.
(10) The provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, relating to search and
seizure shall apply, so far as may be, to search and seizure under this section.
 (11) For the purposes of this section the Board may prescribe—
(a) the procedure to be followed by the Authorised Officer—
(i) for obtaining ingress into any building, place, vessel, vehicle or aircraft
to be searched where free ingress thereto is not available; and
(ii) for ensuring safe custody of any material seized; and
(b) any other matter in relation to search and seizure under this section.
136. (1) The Competent Investigating Authority may authorise any income-tax
authority (hereinafter referred to as the “Requisitioning Officer”) to require any officer or
authority to deliver the material, which have been taken into custody by such officer or
authority under any other law for the time being in force, to the Requisitioning Officer.
(2) The authorisation for requisition under sub-section ( 1) shall be issued by the
Competent Investigating Authority if he has, in consequence of information in his possession,
reasons to believe that —
(a) any person to whom a summons or a notice under sub-section (1) of section
131 or sub-section (1) of section 142 of the Income-tax Act, 1961or under section 37 or
sub-section (4) of section 16 of the Wealth-tax Act, 1957, as they stood before the
commencement of this Code, or under sub-section (1) of section 134 or section 146 or
section 150 of this Code was issued, has omitted or failed to produce, or cause to be
produced, such material; or
(b) any person to whom a summons or notice as aforesaid has been or might be
issued will not, or would not, produce or cause to be produced, such material which
43 of 1961.
27 of 1957.
2 of 1974.
Power to
requisition
material taken
into custody.
43 of 1961.
27 of 1957.
5
15
10
20
25
30
35
40

82
will be useful for, or relevant to, any proceeding under the Income-tax  Act, 1961 or the
Wealth-tax Act, 1957, as they stood before the commencement of this Code, or under
this Code; or
(c) such material represents either wholly or partly tax base or property which
has not been, or would not be, disclosed for  the purposes of the Income-tax Act, 1961,
or the Wealth-tax Act, 1957, as they stood before the commencement of this Code, or
under this Code.
(3)  The officer or authority referred to in sub-section (1) shall deliver the material to
the Requisitioning Officer either forthwith or when such officer or authority is of the opinion
that it is no longer necessary to retain the same in his or its custody.
(4) The provisions of sub-sections (1) to (11) of section 135 shall apply to this section.
137. (1) The Authorised Officer shall hand over the books of account or documents
seized under section 135, within a period of sixty days from the date on which the last of the
authorisations for search was executed, to the Assessing Officer, if the Authorised Officer
has no jurisdiction over the person from whom the books of account or documents were
seized.
(2) The Requisitioning Officer shall hand over the books of account or documents
delivered under section 136, within a period of sixty days from the date on which books of
account or documents were received, to the Assessing Officer, if the Requisitioning Officer
has no jurisdiction over the person from whom the books of account or documents were
taken into custody under any other law for the time being in force.
(3) The officers, referred to in sub-sections (1) and (2), shall, on an application made
by the assessee, allow him to make copies of, or take extracts from, the books of account or
documents seized or requisitioned.
(4) The Assessing Officers may retain the books of account or documents, seized or
requisitioned, up to a period of thirty days from the date of limitation for compleation of
assessment, specified in section 163.
(5) The Assessing Officer may retain the books of account or documents seized beyond
the period specified in sub-section (4) after obtaining the approval of the Chief Commissioner
or the Commissioner.
(6) The Chief Commissioner, or the Commissioner, shall not allow the retention of the
books of account or documents  seized, beyond a period of thirty days from the date on
which the proceedings under this Code, for which such books of account or documents are
relevant, are completed.
(7) The officers, referred to in sub-sections (1) and (2), may, with the approval of the
Chief Commissioner or the Commissioner, return any books of account or documents before
completion of assessment or any other relevant proceedings, after retaining a copy or extract
of such books of account or documents, if he is satisfied that the return of such books of
account or documents shall not adversely affect the interest of revenue.
138. The Assessing Officer, having jurisdiction over the person in whose case search
and seizure was carried out under section 135, or requisition was made under section 136,
shall hand over any material to the Assessing Officer having jurisdiction over another person,
if he is satisfied that the material seized, or requisitioned, belongs to the other person.
139. (1) The Assessing Officer may recover the amount of any liability, referred to in
sub-section (2),—
(a) out of the material, other than books of account or documents, (hereinafter
Retention and
release of
books of ac-
count or docu-
ments seized or
requisitioned.
Delivery of
material be-
longing to
other persons.
Retention and
application of
seized or requi-
sitioned assets.
43 of 1961.
27 of 1957.
43 of 1961.
27 of 1957.
5
15
10
20
25
30
35
40
45

83
referred to as “assets”) seized under section 135 or requisitioned under section 136; or
(b) by any other mode laid down under this Code.
(2) The amount of any liability shall be the aggregate of —
(a) the amount of any liability existing under this Code, the Income-tax Act,
1961, or  the Wealth-tax Act, 1957, as they stood before the commencement of this
Code, the Gift-tax Act, 1958, the Interest-tax Act, 1974 and the Expenditure-tax Act,
1987, till the date of search under section 135 or requisition under section 136;
(b) the amount of any liability under this Code, or under any of the Acts referred
to in clause (a), determined after the date of the search, or requisition, and till the date
of completion of the assessment in consequence to the search or the requisition;
(c) the amount of any liability determined on completion of the assessment in
consequence to the search or the requisition; and
(d) the amount of any liability under this Code, or under any of the Acts referred
to in clause (a), determined after the completion of the assessment in consequence to
the search, or the requisition, and till the date of release of the assets.
(3) The Assessing Officer may recover the existing liability referred to in clause (a)
of sub-section (2) and release the remaining portion of the asset, if any, within a period of
one hundred and twenty days from the date on which the last of the authorisations for
search under section 135 was executed, to the person from whose custody the assets were
seized, if —
(a) an application is made by the person within a period of  thirty days from the
end of the month in which the assets were seized;
(b) the nature and source of the assets is explained by the person to the
satisfaction of the Assessing Officer; and
(c) the prior approval of the Chief Commissioner or the Commissioner is obtained.
(4) The assets, other than money, shall be deemed to be under distraint as if such
distraint was effected by the Assessing Officer or, as the case may be, the Tax Recovery
Officer and the recovery of any liability out of such assets shall be effected in the manner
laid down in the Fifth Schedule.
(5) The Assessing Officer shall release, within the time and subject to such conditions,
as may be prescribed, to the person from whose custody the assets were seized, any asset
or proceeds thereof, which remains after the liabilities referred to in sub-section ( 2) are
discharged.
(6) The Assessing Officer may with the prior approval of the Commissioner  release
any seized or requisitioned asset (other than cash) before making assessment in consequence
of search or requisition, if the concerned person deposits with the Assessing Officer an
amount of money equal to the value of such asset on the date of the release and the amount
so deposited shall be deemed to be cash seized or requisitioned for the purposes of this
Code.
(7) If the assets consist solely of money, or partly of money and partly of other assets,
the Assessing Officer may apply such money in the discharge of the liabilities referred to in
sub-section (2) and the assessee shall be discharged of such liability to the extent of the
money so applied.
140. (1) For the purposes of this Code, the Board may, notwithstanding anything in
any other law for the time being in force, require—
(a) any prescribed person to furnish such information within such time  and in
such form and manner as may be prescribed; and
43 of 1961.
27 of 1957.
18 of 1958.
45 of 1974.
35 of 1987.
Power to call
for inform-
ation.
5
15
10
20
25
30
35
40
45

84
(b) any prescribed income-tax authority to call for such  information in such form
and manner as may be prescribed.
(2) Any income-tax authority, not below the rank of an Income-tax Officer, may require
any person to furnish any information as may be useful for, or relevant to any inquiry or
proceeding, pending before him under this Code, in such form, manner and within such time
as may be specified by him.
 (3) In this section, the expression ‘‘person’’ shall include a banking company or any
officer thereof.
141. (1) The prescribed income-tax authority may enter, or authorise any other income-
tax authority to enter, any place at which a business is carried out by a person, if —
(a) he has reason to suspect that the person has not complied with the provisions
of this Code; and
(b) the place is—
(i) within the limits of the area assigned to him; or
(ii) occupied by any person in respect of whom he exercises jurisdiction.
(2) The income-tax authority, referred to in sub-section ( 1), shall enter any place of
business referred to therein only after sunrise and before sunset, or during the hours at
which such place is open for the conduct of business.
(3) On entering the place, the income-tax authority may require any person, who may
be attending in any manner to the business at the place, to —
(a) afford him to inspect the books of account or documents available at the
place;
(b) afford him to check or verify the cash, stock or other valuable article or thing
found there; and
(c) furnish any information relevant, or useful, for the proceedings under this
Code, in respect of the person or any other person.
(4) For the purposes of this section, any place at which a business is carried out
includes a place—
(a) which is not the principal place of such business;
(b) where any business or activity is being carried out and the tax bases relating
to such business or activity is not to be included in the total tax bases under any
provision of this Code;
(c) where any of the books of account, documents, cash, stock-in-trade or
valuables, relating to the business of the person or the business or activity referred to
in clause (b), are kept; or
(d) where any of the books of account, documents or other record containing
the particulars regarding deduction of tax at source, or collection of tax at source,
made, or required to be made, under this Code, are kept.
(5) On entering the place, the income-tax authority may —
(a) place marks of identification on the books of account, documents or record
inspected by him and take extracts, or copies, therefrom;
(b) impound any books of account, documents or record inspected by him, after
recording the reasons for doing so;
(c) make an inventory of cash, stock or valuables; or
Power of
Survey.
5
15
10
20
25
30
35
40

85
(d) examine on oath any person if his statement would be useful for, or relevant
to, any proceeding under this Code.
(6) The prescribed income-tax authority, for the purpose of verifying the expenditure
made by the person in connection with any function, ceremony or event, after such function,
ceremony or event, may—
(a) require the person by whom such expenditure has been incurred or any
other person who is likely to possess the information regarding such expenditure, to
furnish such information which may be useful for, or relevant to, any proceeding
under this Code; and
(b) record the statements of any other person in this behalf.
(7) The statement made by any person under clause (d) of sub-section (5) and clause
(b) of sub-section (6) may be used in evidence in any proceeding under this Code.
(8) The income-tax authority acting under this section shall, on no account, remove or
cause to be removed from the place wherein he has entered any cash, stock or other valuable
article or thing.
(9) The income-tax authority shall not retain any books of account, documents or
records impounded by him under this section beyond a period of one month without the
approval of the Commissioner.
(10) The income-tax authority, other than an Inspector, shall have all the powers under
sub-section (1) of section 134 for enforcing compliance, if a person refuses, or evades, to—
(a) afford the facility to the income-tax authority to inspect books of account or
other documents;
(b) allow such authority to check or verify any cash, stock or other  valuable
article or thing;
(c) furnish any information; or
(d) have his statement recorded.
(11)  In this section, the expression “proceeding”, as on the date on which powers
under this section are exercised, shall mean all proceedings under this Code in respect of
any year which –
(i) may have been completed on or before such date;
(ii) may be pending as on such date; or
(iii) may be commenced after such date.
142. (1) No information in respect of any assessee, except as provided in sub-section
(2), shall be provided to any person by,—
(a) the Board;
(b) any income-tax authority or officer or ministerial staff; or
(c) any person, agency or authority engaged in any manner in the administration
of this Code.
(2) The Board, or any person specified by it by an order in this behalf, may furnish, or
cause to be furnished, any information in respect of an assessee to any other person
performing any functions under—
(a) any law relating to the imposition of any tax, duty or cess, or to dealings in
foreign currency; or
(b) any other law as the Central Government may, if in its opinion it is necessary
Power to
disclose
information in
respect of
assessee.
5
15
10
20
25
30
35
40

86
so to do in the public interest, specify by notification in this behalf.
(3) The information referred to in sub-section (2) shall be only such information which
fulfils the following conditions, namely:—
(a) the information is received or obtained by the Board, or any person specified
by it by an order under that sub-section, in the performance of its or his functions
under this Code; and
(b) the information is, in the opinion of the person furnishing the information,
necessary for the purpose of enabling the other person receiving the information to
perform the functions under the laws referred to in that sub-section.
(4) The Chief Commissioner or the Commissioner may furnish, or cause to be furnished,
to any person any information relating to any assessee received or obtained by any income-
tax authority in the performance of his functions under this Code, if—
(a) the person makes an application to the Chief Commissioner or the
Commissioner in the prescribed form; and
(b) the Chief Commissioner or the Commissioner is satisfied that it is in the
public interest so to do.
(5) The decision of the Chief Commissioner or the Commissioner under sub-section
(4)  shall not be called in question in any court of law.
(6) The Central Government may, notwithstanding anything in this section or under
any other law for the time being in force, direct, by a notified order, that no information shall
be furnished under sub-section (2) or sub-section (4) in respect of such matters relating to
such class of assessees, or to such authorities, as may be specified in the order.
143. (1) Any proceeding under this Code before an income-tax authority shall be
deemed to be a judicial proceeding within the meaning of section 193 and section 228 and for
the purposes of section 196 of the Indian Penal Code.
(2) Every income-tax authority shall be deemed to be a civil court for the purposes of
section 195, but not for the purposes of Chapter XXVI of the Code of Criminal Procedure,
1973.
B. — A
SSESSMENT PROCEDURE
144. (1) Every person shall furnish a return of tax bases on or before the due date to
the Assessing Officer or such other authority  or agency as may be prescribed.
 (2) The person referred to in sub-section (1) shall-—
(a) in relation to income, be the following, namely:— 
(i) an individual or Hindu undivided family or an artificial juridical person,
if the gross total income from ordinary sources exceeds the threshold limit;
(ii) a company;
(iii) an unincorporated body;
(iv) a non-profit organisation;
(v) a co-operative society;
Proceedings
before in-
come-tax au-
thorities to be
judicial pro-
ceedings.
Self-reporting
of tax bases
45 of 1860.
2 of 1974.
5
15
10
20
25
30
35

87
(vi) a society other than a co-operative society;
(vii) a local authority;
(viii) a political party;
(ix) any person who intends to carry forward the loss or any part thereof
in accordance with the provisions of this Code;
(x) any person who derives any income from special sources and such
income is chargeable to tax;
(xi) any other person liable to pay tax under this Code, and
(xii) any class or classes of persons as may be prescribed;
 (b) in relation to dividend or income distributed, be the following, namely:— 
(i) a company resident in India which distributes the dividend;
(ii) a mutual fund which distributes the income to the unit holders of
equity oriented fund;
(iii) a life insurer who distributes the income to the policy holders of an
approved equity oriented life insurance scheme;
(c)  in relation to net wealth,  be any person, other than a non-profit organisation,
if the net wealth exceeds the maximum amount which is not chargeable to wealth-tax.
(3)   The return of tax bases referred to in sub-section (1) shall be a return in respect of
the tax bases of the person referred to in sub-section (2) or the tax bases of any other person
in respect of which such person is assessable for the relevant financial year.
(4)   The return of tax bases shall be furnished in such form, verified in such manner and
setting forth such other particulars, as may be prescribed.
  (5) A person may, if he discovers any omission or any wrong statement in the return
of tax bases furnished by him under sub-section (1) or under section 146, revise such return
at any time before the expiry of one year from the end of the financial year in which the return
was due or before the completion of the assessment, whichever is earlier.
(6)  A person may furnish the return for any financial year at any time before the expiry
of one year from the end of the financial year in which the return was due or before the
completion of the assessment, whichever is earlier, if—
(a) such person has not furnished a return by the due date; and
(b) no notice under sub-section (1) of  section 146 has been served on him.
(7)  The Assessing Officer may, if he finds that the return has not been furnished by
any person in the prescribed form and manner or does not contain the particulars as required
under sub-section (4), intimate to such person the deficiency and allow him an opportunity
to remove the deficiency within a period of thirty days from the service of the intimation.
(8) The Assessing Officer shall treat the return filed by a person as invalid, if the
deficiency referred to in sub-section ( 7) is not removed within the time allowed and the
provisions of the Code shall apply as if the person had failed to furnish the return.
(9)  The return  of tax bases of a person specified in column (2) of the Table given below
shall be signed and verified by a person specified in column (3) of the said Table:
5
15
10
20
25
30
35
40

88
TABLE
Serial Person furnishing the return Person required to sign and
number or tax bases verify the return of tax bases
(1)( 2)( 3)
1. Individual being mentally (a ) guardian of the individual; or
incapacitated from attending  ( b) any other person duly
to his affairs  competent to act on his behalf.
2. Any other individual ( a) individual himself; or
 (b) any person duly authorised  by a valid
power of attorney by the individual in this
regard, if the individual is  not in India or
for some other reason it is not possible
for him to sign the return.
3. Hindu undivided family ( a) Karta of the family; or
 (b)  any other adult member of the family
if  the Karta is  not in India or is mentally
incapacitated from attending to his affairs.
4. Company not being resident Any person who holds a valid power of
in India attorney from the company to do so.
5. ( a) Company which is being Liquidator referred to in clause ( g)
 wound up by court or otherwise; or of sub-section ( 1) of section 164.
(b) Company where any person has
 been appointed as the receiver of
any assets of the company
6. Company whose management has Principal officer of the company.
 been taken over by the Central
Government or any State
Government under any law
7. Any other company ( a) Managing director of the company;
or (b) any director of the company if there
is no managing director or the managing
director, for any unavoidable reason, is
not able to sign and verify the return.
8. Firm ( a)   managing partner of the firm;  or
(b) any partner (not being a minor) of the
firm if there is no managing partner or the
managing partner, for any unavoidable
reason, is not able to sign and verify the
return.
9. Limited liability partnership ( a) designated partner of the limited
liability partnership; or
(b) any partner (not being a minor) of the
limited liability partnership if there is no
5
15
10
20
25
30
35
40

89
designated partner or the designated
partner, for any unavoidable reason, is not
able to sign and verify the return.
10. Local authority Principal officer of the local authority
11.  Political party Chief executive officer ( whether such
Chief executive officer is known as
secretary or by any other designation) of
the party.
12. Any other association of persons Any member or the principal officer of  the
association.
13.  Any other person  ( a) person himself; or
(b) any person competent to act on his
behalf.
(10)  Any person who is otherwise not required to furnish a return of tax bases under
sub-section (1) may furnish such return before the expiry of one year from the end of the
financial year to which it pertains and all the provisions of this Code shall, as far as may be,
apply as if it is a return furnished under that sub-section.
145.(1) The Board may, without prejudice to the provisions of section  144, frame a tax
return preparer Scheme so as to allow a tax return preparer to prepare and furnish the return
of tax bases of any specified class of persons, in accordance with the Scheme.
(2) Every tax return preparer shall affix his signature on the return so prepared by him.
(3) The Scheme framed by the Board under this section may provide for the following,
namely:— 
(a) the eligibility criteria for a person to qualify as a tax return preparer;
(b) the code of conduct for the tax return preparer;
(c) the duties and obligations of the tax return preparer;
(d) the period for which the tax return preparer shall be  authorised;
(e) the circumstances under which the authorisation given to a tax return preparer
may be withdrawn; and
(f) any other matter which may be specified by the scheme for  the purposes of
this section.
       (4) In this section—
(a) “tax return preparer” means any individual who has been authorised to act as
a Tax Return Preparer under the Scheme framed under this section;
(b) “tax return preparer scheme” means a scheme framed and notified by the
Board and providing for preparing and furnishing of the return of tax bases through a
Tax Return Preparer; and
(c) “specified class of persons” means  a class of persons who  are required to
furnish a return of  tax bases under this Code, other than a company or a person whose
accounts are required to be audited under section 88.
146. (1) The Assessing Officer may serve on a person in whose case the time allowed
under sub-section (1) of section  144 has expired, a notice, within a period of twenty-one
months from the end of the financial year in which the return was due, requiring such person
to furnish a return of tax bases for the relevant financial year.
Tax return
preparer.
Issue of notice
to furnish re-
turn.
5
15
10
20
25
30
35
40

90
(2) The person in receipt of notice issued under sub-section ( 1) shall furnish the
return within a period of  fourteen days from the date of receipt of the notice and the return
shall be furnished  in such form,  verified in the manner and setting forth such other particulars,
as may be prescribed.
147. (1) The assessee shall be liable to pay before furnishing the return of tax bases,
the aggregate of the following amounts as self-assessment tax, namely:—
(a) the amount of tax payable on the basis of the return required to be furnished
under this Code for any financial year as reduced by—
(i) the amount of tax, if any, already paid under this Code;
(ii) any tax deducted or collected at source;
(iii) any relief of tax claimed under section 207;  and
(iv) any tax credit under section 106; and
(b) the amount of interest payable under any provision of this Code for such
financial year.
(2) The amount paid as self-assessment tax for any financial year shall first be adjusted
towards the interest payable under any provision of this Code and the balance, if any, shall
be adjusted towards the tax payable, if the amount of the self-assessment tax paid falls short
of the self-assessment tax payable under sub-section ( 1).
(3) After an assessment under section  155 or section  156 has been made, any amount
paid under sub-section (1) shall be deemed to have been paid towards such assessment.
(4) If any assessee fails to pay the whole or any part of such tax or interest or both in
accordance with the provisions of sub-section (1), he shall, without prejudice to any other
consequences that he may incur, be deemed to be an assessee in default in respect of the tax
or interest or both remaining unpaid and all the provisions of this Code shall apply accordingly.
148. On receipt of any return of tax bases for any financial year, the Assessing Officer,
or any other person authorised by the Board in this behalf, shall issue an acknowledgement
for receipt of the return.
149. (1) The Assessing Officer, or any other person authorised by the Board in this
behalf (hereinafter referred to as the processing authority) shall process the return received
under section  144 or section  146 in the following manner, namely:—
(a) the tax bases shall be computed after making the following adjustments,
namely:—
(i) any arithmetical error in the return; or
(ii) an incorrect claim, if such incorrect claim is apparent from the existence
of any information in the return;
(b) the tax and interest, if any, shall be computed on the basis of the tax base
computed under clause (a); and
(c) the sum payable by, or the amount of refund due to, the assessee shall be
determined after adjustment of the tax and interest, if any, computed under clause (b)
by any tax deducted at source, any tax collected at source, any advance tax paid, any
relief allowable under section 207, any self-assessment tax paid and any other amount
paid otherwise than by way of tax or interest.
Self-assess-
ment tax.
Acknowledg-
ment of
return.
Processing of
return.
5
15
10
20
25
30
35
40

91
(2) The processing authority shall send an intimation to the assessee specifying the
sum determined to be payable by, or refundable to, him and such other particulars as may be
prescribed.
(3) The processing authority shall also send an intimation to the asssessee in a case
where the loss declared in the return by the assessee is adjusted but no tax or interest is
payable by, or refundable to, him.
(4) The processing authority shall not send any intimation in respect of any sum
payable on account of any adjustment made under sub-section (1), if the return is processed
after the expiry of a period of twelve months from the end of the financial year in which the
return is furnished.
(5) The acknowledgement of the return shall be deemed to be the intimation in a case
where no sum is payable by, or refundable to, the assessee under clause ( c) of sub-section
(1), and where no adjustment has been made under clause (a) of sub-section (1).
(6) The Board may, for the purposes of sub-section (1), make a scheme for centralised
processing of returns  for expeditious determination of the tax payable by, or the refund due
to, the assessee.
(7) For the purposes of this section, “an incorrect claim apparent from the existence of
any information in the return” shall mean a claim, on the basis of an entry, in the return—
(i) of an item, which is inconsistent with another entry of the same, or some other
item, in such return;
(ii) in respect of which information required to be supplied to substantiate such
entry has not been so furnished; or
(iii) in respect of a deduction, where such deduction exceeds the specified
statutory limit which may have been expressed as monetary amount, percentage, ratio
or fraction.
150. (1) An Assessing Officer may make an assessment on receipt of return under
section  144 or section 146, if he considers it necessary or expedient to ensure that the
assessee has not understated his tax bases or computed excessive loss or allowance or
underpaid the tax in any manner.
(2) For the purposes of making an assessment, the Assessing Officer shall serve on
any assessee a notice requiring him, on a date to be specified therein—
(a) to attend his office or to produce, or cause to be produced, evidence, if any,
on which the assessee may rely in support of the return;
(b) to produce, or cause to be produced, such accounts or documents (not
relating to a period more than  six years prior to the relevant financial year) as the
Assessing Officer may require; or
(c) to furnish in writing, and verified in the prescribed manner, information in such
form and on such matters (including a statement of all assets and liabilities of the assessee,
whether included in the accounts or not) as the Assessing Officer may require.
(3) The Assessing Officer shall obtain the  prior approval of the Joint Commissioner
before requiring the assessee to furnish the statement of all his assets and liabilities not
included in the accounts for the relevant financial year.
(4) The Assessing Officer may make such inquiry, as he considers necessary, for the
purpose of obtaining full information in respect of tax bases of any person for the relevant
financial year.
(5) No notice under sub-section  (2) shall be served on the assessee after the expiry of
a period of six months from the end of the financial year in which the return is furnished.
Notice for
inquiry before
assessment.
5
15
10
20
25
30
35
40
45

92
151. (1)The Assessing Officer may direct the assessee to get his accounts audited by
an accountant, if, at any stage of the proceeding, he is of the opinion that, having regard to
the nature and complexity of the accounts of the assessee and the interests of revenue, it is
necessary to do so.
(2)The Assessing Officer shall not issue any direction under sub-section ( 1) unless
the assessee has been given an opportunity of being heard and prior approval of the Chief
Commissioner or Commissioner has been obtained.
(3) The provisions of sub-section (1) shall have effect irrespective of the fact that the
accounts of the assessee have been audited under any other law for the time being in force
or otherwise.
(4) The accountant shall, for the purposes of sub-section ( 1), be nominated by the
Chief Commissioner or the Commissioner.
(5) The accountant shall furnish a report of the audit referred to in sub-section (1) in
such form, duly signed and verified by him, and setting forth such particulars as may be
prescribed and such other particulars as the Assessing Officer may require.
(6) The accountant shall furnish the report referred to in sub-section (5) within the time
allowed by the Assessing Officer.
(7)The Assessing Officer may extend the time allowed under sub-section (6) by such
further period or periods as he thinks fit, for reasons to be recorded in writing.
(8) The aggregate of the period allowed under sub-section (6) and the further period
or periods allowed under sub-section (7) shall not exceed one hundred and eighty days from
the date on which the direction under sub-section ( 1) is received by the assessee.
(9) The accountant shall furnish the report referred to in sub-section (5) to the Assessing
Officer and a copy of the same to the assessee.
(10) The remuneration of the accountant and other expenses of any audit under sub-
section (1) shall be determined and paid by the Chief Commissioner or the Commissioner in
accordance with such rules  as may be prescribed.
 152.  (1) The Assessing Officer may, for the purposes of assessment, require a Valuation
Officer to make and report to him an estimate of the value, including fair market value, of any
asset, property, investment or expenditure.
(2)  On a reference made under sub-section ( 1), the valuation officer shall, for the
purpose of estimating the value of the asset, property, investment or expenditure, and subject
to the rules in this behalf, have all the powers to—
(a) enter any land, building or other place belonging to, or occupied by, the
person in  connection with whose assessment the reference has been made;
(b) require any person in charge of, or in occupation or possession of, the land,
building or other place to afford him the necessary facility to survey or inspect the
land, building or other place;
(c) inspect any asset or property in respect of which the reference has been
made;
(d) inspect any books of account, documents or record which may be relevant
for the purpose of making the estimate of the value of the asset, property, investment
or expenditure, in respect of which the reference has been made;
(e) gather any other information relating to the asset, properly investment or
expenditure, which may be relevant for the purposes of estimating the value.
Special audit .
Determination
of value of
assets.
5
15
10
20
25
30
35
40
45

93
(3) The valuation officer shall, by order in writing, estimate the value of the asset,
property, investment or expenditure after taking into account—
(a) such evidence as the assessee may produce; and
(b) the material in his possession gathered after giving an opportunity of being
heard to the assessee.
(4)The valuation officer may estimate the value of the asset, property, investment or
expenditure to the best of his judgment, if the assessee does not co-operate or comply with
his direction.
(5)The valuation officer shall furnish a copy of his estimate under sub-section (3) or
sub-section (4), as the case may be, to the Assessing Officer and the assessee within a
period of six months from the end of the month in which a reference is made under sub-
section (1).
(6) The Assessing Officer  may, on receipt of the report of the valuation officer, proceed
to compute the tax bases of the assessee  after taking into account the value estimated by the
valuation officer.
 153. (1) The Assessing Officer may, with the prior approval of the Commissioner, refer
to the Transfer Pricing Officer, the computation of arm’s length price under section 117 in
relation to any international transaction entered into by the assessee in any financial year, if
he considers it necessary or expedient to do so.
(2) The Transfer Pricing Officer may, upon reference made to him under sub-section
(1), serve on the assessee a notice requiring him, on a date to be specified therein-—
(a) to attend his office or to produce, or cause to be produced, evidence, if any,
on which the assessee may rely in support of the computation made by him of the
arm’s length price in relation to the international transaction; or
(b) to produce, or cause to be produced, such accounts or documents as the
Transfer  Pricing Officer may require.
(3) The Transfer Pricing Officer shall determine the arm’s length price in relation to the
international transaction in accordance with the provisions of section 117 after taking into
account—
(a) such evidence as the assessee may produce; and
(b) the material in his possession gathered after giving an opportunity of being
heard  to the assessee.
(4) The Transfer Pricing Officer may determine the arm’s length price in relation to the
international transaction to the best of his judgment, if the assessee does not co-operate or
comply with his direction.
(5) The Transfer Pricing Officer shall send a report of his determination under sub-
section (3) or sub-section (4), as the case may be, to the Assessing Officer and the assessee.
(6) No determination under sub-section (3) or sub-section (4) shall be made, or report
of such determination sent as required by sub-section (5), after a period of forty-two months
from the end of the financial year in which the international transaction is entered into.
(7) The Transfer Pricing Officer may, for the purposes of determining the arm’s length price
under this section, exercise all, or any, of the powers specified in section 134 or section 140.
Determination
of arm’s
length price.
5
15
10
20
25
30
35
40

94
154. (1) The Commissioner shall, for the purposes of section 123, serve on the assessee
a notice requiring him, on a date to be specified therein to produce, or cause to be produced,
any evidence or particulars on which the assessee may rely in support of his claim that the
provisions of section 123 are not applicable to him.
(2) After hearing the evidence and after taking into account such particulars as the
assessee may produce, the Commissioner shall pass an order declaring an arrangement as
being an impermissible avoidance agreement or otherwise for the purposes of section 123.
(3) Upon declaring an arrangement as an impermissible avoidance agreement, the
Commissioner shall—
(a) issue directions to the Assessing Officer to make such adjustment to the
total income, or the tax liability, of the assessee; and
(b) forward or cause to be forwarded a copy of such order—
(i) to the assessee; and
(ii) to the jurisdictional Commissioner of the other party to the arrange-
ment, who shall then proceed under this section against such other party and
the provisions of this section shall apply accordingly.
(4) No order under sub-section (2) shall be issued after a period of twelve months from
the end of the month in which the notice under sub-section (1) is issued.
155. (1) The Assessing Officer shall,  consequent to a notice issued under sub-section
(2) of section  150, by an order in writing, make an assessment of the tax bases of the
assessee after taking into account—
(a) the evidence furnished by the assessee;
(b) the report of audit under section  151, if any;
(c) the report of the valuation officer, if any;
(d) the order of the Transfer Pricing Officer, if any;
(e) the direction of the Commissioner under section  154, if any;
(f) the direction of the Joint Commissioner under section 157, if any; and
 (g) the material in his possession, in respect of which an opportunity of being
heard has been provided to the assessee.
(2) The Assessing Officer shall, on the basis of the assessment, determine the sum
payable by, or refundable to, the assessee after adjusting the sum paid by, or refunded to, the
assessee in pursuance to the intimation issued under sub-section ( 2) of section 149.
(3) Where an assessment has been made under this section—
(a) any tax or interest paid by the assessee under sub-section (1) of section  149
shall be deemed to have been paid towards such assessment;
(b) if no refund is due on assessment or the amount refundable under sub-
section (1) of section  149 exceeds the amount refundable on assessment, the whole of
the excess amount so refunded shall be deemed to be tax payable by  the assessee and
the provisions of this Code shall apply accordingly.
(4) The Assessing Officer shall, notwithstanding anything in this Code, in the first
instance, forward a draft of the proposed order of assessment (hereinafter in this section
referred to as the draft order) to the eligible assessee if he proposes to make any variation in
the income or loss returned which is prejudicial to the interests of such assessee.
Determination
of an
impermissible
avoidance
agreement
and
consequences
thereof.
Assessment .
5
15
10
20
25
30
35
40

95
(5) On receipt of the draft order, the eligible assessee  may, within a period of thirty
days of the receipt by him of the draft order,—
(a) file his acceptance of the variations to the Assessing Officer; or
(b) file his objections, if any, to such variations to—
(i) the Dispute Resolution Panel; and
(ii) the Assessing Officer.
(6) The Assessing Officer shall complete the assessment on the basis of the draft
order, if—
(a)  the eligible assessee intimates to the Assessing Officer the acceptance of
the variations; or
(b)  no objections are received within the period specified in sub-section (5).
(7) The Assessing Officer shall, notwithstanding anything in section  163, pass the
assessment order within a period of one month from the end of the month in which-
(a) the acceptance is received; or
(b) the period of filing of objections under sub-section  (5) expires.
(8) Upon receipt of the directions issued under sub-section  ( 2) of section  158, the
Assessing Officer shall, in conformity with the directions, complete the assessment within a
period of one month from the end of the month in which the direction is received
notwithstanding anything in section  163, without providing any further hearing in the
matter.
(9) In this section, “eligible assessee” means—
 (a) any person in whose case the variation arises as a consequence of the order
of the Transfer Pricing Officer passed under sub-section ( 3) or sub-section ( 4) of
section  153;
(b)  any foreign company;
(c) any person in whose case the variation arises as a consequence of the
directions of the Commissioner under sub-section (3) of section  154; or
(d) any class or classes of persons as may be prescribed.
 156. (1)The Assessing Officer shall make the assessment of the tax basis to the best
of his judgment, if—
(a) the assessee fails to—
(i) furnish the return required under sub-section ( 1) of section  144 or
section  146 or has not furnished a return or under sub-section (6) of section 144;
(ii) comply with all the terms of a notice issued under sub-section (2) of
section  150;
(iii) comply with a direction issued under section  151; or
(iv
) furnish the return in response to notice under section  159; or
(b) the assessee fails to regularly follow the method of accounting provided in
sub-section (1) of section  89, or the accounting standards notified under sub-section
(2) of  the that section; or
(c) he is not satisfied about the correctness or completeness of the accounts of
the  assessee.
(2)The Assessing Officer shall, in making the assessment under sub-section (1), take
into account all relevant material which he has gathered or is available on record.
Best
judgment
assessment.
5
15
10
20
25
30
35
40

96
(3)The Assessing Officer shall, before making the assessment under sub-section (1),
provide the assessee an opportunity of being heard by serving a notice calling upon the
assessee to show cause, on a date and time to be specified in the notice, as to why the
assessment should not be completed to the best of his judgment.
(4) It shall not be necessary to give an opportunity under sub-section ( 3) before the
making of an assessment under this section, in a case where a notice under section  146 has
been issued.
 157. (1) A Joint Commissioner may, on a reference being made to him by the Assessing
Officer or on an application of an assessee or on his own motion, call for and examine the
record of any proceeding in which an assessment is pending and  if he considers it necessary
or expedient so to do,  he may issue such directions as he thinks fit for the guidance of the
Assessing Officer so as to enable him to complete the assessment.
(2) The Joint Commissioner shall not issue any direction which  is prejudicial to the
assessee unless an opportunity of being heard is given to him.
(3) Any direction issued under this section shall be binding on the Assessing Officer.
(4) For the purposes of this section, any direction as to the lines on which an
investigation connected with the assessment should be made, shall not be considered as a
direction prejudicial to the assessee.
 158. (1) The Dispute Resolution Panel may, in a case where any objection is received
under sub-section (5) of section  155—
(a) call for and examine the record of any proceeding relating to the draft order;
(b) make such further inquiry, as it thinks fit; or
(c) cause any further inquiry to be made by any income-tax authority and report
the result of the same to it.
(2) The Dispute Resolution Panel shall, in the case referred to in sub-section (1), issue
such directions, as it thinks fit, for the guidance of the Assessing Officer to enable him to
complete the assessment.
(3) The Dispute Resolution Panel shall issue the direction referred to in sub-section
(2), after considering—
(a) the draft order;
(b) the objections filed by the eligible assessee;
(c) the evidence furnished by the eligible assessee;
(d) the report, if any, of the Assessing Officer, valuation officer or Transfer
Pricing Officer or any other authority;
(e) the records relating to the draft order;
(f) the evidence collected by, or caused to be collected by, it; and
(g) the result of any inquiry made by, or caused to be made by, it.
(4) The Dispute Resolution Panel may confirm, reduce or enhance the variations
proposed in the draft order.
(5) The Dispute Resolution Panel shall not set aside any proposed variation or issue
any direction under sub-section ( 2) for further inquiry before passing of the assessment
order.
Directions by
Joint
Commissioner
for
assessment.
Direction by
Dispute
Resolution
Panel for
assessment.
5
15
10
20
25
30
35
40

97
(6) If the members of the Dispute Resolution Panel differ in opinion on any  issue,  then
it shall be decided according to the opinion of the majority.
(7)  The direction issued by the Dispute Resolution Panel shall be binding on the
Assessing Officer.
(8)  No direction under sub-section (2) shall be issued unless an opportunity of being
heard is given to the eligible assessee or the Assessing Officer on such directions which are
prejudicial to the interest of the assessee or the revenue, as the case may be.
(9) No direction under sub-section (2) shall be issued after a period of nine months
from the end of the month in which the draft order is forwarded to the eligible assessee.
(10) The Board may make rules for the efficient functioning of the Dispute Resolution
Panel and for the expeditious disposal of the objections filed under clause (b) of sub-section
(5) of section  155 by the assessee.
(11) In this section, “eligible assessee” shall have the meaning as assigned to it in
section  155.
159. (1)The Assessing Officer shall, for reasons to be recorded in writing, reopen a
case for reassessment, if he has reason to believe that any tax base chargeable to tax has
escaped assessment for the relevant financial year.
(2)The Assessing Officer shall, for reopening a case, serve on the assessee a notice
requiring him to furnish, within a period of thirty days, a return of tax bases for any financial
year, in  such form, verified in the manner and setting forth such other particulars as may be
prescribed.
(3) The tax bases chargeable to tax shall be deemed to have escaped assessment in the
following cases, namely:—
(a) where the tax base for the relevant financial year exceeds the maximum amount
not liable to tax but-
(i) the return of tax bases has not been furnished;
(ii) no notice has been issued under section  146; and
(iii) the time limitation for issuing such notice has expired;
(b) where a return of tax bases has been furnished by the assessee, but- 
(i) no assessment has been made; and
(ii) the assessee has understated the tax bases, or has claimed excessive
loss,  deduction, allowance or relief in the return;
(c) where an assessment has been made under section  155 or section  156, but—
(i) the tax bases liable to tax has been under-assessed;
(ii) the tax bases have been assessed at too low a rate;
(iii) the tax bases have been made the subject of relief to which the asses-
see is not  entitled to under this Code;
(iv) excessive loss or capital allowance or any other allowance under this
Code has been computed;
(v) the computation or assessment has not been made in accordance with
any order, direction, instruction or circular issued by the Board;
(vi) the computation or assessment has not been made by the Assessing
Officer in accordance with any order, direction, instruction or circular issued,
43 of 1961.Re-opening
of
assessment.
5
15
10
20
25
30
35
40

98
before making of the assessment, by an authority to whom the Assessing
Officer is subordinate; or
(vii) any objection has been raised by the Comptroller and Auditor Gen-
eral of India to the effect that  the assessment has not been made in accordance
with the provisions of the Income-tax Act, 1961 or the Wealth-tax  Act, 1957 as
they stood before the commencement of this Code or this Code and such objec-
tion forms part of the report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India laid
before each House of Parliament;
(d) where search and seizure has been carried out under section 135, or  material
has been obtained in pursuance of a requisition under section 136, in the case of the
person;
(e) where any material which has been seized, or obtained in pursuance  of a
requisition, has a bearing on the determination of the tax bases of a person other than
the person referred to in clause (d).
 (4) The notice under sub-section (2) shall be issued—
(a) for the seven financial years immediately preceding the financial year in
which the search and seizure has been carried out or the material has been obtained;
and
(b) within a period of seven financial years from the end of the relevant financial
year in any other case.
 (5) Notwithstanding anything in sub-section (4), the notice under sub-section (2) for
any financial year may be issued at any time, if—
(a) the reassessment is to be made in consequence of, or to give effect to, any
finding, or direction, contained in an order passed—
(i) by any authority or court in any proceeding under this Code by way of
appeal, reference or revision; or
(ii) by a court in any proceeding under any other law for the time being in
force; and
(b) the period referred to in sub-section ( 4) for issue of such notice had not
expired at the time the order, which was the subject-matter of appeal, reference or
revision was made.
(6)   No notice under sub-section (2) shall be issued—
(a)  in a case where an assessment has been made under section  155 or section
156 or under this section, by an Assessing Officer below the rank of Joint Commis-
sioner—
(i) within a period of four years from the end of the relevant financial year,
unless the Joint Commissioner is satisfied on the reasons recorded by such
Assessing Officer that it is a fit case for issue of such notice;
(ii)  after the expiry of a period of four years from the end of the relevant
financial year, unless the Commissioner is so satisfied;
(b) in any other case, by an Assessing Officer below the rank of Joint  Commis-
sioner after the expiry of a period of four years from the end of the relevant financial
year, unless the Joint Commissioner is satisfied on the reasons recorded by such
Assessing Officer that it is a fit case for issue of such notice.
(7)  The Commissioner or the Joint Commissioner, being satisfied on the reasons
recorded by the Assessing Officer regarding fitness of a case for the issue of notice under
this section, is not required to issue such notice himself.
43 of 1961.
27 of 1957.
5
15
10
20
25
30
35
40
45

99
 (8) Any assessment proceeding relating to any financial year falling within the period
of seven financial years referred to in sub-section (4) shall abate if it is pending on the date
of the initiation of the search, or on the date of obtaining the material, as the case may be.
(9) The provisions of this section shall also apply in the case of any other person,
referred to in clause ( e) of sub-section ( 3), as if a search and seizure has been carried out
under section  135 in his case, if any material which has a bearing on the determination of the
tax bases of such other person, has been—
(a) seized in the course of search and seizure under section  135 in the case of the
person referred to in clause (d) of sub-section (3); or
(b) obtained in pursuance  of the requisition under section  136 in the case of the
person referred to in clause (d) of sub-section (3).
(10) On receipt of a return in pursuance  of a notice under sub-section (2), or after the
expiry of time prescribed for furnishing the return in pursuance  of such notice, the Assessing
Officer shall, by an order in writing, make the reassessment of the total income and the
provisions of sections  150 to  158 both inclusive shall apply accordingly.
(11) In any reassessment made under this section, the tax shall be chargeable at the
rate or rates at which it would have been charged had the tax bases not escaped assessment.
(12) The proceedings under this section, excluding the proceedings initiated in
consequence of the condition specified in clauses ( d) and ( e) of sub-section ( 3) shall be
dropped, if—
(a) the assessee has not impugned any part of the original assessment order for
the relevant financial year under sections 178 and 192;
(b) he establishes that he had been assessed on an amount not lower than what
he would be rightly liable for, even if the tax base alleged to have escaped assessment
had been taken into account; and
(c) the original assessment order has not been revised under section 161 or
section 191.
(13) For the purposes of this section,—
(a) date of initiation of search, or the date of obtaining the material under sub-
sections (8)  and  ( 9) shall be construed as a reference to the date of receiving the
material by the Assessing Officer having jurisdiction over such other person;
(b) reassessment shall include any other part of the tax bases chargeable to tax
which has escaped assessment and which comes to the notice of the Assessing
Officer subsequently in the course of reassessment proceedings, notwithstanding
that the reasons recorded for reopening under sub-section (1) do not refer to such part
of tax bases; and
(c) reopening a case for reassessment shall include opening a case for assess-
ment where return for a tax bases has not been furnished before the issue of notice
under sub-section (2).
 160. No order of assessment or reassessment shall be passed by an Assessing Officer
without the approval of the Joint Commissioner in a case where—
(a) search and seizure has been carried out under section 135, or  material has
been obtained in pursuance of a requisition under section 136, in the case of the
person;
(b
) any material which has been seized, or obtained in pursuance  of a requisi-
tion, has a bearing on the determination of the tax bases of a person other than the
person referred to in clause (a).
Approval for
search
assessment.
5
15
10
20
25
30
35
40
45

100
 161. (1) An income-tax authority may amend any order passed, or intimation issued
by it under this Code so as to rectify any mistake apparent on the face of the record.
 (2) No amendment under this section shall be made after a period of four years from
the end of the financial year in which the order sought to be amended was passed.
 (3) The income-tax authority shall not make any amendment, which has the effect of
enhancing an assessment or reducing a refund or otherwise increasing the liability of the
assessee, unless the authority concerned has given to the assessee an opportunity of being
heard.
(4) The income-tax authority concerned may make an amendment—
(a) on its own motion; or
(b) on the application made to it by the assessee or, as the case may be, by the
Assessing Officer.
(5) Any application received by an authority for amendment of an order shall be
decided within a period of six months from the end of the month in which such application is
received by it.
(6) In a case where the order has been decided in an appeal or revision, the power of
the authority to amend the order, or intimation, shall be restricted to matters other than those
decided in appeal or revision.
 162. (1) Any sum payable in consequence of any order made, or intimation issued,
under this Code shall be demanded by an income-tax authority by serving upon the assessee
a notice of demand in  such form and manner as may be prescribed.
      (2) The intimation issued under sub-section (2) of section  149 shall be deemed to
be the notice of demand for the purposes of this section.
 163. (1) The Assessing Officer shall not make,—
(a) any order of assessment under section  155 or section  156 after the expiry of
a period of twenty-one months from the end of the financial year in which the return
was due;
 (b) any order of reassessment under section  159 after the expiry of a period of
twenty-one months from the end of the financial year—
(i) in which the last of the authorisations was executed in the case of a
person where search and seizure was carried out under section 135 or the mate-
rial was obtained in pursuance to a requisition under section 136;
(ii) in which any material belonging to the person referred to in section
138 is handed over to the Assessing Officer having jurisdiction over such per-
son;
(iii) in which the notice under section  159 is served, in any other case;
(c) any order of assessment in pursuance of an order under section 185 or
section 187  or section 190 or section 262, setting aside or cancelling an assessment, as
the case may be, after the expiry of a period of one year from the end of the financial
year in which the order is received by the Commissioner;
(d) any order of assessment in pursuance of an order under section 191 or
section 192, after the expiry of a period of one year from the end of the financial year in
which the order is passed under that section;
(e) any order of assessment, reassessment or recomputation in pursuance of the
revival of any proceeding under this Code, after the expiry of a period of one year from
the end of the financial year in which the order of revival of the proceedings is received
by the Commissioner.
Rectification
of mistake.
Time limits
for
completion of
assessment or
re-
assessments.
Notice of
demand.
5
15
10
20
25
30
35
40
45

101
(2) Notwithstanding anything a reference has been made to the Transfer Prices Officer
under section 153 in sub-section (1), the Assessing Officer shall, in a case where not make an
order of assessment or reassessment for such financial year after the expiry of a period of
thirty-three months from the end of the financial year in which the return was due, or notice
under section  159 is served, whichever is later.
(3) The provisions of sub-sections (1) and  (2) shall not apply in respect of assessment,
re-assessment or recomputation to be made in consequence of, or to give effect to, any
finding or direction contained in any order—
(a) under section, 180, 185, 187, 190, 191, 192 or 262; or
(b) of any court in a proceeding otherwise than by way of appeal or reference
under this Code.
(4) In computing the period of limitation for the purposes of sub-sections (1) and  (2),
the following period or time shall not be included, namely:—
(a) the period commencing from the date on which the application for Advance
Pricing  Agreement is filed by the assessee and ending with—
(i) the date on which the order rejecting the application is received by the
Commissioner; or
(ii) the date on which the copy of the Advance  Pricing Agreement, en-
tered under section 118, is received by the Commissioner;
(b) the time taken in reopening the whole or any part of the proceeding or in
giving an opportunity to the assessee to be reheard under section 133;
(c) the period during which the assessment proceeding is stayed by an order or
injunction of any court;
(d) the period commencing from the date on which the Assessing Officer directs
the assessee to get his accounts audited under section  151 and ending with the last
date on which the report of such audit is required to be furnished under that section;
(e) the period commencing from the first day of the month in which the notice
under section  154 is served on the assessee and ending with the last day of the month
in which the order under that section is passed;
(f) the period commencing from the date on which an application is made before
the Authority for Advance Rulings under sub-section (1) of section 258 and ending
with the date on which the order rejecting the application, or the date on which the
advance ruling pronounced by it, is received by the Commissioner under sub-section
(9) or, as the case may be, sub-section (13) of that section;
(g) the period commencing from the date on which an application is made before
the Income tax Settlement Commission under sub-section (1) of section 273 and end-
ing with the date on which the order rejecting the application by it under sub-section
(1) of section 275 is received by the Commissioner.
(5) The period of limitation available to the Assessing Officer for making an order of
assessment, reassessment or recomputation, shall  be extended to sixty days, if the period
immediately after the exclusion of the time or period specified in sub-section (4) is less than
sixty days.
C. — P
ROCEDURE FOR ASSESSMENT IN SPECIAL CASES
 164. (1) For the purposes of this Code, “representative assessee” in respect of an
assessee means—
(a) the agent of a non-resident, if the assessee is a non-resident;
Representative
assessee.
5
15
10
20
25
30
35
40
45

102
(b) the guardian, or manager, of a minor, lunatic or idiot, if the assessee is a minor,
lunatic or idiot;
(c) the Court of Wards, the Administrator-General, the Official Trustee, any
receiver or manager (including any person, whatever be his designation, who manages
property on behalf of the assessee) appointed by, or under, any order of a court, if such
person receives, or is entitled to receive, income on behalf, or for the benefit, of the
assessee;
(d) a trustee appointed under an oral trust, or a trust declared by a duly executed
instrument in writing whether testamentary or otherwise and who receives or is en-
titled to receive, income on behalf, or for the benefit, of any person, if the assessee is
a trust;
(e) the legal representative, or the executor, if the assessee dies;
(f) a participant, or the legal representative of the deceased participant, in the
case of dissolution of an unincorporated body; and
(g) the liquidator appointed under section 448, or section 490, of the Companies
Act, 1956 in the case of a company.
(2) The “agent” in relation to a non-resident includes—
(a) any person in India—
(i) who is employed by, or on behalf of, the non-resident;
(ii) who has any business connection with the non-resident;
(iii) from, or through, whom the non-resident is in receipt of any income,
whether directly or indirectly; or
(iv) who is the trustee of the non-resident; and
(b) any other person who has acquired, by means of transfer, a capital asset in
India from the non-resident.
(3) A broker in India who, in respect of any transaction, does not deal directly with, or
on behalf of, a non-resident principal but deals with, or through, a non-resident broker shall
not be deemed to be an agent under this section in respect of such transaction, if the
following conditions are fulfilled, namely:—
(a) the transactions are carried on in the ordinary course of business through
the first mentioned broker; and
(b) the non-resident broker is carrying on such transactions in the ordinary
course of his business and not as a principal.
(4) The “executor” in relation to the estate of a deceased person means—
(i) an individual, if such individual is the only executor; or
(ii) an association of persons comprising all the executors, if there are
more than one executor,
and includes an administrator or other person administering such estate.
(5) No person shall be treated as an  agent of a non-resident unless he has had an
opportunity of being heard by the Assessing Officer as to his liability to be treated as such.
165. (1) Every representative assessee shall, in his representative capacity, be liable to
assessment only in respect of the tax bases of the person represented by him (hereinafter in
this Sub-chapter referred to as the principal).
(2) Subject to sub-section ( 3), every representative assessee shall be subject to the
same duties, responsibilities and liabilities as if the tax bases accrued to, or received or
owned by, him.
Rights and
obligations of
a
representative
assessee.
5
15
10
20
25
30
35
40
45

103
(3) The tax on tax bases of the representative assessee shall be levied upon, and
recovered from, him in the manner, and to the extent, as it would have been leviable upon, and
recoverable from, the principal.
(4) Any representative assessee, or any person who apprehends that he may be
assessed as a representative assessee, may retain a sum equal to his estimated liability under
this Sub-chapter out of the money payable by him to the principal  on whose behalf he is
liable to pay tax.
(5) The representative assessee, or the person referred to in sub-section ( 4), in the
event of disagreement between him and the principal as to the amount to be so retained, may
apply to the Assessing Officer for a certificate stating the amount to be so retained pending
final settlement of the liability.
(6) Upon receipt of the application under sub-section ( 5), the Assessing Officer
shall issue, within a period of one month from the date of receipt of the application,
the certificate stating the amount to be retained by the representative assessee or
the person.
(7) The certificate issued under sub-section (6) shall be the warrant for retaining the
amount specified therein by the representative assessee or the person.
(8) The amount recoverable from the representative assessee, or the person referred to
in sub-section (4), at the time of final settlement shall not exceed the amount specified in
such certificate, except to the extent to which the representative assessee, or the person, may
have additional assets of the principal at that time.
(9) Every representative assessee who, as such, pays any sum under this Code, shall
be entitled to—
(a) recover the sum so paid from the principal; or
(b) retain an amount equal to the sum so paid out of any moneys that may be in
his possession, or may come to him, in his representative capacity.
(10) In the case of a representative assessee referred to in clause (e),  (f) or clause (g)
of sub-section (1) of section  164—
(a) any proceeding taken against the principal before his death or its disso-
lution or the appointment of the liquidator, shall be deemed to have been taken
against the representative assessee and may be continued against him from the
stage at which it stood on the date of the death or dissolution or the appoint-
ment; and
(b) any proceeding which could have been taken against the principal if the
principal had survived or existed or the liquidator had not been appointed, may be
taken against the representative assessee.
 166. Nothing in this Sub-chapter shall prevent —
(a) the direct assessment of the principal; or
(b) the recovery of any sum payable under this Code from the principal.
 167. The Assessing Officer shall have the same remedy against all property of any
kind vested in, or under the control or management of, any representative assessee as he
would have against the property of the principal, in as full and ample a manner, whether the
demand is raised against the representative assessee or against the principal direct.
Direct
assessment or
recovery not
barred.
Remedy
against
property in
case of
representative
assessee.
5
15
10
20
25
30
35
40

104
168. (1) The assessment of the predecessor and the successor in a business
reorganisation shall, in respect of the financial year in which the business reorganisation is
undertaken, be made in the manner provided in this section.
(2) The predecessor shall be assessed in respect of the income for the period beginning
with the first day of the financial year and ending on the day immediately preceding the date
of business reorganisation.
(3) The successor shall be assessed in respect of the income for the period
beginning with the date of business reorganisation and ending on the last day of the
financial year.
(4) Any proceeding under this Code taken against the predecessor shall be deemed to
have been taken against the successor and may be continued against the successor from the
stage at which it stood on the date of the business reorganisation, if the predecessor does
not exist or cannot be found.
(5) Any proceeding under this Code may be taken against the successor, which could
have been taken against the predecessor if he existed or was found.
 169. (1) A Hindu undivided family, hitherto assessed as undivided, shall be deemed,
for the purposes of this Code, to continue to be a Hindu undivided family, except where, and
in so far as, a finding of partition has been given under this section in respect of the Hindu
undivided family.
(2) The Assessing Officer shall—
(a) make an inquiry into the claim of partition made by, or on behalf of, any
member of a Hindu undivided family, hitherto assessed as undivided, at the time of
making the assessment;
(b) give notice of the inquiry to all members of the family; and
(c) record a finding as to whether there has been a total, or partial, partition of the
joint family property and, if there has been such a partition, the date on which it has
taken place.
(3) The tax bases of the Hindu undivided family, hitherto assessed as undivided, shall,
for the financial year in which the partition took place, be the tax bases in respect of the
period up to the date of partition, as if no partition had taken place.
(4) Each member, or group of members, of the Hindu undivided family, hitherto
assessed as undivided, shall be jointly and severally liable for tax on the tax bases of any
financial year or period, up to the date of partition, and such tax shall be recovered from
him, or them, accordingly.
(5) For the purposes of this section, the several liability of any member, or group of
members, shall be computed according to the portion of the joint family property allotted to
him, or to them, upon the partition.
(6) The provisions of this section shall, so far as may be, apply in relation to the levy
and collection of any penalty, interest, fine or other sum in respect of any period upto the
date of the partition, whether total or partial, of a Hindu undivided family as they apply in
relation to the levy and collection of tax in respect of any such period.
(7) For the purposes of this Code, no claim of partial partition of a Hindu undivided
family shall be inquired into, or recognised as such.
(8) In case of a partial partition of a Hindu undivided family—
Assessment
after partition
of a Hindu
undivided
family.
Assessment
upon business
reorganisation.
5
15
10
20
25
30
35
40

105
(a) the Hindu undivided family shall continue to be assessed under this Code as
if no partial partition had taken place; and
(b) the liability of  that Hindu undivided family  or its members under this Code,
before or after the partial partition, shall remain the same.
(9) In this section—
(a) “partition” means—
(i) where the property admits of a physical division, such division of the
property, but a physical division of the income without a physical division of a
property producing the income shall not be deemed to be a partition; or
(ii) where the property does not admit of a physical division, then such
division as the property admits of, but a mere severance of status shall not be
deemed to be a partition;
(b) “partial partition” means a partition which is partial as regards the persons
constituting the Hindu undivided family, or the properties belonging to the Hindu
undivided family, or both.
 170. (1) Notwithstanding anything in this Code, the assessment of the income of a
non-resident from the business of operation of ships (including an arrangement such as slot
charter, space charter or joint charter) shall be made in accordance with the provisions of this
section.
(2) The master of a ship belonging to, or chartered by, a non-resident shall, before the
departure of the ship, furnish to the Assessing Officer a return of the full amount of
transportation charges accrued to, or received by, the owner or charterer, since the last
arrival of the ship in that port.
(3) The requirement of furnishing the return shall be deemed to have been complied
with, if—
(a) the Assessing Officer is satisfied that—
(i) it is not possible for the master of the ship to furnish the return before
the departure of the ship from the port; and
(ii) the master of the ship has made satisfactory arrangements for furnish-
ing the return and payment of tax; and
(b) the return is furnished within a period of thirty days of the departure of the
ship by any person authorised by the master of the ship.
(4) On receipt of the return, the Assessing Officer shall—
(a) assess the income referred to in sub-section ( 1) in accordance with serial
number 7 of the Table under Paragraph 1 of the Fourteenth Schedule, after calling for
such documents as he deems fit; and
(b) determine the sum payable as tax thereon at the rates applicable to the total
income of a foreign company.
(5) The sum determined under sub-section (4) shall be payable by the master of the
ship or any other person authorised by him.
(6) A port clearance shall not be granted to the ship until the Commissioner of
Customs, or other officer duly authorised to grant it, is satisfied that the tax assessable
under this section has been duly paid or that satisfactory arrangements have been made
for the payment.
Assessment
of non-
resident in
respect of
occasional
shipping
business.
5
15
10
20
25
30
35
40

106
(7) Nothing in this section shall prevent the assessment of the income, referred to in
sub-section (1), for the relevant financial year of the owner, or charterer, of the ship in
accordance with the other provisions of this Code, at his option.
(8) Any payment of tax made under this section shall be treated as advance tax, in case
an assessment is made as envisaged in sub-section ( 7).
 171. (1) The tax bases of an individual for part of a financial year may be chargeable to
tax in that financial year, if—
(a) it appears to the Assessing Officer that the individual may leave India during
the financial year or shortly after its expiry; and
(b) has no intention of returning to India.
(2) The part of a financial year, referred to in sub-section ( 1) shall be the period
beginning with the first day of the financial year and ending with the probable date of his
departure from India.
(3) The Assessing Officer may estimate the tax bases of the individual for part of a
financial year if it cannot be readily determined in accordance with  this Code.
(4) For the purposes of making an assessment under sub-section (1), the Assessing
Officer may require the individual to furnish the return of tax bases within the time specified
therein, which shall not be less than seven days.
(5) Notwithstanding anything in this Code, the Assessing Officer  may, require the
individual to furnish the return of tax bases, within the time specified therein, which shall not
be less than seven days—
(a) for the financial year for which the due date for filing of return has not
expired; and
(b) for such other financial years for which no return of tax bases has been filed
which was otherwise required to be filed.
(6) The Assessing Officer shall, upon receipt of the return, or after the expiry of the
time allowed for furnishing the return under sub-section (4) or sub-section  (5), proceed to
make the assessment in accordance with the provisions of this Code in so far as they apply.
(7) The tax payable on the tax bases computed under this section shall be in addition
to the tax, if any, payable under any other provision of this Code.
172. (1) Notwithstanding anything in this Code,  where it appears to the Assessing
Officer  that an unincorporated body formed for a particular event or purpose in a financial
year is likely to be dissolved in  the financial year or shortly thereafter,  then the Assessing
Officer may charge to tax in that financial year the tax bases of the unincorporated body for
the period beginning from the  first day of the financial year  to the likely date of its dissolution.
(2) The provisions of section  171 shall apply to any proceeding under this section as
they apply in the case of a person leaving India.
 173. (1) Notwithstanding anything in this Code, where it appears to the Assessing
Officer  that any person is likely to charge, sell, transfer, dispose of or otherwise part with any
of his assets, in any financial year, with a view to avoiding payment of any liability under this
Code, then the Assessing Officer may charge to tax in that financial year the tax bases of
such person for the period beginning from the  first day of the financial year  to the date when
the Assessing Officer commences proceedings under this section.
Assessment
of an
unincorporated
body  formed
for a
particular
event or
purpose.
Assessment of
persons likely
to transfer
property to
avoid tax.
Assessment
of persons
leaving India.
5
15
10
20
25
30
35
40

107
(2) The provisions of section  171 shall apply to any proceeding under this section as
they apply in the case of a person leaving India.
 174.  (1) Notwithstanding anything in this Code,  where any business is discontinued
in any financial year, the Assessing Officer may, in his discretion, charge to tax in that
financial year the tax bases of such business for the period beginning from the  first day of
the financial year to the date  on which the business has been discontinued.
(2)  Any person discontinuing any business  shall give to the Assessing Officer notice
of such discontinuance within a period of fifteen days thereof.
(3) Any sum received after the discontinuance of business shall be deemed to be the
income of the recipient and charged to tax accordingly in the year of receipt, if such sum
would have been included in the tax bases of the person who carried on the business had
such sum been received before such discontinuance.
(4) The Assessing Officer may require the person whose business has been
discontinued to furnish the return of tax bases, within the time specified therein, which shall
not be less than a period of seven days.
(5) The notice for furnishing the return shall be served by the Assessing Officer, in the
case of discontinuance of the business of—
(a) the individual, on him;
(b) the unincorporated body, on the participant who was member of the unincor-
porated body at the time of discontinuance; and
(c) the company, on the principal officer thereof.
(6) The Assessing Officer shall, upon receipt of the return, or after the expiry of the
time allowed for furnishing the return under sub-section (4) proceed to make the assessment
in accordance with the provisions of this Code in so far as they apply.
(7) The tax payable on the tax bases computed under this section shall be in addition
to the tax, if any, payable under any other provision of this Code.
 175. (1) The Assessing Officer shall, in a case where a change has occurred in the
constitution of an unincorporated body, make a single  assessment in respect of the entire
financial year in which the change has occurred.
(2) In this section, a change in the constitution of an unincorporated body is said to
have taken place, if—
(a) one, or more, of the participants cease to be participants;
(b) one, or more, new participants are admitted; or
(c) all the participants continue with a change in their respective shares or in the
shares of some of them.
(3) The provisions of this section shall not apply, if the change in constitution is on
account of the death of a participant or the retirement of all the participants.
Assessment
of
unincorporated
body in case
of change in
its
constitution.
Discontinued
business.
5
15
10
20
25
30
35

108
 176. (1) The Assessing Officer shall make separate assessments on any two
unincorporated bodies, if—
(a) one unincorporated body succeeds another unincorporated body; and
(b) the succession is by virtue of retirement of all participants in the unincorpo-
rated body or death of any of the participants.
(2) The separate assessments shall be made in accordance with the provisions of
section  168 as if—
(a) the unincorporated body, succeeding the other unincorporated body, is the
successor; and
(b) the unincorporated body being succeeded is the predecessor.
177. (1) The Assessing Officer shall assess every return filed under section 198,
section 199 or section 202, as if it were a return of tax bases referred to in section  144, and all
the other provisions of this Code shall, as far as may be, apply accordingly.
(2) The Assessing Officer shall, in a case where a person has failed to file the return
under section 198 or section 199 or section 202, issue a notice to the person requiring him to
furnish the return within the time specified therein and all the other provisions of this Code
shall, as far as may be, apply as if it were a return of tax bases referred to in section 144.
D.—A
PPEALS AND REVISION
 178. (1) An assessee may prefer an appeal to the Commissioner (Appeals) where he is
aggrieved by or an intimation issued or an order passed by any income-tax authority below
the rank of the Commissioner as specified in the Twenty-First  Schedule.
(2) Without prejudice to sub-section (1), the assessee may prefer an appeal—
(i) where an application filed by him under section 161 has not been disposed of
by the Assessing Officer within a period of six months from the date of filing of the
application; or
(ii)  where he is required to bear the liability in respect of the tax deductible under
section 195 on the income payable  to a non-resident under any agreement or other
arrangement and—
(a) he claims that no tax was deductible by him on such income payable by
him to the non-resident; and
(b) has paid the tax on such income to the credit of the Central Government.
 179. (1) Every appeal under section  178 shall be in such form and verified in such
manner and accompanied by a fee as may be prescribed.
Form of
appeal and
limitation.
Appeal to
Commissioner
(Appeals).
Assessment
of a deductor
or collector.
Assessment
on
retirement or
death of
participant.
5
15
10
20
25
30

109
(2) The appeal by an assessee under section  178 shall be preferred within a period of
thirty days  from—
(a) the date of service of the notice of demand, if the appeal relates to any order
or intimation in pursuance of which such notice of demand is issued;
(b) the date on which the period of six months for disposing of the application
expired, if the appeal relates to not disposing of the application for rectification under
section  161;
(c) the date of payment of the tax to the Central Government, if the appeal is filed
under clause (ii) of sub-section (2) of section  178; and
(d) the date on which the order sought to be appealed against is served, if the
appeal relates to any other matter.
(3) The Commissioner (Appeals) may admit an appeal after the expiry of the period
specified in sub-section (2), if—
(a) he is satisfied that the appellant had sufficient cause for not preferring it
within that time; and
(b) the delay in preferring the appeal does not exceed a period of one year.
(4) No appeal under this section shall be admitted unless—
(a) the assessee has paid the tax due in accordance with the return of tax bases
furnished;
(b) the assessee has paid an amount equal to the amount of advance-tax which
was payable by him, if no return of tax bases has been filed by the assessee.
(5) The Commissioner (Appeals) may, on an application made by the assessee, exempt
him from the operation of the provisions of clause (b) of sub-section (4) for any good and
sufficient reason to be recorded in writing.
180. (1) The Commissioner (Appeals) shall fix a day and place for the hearing of the
appeal, and shall give notice of the same to the appellant and the Assessing Officer against
whose order the appeal is preferred.
(2) The following shall have the right to be heard at the hearing of the appeal, namely:—
(a) the appellant, either in person or by an authorised representative;
(b) the Assessing Officer, either in person or by a representative.
(3) The Commissioner (Appeals)  may adjourn the hearing of the appeal whenever he
considers it necessary or expedient to do so.
(4) The Commissioner (Appeals) may, before disposing of any appeal, make such
further inquiry as he thinks fit.
(5) The Commissioner (Appeals) may, during the proceedings before him, direct the
Assessing Officer to make inquiry and report the result of the same to him on the points
arising out of any new question of fact or law.
(6) The Commissioner (Appeals) may, at the hearing of an appeal, allow the appellant
to go into any ground of appeal not specified in the grounds of appeal, if the Commissioner
(Appeals) is satisfied that the omission was not wilful or unreasonable.
(7) The order of the Commissioner (Appeals), disposing of the appeal shall be in
writing and shall state the points for determination, the decision thereon and the reasons
therefor.
Procedure in
appeal.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

110
(8) Every appeal preferred under section 178 shall be heard and disposed of  by the
Commissioner (Appeals) as expeditiously as possible and endeavour shall be made to dis-
pose of such appeal within a period of one year from the end of the financial year in which the
appeal is preferred.
(9) On the disposal of the appeal, the Commissioner (Appeals) shall communicate the order
passed by him to the assessee and to the Chief Commissioner or the Commissioner.
181.(1) In disposing of an appeal, the Commissioner (Appeals), shall have the follow-
ing powers, namely:—
(a) in an appeal against an order of assessment  he may confirm, reduce, enhance
or annul the assessment;
(b) in an appeal against an order imposing a penalty, he may confirm or cancel
such order or vary it so as to enhance or reduce the penalty;
(c) in any other case, he may determine the issues arising in the appeal and pass
such orders thereon, as he thinks fit.
(2) The Commissioner (Appeals) may consider and decide any matter which was not
considered by the Assessing Officer.
(3) The Commissioner (Appeals) shall not enhance an assessment or a penalty or
reduce the amount of refund unless the appellant has had an opportunity of showing cause
against such enhancement or reduction.
(4) In disposing of an appeal, the Commissioner (Appeals), may consider and decide
any matter arising out of the proceedings in which the order appealed against was passed,
notwithstanding that such matter was not raised before  him by the appellant.
 182. (1)The Central Government shall constitute an Appellate Tribunal consisting of
a President and as many judicial and accountant members, as it thinks fit, to exercise the
powers and discharge the functions conferred on the Appellate Tribunal by this Code.
(2) A judicial member shall be a person—
(i) who has for at least ten years held a judicial office in the territory of India;
(ii) who has been a member of the Indian Legal Service and has held a post in
Grade I of that Service, or any equivalent or higher post, for at least three years; or
(iii) who has for at least ten years been an advocate of a High Court or of two or
more such courts in succession.
(3) An accountant member shall be a person—
(a) who has for at least fifteen years been in the practice of accountancy as a
chartered accountant under the Chartered Accountants Act, 1949; or
(b) who has been a member of the Indian Revenue Service and has held the post
of Additional Commissioner of Income-tax or any equivalent or higher post for at least
three years.
(4) The Central Government may appoint one or more judicial or accountant members
of the Appellate Tribunal to be Vice-President or, as the case may be, Vice-Presidents thereof.
(5) The Central Government may appoint one of the Vice-Presidents of the Appellate
Tribunal to be the Senior Vice-President thereof.
(6) The Central Government may  appoint a person who is, or has been, a  Chief Justice
of a High Court to be the President of the Appellate Tribunal.
(7) The Senior Vice-President or a Vice-President shall exercise such of the powers and
Powers of
Commissioner
(Appeals).
Appellate
Tribunal.
38 of 1949.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

111
perform such of the functions of the President as may be delegated to him by the President
by a general or special order in writing.
(8) For the purpose of sub-section (2),—
(a) in computing the period during which a person has held judicial office in the
territory of India, there shall be included any period, after he has held any judicial
office, during which the person has been an advocate of a High Court or has held the
office of a member of a tribunal or any post, under the Union or a State, requiring
special knowledge of law;
(b) in computing the period during which a person has been an advocate of a
High Court, there shall be included any period during which the person has held
judicial office or the office of a member of a tribunal or any post, under the Union or a
State, requiring special knowledge of law after he became an advocate.
(9) In this Sub-chapter, “judicial member” means a judicial member referred to in sub-
section (2) and includes the President.
 183. (1) An assessee may prefer an appeal to the Appellate Tribunal, where he is
aggrieved by an order passed by–
(a) a Commissioner (Appeals) under section 180;
(b) a Commissioner under section  98 and section 191;
(c) a Commissioner or Commissioner  (Appeals) in respect of levy of penalty
under Chapter XIV  relating to Penalties;
(d) an Assessing Officer in consequence of an order of the Commissioner under
section 191;
(e) an Assessing Officer in pursuance of the directions of the Dispute Resolu-
tion Panel; and
(f) the income-tax authorities referred to in clauses (a) to (e) above, under sec-
tion 161, in respect of the orders mentioned in the said clauses.
(2) The Commissioner may, if he is not satisfied with the  order passed by  the Commis-
sioner (Appeals), direct the Assessing Officer to prefer an appeal to the Appellate Tribunal
against such  order.
(3) Notwithstanding anything in sub-sections ( 1) and (2), no appeal shall lie to the
Appellate Tribunal against the order of the Commissioner (Appeals) or  the Commissioner,
as the case may be, in the case of a public sector company, irrespective of the fact whether
the order is prejudicial to the company or the revenue, which shall lie to the Authority as
referred to in section 257.
(4) Every appeal under sub-section (1), or sub-section (2), shall be  preferred within a
period of sixty days  from the date on which the order sought to be appealed against is
communicated to the assessee or to the Commissioner, as the case may be.
(5) The Assessing Officer or the assessee may, on receipt of notice that an appeal
against the order of the Commissioner (Appeals) has been preferred under sub-section (1)
or sub-section (2) by the other party,  file a memorandum of cross-objection against any part
of the order of the Commissioner (Appeals) within a period of thirty days of the receipt of the
notice.
(6) The memorandum of cross-objection shall be disposed of by the Appellate Tribu-
nal as if it were an appeal preferred within the time specified in sub-section (4).
Appeals to
Appellate
Tribunal.
35
35
30
25
20
15
10
5

112
(7) The Appellate Tribunal may admit an appeal, or a memorandum of cross-objection,
after the expiry of the period specified in sub-section (4) or sub-section (5), if—
(a) it is satisfied that the appellant had sufficient cause for not preferring it
within that time; and
(b) the delay in filing the appeal does not exceed a period of one year.
(8) An appeal, or the memorandum of cross-objection, to the Appellate Tribunal shall
be in  such form and be verified in  such  manner as may be prescribed.
(9) The appeal by an assessee shall be accompanied by  such fees as may be prescribed.
184. (1) An assessee may make an application to the Appellate Tribunal for stay of
demand relating to the appeal preferred by him under section 183 and such application shall
be accompanied by  such fees  as may be prescribed.
(2) The Appellate Tribunal may, after giving both the parties to the appeal an oppor-
tunity of being heard and having considered the merits of the case, pass such orders on the
stay application as it deems fit.
(3) The Appellate Tribunal may grant stay under sub-section ( 2) for a period not
exceeding  one hundred and eighty days from the date of passing of the order for stay and
the Appellate Tribunal shall dispose of the appeal within the said period of stay specified in
that order.
(4) The Appellate Tribunal may, on an application made by the assessee seeking
extension of the period of stay, extend the period of stay allowed under sub-section (2), if it
is satisfied that the delay in disposing of the appeal is not attributable to the assessee.
(5) The aggregate of the period originally allowed under sub-section ( 2) and the
period or periods extended under sub-section (4) shall not, in any case, exceed three hun-
dred and sixty-five days from the date of passing the order of stay under sub-section (2).
(6) The Appellate T ribunal shall dispose of the appeal during the period of stay
allowed under sub-section (2) or the period or periods extended under sub-section (4),  and
where it fails to do so, the stay order shall stand vacated notwithstanding that the delay in
disposing of the appeal is not attributable to the assessee.
185. (1)The Appellate Tribunal may, after giving both the parties to the appeal an
opportunity of being heard, pass such orders thereon as it thinks fit.
(2) The Appellate Tribunal may, either suo motu or the mistake on being brought to its
notice by the assessee or the Assessing Officer at any time within a period of four years from
the date of the order, with a view to rectifying any mistake apparent on the face of   the record,
amend any order passed by it under sub-section ( 1).
(3) The Appellate Tribunal shall not make an amendment which has the effect of
enhancing an assessment or reducing a refund or otherwise increasing the liability of the
assessee under sub-section (2)  without giving the assessee an  opportunity of being heard.
(4) Every appeal preferred under section 183 shall be heard and disposed of by the
Appellate Tribunal as expeditiously as possible and endeavour shall be made to dispose of
such appeal within a period of two years from the end of the financial year in which the
appeal is preferred.
(5) The Appellate Tribunal shall send a copy of any order passed under this section to
the assessee and to the Commissioner.
(6) Subject to the provisions of section 187, the orders passed by the Appellate Tribu-
nal shall be final.
Orders of
Appellate
Tribunal.
Stay of
deamand by
Appellate
Tribunal.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

113
 186.  (1) The powers and functions of the Appellate Tribunal may be exercised and
discharged by its Benches constituted by the President of the Appellate Tribunal from
among the members thereof.
(2) Subject to sub-section (3), a Bench shall consist of one judicial member and one
accountant member.
(3) The Vice-President or any other member of the Appellate Tribunal authorised in
this behalf by the Central Government may, sitting  alone, dispose of any case allotted to the
Bench of which he is a member and which pertains to an assessee, not being a company or
a non-resident, whose tax bases as computed by the Assessing Officer does not exceed five
lakh rupees.
(4) The President may, in the interest of justice and for the disposal of any particular
case, constitute a Special Bench consisting of three or more members, one of whom shall
necessarily be a judicial member and one an accountant member.
(5) The President shall, on a reference received from the Board for the disposal of any
particular case, constitute a Special Bench consisting of five members or more, two of whom
shall necessarily be judicial members and two accountant members.
(6)  Where on any point the members of a Bench differ in opinion, it shall be decided
according to the opinion of the majority.
(7) If the members of a Bench are equally divided in opinion on any point or points,
they shall state the point or points on which they differ and make a reference to the President
of the Appellate Tribunal who shall either hear  himself or refer   for hearing on such point or
points by one or more of the other members of the Appellate Tribunal and such point or
points shall be decided according to the opinion of the majority of the members of the
Appellate Tribunal who have heard the case, including those who first heard it.
(8) Subject to the provisions of this Code, the Appellate Tribunal shall have powers to
regulate its own procedure and the procedure of Benches thereof in all matters arising out of
the exercise of its powers or of the discharge of its functions, including the place at which
the Benches shall hold their sittings.
(9) The Appellate Tribunal shall, for the purpose of discharging its functions, have all
the powers which are vested in the income-tax authorities under section 134.
(10) Any proceeding before the Appellate Tribunal shall be deemed to be a judicial
proceeding within the meaning of section 193 and section 228 and for the purpose of section
196 of the Indian Penal Code.
(11)The Appellate Tribunal shall be deemed to be a civil  court for all the purposes of
section 195 and Chapter XXVI of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.
 187. (1) An appeal shall lie to the High Court from every order passed in appeal by the
Appellate Tribunal, if the High Court is satisfied that the case involves a substantial ques-
tion of law.
(2) The Chief Commissioner or the Commissioner or an assessee, may file an appeal to
the High Court on being aggrieved by any order passed by the Appellate Tribunal and such
appeal shall be—
Constitution
of  Benches
and
procedure of
Appellate
Tribunal.
2 of 1974.
Appeal to
High Court.
45 of 1860.
40
35
30
25
20
15
10
5

114
(a) filed within a period of one hundred and twenty days from the date on which
the order appealed against is received by the Chief Commissioner or the Commissioner
or the assessee;
(b) in the form of a memorandum of appeal precisely stating therein the substan-
tial question of law involved.
(3) The High Court may admit an appeal after the expiry of the period of one hundred
and twenty days referred to in sub-section (2), if it is satisfied that there was sufficient cause
for not filing the appeal within that period.
(4) If the High Court is satisfied that a substantial question of law is involved in any
case, it shall formulate that question.
(5) The appeal shall be heard only on the question so formulated, and the respondents
shall, at the hearing of the appeal, be allowed to argue that the case does not involve such
question.
(6) Notwithstanding anything in sub-sections (4) and (5), the High Court  may exercise
its power to hear the appeal on any other substantial question of law not formulated by it, if
it is satisfied that the case involves such question of law.
( 7) The High Court shall decide the question of law so formulated and deliver such
judgment thereon containing the grounds on which such decision is founded and may
award such cost as it deems fit.
( 8) The High Court may determine any issue which
—
(a) has not been determined by the Appellate Tribunal; or
(b) has been wrongly determined by the Appellate Tribunal, by reason of a
decision on the question of law referred to in sub-section (1).
( 9) The provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, relating to appeals to the High
Court shall, so far as may be, apply in the case of appeals under this section.
(10) When the High Court delivers a judgment in an appeal filed before it under sub-
section (7), effect shall be given to the order passed on the appeal by the Assessing Officer
on the basis of a certified copy of judgment.
188. (1) An appeal filed before the High Court shall be heard by a Bench of not less
than two Judges of the High Court and shall be decided in accordance with the opinion of
such Judges or of the majority, if any, of such Judges.
(2) Where there is no such majority, the Judges shall state the point of law upon which
they differ and the case shall then be heard upon that point only by one or more of the other
Judges of the High Court and such point shall be decided according to the opinion of the
majority of the Judges who have heard the case including those who first heard it.
 189. An appeal shall lie to the Supreme Court from any  judgment of the High Court
delivered under section 187 which the High Court certified to be a fit case for appeal to the
Supre Court.
190. (1) The provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, relating to appeals to the
Supreme Court shall, so far as may be, apply in the case of appeals under section 189 as they
apply in the case of appeals from decrees of a High Court.
Appeal to
Supreme
Court.
Hearing
before
Supreme
Court.
Case before
High Court to
be heard by
not less than
two Judges.
5 of 1908.
5 of 1908.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

115
(2) The costs of the appeal shall be in the discretion of the Supreme Court.
(3) Where the judgment of the High Court is varied or reversed in the appeal, effect
shall be given to the order of the Supreme Court in the manner provided in sub-section (10)
of section 187.
 191.  (1) The Commissioner may, for the purposes of revising any order passed in any
proceeding under this Code before any income-tax authority subordinate to him, call for, and
examine, all available records relating thereto.
(2) The Commissioner may, after giving the assessee an opportunity of being heard,
pass an order (hereinafter referred to as the revision order) as the circumstances of the case
justify, if he is satisfied that the order sought to be revised is erroneous in so far as it is
prejudicial to the interests of the revenue.
(3) The Commissioner may make, or cause to be made, such inquiry as he  considers
necessary for the purposes of passing an order under sub-section ( 2).
(4) The revision order passed by the Commissioner under sub-section (2) may have
the effect of enhancing or modifying the assessment  but shall not be an order   cancelling
the assessment and directing a fresh assessment.
(5) The power of the Commissioner under sub-section (2) for revising an order shall
not extend to such order,—
(a) against which an appeal is pending before the Commissioner (Appeals);
(b) as has been considered and decided in any appeal; or
(c) as has been considered  by, and passed in pursuance of the directions of, the
Dispute Resolution Panel.
(6) No order under sub-section (2) shall be made after the expiry of a period of two
years from the end of the financial year in which the order sought to be revised was passed.
(7) In computing the period of limitation under sub-section (6),  the following shall not
be included, namely:—
(a) the time taken in giving an opportunity to the assessee to be reheard under
section 133; or
(b) any period during which any proceeding under this section is stayed by an
order, or injunction, of any court.
(8) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provisions, an order passed
by an income-tax authority shall be deemed to be erroneous in so far as it is prejudicial to the
interests of the revenue, if—
(a) the order is passed without making inquiries or verification which, in the
opinion of the Commissioner, should have been made;
(b) the order is passed allowing any relief without probing into the claim;
(c) the order has not been made in accordance with any order, direction or
instruction issued by the Board under section 129;
(d) the order has not been passed in accordance with any decision, prejudicial
to the assessee, rendered by—
Revision of
orders
prejudicial to
revenue.
5
10
20
25
30
35
40
15

116
(i)  the Appellate Tribunal, High Court or Supreme Court in the case of the
assessee or any other person under this Code, the Income-tax Act, 1961, or the
Wealth-tax Act, 1957. as stood before the commencement of this Code; or
(ii) a court under any other law; or
(e) the order has been made following the order of a jurisdictional High Court but
a special leave petition has been granted by the Supreme Court against the said
decision of the High Court   subsequent to the passing of the order.
(9) An order passed by an income-tax authority shall not be considered to be errone-
ous in so far as it is prejudicial to the interests of the revenue, if—
(a) the order has been made by holding a view sustainable in law; and
(b) the Commissioner is not in agreement due to the existence of another view
sustainable in law.
(10)  In this section, “record” shall include all records relating to any proceeding under
this Code available at the time of examination by the Commissioner.
192.  (1) The Commissioner may,  suo motu or on an application made  by the assessee,
for the purposes of revising any order passed by an authority subordinate to him,  other than
an order to which section  191 applies, call for and examine all available records relating
thereto.
 (2) The Commissioner may pass an order, as he considers necessary, which is not
prejudicial to the assessee.
 (3) The power of the Commissioner under sub-section (2) for revising an order shall
not extend to such order—
 (a) against which an appeal has not been filed but the time for filing an appeal
before the Commissioner (Appeals) has not expired;
(b) against which an appeal is pending before the Commissioner (Appeals);
(c)  as has been considered and decided in any appeal; or
(d)  as has been considered  by, and passed in pursuance of the directions of, the
Dispute Resolution Panel.
(4)  The assessee shall  make the  application for revision of any order referred to in
sub-section (1),  within a period of one year from the date on which the order sought to be
revised was communicated to him, or the date on which he otherwise came to know of it,
whichever is earlier.
 (5) Every application by an assessee for revision under this section shall be accompa-
nied by  such fees as may be prescribed.
(6) No order under sub-section (2) shall be made after the expiry of—
(a)  a period of one year from the end of the financial year in which an  application
is made by the assessee  under sub-section ( 4); or
(b)  a period of one year from the date of the order sought to be revised, if the
order is revised by the Commissioner suo motu.
Revision of
other orders.
43 of 1961.
27 of 1957.
5
10
20
25
30
35
15

117
CHAPTER  XIII
COLLECTION AND RECOVERY OF  TAX
A.—Deduction of tax at source
193. (1) The tax on any income shall be payable by deduction or collection at source
or by advance payment, as the case may be, in accordance with the provisions of this
Chapter, notwithstanding that the regular assessment in respect of such income is to be
made in a later financial year.
(2) Nothing in this section shall prejudice the charge of tax on such income under the
provisions of sub-section (2) of section 2.
194. (1) The tax on income shall be payable by the assessee direct if,—
(a) there is no provision under this Chapter for deduction or collection of in-
come-tax at the time of payment; or
(b) income-tax has not been deducted or collected in accordance with the provi-
sions of this Chapter.
(2) Any person who is required to deduct or collect any sum in accordance with the
provisions of this Code does not deduct or collect, or after so deducting or collecting fails
to pay, or does not pay, the whole or any part of the tax, as required by or under this Code,
and where the assessee has also failed to pay such tax directly, then, such person shall,
without prejudice to any other consequences which he may incur, be deemed to be an
assessee in default within the meaning of section  218 in respect of such tax.
195.  (1) Any person responsible for making a specified payment shall, at the time of
payment, deduct income-tax therefrom at the appropriate rate.
(2) The specified payment referred to in sub-section (1), if the deductee is a resident,
shall be the payment of the nature specified in column (2)  of the Third Schedule and the
appropriate rate, in respect of such specified payment, shall be the rate specified in the
corresponding entry in column (3) of the said Schedule.
(3) The specified payment referred to in sub-section ( 1), if the deductee is a non-
resident, shall be the payment of the nature specified in column (2)  of the Fourth Schedule
and the appropriate rate, in respect of such specified payment, shall be the rate specified in
the corresponding entry in column (3) of the said Schedule.
(4) Without prejudice to sub-section ( 3), where a rate in respect of such specified
payment has been provided in the relevant agreement entered into, or adopted by, the
Central Government under section 291, then appropriate rate referred to in sub-section (1)
shall be the rate specified in the corresponding entry in column (3) of the Fourth Schedule or
the rate provided in such agreement whichever is lower.
(5) Notwithstanding anything in this Code, the appropriate rate referred to in sub-
section (1) shall, in a case where the deductee has failed to furnish his permanent account
number to the deductor (except where the deductee is not required to obtain permanent
account number under section 292),  be the higher of  following rates, namely:—
(a) twenty per cent.; and
(b) the rate specified in sub-sections (2), (3) or sub-section (4), as the case may
be.
196.  (1) For the purposes of section 195, the specified payment shall be deemed to
have been made, if the payment has been made—
(a) in cash;
(b) by issue of a cheque or draft;
Deduction or
collection of
tax  at source
and advance
payment.
Direct
payment.
Liability to
deduct tax at
source.
Payment of
income and
deduction of
tax.
5
10
20
25
30
35
40
15
40

118
(c) by credit to any account, whether called suspense account or by any other
name; or
(d) by any other mode as may be prescribed,
whichever is earlier.
(2) If the payment is wholly or partly in kind, the deductor shall ensure that the tax
deductible in respect of such payment has been paid before making the payment.
(3) The deductor may, at the time of making any deduction of tax from the payment
liable to be taxed under the head “Income from employment” or from the payment in the
nature of interest, increase or reduce the amount to be deducted from any payment to be
made to a deductee for the purposes of adjusting any deficiency, or excess, arising out of any
previous deduction or non-deduction during the financial year in respect of such deductee.
(4) For the purposes of making any deduction of tax from the payment liable to be taxed
under the head “Income from employment”, the deductor shall take into account the follow-
ing particulars, if any, furnished by the deductee in such form and manner as may be pre-
scribed, namely:—
(i) details of payment liable to be taxed under the head “Income from employ-
ment” due to or received by the deductee from any other employer during the year and
any tax deducted therefrom;
(ii) tax relief for arrears or advance receipts under section 206.
(5) If the tax payable on any payment is to be borne by the deductor in pursuance of an
agreement or arrangement, then, for the purposes of deduction of tax, the payment shall be
grossed up to such amount as would, after deduction of tax thereon at the rate referred to in
sub-section (1) of section 195, be equal to the net amount payable under such agreement or
arrangement.
197.  (1) The deductee may make an application, in such form and manner as may be
prescribed, to the Assessing Officer seeking a certificate for deduction of income-tax at a
lower rate or, as the case may be, no deduction of income-tax from payments to be received
by him.
(2) The deductor may make an application, in such form and manner as may be pre-
scribed, to the Assessing Officer seeking a certificate for deduction of income-tax at a lower
rate or, as the case may be, no deduction of income-tax from payments to be made by him to
a non-resident deductee.
(3) Where the Assessing Officer is satisfied that the total income of the deductee
justifies deduction of income-tax at a lower rate or no deduction of income-tax, he shall give
to the deductee or the deductor, as the case may be, such certificate as may be appropriate.
(4) The deductor shall deduct income-tax at the rates specified in the certificate issued
under sub-section (3), until—
(a)  such certificate is cancelled by the Assessing Officer; or
(b)  the expiry of the validity of the certificate,
whichever is earlier.
(5) The Board may prescribe the circumstances  and the cases in which an application
may be made for the grant of the certificate and the conditions subject to which such
certificate may be granted and provide for all other matters connected therewith.
198. (1) Every deductor shall pay the sum deducted to the credit of the Central Gov-
ernment within such time and manner as may be  prescribed.
Certificate
for lower or
no deduction
of tax.
Obligation of
deductor.
5
10
20
25
30
35
40
15
45

119
(2) Every deductor shall furnish to the deductee a certificate to the effect that tax has
been deducted within such time and containing such particulars as may be prescribed.
(3) Every deductor shall deliver, or cause to be delivered, a return of tax deduction in
such manner as is provided under sub-section (4) of section 199.
199.  (1) Every deductor shall deliver, or cause to be delivered, a return in respect of
payment of interest to residents without deduction of tax.
(2) The deductor referred to in sub-section (1) shall be—
(a) any financial institution; or
(b) any co-operative society.
(3) The Central Government may, by notification , require any deductor to deliver, or
cause to be delivered, a return in respect of any payment without deduction of tax.
(4) The Board shall, in respect of the return of tax deduction under section 198 and the
return under this section, prescribe the following, namely:—
(a) the period in respect of which the return is to be furnished;
(b) the form of the return and the particulars therein;
(c) the manner of verification of the return;
(d) the time by, and the medium in, which the return is to be delivered;
(e) the income-tax authority, or any other person, authorised to receive the
return; and
(f) any other matter connected therewith.
200. Notwithstanding anything in section 195, no tax shall be deducted at source,—
(A) where the payee is a resident, from the following, namely:—
(a) any payment, other than salary, made by an individual or a Hindu
undivided family,  if the individual or the Hindu undivided family is not liable to
get the accounts audited under section 88 for the financial year immediately
preceding the financial year in which the payment is made;
(b) any interest payable on any security,—
(i) of the Central Government or a State Government; or
(ii) issued by a company, if such security is in dematerialised form
and is listed on a recognised stock exchange in India;
(c) any interest on debenture payable to an individual, if -
(i) the debentures are issued by a widely held company;
(ii) the debentures are listed in a recognised stock exchange in
India; and
(iii) the aggregate amount payable during the financial year does
not exceed five thousand rupees;
(d) any interest on time deposits (being deposits repayable on the expiry
of fixed periods, excluding recurring deposits) payable, if—
(i) the time deposits are made with a banking company or a co-
operative bank or a housing-finance public company; and
Reporting of
payments
without
deduction of
tax.
No deduction
of tax in
certain cases.
5
10
20
25
30
35
40
15

120
(ii) the aggregate amount payable by the payer, being a branch of
the bank or company during the financial year, does not exceed ten
thousand rupees;
(e) any other interest payable if the aggregate amount of the payments
during the financial year does not exceed five thousand rupees;
(f) any interest payable to,—
(i) any banking company;
(ii) any co-operative bank;
(iii) any financial corporation established by or under a Central or
State or Provincial Act;
(iv) any insurer;
(v) any mutual fund; or
(vi) any institution, association or body, or class of institutions,
associations or bodies, which the Central Government may, for reasons to
be recorded in writing, notify in this behalf;
(g) any interest payable by a firm to a partner of the firm;
(h) any interest payable in respect of deposits under any scheme framed
by the Central Government and notified by it in this behalf;
(i) any interest payable in respect of deposits (other than time deposits)
with a banking company or a co-operative bank;
(j) any interest payable by the Central Government under any provision  of
this Code or the Income-tax Act, 1961, or the Wealth-tax Act, 1957, as they  stood
before the commencement of this Code;
(k) any interest payable on the amount of compensation awarded by the
Motor Accidents Claims Tribunal, if the aggregate of the amounts of such inter-
est paid, or credited, during the financial year does not exceed one lakh rupees;
(l) any amount payable on maturity, or redemption, of a zero coupon bond;
(m) any payment for carriage of goods by road transport if the payee
furnishes his permanent  account number to the payer;
(n) any payment to a contractor in respect of works contract, service
contract, advertising, broadcasting and telecasting, supply of labour for carry-
ing out any works, or service, contract or carriage of goods or passengers by
any mode of transport, other than by railways, if —
(i) the amount of any payment during the financial year does not
exceed thirty thousand rupees; and
(ii) the aggregate amount of the payments during the financial year
does not exceed seventy-five thousand rupees;
(o) any payment of commission or brokerage, if the aggregate amount of
the payments during the financial year does not exceed five thousand rupees;
(p) any payment of rent, if the aggregate amount of the payments during
the financial year does not exceed one lakh eighty thousand rupees;
(q) any payment of compensation on compulsory acquisition of immov-
able property, if the aggregate amount of the payments during the financial year
does not exceed two lakh rupees;
43 of 1961.
27 of 1957.
5
10
20
25
30
35
40
15

121
(r) any amount payable by way of distribution of income by a  mutual
fund  in respect of a fund, not being an equity oriented fund,  to any  unitholder,
if,—
(i) such unitholder is not a company; and
(ii) the aggregate amount of the payment to the unitholder during
the financial year does not exceed ten thousand rupees;
(s) any amount payable, by a life insurer to any policy-holder, if,—
(i) such policy-holder is not a company;
(ii) the policy is other than a policy referred to in clause ( d) or
clause (e) of sub-section (3) of section 59; and
(iii) the aggregate amount of the payment to the policy-holder dur-
ing the financial year does not exceed ten thousand rupees;
(B) where the payee is a non-resident, being a foreign institutional investor, on
any payment made to it as a consideration for sale of securities listed on a  recognised
stock exchange.
201. (1) All sums deducted in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter shall, for
the purposes of computing total income of a deductee be deemed to be the income received.
(2) Any deduction made in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter and paid to
the credit of the Central Government shall be treated as a payment of tax on behalf of the
person in respect of whom the deduction was made.
(3) For the purposes of giving credit in respect of tax deducted, the Board may pre-
scribe—
(a) the procedure for giving credit to the deductee, or any other person;
(b) the financial year for which such credit may be given; and
(c) any other matter connected therewith.
B.—Collection of  tax at source
202.(1) Any person, being a seller, lessor or licensor, who is responsible for collecting
any amount on account of any transaction specified in column (2) of the Table given below,
shall collect from the buyer, lessee or licensee, as the case may be, a sum by way of income-
tax, equal to the percentage, as specified in the corresponding entry in column (3) of the said
Table, of such amount:
TABLE
Serial                        Nature of transaction                                                              Percentage
number
    (1)                                  (2)                                                                                              (3)
1. Sale of alcoholic liquor for human consumption Three per cent.
2. Sale of tendu leaves Three per cent.
3. Sale of timber obtained under a forest lease or otherwise Three  per cent.
4. Sale of any other forest produce not being timber or tendu leaves Three  per cent.
5. Sale of scrap Three  per cent.
6. Grant of lease or licence or contract or transfer of any right or
interest, either in whole or in part, for a parking lot Three  per cent.
7. Grant of lease or licence or contract or transfer of any right
or interest, either in whole or in part, for a toll plaza Three  per cent.
8. Grant of lease or licence or contract or transfer of any right or
interest, either in whole or in part, for mining or quarrying Three  per cent.
Credit for tax
deducted.
Tax collection
at source.
5
10
20
25
30
35
40
15
45

122
(2) For the purposes of sub-section (1), the collection of an amount shall be deemed to
have been made, if the amount has been received—
(a) in cash;
(b) by way of a cheque or a draft;
(c) by debit to any account, whether called “suspense account” or by any other
name; or
(d) by any other mode as may be prescribed,
whichever is earlier.
(3) Any person collecting any amount under sub-section ( 1) shall pay the sum so
collected to the credit of the Central Government within such time and manner as may be
prescribed.
(4) Every person responsible for collecting any amount under sub-section ( 1) shall
furnish to the buyer, lessee or licensee referred to in sub-section ( 1), a certificate of tax
collection within such time as may be prescribed .
(5) Every person responsible for collecting any amount under sub-section ( 1) shall
deliver, or cause to be delivered, a return of tax collection in the manner provided under sub-
section sub-section ( 6).
(6) The Board shall in respect of the return of tax collection, prescribe the following
namely:—
(a) the period in respect of which the return is to be furnished;
(b) the form of the return and the particulars therein;
(c) the manner of verification of the return;
(d) the time by, and the medium in, which the return is to be delivered;
(e) the income-tax authority, or any other person, authorised to receive the
return; and
(f) any other matter connected therewith.
203.  (1) All sums collected  in accordance with the provisions of this Sub-chapter and
paid to the credit of the Central Government shall be deemed to be a payment of tax on behalf
of the person from whom such amount has been collected (in this section referred to as
collectee).
(2) For the purpose of giving credit in respect of tax collected, the Board may prescribe—
(a) the procedure for giving credit to the collectee, or any other person;
(b) the financial year for which such credit may be given; and
(c) any other matter connected therewith.
204.  (1) In Sub-chapter A—
(a) ‘‘broadcasting and telecasting’’ includes production of programmes for broad-
casting or telecasting;
(b) ‘‘contract’’ and ‘‘contractor’’ include ‘‘sub-contract’’ and ‘‘sub-contractor’’
respectively;
(c) ‘‘professional or technical services’’ means services rendered by a person in
the course of carrying on legal, medical, engineering, architectural or accountancy
profession, technical consultancy, interior decoration or any other profession as noti-
fied by the Board;
Credit for tax
collected.
Interpretations
under Sub-
chapters A
and B.
5
10
20
25
30
35
40
15

123
(d) ‘‘service contract’’ includes a contract for job work;
(e) ‘‘work’’ includes manufacturing or supplying a product according to the
requirement or specification of a customer by using material purchased from such
customer and not from any other person.
(2) In Sub-chapter B—
(a) “buyer” means a person who obtains in any sale, by way of auction, tender,
or any other mode, goods of the nature specified in the Table given in sub-section (1)
of  section 202 or the right to receive any such goods but does not include,—
(i) a public sector company, the Central Government, a State Government,
an embassy, a high commission, legation, commission, consulate and trade
representation of a foreign State, and a club; or
(ii) a buyer in the retail sale of such goods, purchased by him for personal
consumption;
(b) “lessee or licensee” means a person other than a public sector company who
is granted a lease or licence or is awarded a contract or is transferred, wholly or partly,
any right or interest by a lessor or licensor;
(c) “lessor or licensor” means a person who grants a lease or licence or enters
into a contract or otherwise transfers, wholly or partly, any right or interest to a lessee
or licensee;
(d) “scrap” means waste from the manufacture or mechanical working of mate-
rials which is unusable because of breakage, wear and tear and other reasons;
(e) “seller” means,—
(i) the Central Government, a State Government or any local authority;
(ii) a corporation or authority established by or under a Central, State or
Provincial  Act;
(iii) any company,  firm or co-operative society; and
(iv) an individual or a Hindu undivided family, if the total sales, gross
receipts or turnover from the business carried on by him exceed the monetary
limits specified in sub-section (1) of section 88 during the financial year immedi-
ately preceding the financial year in which the goods of the nature specified in
column (2) of the Table given in sub-section ( 1) of section 202 against serial
numbers 1 to 5  are sold.
C.—Advance Tax
205. (1) Every assessee shall be liable to pay advance income-tax during any financial
year in respect of his total income of the financial year, if the amount of advance income-tax
payable exceeds ten thousand rupees.
(2) The amount of advance income-tax payable by an assessee in the financial year
shall be computed in the following manner, namely:—
(a) the assessee shall first estimate his total income and calculate income-tax
thereon at the rates in force in the financial year;
(b) the income-tax so calculated shall be reduced by –
(i) the amount of income-tax which would be deductible or collectible at
source during the financial year from any income which is taken into account in
estimating the total income;
Liability to
pay advance
tax
5
10
20
25
30
35
40
15

124
(ii) the amount of credit under section 207, allowed to be set-off in the
financial year; and
(c) the balance amount of income-tax shall be the advance income-tax payable.
(3) The advance income-tax, in case of any person other than a company, shall be
payable in three instalments during the financial year on or before the dates specified in
column (2) of  the Table given below and shall be equal to the amount specified in corre-
sponding entry in column (3) of the said Table:
TABLE
Serial Date of instalment Amount payable
Number in the financial year
(1) (2) (3)
  1. On or before the 15th September. Not less than thirty per cent. of
the advance income-tax.
  2. On or before the 15th December. Not less than sixty per cent.  of
the    advance    income-tax,   as
reduced by the amount,  if  any,
paid in the earlier instalment.
  3. On or before the 15th March. The whole amount of the
advance income-tax as  reduced
by  the amount or amounts, if any,
paid in the earlier instalment or
instalments.
(4) The advance income-tax, in the case of a company, shall be payable in four
instalments during the financial year on or before the dates specified in column (2) of  the
Table given below and shall be equal to the amount specified in corresponding entry in
column (3) of the said Table:
TABLE
Serial Date of instalment Amount payable
Number in the financial year
(1) (2) (3)
 1. On or before the 15th June. Not less than fifteen per cent. of the ad-
vance income-tax.
 2. On or before the 15th September. Not less than forty-five per cent. of the ad-
vance income-tax, as reduced by the
amount, if any, paid in the earlier instalment.
 3. On or before the 15th December. Not less than seventy-five per cent. of the
advance income-tax as reduced by the
amount or amounts, if any, paid in the ear-
lier instalment or instalments.
 4. On or before the 15th March. The whole amount of the advance income-
tax as reduced by the amount or amounts, if
any, paid in the earlier instalment or
instalments.
5
10
20
25
30
35
40
15

125
(5) Any amount of advance income-tax paid after the 15th March but before the expiry
of the financial year shall be treated as advance income-tax paid during the financial year.
(6) Every person who is liable to pay advance income-tax shall, of his own volition,
pay the appropriate percentage of the advance income-tax on or before the due dates.
(7) The assessee may increase or reduce the payment of remaining instalments of the
advance income-tax in accordance with his estimation of the total income.
(8) Where in the opinion of the Assessing Officer, any person is liable to pay advance
income-tax, he may by an order in writing—
 (a) require such person to pay advance income-tax calculated in such  manner
as may be prescribed; and
(b)  issue to such person a notice of demand under section 162 specifying the
instalments in which such tax is to be paid.
(9) The person who has been served with an order under sub-section ( 8)—
(a) may file an estimation, in such form as may be prescribed, to the Assessing
Officer, if in his estimation, the advance income-tax payable by him is lower than the
amount specified in the said order; and
 (b) pay the advance income-tax  in accordance with his estimation  on or before
the due dates specified in this section.
(10) No order under sub-section (8) shall be passed after the last day of February of
the financial year for which the advance tax is due.
D.—Tax relief in respect of arrears or advance receipts
206. (1) The Assessing Officer shall, on an application made to him by any person,
grant such relief as may be prescribed, if the person is in receipt in any financial year of any
arrears, or advance, of salary or family pension relating to any other financial year.
(2) The relief referred to in sub-section ( 1) shall not be allowed in respect of any
compensation received towards retrenchment, voluntary retirement or termination of ser-
vice.
E.—Foreign tax credit
207.  (1) An assessee, being a resident in India in any financial year, shall be allowed
a credit in respect of income-tax paid by deduction or otherwise, in any country or other
specified territory  under the law in force in that   country or territory, in accordance with the
provisions of this section.
(2) An assessee, referred to in sub-section ( 1), shall be allowed a credit against the
Indian income-tax payable by him in respect of his income of the financial year,—
(a) which has been taxed in any country or other specifried territory  with which
India has an agreement under section 291, in accordance with the agreement entered
into with such country or specified territory; or
(b)  which has accrued outside India (but not deemed to be received in India)
and taxed in a country with which India does not have an agreement under section
291, of the amount determined in the following manner, namely:—
 (i) at the Indian rate of tax or the rate of tax of the other country, which-
ever is lower;
(ii)  at the Indian rate of tax, if both the rates are equal.
(3) Notwithstanding anything in sub-section (2), the amount of credit of foreign tax
referred to therein shall not, in any case, exceed—
(a) the Indian income-tax payable in respect of income which is taxed outside
India; and
(b) the Indian income-tax payable on total income of the assessee.
(4
) The Central Government may, for the relief or avoidance of double taxation, pre-
Tax relief for
arrears or
advance
receipts
Foreign tax
credit.
5
10
20
25
30
35
40
15
45

126
scribe—
(a) the method for computing the amount of credit;
(b) the manner of claiming credit; and
(c) such other particulars as may be considered necessary.
F.—Payment of Wealth-tax
208. The wealth-tax referred to in section 112 shall be payable by the due date of filing
of the return of tax bases.
G. —Interest payable to the Central Government
209. (1) Where an assessee defaults in furnishing the return of tax-bases, he shall be
liable to pay simple interest at the rate of one per cent. per month, in circumstances specified
in sub-section ( 2) for the period mentioned in sub-section ( 3) on the amount computed
under sub-section (4).
(2) The circumstances referred to in sub-section (1) shall be –
(a) where the return of tax-bases for any financial year under sub-section (1) or
sub-section (6) of section 144 or sub-section (1) of section 146  is furnished after the
due date, or is not furnished;
(b) where the return of tax-bases for any financial year is required by a notice
under section 159 and no return of tax-bases has been furnished for such year before
the issue of such notice; or
(c) where the return of tax bases for any financial year is required by a notice
under section 159 and—
(i) such notice has been issued after the determination of income under
sub-section (1) of section 149 or after the completion of an assessment under
section 155 or section 156 or section 159; and
(ii) such return has been furnished after the expiry of time allowed under
such notice or is not furnished.
(3) The period referred to in sub-section (1) shall—
(a) in a case referred to in clause ( a) or clause ( b) of sub-section ( 2), shall
commence on the date immediately following the due date and—
(i) end on the date of furnishing of the return; or
(ii) end on the date of completion of assessment under section 156 or
section 159, where no return has been furnished;
(b) in a case referred to in clause (c) of sub-section (2), shall commence on the
date immediately following the last date of the time allowed under the notice referred
in said clause (c), and—
(i) end on the date of furnishing of the return where the return is furnished
after expiry of the time allowed; or
(ii) end on the date of completion of assessment under section 159  where
no return has been furnished.
(4) The amount referred to in sub-section (1),—
(a) in a case referred to in clause ( a) or clause (b) of sub-section (2), shall be
computed in accordance with the following formula –
A – B
Where
A = the amount of the tax on the total income determined under sub-section (1)
of section 149 or on assessment made under sub-section (1) of section 155 or
sub-section (1) of section 156 or under section 159, as the case may be;
Payment of
wealth-tax
Interest for
default in
furnishing
retrun of tax
basis.
5
10
20
25
30
35
40
15
45

127
B =  the aggregate of —
(i) advance tax paid, if any;
(ii) any tax deducted or collected at source;
(iii) any relief of tax allowed under section 291 on account of tax paid in a
country or specified territory outside India;
(iv) any deduction, from the Indian income-tax payable, allowed under
section 207, on account of the tax paid in a country outside India; and
(v) any tax credit available for set-off under section 106;
(b) in a case referred to in clause (c) of sub-section (2), shall be the amount by
which tax determined on reassessment exceeds the tax on the total income determined
under sub-section (1) of section 149 or on the basis of the earlier assessment, as the
case may be.
 (5) The interest payable under sub-section (1) shall be reduced by the interest, if any,
paid under section 147 towards the interest chargeable under this section.
(6) The interest payable under this section shall be increased or reduced, in accordance
with the variation in the amount of tax on which interest was payable under this section, as
a result of modification in the assessed income on account of any rectification, revision or
appellate order under this Code.
(7) The Assessing Officer shall serve on the assessee a notice of demand, in such
form as may be prescribed, specifying the sum payable on account of increase in the interest
referred under sub-section (6) and such notice shall be deemed to be a notice under section
162 and the provisions of this Code shall apply accordingly.
(8) The excess interest paid, if any, shall be refunded in a case where the interest is
reduced under sub-section ( 6).
210. (1) Where an assessee defaults in payment of advance income-tax, he shall be
liable to pay simple interest at the rate of one per cent. per month in the circumstances
specified in sub-section ( 2) for the period mentioned in sub-section ( 3) on the amount
computed under sub-section (4).
(2) The circumstances referred to in sub-section ( 1) shall be the following,
namely:—
(a) where the assessee is liable to pay advance income-tax under section 205
and has failed to pay such tax; or
(b) where the advance income-tax paid by such assessee is less than ninety per
cent. of the assessed tax.
(3) The period referred to in sub-section (1) shall in a case referred to in sub-section
(2) commence on the 1st day of April next following the financial year and—
(a) end on the date of determination of total income under sub-section ( 1) of
section 149; or
(b) end on the date of assessment, where an assessment has been made under
section 155 or section 156 or an assessment under section 159 made for the
first time.
(4) The amount referred to in sub-section (1
) shall be,—
(a) the assessed tax less the advance tax; and
Interest for
default in
payment of
advance
income-tax.
5
15
10
20
25
30
35
40

128
(b) in a case where the assessee has paid self-assessment tax under section 147
before the date of determination of total income or the date of an assessment referred
to in clause (b) of sub-section (3), as the case may be,—
(i) the assessed tax less the advance tax, for the period up to the date on
which the self assessment tax is paid; and
(ii) the assessed tax less the advance tax and such self-assessment tax,
for the period commencing immediately after the date on which such self-
assessment tax is paid.
(5) The assessed tax referred to in sub-section ( 4) shall be calculated in accordance
with the following formula—
A – B
Where
A = the amount of the tax on the total income determined under sub-section (1)
of section 149, and where an assessment referred to in clause (b) of sub-section
(3) has been made, the amount of tax on the total income determined on such
assessment;
B = the aggregate of —
(i) any tax deducted or collected at source;
(ii) any relief of tax claimed under section 207; and
(iii) any tax credit available for set-off under section 106.
(6) Where tax is paid under section 147 or otherwise before the determination of total
income under sub-section (1) of section 149 or completion of an assessment referred to in
clause (b) of sub-section (3), interest shall be calculated—
(i) in accordance with sub-sections (1) to (5), up to the date on which the tax is
so paid and reduced by the interest, if any, paid under section 147 towards the interest
chargeable under this section; and
(ii) thereafter, at the rate specified in sub-section (1) on the amount by which
the tax so paid together with the advance tax paid falls short of the assessed tax.
(7) In a case where as a result of reassessment under section 159 (not being an
assessment made for the first time), the amount of tax on total income, as referred to in
sub-section ( 5) is increased then, in addition to the interest under sub-section ( 1), the
assessee shall be liable to pay simple interest at the rate of one per cent. per month for the
period mentioned in sub-section (8) on the amount computed under sub-section (9).
(8) The period referred to sub-section ( 7) shall commence on the day immediately
following the end of the period, as applicable, mentioned in sub-section (3) and end on the
date of  reassessment under section 159.
(9) The amount referred to in sub-section (7) shall be the amount by which the tax on
the total income determined on the basis of reassessment under section 159 exceeds the
relevant amount determined in variable A in the formula contained in sub-section (5).
(10) The interest payable under this section shall be increased or reduced, in accordance
with the variation in the amount on which interest was payable under this section, on
account of any rectification, revision  or appellate order  under this Code.
(11) The Assessing Officer shall serve on the assessee a notice of demand in such
form as may be prescribed specifying the sum payable on account of increase in the interest
referred to in sub-section (10) and such notice shall be deemed to be a notice under section
162 and the provisions of this Code shall apply accordingly.
5
15
10
20
25
30
35
40
45

129
(12) The excess interest paid, if any, shall be refunded in a case where the interest is
reduced under sub-section ( 10).
211. (1) Where a person other than a company, who is liable to pay advance income-
tax under section 205 has—
(a) failed to pay such tax; or
(b) paid the tax on or before the dates specified in column (2) of the  Table given
below which is less than the percentage of the advance income-tax payable specified
in column (3) of the said Table,
he shall be liable to pay simple interest at the rate of one per cent. per month for the period
specified in column (4) of the said Table on the amount of shortfall from the percentages of
advance income-tax payable as specified in column (5) and the interest payable by such
person under this section shall be the aggregate of all such amounts.
TABLE
Serial Due Percentage for Period Percentage for
number date purposes of purposes of
ascertaining computing
liability Interset
(1) (2) (3) (4)      (5)
1. 15th September. Thirty per cent. Three months. Thirty per cent.
2. 15th December. Sixty per cent. Three  months. Sixty per cent.
3. 15th March. One hundred per cent.One  month. One hundred per cent.
(2) Where a  company, which is liable to pay advance income-tax under section 205
has,—
(a) failed to pay such tax; or
(b) paid the tax on or before the dates specified in column (2) of the Table given
below which is less than the percentage of the advance income-tax payable specified
in column (3) of the said Table,
it shall be liable to pay simple interest at the rate of one per cent. per month for the period
specified in column (4) of the said Table on the amount of shortfall from the percentages of
advance income-tax payable as specified in column (5) and the interest payable by such
company under this section shall be the aggregate of all such amounts:
TABLE
Serial Due Percentage for Period Percentage for
number date purposes of purposes of
ascertaining computing
liability Interset
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5)
1. 15th June. Twelve per cent. Three  months Fifteen per cent.
2. 15th September . Thirty-six per cent. Three  months Forty-five per cent.
3. 15th December. Seventy-five Three  months Seventy-five
per cent. per cent.
4. 15th March. One hundred per cent.One  month One hundred per cent.
Interest for
deferment
of advance
income-tax.5
15
10
20
25
30
35
40

130
(3) The assessee shall not be liable to pay interest under sub-section ( 1) or sub-
section (2), as the case may be, on any shortfall in the advance income-tax payable where
such shortfall is on account of under estimation or failure to estimate,—
(a) the amount of capital gains; or
(b) income of nature listed at serial number 4 in the Table in Part III of the First
Schedule.
(4) The provisions of sub-section ( 3) shall apply in a case where the assessee has
paid the whole of the amount of tax payable, in respect of  the income of nature referred to in
that sub-section, in the remaining instalments of advance tax or where no such instalments
are due, by the 31st day of March of the financial year.
212. (1) An assessee shall be liable to pay simple interest at the rate of one-half per
cent. per month on the excess amount of refund granted to him in circumstances specified in
sub-section (2) for the period mentioned in sub-section (3).
(2) The circumstances referred to in sub-section ( 1) shall be where any refund is
granted to the assessee under sub-section ( 1) of section 149, and—
(a) no refund is due on assesment made under section 155 or section 156 or
section 159; or
(b) the amount refunded under sub-section (1) of section 149 exceeds the amount
refundable on  assessment, assessment made under section 155 or section 156 or
section 159.
(3) The period referred to in sub-section (1) shall commence from the date of grant of
refund and end on the date of regular assessment.
(4) The interest chargeable, if any, under sub-section (1) shall be varied in accordance
with any rectification, revision or appellate order under this Code.
213. (1) Any amount, otherwise than by way of advance tax, specified as payable in a
notice of demand under section 162 shall be paid within a period of thirty days of the service
of the notice.
(2) The period mentioned in sub-section (1) may be reduced with the prior approval of
the Joint Commissioner, if the Assessing Officer has any reason to believe that it will be
detrimental to revenue if the  period of thirty days is allowed.
(3) If the amount specified in any notice of demand under section 162 is not paid
within the period specified therein, then the assessee shall be liable to pay simple interest at
the rate of one per cent. per month for  the period commencing from the day immediately
following the end of the period specified in such notice and ending with the day on which
the amount is paid.
(4) The interest payable under this section shall be increased or reduced, in accordance
with the variation in the amount on which interest was payable under this section, on
account of any rectification, revision or appellate order  under this Code.
214. (1) Where any person who is required to deduct or collect any tax in accordance
with the provisions of this Code, does not deduct  or collect the whole or any part of the tax,
or after deduction fails to pay the tax, he shall be liable to pay simple interest or collection-
(a) at the rate of one per cent. per month  on the amount of such tax for the
period from the date on which such tax was deductible or collectable to the date on
which such tax is deducted or collected, as the case may be; and
(b)  at the rate of one and one-half per cent. per month on the amount of such tax
for the period from the date on which such tax was deducted or collected, as the case
may be, to the date on which such tax is paid.
Interest on
excess refund.
Interest
payable on
demand raised.
Interest for
failure to
deduct or
collect or pay
tax.
5
15
10
20
25
30
35
40
45

131
H.—Refunds
215. (1) An assessee shall be entitled to a refund of the excess of any amount paid by
him or on his behalf, or treated as paid by him or on his behalf, for any financial year over the
amount with which he is liable under this Code.
(2) Every claim for refund shall be made within such time and such form and manner,
as may be prescribed.
(3) An assessee shall, in a case where an assessment is set aside or cancelled or an
order of fresh assessment is directed to be made in an appeal, or any other proceeding under
this  Code, be entitled to the refund only on the making of the fresh assessment.
(4) The amount of refund determined under this sub-chapter shall be reduced by the
amount, if any, remaining payable under this Code by the assessee to whom the refund is
due, and the balance amount of refund, if any, shall be issued along with an intimation to this
effect to the assessee.
(5) In a claim under this Sub-chapter, it shall not be open to the assessee to question
the correctness of any assessment or other matter which has become final and conclusive or
ask for a review of the same, and accordingly the assessee shall not be entitled to any relief
on such claim except refund of tax paid in excess.
216. (1) An assessee shall be entitled to receive simple interest at the rate of one-half
per cent. per month on any amount refundable to him under section 215 in respect of any
financial year for the period mentioned in sub-section (2).
(2) The period referred to in sub-section (1) shall, —
(a) in a case where refund is out of any tax paid by way of advance tax or treated
as so paid under section 201 or collected at source under section 203, commence on
the 1st day of April next following the financial year and end on the date on which the
refund is granted; and
(b)  in any other case, commence from the date on which such amount was paid
and end on the date on which the refund is granted.
(3) Notwithstanding anything   in sub-section (2), in a case where the return is furnished
after the due date, the period referred to in sub-section (1) shall commence on the date on
which the return is furnished and end on the date on which the refund is granted.
(4) No interest shall be payable under clause (a) of sub-section (2) if the amount of
refund is less than ten per cent. of the tax as determined under sub-section (1) of section 149
or on regular assessment.
(5) If the proceedings resulting in the refund are delayed for reasons attributable to
the assessee, whether wholly or in part, the period of the delay so attributable to him shall be
excluded from the period for which interest is payable, and where any question arises as to
the period to be excluded, it shall be decided by the Chief Commissioner or  the Commissioner.
(6) The interest under this section shall be increased or reduced in accordance with
the variation in the amount on which the interest was payable as a result of any rectification,
revision or appellate order under this Code.
(7) The Assessing Officer shall serve on the assessee a notice of demand in such form
as may be prescribed specifying the amount of excess interest paid to him where interest is
reduced under sub-section (6) and such notice shall be deemed to be a notice under section
162 and the provisions of this Code shall apply accordingly.
(8) An assessee shall be entitled to receive simple interest at the rate of one-half per
cent. per month on the amount of interest receivable by him under this section for the period
Refunds.
Interest on
refund.
5
15
10
20
25
30
35
40
45

132
from the date of grant of refund  to the date of actual payment of such interest, if such
interest is not paid to him along with the refund.
217. (1) If the income of a person is included in the total income of any other person
under the provisions of this Code, then such other person shall be entitled to a refund in
respect of such income.
 (2) The legal representative or the trustee or guardian or receiver, as the case may be,
of a person shall be entitled to claim or receive refund for the benefit of such person or his
estate if such person is unable to claim or receive any refund due to him on account of death,
incapacity, insolvency, liquidation or any other similar cause.
J.—Recovery
218. (1) Any amount specified as payable in a notice of demand, otherwise than by
way of advance tax, shall be paid within thirty days of the service of the notice, to the credit
of the Central Government in such manner of may be prescribed.
(2)  Where the Assessing Officer has any reason to believe that it will be detrimental
to the interests of revenue, if the period of thirty days referred to in sub-section ( 1) is
allowed, he may, with the previous approval of the Joint Commissioner reduce such period,
as he deems fit.
(3) The Assessing Officer may, on an application made by the assessee, before the
expiry of a period of thirty days or the period reduced under sub-section (2) or during the
pendency of appeal with the Commissioner (Appeals), extend the time for payment, or allow
payment by instalments, subject to such conditions as he may think fit to impose in the
circumstances of the case.
(4) An assessee shall be deemed to be an assessee in default, if the tax arrear is not
paid within the time allowed under sub-section (1) or the period reduced under sub-section
(2) or extended under sub-section (3), as the case may be.
(5) Where an assessee defaults in paying anyone of the instalments within the time
fixed under sub-section (3), he shall be deemed to be an assessee in default in respect of the
whole of the amount then outstanding.
(6) The Assessing Officer may, in a case where no certificate has been drawn up under
section  219 by the Tax Recovery Officer, recover the amount in respect of which the assessee
is in default, or is deemed to be in default, by anyone or more of the modes provided in
section 220.
(7) The Tax Recovery Officer vested with the powers to recover the tax arrear on
drawing up of a statement of tax arrear under section 219.
  219. (1) The Tax Recovery Officer may draw up under his signature a statement of tax
arrears of an assessee referred to in sub-section ( 4) or sub-section ( 5) of section 218, in
form,  as may be prescribed  such statement being hereafter in this Chapter and in the Fifth
Schedule referred to as “certificate”).
(2) The certificate under sub-section ( 1) shall stand amended from time to time
consequent to any proceeding under this Code and the Tax Recovery Officer shall recover
the amount so modified.
(3) The Tax Recovery Officer may rectify any mistake apparent on the face of the
record.
(4) The Tax Recovery Officer shall have the power to extend the time for payment, or
allow payment by instalments, subject to such conditions as he may think fit to impose in
the circumstances of the case.
(5) The Tax Recovery Officer shall proceed to recover from the assessee the amount
specified in the certificate by one or more of the modes referred to in section 220 or in the
Fifth Schedule.
Person
entitled to
claim refund
in certain
special cases.
Recovery by
Assessing
Officer.
Recovery by
Tax Recovery
Officer.
5
15
10
20
25
30
35
40
45

133
(6) It shall not be open to the assessee to dispute the correctness of any certificate
drawn up by the Tax Recovery Officer on any ground whatsoever, but it shall be lawful for
the Tax Recovery Officer to cancel the certificate if, for any reason, he thinks it necessary so
to do.
220. (1) The Assessing Officer or the Tax Recovery Officer may require the employer
of the assessee to deduct from any payment to the assessee such amount as is sufficient to
meet the tax arrear from the assessee.
(2) Upon requisition under sub-section ( 1), the employer shall comply with the
requisition and shall pay the sum so deducted to the credit of the Central Government in
manner such as may be prescribed.
(3) Any part of the salary exempt from attachment in execution of a decree of a civil
Court under section 60 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, shall be exempt from any
requisition made under sub-section (1).
(4) The Assessing Officer or the Tax Recovery Officer may, by notice in writing, require
any debtor of the assessee to pay such amount, not exceeding the amount of debt, as is
sufficient to meet the tax arrear of the assessee.
(5) Upon receipt of the notice under sub-section (4), the debtor shall comply with the
requisition and shall pay the sum to the credit of the Central Government in such manner as
may be prescribed within the time (not being before the debt becomes due to the assessee)
specified in the notice.
(6) A copy of the notice issued under sub-section (4) shall be forwarded to the assessee
at his last address known to the Assessing Officer or the Tax Recovery Officer and in the
case of a joint account to all the joint holders at their last addresses known to the Assessing
Officer or the Tax Recovery Officer.
(7) It shall not be necessary for any pass book, deposit receipt, policy or any other
document to be produced for the purpose of any entry, endorsement or the like being made
before payment is made, notwithstanding any rule, practice or requirement to the contrary if
the notice under sub-section (4) is issued to a post office, banking company, insurer or any
other person.
(8) Any claim in respect of any property, in relation to which a notice under sub-
section (4) has been issued, arising after the date of the notice, shall be void as against any
demand contained in the notice.
(9) A person to whom a notice under sub-section ( 4) has been issued, shall not be
required to pay the amount of tax arrear specified therein, or part thereof, if he objects to it by
a statement on oath that the sum demanded, or any part thereof, is not due to the assessee
or that he does not hold any money for, or on account of, the assessee.
(10) The person referred to in sub-section (9) shall be personally liable to the Assessing
Officer or the Tax Recovery Officer, as the case may be, to the extent of his own liability to the
assessee on the date of the notice, or to the extent of the liability of the assessee for any sum
due under this Code, whichever is less, if it is discovered that the statement made by him was
false in any respect.
(11) The Assessing Officer or the Tax Recovery Officer may amend or revoke any
notice issued under sub-section (4) or extend the time for making any payment in pursuance
of such notice.
(12) The Assessing Officer or the Tax Recovery Officer shall grant a receipt for any
amount paid in compliance with a notice issued under sub-section ( 4), and the person so
paying shall be fully discharged from his liability to the assessee to the extent of the amount
so paid.
5 of 1908.
Modes of
recovery.
5
15
10
20
25
30
35
40
45

134
(13)  Any person discharging any liability to the assessee after receipt of a notice
under sub-section (4) shall be personally liable to the Assessing Officer or the Tax Recovery
Officer to the extent of his own liability to the assessee so discharged or to the extent of the
liability of the assessee for any sum due under this Code, whichever is less.
(14)  The debtor to whom a notice under sub-section (4) is sent shall be deemed to be
an assessee in default, if he fails to make such payment and further proceedings may be
initiated against him for the realisation of the amount in the manner provided in this section
and the Fifth Schedule.
(15) The Assessing Officer or the Tax Recovery Officer may apply to the court, in
whose custody there is money belonging to the assessee, for payment to him of the entire
amount of such money or  if it is more than the tax due, an amount sufficient to discharge the
tax liability.
(16) The Assessing Officer or the Tax Recovery Officer shall effect the recovery of
any tax arrear in the same manner as attachment, distraint  and sale of any movable property
under the Fifth Schedule, if he is so authorised by the Chief Commissioner, or the
Commissioner, by general or special order.
(17)  In this section,—
(a) ‘‘debtor’’  in relation to an assessee,  means,—
(i) any person from whom money is due, or may become due, to the
assessee; or
(ii) any person who holds, or may subsequently hold, money for, or on
account of, the assessee; or
(iii) any person who holds, or may subsequently hold, any money for, or
on account of, the assessee jointly with any other person;
(b) shares of the joint holders in the account shall be presumed, until the con-
trary is proved, to be equal.
221.  (1) The Tax Recovery Officer competent to take action under section 219 shall be
the Tax Recovery Officer —
(a) within whose jurisdiction —
(i) the assessee carries on his business;
(ii) the principal place of  business of the assessee is situate;
(iii) the assessee resides; or
(iv) any movable or immovable property of the assessee is situate; or
(b) who has been assigned jurisdiction under section 130.
(2) The Tax Recovery Officer, referred to in sub-section (1), may send a certificate, in
such manner as may be prescribed, specifying the tax arrear to be recovered, to another Tax
Recovery Officer within whose jurisdiction the assessee resides or has property, if the first-
mentioned Tax Recovery Officer —
(a) is not able to recover the entire amount by sale of the property, movable or
immovable, within his jurisdiction; or
(b) is of the opinion that, for the purpose of expediting, or securing, the recov-
ery of the whole, or any part, of the amount under this Chapter, it is necessary so to do.
(3) The second-mentioned Tax Recovery Officer shall, on receipt of the certificate,
assume jurisdiction for recovery of the amount of tax arrear specified therein and proceed to
recover the amount in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter.
Tax Recovery
Officer by
whom
recovery is to
be effected.
5
15
10
20
25
30
35
40
45

135
222. The amount of tax arrears due from a non-resident may be recovered from—
(a) any asset of the non-resident, wherever located; or
(b) any amount payable by any person to the non-resident.
223. (1) The liquidator shall inform the Assessing Officer, who has jurisdiction to
assess the income of the company, of his appointment within a period of thirty days of his
becoming the liquidator.
(2) The Assessing Officer shall, within a period of three months from the date on which
he receives the information, intimate to the liquidator the amount which, in his opinion,
would be sufficient to provide for any tax arrears or any amount which is likely to become
payable thereafter, by the company under this Code or under the Income tax Act, 1961 or the
Wealth-tax Act, 1957 as they  stood before the commencement of this Code.
(3) The liquidator—
(a) shall not part with any of the assets of the company, or the properties, in his
custody until he has been intimated by the Assessing Officer under sub-section ( 2);
and
(b) on being so intimated, shall set aside an amount equal to the amount inti-
mated.
(4) Upon receipt of the intimation from the Assessing Officer under sub-section (2),
the amount so intimated shall, notwithstanding anything  in any other law for the time being
in force, be the first charge on the assets of the company remaining after payment of the
following dues, namely:—
(a) workmen’s dues; and
(b) debts due to secured creditors to the extent such debts rank under
clause (iii) of the proviso to sub-section (1) of section 529 of the Companies Act, 1956
pari passu with such dues.
(5) The liquidator shall be personally liable for the payment of the amount payable by
the company, if he—
(a) fails to inform in accordance with sub-section (1); or
(b) fails to set aside the amount as required by sub-section (3).
(6) The obligations and liabilities attached to the liquidator under this section shall
attach to all the liquidators jointly and severally in a case where there are more than one
liquidator.
(7) The provisions of this section shall prevail over anything to the contrary contained
in any other law for the time being in force.
(8) In this section,—
(a) “liquidator” in relation to a company shall include a receiver of the assets of
the company;
(b) “workmen’s” and “workmen’s dues” shall have the meaning respectively
assigned to them in section 529 of the Companies Act, 1956.
224. (1) Every person being a manager at any time during the financial year shall be
jointly and severally liable for the payment of any amount due under this Code in respect of
the company for the financial year, if the amount cannot be recovered from the company.
(2) The provisions of sub-section (1) shall not apply, if the manager proves that non-
recovery cannot be attributed to any neglect, misfeasance or breach of duty on his part in
relation to the affairs of the company.
Recovery of
tax arrear in
respect of
non-resident
from his
assets.
1 of 1956.
Liability of
manager of a
company.
Recovery in
case of a
company in
liquidation.
43 of 1961.
27 of 1957.
1 of 1956.
5
15
10
20
25
30
35
40
45

136
(3) The provisions of this section shall prevail over anything to the contrary contained
in the Companies Act, 1956.
(4) In this section, “manager” shall include a managing director and both shall have
the meaning respectively assigned to them in clause (24) and clause (26) of section 2 of the
Companies Act, 1956.
225. (1) Every person, being a participant in an unincorporated body at any time
during the financial year, or the representative assessee of the deceased participant, shall be
jointly and severally liable, along with the unincorporated body, for payment of any amount
payable by the unincorporated body under this Code and all the provisions of this Code
shall apply accordingly.
(2) In case of a limited liability partnership, the provisions of sub-section (1) shall not
apply, if the partner proves that non-recovery cannot be attributed to any neglect, misfeasance
or breach of duty on his part in relation to the affairs of partnership.
(3) The provisions of this section shall prevail over anything to the contrary contained
in the Limited Liability Partnership Act, 2008.
226 . If the recovery of tax in any area has been entrusted to a State Government under
clause (1) of article 258 of the Constitution, the State Government may direct, with respect to
that area or any part thereof, that tax shall be recovered therein with, and as an addition to,
any municipal tax or local rate, by the same person and in the same manner as the municipal
tax or local rate is recovered.
227. (1) The Board may forward a certificate to any Tax Recovery Officer for recovery
of any amount under the corresponding law in force in any country or specified territory
outside India from a person having property in India, if such country or territory or any
authority under the Government of that territory or country, has entered into an agreement
with India under sub-sections (1) and (2) or sub-section (4) of section 291, as the case may
be, for the purposes specified in clause (d) of sub-section (1) of section 291.
(2) On receipt of the certificate under sub-section (1) from the Board, the Tax Recovery
Officer shall —
(a) proceed to recover the amount specified in the certificate in the manner in
which he would proceed to recover the amount specified in a certificate under
section 219; and
(b) remit any sum so recovered by him to the Board after deducting his expenses
in connection with the recovery proceedings.
(3) The Tax Recovery Officer may, in a case where an assessee has property in a
specified territory  outside India, forward a certificate to the Board for recovery of the tax
arrears from the assessee, if the Central Government or any specified association in India has
entered into an agreement with that country or territory  under sub-sections (1), (2) or sub-
section (4) of section 291, as the case may be, for the purposes specified in clause (d) of sub-
section (1) of section 291.
(4) On receipt of the certificate under sub-section (3) from the Tax Recovery Officer,
the Board may take such action thereon as it may deem appropriate having regard to the
terms of the agreement with such country or a specified territory.
228. ( 1) No person shall leave the territory of India unless he furnishes to such
authority as may be notified an undertaking to the effect that he has made satisfactory
arrangement for discharging his tax liability, if any, in respect of any income or wealth liable
to tax in  India.
(2) The person referred to in sub-section (1) shall be  a person—
 (a) who is not domiciled in India;
1 of 1956
Joint and
several
liability of
participants.
Recovery
through State
Government.
Recovery of
tax in
pursuance of
agreements
with  foreign
countries
specified
territory.
Tax clearance
certificate in
certain cases.
6 of 2009.
5
15
10
20
25
30
35
40
45

137
(b) who has come to India in connection with a business or employment; and
(c) who has income derived from any source in India.
(3) Every person, who is domiciled in India at the time of his departure from India,
shall—
(a) furnish to the notified authority such particulars as may be prescribed; and
(b) obtain a certificate from the notified authority that he has no liability, if in the
opinion of the Assessing Officer it is necessary for such person to obtain such certifi-
cate.
(4) The Central Government may notify the class of persons to whom the provisions of
sub-section (1) or sub-section (3) shall not apply.
(5) The notified authority shall, on receipt of the undertaking or particulars referred to
in sub-section (1) or sub-section (3), immediately issue to the person a no objection certificate
for leaving India.
(6) The owner, or charterer, of any ship, or aircraft, shall be personally liable to pay the
whole, or any part, of the amount payable under this Code by any person required to obtain
a no objection certificate in accordance with the foregoing sub-sections if the person leaves
India, without the possession of the certificate, in the ship, or aircraft, of the owner or the
charterer.
(7) The owner, or charterer, of any ship, or aircraft, shall be deemed to be an assessee
in default in respect of the liability created under sub-section (6) and such amount shall be
recoverable from him in the manner provided in this Chapter as if it were tax arrears.
(8) The Board may, having regard to the interests of revenue, prescribe:—
(a) the circumstances;
(b) the form and the manner, in which the undertaking is to be furnished; and
(c) any other matter connected therewith.
(9) In this section, the expressions “owner” and “charterer” include any representative,
agent or employee authorised by the owner, or charterer, to allow persons to travel by the
ship or aircraft.
229.  (1) The several modes of recovery specified in this Chapter shall not affect in any
way—
(a) any other law for the time being in force relating to the recovery of debts due
to  the Government; or
(b) the right of the Government to institute a suit for the recovery of the tax
arrears from the assessee.
(2) It shall be lawful for the Assessing Officer, or the Government, to have recourse to
any such law or suit, notwithstanding that the tax arrears are being recovered from the
assessee by any mode specified in this Sub-chapter.
CHAPTER - XIV
PENALTIES
 230.  (1) A  person shall be liable to a penalty if he has under reported the tax bases for
any financial year.
(2) The penalty referred to in sub-section ( 1) shall be a sum which shall not be less
than, but which shall not exceed two times, the amount of tax payable in respect of the
amount of tax bases under reported for the financial year.
Recovery by
suit or under
other law not
Affected.
Penalty for
under
reporting of
tax bases.
5
15
10
20
25
30
35
40

138
(3) A person shall be considered to have under reported the tax bases, if—
(a) the tax bases assessed or reassessed, for the first time, is greater than the
maximum amount not chargeable to tax, if any, where no return of tax bases has been
filed;
(b) the tax bases assessed is greater than the tax bases disclosed in the return of
tax bases; or
(c) the tax bases reassessed is greater than the tax bases assessed immediately
before the re-assessment.
(4) The amount of tax bases under reported shall be the aggregate amount of the
addition or disallowance made by the Assessing Officer, the Commissioner or the
Commissioner (Appeals), as the case may be.
(5) The aggregate amount of the addition or disallowance made by the Assessing
Officer in assessment or re-assessment shall, in a case—
(a)  where no return of tax bases has been filed as required by any provision of
this Code, be the assessed tax bases as reduced by the maximum amount not charge-
able to tax, if any;
(b)  where the return of tax bases has been filed as required by section 144 or
section 146, be the amount of tax bases assessed as reduced by the tax bases dis-
closed in the return so filed;
 (c)  where no return of tax bases has been filed under section 144 or in response
to a notice under section 146 and whether or not the return of tax bases has been filed
in response to a notice under section 159, be the tax bases reassessed as reduced by
the maximum amount not chargeable to tax, if any; and
(d)  where a return of tax bases has been filed as required by section 144 or in
response to a notice under section 146 and whether or not the return of the tax bases
has also been filed as required by section 159, be the amount of the tax bases reas-
sessed as reduced by the tax bases assessed immediately before the reassessment.
(6) The aggregate amount of the addition or disallowance made by the Commissioner
in revision shall be tax bases assessed consequent to revision as reduced by the tax bases
assessed in the order so revised.
(7) The aggregate amount of the addition or disallowance made by the Commissioner
(Appeals) in appeal shall be the aggregate of all enhancements made by the Commissioner
(Appeals) in the order under appeal.
(8) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (10), the aggregate amount of the addition
or disallowance referred to in sub-sections (5) to (7) shall include—
(a) the amount of any money or the value of bullion, jewellery or other valuable
article or thing, (hereinafter referred to as “assets”), found in the possession of the
assessee, or under his control, in the course of search under section 135,  if the
assessee claims that such assets have been acquired by him by utilising (wholly or in
part) his income for any financial year which has ended before the date of search,
and—
(i) the due date for filing the return of tax bases for the financial year has
expired, but the assessee has not filed such return before such due date; or
(ii) the return of tax bases for such financial year has been furnished
before the date of search, but such income has not been declared therein;
(b) the amount, or value, of assets belonging to the assessee and delivered to
the requisitioning officer under sub-section (3) of section 136 or handed over to the
Assessing Officer under section 138, if the assessee claims that such assets have
5
15
10
20
25
30
35
40
45

139
been acquired by him by utilising (wholly or partly) his income for any financial year
which has ended before the date of requisition or the date of search, as the case may
be, during the course of which the assets were seized, and—
(i) the due date for filing the return of tax bases for the financial year has
expired, but the assessee has not filed such return; or
(ii) the return of tax bases for such financial year has been furnished
before the date of requisition or the date of search, as the case may be, but such
income has not been declared therein;
(c) any tax bases based on any entry in any books of account or other docu-
ments or transactions, if the assessee claims that such entry in the books of account or
other documents or transactions represents his tax bases, wholly or in part, for any
financial year which has ended before the date of search during the course of which
the assets were seized, and—
(i) the due date for filing the return of tax bases for the financial year has
expired, but the assessee has not filed such return; or
(ii) the return of tax bases for such financial year has been furnished
before the date of search, but such tax bases has not been declared therein;
(d) in a case where the source of any receipt, deposit or investment in any
financial year is claimed to have been added or deducted, as the case may be, in any
year prior to the financial year in which such receipt, deposit or investment appears
(hereinafter referred to as “preceding year”) and no penalty was levied for such pre-
ceding year, then such amount as is sufficient to cover such receipt, deposit or invest-
ment.
(9)  For the purposes of clause ( d) of sub-section (8), the amount referred to in said
clause shall be deemed to be amount of tax bases under reported for the preceding year in the
following order—
(a) the preceding year immediately before the year in which the receipt, deposit
or investment appears, being the first preceding year, and
(b) where the amount added or deducted in the first preceding year is not suffi-
cient to cover the receipt, deposit or investment, the year immediately preceding the
first preceding year and so on.
 (10) The aggregate amount of the addition or disallowance referred to in sub-sections
(5) to (7) shall not include the following, namely:—
(a) the amount relating to addition or disallowance in respect of which the
assessee offers an explanation and the Assessing Officer is satisfied that—
(i) the explanation is bona fide;
(ii) the assessee has disclosed all the facts material to the addition or
disallowance; and
(iii) the assessee has disclosed all the facts relating to the explanation.
(b) the amount relating to addition or disallowance determined on the basis of an
estimate by the Assessing Officer, if the accounts are correct and complete to the
satisfaction of the Assessing Officer, but the method employed is such that, in the
opinion of the Assessing Officer, the income cannot properly be deduced therefrom;
(c) the amount relating to addition or disallowance pertaining to any issue,
determined on the basis of an estimate by the Assessing Officer, if the assessee—
(i) has, on his own, estimated a lower amount of addition or disallowance
on the same issue;
5
15
10
20
25
30
35
40
45

140
(ii) has included such amount in the computation of his tax bases; and
(iii) has disclosed all the facts material to the addition or disallowance;
and
 (d) the amount of undisclosed tax bases referred to in section  231.
(11) The tax payable in respect of the aggregate amount of the addition or disallowance
shall be the amount of tax calculated on the aggregate amount of the addition or disallowance
made by the Assessing Officer, the Commissioner or the Comissioner (Appeals), as the case
may be,— 
(a) at the applicable rate in the case to which Paragraph A or Paragraph B of  Part
I of the First Schedule applies; and
(b) at the rate specified in  Part I of the First Schedule or the Second Schedule, as
the case may be,  in all other cases.
(12) No addition or disallowance of an amount shall form the basis for imposition of
penalty, if— 
(a) such addition or disallowance has formed the basis of imposition of penalty
in the case of the person for the same or any other financial year; or
(b) the amount relates to any addition or disallowance made pursuant to the
adjustment under section 149.
(13) The penalty referred to in sub-section (1) shall be imposed, by an order in writing,
by—
(a)  the Assessing Officer, if the amount of tax bases under reported is deter-
mined in assessment or re-assessment;
(b) the Commissioner, if the amount of tax bases under reported is determined in
revision of the tax bases by the Commissioner; or
(c) the Commissioner (Appeals), if the amount of tax bases under reported is
determined in appeal against an assessment or re-assessment order.
231. (1) A  person shall be liable to a penalty in respect of the undisclosed tax bases for
the specified financial year, if a search and seizure  has been conducted under section 135 in
his case.
(2)  The  person referred to in sub-section (1) shall be liable to a penalty—
(a) at the rate of ten per cent. of the undisclosed tax bases for the specified
financial year, if such person—
(i) in a statement under sub-section (9) of section 135 in the course of the
search, admits the undisclosed tax bases;
(ii) substantiates the manner in which the undisclosed tax bases was
derived; and
(iii) pays the tax, together with interest, if any, in respect of the undis-
closed tax bases.
(b) at the rate of twenty per cent. of the undisclosed tax bases for the specified
financial year, if in a statement under sub-section (9) of section 135  in the course of the
search, such person does not admit the undisclosed tax bases, but declares such tax
bases in the return of tax bases for such financial year and pays the tax, together with
interest, if any, in respect of such tax bases; or
(c) of the sum specified  in sub-section (2) of section 230, if in a statement under
sub-section (9) of section 135 in the course of the search, such person does not admit
Penalty
where search
has been
initiated.
5
15
10
20
25
30
35
40
45

141
the undisclosed tax bases and also fails to declare such tax bases in the return of tax
bases for such financial year.
(3) The penalty referred to in sub-section (1) shall be imposed, by an order in writing,
by the Assessing Officer.
(4)  In this section—
   (a) “undisclosed tax bases” means—
(i) any tax bases of the specified financial year represented, either wholly
or partly, by any money, bullion, jewellery or other valuable article or thing or
any entry in the books of account or other document or any transaction, found
in the course of a search under section 134, which has—
(A) not been recorded on or before the date of search in the books of
account or other documents maintained in the normal course relating to
the specified financial year; or
(B) otherwise not been disclosed to the Chief Commissioner or the
Commissioner before the date of the search; or
(ii) any tax bases of the specified financial year represented, either wholly
or partly, by any entry in respect of an expense recorded in the books of account
or other documents maintained in the normal course relating to the specified
financial year which is found to be false and would not have been found to be
so, had the search not been conducted;
     (b) “specified financial year” means the financial year-—
(i) which has ended before the date of search, but the due date for filing
the return of tax bases for such year has not expired before the date of search
and the assessee has not furnished the return of tax bases for the financial year
before the said date; or
(ii) in which search was conducted.
 232. (1) A  person shall be liable to a penalty if he has, without reasonable cause, failed
to—
(a) keep and maintain any  books of account and other documents as required
by section 87 for any financial year or to retain such books of account and other
documents in accordance with the rules made thereunder;
(b) get his accounts audited in respect of any financial year or obtain and furnish
a report of such audit as required by section 88;
(c) deduct the whole, or any part, of the tax as required by the provisions of  Sub-
chapter A of  Chapter XIII;
(d) collect the whole, or any part, of the tax as required by the provisions of  Sub-
chapter B of Chapter XIII;
(e) pay the whole, or any part, of the tax as required by section 198 or section
202;
(f) pay any sum as required by notice under section 162;
(g) furnish the return of tax bases under section 144 by the end of the financial
year in which such return is due;
(h) comply with the provisions of section 294;
(i) furnish the information as required under section 140;
Penalty for
other
defaults.
5
15
10
20
25
30
35
40
45

142
(j) answer any question put to him by an income-tax authority in the exercise of
its powers under this Code;
(k) sign any statement made by him in the course of any proceedings under this
Code which an income-tax authority may legally require him to sign;
(l) attend or produce books of account or documents at the place or time, if he
is required to attend or to give evidence or produce books of account or other docu-
ments, at certain place and time in response to summons issued under sub-section (1)
of section 134;
(m) furnish in time the return of tax deduction as required under section 198;
(n) furnish in time the return of tax collection as required under section 202;
(o) furnish a certificate to the deductee as required by section 198;
(p) furnish a certificate to the buyer, lessee or licensee as required by section
202;
(q) deduct and pay tax as required by sub-section (2) of section 220;
(r) deliver, or cause to be delivered, a return in respect of payment of interest as
required by sub-section (1) of section 199;
(s) deliver, or cause to be delivered, a return in respect of payment as required by
sub-section (3) of section 199;
(t) comply with the provisions of section 292;
(u) comply with the provisions of section 293;
(v) comply with a notice issued under section 146 or section 150 or directions
under section 151; or
(w) furnish the annual information return as required by section 295.
(2) The  penalty referred to in sub-section (1) shall be any sum—
(a) which shall not be less than fifty thousand rupees but which shall not
exceed two lakh rupees, in the cases referred to in clause ( a) or clause ( b) of sub-
section (1);
(b) which shall not be less than twenty-five per cent. but which shall not exceed
the amount, of tax deductible or collectible or payable, as the case may be, in the cases
referred to in clauses (c) to (f) of sub-section (1);
(c) equal to five thousand rupees, in the case referred to in clause ( g) of sub-
section (1);
(d) equal to the amount of loan or deposit taken or accepted, or repaid, as the
case may be, in the case referred to in clause (h) of sub-section (
1);
(e) which shall not be less than five thousand rupees but which shall not exceed
one lakh rupees, in any other case referred to in sub-section (1).
 233. (1) The income-tax authority shall, for the purposes of imposing any penalty
under this Chapter, issue a notice to any assessee requiring him to show cause why the
penalty should not be imposed on him.
(2) The income-tax authority for the purposes of sub-section (1) shall be—
(a) the income-tax authority referred to in sub-section (13) of section  230, if the
penalty is imposable under the said section;
(b) the Assessing Officer, if the penalty is imposable under section 231; and
Procedure.
5
15
10
20
25
30
35
40

143
(c) the income-tax authority before whom the default has been committed, if the
penalty is imposable under section 232.
(3) The notice referred to in sub-section (1) shall be issued—
 (a) during the pendency of any proceedings under this Code for the relevant
financial year, in respect of penalties referred to in section 230 or section 232;
 (b) within a period of three years from the end of the financial year in which the
default is committed, in respect of penalties referred to in section 232.
(4) No order imposing a penalty under this Chapter shall be made unless the assessee
has been given an opportunity of being heard.
(5) An order imposing a penalty under this Chapter shall be made with the approval
of the Joint Commissioner, if—
(a) the penalty exceeds one lakh rupees and the income-tax authority levying the
penalty is in the rank of Income-tax Officer; or
(b) the penalty exceeds five lakh rupees and the income-tax authority levying the
penalty is in the rank of Assistant Commissioner or Deputy Commissioner.
(6) Every order  of penalty issued under this Chapter shall be accompanied by a notice
of demand in respect of the amount of penalty imposed and such notice of demand shall be
deemed to be a notice under section 162.
234. (1) No order imposing a penalty under this Chapter shall be passed after the
expiry of a period of one year from the end of the financial year in which the notice for
imposition of penalty is issued under section 233.
(2) An order imposing, or dropping the proceedings for imposition of, penalty under
this Chapter may be revised, or revived, as the case may be, on the basis of assessment of the
tax bases as revised after giving effect to the order of the Commissioner (Appeals), the
Appellate Tribunal, the High Court or the Supreme Court or order of revision under section
191 or section  192.
(3) An order revising the penalty under sub-section ( 2) shall not be passed after the
expiry of a period of six months from the end of the month in which order of the Commissioner
(Appeals), the Appellate Tribunal,  the Authority for Advance Ruling and Dispute Resolution,
the High Court or the Supreme Court is received by the Chief Commissioner or the
Commissioner or the order of revision under section 191 or section 192 is passed.
(4) In computing the period of limitation for the purposes of this section, the following
time or period shall not be included—
(a) the time taken in giving an opportunity to the assessee to be re-heard again
under section 133;
(b) any period during which the immunity granted under section 283 remained in
force; and
(c) any period during which a proceeding under this Chapter for the levy of
penalty is stayed by an order, or injunction, of any court.
CHAPTER XV
P
ROSECUTION
 235. The provisions of this Chapter  shall be in addition to, and not in derogation of,
the provisions of any other law for the time being in force,  relating to prosecution for
offences thereunder.
Bar of
limitation for
imposing
penalty
Chapter not
in derogation
of any other
law
5
15
10
20
25
30
35
40

144
 236. Whoever contravenes any order referred to in   sub-section (7)  of section 139 shall
be punishable with rigorous imprisonment which may extend to two years and  with fine, which
shall not be less than fifty thousand rupees but which may extend to five lakh rupees.
 237.  If a person who is required to afford the authorised officer the necessary facility to
inspect the books of account or other documents, as required under clause (d) of sub-section
(2) of section 135, fails to afford such facility to the authorised officer, he shall be punishable
with rigorous imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years and  with fine, which
shall not be less than fifty thousand rupees but which may extend to five lakh rupees.
 238. Whoever fraudulently removes, conceals, transfers or delivers to any person,
any property or any interest therein, intending thereby to prevent that property or interest
therein from being taken in execution of a certificate under the provisions of the Fifth
Schedule shall be punishable with rigorous imprisonment for a term which may extend to
two years and with fine, which shall not be less than fifty thousand rupees but which may
extend to  five lakh rupees.
 239. (1) If a person —
(a) fails to give the information as required by sub-section (1) of section 223;
(b) fails to set aside the amount as required by sub-section (3) of that section;
or
(c) parts with any of the assets of the company, or the properties, in his custody
in contravention of the provisions of the said sub-section (3), he shall be punishable
with rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than six months but
which may extend to two years and with fine, which shall not be less than fifty thousand
rupees, but which may extend to  five lakh rupees.
(2) No person shall be punishable for any failure referred to in sub-section (1), if he
proves that there was reasonable cause for such failure.
240. (1) If a person fails to pay to the credit of the Central Government,—
(a) the tax deducted, or collected, at source by him as required by, or  under, the
provisions of Sub-chapter A or Sub-chapter B of Chapter XII;
(b) the dividend distribution tax under section 109; or
(c) the tax on distributed income under section 110,
he shall be punishable—
(i) with rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than three
months but which may extend to seven years; and
(ii)  with fine to be determined at the rate of  three per cent. of the tax  for each
month of default,  for the period commencing from the date on which the amount was
required to be paid to the credit of the Central Government and ending with the date of
payment or the date of conviction, whichever is earlier.
(2) No person shall be punishable for any failure referred to in clause (a) of sub-
section (1), if he proves that there was reasonable cause for such failure.
241. (1) If a person wilfully attempts in any manner whatsoever to evade any  tax,
penalty or interest chargeable or imposable under this  Code, he shall, without prejudice to
any penalty that may be imposable on him under any other provision of this  Code, be
punishable,—
(i) in a case where the amount sought to be evaded exceeds one lakh rupees,
with rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than six months but
Contravention
of any
restraint order
Failure to
comply with
the provisions
of clause (d)
of sub-section
(2) of section
135.
Removal,
concealment,
transfer or
delivery of
property to
thwart tax
recovery.
Failure to
comply with
the provisions
of sub-sections
(1) and (3) of
section 223.
Failure to pay
tax deducted
or collected at
source or to
pay dividend
or income
distribution
tax.
Wilful
attempt to
evade tax.
5
15
10
20
25
30
35
40
45

145
which may extend to seven years and with fine which shall not be less than fifty
thousand rupees but which may extend to five lakh rupees;
(ii) in any other case, with rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall not be
less than three months but which may extend to three years and with fine which shall
not be less than twenty-five thousand rupees but which may extend to three lakh
rupees.
(2)  If a person wilfully attempts in any manner whatsoever to evade the payment of
any tax, penalty or interest under this  Code, he shall, without prejudice to any penalty that
may be imposable on him under any other provision of this  Code, be punishable with
rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than three months but which may
extend to three years and shall, in the discretion of the court, also be liable to  fine.
(3) For the purposes of this section, a wilful attempt to evade any tax, penalty or
interest chargeable or imposable under this Code or the payment thereof shall include a case
where any person—
(a) has in his possession, or control, any books of account or other documents,
relevant to any proceeding under this Code, containing a false entry or statement;
(b) makes, or causes to be made, any false entry, or statement, in such books of
account or other documents;
(c) wilfully omits, or causes to be omitted, any relevant entry, or statement, in
such books of account or other documents; or
(d) causes any other circumstance to exist which will have the effect of enabling
such person to evade any  tax, penalty or interest chargeable or imposable under this
Code, or the payment thereof.
242 (1) If a person wilfully fails to furnish in due time the return of tax bases—
(a) under sub-section (1) of section 144, or in response to a notice given under
section 146; or
(b) in response to a notice given under section 159,
he shall be punishable—
(i) in a case where the amount of tax which would have been evaded, if the failure
had not been discovered, exceeds one lakh rupees, with rigorous imprisonment for a
term which shall not be less than six months but which may extend to seven years and
with fine which shall not be less than one hundred rupees but which may extend to five
hundred rupees, for every day during which the default continues;
 (ii) in any other case, with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than
three months but which may extend to three years and with fine which shall not be less
than fifty rupees but which may extend to three hundred rupees, for every day during
which the default continues.
(2) A  person shall not be proceeded against under this section for failure to furnish in
due time the return of tax bases—
(a)  under sub-section (1) of section 144, or in response to a notice given under
section 146, if the return is furnished before the expiry of the financial year in which
such return is due;
(b)  in response to a notice given under section 159, if the return is filed before
the expiry of the period specified in the said notice; or
 (c) the tax payable by the person on the tax bases determined on assessment or
re-assessment as reduced by advance tax, or tax collected or deducted at source, does
not exceed twenty-five thousand rupees.
Failure to
furnish
returns of
tax bases.
5
15
10
20
25
30
35
40
45

146
243. If a person wilfully fails to produce, or cause to be produced, on or before the
date specified in any notice served on him under sub-section (2) of section 150, such
accounts and documents as are referred to in the notice, he shall be punishable with rigorous
imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year or with fine equal to a sum calculated
at a rate which shall not be less than fifty rupees or more than one hundred rupees for every
day during which the default continues, or with both.
244. If a person wilfully fails to comply with a direction issued to him under sub-
section (1) of section 151, he shall be punishable with rigorous imprisonment for a term
which may extend to one year or with fine equal to a sum calculated at a rate which shall not
be less than fifty rupees or more than one hundred rupees for every day during which the
default continues, or with both.
245. (1)  If a person makes a statement in any verification under this Code or under
any rule made thereunder, or delivers an account or statement which is false, and which he
either knows or believes to be false, or does not believe to be true, he shall be punishable,—
(i) in a case where the amount of tax which would have been evaded if the
statement or account had been accepted as true exceeds one lakh rupees, with rigor-
ous imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than six months but which may
extend to seven years and with fine which shall not be less than fifty thousand rupees
but which may extend to five lakh rupees;
(ii) in any other case, with rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall not be
less than three months but which may extend to three years and with fine which shall
not be less than twenty-five thousand rupees but which may extend to three lakh
rupees.
 246. (1) If any person (herein referred to as the first person) wilfully and with intent to
enable any other person (herein referred to as the second person) to evade any tax or
interest or penalty chargeable and imposable under this Code, makes or causes to be made
any entry or statement which is false and which the first person either knows to be false or
does not believe to be true, in any books of account or other document relevant to or useful
in any proceedings against the first person or the second person, under this Code, the first
person shall be punishable with rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall not be less
than  three months, but which may extend to  three years and with fine which shall not be
less than twenty-five thousand rupees but which may extend to three lakh rupees.
(2) For the purposes of establishing the charge under this section, it shall not be
necessary to prove that the second person has actually evaded any tax, penalty or interest
chargeable or imposable under this Code.
247. (1) If a person abets or induces in any manner another person to make and deliver
an account or a statement or declaration relating to any tax bases chargeable to tax which is
false and which he either knows to be false or does not believe to be true or to commit an
offence under sub-section (1) of section 241, he shall be punishable,—
(i) in a case where the amount of tax, penalty or interest which would have been
evaded, if the declaration, account or statement had been accepted as true, or which
is wilfully attempted to be evaded exceeds one lakh rupees, with rigorous imprison-
ment for a term which shall not be less than six months but which may extend to seven
years and with fine which shall not be less than fifty thousand rupees but which may
extend to five lakh rupees;
(ii) in any other case, with rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall not be
less than three months but which may extend to three years and with fine which shall
not be less than twenty-five thousand rupees but which may extend to three lakh
rupees.
Failure to
furnish
statements,
reports etc.
Failure to
comply with
direction
under this
Code.
False
statement in
verification.
Falsification
of books of
account or
documents.
Abetment of
false return.
5
15
10
20
25
30
35
40
45

147
 248. (1) Where an offence under this Code has been committed by a company, every
person who, at the time the offence was committed, was in charge of, and was responsible to,
the company for the conduct of the business of the company as well as the company shall be
deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished
accordingly.
(2) Nothing in sub-section (1) shall render any such person liable to any punishment
if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge or that he had exercised
all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.
(3) Notwithstanding anything in sub-section ( 1), where an offence under this Code
has been committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has been committed with
the consent or connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of, any director,
manager, secretary or other officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary or other
officer shall also be deemed to be guilty of that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded
against and punished accordingly.
(4) Where an offence under this Code has been committed by a person, being a
company, and the punishment for such offence is imprisonment and fine, then, without
prejudice to in sub-section (1) or sub-section (3), such company shall be punished with fine
and every person, referred to in sub-section (1), or the director, manager, secretary or other
officer of the company referred to in sub-section (3), shall be liable to be proceeded against
and punished in accordance with the provisions of this Code.
(5)  In this section—
(a) “company” means a body corporate, and includes —
(i) an unincorporated body;
(ii) a Hindu undivided family;
(b) “director”, in relation to —
(i) an unincorporated body, means a participant in the body;
(ii) a Hindu undivided family, means an adult member of the family; and
(iii) a company, means a whole-time director, or where there is no such
director, any other director or manager or officer, who is in charge of the affairs of
the company.
 249. (1) The entries in the records, or other documents, in the custody of an income-
tax authority shall be admitted in evidence in any proceeding for the prosecution of any
person for an offence under this Chapter.
(2) The entries referred to in sub-section (1) may be proved by the production of—
(a) the records or other documents (containing such entries) in the custody of
the income-tax authority; or
(b) a copy of the entries certified by that authority under its signature, as true
copy of the original entries contained in the records or other documents in its custody.
 250. (1) Where during the course of any search made under section 135, any  material
has  been found in the possession or control of any person and such material  is tendered by
the prosecution in evidence against such person or against such person and the person
referred to in section  247 for an offence under this Code, the provisions of section 311 shall,
so far as may be, apply in relation to such material.
(2) Where any  material taken into custody, from the possession or control of any
person,  is delivered to the requisitioning officer under section 136 and such  material  is
tendered by the prosecution in evidence against such person or against such person and the
Offences by
companies,
etc.
Proof of
entries in
records or
documents.
Presumption
as to assets,
and books of
account, in
certain cases.
5
15
10
20
25
30
35
40
45

148
person referred to in section  247 for an offence under this Code, the provisions of section
311 shall, so far as may be, apply in relation to such material.
 251. (1) In any prosecution for any offence under this Code which requires a culpable
mental state on the part of the accused, the court shall presume the existence of such mental
state but it shall be a defence for the accused to prove the fact that he had no such mental
state with respect to the act charged as an offence in that prosecution.
(2)  In this section—
  (a) “culpable mental state” includes intention, motive or knowledge of a fact or
belief in, or reason to believe, a fact;
(b) a fact is said to be proved only when the court believes it to exist beyond
reasonable doubt and not merely when its existence is established by a preponder-
ance of probability.
 252. (1)  A person shall not be proceeded against for an offence under sections  236
to  247 (both inclusive) except with the previous sanction of the Commissioner or the
Commissioner (Appeals), as the case may be.
(2) The Chief Commissioner may issue such instructions, or directions, to the income-
tax authorities referred to in sub-section (1) as he may  think fit for the institution of proceedings
under this section.
(3) The Chief Commissioner may compound, either before or after the institution of
proceedings (with permission of the Court), any offence under this Chapter, under the
circumstances and for the amount, as may be prescribed.
(4) The power of the Board to issue orders, instructions or directions under this Code
shall include the power to issue orders, instructions or directions (including instructions or
directions to obtain its previous approval) to other income-tax authorities for the proper
composition of offences (including an authorisation to file and pursue complaints by one or
more Inspectors of Income-tax) under this section.
(5) An offence in relation to which a punishment has been awarded by a court shall
not be compounded.
(6)  Where any proceeding has been taken against any person under sub-section (1),
any statement made or account or other document produced by such person before any
income-tax authority, other than an Inspector, shall not be inadmissible as evidence for the
purpose of such proceedings merely on the ground that such statement was made or such
account or other document was produced in the belief that the offence in respect of which
such proceeding was taken would be compounded.
 253.   If any person convicted of an offence under sections  240, 241, 242, 243, 245, 246
and section  247 is again convicted of an offence under any of the aforesaid provisions, he
shall be punishable for the second and every subsequent offence with rigorous imprisonment
for a term which shall not be less than six months, but which may extend to seven years and
with fine.
 254. Notwithstanding anything in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, any offence
punishable under this Chapter shall be deemed to be non-cognizable within the meaning of
that Code.
 255. (1) If a public servant furnishes any information or produces any document in
contravention of the provisions of section 142, he shall be punishable with imprisonment for
a term which may extend to six months, and with fine.
(2) No prosecution shall be instituted under this section except with the previous
sanction of the Central Government, which may be accorded only after giving such public
servant an opportunity of being heard.
Presumption
as to culpable
mental state
Prosecution to
be at instance
of Chief
Commissioner
or Commis-
sioner.
Punishment
for second and
subsequent
offences.
2 of 1974.Offences to be
non-cogni-
zable
Disclosure of
information
by public
servants.
5
15
10
20
25
30
35
40
45

149
CHAPTER  XIV
ADV ANCE RULINGS AND DISPUTE RESOLUTION
 256. An applicant or appellant, specified in column (2) of the Table given below, may
seek a ruling or, as the case may be, a resolution of dispute on  matters  specified in the
corresponding entry of column (3) of the said Table:
TABLE
Serial         Applicant/Appellant Scope of ruling and dispute
number resolution
(1)                     (2)                                                                      (3)
 1.       Non-resident. A determination in relation to a transaction  which
has been undertaken, or is proposed to be
undertaken, by the applicant, and such
determination shall include the determination of
any question of law, or of fact, specified in the
application.
 2.      Resident. A determination in relation to the tax liability of a
non-resident arising out of a transaction which
has been undertaken, or is proposed to be
undertaken, by the applicant with such non-
resident, and such determination shall include the
determination of any question of law, or of fact,
specified in the application.
 3.     Any class of  A determination in respect of an issue relating
         residents, as notified by to computation of tax bases which is pending
          the Central Government before any income-tax authority, or the Appellate
         in this behalf. Tribunal, and such determination shall include
the determination of any question of law or of
fact relating to such computation of tax bases
specified in the application.
 4. Public Sector company or A resolution of any dispute relating to Company
         Commissioner computation of tax bases or any other issue arising
from—
(i) an appellate, penalty or rectification order
of the  Commissioner (Appeals);
(ii) a revision, penalty or rectification order of
the Commissioner, felt in the case of a
public sector company.
5.       Public Sector Company. A resolution of any dispute relating to
computation of tax bases or any other issue arising
from the order of an Assessing Officer passed in
pursuance of the direction of the Dispute
Resolution Panel,
or any rectification order in relation to such order.
257. (1) The Central Government shall constitute an Authority for Advance Rulings
and Dispute Resolution (hereinafter referred to as the Authority) for the purposes of
pronouncing an advance ruling and resolution of disputes.
Scope of
ruling and
dispute
resolution.
Authority
for Advance
Rulings and
Dispute
Resolution.
5
15
10
20
25
30
35
40
45

150
(2) The Authority shall consist of a Chairperson and such number of Vice-chairpersons,
legal Members and revenue Members as the Central Government may appoint.
(3) A person shall not be qualified for appointment as—
(a) the Chairperson unless he has been a Judge of the Supreme Court;
(b) the Vice-chairperson unless he has been a Judge of a High Court;
(c) a revenue Member unless he is an officer of the Indian Revenue Service and
is a Chief Commissioner;
(d) a legal Member unless he is an officer of the Indian Legal Service and is an
Additional Secretary to the Government of India.
(4) The salaries and allowances payable to, and the terms and conditions of service of,
the Members shall be such as may be prescribed.
(5) The Central Government shall provide to the Authority such officers and staff, as
may be necessary, for the efficient exercise of the powers of the Authority under this Code.
(6) The powers and functions of the Authority may be discharged by its Benches
constituted by the Chairperson of the Authority from amongst the members thereof.
(7) A Bench shall consist of the Chairperson or the Vice-chairperson and one legal
Member and one revenue Member.
(8) The principal Bench of the Authority shall be located in National Capital Territory
of Delhi and other Benches of the Authority shall be located at such places  as is deemed fit
by the Central Government.
(9) No proceeding before, or pronouncement of advance ruling or order or direction on
appeal for resolution of dispute by, the Authority shall be questioned, or shall be invalid, on
the ground merely of the existence of any vacancy, or defect, in the constitution of the
Authority.
 258. (1) An applicant may make an application for seeking advance ruling, under this
Chapter, stating the question on which the advance ruling is sought.
(2) The application shall be made in such form and manner  and be accompanied by
such fees as may be prescribed.
(3) An applicant may withdraw an application within a period of thirty days from the
date of filing of the application.
(4) On receipt of an application, the Authority shall cause a copy thereof to be forwarded
to the Commissioner and, if necessary, call upon him to furnish the relevant records.
(5) The Authority may, after examining the application and the records called for, by an
order in writing, either allow or reject the application.
(6) No application shall be rejected under sub-section ( 5) unless an opportunity of
being heard has been given to the applicant and reasons for such rejection shall be given in
the order.
(7) The Authority shall not allow the application where the question raised in the
application—
(a) is already pending before any income-tax authority, Appellate Tribunal or
any court;
(b) involves determination of fair market value of any property;
(c) relates to a transaction or issue which is designed prima facie for the avoid-
ance of income-tax.
Procedure for
advance
ruling.
5
15
10
20
25
30
35
40

151
(8) Notwithstanding anything  in sub-section ( 7), in the case of any person falling
within the class of persons notified under section  256, the Authority may allow the application
even if the question raised therein is pending before any income-tax authority or Appellate
Tribunal.
(9) A copy of every order made under sub-section (5) shall be sent to the applicant and
to the Commissioner.
(10) The Authority shall, in a case where an application is allowed under sub-section
(5), pronounce its advance ruling on the question specified in the application, after examining
such further material as may be placed before it by the applicant or the Commissioner or
obtained by the Authority.
(11) The Authority shall, before pronouncing its advance ruling, provide an opportunity
of being heard to the applicant or to the Commissioner.
(12) The Authority shall pronounce its advance ruling in writing within a period of six
months of the receipt of the application.
(13) A copy of the advance ruling pronounced by the Authority, duly signed by the
Members and certified in such manner as may be  prescribed,  shall be sent to the applicant
and to the Commissioner, as soon as may be, after such pronouncement.
 259. No income-tax authority, or the Appellate Tribunal, shall proceed to decide any
issue in respect of which an application has been made by a person falling within the class of
persons notified under section  256.
 260. (1) The advance ruling pronounced by the Authority under section  258 shall be
binding only—
(a) on the applicant in whose case the advance ruling has been pronounced;
(b) in respect of the transaction in relation to which the advance ruling has been
pronounced; and
(c) on the Commissioner, and the income-tax authorities subordinate to him, in
respect of the applicant and the said transaction.
(2) The advance ruling referred to in sub-section ( 1) shall not be binding, if there is
a change in law, or fact, on the basis of which the advance ruling has been pronounced.
 261. (1) The Authority may, by order, declare an advance ruling to be void ab initio if
it finds that the ruling has been obtained by the applicant by fraud or misrepresentation of
facts.
(2) Upon declaring the ruling to be void ab initio, all the provisions of this Code shall
apply (after excluding the period beginning with the date of such advance ruling and ending
with the date of order under this sub-section) to the applicant as if such advance ruling had
never been made.
(3) A copy of the order made under sub-section (1) shall be sent to the applicant and
the Commissioner.
 262. (1) An appellant may prefer an appeal against the orders  referred to in serial
numbers 4 and 5 of the Table given in section 256 for seeking resolution of  a dispute.
(2) Every appeal under sub-section (1) shall be preferred within a period of sixty days
from the date on which the order sought to be appealed against is communicated to the
appellant.
(3) The respondent, on receipt of notice that an appeal against the order of the
Commissioner (Appeals) has been preferred under sub-section (1) by the other party,  may
Applicability
of advance
ruling.
Income-tax
authority or
Appellate
Tribunal not
to proceed in
certain cases.
Advance
ruling to be
void in
certain
circum-
stances.
Procedure
for dispute
resolution.
5
15
10
20
25
30
35
40
45

152
file a memorandum of cross objections against any part of the order of the Commissioner
(Appeals) within a period of thirty days of the receipt of the notice.
(4) The memorandum of cross objections shall be disposed of by the Authority as if it
were an appeal preferred within the time specified in sub-section (2).
(5) The Authority may admit an appeal, or a memorandum of cross  objections, after
the expiry of the period specified in sub-section (2) or sub-section (3), if—
(a) it is satisfied that the appellant had sufficient cause for not preferring it
within that time; and
(b) the delay in filing the appeal does not exceed a period of one year.
(6) The appeal, or the memorandum of cross objections, shall be in such form and
manner and be verified in such manner as may be prescribed.
(7) The appeal by the public sector company shall be accompanied by such fees as
may be prescribed.
(8) The Authority may, after giving both the parties to the appeal an opportunity of
being heard, pass such orders thereon as it thinks fit.
(9) A copy of the order passed by the Authority  shall be sent to both the parties.
(10) Every appeal preferred under this section shall be heard and disposed of by the
Authority as expeditiously as possible and endeavour shall be made to dispose of such
appeal within a period of two years from the end of the financial year in which the appeal is
preferred.
(11) The order or direction of the Authority in the matter of an appeal shall be final and
binding on both the parties.
  263. (1) A public sector company may make an application to the Authority for stay
of demand relating to the appeal preferred by it under section 256 and such application shall
be accompanied by  such fees  as may be prescribed.
(2) The Authority may, after giving both the parties to the appeal an opportunity of
being heard and having considered the merits of the case, pass such orders on the stay
application as it deems fit.
(3) The Authority may pass an order of stay under sub-section ( 2) for a period not
exceeding  one hundred and eighty days from the date of passing of the order for stay and
the Authority shall dispose of the appeal within the said period of stay specified in that
order.
(4) The Authority may, on an application made by the public sector company seeking
extension of the period of stay, extend the period of stay allowed under sub-section (2), if it
is satisfied that the delay in disposing of the appeal is not attributable to the  company.
(5) The aggregate of the period originally allowed under sub-section ( 2) and the
period or periods extended under sub-section (4) shall not, in any case, exceed three hundred
and sixty-five days from the date of passing the order of stay under sub-section (2).
(6) The Authority shall dispose of the appeal during the period of stay allowed
under sub-section ( 2) or the period or periods extended under sub-section ( 4),
notwithstanding that the delay in disposing of the appeal is not attributable to the  company
and where  the Authority fails to do so, the stay order shall stand vacated.
264. (1) The Authority may, either suo motu or the mistake on being brought to its
notice by the public sector company or the Commissioner or the Assessing Officer, with a
view to rectifying any mistake apparent on the face of record, amend any order passed by it
under section 258 or section 262.
Stay of
demand by  the
Authority.
Power to
rectify a
mistake.
5
15
10
20
25
30
35
40
45

153
(2) No  order under sub-section (1)  shall be passed  after a period of four years from
the date on which order sought to be amended was made.
(3) The Authority shall not make an amendment which has the effect of enhancing
an assessment or reducing a refund or otherwise increasing the liability of the public sector
company without giving the said company an  opportunity of being heard.
265. (1) The Authority shall, for the purpose of exercising its powers, have all the
powers of a civil court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 as are referred to in section
134 of this Code.
(2) The Authority shall be deemed to be a civil court for the purposes of section 195
of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, but not for the purposes of Chapter XXVI of the said
Code.
(3) Every proceeding before the Authority shall be deemed to be a judicial proceeding
within the meaning of sections 193 and 228 of the Indian Penal Code, and for the purpose of
section 196 of the said Code.
 266. The Authority shall, subject to the provisions of this Chapter, have power to
regulate its own procedure in all matters arising out of the exercise of its powers under this
Code.
267. In this Chapter, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “advance ruling” means a ruling by the Authority on a question raised by the
applicant under section  258 within the scope as specified under section  256;
(b) “appellant” means a public sector company or the Commissioner who prefers
an appeal under sub-section (1) of section 262;
(c) “applicant” means any person who makes an application under sub-section
(1) of section  258;
(d) “application” means an application made to the Authority under sub-section
(1) of section  258;
(e) “Authority” means the Authority for Advance Rulings and Dispute Resolu-
tion constituted under section  257;
(f) “Chairperson” means the Chairperson of the Authority;
(g) “Member” means a Member of the Authority and includes the Chairperson
and Vice-chairperson;
(h) “Vice-chairperson” means the Vice-chairperson of the Authority.
CHAPTER XVI
S
ETTLEMENT OF CASES
268. (1) The Central Government shall constitute a Commission to be called the Income-
tax Settlement Commission for the settlement of cases under this Chapter.
(2) The Settlement Commission shall consist of a Chairperson and as many Vice-
Chairpersons and other members as the Central Government deems fit and shall function
within the Department of the Central Government dealing with direct taxes.
(3) The Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and other members of the Settlement
Commission shall be appointed by the Central Government from amongst the officers of the
Indian Revenue Service who have served for at least twenty-eight years in the service,
including at least five years in the rank of Commissioner or above.
269.(1) The jurisdiction, powers and authority of the Settlement Commission may be
exercised by Benches thereof.
Procedure of
Authority.
Inter
pretations in
this Chapter.
Income-tax
Settlement
Commission.
Jurisdiction
and powers of
Settlement
Commission.
Powers of
Authority.
2 of 1974.
45 of 1860.
5 of 1908.
5
15
10
20
25
30
35
40
45

154
(2) A Bench shall be presided over by the Chairperson or a Vice-Chairperson, as the
case may be, and shall consist of two other members.
(3) A Bench may function with only two members if—
(a) the third member is unable to discharge his functions owing to absence,
illness or any other cause; or
(b) any vacancy occurs either in the office of the Presiding Officer or in the
office of any member of the Bench.
(4) The Bench, referred to in sub-section ( 3), shall be presided over by the senior
among the two members if none of such members is the Chairperson or Vice-Chairperson.
(5) The Presiding Officer of the Bench, referred to in sub-section (3), may refer a case
or matter to the Chairperson for transfer to such Bench as the Chairperson may deem fit if at
any stage of the hearing of any such case or matter it appears to the Presiding Officer that
the case or matter is of such a nature that it ought to be heard of by a Bench consisting of
three members.
(6) The Bench for which the Chairperson is the Presiding Officer shall be the principal
Bench and the other Benches shall be known as Additional Benches.
(7) The Chairperson may authorise the Vice-Chairperson or other Member appointed
to one Bench to also discharge the functions of the Vice-Chairperson or, as the case may be,
other member of another Bench.
(8) The Chairperson may, for the disposal of any particular case, constitute a Special
Bench consisting of more than three Members.
(9) The principal Bench and the additional Benches shall ordinarily sit at such places
as the Central Government may, by notification, specify.
(10) The Special Bench shall sit at a place to be fixed by the Chairperson.
270. The Vice-Chairperson or, as the case may be, such one of the Vice-Chairpersons
as the Central Government may, by notification, authorise in this behalf, shall act as the
Chairperson –
(a) till the date on which a new Chairperson, appointed in accordance with the
provisions of this Chapter, enters upon his office, in case there occurs any vacancy in
the office of the Chairperson by reason of his death, resignation or otherwise; or
(b) till the date on which the Chairperson resumes his duties, in case the Chair-
person is unable to discharge his functions owing to absence, illness or any other
cause.
271. (1) The Chairperson may, on the application of the assessee or the Chief
Commissioner or the Commissioner or on his own motion, transfer any case pending before
one Bench for disposal to another Bench.
(2) The case under sub-section ( 1) shall be transferred by the Chairperson after
recording the reasons for doing so.
272. (1) If the members of a Bench differ in opinion on any point, the point shall be
decided according to the opinion of the majority, if there is a majority.
(2) If the Members of a Bench differ in opinion on any point and they are equally
divided, they shall state the point on which they differ and make a reference to the Chairperson.
(3) The Chairperson, on receipt of the reference under sub-section (2), shall—
(a) either hear the point himself, or
(b) refer the case for hearing on the point by one or more of the other
Members.
Vice-
Chairperson
to act as
Chairperson.
Power of
Chairperson
to transfer
cases from
one Bench to
another.
Decision to be
by majority.
5
15
10
20
25
30
35
40
45

155
(4) The point, referred to in sub-section (2), shall be decided according to the opinion
of the majority of the Members who have heard the case, including those who first heard it.
273. (1)  An assessee may, at any stage of a case relating to him, make an application
to the Settlement Commission in such form and manner as may be prescribed, to have the
case settled.
(2) The application made under sub-section (1) by an assessee shall contain –
(a) a full and true disclosure of his income or wealth which has not been dis-
closed before the Assessing Officer;
(b) the manner in which such income or wealth has been derived;
(c) the details of additional amount of income-tax or wealth-tax  payable on such
income or wealth along with the proof of payment of such tax; and
(d) such other particulars as may be prescribed.
(3) The application under sub-section (1) shall not be made unless –
(a) the assessee has furnished the return of tax bases which he is or was required
to furnish under any of the provisions of this Code; and
(b) the additional amount of income-tax payable on the income disclosed in the
application exceeds,—
 (i) fifty lakh rupees in a case where proceedings for assessment or re-
assessment way financial year have been initiated in consequence of an action
under section 135 or section 136, as the case may be;
(ii) ten lakh rupees in any other case; and
(c) the additional amount of income-tax or wealth-tax payable together with
interest has been paid on or before the date of making the application and proof of
such payment is submitted with the application.
(4) Every application made under sub-section (1) shall be accompanied by such fees
as may be prescribed.
(5) The assessee shall not be allowed to withdraw an application made by him under
sub-section (1).
(6) The assessee shall, on the date on which he makes an application under sub-
section (1) to the Settlement Commission, also intimate the Assessing Officer in such manner
as may be prescribed, of having made such application to the Settlement Commission.
274. The additional amount of tax payable in respect of the income or wealth disclosed
in the application referred to in clause (c) of sub-section (2) of section 273 shall be calculated
in the following manner, namely: -
(a) in the case where the income  or wealth disclosed in the application relates to
only one financial year and –
(i) the applicant has furnished a return of tax bases of that year—
(A) the amounts of the total income returned and the income disclosed
in the application shall be aggregated;
(B) the tax shall be calculated on the aggregate income so arrived at
as if such aggregate income were the total income;
(C) the amount of tax so calculated shall be reduced by the amount
of tax calculated on the total income returned for that financial year;
(D) the balance amount of tax so determined shall be the additional
Application for
settlement of
cases.
Additional
amount of
income-tax.
5
15
10
20
25
30
35
40

156
amount of tax payable in respect of the income disclosed in the application;
        (ii) if the applicant has not furnished  a return in respect of the total
income of that financial year, tax shall be calculated on the income disclosed in
the application;
(b) in the case where the income disclosed in the application relates to more
than one financial year,—
(i) the additional amount of income-tax payable in respect of the income
disclosed for each of the financial years shall first be calculated in the manner
provided under clause (a);
(ii) the additional amount of income-tax so calculated for each of the
financial years shall be aggregated;
(iii) the aggregate amount of the additional income-tax so computed shall
be the additional amount of tax payable in respect of the income disclosed in the
application;
(c ) in a case where the wealth disclosed in the application relates to,—
 (i) one financial year the additional amount of tax payable shall be calcu-
lated in the manner provided in clause (a); and
(ii)  more than one financial year, the additional amount of tax payable
shall be calculated in the manner provided in clause (b).
275. (1) The Settlement Commission shall, within a period of ten days from the date of
the receipt of an application under section 273, issue a notice to the applicant requiring him
to explain as to why the application made by him may be allowed to be proceeded with.
(2)  The Settlement Commission shall, on hearing the applicant, within a period of
twenty days from the date of receipt of the application, by an order in writing, reject  or allow
the application to be proceeded with.
(3) The application received under section 273 shall be deemed to have been allowed
to be proceeded with, if no order has been passed within the period specified in  sub-section
(2).
(4) The Settlement Commission shall in respect of an application which has been
allowed to be proceeded with under sub-section (1) or sub-section (2), call for a report from
the Commissioner within a periof of forty-five days from the date on which the application is
made.
(5) The Commissioner shall furnish the report within a period of forty-five days of the
receipt of communication from the Settlement Commission under sub-section (4).
(6) The Settlement Commission may, on the basis of the report of the Commissioner,
and within a period of fifteen days of the receipt of the report by an order in writing, declare
the application in question as invalid.
(7) The Settlement Commission, before passing the order under sub-section (6), shall–
(a) consider the report of the Commissioner, if it is furnished within the time
specified in sub-section (5);
(b) take into account the nature and circumstances of the case or the complexity
of the investigation involved therein; and
(c) provide an opportunity of being heard to the applicant and to the Commis-
sioner.
(8) The Settlement Commission shall send a copy of order under sub-sections (
2) and
(6) to the applicant and to the Commissioner.
276. (1) The Settlement Commission may, if the application has not been declared as
invalid under sub-section (6) of section 275, call for the records from the Commissioner.
(2)  If the Settlement Commission , on examination of the records made available by the
Commissioner or on an application made by him, is of the opinion that any further inquiry or
Admission of
application.
Further
inquiry into
the case.
5
15
10
20
25
30
35
40
45
50

157
investigation in the matter is necessary, it may direct the Commissioner to –
(a) make or cause to be made such further inquiry or investigation; and
(b)  furnish a report on the matters covered by the application and any other
matter relating to the case.
(3) The Commissioner shall furnish the report required under clause (b) of sub-section
(2) within a period of one hundred and twenty days from the date of receipt of communication
from the Settlement Commission.
(4) If the Commissioner does not furnish his report within the time specified in sub-
section (3), the Settlement Commission may proceed to pass an order without such report.
277. (1) The Settlement Commission shall, after the application has not been declared
as invalid under sub-section (6) of section 275, pass such order in writing as it thinks fit, in
accordance with the provisions of this Code, on the matters covered by the application and
any other matters relating to the case not covered by the application but referred to in the
report of the Commissioner under sub-section (5) of section 275 or sub-section (3) of section
276.
(2) The order passed by the Settlement Commission under sub-section ( 1) shall
provide –
(a) for the terms of settlement including any demand by way of tax, penalty or
interest, the manner in which any sum due under the settlement shall be paid and all
other matters to make the settlement effective; and
(b) that the settlement shall be void if it is subsequently found by the Settlement
Commission that it has been obtained by fraud or misrepresentation of facts.
(3) The Settlement Commission, before passing any order under sub-section ( 1),
shall –
(a) examine the records called for from the Commissioner;
(b) examine  all the issues arising from the report of the Commissioner received
under sub-section (5) of section 275 or sub-section (3) of section 276;
(c) provide an opportunity to the applicant and to the Commissioner to be heard,
either in person or through a representative duly authorised in this behalf; and
(d) examine such further evidence as may be placed before it or obtained by it.
(4) The Settlement Commission shall pass the order under sub-section ( 1) within a
period of eighteen months  from the end of the month  in which the application was made.
278. (1) The assessee shall pay any sum payable in pursuance of an order under sub-
section (1) of section 277 within a period of thirty days of the receipt of a copy of the order.
(2) The Settlement Commission may, on an application by the assessee, extend the
time for payment of additional amount of income-tax or wealth-tax or allow the payment by
instalments if the assessee furnishes adequate security for such payment.
(3) The assessee shall, if the tax is not paid within the time specified in sub-section (1),
be liable to pay simple interest at the rate of fifteen per cent. per annum on the amount
remaining unpaid from the date of expiry of the period specified under sub-section (1) to the
date on which the amount is paid irrespective of the fact that the Settlement Commission has
extended the time for payment of such tax or has allowed payment thereof by instalment.
(4). The Assessing Officer may, in accordance with the provisions  of Chapter XI,-
(a) recover the amount of any sum specified in the order under sub-section (1) of
section 277, together with any interest payable thereon under sub-section ( 3); and
(b) impose and recover any penalty for default in making payment of such sum.
279 (1)The Settlement Commission may, during the pendency of any proceeding
before it, by order, attach provisionally any property belonging to the applicant in the
manner provided in the Fifth Schedule if it is of the opinion that it is necessary to do so for
the purpose of protecting the interests of the revenue.
(2) Every provisional attachment made by the Settlement Commission under
Order of
settlement.
Payment of tax
on settlement.
Power of
Settlement
Commission
to order
provisional
attachment to
protect
revenue
5
15
10
20
25
30
35
40
50
45

158
sub-section (1) shall cease to have effect after the expiry of a period of six months from the
date of the order made under sub-section (1).
(3) The Settlement Commission may, for reasons to be recorded in writing, extend the
period specified under sub-section ( 2) by such further period or periods as it thinks fit,
provided that the total period of extension shall not in any case exceed two years.
(4) If  a provisional attachment made under section 297 is  pending immediately before
an application is made under section 273, then such order shall continue to have effect
under this section  up to the period to which the order made under section 297 would have
continued if such application had not been made.
280. (1) The order passed by the Settlement Commission under sub-section ( 1) of
section 277 shall be void if it is subsequently found by the Settlement Commission that it
has been obtained by fraud or misrepresentation of facts.
(2) If the order becomes void,—
(a) the proceedings before the Assessing Officer with respect to the matters
covered by the settlement shall be deemed to have been revived from the stage at
which the application was admitted by the Settlement Commission; and
(b) the Assessing Officer may complete such proceedings at any time before the
expiry of twenty-one months from the end of the financial year in which the order
becomes void.
281. (1) The Settlement Commission shall have all the powers which are vested in an
income-tax authority under this Code.
(2) The Settlement Commission shall, after an application has been made under section
273—
(a) and until a report under sub-section (3) of section 276 is made by the Commis-
sioner or the time allowed for submission of the report under said section has expired,
whichever is later, have concurrent jurisdiction with the Assessing Officer; and
(b) thereafter until an order of settlement is passed under sub-section ( 1) of
section 277, have exclusive jurisdiction to exercise the powers and perform the func-
tions of any income-tax authority under this Code in relation to the case.
(3) Notwithstanding anything in sub-section ( 2) and in the absence of any express
direction to the contrary by the Settlement Commission, nothing contained in this section
shall affect the operation of any other provision of this Code requiring the applicant to pay
tax on the basis of self-assessment in relation to the matters before the Settlement Commission.
(4) In the absence of any express direction by the Settlement Commission to the
contrary, nothing in this Chapter shall affect the operation of the provisions of this Code in
so far as they relate to any matters other than those before the Settlement Commission.
(5) The Settlement Commission shall, subject to the provisions of this Chapter, have
powers to regulate its own procedure and the procedure of the Benches thereof in all matters
arising out of the exercise of its powers or of the discharge of its functions, including the
places at which the Benches shall hold their sittings.
282. (1)  No person shall be entitled to inspect, or obtain copies of, any reports made
by any income-tax authority to the Settlement Commission; but the Settlement Commission
may, in its discretion, furnish copies thereof to any such person on an application made to
it in this behalf and on payment of such fees as may be prescribed.
(2)  For the purpose of enabling any person whose case is under consideration to
rebut any evidence brought on record against him in any such report, the Settlement
Commission shall, on an application made in this behalf, and on the payment of such fees as
may be prescribed, furnish such person with a certified copy of any such report or part
thereof relevant for the purpose.
283. (1) The Settlement Commission may, subject to such conditions as it may think
fit to impose, grant to a person who made application under section 273, immunity, with
respect to the case covered by the settlement, from—
Revival of
proceedings
before
Assessing
Officer.
Powers of
Settlement
Commission
after
admission.
Inspection
and furnishing
reports.
Power of
Settlement
Commission
to grant
immunity.
5
15
10
20
25
30
35
40
50
45

159
(a) imposition of any penalty under this Code or under the Income-tax Act, 1961
or the Wealth-tax Act, 1957 as they stood immediately before the commencement of
this Code; or
(b) prosecution for any offence under this Code or under the Income-tax Act,
1961 or the Wealth-tax Act, 1957 as they stood immediately before the commencement
of this Code, instituted after the date of receipt of application under section 273 by the
Settlement Commission.
(2) The Settlement Commission shall grant immunity under sub-section (1) only if it is
satisfied that the person has—
(a) co-operated with the Settlement Commission in the proceedings before it;
and
(b) made a full and true disclosure of his income,  and the manner in which such
income has been derived, in the application for settlement.
(3) An immunity granted to a person under sub-section (1) shall stand withdrawn, if
such person—
(a) fails to pay any sum specified in the order passed under sub-section ( 1) of
section 277 within the time allowed by the Settlement Commission;
(b) fails to comply with any other condition subject to which the immunity was
granted; or
(c) had, in the course of the settlement proceedings, concealed any particular
material to the settlement or given false evidence.
(4) The person, in whose case the immunity is withdrawn under sub-section (4),—
(a) may be tried—
(i) for the offence with respect to which the immunity was granted;
(ii) for any other offence of which he appears to be guilty in connection
with the settlement;
(b) shall become liable to the imposition of any penalty under this Code to which
he would have been liable, had the immunity not been granted.
284.  (1) The proceedings before the Settlement Commission shall abate on the  date
specified in sub-section (2), if—
(a)   an application made under section 273,—
(i)   has not been allowed to be proceeded with or has been rejected under
sub-section (
2) of section 275; or
(ii)  has  been declared as invalid under sub-section (6) of section 275; or
(b) an order under sub-section (1) of section 277 has not been passed within the
time  period specified under sub-section (4) of section 277.
(2) The  date  referred to in sub-section (1) shall be –
(a) in respect of  sub-clause (i) of clause (a) of the said sub-section, the day on
which the application was rejected;
(b) in respect of  sub-clause (ii) of clause (a) of the said sub-section , the last day
of the month in which the application was declared invalid; and
(c) in respect of clause (b), on the date on which the time  period specified in sub-
section (4) of section 277 expires.
Abatement of
proceeding
before
Settlement
Commission.
43 of 1961.
27 of 1957.
43 of 1961.
27 of 1957.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

160
(3) If a proceeding before the Settlement Commission abates, the Assessing Officer,
or, as the case may be, any other income-tax authority before whom the proceeding at the
time of making the application was pending, shall dispose of the case in accordance with the
provisions of this Code  as if no application under section 273 had been made.
(4) For the purposes of sub-section (3), the Assessing Officer or, as the case may be,
other income-tax authority, shall be entitled to use all the material and other information
produced by the assessee before the Settlement Commission or the results of the inquiry
held or evidence recorded by the Settlement Commission  in the course of the proceedings
before it, as if such material, information, inquiry and evidence had been produced before
the Assessing Officer or other income-tax authority or held or recorded by him in the course
of the proceedings before him.
(5) In a case referred to in sub-section ( 3), the period commencing from the date of
application to the Settlement Commission under section 273 and ending with the date referred
to in sub-section (2) shall be excluded from the time limits specified in sections 161 and 163,
for the purposes of making a rectification or an assessment or reassessment, and under
section 216 for the purposes of payment of interest.
285.  In a case where  the proceedings before the Settlement Commission abate under
sub-section (1) of section 284, the Assessing Officer shall allow the credit for the tax and
interest paid,—
(a) on or before the date of making the application under section 273; or
(b) during the pendency of the case before the Settlement Commission.
 286. Any sum specified in an order of settlement passed under sub-section ( 1) of
section 277 may, subject to such conditions, if any, as may be specified therein, be recovered,
and any penalty for default in making payment of such sum may be imposed and recovered
in accordance with the provisions of Chapter XIII, by the Assessing Officer having jurisdiction
over the person who made the application for settlement under section 273.
287. Every order of settlement passed under sub-section ( 1) of section 277 shall be
conclusive as to the matters stated therein and no matter covered by such order shall be
reopened in any proceedings under this Code or under any other law for the time being in
force.
288. (1) A person shall not be entitled to make an application under section 273  in
relation to any other matter if—
(a) an order passed under sub-section ( 1) of section 277 provides for the
imposition of a penalty on that person under section 230; or
(b) such person is convicted of any offence under this Code in relation to that
case.
(2) Subject to the provisions of sub-section ( 1), a person shall be entitled to make
application under section 273 only once in the following circumstances, namely:—
(a)  where search and seizure has been carried out under section 135, or material
has been obtained in pursuance to a requisition under section 136, in the case of the
person; or
(b) where any material,  seized  or obtained in pursuance of  a requisition  in the
case of another person, has a bearing  on the determination of the tax bases of the
person  making application under section 273.
289. Any proceeding under his Chapter before the Settlement Commission shall be a
judicial proceeding within the meaning of sections 193 and 228, and for the purposes of
section 196 of the Indian Penal Code.
Credit for tax
paid in case of
abatement of
proceedings.
Recovery of
sums due
under order
of
settlement.
Order of
settlement
to be
conclusive.
Bar on
subsequent
application.
Proceedings
to be judicial
proceedings. 45 of 1860.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

161
290. (1)  In this Chapter, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “Bench” means a Bench of the Settlement Commission;
(b) “case” means any proceeding under this Code for the assessment or
reassessment of any person in respect of any financial year or  years which may be
pending before the Assessing Officer on the date on which an application under
sub-section (1) of section 273 is made but does not include,—
(i) a proceeding for making fresh assessment in pursuance of an order
under section 191 or section 192;
(ii) an assessment or reassessment  proceeding during which prosecution
proceedings under Chapter-XV have been initiated;
(c) “Chairperson” means the Chairperson of the Settlement Commission;
(d) “Member” means a  Member of the Settlement Commission, and includes the
Chairperson and a Vice-Chairperson;
(e) “Settlement Commission” means the Income-tax Settlement Commission
constituted under section 268;
(f) “Vice-Chairperson” means a Vice-Chairperson of the Settlement Commission.
(2) For the purpose of clause (b) of sub-section (1), a proceeding for,—
(a) prosecution shall be deemed to have been initiated from the date on which a
show cause notice for institution of prosecution  is issued to any person.;
(b)  making fresh assessment in pursuance of an order under section 192 shall be
deemed to have commenced from the date on  which the order under section 192,
setting aside or cancelling an assessment was passed.
PART  G
G
ENERAL
CHAPTER XVIII
291. (1) The Central Government may enter into an agreement with the Government of
any other country—
(a) for the granting of relief in respect of —
(i) income or wealth on which income-tax or wealth-tax, as the case may be,
has been paid both under this Code and under the corresponding law in force in
that country; or
(ii) income-tax or wealth-tax chargeable under this Code and under the
corresponding law in force in that country to promote mutual economic relations,
trade and investment;
(b) for the avoidance of double taxation of income or wealth under this Code and
under the corresponding law in force in that country;
(c) for exchange of information for the prevention of evasion or avoidance of
income-tax or wealth-tax chargeable under this Code or under the corresponding law in
force in that country, or investigation of cases of such evasion or avoidance;
(d) for recovery of income-tax or wealth-tax under this Code and under the
corresponding law in force in that country; or
(e) for carrying out any other purpose of this Code not expressly covered under
clauses (a) to (d) above or the corresponding law in force in that country.
Interpretations
in this
Chapter.
Agreement
with foreign
countries or
specified
territory.
15
20
25
30
35
45
5
10
40

162
(2) The Central Government may enter into an agreement with the Government of any
specified territory outside India for the purposes specified in sub-section (1).
 (3) The Central Government may, by notification, make such provisions as may be
necessary for implementing the agreements referred to in sub-sections (1) and (2).
(4) Any specified association in India may enter into an agreement with any specified
association in the specified territory outside India for the purposes of sub-section ( 1) and
the Central Government may by notification make such provisions as may be necessary for
adopting and implementing such agreement.
(5) A person shall not be entitled to claim relief under the provisions of the agreement
unless a certificate of his being a resident in the other country or specified territory is
obtained by him from the tax authority of that country or specified territory, in such form as
may be prescribed.
(6) The provisions of this Code shall not be regarded as discriminatory against the
foreign company merely on the consideration that the liability of the foreign company to pay
tax is calculated at a rate higher than the rate at which the liability of a domestic company is
calculated.
(7) Any term used  but not defined in this Code or in the agreement referred to in sub-
sections (1), (2) or  sub-section (4) shall, unless the context otherwise requires, and is not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Code or the Agreement, have the meaning assigned
to it in the notification issued by the Central Government.
(8) Where the Central Government has entered into an agreement under sub-section
(1) or sub-section (2), or has adopted an agreement entered into by the specified association
under sub-section (4), as the case may be, then the provisions of this Code shall apply in
relation to the assessee to whom such agreement applies, to the extent they are more beneficial
to him.
(9) Notwithstanding anything in sub-section (8), the provisions of this Code relating
to—
(a) General Anti-Avoidance Rule under section 123;
(b) levy of Branch Profit Tax under section 111; or
(c) Control Foreign Company Rules referred to in the Twentieth Schedule,
shall apply to the assessee referred to in sub-section (8), whether or not such provisions are
beneficial to him.
292. ( 1) Every person who fulfils such conditions and requirements as may be
prescribed shall make an application for the allotment of a permanent account number and
such person shall be allotted a permanent account number.
(2) Any person not required to make an application under sub-section (1), may make
an application for the allotment of permanent account number and he shall be allotted a
permanent account number.
(3) A permanent account number may, having regard to the nature of transactions as
may be prescribed, be allotted to any other person, whether or not an application is made by
him.
(4) Any person who has been allotted a permanent account number shall quote the
number in such transactions or documents as may be prescribed.
(5) In respect of the permanent account number, the Board shall prescribe—
(a) the form and the manner in which an application may be made for the allot-
ment of a permanent account number and the particulars which the  application shall
contain;
Permanent
account
number.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

163
(b) the income-tax authority, or any other person who shall be  authorised to
receive the application or allot the permanent account number;
(c) the categories of transactions in relation to which permanent account num-
ber shall be quoted by every person in the documents pertaining to those transac-
tions;
(d) the categories of documents in which the permanent account number shall
be quoted by every person;
(e) class, or classes, of persons to whom the provisions of this section shall not
apply;
(f) the form and the manner in which the person who has not been allotted a
permanent account number shall make his declaration in relation to categories of
transactions and documents;
(g) the manner in which the permanent account number shall be quoted in re-
spect of the categories of transactions referred to in clause (c); and
(h) any other matter connected therewith.
293. (1) Every person liable to deduct tax at source, or collect tax at source, shall make
an application for the allotment of a tax account number and such person shall be allotted a
tax account number.
(2) Any person who has been allotted a tax account number shall quote the number in
such transactions or documents as may be prescribed.
294. (1) No person shall accept from, or repay to, any other person any loan or deposit
otherwise than by an account payee cheque or bank draft, if the aggregate amount of such
loan or deposit in a financial year exceeds fifty thousand rupees.
(2) The provisions of this section shall not apply to any loan or deposit taken or
accepted from, or by —
(a) the Government;
(b) any banking company, post office savings bank or co-operative bank;
(c) any corporation established by a Central, State or Provincial Act;
(d) any Government company as defined in section 617 of the Companies Act,
1956;
(e) such other institution, association or body, or class of institutions, associa-
tions or bodies which the Central Government may, for reasons to be recorded in
writing, notify;
(f) any person having only agricultural income.
(3) In this section,—
(a) “loan or deposit” means a loan or deposit of money;
(b) “loan or deposit” in relation to repayment, means—
(i) any loan or deposit of money repayable after a period or notice; and
(ii) in case of a person other than a company, includes a loan or deposit of
any nature;
(c)
 “aggregate amount of loan or deposit”, in the case of repayment, means any
loan or deposit together with interest repaid during a financial year.
Tax account
number.
1 of 1956.
Mode of
acceptance or
repayment of
certain loans
or deposits.
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
5

164
295.  (1) Every person  responsible for registering or maintaining books of account or
other documents containing a record of any specified financial transaction, under any law
for the time being in force, shall furnish an annual information return, in respect of such
specified financial transaction.
(2) The person referred to in sub-section (1) shall be—
(a) an assessee;
(b) a designated person in the case of an office of the Government;
(c) a local authority or other public body or association;
(d) the Registrar or Sub-Registrar appointed under section 6 of the  Registration
Act, 1908;
(e) the registering authority empowered to register motor vehicles under Chapter
IV of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988;
(f) the Post Master General as referred to in clause (j) of section 2 of the Indian
Post Office Act, 1898;
(g) the Collector referred to in clause (c) of section 3 of the Land Acquisition
Act, 1894;
(h) the recognised stock exchange referred to in clause ( f) of section 2 of the
Securities Contracts (Regulation) Act, 1956;
(i) an officer of the Reserve Bank of India, constituted under section 3of the
Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934; or
(j) a depository referred to in clause ( e) of sub-section (1) of section 2 of the
Depositories Act, 1996.
(3) The annual information return  referred to in sub-section (1) shall be furnished to
such  income-tax authority or any other authority or agency, in such form and manner
(including on a floppy, diskette, magnetic cartridge tape, CD-ROM or any computer readable
media) and within such time as may be prescribed.
(4) In this section, “specified financial transaction” means—
(a) a transaction of purchase, sale or exchange of goods or property or right or
interest in a property;
(b) a transaction by way of an investment made or an expenditure incurred;
(c) a transaction for taking or accepting any loan or deposit; or
(d) any other transaction as may be prescribed.
(5) The person referred to in sub-section ( 2) shall furnish the annual information
return in respect of the financial transactions referred to in sub-section (4) if the aggregate
value of each such transaction in any financial year exceeds the amount as may be prescribed.
(6) The income-tax authority referred to in sub-section (3) may, if he considers that the
annual information return furnished under sub-section (1) is defective, intimate the defect to
the person who has furnished such return and give him an opportunity of rectifying the
defect within a period of one month from the service of such intimation.
(7) The income-tax authority referred to in sub-section (
3) shall treat the annual
information return as invalid if the defect referred to in sub-section (6) is not removed within
the time allowed, and the provisions of this Code shall apply as if such person had failed to
furnish the annual information return.
(8)  If  a person who is required to furnish an annual information return under sub-
section (1) has not furnished the same within the specified time, then, the income-tax authority
Obligation to
furnish annual
information
return.
1 of 1908.
59 of 1988.
6 of 1898.
1 of 1894.
42 of 1956.
2 of 1934.
22 of 1996.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

165
referred to in sub-section (3) may serve upon such person a notice requiring him to furnish
the return within a period not exceeding sixty days from the date of service of the notice and
such person shall furnish the annual information return within the time specified in the
notice.
296. (1) If a person creates a charge on, or tranfers, any of his assets in favour of any
other person during the pendency of any proceeding under this Code or after the completion
thereof, then, such charge on, or transfer of, any asset by him in favour of the other person,
shall be void as against any claim in respect of any sum payable by him under this Code.
(2) The charge, or transfer, referred to in sub-section (1) by a person shall not be void,
if it is made—
(a) for adequate consideration and without knowledge of the pendency of such
proceeding or of any such sum payable by the person;
 (b) with the previous permission of the Assessing Officer.
(3) This section applies to cases where the amount of tax or other sum payable, or
likely to be payable, under this Code exceeds five thousand rupees and the assets charged
or transferred exceeds ten thousand rupees in value.
(4) In this section, “asset” shall not include any business trading asset.
297.(1) Where during the pendency of any proceeding for the assessment of any tax
bases,  the Assessing Officer is of the opinion that for the purpose of protecting the interests
of revenue, it is necessary so to do, he may, with the previous approval of the Chief
Commissioner or the Commissioner, by order in writing, attach provisionally any property
belonging to the assessee in the manner provided in the Fifth Schedule.
 (2) Every such order shall cease to have effect after the expiry of a period of six months
from the date of the order made under sub-section (1).
(3) The Chief Commissioner or the Commissioner may, for reasons to be recorded
in writing, extend the period referred to in sub-section ( 2) by such further period or
periods as he thinks fit, provided that the total period of extension shall in no case exceed
two years.
298.(1) The service of any notice, summons, requisition, order or any other
communication under this Code (hereinafter in this section referred to as communication)
may be made by delivering or transmitting a copy thereof, to the person named  therein,—
(a) by post or by such courier service as may be approved by the Board;
(b) in such manner as provided for the service of summons in the Code of Civil
Procedure, 1908;
(c) in the form of any electronic record as provided in Chapter IV of the Informa-
tion Technology Act, 2000; or
(d) by any other means of transmission of documents , including fax message or
electronic mail message, as may be prescribed.
(2)  The Board may make rules providing for the addresses including the address for
electronic mail or electronic mail message to which the communication referred to in sub-
section (1) may be delivered or transmitted to the person named therein.
(3) In this section, the expressions “electronic mail” and “electronic mail message”
shall have the same meaning as assigned to them in the Explanation to section 66A of the
Information Technology Act, 2000.
299. (1) A notice or any other document required to be issued, served or given for the
purposes of this Code by any income-tax authority shall be authenticated in manuscript by
that authority.
Certain
transfers to be
void.
Provisional
attachment to
protect
revenue in
certain cases.
21 of 2000.
Service of
notice
generally.
Authentication
of notices and
other
documents.
5 of 1908.
21 of 2000.
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
5
40
45

166
(2) Every notice or other document to be issued, served or given for the purposes of
this Code by any income-tax authority shall be deemed to be authenticated, if the name and
office of a designated income-tax authority is printed, stamped or otherwise written thereon.
(3) In this section, a designated income-tax authority shall mean any income-tax
authority authorised by the Board to issue, serve or give such notice or other document
after authentication in the manner as provided in sub-section (2).
300. (1) A notice which is required to be served upon a person for the purposes of
assessment under this Code shall be deemed to have been duly served upon him in accordance
with the provisions of this Code, if the person has appeared in any proceeding or co-
operated in any inquiry relating to an assessment.
(2) The person, referred to in sub-section ( 1), shall be precluded from taking any
objection in any proceeding or inquiry under this Code that the notice was— 
(a) not served upon him;
(b) not served upon him in time; or
(c) served upon him in an improper manner.
(3) The provisions of this section shall not apply, if the person has raised the objection
before the completion of the assessment.
301. (1) Any notice under this Code in respect of the tax bases of a Hindu undivided
family shall, in a case where a finding of total partition has been recorded by the Assessing
Officer under section 169 in respect of any Hindu undivided family, be served on the person
who was the last manager of such family.
(2) If the last manager of the Hindu undivided family is dead, then the notice shall be
served on all adults who were members of such family immediately before the partition.
(3) The notice under this Code, in respect of the tax bases of an unincorporated body,
shall, where the unincorporated body is dissolved, may be served on any person who was
a participant (not being a minor) immediately before its dissolution.
302. (1) The Central Government may, if it is of the opinion that it is necessary or
expedient in the public interest, cause to be published in any manner the name and any other
particulars relating to any proceeding, or prosecution, under this Code in respect of—
(a) any assessee;
(b) any participant of an unincorporated body; or
(c) any director, managing agent, secretary, treasurer, or manager of the
company.
(2) No publication under this section shall be made in relation to any penalty imposed
under this Code until the time for preferring an appeal to the Commissioner (Appeals) has
expired without an appeal having been preferred or the appeal, if preferred, has been disposed
of.
303. (1) Any assessee who is entitled or required to attend before any income-tax
authority or the Appellate Tribunal, in connection with any matter relating to the valuation
of any asset, may attend through a registered valuer.
(2) The provisions of sub-section (1) shall not apply in a case where the assessee is
required to attend personally for examination on oath or affirmation under section 134.
304. (1) Any assessee who is entitled or required to attend before any income-tax
authority or the Appellate Tribunal, in connection with any proceeding under this Code,
may attend through an authorised representative.
Notice
deemed to be
valid in
certain
circumstances.
Service of
notice when
family is
disrupted or
unincorporated
body is
dissolved.
Publication
of
information
respecting
assessees in
certain cases.
Appearance
by registered
valuer in
certain
matters.
Appearance
by authorised
representative.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

167
(2) The provisions of sub-section (1) shall not apply in a case where the assessee is
required to attend personally for examination on oath or affirmation under section 134.
(3) In this section, “authorised representative” means a person authorised by the
assessee in writing to appear on his behalf, being —
(a) a person related to the assessee in any manner, or a person regularly em-
ployed by the assessee;
(b) any officer of a scheduled bank with which the assessee maintains a current
account or has other regular dealings;
(c) any legal practitioner who is entitled to practice in any civil court in India;
(d) an accountant;
(e) any person who has passed any accountancy examination recognised in this
behalf by the Board; or
(f) any person who has acquired such educational qualifications as may be
prescribed.
(4) The following persons shall not be qualified to represent an assessee under sub-
section (1):—
(a) a person who has been dismissed or removed from Government service;
(b) a legal practitioner, or an accountant, who is found guilty of misconduct in
his professional capacity by any authority entitled to institute disciplinary proceed-
ings against him;
(c) a person, not being a legal practitioner or an accountant, who is found guilty
of misconduct in connection with any income-tax proceedings by such  authority, as
may be prescribed.
(5) The Chief Commissioner may, by an order in writing, specify the period upto which
the disqualification under sub-section ( 4) shall continue, having regard to the nature of
misconduct and such disqualification shall not exceed a period of six years.
(6) A person shall not be allowed to appear as an authorised representative, if he has
committed any fraud or misrepresented the facts which resulted in loss to the revenue and
that person has been declared as such by an order of the Chief Commissioner.
305. (1) The amount of tax bases computed in accordance with this Code shall be
rounded off to the nearest multiple of hundred rupees.
(2) Any amount payable or receivable by the assessee under this Code shall be rounded
off to the nearest multiple of ten rupees.
(3) The method of rounding off under sub-section (1) or sub-section (2), shall be such
as may be prescribed.
306. Every person deducting, retaining, or paying any tax in pursuance of this Code in
respect of income belonging to another person is hereby indemnified for the deduction,
retention, or payment thereof.
307. (1) The Central Government may tender immunity to any person from—
(a) prosecution for any offence under this Code, the Indian Penal Code, or any
other Central Act for the time being in force; and
(b) the imposition of any penalty under this Code.
(
2) The immunity under sub-section (1) shall be granted by the Central Government, if—
(a) the person makes a full and true disclosure of the whole circumstances
relating to the concealment of income or evasion of payment of tax on income;
Rounding off
of tax bases
and tax.
Indemnity.
Power to
tender
immunity
from
prosecution.
45 of 1860.
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
5
40

168
(b) it is of the opinion that it is necessary or expedient so to do; and
(c) the reasons for the opinion are recorded in writing.
(3) A tender of immunity made to and accepted by the person concerned, shall, to the
extent to which the immunity extends, render him immune from—
(a) prosecution for any offence in respect of which the tender was made; or
(b) the imposition of any penalty under this Code.
(4) The immunity granted under this section shall be deemed to have been withdrawn,
if the Central Government records a finding to the effect that the person to whom the
immunity has been tendered has—
(a) wilfully concealed any particular which has the effect of altering the opinion
formed under sub-section (2);
(b) given any false evidence; or
(c) not complied with any condition on which the tender was made.
(5) The person, whose immunity has been withdrawn under sub-section (4), may be
tried for the offence in respect of which the tender of immunity was made or for any other
offence of which he appears to have been guilty in connection with the same matter and
shall become liable to the imposition of any penalty under this Code to which he would
otherwise have been liable.
308. No court inferior to that of a metropolitan magistrate or a magistrate of the First
Class shall try any offence under this Code.
309. Nothing contained in section 360 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, or in
the Probation of Offenders Act, 1958, shall apply to a person convicted of an offence under
this Code, unless the person is under eighteen years of age.
310.  No return of tax-bases, assessment, notice, summons or other proceedings,
furnished or made or issued or taken or purported to have been furnished or made or issued
or taken in pursuance of any of the provisions of this Code shall be invalid or shall be
deemed to be invalid merely by reason of any mistake, defect or omission in such return of
tax-bases, assessment, notice, summons or other proceeding if such return of taxbases,
assessment, notice, summons or other proceeding is in substance and effect in conformity
with or according to the intent and purpose of this Code.
311. (1) Where any material found in the possession, or control, of any person in the
course of a search under section 135 or survey under section 141, may, in any proceeding
under this Code be presumed that—
(a) the material belongs to such person;
 (b) the contents of the material, being books of account and other documents,
are true;
(c) the signature and every other part of the books of account and other docu-
ments which purport to be in the handwriting of any particular person, or which may
reasonably be assumed to have been signed by, or to be in the handwriting of, any
particular person, are in that person’s handwriting; and
(d) a document which is stamped, executed or attested, was duly stamped and
executed or attested by the person by whom it purports to have been so executed or
attested.
Cognizance of
offences.
Section 360
of the Code
of Criminal
Procedure,
1973, and
the
Probation of
Offenders
Act, 1958,
not to apply.
Return of tax
bases not to
be invalid on
certain
grounds.
Presumption
as to material
found.
2 of 1974.
20 of 1958.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

169
(2) The presumption under sub-section ( 1) shall also apply to a case, where any
material has been delivered to the requisitioning officer in accordance with the provisions of
section 136 as if they had been found in the possession or control of the person referred to
in section 136.
312. (1) No suit shall be brought in any civil court to set aside or modify any proceeding
taken or order made under this Code.
(2) No prosecution, suit or other proceeding shall lie against the Government, or any
officer of the Government, for anything in good faith done, or intended to be done, under this
Code.
313. Where the Central Government or the Board or an income-tax authority who has
been conferred upon the power under any provision of this Code to issue any notification or
order, or grant any approval or registration in respect of an assessee,  shall, for reasons to be
recorded in writing, have all the powers to rescind such notification, order, approval or
registration provided that the assessee has been given an opportunity of showing cause
against the proposed rescindment.
PART H
INTERPRETATIONS  AND  MISCELLANEOUS  PROVISIONS
CHAPTER XIX
I
NTERPRETATIONS AND CONSTRUCTIONS
314. In this Code, unless the context otherwise requires —
(1) “absolute value” means the numerical value without regard to its sign;
(2) “accountant” means a chartered accountant within the meaning of the Char-
tered Accountants Act, 1949 and includes any person who is entitled to act as an
auditor of companies under sub-section (2) of section 226 of the Companies Act, 1956;
(3) “accrual” in relation to income, expenditure or liability, with its grammatical
variations, shall include income, expenditure or liability which has arisen;
(4) “accumulated profits” in relation to dividend means—
(a) all profits of the company of three consecutive financial years immedi-
ately preceding the financial year in which its undertaking is compulsorily ac-
quired in the case where the company is in liquidation consequent to such
compulsory acquisition by—
(i) the Government; or
(ii) a corporation owned or controlled by the Government under any
law for the time being in force; and
(b) all profits of the company up to the date of distribution or payment of
dividend or upto the date of liquidation, as the case may be, in any other case;
(5) “actual cost” in relation to a business capital asset shall be the cost com-
puted under section 44;
(6)“advance tax” means the advance tax payable in accordance with the provi-
sions of section 205;
(7) “advance ruling” shall have the meaning assigned to it in section 267;
(8) “agreement” includes any arrangement or understanding or action in con-
cert, whether or not such arrangement, understanding or action, is—
(a) in writing;
(b) formal; or
Bar of suits in
civil courts.
Power to
rescind.
38 of 1949.
1 of 1956.
Interpretations
in this Code.
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
5
45

170
(c) intended to be enforceable by legal proceedings;
(9) “agreement of association” means—
(a) a partnership deed in relation to a firm; or
(b) an oral, or written, agreement between the participants of any other
unincorporated body;
(10) “agreement for non-compete” means an agreement for—
(a) not carrying out any activity in relation to any business; or
(b) not sharing any—
(i) know-how, patent, copyright, trade mark, licence, franchise or
any other business or commercial right of similar nature; or
(ii) information or technique likely to assist in the trading or manu-
facture or processing of goods or provision for services;
(11) “agricultural income” means the following income, namely:—
(a) any profits and gains derived from cultivation of agricultural land;
(b) any rent derived from any agricultural land;
(c) any rent derived from any farm house; and
(d) any income derived from saplings or seedlings grown in a nursery;
(12) “agricultural land” means any land situated in India which is used for
agricultural purposes and—
(a) is assessed to land revenue in India; or
(b) is subject to a local rate assessed and collected by officers of the
Government as such;
(13) “amalgamated company” means—
(a) a company with which amalgamating company or companies merge;
or
(b) a company formed as a result of merger of two or more amalgamating
companies;
(14) “amalgamating company” means—
(a) a company which merges with another company; or
(b) a company which merges with another company to form a new  com-
pany;
(15) “amalgamating co-operative” means—
(a) a co-operative which merges with another co-operative; or
(b) every co-operative merging to form a new co-operative;
(16) “amalgamation” in relation to—
(a) a company means the merger of an amalgamating company or
companies with an amalgamated company, if —
(i) all the assets and liabilities of the amalgamating company
immediately before the merger (other than the assets transferred, by sale
or distribution on winding up, to the amalgamated company) become the
assets and liabilities  of the amalgamated company;
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

171
(ii) shareholders holding seventy-five per cent. or more, in value of
the shares in the amalgamating company (other than shares already held
by the amalgamated company or its nominee or its subsidiary, immediately
before the merger), become shareholders of the amalgamated company;
and
(iii) the scheme of amalgamation is in accordance with the provisions
of the Companies Act, 1956; and
(b) a co-operative means the merger of an amalgamating co-operative with
an amalgamated co-operative, if— 
(i) all the assets and liabilities of the amalgamating co-operative
immediately before the merger (other than the assets transferred, by sale
or distribution on winding up, to the amalgamated co-operative) become
the assets and liabilities of the amalgamated co-operative;
(ii) the members holding seventy-five per cent. or more voting rights
in the amalgamating co-operative become members of the amalgamated
co-operative; and
(iii) the shareholders holding seventy-five per cent. or more in value
of the shares in the amalgamating co-operative (other than the shares held
by the amalgamated co-operative or its nominee or its subsidiary, immedi-
ately before the merger) become shareholders of the amalgamated co-
operative; or
(c) an unincorporated body or a proprietory concern means the succes-
sion of an amalgamating unincorporated body or proprietory concern with an
amalgamated company if—
(i) all the assets and liabilities of such body or concern relating to
the business immediately before the succession become the assets and
liabilities of the amalgamated company;
(ii) the participants of the body or the proprietor of the concern do
not receive any consideration or benefit, directly or indirectly, in any form
or manner, other than by way of allotment of shares in the amalgamated
company;
(iii) the aggregate of the shareholding in the amalgamated company
of the participants of the body or the proprietor of the concern, upon
succession, is not less than fifty per cent. of the total value of the shares
in the company; and
(iv) in the case of an amalgamating unincorporated body, all the
participants immediately before the succession become the shareholders
of the company in the same proportion in which their capital accounts
stood in the books of such body on the date of the succession;
(17) “Appellate Tribunal” means the Appellate Tribunal constituted under sec-
tion 182;
(18) “Approved Fund” means—
(a) a provident fund, superannuation fund or gratuity fund approved in
accordance with the provisions of the Nineteenth Schedule;
(b) a pension fund, which has been approved by the Board in accordance
with the Scheme framed and prescribed by the Central Government in this
behalf;
(c) any other fund which has been approved by the Board in accordance
with the scheme framed and prescribed by the Central Government in this behalf.
1 of 1956.
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
5
45

172
(19) “arm’s length price” shall have the meaning assigned to it in section 124;
(20) “assessee” means every person—
(a) who is required to file a return of his tax bases or the tax bases of any
other person in respect of which such person is assessable for the relevant
financial year;
(b) who files a return of his tax bases, notwithstanding the fact that he is
otherwise not required to do so;
(c) who is required to furnish any information or document under this
Code;
(d) in respect of whom any proceeding under this Code has been initi-
ated;
(e) by whom any tax, or any other sum of money, is payable under this
Code;
(f) to whom, or to any other person in respect of which such person is
assessable, any amount of refund is payable under this Code;
(g) who is deemed to be an assessee under any provision of this Code; or
(h) who is deemed to be an assessee in default under any provision of this
Code;
(21) “assessee in default” means—
(a) an assessee who has failed to fulfill his obligation under this Code and
has consequently failed to make payment of any amount due from him to the
Central Government; or
(b) an assessee who is deemed to be assessee in default under any provi-
sion of this Code;
(22) “Assessing Officer” means the Income Tax Officer, Assistant Commis-
sioner, Assistant Director, Deputy Commissioner, Deputy Director, Joint Commissioner,
Joint Director, Additional Commissioner or Additional Director, who is vested with the
relevant jurisdiction by virtue of direction or order issued under section 130 or any
other provision of this Code;
(23) “assessment” includes—
(a) reassessment;
(b) any order giving effect to the directions of an Appellate Authority;
(c) any order under section 191 or section 192; and
(d) any order under section 161 rectifying any mistake apparent on the
face of the record with reference to sub-clause ( a) or sub-clause ( b) or
sub-clause (c);
(24) “asset” means—
(a) a business asset; or
(b) an investment asset;
(25) “Assistant Commissioner” means a person appointed to be an Assistant
Commissioner of Income-tax under section 127;
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

173
(26) “Assistant Director” means a person appointed to be an Assistant Director
of Income-tax under section 127;
(27) “associated concern” shall have the meaning assigned to “associated
enterprise” in section 124;
(28) “associated enterprise” shall have the meaning assigned to it in section 124;
(29) “associated operation” shall have the meaning assigned to it in section 124;
(30) “associated person” shall have the meaning assigned to it in section 124;
(31)  “backward classes” means such classes of citizens, other than the Sched-
uled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes, as may be notified, from time to time, by the
Central Government or any State Government;
(32) “banking company” means a company to which the Banking Regulation
Act, 1949, applies;
(33) “block of assets” means a group of business capital assets falling within a
class of business capital assets, for which the same percentage of depreciation is
specified;
(34) “Board” means the Central Board of Direct Taxes constituted under the
Central Boards of Revenue Act, 1963 and notified by the Central Government for the
purposes of this Code;
(35) “books” or “books of account” includes ledgers, day-books, cash books,
account-books, stock register and other books, kept—
(a) in the written form;
(b) as data stored in a disc, floppy, tape or any other form of electro-
magnetic data storage device; or
(c) as print outs of the data stored in any of the form referred to in sub-
clause (b);
(36) “broken-period income” means the income for the period commencing from
the date on which the debt instrument is acquired by the person or the beginning of
the financial year, whichever is later, and ending on the date on which the security is
sold, and calculated in such manner as may be prescribed;
(37) “business” includes —
(a) any trade, commerce or manufacture; or any adventure or concern of
that nature;
(b) any profession or vocation;
(38) “business asset” means—
(a) business trading asset; or
(b) business capital asset;
(39) “business capital asset” means—
(a) any capital asset self-generated in the course of business;
(b) any intangible capital asset in the nature of—
(i) goodwill of a business,
(ii) a trade mark or brand name associated with the business,
(iii) a right to manufacture or produce any article or thing,
(iv) right to carry on any business,
10 of 1949.
54 of 1963.
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
5

174
(v) tenancy right in respect of premises occupied by the assessee
and used by him for the purposes of his business, or
(vi) licence, right or permit (by whatever name called) acquired in
connection with, or in the course of, any business;
(c) any tangible capital asset in the nature of a building, machinery, plant
or furniture; or
(d) any other capital asset not being land connected with or used for the
purposes of any business of the assessee;
(40) “business connection”  in relation to a non-resident shall include a perma-
nent establishment;
(41) “business reorganisation” means reorganisation of business of two or more
residents, involving—
(a) an amalgamation;
(b) a merger under a scheme sanctioned and brought into force by the
Central Government under the Banking Regulation Act, 1949; or
(c) a demerger;
(42) “business trading asset” means stock-in-trade, consumable stores or raw
materials held for the purposes of business;
(43) “capital asset” means property of any kind held by an assessee other than
business trading asset;
(44) “capital employed in the business” in relation to actual cost means the
aggregate of the paid-up share capital, debentures and long-term borrowings— 
(a) in a case where the prescribed expenditure referred to in serial number
7 of the Table of the Twenty-second Schedule is incurred before the commence-
ment of the business, as on the last day of the financial year in which the
business of the company commences;
(b) in any other case as on the last day of the financial year in which the
extension of the business is completed, or the new business commences pro-
duction or operation, in so far as such capital, debentures and long-term bor-
rowings have been issued or obtained in connection with the extension of the
business or the setting up of the new business of the company;
(45) “capital gains” means the income as computed under section 46;
(46) “carbon credit” for trading purposes in respect of its one unit shall mean
reduction of one ton of carbon dioxide emissions or emissions of its equivalent gases
which can be traded in market at its prevailing market price, which is validated by the
United Nations Framework on Climate Change.
(47) “card game and other game of any sort” includes any game show, an
entertainment programme on television or electronic mode, in which people compete
to win prizes or any other similar game;
(48) “Chief Commissioner” means a person appointed to be a Chief Commis-
sioner of Income-tax or Director-General of Income-tax under section 127;
(49) “child” in relation to an individual, includes a step-child and an adopted
child of that individual;
(50) “closely-held company” means a company which is not a widely held
company;
10 of 1949.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

175
(51) “cold chain facility” means a chain of facilities for storage or transportation
of agricultural and forest produce, meat and meat products, poultry, marine and dairy
products, products of horticulture, floriculture and apiculture and processed food
items under scientifically controlled conditions including refrigeration and other facili-
ties necessary for the preservation of such produce;
(52) “Commissioner (Appeals)” means a person appointed to be a Commis-
sioner of Income-tax (Appeals) under section 127;
(53) “Commissioner” means a person appointed to be a Commissioner of In-
come-tax or a Director of Income-tax under section 127;
(54) “company” means—
(a) any Indian company,
(b) any body corporate incorporated by or under the laws of a country
outside India, or
(c) any person who is or was assessable or was assessed as a company
under the Indian Income-tax Act, 1922, or the Income-tax Act, 1961;
(55) “Competent Investigating Authority” means any income-tax authority not
below the rank of Joint Commissioner prescribed as such;
(56) “Comptroller and Auditor-General of India” means the Comptroller and
Auditor General of India appointed under article 148 of the Constitution;
(57) “computer software” means—
(a) any computer programme recorded on any disc, tape, perforated media
or other information storage device; or
(b) any customised electronic data or any product or service of similar
nature, as may be notified by the Board;
(58) “Controller of Insurance” shall have the same meaning assigned to it in
clause (5B) of section 2 of the Insurance Act, 1938;
(59) “converted property” means—
(a) any property having been the separate property of an individual has
been converted by the individual into property as belonging to the Hindu undi-
vided family through the act of impressing such separate property with the
character of property belonging to the family or throwing it into the common
stock of the family; or
(b) any property which has been transferred by the individual, directly or
indirectly, to such  family otherwise than for adequate consideration;
(60) “co-operative bank” shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in Part V
of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949;
(61) “co-operative sector company” means a company in which not less than
fifty-one per cent. of the paid up equity share capital is beneficially held by, one or
more co-operative societies throughout the financial year;
(62) “co-operative society” means a co-operative society registered under the
Co-operative Societies Act, 1912 or under any State or Provincial Act for the time being
in force for the registration of co-operative societies;
(63) “cost inflation index” in relation to a financial year means such index as the
Central Government may specify by notification, having regard to seventy-five per
cent. of the average rise in the consumer price index for non-urban manual employees
for the immediately preceding financial year;
4 of 1938.
11 of 1922.
43 of 1961.
10 of 1949.
2 of 1912.
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
5
45

176
(64) “cost of the project” in relation to actual cost means the actual cost of the
fixed assets, being land, buildings (including expenditure on development of land and
buildings), leaseholds, plant, machinery, furniture, fittings and railway sidings, which
are shown in the books of the assessee—
(a) in a case where the prescribed expenditure referred to in serial
number 7 of the Table of the Twenty-second Schedule is incurred before the
commencement of the business, as on the last day of the financial year in which
the business of the assessee commences;
(b) in any other case, as on the last day of the financial year in which the
extension of the business is completed, or the new business commences pro-
duction or operation, in so far as such fixed assets have been acquired or
developed in connection with the extension of the business or the setting up of
the new business of the assessee;
(65) “cultivation” includes any process ordinarily employed by a cultivator or
receiver-of-rent in kind to render the produce raised or received by him fit to be taken
to market;
(66) “current income from ordinary sources” means the net result of the aggre-
gation under sub-section (1) of section 61;
(67) “current income from the special source” means the income referred to in
sub-section (2) of section 62;
(68) “date of setting up of a business” means—
(a) in the case of business of manufacturing, production or processing of
goods, the date on which the manufacture, production or processing of the
goods begins after successful trial run of the plant; or
(b) in any other case, the date on which it is ready to commence its
commercial operations;
(69) “debt” includes a loan or borrowing;
(70) “debt instrument” means a paper or electronic obligation that enables the
borrower to raise funds by promising to repay the lender, or investor, in accordance
with the terms of a contract and includes note, bond, certificate, mortgage, lease, loan,
borrowing or other agreement between the borrower and the lender;
(71) “deduction of tax at source” or “collection of tax at source” with all their
grammatical variations, mean deduction or collection of tax under Chapter XIII;
(72) “deductor” means a person responsible for making any payment in respect
of which he is liable to deduct tax at source under Sub-chapter A of Chapter-XIII;
(73) “demerged company” means—
(a) the company whose undertaking is transferred, pursuant to a demerger,
to a resulting company; or
(b) the authority or the body constituted or established under a Central,
State or Provincial Act, or a local authority or a public sector company, which is
split up or reconstructed, to form a resulting company;
(74)“demerger” means—
(a) the transfer, pursuant to a scheme of arrangement under sections 391
to 394 of the Companies Act, 1956, by a demerged company of one or more of its
undertakings to any resulting company, if—
(i) all the assets and liabilities of the undertaking or undertakings
1 of 1956.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

177
immediately before the transfer become the assets and liabilities of the
resulting company;
(ii) the assets and the liabilities are transferred at values (other than
change in the value of assets consequent to their revaluation) appearing
in its books of account immediately before the transfer;
(iii) the resulting company issues, in consideration of the transfer,
its equity shares to the shareholders of the demerged company on a
proportionate basis;
(iv) the shareholders holding seventy-five per cent. or more, in
value of the shares in the demerged company (other than shares already
held by the resulting company or its nominee or its subsidiary, immediately
before the transfer), become shareholders of the resulting company or
companies, otherwise than as a result of the acquisition of the assets of
the demerged company or any undertaking thereof by the resulting
company;
(v) the transfer of the undertaking is on a going concern basis; and
(vi) the transfer is in accordance with such other conditions as may
be notified by the Central Government having regard to the necessity to
ensure that the transfer is for genuine business purposes; or
(b) the splitting up, or the reconstruction, of any authority or a body constituted
or established under a Central, State or Provincial Act, or a local authority or a public
sector company to form a resulting company, in accordance with the conditions as
may be notified by the Central Government;
(75) “Deputy Commissioner” means a person appointed to be a Deputy Com-
missioner of Income-tax under section 127;
(76) “Deputy Director” means a person appointed to be a Deputy Director of
Income-tax under section 127;
(77) “Director” means a person appointed to be a Director of Income-tax under
section 127;
(78) “Director General” means a person appointed to be a Director General of
Income-tax under section 127;
(79) “director”, “manager” and “managing agent”, in relation to a company,
have the meanings respectively assigned to them in the Companies Act, 1956;
(80) “Dispute Resolution Panel” means a collegium comprising of three Com-
missioners of Income-tax constituted by the Board for this purpose;
(81) “dividend” distributed or paid by a company
(I) includes—
(a) any distribution by a company of accumulated profits, whether capit-
alised or not, if such distribution entails the release by the company to its
shareholders of all or any part of the assets of the company;
(b) any distribution to its shareholders by a company of debentures, de-
benture-stock, or deposit certificates in any form, whether with or without inter-
est, and any distribution to shareholders of its preference shares by way of
bonus, to the extent to which the company possesses accumulated profits,
whether capitalised or not;
(c) any distribution made to the shareholders (other than shareholders not
entitled in the event of liquidation to participate in the surplus assets) of a
company on its liquidation, to the extent to which the distribution is attributable
1 of 1956.
10
15
20
25
30
35
45
5
40

178
to the accumulated profits of the company immediately before its liquidation,
whether capitalised or not;
(d) any distribution to its shareholders (other than shareholders not
entitled in the event of liquidation to participate in the surplus assets) by a
company on the reduction of its capital, to the extent to which the company
possesses accumulated profits, whether such accumulated profits have been
capitalised or not; and
(e) any payment by a closely-held company, to the extent of its
accumulated profits, if such payment is—
(i) by way of advance or loan to a shareholder being the beneficial
owner of equity shares holding not less than ten per cent. of the voting
power; or
(ii) by way of advance or loan to any Hindu undivided family, or a
firm, or an association of persons, or a body of individuals, or a company
(in this clause referred to as the said concern), in which such shareholder
is a member or a partner or a shareholder, and in which he has a substan-
tial interest; or
(iii)  to any person on behalf, or for the individual benefit, of such
shareholder;
(II) but does not include:—
(a) any advance or loan made to a shareholder or the said concern by a
company in the ordinary course of its business, where the lending of money is
a substantial part of the business of the company;
(b)  any dividend paid by a company which is set off by the company
against the whole or any part of any sum previously paid by it and treated as a
dividend within the meaning of sub-clause (e), to the extent to which it is so set
off;
(c) any payment made by a company on purchase of its own shares from
a shareholder in accordance with the provisions of section 77A of the Compa-
nies Act, 1956; and
(d)  any distribution of shares pursuant to a demerger by the resulting
company to the shareholders of the demerged company (whether or not there is
a reduction of capital in the demerged company);
(82) “dividend distribution tax” means the tax chargeable under section 109;
(83) “document” includes an electronic record as defined in clause (t) of sub-
section (1) of section 2 of the Information Technology Act, 2000;
(84) “domestic company” means a company resident in India;
(85) “disaster” shall have the same meaning as assigned to it under clause (d) of
section 2 of the Disaster Management Act, 2005;
(86) “due date” means—
(a) in relation to the return of tax bases—
(i) the 30th June following the financial year if the person is not a
company and does not derive any income from business; or
(ii) the 31st August following the financial year, in all other cases;
or
(b) in relation to any other return, such date as may be prescribed;
53 of 2005.
21 of 2000.
1 of 1956.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

179
(c) in relation to the report required to be furnished under  section 88, the
31st August following the financial year.
(87) “electoral trust” means a trust so approved by the Board in accordance with
the scheme  made in this regard by the Central Government.
(88) “employer” means a person who controls an individual under an express or
implied contract of employment and is obliged to compensate him by way of salary;
(89) “equity oriented” in relation to a scheme means the scheme—
(a) of a Mutual Fund registered under the Securities and Exchange Board
of India Act, 1992 or regulations made thereunder; and
(b) which invests sixty-five per cent. or more of its investible funds in the
form of equity shares in domestic companies, computed with reference to the
annual average of the monthly averages of the opening and closing figures;
(90) “equity shares” shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in section 85
of the Companies Act, 1956;
(91) “execution of an authorisation for search or requisition” means —
(a) in the case of a search, on the conclusion of the search as recorded in
the last panchnama drawn in relation to the person in whose case the authorisation
has been issued; or
(b) in the case of requisition under section 136, on the date on which all the
books of accounts, other documents or assets are received by the Requisition-
ing Officer;
(92) “ex-serviceman” means—
(a) a person who has served in any rank, whether as combatant or non-
combatant, in the armed forces of the Union (but excluding the Assam Rifles,
Defence Security Corps, General Reserve Engineering Force, Lok Sahayak Sena,
Jammu and Kashmir Militia and Territorial Army) for a continuous period of not
less than six months after attestation and has been released, otherwise than by
way of dismissal or discharge on account of misconduct or inefficiency; and
(b) in the case of a deceased or incapacitated ex-serviceman, it includes
the spouse, children, father, mother, minor brother, widowed daughter and wid-
owed sister, wholly dependant upon such ex-serviceman immediately before his
death or incapacitation;
(93) “fair market value”, in relation to an asset, means the price determined in
such manner as may be prescribed;
(94) “family” in relation to an individual, means —
(a) the spouse and children of the individual; and
(b) the parents, brothers or sisters of the individual, if mainly dependant
on the individual;
(95) “family pension” means a regular monthly amount payable by the employer
to a person belonging to the family of an employee in the event of the death of the
employee;
(96) “farm house” means any building which fulfills the following conditions,
namely:— 
(a)  it is situated on, or in the immediate vicinity of an agricultural land;
15 of 1992.
1 of 1956.
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
5

180
(b)  the building is used exclusively—
(i) as a dwelling house, store-house, or other out-building, for agri-
cultural purpose; or
(ii) to carry out any process to render the produce raised or re-
ceived by the owner fit to be taken to the market; and
(c) the building is—
(i) occupied by the cultivator or the receiver of rent-in-kind; or
(ii) owned and occupied by the receiver of rent;
(97)“fees for technical services” —
(a) means any consideration (including any lump sum consideration) paid
or payable, directly or indirectly, for—
(i) rendering of any managerial, technical or consultancy services;
(ii) provision of services of technical or other personnel; or
(iii) development and transfer of a design, drawing, plan or soft-
ware, or such other services; and
(b) does not include consideration for any construction, assembly, min-
ing or like project undertaken by the recipient or consideration which would be
income of the recipient chargeable under the head “Income from employment”;
(98) “finance charges” means—
(a) any interest; or
(b) any incidental financial charges;
(99) “financial institution” means—
(a) a banking company or a scheduled bank;
(b) a non-banking financial company;
(c) a public financial institution;
(d) state financial corporations;
(e) state industrial investment corporations; or
(f) a housing finance public company;
(100) “financial intermediary” means stock broker or sub-broker or such other
intermediary registered under section 12 of the Securities and Exchange Board of
India Act, 1992 or the Depositories Act, 1996;
(101)“financial lease” with its grammatical variations, means a lease transaction
where—
(
a) contract for lease is entered into between two parties for leasing of a
specific asset;
(b) such contract is for use and occupation of the asset by the lessee;
(c) the lease payment is calculated so as to cover the full cost of the asset
together with the interest charges; and
(d) the lessee is entitled to own, or has the option to own, the asset at the
end of the lease period after making the lease payment;
15 of 1992.
22 of 1996.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

181
(102) “financial year” or “year” means—
(a) the period beginning with the date of setting up of a business and
ending with the 31st day of March following the date of setting up of such
business;
(b) the period beginning with the date on which a source of income newly
comes into existence and ending with the 31st day of March following the date
on which such new source comes into existence;
(c) the period beginning with the 1st day of the financial year and ending
with the date of discontinuance of the business or dissolution of the unincorpo-
rated body or liquidation of the company, as the case may be;
(d) the period beginning with the 1st day of the financial year and ending
with the date of retirement or death of a participant of the unincorporated body;
(e) the period immediately following the date of retirement, or death, of a
participant of the unincorporated body and ending with the date of retirement,
or death, of another participant or the 31st day of March following the date of
the retirement, or death, as the case may be; or
(f) the period of twelve months commencing from the 1st day of April of
the relevant year in any other case;
(103) “firm” shall have the meaning assigned to it in the Indian Partnership
Act, 1932 and shall include a limited liability partnership as defined in the Limited
Liability Partnership Act, 2008;
(104) “foreign company” means a company which is not a domestic company;
(105) “foreign currency” shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in section
2 of the Foreign Exchange Management Act, 1999;
(106) “forward contract” means a contract with an authorised person, as defined
in section 2 of the Foreign Exchange Management Act, 1999, for providing a specified
sum in a foreign currency on or after a stipulated future date at the rate of exchange
specified in the contract;
(107) “general public” shall have the same meaning assigned to it in clause (c) of
section 103;
(108) “Global Depository Receipts” means any instrument (by whatever name
called)-
(a) created by the Overseas Depository Bank outside India against issue
of foreign currency convertible bonds or ordinary shares, of a domestic company;
and
(b) issued to non-residents;
(109) “gross total income” for a financial year means the aggregate of the gross
total income from ordinary sources and the gross total income from special sources,
for that financial year;
(110) “gross total income from ordinary sources” of a financial year means the
net result of the aggregation under sub-section (2) or sub-section (3) of section 61, for
that financial year;
(111) “gross total income from the special source” of a financial year means the
net result of the aggregation under sub-section (2) or sub-section (3) of section 62, for
that special source for that financial year;
(112) “head office expenditure” means executive and general administration
9 of 1932.
6 of 2009.
42 of 1999.
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
5
45

182
expenditure incurred by the assessee outside India, including expenditure incurred in
respect of—
(a) rent, rates, taxes, repairs or insurance of any premises outside India
used for the purposes of the business;
(b) salary, wages, annuity, pension, fees, bonus, commission, gratuity,
perquisites or profits in lieu of or in addition to salary, whether paid or allowed
to any employee or other person employed in, or managing the affairs of, any
office outside India;
(c) traveling by any employee or other person employed in, or managing
the affairs of, any office outside India; and
(d) such other matters connected with administration as may be prescribed;
(113) “heavy goods vehicle” shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in
section 2 of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988;
(114) “horse race” means a horse race upon which wagering or betting is law-
fully made;
(115) “hospital” includes a dispensary or a clinic or a nursing home;
(116) “house property” means—
(a) any building or land appurtenant thereto; along with facilities and
services whether in-built or provided separately; or
(b) any building along with any machinery, plant, furniture or any other
facility  or services whether inbuilt or provided separately;
(117) “housing development company” means any public sector company which
is engaged in providing long-term finance for construction or purchase of houses in
India for residential purposes;
(118) “housing-finance public company” means a company—
(a) which is a public company;
(b) whose main object is carrying on the business of providing long-term
finance for construction or purchase of houses in India for residential pur-
poses; and
(c) which is registered in accordance with the Housing Finance Compa-
nies (NHB) Directions, 1989 given under section 30 and section 31 of the Na-
tional Housing Bank Act, 1987;
(119) “incidental financial charges” means any fee, commission, brokerage, tax
payable or any other similar expenditure incurred for the purposes of borrowing or
incurring any debt or in respect of any credit facility which has not been utilised;
(120) “income” includes,—
(a) gross salary referred to in section 22;
(b) gross rent referred to in section 26;
(c) the amount of any accrual or receipt from the businesses referred to in
column (2) of the Table in sub-section (2) of section 32;
(d) gross earnings from the business referred to in section 32;
(e) full value of the consideration received or accruing as a result of the
transfer of any investment asset referred to in section 50;
(f) gross residuary income referred to in section 58;
53 of 1987.
59 of 1988.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

183
(g) gross receipts referred to in section 93;
(h) voluntary contributions received by a political party or an electoral
trust;
(i) any sum deducted at source on payment received, in accordance with
the provisions of Chapter XIII; and
(j) income of the nature referred to in column (3) of the Table in Part III of
the First Schedule;
(121) “income from business” means the profits of the business as computed
under section 32;
(122) “income under the head ‘Capital gains’ ” means the income in respect of
that head as computed under sub-section (3) or sub-section (4), as the case may be; of
section 60;
(123) “income under the head ‘Income from business’ ” means the income in
respect of that head, as computed under sub-section (9) of section 60;
(124) “income from employment” means the income as computed under
section 21;
(125) “income under the head ‘Income from employment’ ” means the income in
respect of that head, as computed under sub-section (1) of section 60;
(126) “income from house property” means the income as computed under
section 25;
(127) “income under the head ‘Income from house property’ ” means the income
in respect of that head, as computed under sub-section (1) of section 60;
(128) “income from residuary sources” means the income as computed under
section 55;
(129) “income under the head ‘Income from residuary sources’ ” means the
income in respect of the head as computed under sub-section (11) of section 60;
(130) “Income-tax Officer” means a person appointed to be an Income-tax
Officer under section 127;
(131) “India” means—
(a) the territory of India as referred to in article 1 of the Constitution;
(b) its territorial waters, continental shelf, exclusive economic zone or any
other maritime zone as defined in the Territorial Waters, Continental Shelf, Exclu-
sive Economic Zone and Other Maritime Zones Act, 1976;
(c) the sea-bed and the subsoil underlying the territorial waters; and
(d) the air space above its territory and territorial waters;
(132) “Indian company” means a body corporate which—
(a) is registered or established or constituted by or under—
(i) the Companies Act, 1956;
(ii) a Central, State or Provincial Act;
(iii) any law relating to companies formerly in force in any part of
India other than the State of Jammu and Kashmir;
(iv) any law for the time being in force in the State of Jammu and
Kashmir; and
(b) has its registered or, as the case may be, principal office in India;
80 of 1976.
1 of 1956.
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
5

184
(133) “Indian currency” shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in
section 2 of the Foreign Exchange Management Act, 1999;
(134) “Indian income-tax” means income-tax charged in accordance with the
provisions of this Code;
(135) “Indian rate of tax” means the rate determined by dividing the amount of
Indian income-tax after deduction of any relief due under the provisions of this Code
but before deduction of any relief due under section 207, by the total income;
(136) “Indian ship” shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in clause (18)
of section 3 of the Merchant Shipping Act, 1958;
(137) “infrastructure facility” means the following facilities, namely:—
(a) a road including toll road, a bridge or a rail system;
(b) a highway project including housing or other activities being an inte-
gral part of the highway project;
(c) a water supply project, water treatment system, irrigation project, sani-
tation and sewerage system or solid waste management system; and
(d) a port, airport, inland waterway or inland port;
(138) “Inspector of Income-tax” means a person appointed to be an Inspector
of Income-tax under section 127;
(139) “insurer” means an Indian insurance company under clause (7A) and any
person referred to in clause (9) of section 2 of the Insurance Act, 1938, which has been
granted a certificate of registration under section 3 of that Act;
(140) “interest” means any amount payable to any person (including any par-
ticipant), in any manner, in respect of any borrowing or debt incurred or any other
similar right or obligation and includes any service fee or other charges in respect of
the money borrowed or debt incurred or in respect of any credit facility which has not
been utilised;
(141) “investment asset” means,—
(a)  any capital asset which is not a business capital asset;
(b) any security held by a Foreign Institutional Investor;
(c) any undertaking or division of a business;
(142) “jewellery” in relation to a capital asset, includes—
(a) ornaments made of gold, silver, platinum or any other precious metal
or any alloy containing one or more of such precious metals, whether or not
containing any precious or semi-precious stone, and whether or not worked or
sewn into any wearing apparel;
(b) precious or semi-precious stones, whether or not set in any furniture,
utensil or other article, worked or sewn into any wearing apparel;
(143) “Joint Commissioner” means a person appointed to be a Joint Commis-
sioner of Income-tax or an Additional Commissioner of Income-tax under section 127;
(144) “Joint Director” means a person appointed to be a Joint Director of
Income-tax or an Additional Director of Income-tax under section 127;
(145) “Keyman insurance policy” means a life insurance policy taken by—
(a) an employer on the life of an employee or a former employee; or
(b) a person on the life of another person who is, or was, connected in any
manner whatsoever with the business of the first-mentioned person;
42 of 1999.
44 of 1958.
4 of 1938.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

185
(146) “khadi” and “village industries” shall have the meanings respectively
assigned to them in the Khadi and Village Industries Commission Act, 1956;
(147) “legal representative” shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in
clause (11) of section 2 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908;
(148) “liabilities” in relation to a demerger shall include—
(a) the liabilities which arise out of the activities or operations of the
undertaking;
(b) the loans or borrowings (including debentures) raised, incurred and
utilised solely for the activities or operations of the undertaking; and
(c) in cases, other than those referred to in clause ( a) or clause ( b), so
much of the amounts of general or multipurpose borrowings, if any, of the asses-
see as they stand in the same proportion which the value of the assets trans-
ferred in a demerger bears to the total value of the assets of such assessee
immediately before the demerger;
(149) “life insurer” means an insurer who is wholly engaged in the business of
providing assurance on the life of human beings;
(150) “light goods vehicle or other vehicle” means a vehicle which is not a
heavy goods vehicle;
(151) “local authority” means—
(a) a Panchayat as referred to in clause (d) of article 243 of the Constitu-
tion;
(b) a Municipality as referred to in clause (e) of article 243P of the Consti-
tution;
(c) a Municipal Committee and a District Board, legally entitled to, or
entrusted by the Government with, the control or management of a municipal or
local fund; or
(d) a Cantonment Board as defined in section 3 of the Cantonments
Act, 2006;
(152) “long-term borrowings” means—
(a) moneys borrowed from the Government, a scheduled bank or a finan-
cial institution where the terms of the borrowings provide for the repayment
during a period of not less than five years; or
(b) moneys borrowed or debt incurred in a foreign country for the pur-
chase of plant and machinery outside India, where the terms of the borrowings
provide for the repayment during a period of not less than seven years;
(153) “long-term finance” means any loan or advance where the terms under
which money is loaned or advanced provide for its repayment along with interest
thereon during a period of not less than five years;
(154) “long term leasing” means—
(a) a lease for a term of not less than twelve years; or
(b) a lease which provides for the extension of its term by a further term or
terms, and the aggregate of the term for which such lease is granted or to be
extended is not less than twelve years;
(155) “lottery” includes winnings from prizes awarded to any person by draw of
lots or by chance or in any other manner whatsoever, under any scheme or arrangement
by whatever name called;
5 of 1908.
41 of 2006.
61 of 1956.
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
5
45

186
(156) “manufacture”, with its grammatical variations, means a change in a non-
living physical object or article or thing—
(a) resulting in transformation of the object or article or thing into a new
and distinct object or article or thing having a different name, character and use;
or
(b) bringing into existence of a new and distinct object or article or thing
with a different chemical composition or integral structure;
(157) “material” includes any books of account, document, money, bullion,
jewellery or other valuable article or thing;
 (158) “maximum marginal rate” means the rate of income-tax applicable in relation
to the highest slab of income in the case of an individual or Hindu undivided family or
artificial juridical person, as specified in the First Schedule;
(159) “medical authority” means,—
(i) the medical authority referred to in clause (p) of section 2 of the Persons
with Disabilities (Equal Opportunities, Protection of Rights and Full Participation)
Act, 1995; or
(ii) such other medical authority as may be notified by the Central
Government for this purpose.
(160) “mineral” includes a group of associated minerals specified in Part I or
Part II of the Eighteenth Schedule;
(161) “mineral oil” shall have the meaning assigned to it in the Eleventh Schedule;
(162) “mutual benefit finance company” means a company—
(a) which carries on, as its principal business, the business of acceptance
of deposits from its members; and
(b) which is a Nidhi or Mutual Benefit Society within the meaning of
section 620A of the Companies Act, 1956;
(163) “mutual fund” means a mutual fund registered as such under the Securities
and Exchange Board of India Act, 1992;
(164) “NABARD” means the National Bank for Agriculture and Rural
Development established under section 3 of the National Bank for Agriculture and
Rural Development Act, 1981;
(165) “National Housing Bank” means the National Housing Bank established
under section 3 of the National Housing Bank Act, 1987;
(166) “net worth” in relation to,—
(a) a demerged company, mean the aggregate of the paid-up share capital
and general reserves as appearing in the books of account of the demerged
company immediately before the demerger; and
(b) an undertaking or division transferred under slump sale, means the
value determined in such manner as may be prescribed;
(167) “new investment asset” means the new investment asset within the
meaning of section 55;
(168) “New Pension System Trust” means the New Pension System Trust
established on the 27th day of February, 2008 under the provisions of the Indian
Trusts Act, 1882;
1 of 1996.
1 of 1956.
15 of 1992.
61 of 1981.
53 of 1987.
2 of 1882.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

187
(169) “non-profit organisation” means an organisation, by whatever name called,
including a trust, if—
(i)  it is not established for the benefit of any particular caste or religious
community;
(ii) it does not provide any benefit for the members of any particular caste
or religious community;
(iii) it is established for the benefit of the general public or for the benefit
of the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes, backward classes, women or
children;
(iv) it is established for carrying on charitable activities;
(v) it is not established for the benefit of any of its members;
(vi) it actually carries on the charitable activities during the financial year;
(vii) the actual beneficiaries of its activities are the general public, the
Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes, backward classes, or women or chil-
dren; and
(viii) it is registered as such under section 98;
(170) “non-resident” means a person who is not a resident;
(171) “non-resident deductee” means a person who is non-resident in India and
receives any amount which is liable to deduction of tax at source under Chapter XIII;
(172) “notice” means the legal instrumentality by which intimation is provided;
(173) “notification” means a notification published in the Gazette of India and
the expression “notify” shall be construed accordingly;
(174) “option” in relation to sweat equity shares means a right but not an
obligation, granted to an employee to apply for the sweat equity shares at a predeter-
mined price;
(175) “original investment asset” means an investment asset in respect of which
deduction under section 55 is claimed;
(176) “Overseas Depository Bank” means a bank authorised by the issuing
company to issue Global Depository Receipts against issue of Foreign Currency Con-
vertible Bonds or ordinary shares of the issuing company;
(177) “owner” in relation to a house property includes—
(a) an individual who transfers otherwise than for adequate consideration
any house property to his or her spouse, not being a transfer in connection with
an agreement to live apart, or to a minor child;
(b) the holder of an impartible estate;
(c) a member of a co-operative society, company or other association of
persons to whom a building or part thereof is allotted or leased under a house
building scheme of the society, company or association; and
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
5

188
(d) a person who is allowed to take or retain possession of any building or
part thereof in part performance of a contract of the nature referred to in section
53A of the Transfer of Property Act, 1882.
(178) “paid”—
(a) in relation to “Income from business” or “Income from residuary
sources”, means incurred or actually paid, according to the method of accounting
on the basis of which the income under those heads are computed; and
(b) in all other cases, mean actually paid;
(179) “participant” means—
(a) a partner in relation to a firm; or
(b) a member in relation to an association of persons or body of individuals;
(180) “partner” shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in the Indian
Partnership Act, 1932 and shall include—
(a) a partner of a limited liability partnership as defined in the Limited
Liability Partnership Act, 2008; and
(b) any person who, being a minor, has been admitted to the benefits of
partnership;
(181)  “partnership” shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in the Indian
Partnership Act, 1932 and shall include a limited liability partnership as defined in the
Limited Liability Partnership Act, 2008;
(182) “permanent account number” means a permanent account number allotted
to a person under section 292;
(183)  “permanent establishment” means a fixed place of business through
which the business of a non-resident assessee is wholly or partly carried on and—
(a) includes—
(i) a place of management;
(ii) a branch;
(iii) an office;
(iv) a factory;
(v) a workshop;
(vi) a sales outlet;
(vii) a warehouse in relation to a person providing storage facilities
for others;
(viii) a farm, plantation other place where agricultural, forestry,
plantation or related activities are carried on;
(ix) a mine, an oil or gas well, a quarry or any other place of extraction
of natural resources;
(x) a building site or construction, installation or assembly project
or supervisory activities in connection therewith;
(xi) furnishing of services, including consultancy services, by the
assessee through employees or other personnel engaged by him for such
purpose; and
(xii) an installation or structure or plant or equipment, used for
4 of 1882.
9 of 1932.
6 of 2009.
9 of 1932.
6 of 2009.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

189
exploration or for exploitation of natural resources; and
(b) deemed to include—
(i) a person, other than an independent agent being a broker, general
commission agent or any other agent of independent status acting in the
ordinary course of his business, acting in India on behalf of an assessee,
if such person—
(A) has and habitually exercises in India an authority to
conclude contracts on behalf of the assessee, unless his activities
are limited to the purchase of goods or merchandise for the assessee;
(B) habitually maintains in India a stock of goods or
merchandise from which he regularly delivers goods or merchandise
on behalf of the assessee; or
(C) habitually secures orders in India, mainly or wholly for the
non-resident or for that non-resident and other non-residents
controlling, controlled by, or subject to the same common control,
as that non-resident;
(ii) the person acting in India on behalf of an assessee engaged in
the business of insurance, through whom the assessee collects premia in
the territory of India or insures risks situated therein;
(iii) a substantial equipment in India which is being used by, for or
under any contract with the assessee;
(184) “person” includes—
(a) an individual,
(b) a Hindu undivided family,
(c) a company,
(d) a co-operative society or any other society,
(e) a firm,
 (f) a non-profit organisation,
(g) an association of persons,
(h) a body of individuals,
(i) a local authority,
(j) every artificial juridical person, not falling within any of the  preceding
sub-clauses;
whether or not the society, firm or organisation, association, body, local authority or
artificial juridical person was formed or established or incorporated with the object of
deriving income;
(185) “person having a substantial interest in a concern”, with its grammatical
variations, means— 
(a) a person who is the beneficial owner (including the beneficial ownership
held by one or more of his relatives, in case the person is an individual) of equity
shares carrying not less than twenty per cent. of the voting power, at any time
during the financial year,  in a concern being a company; and
(b) a person who is, at any time during the financial year, beneficially
entitled (including the income which is beneficially entitled to one or more of his
relative, in case the person is an individual) to not less than twenty per cent. of
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

190
the income in any other concern being a Hindu undivided family, or a firm or an
unincorporated body;
(186) “person of Indian origin” means any person who or either of whose
parents or any of whose grand parents—
(i) was born in India, or
(ii) was born in India as defined in the Government of India Act, 1935, in
case the person or the parent or the grand parent was born before the 15th day
of August, 1947;
(187) “person responsible for making specified payment” means—
(a) an employer who makes the payment which is in the nature of salary;
(b) any person who makes the payment of the nature specified in column
(2) of the Schedule or the Fourth Schedule;
(188) “person with disability” means a person referred to,—
(i) in clause ( t) of section 2 of the Persons With Disabilities (Equal
Opportunities, Protection of Rights and Full Participation) Act, 1995; or
(ii) in clause (j) of section 2 of the National Trust for Welfare of Persons
with Autism, Cerebral Palsy, Mental Retardation and Multiple Disabilities Act,
1999.
(189) “person with severe disability” means—
(i) a person with eighty per cent. or more of one or more disabilities, as
referred to in sub-section ( 4) of section 56 of the Persons With Disabilities
(Equal Opportunities, Protection of Rights and Full Participation) Act, 1995; or
(ii) a person with severe disability referred to in clause (o) of section 2 of
the National Trust for Welfare of Persons with Autism, Cerebral Palsy, Mental
Retardation and Multiple Disabilities Act, 1999;
(190) “personal effect” in relation to a capital asset means any movable property
including wearing apparel and furniture held for personal use by the assessee or any
member of his family dependant on him, but excludes,—
(a) jewellery;
(b) archaeological collections;
(c) drawings;
(d) paintings;
(e) sculptures; and
(f) any work of art;
(191) “perquisite” means,—
(a) the amenity, facility, privilege or service, whether convertible into money
or not, provided directly or indirectly to an employee by the employer, whether
by way of reimbursement or otherwise, being—
(i) the value of any accommodation computed in such manner as
may be prescribed;
(ii) any sum payable to effect an assurance on life or to effect a
contract for an annuity;
(iii) the value of any sweat equity share allotted or transferred, as
on the date on which the option is exercised by the employee; or
(iv) the value of any obligation which, but for payment by the
employer, would have been payable by the employee, computed in such
manner as may be prescribed;
1 of 1996.
44 of 1999.
1 of 1996.
44 of 1999.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

191
(b) the value of any amenity, facility, privilege or service, other than those
referred to in sub-clause (a) computed in such manner as may be prescribed but
does not include,—
(i) the value of any medical treatment provided to an employee or
any member of his family in a hospital maintained by the employer;
 (ii) any sum paid by an employer in respect of any expenditure
actually incurred by an employee on medical treatment of himself or his
family members in any hospital maintained by the Government or any local
authority or any other hospital approved by the Government;
(iii) any sum paid by an employer in respect of any expenditure
actually incurred by an employee on medical treatment of himself or his
family members with regard to specified diseases, in any hospital approved
by the Chief Commissioner in accordance with such guidelines as may be
prescrbed;
(iv) any premium paid or reimbursed by an employer to effect or to
keep in force an insurance on the health of an employee under any scheme
approved by the Central Government or the Insurance Regulatory and
Development Authority;
(v) any sum paid by an employer in respect of any expenditure
actually incurred by an employee on medical treatment of himself or his
family members [other than the expenditure on treatment referred to in
items (i), ( ii) and ( iii)] to the extent it does not exceed fifty thousand
rupees in a financial year;
(vi) any sum paid by an employer in respect of any expenditure
actually incurred by an employee outside India on medical treatment of
himself or his family members (including expenditure incurred on travel
and stay abroad) if,—
(A) the expenditure does not exceed the amount permitted by
the Reserve Bank of India; and
(B) the income from employment excluding the amount of
expenditure referred to in this sub-clause of such employee does
not exceed five lakh rupees in the financial year;
(192) “place of effective management” means—
(i) the place where the board of directors of the company or its executive
directors, as the case may be, make their decisions; or
(ii) in a case where the board of directors routinely approve the commercial
and strategic decisions made by the executive directors or officers of the company,
the place where such executive directors or officers of the company perform
their functions:
(193) “plant” includes ships, aircrafts, vehicles, books, scientific apparatus and
surgical equipment but does not include tea bushes, livestock, buildings or furniture
and fittings;
(194) “political party” means a political party registered and recognised  under
the Representation of the People Act, 1951;
(195) “predecessor” in relation to a business reorganisation means—
(a) the amalgamating company, in the case of amalgamation;
(b) the merging company in the case of business reorganisation  referred
to in sub-clause (b) of clause (41);
(c) the demerged company, in the case of demerger; or
43 of 1951.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

192
(d) the unincorporated body or the proprietary concern, in the case of
business reorganisation referred to in sub-clause (a) of clause (41);
(196) “preference shares” means preference shares within the meaning of section
85 of the Companies Act, 1956;
(197) “pre-paid taxes” means tax paid by way of, — 
(a) tax deduction at source on payment received;
(b) tax collection at source on payment made;
(c) advance-tax;
(d) self-assessment tax; or
(e) foreign tax credit;
(f) credit for tax paid on book profit;
(198) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Code;
(199) “primary co-operative agricultural and rural development bank” means a
society having its area of operation confined to a taluk and the principal object of
which is to provide for long-term credit for agricultural and rural development activities;
(200) “principal officer” in relation to a person, being a local authority or any
other public body or a company or an unincorporated body, means—
(a) the secretary, treasurer, manager or agent of the person, or
(b) any person connected with the management or administration of the
person upon whom the Assessing Officer has served a notice of his intention of
treating him as the principal officer thereof;
(201) “private discretionary trust” means any entity, whether incorporated or
not, which fulfills the following conditions, namely:—
(a) the shares of its beneficiaries are indeterminate or unknown;
(b) it is not a non-profit organisation; and
(c) it is not registered under any law of the Central, State or Provincial
Government for the regulation of the religious endowments;
(202)“profits in lieu of or in addition to any salary” includes—
(a) the amount of any compensation due to or received by an employee
from his employer or former employer at or in connection with his voluntary
retirement, the termination of his employment, or the modification of the terms
and conditions relating thereto;
(b) any sum received under a keyman insurance policy including the sum
allocated by way of bonus on such policy, if any part of the contribution to the
policy is made by his employer or former employer; and
(c) any amount due to or received, directly or indirectly, by any assessee
from any person—
(i) before his joining any employment with that person; or
(ii) after cessation of his employment with that person;
(203) “public company” shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in section
3 of the Companies Act, 1956;
(204) “public financial institution” shall have the same meaning assigned to it
in section 4A of the Companies Act, 1956;
1 of 1956.
1 of 1956.
1 of 1956.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

193
(205) “public sector company” means— 
(a) any corporation established by or under any Central, State or Provincial
Act, or
(b) a Government company as defined in section 617 of the Companies
Act, 1956;
(206) “public servant” shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in section
21 of the Indian Penal Code;
(207) “rate of exchange” means the rate of exchange determined or recognised
by the Central Government for the conversion of Indian rupee into foreign currency or
vice versa;
(208) “rate of tax of the other country” means income-tax or wealth-tax, or as the
case may be, and surcharge or cess thereon, if any, actually paid in the other country
in accordance with the corresponding laws in force in the said country after deduction
of all relief due, but before deduction of any relief due in the said country in respect of
double taxation, divided by the whole amount of the income as assessed in the said
country;
(209) “rate in force” , in relation to a financial year means the rate of income-tax
or wealth-tax, as the case may be, specified for the relevant purpose—
(a) in this Code; or
(b) in the relevant agreement entered into by the Central Government
under section 291;
(210) “re-assessment” means any assessment of tax bases in pursuance of a
notice issued under section 159, whether or not—
(a) a return of tax bases has been filed before, or after, the issue of the said
notice; or
(b) an assessment of the tax bases has been made before the issue of the
said notice;
(211) “recognised stock exchange” means a recognised stock exchange as
referred to in clause (f) of section 2 of the Securities Contracts (Regulation) Act, 1956
and which fulfils such conditions as may be prescribed and notified by the Central
Government for this purpose;
(212) “recognised commodity exchanges” means a registered association as
defined in clause (jj) of section 2 of the Forward Contracts (Regulation) Act, 1952;
(213)“registered valuer” means a person registered as such by the Board for
determining the value of any asset in accordance with the procedure as may be
prescribed;
(214) “relative”, in relation to an individual, means— 
(a) spouse of the individual;
(b) brother or sister of the individual;
(c) brother or sister of the spouse of the individual;
(d) brother or sister of either of the parents of the individual;
(e) any lineal ascendant or descendant of the individual;
(f) any lineal ascendant or descendant of the spouse of the individual;
(g) spouse of the persons referred to in sub-clauses (b) to (f); or
1 of 1956.
45 of 1860.
42 of 1956.
74 of 1952.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

194
(h) any lineal descendant of a brother or sister of either the individual or
of the spouse of the individual;
(215) “remission or cessation of any liability” includes the remission or cessation
of any liability—
(a) by a unilateral act by the assessee by way of writing off such liability
in his account or creating a reserve (by whatever name called); or
(b) by virtue of there being no transaction with the creditor during the
period of five years from the end of the financial year in which the last transaction
took place;
(216) “Reserve Bank of India” means the Bank constituted under sub-section
(1) of section 3 of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934;
(217) “resident” means a person who is resident in India within the meaning of
section 4;
(218) “resident deductee” means a person who is resident and receives any
amount liable to deduction of tax at source under Chapter XIII;
(219) “resulting company” means—
(a) one or more companies (including a wholly owned subsidiary thereof)
to which the undertaking of the demerged company is transferred in a demerger,
and the resulting company in consideration of such transfer of undertaking,
issues shares to the shareholders of the demerged company; or
(b) any authority, body, local authority or a company established,
constituted or formed as a result of demerger;
(220) “royalty” means consideration (including any lump-sum consideration
but excluding any consideration which would be the income of the recipient chargeable
under the head “Capital gains”) for—
(a) the transfer of all or any rights (including the granting of a licence) in
respect of a patent, invention, model, design, trade mark, secret formula, process,
or similar property;
(b) the imparting of any information concerning the working of, or the use
of, a patent, invention, model, design, secret formula, process, trade mark,  or
similar property;
(c) the use of any patent, invention, model, design, secret formula, process,
trade mark, or similar property;
(d) the imparting of any information concerning technical, industrial,
commercial or scientific knowledge, experience or skill;
(e) the use or right to use of any industrial, commercial or scientific
equipment including ship or aircraft but excluding the amount, referred to in
item numbers 17 and 18  of  the Table in the Fourteenth Schedule, which is
subjected to tax in accordance with the provisions of that Schedule;
(f) the use or right to use of transmission by satellite, cable, optic fiber or
similar technology;
(g) the transfer of all or any rights (including the granting of a licence) in
respect of —
(i) any copyright of literary, artistic or scientific work;
(ii) cinematographic films or work on films, tapes or any other means
of reproduction; or
2 of 1934.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

195
(iii) live coverage of any event;
(h) the rendering of any services in connection with the activities referred
to in sub-clauses (a) to (g);
(221) “rural area” means any area not being an urban area;
(222) “safe harbour”, in relation to computation of arm’s length price under
section 117, means circumstances in which the income-tax authorities shall accept the
transfer price declared by the assessee;
(223) “salary” includes,—
(a) wages;
(b) remuneration;
(c) perquisites;
(d) profits in lieu of or in addition to any salary;
(e) any advance or arrear of salary;
(f) any allowance or benefit granted to an employee—
(i) to meet his personal expenses at the place where the duties of his
office or employment of profit are ordinarily performed by him or where he
ordinarily resides;
(ii) to compensate him for the increased cost of living;
(iii) to meet expenses wholly, necessarily and exclusively for the
performance of the duties of an office or employment of profit;
(iv) to remunerate or compensate him for performing duties of a
special nature relating to his office or employment of profit;  or
(v)  which is in the nature of house rent allowance;
(g) any allowance, other than the allowances referred to in sub-clause (f),
concession or assistance;
(h) any payment received by an employee in respect of any period of leave
not availed by him;
(i) any contribution made by an employer, in the financial year, to the
account of an employee under a pension fund;
(j) any contribution made by an employer,  in the financial year, to the
account of an employee in any other fund;
(k) any amount of interest credited, in the financial year, on the balance to
the credit of an employee in a fund referred to in clause (j);
(l) any annuity, pension or any commutation thereof;
(m) any gratuity;
(n) any fees or commission;
(224) “Schedule” means a Schedule to this Code;
(225) “scheduled bank” means any bank listed in the Second Schedule to the
Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934;
(226) “Scheduled Castes” and “Scheduled Tribes” shall have the meaning
respectively assigned to them in clauses (24) and (25) of article 366 of the Constitution;
2 of 1934.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

196
(227)  “scientific research and development” means systemic investigation and
research in a field of technology, natural or applied science (including agriculture,
animal husbandary or fisheries) if—
(a) it is carried out by the assessee by means of experiment or analysis;
(b) it is in the nature of—
(i) basic research, namely, work undertaken for the advancement of
scientific knowledge without a specific practical application in view;
(ii) applied research, namely, work undertaken for the advancement
of scientific knowledge with a specific practical application in view; or
(iii) experimental development, namely, work undertaken for the
purpose of achieving technological advancement for the purpose of
creating new, or improving existing materials, devices, products or
processes, including incremental improvements thereto; and
(c) it is not in the nature of—
(i) market research or sales promotion;
(ii) quality control or routine testing of materials, devices, products
or processes;
(iii) research in social sciences or  humanities;
(iv) prospecting, exploring or drilling for, or producing, minerals,
petroleum or natural gas;
(v) the commercial production of a new or improved material, device
or product or the commercial use of a new or improved process;
(vi) style changes; or
(vii) routine data collection;
(228) “security” shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in clause (h) of
section 2 of the Securities Contracts (Regulation) Act, 1956;
(229) “Securities and Exchange Board of India” means the Board established
under section 3 of the Securities and Exchange Board of India Act, 1992;
(230) “self-assessment tax” means the tax paid after the financial year but before
filing the return of tax bases;
(231) “senior citizen” means an individual resident in India who attains the age
of sixty-five years or more at any time during the financial year;
(232) “service” for the purposes of non-compete agreement means service of
any description which is made available to potential users and includes the provision
of services in connection with business of any industrial or commercial nature such as
accounting, banking, merchant banking, communication, conveying of news or
information, advertising, entertainment, amusement, education, financing, insurance,
chit funds, real estate, construction, transport, storage, processing, supply of electrical
or other energy, boarding and lodging;
(233) “Sikkimese” means,—
(a) an individual, whose name is recorded in the register maintained under
the Sikkim Subjects Regulation, 1961 read with the Sikkim Subject Rules, 1961
(in this clause referred to as the “Register of Sikkim Subjects”), immediately
before the 26th day of April,  1975;
42 of 1956.
15 of 1992.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

197
(b) an individual, whose name is included in the Register of Sikkim Sub-
jects by virtue of the Government of India Order No.26030/36/90-I.C.I., dated the
7th August, 1990 and Order of even number dated the 8th April, 1991; or
(c) any other individual, whose name does not appear in the Register of
Sikkim Subjects, but it is established beyond doubt that the name of such
individual’s father or husband or paternal grandfather or brother from the same
father has been recorded in that register;
(234)  “slump sale” means the sale of any undertaking or division of a business
for a lump-sum consideration without values being assigned to the individual assets
and liabilities in such sale, other than the assignment of values to the assets or liabili-
ties for the sole purpose of payment of stamp duty, registration fees or other similar
taxes or fees;
(235) “society” means a society registered under the Societies Registration Act,
1860 or under any law corresponding to that Act in force in any part of India;
(236) “sold” includes a transfer by way of exchange or a compulsory acquisition
under any law for the time being in force but does not include a transfer, in a scheme of
business reorganisation, of any asset by the predecessor to the successor;
(237) “special modes of acquisition” means—
(a) acquisition of converted property by a Hindu Undivided Family; or
(b) acquisition by any person in any of the following manner,—
(i) upon distribution of any asset on the total or partial partition of a
Hindu undivided family;
(ii) by way of a gift;
(iii) under a will;
(iv) by way of succession, inheritance or devolution;
(v) upon distribution of any asset on the dissolution of an unincor-
porated body;
(vi) upon distribution of any asset on the liquidation of a company;
(vii) upon a revocable or an irrevocable settlement to a trust; or
 (viii) under a transaction referred to in clause ( d) to clause (h) of
sub-section (1) of section 47;
(238) “special source”, in its grammatical variation, shall have the meaning
assigned to it in section 15.
(239) “specified association” means any institution, association or body, whether
incorporated or not, functioning under any law for the time being in force in India or
the laws of the specified territory outside India and notified as such by the Central
Government;
(240) “specified derivative transaction” means any transaction in derivatives,
if—
(a)  it is carried out electronically on screen-based systems of a recognised
stock exchange;
(b) it is carried out by a bank or mutual fund or any other person, through
a financial intermediary; and
(c) it is supported by a time stamped contract note issued by the financial
intermediary to every client indicating in the contract note—
21 of 1860.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

198
(i) the unique client identity number allotted under any law for the
time being in force; and
(ii) the permanent account number allotted under this Code;
(241) “specified knowledge-based industry or service” means—
(a) information technology software;
(b) information technology service;
(c) entertainment service;
(d) pharmaceutical industry;
(e) bio-technology industry; and
(f) any other industry or service, as may be notified by the Central Gov-
ernment;
(242) “specified territory” means any area outside India and notified as such by
the Central Government;
(243) “speculative business” means speculative transactions carried on in the
nature of a business;
(244) “speculative transaction” means a transaction in which a contract for the
purchase or sale of any commodity, including stocks and shares, is periodically or
ultimately settled otherwise than by the actual delivery or transfer of the commodity
or scrips other than the following transactions; namely,—
(a) a specified derivative transaction;
(b) a contract in respect of raw materials or merchandise entered into by a
person in the course of his manufacturing or merchandising business to guard
against loss through future price fluctuations in respect of his contracts for
actual delivery of goods manufactured, or merchandise sold by him;
(c) a contract in respect of stocks and shares entered into by a dealer or
investor therein to guard against loss in his holdings of stocks and shares
through price fluctuations; and
(d) a contract entered into by a member of a forward market or a stock
exchange in the course of any transaction in the nature of jobbing or arbitrage
to guard against loss which may arise in the ordinary course of his business as
such member;
 (245) “speed boat” means a motor boat driven by a high speed internal com-
bustion engine capable of propelling the boat at a speed exceeding 24 kilometers per
hour in still water and so designed that when running at such speed, its bow will rise;
(246) “stamp duty value” means—
(a) the value adopted, or assessed, by any authority of the Central Gov-
ernment or a State Government for the purposes of payment of stamp duty in
respect of an immovable property; or
(b) the value which the stamp valuation authority would have, notwith-
standing anything in any other law for the time being in force, adopted or
assessed, if it were referred to such authority for the purposes of payment of
stamp duty;
(247) “State Bank of India” means the State Bank of India constituted under the
State Bank of India Act, 1955;
23 of 1955.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

199
(248) “State financial corporation” means a financial corporation established
under section 3 or section 3A or an institution notified under section 46 of the State
Financial Corporations Act, 1951;
(249) “State industrial investment corporation” means a Government company
within the meaning of section 617 of the Companies Act, 1956, engaged In the busi-
ness of providing long-term finance for industrial projects;
(250) “State Pooled Finance Entity” means such entity which is set up in accor-
dance with the guidelines for the Pooled Finance Development Scheme notified by the
Central Government;
(251) “subsidiary” shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in section 4 of
the Companies Act, 1956 and includes subsidiary incorporated outside India;
(252) “successor” in a “business reorganisation” means—
(a) the amalgamated company or amalgamated co-operative, in the case of
amalgamation;
(b) the merged company in the case of business reorganisation referred to
in sub-clause (b) of clause (41);
(c) the resulting company, in the case of demerger;
(253) “successor in business” means—
(a) a successor in a “business reorganisation”;
(b) a firm which succeeds another firm carrying on a business; and
(c) a person who succeeds any other person in a business;
(254) “sweat equity share” means—
(a) any security underlying any employees stock option granted under
any plan, or scheme, of the employer; or
(b) any security issued by a company to its employee or director, at a
discount or for consideration other than cash;
(255) “tax” means any tax chargeable under the provisions of this Code and
includes surcharge or cess, if any;
(256) “tax account number” means a number allotted under this Code to a per-
son who is liable to deduct tax at source or collect tax at source under Sub-chapter A or
Sub-chapter B of Chapter XIII;
(257) “tax arrear” means any amount of tax, interest, penalty, fine or any other
sum, due from an assessee under this Code;
(258) “tax bases” means—
(a) income or total income, as the case may be, in relation to income-tax;
(b) net wealth in relation to wealth-tax;
(c) dividend distributed in relation to dividend distribution tax or income
distributed in relation to tax on distributed income;
(d) branch profits in relation to branch profits tax;
(e) the income or total income, net wealth, or dividend or income distrib-
uted referred to in sub-clauses (a) to (c) of any other person in respect of which
the assessee is assessable under this Code;
63 of 1951.
1 of 1956.
1 of 1956.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

200
(259) “Tax Recovery Officer” means any Income-tax Officer who may be
authorised by the Chief Commissioner or the Commissioner, by general or special
order in writing—
(a) to exercise the powers of a Tax Recovery Officer; and
(b) to exercise or perform such powers and functions, which are conferred
on or assigned to an Assessing Officer, as may be prescribed;
(260) “test of continuity of business”  stands satisfied, in case of a successor,
if he—
(a) holds at least three-fourths of the book value of fixed assets of the
predecessor acquired through business reorganisation, continuously for a mini-
mum period of five financial years immediately succeeding the financial year in
which the business reorganisation takes place;
(b) continues the business of the predecessor for a minimum period of
five financial years immediately succeeding the financial year in which the busi-
ness reorganisation takes place; and
(c) fulfils such other conditions as may be prescribed to ensure the re-
vival of the business of the predecessor or to ensure that the business
reorganisation is for genuine business purpose;
(261) “threshold limit” means the maximum amount which is not liable to income-
tax;
(262)  “tonnage income scheme” means a scheme for computation of profits of
business of operating qualifying ships under the provisions of the Tenth Schedule;
(263) “total income” of a financial year means the total income computed under
section 63 for that financial year;
(264) “total income from special sources” of a financial year means the net
result of the aggregation under sub-section (4) of section 62 for that financial year;
(265) “total turnover” in relation to a business means the gross sum received or
receivable by the assessee, directly or indirectly, in respect of his world-wide sale of
goods or supply of services, as the case may be, of the business including any tax,
duty, cess or fee (by whatever name called) collected or collectible in respect of the
sale or supply;
(266) “trade debt” means a debt—
(a) which has been taken into account in computing the income of the
assessee in any financial year; or
(b) which is money lent in the ordinary course of banking or money lend-
ing which is carried on by the assessee;
(267) “transfer”, in relation to a capital asset, includes— 
(a) the sale, exchange or relinquishment of the asset;
(b) the extinguishment of any rights in it;
(c) its compulsory acquisition under any law for the time being in force;
(d) its conversion into, or its treatment as, stock-in-trade of a business;
(e) the buy-back of any shares or other specified securities referred to in
clause (a) of the Explanation to section 77A of the Companies Act, 1956, by the
issuer of such shares or securities;
1 of 1956.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

201
(f) any contribution of the asset, whether by way of capital or otherwise, to
a company or an unincorporated body, in which the transferor is, or becomes, a
shareholder or participant, as the case may be;
(g) the distribution of the asset on account of dissolution of an unincor-
porated body;
(h) the distribution of the asset on account of liquidation or dissolution of
a company;
(i) any transaction allowing the possession of an immovable property, to
be taken or retained in part performance of a contract of the nature referred to in
section 53A of the Transfer of Property Act, 1882;
(j) any transaction which enables the enjoyment of the asset, being any
immovable property, whether by way of becoming a participant in an unincorpo-
rated body or acquiring shares in a company or by way of any agreement,
arrangement or in any other manner;
(k) the maturity or redemption of a zero coupon bond;
(l) slump sale;
(m) any damage to the insured asset or its destruction as a result of—
(i) flood, typhoon, hurricane, cyclone, earthquake or any other con-
vulsion of nature;
(ii) riot or civil disturbance;
(iii) accidental fire or explosion; or
(iv) action by an enemy or action taken in combating an enemy
(whether with or without a declaration of war);
(n) transfer of securities by a person having beneficial interest in the
securities held by a depository as registered owner;
(o) distribution of money or the asset to a participant in an unincorporated
body on account of his retirement from the body; and
(p) any disposition, settlement, trust, covenent, agreement or arrange-
ment.
(268) “Transfer Pricing Officer” means an Additional Commissioner, Joint Com-
missioner,  Deputy Commissioner or Assistant Commissioner, authorised by the Board
to perform all or any of the functions for determining the arm’s length price in respect
of an international transaction and for levying any penalty connected thereto, in
respect of any person or class of persons;
(269) “transportation charge” includes—
(a) any amount paid whether in or out of India to the assessee, or to any
person on his behalf, on account of the carriage of passengers, livestock, mail
(including courier) or goods from any place or any port in India;
(b) any amount received or deemed to be received in India by or  on behalf
of the assessee on account of the carriage of passengers, livestock, mail (includ-
ing courier)  or goods, from  any place or any port outside India;
(c) any amount paid to, or received  or deemed to be received in India by,
the assessee or any person on his behalf  by way of demurrage charges or
handling charges or such other charges; or
(d) any amount paid to, or received or deemed to be received by, the
assessee or any person on his behalf for charter, whether or not with crew,
4 of 1882.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

202
including an arrangement as slot charter, space charter, joint charter or any
similar arrangement, of ships, aircraft or any other mode of transport,  in relation
to sub-clauses (a) and (b) above;
(270) “trust” shall have the meaning assigned to it in clause (e) of section 103;
(271) “unabsorbed current capital loss” means the amount determined under
sub-section (4) of section 60.
(272) “unabsorbed current horse race loss” means the amount determined un-
der sub-section (10) of section 60;
(273) “unabsorbed current loss from ordinary sources” means the amount de-
termined under sub-section (3) of section 61;
(274) “unabsorbed current loss from the special source” means the amount
determined under sub-section (3) of section 62;
(275) “unabsorbed current speculative loss” means the amount determined
under sub-section (8) of section 60;
(276) “unabsorbed preceeding year capital loss” means the unabsorbed cur-
rent capital loss, for the financial year immediately preceeding the relevant financial
year;
(277 ) “unabsorbed preceeding year horse race loss” means the unabsorbed
current horse race loss for the financial year immediately preceeding the relevant
financial year;
(278) “unabsorbed preceeding year loss from ordinary sources” means the
unabsorbed current loss from ordinary sources, for the financial year immediately
preceeding the relevant financial year;
(279) “unabsorbed preceeding year loss from the special source” means the
unabsorbed current loss from the special source, of the financial year immediately
preceeding the relevant financial year;
(280) “unabsorbed preceeding year speculative loss” means the unabsorbed
current speculative loss for the financial year immediately preceeding the relevant
financial year;
(281) “undertaking” in relation to demerger includes—
 (a) any part of an undertaking;
(b) a unit or division of an undertaking;
(c) a business activity taken as a whole; or
(d) individual assets or liabilities or any combination thereof which con-
stitutes a business activity;
(282) “unincorporated body” means—
(a) a firm;
(b) an association of persons; or
(c) a body of individuals;
(283) “university” means a university established or incorporated by or under
a Central, State or Provincial Act and includes an institution deemed  to be a Univer-
sity under section 3 of the University Grants Commission Act, 1956;
(284) “urban area” means—
(a
) an area within the jurisdiction of a municipality (whether known as a
municipality, municipal corporation, notified area committee, town area commit-
3 of 1956.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

203
tee, town committee or by any other name) or a cantonment board and which has
a population of more than ten thousand according to the last preceding census
of which the relevant figures have been published before the first day of the
financial year; or
(b) an area within such distance from the local limits of any municipality or
cantonment board referred to in sub-clause (a), as the Central Government may
having regard to the extent of, and scope for, urbanisation of that area and other
relevant considerations, specify in this behalf by notification;
(285) “urban development authority” means any authority constituted in India
by, or under, any law enacted for the purpose of—
(a) dealing with and satisfying the need for housing accommodation; or
(b) planning, development or improvement of cities, towns and villages;
(286) “valuation date” in relation to wealth-tax means the 31st day of March of
the relevant financial year;
(287) “valuation officer” means a person appointed as a Valuation Officer by the
Central Government and includes a regional valuation officer, a district valuation
officer and an assistant valuation officer;
(288) “value of inventory of the business” as on the—
(a) close of the financial year means the value of stock of finished goods,
work-in-progress, raw material, stores and spares or any other inventory remain-
ing in stock, as on the close of the said financial year and the value is computed
in accordance with the method of accounting regularly employed by the asses-
see; and
(b) beginning of the financial year shall be—
(i) nil, if the business has commenced during the financial year; and
(ii) the value of inventory of the business, as on the close of the
immediately preceding financial year, in any other case;
(289) “value of sweat equity shares” shall be the value of the sweat equity
shares on the date on which the option is exercised by the assessee, determined in
accordance with the method as may be prescribed, as reduced by the amount actually
paid by, or recovered from, the assessee in respect of such shares;
(290) “venture capital company” means a company—
(a) which has been granted a certificate of registration as a venture capital
company under the Securities and Exchange Board of India Act, 1992; and
(b) which fulfils all other conditions as may be prescribed in this behalf;
(291) “venture capital fund” means a fund—
(a) which has been granted a certificate of registration as a venture capital
fund under the Securities and Exchange Board of India Act, 1992; and
(b) which fulfils all other conditions as may be prescribed in this behalf;
(292) “venture capital undertaking” means a domestic company whose shares
are not listed in a recognised stock exchange in India and which is engaged in the
business of—
(a) nano-technology;
(b) information technology relating to hardware and software
development;
15  of 1992.
15  of 1992.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

204
(c) seed research and development;
(d) bio-technology;
(e) research and development of new chemical entities in the pharmaceu-
tical sector;
(f) production of bio-fuels;
(g) dairy and poultry;
(h) building and operating composite hotel cum convention centre with
seating capacity of more than three thousand;
(i) development of infrastructural facility; or
(j) any other business as may be prescribed;
(293) “widely held company” means— 
(a) a company owned by the Government or the Reserve Bank of India;
(b) a company in which not less than forty per cent. of the paid-up share
capital is held (whether alone or taken together) by the Government or the
Reserve Bank of India or a corporation owned by that bank;
(c) a company registered under section 25 of the Companies Act, 1956;
(d) a mutual benefit finance company;
(e) a co-operative sector company;
(f) a public company;
(g) a corporation established by or under a Central, State or Provincial
Act;
(h) a company in which not less than fifty per cent. of the paid up equity
share capital is held throughout the relevant financial year, by the companies
(whether alone or taken together) to which this clause applies; or
(i) a company which is not a private company as defined in section 3 of
the Companies Act, 1956 and the shares in such company, carrying not less
than fifty per cent. of the voting power, have been allotted and were throughout
the relevant financial year held— 
(I) by the companies referred to in clauses (a) to (h) (whether alone
or taken together); or
(II) by a subsidiary of a company referred to in clauses (a) to (h), if
the whole of the paid-up share capital of such subsidiary company has
been held by the parent company or by its nominees throughout the
financial year;
(294) “working participant” means an individual who is actively engaged in
conducting the affairs of the business or profession of the unincorporated body of
which he is a participant;
(295) “written down value” shall have the  meaning assigned to it in section 45;
(296) “written off” in relation to a debt means recording an appropriate entry in
the account of the debtor so as to reduce the amount of the debt without any recovery
thereof;
(297) “zero coupon bond” means a bond—
(a) issued by any company, fund or scheduled bank in accordance with a
scheme notified by the Central Government;
1  of 1956.
1  of 1956.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

205
(b) in respect of which no payment and benefit is received or receivable
before maturity or redemption from the company, fund or scheduled bank; and
(c) which the Central Government may, by notification, specify in this
behalf.
315.  In this Code, unless otherwise stated,—
(a) a reference to any income, or to the result of any computation, shall be
construed as a reference to both the negative and positive variation of the income or
the result, as the case may be;
(b) any direction for aggregation of two or more items, which are expressed as
amounts, shall be construed also to include a direction for aggregation of negative and
postive amounts in all their combinations;
(c) the value of any variable in a formula shall be deemed to be nil, if the value of
such variable is indeterminable or unascertainable.
CHAPTER XX
M
ISCELLANEOUS
316. ( 1) The Board may, subject to the control of the Central Government, by
notification, make rules for the whole or any part of India for carrying out the purposes of this
Code.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such
rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—
(a) the ascertainment and determination of any class of income;
(b) the manner in which and the procedure by which the income shall be arrived
at, in the case of—
(i) agriculture income;
(ii) a person residing outside India;
(iii) a person whose total income includes income referred to in section 9;
(c) the determination of the amount of expenditure allowable under this Code in
such manner, extent and on such basis and conditions, as appears to the Board to be
proper and reasonable;
(d) the methods by which an estimate of any income liable to tax, or expenditure
liable to deduction, may be made, if such income or expenditure cannot be definitely
ascertained, or can be ascertained only with an amount of trouble and expense to the
assessee which in the opinion of the Board is unreasonable;
(e) the form and manner in which any document, application, claim, return or
information may be made or furnished and the fees that may be levied in respect of any
document, application or claim;
(f) the class or classes of persons who shall be required to furnish any docu-
ment, application, claim, return or information in electronic form;
(g) the form and manner in which a document, application, claim, return or infor-
mation may be furnished electronically;
(h) the document, statement, receipt, certificate or report which, regardless of
anything to the contrary contained in this Code, may not be furnished along with the
return but shall be produced before the Assessing Officer on demand;
Construction.
Power to make
rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

206
(i) the computer resource or the electronic record to which a document, applica-
tion, claim, return or information may be transmitted electronically;
(j) the manner in which any document, application, claim, return or information
required to be filed under this Code may be verified;
(k) the authority, agency or organisation who may receive any application,
claim, return or information on behalf of the Board or the Department;
(l) the procedure to be followed in calculating interest payable by assessees or
interest payable by Government to assessees under any provision of this Code, in-
cluding the rounding off of the period for which such interest is to be calculated in
cases where such period includes a fraction of a month, and specifying the circum-
stances in which and the extent to which petty amounts of interest payable by assessees
may be ignored;
(m) the form and manner in which any appeal or cross-objection may be filed
under this Code and the manner in which intimation of any such order as is referred to
in clause (d) of sub-section (3) of section 184 may be served;
(n) the circumstances, the conditions and the manner in which, the Commis-
sioner (Appeals) may permit an appellant to produce evidence which he did not
produce or which he was not allowed to produce before the Assessing Officer;
(o) the fee payable in respect of any appeal, application, reference or ruling;
(p) the maintenance of a register of persons referred to in section 304, other than
legal practitioners or accountants, practicing before income-tax authorities and for the
constitution of and the procedure to be followed by the authority referred to in sub-
section (4) of that section;
(q) the issue of certificate verifying the payment of tax by assessees;
(r) the authority to be prescribed for any of the purposes of this Code;
(s) the procedure for giving effect to the terms of any agreement for the granting
of relief in respect of double taxation or for the avoidance of double taxation which
may be entered into by the Central Government under this Code; and
(t) any other matter which by this Code is to be, or may be, prescribed.
(3) Any order made, proceeding initiated or conducted, or liability or obligation
discharged, in accordance with the rules framed under this section shall be deemed to be
duly made, initiated, conducted or discharged, in accordance with the provisions of this
Code.
(4) The power to make rules conferred by this section shall include the power to give
retrospective effect, from a date not earlier than the date of commencement of this Code, to
the rules or any of them and, unless the contrary is permitted, no retrospective effect shall be
given to any rule so as to prejudicially affect the interests of assessees.
317. Every rule and scheme made and notification issued under this Code shall be
laid, as soon as may be after it is made or issued before each House of Parliament, while it is
in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two
or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following
the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any
modification in the rule, scheme or notification or both Houses agree that the rule, scheme or
notification should not be made or issued, the rule, scheme or notification shall thereafter
have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however,
that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything
previously done under that rule, scheme or notification.
Laying of
rules, schemes
and
notifications
before
Parliament.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

207
318. (1) The Income-tax Act, 1961 and the Wealth-tax Act, 1957 are hereby repealed.
(2) Notwithstanding the repeal of the Income-tax Act, 1961 and the Wealth-tax Act,
1957 (hereinafter referred to as the repealed Income-tax Act or the repealed Wealth-tax Act,
respectively),—
(a) where a return of income or wealth has been filed before the commencement
of this Code by any person for any assessment year, proceedings for the assessment
of that person for that year may be taken and continued as if this Code had not been
enacted;
 (b) where a return of income is filed after the commencement of this Code,
otherwise than in pursuance of a notice under section 148 of the repealed Income-tax
Act, by any person for the financial year ending on the 31st day of March, 2012, or any
earlier year, the assessment of that person for that year shall be made in accordance
with the procedure specified in this Code;
(c) where a return of wealth is filed after the commencement of this Code, other-
wise than in pursuance of a notice under section 17 of the repealed Wealth-tax Act, by
any person for the financial year ending on the 31st day of March, 2012, or any earlier
year, the assessment of that person for that year shall be made in accordance with the
procedure specified in this Code;
(d) any proceeding pending on the commencement of this Code before any
income-tax authority, wealth-tax authority, the Appellate Tribunal, the Authority for
Advance Ruling and Dispute Resolution, the Settlement Commission or any court, by
way of appeal, reference, application or revision, shall be continued and disposed
under the repealed Income-tax Act, or as the case may be, the repealed Wealth-tax Act,
as if this Code had not been enacted;
(e) where in respect of any assessment year after the year ending on the 31st day
of March, 2001—
(i) a notice under section 148 of the repealed Income-tax  Act or under
section 17 of the repealed Wealth-tax Act had been issued before the commence-
ment of this Code, the proceedings in pursuance of the notice may be continued
and disposed of as if this Code had not been enacted;
(ii) any income or wealth liable to tax has escaped assessment within the
meaning of that expression in section 159 and no proceedings under section 147
of the repealed Income-tax Act or under section 17 of the repealed Wealth-tax
Act in respect of any such income or wealth, as the case may be,  are pending at
the commencement of this Code, a notice under section 159 may be issued with
respect to that financial year and all the provisions of this Code shall apply
accordingly;
(f) any proceeding for the imposition of a penalty in respect of any assessment
completed before the first day of April, 2012, may be initiated and any such penalty
may be imposed under the repealed Income-tax Act, or as the case may be, the repealed
Wealth-tax Act as if this Code had not been enacted;
(g) any proceeding for the imposition of a penalty in respect of any assessment
for the financial year ending on the 31st day of March, 2011, or any earlier year, which
is completed on or after the 1st day of April, 2011, may be initiated and any such
penalty may be imposed under this Code;
(h) any election or declaration made, or option exercised, by an assessee under
any provision of the repealed Income-tax Act or as the case may be, the repealed
Wealth-tax Act and in force immediately before the commencement of this Code shall
be deemed to have been an election or declaration made, or option exercised, under the
corresponding provision of this Code;
Repeals and
savings.
43 of 1961.
27 of 1957.
43 of 1961.
27 of 1957.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50

208
(i) where, in respect of any assessment completed before the commencement of
this Code, a refund falls due after such commencement, or default is made after such
commencement in the payment of any sum due under such completed assessment,
the provisions of this Code relating to interest payable by the Central Government on
refunds and interest payable by the assessee for default shall apply;
(j) any sum payable under the repealed Income-tax Act or as the case may be,
the repealed Wealth-tax Act may be recovered under this Code, but without prejudice
to any action already taken for the recovery of such sum under such repealed Acts;
(k) any agreement entered into under section 90 or section 90A of the repealed
Income-tax Act or under section 44A  of the repealed Wealth-tax Act shall, so far as it
is not inconsistent with section 291 of this Code, be deemed to have been entered into
under section 291 of this Code and shall continue in force accordingly;
(l) any appointment made under the provisions of the repealed Income-tax Act,
or as the case may be, the repealed Wealth tax Act shall be deemed to have been made
under the corresponding provisions of this Code and shall continue to remain in force
accordingly;
(m) any order made under any provision of the repealed Income-tax Act or as the
case may be, the repealed Wealth-Tax Act. shall, so far as it is not inconsistent with the
corresponding provisions of this Code, be deemed to have been made under the
corresponding provisions aforesaid and shall continue in force accordingly;
(n) where the period prescribed for any application, appeal, reference or revi-
sion under the repealed Income-tax Act or as the case may be, the repealed Wealth-tax
Act had expired on or before the commencement of this Code, nothing in this Code
shall be construed as enabling any such application, appeal, reference or revision to
be made under this Code by reason only of the fact that a longer period therefor is
prescribed or provision is made for extension of time in suitable cases by the appropri-
ate authority;
(o) the deduction under section 80-IA, section 80-IB (other than sub-section
(9), section 80-IC, section 80-ID, section 80-IE or section 80JJA or section 80JJAA of
the repealed Income-tax Act shall continue to be allowed under this Code, if the
assessee is eligible for such deduction for the assessment year beginning on the 1st
day of April, 2012 subject to the conditions—
(i) that the amount of profits eligible for deduction under the provisions
of aforesaid sections are calculated in accordance with the provisions of this
Code other than the provisions in clauses ( d) and  ( e) of paragraph (5) of the
Thirteenth Schedule relating to capital expenditure, if applicable;
(ii) that the period for which the deduction is allowed under the provi-
sions of aforesaid sections shall not include a period for which the deduction
was otherwise not allowable under the repealed Income-tax Act;
(iii) that the amount related to capital expenditure if any excluded in (i)
above shall not be allowed as deduction under this Code in computing the
gross total income; and
(iv) that the assessee otherwise continues to satisfy the conditions as
specified in the respective sections in the financial year;
(p) the deduction under section 80-IAB of the repealed Income-tax Act shall
continue to be allowed under this Code, if the assessee, being a developer engaged in
the business of developing, operating and maintaining a Special Economic Zone
notified on or before 31st day of  March, 2012 under the Special Economic Zones Act,
2005,  subject to the conditions—
28 of 2005
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

209
(i) that the amount of profits eligible for deduction under the provisions of
the aforesaid section are calculated in accordance with the provisions of this
Code other than the provisions in clauses ( d) and ( e) of paragraph ( 4) of the
Twelfth Schedule relating to capital expenditure;
(ii) that the period for which the deduction is allowed under the provi-
sions of the aforesaid section shall not include a period for which the deduction
was otherwise not allowable under the repealed Income-tax Act;
(iii) that the amount related to capital expenditure if any excluded in ( i)
above shall not be allowed as deduction under this Code in computing the gross
total income; and
(iv) that the assessee otherwise continues to satisfy the conditions as
specified in the respective section in the financial year;
(q) the deduction under section 80LA of the repealed Income-tax Act shall continue
to be allowed under this Code, if the assessee commences its business operation in the
Offshore Banking Unit, or unit of an International Financial Services Centre, in the Special
Economic Zone on or before the 31st day of March, 2014,  subject to the conditions—
(i) that the amount of profits eligible for deduction under the provisions of
the aforesaid section are calculated in accordance with the provisions of this
Code other than the provisions in clauses ( d) and ( e) of paragraph ( 4) of the
Thirteenth Schedule relating to capital expenditure;
(ii) that the period for which the deduction is allowed under the provi-
sions of the aforesaid section shall not include a period for which the deduction
was otherwise not allowable under the repealed Income-tax Act;
(iii) that the amount related to capital expenditure if any excluded in ( i)
above shall not be allowed as deduction under this Code in computing the gross
total income; and
(iv) that the assessee otherwise continue to satisfy the conditions as
specified in the respective section in the financial year;
(r) the deduction under section 10AA of the repealed Income-tax Act shall con-
tinue to be allowed under this Code, if the assessee, being an entrepreneur as referred
to in clause (j) of section 2 of the Special Economic Zones Act, 2005, begins to manu-
facture or produce articles or things or provide any service in the unit in the Special
Economic Zone on or before the 31st day of  March, 2014, subject to the conditions—
(i) that the amount of profits eligible for deduction under the provisions of
the aforesaid section are calculated in accordance with the provisions of this
Code other than the provisions in clauses ( d) and  ( e) of paragraph ( 4) of the
Twelfth Schedule relating to capital expenditure;
(ii) that the period for which the deduction is allowed under the provi-
sions of the aforesaid section shall not include a period for which the deduction
was otherwise not allowable under the repealed Income-tax Act;
(iii) the amount related to capital expenditure if any excluded in (i) above
shall not be allowed as deduction under this Code in computing the gross total
income; and
(iv) that the assessee otherwise continue to satisfy the conditions as
specified in the respective section in the financial year;
(s) the deduction under sub-section (9) of  section 80-IB of the repealed Income-
tax Act shall continue to be allowed under this Code, if the undertaking referred to in
the said sub-section also fulfills any of the following, namely:—
(A) it is engaged in commercial production of mineral oil in any blocks
licensed under a single contract, which is awarded under the New Exploration
Licensing Policy announced by the Government of India vide Resolution No. O-
19018/22/95-ONG.DO.DL, dated 10th February, 1999 (hereinafter referred as the
28 of 2005.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50

210
NELP) or has been awarded in pursuance of any law for the time being in force
or has been awarded by the Central or a State Government in any other manner,
before the commencement of this Code;
(B) it is engaged in refining of mineral oil and begins such refining on or
after the 1st day of October, 1998 but not later than the 31st day of March, 2012;
(C) it is engaged in commercial production of natural gas in blocks li-
censed under the VIII Round of bidding for award of exploration contracts
under the NELP and begins commercial production of natural gas on or after the
1st day of April, 2009;
(D)  it is engaged in commercial production of natural gas in blocks li-
censed under the IV Round of bidding for award of  exploration contracts for
Coal Bed Methane blocks and begins commercial production of natural gas on
or after the 1st day of April, 2009,
subject to the conditions—
(i) that the amount of profits eligible for deduction under the provisions of the
aforesaid section are calculated in accordance with the provisions of this Code other
than the provisions in clauses ( d) and ( f) of paragraph 3 of the Eleventh Schedule
relating to capital expenditure;
(ii) that the period for which the deduction is allowed under the provisions of
the aforesaid section shall not include a period for which the deduction was otherwise
not allowable under the repealed Income-tax Act;
(iii) that the amount related to capital expenditure if any excluded in (i) above
shall not be allowed as deduction under this Code in computing the gross total in-
come; and
(iv) that the assessee otherwise continue to satisfy the conditions as specified
in the respective section in the financial year.
(3) In this section, “assessment year” shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in
the repealed Income-tax Act, 1961 or the  repealed Wealth-tax Act, 1957 as the case may be
as they stood prior to their repeal.
319. (1) If any difficulty arises—
(i) in protecting the interests of the assessee;
(ii) in preventing the loss of revenue;
(iii) in applying the provisions of the Income-tax Act, 1961 and the rules, orders
or notifications issued thereunder as it stood before the commencement of this Code;
(iv) in clarifying or declaring the true intent of the rules, orders or notifications
in their application under this Code; or
(v) in giving  effect to the provisions of this Code while repealing the Income-tax
Act, 1961; or
(vi) in generally giving effect to the provisions of this Code,
the Central Government may, by order, make such provisions not inconsistent with the
provisions of this Code, as it may appear to it to be necessary or expedient for the purpose
of removing the difficulty.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, any
such order may provide for the adaptations and modifications subject to which the repealed
Income-tax Act, 1961 shall apply in relation to the assessments for the financial year ending
on the 31st day of March, 2011, or any earlier year.
(3) No order under sub-section (1) shall be made after the expiry of a period of three
years from the commencement of this Code.
(4) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament.
Power to
remove
difficulties
.
43 of 1961.
43 of 1961.
43 of 1961.
43 of 1961.
27 of 1957.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50

THE FIRST SCHEDULE
[See sections 2(4), 15(1), 62(1), 211(3), 230(11), 314(120)(K) and (158)]
RATES OF  INCOME-TAX
PART I
The liability to income tax, of any person, in respect of his total income of a financial
year, which does not include income from any special source, shall be the amount of income-
tax calculated at the rate specified, and in the manner provided, in the following Paragraph
A to Paragraph F:
Paragraph A
(I) In the case of every individual, other than the individual referred to in item (II) of
this Paragraph, Hindu undivided family or artificial juridical person, not being a case to
which any other Paragraph of this Part applies,—
Rates of income-tax
(1) where the total income does not Nil;
exceed Rs. 2,00,000
(2) where the total income exceeds 10 per cent. of the amount by which
Rs. 2,00,000 but does not exceed the total income exceeds Rs.2,00,000;
Rs. 5,00,000
(3) where the total income exceeds Rs.30,000 plus 20 per cent. of the
Rs.5,00,000 but does not exceed amount by which the total income
Rs.10,00,000 exceeds Rs.5,00,000 ;
(4) where the total income exceeds Rs.1,30,000 plus 30 per cent. of the
 Rs.10,00,000 amount by which the total income
exceeds Rs.10,00,000;
(II)  In the case of every individual, being a resident in India, who is of the age of
sixty-five years or more at any time during the financial year—
Rates of income-tax
(1) where the total income does not Nil;
exceed Rs. 2,50,000
(2) where the total income exceeds 10 per cent. of the amount by which the
Rs.2,50,000 but does not total income exceeds Rs. 2,50,000
exceed Rs.5,00,000;
 (3) where the total income exceeds Rs. 25,000 plus 20 per cent. of the amount
Rs. 5,00,000 but does not exceed by which the total income exceeds
Rs. 10,00,000 Rs. 5,00,000;
(4) where the total income exceeds Rs. 1,25,000 plus 30 per cent. of the
Rs.10,00,000 amount by which the total income
exceeds Rs. 10,00,000;
Paragraph B
(I) In the case of every co-operative society—
Rates of income-tax
(1)  where the total income does not 10 per cent. of the total income;
exceed Rs.10,000
211
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

212
(2) where the total income exceeds Rs.1,000 plus 20 per cent. of the
Rs.10,000 but does not exceed amount by which the total income
Rs. 20,000 exceeds Rs. 10,000;
(3) where the total income exceeds Rs. 3,000 plus 30 per cent of the
Rs. 20,000 amount by which the total income
exceeds Rs. 20,000.
(II) In the case of every other society—
Rate of income-tax
On the whole of the total income 30 per cent.
Paragraph C
In the case of every non-profit organisation,—
Rate of income-tax
(i) when the total income does not Nil;
exceed Rs. 1,00,000
(ii) where the total income exceeds 15 per cent. of the amount by which
Rs. 1,00,000 the total income exceeds Rs. 1,00,000
Paragraph D
In the case of every unincorporated body,—
Rate of income-tax
On the whole of the total income 30 per cent.
Paragraph E
In the case of a company,—
Rate of income-tax
On the whole of the total income 30 per cent.
PART II
In the cases to which Paragraph A of Part 1 applies, where the person has, in the
financial year, any net agricultural income exceeding five thousand rupees, in addition to
total income from ordinary sources and the total income exceeds the threshold limit, then,—
(a) the net agricultural income shall be taken into account, in the manner provided
in clause (b) [that is to say, as if the net agricultural income were comprised in the total
income after the threshold limit but without being liable to tax], only for the purpose
of charging income-tax in respect of the total income; and
(b) the income-tax chargeable shall be calculated as follows:
(i) the total income and the net agricultural income shall be aggregated
and the amount of income-tax shall be determined in respect of the aggregate
income at the rates specified in the said Paragraph A, as if such aggregate
income were the total income;
(ii) the net agricultural income shall be increased by the amount of
threshold limit, and the amount of income-tax shall be determined in respect of
the net agricultural income as so increased at the rates specified in the said
Paragraph A, as if the net agricultural income as so increased were the total
income;
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

213
(iii) the amount of income-tax determined in accordance with sub-clause
(i) shall be reduced by the amount of income-tax determined in accordance with
sub-clause (ii) and the sum so arrived at shall be the income-tax in respect of
the total income.
PART III
Where, if the total income of a person specified in column (2) of the Table given below
includes income from any special source specified in the corresponding entry in column (3)
of the said Table, the liability to income-tax of the person shall be the aggregate of—
(a) the amount calculated at the rate specified in the corresponding entry in
column (4) of the said Table on the income specified in the corresponding entry in
column (3); and
(b) the amount of income-tax calculated in accordance with the provisions of
Part I and Part II in respect of the balance of his total income, that is, the “total income
from ordinary sources”:
T
ABLE
Serial   Person Nature of income Rate of tax
Number
(1) (2) (3) (4)
(1) Non-resident ( a) On investment income by way of- 
(i) interest 20 per cent.
(ii) dividends on which distribution tax
has not been paid under section 109.
(iii) Profit distributed by a fund on
which tax on distributed income has
not been paid under section 110  20 per cent.
(b) On income by way of royalty  20 per cent.
or fees for technical services
(c ) On income by way of  20 per cent.
insurance including reinsurance.
(2) Non-resident sportsperson, On income by way of—
who is not a citizen of India ( i) participation in India in any 10 per cent.
game [other than a game the
winnings  wherefrom are taxable
under item (ii) or item (iii) of
serial number 4] or sport;
(ii) advertisement; or 10 per cent.
(iii) contribution of articles relating 10 per cent.
 to any game or sport in newspapers,
magazines or journals in India.
(3) Non-resident sports On income by way of guarantee 10 per cent.
association or institution money in relation to any game or
sports played in India.
(4) Any assessee whether Income by way of winnings from—               30 per cent.
resident or non-resident ( i) any lottery or crossword puzzle;
(ii) race, including horse race (not
being the income from the activity
of owning and maintaining race
horses); or
(iii) card game or any other game
or gambling or betting
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50

THE SECOND SCHEDULE
[See Sections 104(1), (6), 109(2), 110(3), 111(2), 112(2), 230(11) and 314(225)]
RATES OF OTHER TAXES
A.—Tax on book profit
1. The  income-tax referred to in sub-section (1) of  section 103 shall be calculated
at the rate specified hereunder:—
Rate of tax
On the amount of book profit 20 per cent.
B.—Tax on  distributed profits of a domestic company
2. The tax referred to in sub-section (2) of section 109 shall be calculated at the rate
specified hereunder:—
Rate of tax
On the amount of dividend declared, distributed 15 per cent.
or paid by a domestic company
C.—Tax on distributed income
3. The tax referred to in sub-section (3) of section 110 shall be calculated at the rates
specified hereunder:—
Rates of tax
On the amount of income distributed by
(i) a mutual fund to the unit holders of equity 05 per cent.
oriented fund; or
(ii) life insurer to the policy holders of an
approved equity oriented life insurance scheme 05 per cent.
D.—Tax on branch profits
4. The tax  referred to in sub-section (2) of section 111 shall be calculated at the rate
specified hereunder:—
Rate of tax
On the branch profits 15 per cent.
E.—Tax on net wealth
5. The tax referred to in sub-section (2) of section 112 shall be calculated at the rates
specified and in the manner provided hereunder:—
Rates of tax
(1) where the net wealth as on the valuation NIL
date does not exceed one crore rupees
(2) where the net wealth, as on the valuation date 1 per cent. of  the
exceeds rupees one crore a mount by which
the net wealth exceeds
one crore  rupees
214
5
10
15
20
25
30
35

THE THIRD SCHEDULE
[see sections 195(2) and 314(187)(b)]
RATES FOR DEDUCTION OF TAX AT SOURCE
(Rates for deduction of tax at source in the case of resident deductee)
Serial Nature of payment Rate
number (Specified payment)
(1) (2) (3)
1. Income from employment The average rate of income-tax
on estimated income from
employment during the
financial year, computed on the
basis of the rates specified in
Part 1 of the First Schedule
2. Payment in respect of — 2 per cent.
(a) works contract;
(b) service contract;
(c) broadcasting and telecasting;
(d) supply of labour for carrying
out any works, or service contract;
(e) advertising; or
(f) carriage of goods and passengers
by any mode of transport other than
by railways.
3. Interest. 10 per cent.
4. Dividend other than dividend in respect of 10 per cent.
which dividend distribution tax is paid
5. Income distributed by mutual fund on which 10 per cent.
income distribution tax is not paid,-
(i) where the deductee is an Individual 20 per cent.
or a Hindu undivided family;
(ii) any other deductee
6. Payment made by a life-insurer in respect of
a life insurance policy other than the policy
referred to in clause (d) or clause (e) of sub-
section (3) of section 59—
(i)  where the deductee is an Individual 10 per cent.
or a Hindu undivided family;
(ii) any other deductee 20 per cent.
7. Commission, brokerage, remuneration, 10 per cent.
or prize (by whatever name called) for
rendering any services
8. Fees for professional or technical services 10 per cent.
9. Payment for royalty or non-compete fee 10 per cent.
10. Payment of compensation on compulsory 10 per cent.
acquisition of immovable property other
than agricultural land.
11. Rent—
(i) for the use of machinery or plant or 2 per cent.
equipment; 10 per cent.
215
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

216
(ii) for the use of any land or building 10 per cent.
(including factory building) or land
appurtenant to a building (including factory
building) or furniture or fittings
12. Winnings from any lottery or crossword 30 per cent.
puzzle or card game or other game of any sort
13. Winnings from any horse race. 30 per cent.
(1) (2) (3)
5

 THE FOURTH SCHEDULE
[See sections 195(3) and (4), 314(187)(b)]
(Rates for deduction of tax at source in the case of non-resident deductee)
Serial Nature of payment Rate
number (Specified payment)
(1) (2) (3)
1. Income from employment The average rate of income-tax
on estimated income from
employment during the
financial year, computed on the
basis of the rates specified in
Part 1 of the First Schedule
2. Payment by way of — 20 per cent.
(i) interest; or
(ii) dividends on which dividend
distribution tax has not been paid
under secton 109; or
(iii) profit distributed by a fund on
which tax on distributed income
has not been paid under section 110.
3. Payment by way of royalty or fees for 20 per cent.
technical services.
4. Winnings from lotteries, crossword puzzles, 30 per cent.
card games or any other game or gambling
or betting.
5. Winnings from horse races (not related to 30 per cent.
the activity of owning and maintaining
race horses).
6. Payment to a non-resident sportsperson 10 per cent.
(not being a citizen of India) by way of—
(i) participation in India in any game or
sport  (other than winnings referred to at
serial numbers 4 and 5);
(ii) advertisement; or
(iii) contribution of articles relating to
any  game or sport in newspapers,
magazines or  journals in India
7. Payment by way of guarantee money to a 10 per cent.
non-resident sports association or institution
in relation to any game or sports played in India
8. Any other sum chargeable to tax. 30 per cent.
217
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

THE FIFTH SCHEDULE
[See sections 139(4), 219(1), (5), 220(14), 16, 238, 279(1) and 297(1)]
PROCEDURE FOR RECOVERY OF TAX
PART I
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1. ( 1) The Tax Recovery Officer shall, upon assumption of jurisdiction under
section 219, cause to be served upon the defaulter a notice requiring the defaulter to pay the
amount specified in the certificate within a period of fifteen days from the date of service of
the notice.
(2) The notice under sub-paragraph ( 1) shall also intimate to the defaulter the steps
which shall be taken to realise the amount under this Schedule, if he defaults to make
payment within the time specified therein or within such further time as the Tax Recovery
Officer may in his discretion, grant.
2. (1) No step in execution of a certificate shall be taken until the period of fifteen days
has elapsed since the date of the service of the notice required under paragraph.
(2) The Tax Recovery Officer may attach the whole or any part of the movable property
of the defaulter, as would be liable to attachment in execution of a decree of a civil court,
within the said period of fifteen days if—
(a) he is satisfied, for reasons to be recorded in writing, that the defaulter is
likely to conceal, remove or dispose of the whole  or any part of the movable property;
and
(b) the realisation of the amount of the certificate would in consequence be
delayed or obstructed.
(3) The defaulter whose property has been so attached may furnish security to the
satisfaction of the Tax Recovery Officer and on such acceptance of the security by the Tax
Recovery Officer, the attachment shall be cancelled from the date on which the security is
accepted.
3. (1) If the amount mentioned in the notice is not paid within the time specified
therein, or within such further time as the Tax Recovery Officer may grant in his discretion,
the Tax Recovery Officer shall proceed to realise the amount by one  or more of the following
modes, namely:—
(a) by attachment and sale of the defaulter’s movable property;
(b) by attachment and sale of the defaulter’s immovable property;
(c) by arrest of the defaulter and his detention in prison in accordance with the
provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973;
(d) by appointing a receiver for the management of the defaulter’s movable and
immovable properties.
(2) The defaulter’s movable or immovable property, referred to in sub-paragraph (1),
shall include any property transferred directly, or indirectly, otherwise than for adequate
consideration by the defaulter to—
(a) his spouse; or
(b) minor child.
(3) In respect of any arrears due from the defaulter for the period prior to the date of
attainment of majority by the minor child, the property shall continue to be included in the
defaulter’s movable or immovable property even after the date.
4. There shall be recoverable, in the proceedings in execution of every certificate—
(a) such interest upon the amount of tax or penalty or other sum to which the
certificate relates as is payable in accordance with section 213, and
Issue of
notice.
When
certificate
may be
executed.
Mode of
recovery.
Interest, costs
and charges
recoverable.
218
2 of 1974.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

219
(b) all charges incurred in respect of—
(i) the service of notice upon the defaulter to pay the arrears, and of
warrants and other processes, and
(ii) all other proceedings taken for realising the arrears.
5. ( 1) Where property is sold in execution of a certificate, there shall vest in the
purchaser merely the right, title and interest of the defaulter at the time of the sale, even
though the property itself be specified.
(2) Where immovable property is sold in execution of a certificate, and such sale has
become absolute, the purchaser’s right, title and interest shall be deemed to have vested in
him from the time when the property is sold, and not from the time when the sale becomes
absolute.
6. (1) No suit shall be maintained against any person claiming title under a purchase
certified by the Tax Recovery Officer in the manner laid down in this Schedule, on the
ground that the purchase was made on behalf of the plaintiff or on behalf of some one
through whom the plaintiff claims.
(2) Nothing in paragraph (1) shall bar a suit to obtain a declaration that the name of
any purchaser certified thereunder was inserted in the certificate fraudulently or without
the consent of the real purchaser, or interfere with the right of a third person to proceed
against that property, though ostensibly sold to the certified purchaser, on the ground that
it is liable to satisfy a claim of such third person against the real owner.
7. (1) Whenever assets are realised by sale, or otherwise, in execution of a certificate,
the proceeds shall be disposed of in the following manner, namely:—
(a) they shall first be adjusted towards the amount due under the certificate in
execution of which the assets were realised and the costs incurred in the course of
such execution;
(b) if there remains a balance after the adjustment referred to in clause (a), the
same shall be utilised for satisfaction of any other amount recoverable from the
assessee under this Code which may be due on the date on which the assets were
realised; and
(c) the balance, if any, remaining after the adjustments under clauses (a) and (b)
shall be paid to the defaulter.
(2) If the defaulter disputes any adjustment under clause (b) of sub-paragraph (1), the
Tax Recovery Officer shall determine the dispute.
8. (1) Except as otherwise expressly provided in this Code, every question arising
between the Tax Recovery Officer and the defaulter or their representatives, relating to the
execution, discharge or satisfaction of a certificate, or relating to the confirmation or setting
aside by an order under this Code of a sale held in execution of such certificate, shall be
determined, by the order of the Tax Recovery Officer before whom such question arises and
not by suit in courts.
(2) Notwithstanding sub-paragraph (1), a suit may be brought in a civil court in
respect of any question referred to in that sub-paragraph upon the ground of fraud.
9. (1) Any property exempted, under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, from attachment
and sale in execution of a decree of a civil court, shall be exempt from attachment and sale
under this Schedule.
(2) The Tax Recovery Officer’s decision as to what property is so entitled to exemption
other than the property exempt under sub-paragraph ( 1) shall be conclusive.
10. (1) Where any claim is preferred to or any objection is made, to the attachment or
sale of any property in execution of a certificate, on the ground that such property is not
liable to such attachment or sale, the Tax Recovery Officer shall proceed to investigate the
claim or objection.
Purchaser’s
title.
Suit against
purchaser not
maintainable
on ground of
purchase being
made on
behalf of
plaintiff.
Disposal of
proceeds of
execution.
General bar to
jurisdiction of
civil courts,
save where
fraud alleged.
Property
exempt from
attachment.
Investigation
by Tax
Recovery
Officer.
5 of 1908.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50

220
(2) No investigation under sub-paragraph (1) shall be made, where the Tax Recovery
Officer considers that the claim or objection was designedly or unnecessarily delayed.
(3) Where the property to which the claim or objection applies has been advertised
for sale, the Tax Recovery Officer  ordering the sale, may postpone it pending the investigation
of the claim or objection, upon such terms as to security or otherwise as he thinks fit.
(4) The claimant or objector must adduce evidence—
(a) in the case of an immovable property at the date of the service of the notice
issued under this Schedule to pay the arrears, or
(b) in the case of a movable property, at the date of the attachment, to show that
he had some interest in, or was possessed of, the property in question—
(5) The Tax Recovery Officer shall make an order releasing the property wholly or to
such extent as he thinks fit, from attachment or sale, if he is satisfied or investigation that for
the reason stated in the claim or objection, such property—
(a) was not, at the said date, in the possession of the defaulter or of some
person in trust for him;
(b) was not in the occupancy of a tenant or other person paying rent to the
defaulter; or
(c) being in the possession of the defaulter at the said date, it was so in his
possession, not on his own account or as his own property, but on account of or in
trust for some other person, or partly on his own account and partly on account of
some other person.
(6) The Tax Recovery Officer shall disallow the claim, for reasons to be recorded in
writing, if he is satisfied that the property was—
(a) at the said date, in the possession of the defaulter as his own property and
not on account of any other person;
(b) in the possession of some other person in trust for the defaulter; or
(c) in the occupancy of a tenant or other person paying rent to the defaulter.
(7) Where a claim or an objection is preferred, the party against whom an order is
made may institute a suit in a civil court to establish his right to the property in disputes;
but, subject to the outcome of such suit the order of the Tax Recovery Officer shall be
conclusive.
11. Where—
(a) the amount due, with costs and all charges and expenses resulting from the
attachment of any property or incurred in order to hold a sale, are paid to the Tax
Recovery Officer, or
(b) the certificate is cancelled,
the attachment shall be deemed to be withdrawn and, in the case of immovable property, the
withdrawal shall, if the defaulter so desires, be proclaimed at his expense, and a copy of the
proclamation shall be affixed in the manner provided in this Schedule.
12. The attachment and sale of movable and immovable property may be made by
such persons as the Tax Recovery Officer may from time to time direct.
13. ( 1) Any deficiency of price which may happen on a resale by reason of the
purchaser’s default, and all expenses attending such resale, shall be certified to the Tax
Recovery Officer by the officer holding the sale, and shall, at the instance of either the Tax
Recovery Officer or the defaulter, be recoverable from the defaulting purchaser under the
procedure provided in this Schedule.
Removal of at-
tachment on
satisfaction, or
cancellation of
certificate.
Officer entitled
to attach and
sell.
Defaulting
purchaser
answerable for
loss on resale.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

221
(2) No application under sub-paragraph (1) shall not be entertained, if it is filed after
the end of fifteenth day from the date of resale.
14. (1) The Tax Recovery Officer may, in his discretion, adjourn any sale hereunder to
a specified day and hour; and the officer conducting any such sale may, in his discretion,
adjourn the sale, after recording his reasons for such adjournment.
(2) If the sale is made in, or within the precincts of, the office of the Tax Recovery
Officer, no such adjournment shall be made without the leave of the Tax Recovery Officer.
(3) Where a sale of immovable property is adjourned under sub-paragraph ( 1) for a
longer period than one calendar month, a fresh proclamation of sale under this Schedule
shall be made unless the defaulter consents to waive it.
(4) Every sale shall be stopped if, before the lot is knocked down, the arrears and
costs (including the costs of the sale) are tendered to the officer conducting the sale, or
proof is given to his satisfaction that the amount of such arrears and costs has been paid to
the Tax Recovery Officer who ordered the sale.
15. (1) Where a notice has been served on a defaulter under paragraph 1, the defaulter,
or his representative in interest, shall not be competent to mortgage, charge, lease or
otherwise deal with any property belonging to him except with the permission of the Tax
Recovery Officer, nor shall any civil court issue any process against such property in
execution of a decree for the payment of money.
(2) Where an attachment has been made under this Schedule, any private transfer, or
delivery, of the property attached or of any interest therein and any payment to the defaulter
of any debt, dividend or other moneys contrary to such attachment, shall be void as against
all claims enforceable under the attachment.
16. No officer or other person having any duty to perform in connection with any sale
under this Schedule shall, either directly or indirectly, bid for, acquire or attempt to acquire
any interest in the property sold.
17. No sale under this Schedule shall take place on —
(a) a Sunday;
(b) other general holiday recognised by the State Government ; or
(c) any day which has been notified by the State Government to be a local
holiday for the area in which the sale is to take place.
18. Any officer authorised to attach or sell any property or to arrest the defaulter or
charged with any duty to be performed under this Schedule, may apply to the officer-in-
charge of the nearest police station for such assistance as may be necessary in the discharge
of his duties, and the authority to whom such application is made shall depute a sufficient
number of police personnel for furnishing such assistance.
19. A Tax Recovery Officer may, with the previous approval of the Joint Commissioner,
entrust any of his functions as the Tax Recovery Officer to any other officer lower than him
in rank (not being lower in rank than an Inspector of Income-tax) and such officer shall, in
relation to the functions so entrusted to him, be deemed to be a Tax Recovery Officer.
PART II
A
TTACHMENT AND SALE OF MOV ABLE PROPERTY
Attachment
20. Except as otherwise provided in this Schedule, when any movable property is to
be attached, the officer shall be furnished by the Tax Recovery Officer (or other officer
empowered by him in that behalf) a warrant in writing and signed with his name specifying
the name of the defaulter and the amount to be realised.
Adjournment
or stoppage of
sale.
Private
alienation to
be void in
certain cases.
Prohibition
against bidding
or purchase by
officer.
Prohibition
against sale on
holidays.
Assistance by
police.
Entrustment
of certain
functions by
Tax Recovery
Officer.
Warrant.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

222
21. The officer shall cause a copy of the warrant to be served on the defaulter.
22. If, after service of the copy of the warrant, the amount is not paid forthwith, the
officer shall proceed to attach the movable property of the defaulter.
23. (1) Where the property to be attached is movable property (other than agricultural
produce) in the possession of the defaulter, the attachment shall be made by actual seizure,
and the officer shall keep the property in his own custody or the custody of one of his
subordinates and shall be responsible for due custody thereof.
(2) The officer referred in sub-paragraph (1) may sell the property seized at once, if—
(a) the property seized is subject to speedy and natural decay; or
(b) the expense of keeping the seized property in custody is likely to exceed its
value.
24. (1) Where the property to be attached is agricultural produce the attachment shall
be made by affixing a copy of the warrant of attachment—
(a) where such produce is growing crop, on the land on which such crop has
grown; or
(b) where such produce has been cut or gathered, on the threshing floor or
place for treading out grain or the like, or fodder-stack, on or in which it is deposited,
in such manner as may be considered necessary.
(2) A copy of warrant of attachment, where the property to be attached is agricultural
produce, shall also be affixed on the outer door or on some other conspicuous part of the
house in which the defaulter ordinarily resides, or with the leave of the Tax Recovery
Officer, on the outer door or on some other conspicuous part of the house in which he—
(a) carries on business or personally works for gain; or
(b) is known to have last resided or carried on business or personally worked
for gain.
(3) Upon affixing the copy of warrant under sub-paragraphs (1) and (2), the produce
shall be deemed to have passed into the possession of the Tax Recovery Officer.
25. (1) Where agricultural produce is attached, the Tax Recovery Officer shall make
such arrangements for the custody, watching, tending, cutting and gathering thereof as he
may deem sufficient; and he shall have power to defray the cost of such arrangements.
(2) The defaulter may tend, cut, gather and store the produce and do any other act
necessary for maturing or preserving it, subject to such conditions as may be imposed by
the Tax Recovery Officer in this behalf, either in the order of attachment or in any subsequent
order.
(3) If the defaulter fails to do all or any of the acts referred to in sub-paragraph (2), any
person appointed by the Tax Recovery Officer in this behalf may, subject to the like
conditions, do all or any of such acts, and the costs incurred by such person shall be
recoverable from the defaulter as if they were included in the certificate.
(4) Any agricultural produce attached as a growing crop shall not be deemed to have
ceased to be under attachment or to require re-attachment merely because it has been
severed from the soil.
(5) Where an order for the attachment of a growing crop has been made at a considerable
time before the crop is likely to be fit to be cut or gathered, the Tax Recovery Officer may
suspend the execution of the order for such time as he thinks fit, and may, in his discretion,
make a further order prohibiting the removal of the crop pending the execution of the order
of attachment.
(6) A growing crop which from its nature does not admit of being stored shall not be
attached under this paragraph at any time less than twenty days before the time at which it
is likely to be fit to be cut or gathered.
Service of copy
of warrant.
Attachment.
Property in
defaulter’s
possession.
Agricultural
produce.
Provisions as
to agricultural
produce under
attachment.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
5045

223
26. (1) In the case of a debt not secured by a negotiable instrument, a share in a
corporation or other movable property not in the possession of the defaulter except property
deposited in, or in the custody of, any court, the attachment shall be made by a written order
prohibiting,
(a) in the case of the debt the creditor from recovering the debt and the debtor
from making payment thereof until the further order of the Tax Recovery Officer;
(b) in the case of the share the person in whose name the share may be standing
from transferring the same or receiving any dividend thereon;
(c) in the case of the other movable property (except as aforesaid) the person in
possession of the same from giving it over to the defaulter.
(2) A copy of such order shall be affixed on some conspicuous part of the office of the
Tax Recovery Officer, and another copy shall be sent, in the case of the debt, to the debtor,
in the case of the share, to the proper officer of the corporation, and in the case of the other
movable property (except as aforesaid), to the person in possession of the same.
(3) A debtor prohibited under clause (a) of sub-paragraph (1) may pay the amount of
his debt to the Tax Recovery Officer, and such payment shall discharge him as effectually as
payment to the party entitled to receive the same.
27. (1) The attachment of a decree of a civil court for the payment of money, or for sale
in enforcement of a mortgage or charge, shall be made by the issue to the civil court of a
notice requesting the civil court to stay the execution of the decree unless and until—
(a) the Tax Recovery Officer cancels the notice; or
(b) the Tax Recovery Officer, or the defaulter, applies to the court receiving such
notice to execute the decree.
(2) Where a civil court receives an application under clause (b) of sub-paragraph (1),
it shall, on the application of the Tax Recovery Officer, or the defaulter, and subject to the
provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, proceed to execute the attached decree and
apply the net proceeds in satisfaction of the certificate.
(3) The Tax Recovery Officer shall be deemed to be the representative of the holder of
the attached decree, and to be entitled to execute such attached decree in any manner lawful
for the holder thereof.
28. Where the property to be attached consists of the share, or interest, of the defaulter
in movable property belonging to him and another as co-owners, the attachment shall be
made by a notice to the defaulter prohibiting him from transferring the share or interest or
charging it in any way.
29. Attachment of the salary or allowances of servants of the Government, or a local
authority, may be made in the manner provided under rule 48 of Order 21 of the First
Schedule to the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, and the provisions of the said rule shall,
for the purposes of this paragraph, apply subject to such modifications as may be
necessary.
30. Where the property is a negotiable instrument not deposited in a court or in the
custody of a public officer, the attachment shall be made by actual seizure, and the instrument
shall be brought before the Tax Recovery Officer and held subject to his orders.
31. (1) Where the property to be attached is in the custody of any court or public
officer, the attachment shall be made by a notice to such court or officer, requesting that
such property, and any interest or dividend becoming payable thereon, may be held subject
to the further orders of the Tax Recovery Officer by whom the notice is issued.
(2) Where the property is in the custody of a court, any question of title or priority
arising between the Tax Recovery Officer and any other person, not being the defaulter,
claiming to be interested in such property by virtue of any assignment, attachment or
otherwise, shall be determined by the court.
Debts and
shares.
Attachment
of decree.
Share in
movable
property.
Salary of
Government
servants.
Attachment
of negotiable
instrument.
Attachment
of property in
custody of
court or public
officer.
5 of 1908.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50

224
32. (1) Where the property to be attached consists of an interest of the defaulter,
being a partner, in the partnership property, the Tax Recovery Officer may make an order
charging the share of such partner in the partnership property and profits with payment of
the amount due under the certificate.
(2) The Tax Recovery Officer may, by the order referred to in sub-paragraph (1) or any
subsequent order, appoint a receiver of the share of such partner in the profits, whether
already declared or accruing and of any other money which may become due to him in
respect of the partnership, and direct accounts and inquiries and make an order for the sale
of such interest or such other order as the circumstances of the case may require.
(3) The other persons shall be at liberty at any time to redeem the interest charged or,
in the case of a sale being directed, to purchase the same.
33. In the case of attachment of movable property by actual seizure, the officer shall,
after attachment of the property, prepare an inventory of all the property attached, specifying
in it the place where it is lodged or kept, and shall forward the same to the Tax Recovery
Officer and a copy of the inventory shall be delivered by the officer to the defaulter.
34. The attachment by seizure shall not be excessive, that is to say, the property
attached shall be as nearly as possible proportionate to the amount specified in the warrant.
35. Attachment by seizure shall be made after sunrise and before sunset and not
otherwise.
36. The officer may break open any inner or outer door or window of any building and
enter any building in order to seize any movable property, if the officer has reasonable
grounds to believe that such building contains movable property liable to seizure under the
warrant and the officer has notified his authority and intention of breaking open if admission
is not given provided that before breaking open, he shall give all reasonable opportunity to
women to withdraw.
37. The Tax Recovery Officer may direct that any movable property attached under
this Schedule or such portion thereof as may seem necessary to satisfy the certificate shall
be sold.
38. When any sale of movable property is ordered by the Tax Recovery Officer, the
Tax Recovery Officer shall issue a proclamation, in the language in use in the district, of the
intended sale, specifying the time and place of sale and whether the sale is subject to
confirmation or not.
39. (1) Such proclamation shall be made by beat of drum or other customary mode—
(a) in the case of property attached by actual seizure—
(i) in the village in which the property was seized, or, if the property was
seized in a town or city, then, in the locality in which it was seized; and
(ii) at such other places as the Tax Recovery Officer may direct;
(b) in the case of property attached otherwise than by actual seizure, in such
places, if any, as the Tax Recovery Officer may direct.
(2) A copy of the proclamation shall also be affixed in a conspicuous part of the office
of the Tax Recovery Officer.
40. Except where the property is subject to speedy and natural decay, or when the
expense of keeping it in custody is likely to exceed its value, no sale of movable property
under this Schedule shall, without the consent in writing of the defaulter, take place until
after the expiry of at least fifteen days calculated from the date on which a copy of the sale
proclamation was affixed in the office of the Tax Recovery Officer.
Attachment
of partnership
property.
Inventory.
Attachment
not to be
excessive.
Seizure
between
sunrise and
sunset.
Power to break
open doors.
Sale.
Issue of
proclamation.
Proclamation
how made.
Sale after
fifteen days.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

225
41. (1) Where the property to be sold is agricultural produce, the sale shall be held—
(a) if such produce is a growing crop, on or near the land on which such crop
has grown, or
(b) if such produce has been cut or gathered, at or near the threshing floor or
place for treading out grain or the like, or fodder-stack, on or in which it is deposited.
(2) The Tax Recovery Officer may direct the sale to be held at the nearest place of
public resort, if he is of the opinion that the produce is thereby likely to sell at a greater
value.
(3) The sale shall be postponed, where, on the produce being put up for sale—
(a) a fair price, in the estimation of the person holding the sale, is not offered for
it, and
(b) the owner of the produce, or a person authorised to act on his behalf,
applies to have the sale postponed till the next day or, if a market is held at the place
of sale, the next market day.
(4) When the sale has been postponed under sub-paragraph ( 3), it shall be then
completed on the date postponed irrespective of any price offered for the produce.
42. (1) Where the property to be sold is a growing crop and the crop from its nature
admits of being stored but has not yet been stored, the day of the sale shall be so fixed as
to admit of the crop being made ready for storing before the arrival of such day, and the sale
shall not be held until the crop has been cut, or gathered, and is ready for storing.
(2) Where the crop from its nature does not admit of being stored or can be sold at a
greater value in an unripe stage, it may be sold before it is cut and gathered, and the
purchaser shall be entitled to enter on the land, and to do all that is necessary for the
purpose of tending or cutting or gathering the crop.
43. The property shall be sold by public auction in one, or more, lots as the officer may
consider advisable, and if the amount to be realised by sale is satisfied by the sale of a
portion of the property, the sale shall be immediately stopped with respect to the remainder
of the lots.
44. (1) Where movable property is sold by public auction, the price of each lot shall be
paid at the time of sale or as soon after as the officer holding the sale directs and in default
of payment, the property shall forthwith be resold.
(2) On payment of the purchase-money, the officer holding the sale shall grant a
certificate specifying the property purchased, the price paid and the name of the purchaser,
and the sale shall become absolute.
(3) Where the movable property to be sold is a share in goods belonging to the
defaulter and a co-owner, and two or more persons, of whom one is such co-owner,
respectively, bid the same sum for such property or for any lot, the bidding shall be deemed
to be the bidding of the co-owner.
45. No irregularity in publishing, or conducting, the sale of movable property shall
vitiate the sale, but any person sustaining substantial injury by reason of such irregularity
at the hand of any other person may institute a suit in a civil court against him for
compensation, or (if such other person is the purchaser) for the recovery of the specific
property and for compensation in default of such recovery.
46. The Tax Recovery Officer may, notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained
in this Schedule, authorise the sale of any property, which is a negotiable instrument or a
share in a corporation, through a broker instead of directing the sale to be made by public
auction.
Sale of
agricultural
produce.
Special
provisions
relating to
growing crops.
Sale to be by
auction.
Sale by public
auction.
Irregularity
not to vitiate
sale, but any
person injured
may sue.
Negotiable
instruments
and shares in a
corporation.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

226
47. Where the property attached is current coin or currency notes, the Tax Recovery
Officer may, at any time during the continuance of the attachment, direct that such coins or
notes shall be credited to the Central Government and the amount so credited shall be dealt
with in the manner specified in paragraph 7.
PART III
A
TTACHMENT AND SALE OF IMMOV ABLE PROPERTY
ATTACHMENT
48. The Attachment of the immovable property of the defaulter shall be made by an
order prohibiting the defaulter from transferring, or charging, the property in any way and
prohibiting all persons from taking any benefit under such transfer or charge.
49. A copy of the order of attachment shall be served on the defaulter.
50. The order of attachment shall be proclaimed at some place on, or adjacent to, the
property attached by beat of drum, or other customary mode, and a copy of the order shall
be affixed on a conspicuous part of the property and on the notice board of the office of the
Tax Recovery Officer.
51. Where any immovable property is attached under this Schedule, the attachment
shall relate back to, and take effect from, the date on which the notice to pay the arrears,
issued under this Schedule, was served upon the defaulter.
SALE
52. (1) The Tax Recovery Officer may direct that any immovable property which has
been attached, or such portion thereof as may seem necessary to satisfy the certificate,
shall be sold.
(2) Where any immovable property is ordered to be sold, the Tax Recovery Officer
shall cause a proclamation of the intended sale to be made in the language in use in the
district.
53. A proclamation of sale of immovable property shall be drawn up after notice to the
defaulter, and shall state the time and place of sale, and specify as fairly and accurately as
possible—
(a) the property to be sold;
(b) the revenue, if any, assessed upon the property or any part thereof;
(c) the amount for the recovery of which the sale is ordered;
(d) the reserve price, if any, below which the property may not be sold; and
(e) any other thing which the Tax Recovery Officer considers it material for a
purchaser to know, in order to judge the nature and value of the property.
54. (1) Every proclamation for the sale of immovable property shall be made at some
place on or near such property by beat of drum or other customary mode, and a copy of the
proclamation shall be affixed on a conspicuous part of the property and also upon a
conspicuous part of the office of the Tax Recovery Officer.
(2) Where the Tax Recovery Officer so directs, such proclamation shall also be
published in the Official Gazette or in a local newspaper, or in both; and the cost of such
publication shall be deemed to be costs of the sale.
(3) Where the property is divided into lots for the purpose of being sold separately, it
shall not be necessary to make a separate proclamation for each lot, unless proper notice of
the sale cannot, in the opinion of the Tax Recovery Officer, otherwise be given.
Order for
payment of
coin or
currency notes
to the
Assessing
Officer.
Attachment.
Service of
notice of
attachment.
Proclamation
of
attachment.
Attachment
to relate back
from the date
of service of
notice.
Sale and
proclamation
of sale.
Contents of
proclamation.
Mode of
making
proclamation.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

227
55. No sale of immovable property under this Schedule shall, without the consent in
writing of the defaulter, take place until after the expiration of at least thirty days calculated
from the date on which a copy of the proclamation of sale has been affixed on the property
or in the office of the Tax Recovery Officer, whichever is later.
56. (1) The sale shall be by public auction to the highest bidder and shall be subject
to confirmation by the Tax Recovery Officer.
(2)  No sale under this paragraph shall be made, if the amount bid by the highest bidder
is less than the reserve price, if any, specified under clause (d) of paragraph 53.
57. (1) On every sale of immovable property, the person declared to be the purchaser
shall pay, immediately after such declaration, a deposit of twenty-five per cent. on the
amount of his purchase money, to the officer conducting the sale; and, in default of such
deposit, the property shall forthwith be resold.
(2) The full amount of purchase money payable shall be paid by the purchaser to the
Tax Recovery Officer on or before the fifteenth day from the date of the sale of the property.
58. In default of payment within the period mentioned in paragraph 57, the deposit
may, if the Tax Recovery Officer thinks fit, after defraying the expenses of the sale, be
forfeited to the Government, and the property shall be resold, and the defaulting purchaser
shall forfeit all claims to the property or to any part of the sum for which it may subsequently
be sold.
59. (1) Where the sale of a property, for which a reserve price has been specified under
clause (d) of paragraph 53, has been postponed for want of a bid of an amount not less than
such reserve price, it shall be lawful for an Assessing Officer, if so authorised by the Chief
Commissioner or this Commissioner in this behalf, to bid for the property on behalf of the
Central Government at any subsequent sale.
(2) All persons bidding at the sale shall be required to declare, if they are bidding on
their own behalf or on behalf of their principles.
(3) The bid shall be rejected if the person bidding on behalf of his principal fails to
deposit the authority.
(4) Where the Assessing Officer referred to in sub-paragraph (1) is declared to be the
purchaser of the property at any subsequent sale, nothing contained in paragraph 57 shall
apply to the case and the amount of the purchase price shall be adjusted towards the
amount specified in the certificate.
60. (1) Where immovable property has been sold in execution of a certificate, the
defaulter, or any person whose interests are affected by the sale, may, at any time within a
period of  thirty days from the date of the sale, apply to the Tax Recovery Officer to set aside
the sale, on his depositing—
(a) the amount specified in the proclamation of sale as that for the recovery of
which the sale was ordered, with interest thereon at the rate of one and one-fourth per
cent. for every month calculated from the date of the proclamation of sale to the date
when the deposit is made; and
(b) for payment to the purchaser, as penalty, a sum equal to five per cent. of the
purchase money, but not less than one rupee.
(2) Where a person makes an application under paragraph 61 for setting aside the sale
of his immovable property, he shall not, unless he withdraws that application, be entitled to
make or prosecute an application under this paragraph.
61. (1) Where immovable property has been sold in execution of a certificate by such
Income tax Officer as may be authorised by the Chief Commissioner or the Commissioner in
this behalf, the defaulter or any person whose interests are affected by the sale, may at any
time within thirty days from the date of the sale, apply to the Tax Recovery Officer to set
aside the sale of the immovable property on the ground—
Time of sale.
Sale to be by
auction.
Deposit by
purchaser and
resale in
default.
Procedure in
default of
payment.
Authority to
bid.
Application to
set aside sale
of immovable
property on
deposit.
Application to
set aside sale of
immovable
property on
ground of non-
service of
notice or
irregularity.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50

228
(a) that notice was not served on the defaulter to pay the arrears as required by
this Schedule; or
(b) of a material irregularity in publishing, or conducting, the sale.
(2) No sale shall be set aside on any ground referred to in sub-paragraph ( 1) unless
the Tax Recovery Officer is satisfied that the applicant has sustained substantial injury by
reason of the non-service or irregularity.
(3) An application made by a defaulter under this paragraph shall be disallowed
unless the applicant deposits the amount recoverable from him in the execution of the
certificate.
62. At any time within a period of thirty days of the sale, the purchaser may apply to
the Tax Recovery Officer to set aside the sale on the ground that the defaulter had no
saleable interest in the property sold.
63. (1) Where no application is made for setting aside the sale under paragraphs 60
and 61 or where such an application is made and disallowed by the Tax Recovery Officer, the
Tax Recovery Officer shall (if the full amount of the purchase money has been paid) make an
order confirming the sale and thereupon, the sale shall become absolute.
(2) Where application is made and allowed, and where, in the case of an application
made to set aside the sale on deposit of the amount and penalty and charges, the deposit is
made within  a period of thirty days from the date of the sale, the Tax Recovery Officer shall
make an order setting aside the sale.
(3) No order under sub-paragraph (2) shall be made unless notice of the application
has been given to the persons affected thereby.
64. Where a sale of immovable property is set aside, any money paid or deposited by
the purchaser on account of the purchase, together with the penalty, if any, deposited for
payment to the purchaser, and such interest as the Tax Recovery Officer may allow, shall be
paid to the purchaser.
65. Where a sale of immovable property has become absolute, the Tax Recovery
Officer shall grant a certificate specifying the property sold, and the name of the person
who at the time of sale is declared to be the purchaser and such certificate shall state the
date on which the sale became absolute.
66. (1) Where an order for the sale of immovable property has been made, if the
defaulter can satisfy the Tax Recovery Officer that there is reason to believe that the amount
of the certificate may be raised by the mortgage or lease or private sale of such property, or
some part thereof, or of any other immovable property of the defaulter, the Tax Recovery
Officer may, on his application, postpone the sale of the property comprised in the order for
sale, on such terms, and for such period as he thinks proper, to enable him to raise the
amount.
(2) In such case, the Tax Recovery Officer shall grant a certificate to the defaulter,
authorising him, within a period to be mentioned therein, and notwithstanding anything
contained in this Schedule, to make the proposed mortgage, lease or sale.
(3) All moneys payable under the mortgage, lease or sale referred to in sub-paragraph
(2) shall be paid to the Tax Recovery Officer and not to the defaulter.
(4) No mortgage, lease or sale under this paragraph shall become absolute until it has
been confirmed by the Tax Recovery Officer.
67. Every resale of immovable property, in default of payment of the purchase money
within the period allowed for such payment, shall be made after the issue of a fresh
proclamation in the manner and for the period hereinbefore provided for the sale.
Setting aside
sale where
defaulter has
no saleable
interest.
Confirmation
of sale.
Return of
purchase
money in
certain cases.
Sale
certificate.
Fresh
proclamation
before resale.
Postponement
of sale to
enable
defaulter to
raise amount
due under
certificate.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

229
68. Where the property sold is a share of undivided immovable property, and two or
more persons, of whom one is a co-sharer, respectively, bid the same sum for such property
or for any lot, the bid shall be deemed to be the bid of the co-sharer.
69. ( 1) Without prejudice to the provisions contained in this Part, an Assessing
Officer, duly authorised by the Chief Commissioner or the Commissioner in this behalf, may
accept in satisfaction of the whole or any part of the amount due from the defaulter the
property, the sale of which has been postponed for the reason mentioned in sub-paragraph
(1) of paragraph 59, at such price as may be agreed upon between the Assessing Officer and
the defaulter.
(2) Where any property is accepted under sub-paragraph ( 1), the defaulter shall
deliver possession of such property to the Assessing Officer and on the date the possession
of the property is delivered to the Assessing Officer, the property shall vest in the Central
Government and the Central Government shall, where necessary, intimate the concerned
Registering Officer appointed under the Registration Act, 1908, accordingly.
(3) Where the price of the property agreed upon under sub-paragraph (1) exceeds the
amount due from the defaulter, such excess shall be paid by the Assessing Officer to the
defaulter within a period of three months from the date of delivery of possession of the
property.
(4) Where the Assessing Officer fails to pay the excess amount referred to in sub-
paragraph (3) within the period referred therein, the Central Government shall, for the period
commencing on the expiry of such period and ending with the date of payment of the
amount remaining unpaid, pay simple interest at one-half per cent for every month or part of
a month to the defaulter on such amount.
70. (1) No sale of immovable property shall be made under this Part after the expiry of
the period of  six years from the end of the financial year in which the order giving rise to a
demand of any tax, interest, fine, penalty or any other sum, for the recovery of which the
immovable property has been attached, has become final in terms of the provision of sub-
Chapter D of Chapter XII.
(2) The period of limitation referred to in sub-paragraph (1) shall stand extended by
one year, if the immovable property is required to be re-sold—
(a) due to the amount of highest bid being less than the reserve price;
(b) under the circumstances mentioned in paragraph 57 or paragraph 58; or
(c) due to the sale being set aside under paragraph 61.
(3) In computing the period of limitation under sub-paragraph ( 1), the following
period shall be excluded—
(a) the period during which the levy of the aforesaid tax, interest, fine, penalty
or any other sum is stayed by an order or injunction of any court;
(b) the period during which the proceedings of attachment or sale of the
immovable property are stayed by an order or injunction of any court; or
(c) the period commencing from the date of the presentation of any appeal
against the order passed by the Tax Recovery Officer under this Schedule and ending
on the day the appeal is decided.
(4) Where immediately after the exclusion of the period referred in sub-paragraph (3),
the period of limitation for the sale of the immovable property is less than 180 days, such
remaining period shall be extended to 180 days and the aforesaid period of limitation shall
be deemed to be extended accordingly.
(5) Where the sale of immovable property is not made in accordance with the provisions
of sub-paragraph (1), the attachment order in relation to the said property shall be deemed
to have been vacated on the expiry of the time of limitation specified under this paragraph.
Bid of co-
sharer to have
preference.
Acceptance of
property in
satisfaction of
amount due
from the
defaulter.
Time limit for
sale of
attached
immovable
property.
16 of 1908.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

230
PART IV
PROCEDURE FOR DISTRAINT
71. Where any distraint and sale of movable property are to be effected by any
Assessing Officer or Tax Recovery Officer authorised for the purpose, such distraint and
sale shall be made, as far as may be, in the same manner as attachment and sale of any
movable property attachable by actual seizure, and the provisions of this Schedule relating
to attachment and sale shall, so far as may be, apply in respect of such distraint and sale.
PART V
A
PPOINTMENT OF RECEIVER
72. (1) Where the property of a defaulter consists of a business, the Tax Recovery
Officer may attach the business and appoint a person as receiver to manage the business.
(2) The attachment of a business under this paragraph shall be made by an order
prohibiting the defaulter from transferring or charging the business in any way and
prohibiting all persons from taking any benefit under such transfer or charge, and intimating
that the business has been attached under this paragraph.
(3) A copy of the order of attachment shall be served on the defaulter, and another
copy shall be affixed on a conspicuous part of the premises in which the business is carried
on and on the notice board of the office of the Tax Recovery Officer.
73. Where immovable property is attached, the Tax Recovery Officer may, instead of
directing a sale of the property, appoint a person as receiver to manage such property.
74. (1) Where any business or other property is attached and taken under management
under paragraphs 70 and 73, the receiver shall, subject to the control of the Tax Recovery
Officer, have such powers as may be necessary for the proper management of the property
and the realisation of the profits, or rents and profits, thereof.
(2) The profits or rents and profits of such business or other property, shall, after
defraying the expenses of management, be adjusted towards discharge of the arrears, and
the balance, if any, shall be paid to the defaulter.
75. The attachment and management under this Part may be withdrawn at any time at
the discretion of the Tax Recovery Officer, or if the arrears are discharged by receipt of such
profits and rents or are otherwise paid.
PART VI
A
RREST AND DETENTION OF THE DEFAULTER
76. (1) No order for the arrest and detention in civil prison of a defaulter shall be made
unless the Tax Recovery Officer has issued and served a notice upon the defaulter calling
upon him to appear before him on the date specified in the notice and to show cause why he
should not be committed to the civil prison.
(2) The provisions of sub-paragraph (1) shall not apply if the Tax Recovery Officer,
for reasons recorded in writing, is satisfied—
(a) that the defaulter has, with the object or effect of obstructing the execution
of the certificate, after the drawing up of the certificate by the Tax Recovery Officer,
dishonestly transferred, concealed, or removed any part of his property; or
(b) that the defaulter has, or has had since the drawing up of the certificate by
the Tax Recovery Officer, the means to pay the arrears or some substantial part
thereof and refuses or neglects or has refused or neglected to pay the same.
(3) Notwithstanding anything in sub-paragraph ( 1), a warrant for the arrest of the
defaulter may, be issued by the Tax Recovery Officer, if he is satisfied, by affidavit or
otherwise, that the defaulter is likely to abscond, or leave the local limits of the jurisdiction
Procedure for
distraint.
Appointment
of receiver
for business.
Appointment
of receiver for
immovable
property.
Powers of
receiver.
Withdrawal of
management.
Notice to
show cause.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

231
of the Tax Recovery Officer, with the object, or effect, of delaying the execution of the
certificate.
(4) The Tax Recovery Officer may issue a warrant for the arrest of the defaulter if
appearance is not made in obedience to a notice issued and served under sub-paragraph
(1).
(5) A warrant of arrest issued by a Tax Recovery Officer under sub-paragraph (3) or
sub-paragraph (4) may also be executed by any other Tax Recovery Officer within whose
jurisdiction the defaulter may for the time being be found.
(6) Every person arrested in pursuance of a warrant of arrest under this paragraph
shall be brought before the Tax Recovery Officer issuing the warrant as soon as practicable
and in any event within twenty-four hours of his arrest (exclusive of the time required for
the journey).
(7) The Tax Recovery Officer shall at once release the defaulter if he pays the amount
entered in the warrant of arrest as due and the costs of the arrest to the officer arresting him.
(8) In this paragraph, the karta of a Hindu undivided family shall be deemed to be the
defaulter if the defaulter is the Hindu undivided family.
77. The Tax Recovery Officer shall give the defaulter an opportunity of showing
cause why he should not be committed to the civil prison, when the defaulter appears
before the Tax Recovery Officer in pursuant to the a notice under paragraph 76 or is brought
before the Tax Recovery Officer under the said paragraph 76.
78. Pending the conclusion of the inquiry, the Tax Recovery Officer may, in his
discretion, order the defaulter to be detained in the custody of such officer as the Tax
Recovery Officer may think fit or release him on his furnishing security to the satisfaction of
the Tax Recovery Officer for his appearance when required.
79. (1) Upon the conclusion of the inquiry, the Tax Recovery Officer may make an
order for the detention of the defaulter in the civil prison and shall in that event cause him
to be arrested if he is not already under arrest.
(2) In order to give the defaulter an opportunity of satisfying the arrears, the Tax
Recovery Officer may, before making the order of detention—
(a) leaves the defaulter in the custody of the officer arresting him, or of any
other officer, for a specified period not exceeding 15 days; or
(b) release him on his furnishing security to the satisfaction of the Tax Recovery
Officer for his appearance at the expiration of the specified period if the arrears are not
so satisfied.
(3) The Tax Recovery Officer shall direct the release of the defaulter, who is under
arrest, if he does not make an order of detention under sub-paragraph ( 1).
80. (1) Every person detained in the civil prison in execution of a certificate may be so
detained—
(a) where the certificate is for a demand of an amount exceeding two hundred
and fifty rupees, for a period of six months; and
(b) in any other case, for a period of six weeks.
(2) The person so detained shall be released from detention—
(a) on the amount mentioned in the warrant for his detention being paid to the
officer-in-charge of the civil prison, or
(b) on the request of the Tax Recovery Officer on any ground other than the
grounds mentioned in paragraphs 81 and 82.
(3) A defaulter released from detention under this paragraph shall not, merely by
reason of his release be discharged from his liability for the arrears but shall not liable to be
Hearing.
Custody
pending
hearing.
Order of
detention.
Detention in
and release
from prison.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

232
rearrested under the certificate in execution of which he was detained in the civil prison.
81. (1) The Tax Recovery Officer may order the release of a defaulter who has been
arrested in execution of a certificate upon being satisfied that—
(a) he has disclosed the whole of his property and has placed it at the disposal
of the Tax Recovery Officer; and
(b) he has not committed any act of bad faith.
(2) The Tax Recovery Officer may order the rearrest of the defaulter in execution of the
certificate, if he has ground for believing the disclosure made by the defaulter under sub-
paragraph (1) to have been untrue.
(3) The period of the detention of the defaulter in the civil prison shall not in the
aggregate exceed the period authorised under paragraph 80.
82. (1) The Tax Recovery Officer may, at any time after a warrant for the arrest of a
defaulter has been issued, cancel the warrant on the ground of serious illness of the defaulter.
(2) The Tax Recovery Officer may, in a case where a defaulter has been arrested,
release him if, in the opinion of the Tax Recovery Officer, he is not in a fit state of health to
be detained in the civil prison.
(3) A defaulter, who has been committed to the civil prison, may be released therefrom
by the Tax Recovery Officer on the ground of the existence of any infectious or contagious
disease, or on the ground of his suffering from any serious illness.
(4) A defaulter released under this paragraph may be rearrested, but the period of his
detention in the civil prison shall not in the aggregate exceed the period authorised under
paragraph 80.
83. For the purpose of making an arrest under this Schedule—
(a) no dwelling house shall be entered after sunset and before sunrise;
(b) no outer door of a dwelling house shall be broken open unless such dwelling
house or a portion thereof is in the occupancy of the defaulter and he or other
occupant of the house refuses or in any way prevents access thereto; but, when the
person executing any such warrant has duly gained access to any dwelling house, he
may break open the door of any room or apartment if he has reason to believe that the
defaulter is likely to be found there;
(c) no room, which is in the actual occupancy of a woman who, according to the
customs of the country, does not appear in public, shall be entered into unless the
officer authorised to make the arrest has given notice to her that she is at liberty to
withdraw and has given her reasonable time and facility for withdrawing.
84. The Tax Recovery Officer shall not order the arrest and detention in the civil
prison of—
(a) a woman; or
(b) any person who, in his opinion, is a minor or of unsound mind.
PART VII
M
ISCELLANEOUS
85. Every Chief Commissioner, the Commissioner, Tax Recovery Officer or other officer
shall while acting in the discharge of his functions under this Schedule, be deemed to be
acting judicially within the meaning of the Judicial Officers Protection Act, 1850.
Release.
Release on
ground of
illness.
Entry into
dwelling
house.
Prohibition
against arrest
of women or
minors, etc.
Officers
deemed to be
acting
judiciadly. 18 of 1850.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

233
86. Every Chief Commissioner, Commissioner, Tax Recovery Officer or other officer
acting under the provisions of this Schedule shall have the powers of a civil court while
trying a suit for the purpose of receiving evidence, administering oaths, enforcing the
attendance of witnesses and compelling the production of documents.
87. No certificate shall cease to be in force by reason of the death of the defaulter.
88. The proceedings under this Schedule, except arrest and detention, may be
continued against the legal representative of the defaulter, and the provisions of this Schedule
shall apply as if the legal representative were the defaulter, if the defaulter dies, at any time,
after the certificate is drawn up by the Tax Recovery Officer.
89. (1) An appeal from any original order passed by the Tax Recovery Officer under
this Schedule, not being an order which is conclusive, shall lie to the Chief Commissioner or
Commissioner.
(2) Every appeal under this paragraph may be presented within a period of thirty days
from the date of the order appealed against.
(3) Pending the decision of any appeal, execution of the certificate may be stayed if
the appellate authority so directs, but not otherwise.
(4) Where a Chief Commissioner or Commissioner is authorised to exercise powers as
such in respect of any area, then, notwithstanding anything in sub-paragraph (1), all appeals
against the orders passed before the date of such authorisation by any Tax Recovery
Officer authorised to exercise powers as such in respect of that area, or an area which is
included in that area, shall lie to such Chief Commissioner or Commissioner.
90. Any order passed under this Schedule may, after notice to all persons interested,
be reviewed by the Chief Commissioner, Commissioner, Tax Recovery Officer or other officer
who made the order, or by his successor in office, on account of any mistake apparent from
the record.
91. A person may be proceeded against under this Schedule, if he has become surety
for the amount due by a defaulter, as if such person were the defaulter.
92. (1) The sum payable for the subsistence of a defaulter, who is arrested or detained
in the civil prison, from the time of arrest until he is released shall be borne by the Tax
Recovery Officer.
(2) The sum shall be calculated on the scale fixed by the State Government for the
subsistence of judgment-debtors arrested in execution of a decree of a civil court.
(3) The sums payable under this paragraph shall be deemed to be the costs in the
proceeding but the defaulter shall not be detained in the civil prison or arrested on account
of any sum so payable.
93. The Board may prescribe the form to be used for any order, notice, warrant, or
certificate to be issued under this Schedule.
94. (1) The Board may make rules, consistent with the provisions of this Code, for
regulating the procedure to be followed by Chief Commissioners, Commissioners, Tax
Recovery Officers and other officers acting under this Schedule.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the power conferred by
sub-paragraph (1), such rules may provide for all, or any of the following matters, namely:—
(a) the area within which Chief Commissioners, Commissioners or Tax Recovery
Officers may exercise jurisdiction;
(b) the manner in which any property sold under this Schedule may be delivered;
(c) the execution of a document or the endorsement of a negotiable instrument
or a share in a corporation, by or on behalf of the Tax Recovery Officer, where such
Power to take
evidence.
Continuance
of certificate.
Procedure on
death of
defaulter.
Appeals.
Review.
Recovery
from surety.
Subsistence
allowance.
Forms.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

234
execution, or endorsement, is required to transfer such negotiable instrument, or
share, to a person who has purchased it under a sale under this Schedule;
(d) the procedure for dealing with resistance, or obstruction, offered by any
person to a purchaser of any immovable property sold under this Schedule, in
obtaining possession of the property;
(e) the fees to be charged for any process issued under this Schedule;
(f) the scale of charges to be recovered in respect of any other proceeding taken
under this Schedule;
(g) recovery of poundage fee;
(h) the maintenance and custody, while under attachment, of livestock or other
movable property, the fees to be charged for such maintenance and custody, the sale
of such livestock or property, and the disposal of proceeds of such sale;
(i) the mode of attachment of business.
95. Nothing in this Schedule shall affect any provision of this Code whereunder the
tax is a first charge upon any asset.
96. In this Schedule, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “certificate”, except in paragraphs 6, 44, 65 and sub-paragraph (2) of paragraph
66, in respect of any assessee means the certificate referred to in sub-section ( 1) of
section 219;
(b) “defaulter” means the assessee mentioned in the certificate;
(c) “execution” in relation to a certificate means recovery of arrears in pursuance
of the certificate;
(d) “movable property” includes growing crops;
(e) “officer” means a person authorised to make an attachment or sale under
this Schedule;
(f) “paragraph” means a paragraph contained in this Schedule; and
(g) “share in a corporation” includes stock, debenture-stock, debentures or
bonds.
Interpretations
in this
Schedule.
Saving
regarding
charge.
5
10
15
20
25
35
40

THE SIXTH SCHEDULE
(See sections 10 and 18 (1) (a))
Income not included in the total income
1. Agricultural income.
2. Subject to the provisions of sub-section ( 1) of section 9, any sum received by an
individual as a member of a Hindu undivided family if,—
(a) the sum has been paid out of the income of the family; or
(b) in the case of any impartible estate, the sum has been paid out of the income
of the impartible estate belonging to the family.
3. Any sum received by a person, being a participant in an unincorporated body,
towards his share as per the agreement of association, in the total income of  such body
which is separately assessed.
4. The amount of family pension received by the widow or children or nominated
heirs, as the case may be, of a member of the armed forces (including para-military forces) of
the Union, if the death of such member has occurred in the course of operational duties, in
such circumstances and subject to such conditions, as may be prescribed.
5. Any income arising to a foreign company, as the Central Government may, by
notification, specify in this behalf, by way of royalty or fees for technical services received
in pursuance of an agreement entered into with the Government for providing services in or
outside India in projects connected with security of India.
6. Any income of the European Economic Community, (established by the treaty of
Rome of 25th March, 1957) derived in India by way of interest, dividends or capital gains
from investments made out of its funds under such scheme as the Central Government may,
by notification specify in this behalf.
7. Any amount of interest payable—
(a) on securities held by the Issue Department of the Central Bank of Ceylon
constituted under the Ceylon Monetary Law Act, 1949;
(b) to a bank incorporated in a country outside India and authorised to perform
central banking functions in that country, on deposits by it with any scheduled bank,
with the approval of the Reserve Bank of India;
(c) to the Nordic Investment Bank being a multilateral financial institution
constituted by the Governments of Denmark, Finland, Iceland, Norway and Sweden,
on a loan advanced by it to a project approved by the Central Government in terms of
the Memorandum of Understanding entered into by the Central Government with that
Bank on the 25th day of November, 1986;
(d) to European Investment Bank, on a loan granted by it in pursuance of the
framework-agreement for financial co-operation entered into on the 25th day of
November, 1993 by the Central Government with that Bank.
8. Income accruing to a person, if —
(a) the person is a member of a Scheduled Tribe as defined in clause ( 25) of
article 366 of the Constitution; and
(b) the person resides in—
(i) the States of Arunachal Pradesh, Manipur, Mizoram, Nagaland and
Tripura,
(ii) any area specified in Part I or Part II of the Table appended to paragraph
20 of the Sixth Schedule to the Constitution,
(iii) the areas covered by notification No. TAD/R/35/50/109, dated the
23rd February, 1951, issued by the Governor of Assam under the proviso to
235
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

236
sub-paragraph (3) of Paragraph 20 of the Sixth Schedule to the Constitution as
it stood immediately before the commencement of the North-Eastern Areas (Re-
organisation) Act, 1971, or
(iv) the Ladakh region of the State of Jammu and Kashmir and the income
of such person is in the nature of dividend or interest on securities or from any
source in the States or areas specified in clause ( b).
9. Income accruing from any source in the State of Sikkim or by way of dividend or
interest on securities to a Sikkimese, other than a Sikkimese woman who, on or after the 1st
day of April, 2008, marries an individual who is not a Sikkimese.
10. Any income, the nature and extent, accruing to a body or authority which is
notified by the Central Government in this behalf if such body or authority—
(a) has been established or constituted or appointed under—
(i) a treaty or an agreement entered into by the Central Government with
two or more countries; or
(ii) a convention signed by the Central Government; and
(b) is not established, constituted or appointed for the purposes of profit; and
11. The amount of accumulated balance in the account of an employee participating in
an approved provident fund and any accretion thereto, to the extent provided in paragraph
8 of Part I of the Nineteenth Schedule.
12. Any payment from a provident fund to which the Provident Funds Act, 1925,
applies or from any other provident fund set up by the Central Government and notified by
it in this behalf.
13. Any payment from an approved superannuation fund made—
(a) in lieu of or in commutation of an annuity on his retirement at or after a
specified age or on his becoming incapacitated prior to such retirement; or
(b) on the death of a beneficiary.
14. The amount of remuneration received by an individual who is not a citizen of
India, if the following conditions are fulfilled, namely:—
(a) such individual is an official, by whatever name called, of an embassy, high
commission, legation, commission, consulate or the trade representation of a foreign
State, or as a member of the staff of any of these officials, for service in such capacity;
(b) the remuneration of the corresponding officials or, as the case may be,
members of the staff, if any, of the Government resident for similar purposes in the
country concerned enjoys a similar exemption in that country; and
(c) the members of the staff are subjects of the country represented and are not
engaged in any business or profession or employment in India otherwise than as
members of such staff.
15. The amount received by an individual who is not a citizen of India, by way of
remuneration as an employee of a foreign enterprise for services rendered by him during his
stay in India, if the following conditions are fulfilled, namely:—
(a) the foreign enterprise is not engaged in any trade or business in India;
(b) his stay in India does not exceed in the aggregate a period of ninety days in
such financial year; and
(c) such remuneration is not liable to be deducted from the income of the
employer chargeable under this Code.
16. The amount received by, or due to, any individual being a non-resident, who is not
19 of 1925.
81 of 1971.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

237
a citizen of India, by way of remuneration, if the following conditions are fulfilled, namely:—
(a) such remuneration is for services rendered in connection with the employment
on a foreign ship; and
(b) his total stay in India does not exceed in the aggregate a period of ninety
days in the financial year.
17. The amount of remuneration received by an individual who is not a citizen of
India, if the following conditions are fulfilled, namely:—
(a) he is an employee of the Government of a foreign State during his stay in
India; and
(b) his stay in India is in connection with his training in any establishment or
office of, or in any undertaking owned by,—
(i) the Government;
(ii) any company in which the entire paid-up share capital is held by the
Central Government, or any State Government or State Governments, or partly
by the Central Government and partly by one or more State Governments;
(iii) any company which is a subsidiary of a company referred to in item
(ii);
(iv) any corporation established by or under a Central, State or Provincial
Act; or
(v) any society registered under the Societies Registration Act, 1860, or
under any other corresponding law for the time being in force and wholly
financed by the Central Government, or any State Government or State
Governments, or partly by the Central Government and partly by one or more
State Governments.
18. Any amount received by an assessee under the Bhopal Gas Leak Disaster
(Processing of Claims) Act, 1985 in excess of the amount, if any, allowed as a deduction in
any financial year on account of any loss or damage caused to him by such disaster.
19. Any dividend declared, distributed or paid to a company or a non-resident, in
respect of which dividend distribution tax has been paid under section 109.
20. Any income received from an equity oriented fund in respect of which tax on
distribution of income has been paid under section 110.
21. Any amount of interest received on Gold Deposit Bonds issued under the Gold
Deposit Scheme, 1999 notified by the Central Government.
22. Any income of a political party which is computed under the heads “Income from
house property” or “Capital gains” or “Income from residuary sources” or any income by
way of voluntary contributions received by it from any person, if—
(a) the political party keeps and maintains such books of account and other
documents as would enable the Assessing Officer to properly deduce its income
therefrom;
(b) the political party keeps and maintains a record of such contributions in
excess of twenty thousand rupees, along with the name and address of the
contributors;
(c) the accounts of such political party are audited by an accountant; and
(d) the treasurer of such political party or any other person authorised by that
political party in this behalf submits a report under sub-section (3) of section 29C of
the Representation of the People Act, 1951 for the financial year.
14 of 1860.
43 of 1951.
21 of 1985.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

238
23. Any amount of interest on deposits in a Non-Resident (External) Account in any
bank in India accruing to an individual, if he—
(a) is outside India in terms of clause (w) of section 2 of the Foreign Exchange
Management Act, 1999; or
(b) has been permitted by the Reserve Bank of India to maintain the aforesaid
account.
24. Any amount of interest payable by a scheduled bank, other than a co-operative
bank, to a non-resident, on deposits in foreign currency where the acceptance of such
deposits by the bank is approved by the Reserve Bank of India.
25. Any amount received by way of—
(a) daily allowance by any person by reason of his membership of Parliament or
of any State Legislature or of any Committee thereof;
(b) an allowance by any person by reason of his membership of Parliament
under the Members of Parliament (Constituency Allowance) Rules, 1986;
(c) constituency allowance by any person by reason of his membership of any
State Legislature under the Act or rules made by the State concerned.
26. Any amount received, whether in cash or in kind—
(a) in pursuance of any award instituted by the Central Government or any
State Government or instituted by any other body and approved by the Central
Government in this behalf; or
(b) as a reward from the Central Government or any State Government for such
purposes as may be approved by the Central Government in this behalf.
27. Any amount received by way of—
(a) pension by an individual, who had been in the service of the Central
Government or State Government and has been awarded “Param Vir Chakra” or “Maha
Vir Chakra” or “Vir Chakra” or such other gallantry award as the Central Government
may, by notification, specify in this behalf;
(b) family pension by any member of the family of the individual referred to in
clause (a).
28. Any sum received as compensation, from the multilateral fund of the Montreal
Protocol on non-use of Substances that Deplete the Ozone layer under the United Nations
Environment Programme, in accordance with the terms of agreement entered into by the
Government of India.
29. Any income accruing to an individual outside India, in a financial year from a
source other than a business controlled in or a profession set up in India, if the individual—
(a) has been a non-resident in India in nine out of ten financial years preceding
that financial year; or
(b) has during the seven financial years preceding that financial year been in
India for less than seven hundred and thirty days.
30. Any amount received from the Central Government, a State Government or a local
authority by an individual or his legal heir, by way of compensation on account of any
disaster, in excess of the amount, if any, allowed as a deduction in any financial year on
account of any loss or damage caused by such disaster, to him or his legal heir.
31. Any amount of interest on bonds—
(a) issued by a local authority or by a State Pooled Finance Entity or a public
sector company; and
(b) specified by the Central Government by notification.
42 of 1999.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

239
32. Any amount of capital gain arising on account of the transfer of—
(a) agricultural land situated in a rural area;
(b) any personal effects; or
(c) Gold Deposit Bonds issued under the Gold Deposit Scheme, 1999 notified
by the Central Government.
33. Gross rent in respect of any one palace in the occupation of a Ruler, if the annual
value of the palace was exempt from income-tax before the commencement of the Constitution
(Twenty-sixth Amendment) Act, 1971, by virtue of the provisions of the Merged States
(Taxation Concessions) Order, 1949, or the Part B States (Taxation Concessions) Order,
1950, or, as the case may be, the Jammu and Kashmir (Taxation Concessions) Order, 1958.
34. Any income and amount thereof notified by the Central Government accruing to
any person from any international sporting event held in India, if such event—
(a) is approved by the international body regulating the international sport
relating to such event; and
(b) has participation of more than two countries; and
(c) is notified by the Central Government,
for the purposes of this paragraph.
35. Any income of a venture capital company or a venture capital fund from investment
in a venture capital undertaking.
36. Any income of a union or an association of such unions, which is computed under
the head “Income from house property” or “Income from residuary sources” if—
(a) such union is registered under the Trade Unions Act, 1926; and
(b) it is formed primarily for the purpose of regulating the relations between
workmen and employer or amongst workmen.
37. Any income received by an individual as a loan, either in lump sum or in instalment,
in a transaction of reverse mortgage referred to in clause (v) of sub-section (1) of section 45.
38. Any allowance or perquisite paid or allowed outside India by the Government to a
citizen of India for rendering service outside India.
39. Any payment from New Pension System Trust to an employee having an account
with the Trust under the New Pension Scheme notified by the Central Government.
40. Any payment in commutation of pension received under any scheme of any
employer, to the extent it does not exceed –
(a) in a case where employee receives any gratuity, the commuted value of one-
third of the pension which he is normally entitled to receive; and
(b) in any other case the commuted value of one-half of such pension.
41. Any payment received by the employee, from one or more employers, as the
cash equivalent of the leave salary in respect of the period of earned leave at his
credit at the time of his retirement, to the extent the aggregate of such amount does
not exceed the limit as may be prescribed.
42. Any payment received by the employee, from one or more employers, by
way of gratuity—
(i) on his retirement; or
(ii) on his becoming incapacitated prior to such retirement; or
(iii) on termination of his employment; or
(iv) any gratuity received by the family on the death of the employee,
to the extent the aggregate of such amount does not exceed the limit as may be
prescribed.
16 of 1926.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

240
43. Any amount received by the employee, from one or more employers, in connection
with termination of his service voluntary retirement or separation under any scheme framed
for this purpose in accordance with such rules as may be prescribed, to the extent the
aggregate of such amount does not exceed the limit as may be prescribed.
44. Any amount of compensation received by a workman under the Industrial Disputes
Act, 1947 or under any other law for the time being in force or under any award or contract
of service, at the time of his retrenchment in accordance with the provisions of clause (b) of
section 25F of the said Act or five lakh rupees, whichever is less.
45. Any amount of scholarship review by a student to meet the cost of education.
46. Any sum received by any person from an insurer in respect of a life insurance
policy upon death of the insured person.
47. Income of a co-operative society from such activities and to such extent as may be
prescribed.
14 of 1947.
5
10

THE SEVENTH SCHEDULE
(See sections 11 and 90)
Persons, entity or funds  not liable to income-tax
1. The Coffee Board constituted under section 4 of the Coffee Act, 1942.
2. The Rubber Board constituted under sub-section ( 1) of section 4 of the Rubber
Board Act,1947.
3. The Tea Board established under section 4 of the Tea Act, 1953.
4. The Tobacco Board constituted under the Tobacco Board Act, 1975.
5. The Marine Products Export Development Authority established under section 4 of
the Marine Products Export Development Authority Act,1972.
6. The Agricultural and Processed Food Products Export Development Authority
established under section 4 of the Agricultural and Processed Food Products Export
Development Authority Act, 1985.
7. The Spices Board constituted under sub-section ( 1) of section 3 of the Spices
Board Act, 1986.
8. The Coir Board established under section 4 of the Coir Industry Act,1953.
9. The Prime Minister’s National Relief Fund.
10. The Prime Minister’s Fund (Promotion of Folk Art).
11. The Prime Minister’s Aid to Students Fund.
12. The National Foundation for Communal Harmony.
13. The Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority.
14. A Mutual Fund registered under the Securities and Exchange Board of India Act,
1992.
15. Any Provident Fund to which the Provident Funds Act, 1925 applies.
16. New Pension System Trust.
17. Any approved provident fund.
18. Any approved superannuation fund.
19. Any approved gratuity fund.
20. The Deposit-linked Insurance Fund established under—
(a) the Coal Mines Provident Funds and Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1948;
(b) the Employees’ Provident Funds and Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1952;
21. The Employees’ State Insurance Fund set-up under the Employees’ State Insurance
Act, 1948.
22. Any electoral trust so approved by the Board in accordance with the scheme made
in this regard by the Central Government, if ninety-five per cent. of the aggregate of all
voluntary contributions received by it during the financial year and the surplus, if any,
brought forward from any preceding financial year is distributed to political parties.
23. A corporation established by a Central, State or Provincial Act or any other body,
institution or association (being a body, institution or association wholly financed by
Government) where such corporation or other body or institution or association has been
established or formed for promoting the interests of the members of the Scheduled Castes
or the Scheduled Tribes or backward classes or of any two or all of them.
24. Any corporation established by the Central or State Government for promoting
the interests of the members of a minority community notified as such by the Central
Government.
7 of 1942.
24 of 1947.
29 of 1953.
4 of 1975.
13 of 1972.
2 of 1986.
10 of 1986.
45 of 1953.
15 of 1992.
19 of 1925.
46 of 1948.
19 of 1952.
34 of 1948.
241
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

242
25. Any statutory corporation established for the welfare and economic upliftment of
ex-servicemen, being the citizens of India.
26. Any co-operative society formed for promoting the interests of the members of the
Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled Tribes or both if —
(a) the membership of the co-operative society consists of only other co-
operative societies formed for similar purposes; and
(b) the finances of the society are provided by the Government and such other
societies.
27. Panchayat as referred to in clause (d) of article 243 of the Constitution.
28. Municipality as referred to in clause (e) of article 243P of the Constitution.
29. Municipal Committee and District Board, legally entitled to, or entrusted by the
Government with the control or management of a Municipal or local fund.
30. Cantonment Board as defined in section 3 of the Cantonments Act, 2006.
31. Any Regimental Fund or Non-Public Fund established by the armed forces of the
Union for the welfare of the past and present members of such forces or their dependants.
32. Any fund set up, on or after, the 1st day of August, 1996, by an insurer under a
pension scheme,—
(a) to which contribution is made by any person for the purpose of receiving
pension from such fund; and
(b) which is approved by the Controller of Insurance or the Insurance Regulatory
and Development Authority.
33. An authority or Board, by whatever name called, established in a State by or under
any State or Provincial Act for the development of khadi or village industries in the State.
34. Any body or authority (whether or not a body corporate or a corporation sole)
established, constituted or appointed by or under any Central, State or Provincial Act
which provides for the administration of any one or more of the following, namely:—
(a) public religious or charitable trusts; or
(b) endowments (including maths, temples, gurdwaras, wakfs, churches,
synagogues, agiaries or other places of public religious worship); or
(c) societies for religious or charitable purposes registered as such under the
Societies Registration Act, 1860, or any other law for the time being in force.
35. Any association, authority, body, institution or trust registered under the Central,
State or Provincial Act for the regulation of public religious endowments.
36. The South Asia Association for Regional Cooperation ‘‘SAARC’’ Fund for Regional
Projects set-up by the Colombo Declaration issued on the 21st day of December, 1991 under
the Charter of (SAARC) dated the 8th Day of December, 1985.
37. The Central Electricity Regulatory Commission constituted under sub-section (1)
of section 76 of the Electricity Act, 2003.
38. Any Agricultural Produce Marketing Committee or Board constituted under any
law for the time being in force for the purpose of regulating the marketing of agricultural
produce.
39.  Any non-profit organisation, being a public religious trust or institution, if—
(a) it is registered under section 98 of this Code;
(b) it is registered under a State Act, if any;
(c)  it applies its income wholly for public religious purposes;
41 of 2006.
36 of 2003.
21 of 1860.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

243
(d) it is established for the benefit of the general public;
(e) it maintains books of account and obtains an audit report from a accountant
if its gross receipts in any financial year exceed five lakh rupees;
(f) its funds or assets are invested or held, at any time during the financial year
in the modes specified in section 95; and
(g) its funds or assets are not used or applied or deemed to have been used or
applied, directly or indirectly, for the benefit of any interested person.
40. A non-profit organisation of public importance as notified by the Central
Government under sub-section (2) of section 90.
5

 THE EIGHTH SCHEDULE
[See section 32(2)]
COMPUTATION OF PROFITS OF THE INSURANCE BUSINESS
1. The profits of the business of life insurance shall be the profit determined in the
Shareholders’ Account (Non-Technical Account) in accordance with the Insurance Act,
1938.
2. The profits referred to in paragraph 1 shall be—
(a) increased by the aggregate of the amounts referred to in sub-section ( 2) of
section 33 to the extent such amounts are not included in the profits referred to in that
paragraph and the amounts referred to in sub-section ( 4) of section 35 and sub-
section (2) of section 36 to the extent such amounts have been claimed as deductions
while computing the said profits; and
(b) decreased by the amount allowable as deduction under clause (xxx) of sub-
section ( 2) of section 35 and finance charges allowable as deduction under sub-
section (1) of section 36 to the extent such amount has been included under clause
(a).
3. The profits of the business of insurance other than life insurance shall be the
profits disclosed in the annual accounts, copies of which are required to be furnished under
the Insurance Act, 1938, to the Controller of Insurance.
4. The profits referred to in paragraph 3 shall be—
(a) increased by the aggregate of,—
(i) the amounts referred to in sub-section ( 2) of section 33 to the extent
such amounts are not included in the profits referred to in that paragraph; and
(ii) the amounts referred to in sub-section ( 4) of section 35 and sub-
section (2) of section 36 to the extent such amounts have been claimed as a
deduction in computing the profits referred to in that paragraph;
(b) decreased by—
(i) the amount allowable as deductions under clause ( xxx) of sub-
section (2) of section 35 to the extent such amount has been included under
sub-clause (i) of clause (a);
(ii) the amount of finance charges allowable as deduction under sub-
section  ( 1) of section 36 to the extent such amount has been included under
sub-clause (ii) of clause (a); and
(iii) such amount carried over to a reserve for unexpired risks as may be
prescribed.
5. The profits of the branches in India of a person not resident in India and carrying
on any business of insurance, may, in the absence of more reliable data, be deemed to be
that proportion of the world income of such person which corresponds to the proportion
which his premium income derived from India bears to his total premium income.
6. The profits of the business of insurance determined under paragraphs 1 to 5 shall
be aggregated and the profits so aggregated shall be the profit from the business of
insurance.
7. The profit from the business of insurance shall be aggregated with unabsorbed
preceding year loss from the business of insurance, if any, and the net result of such
aggregation shall be the current profit from the business of insurance for the financial year.
8. The current profit from the business of insurance shall be treated as nil, if the net
result of aggregation in paragraph 7 is negative and the absolute value of the net result of
the aggregation shall be the amount of unabsorbed current loss of the business of insurance
for the financial year.
244
36 of 2003.
4 of 1938.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

245
9. The profits computed under paragraphs 1 to 5 shall be presumed to have been
computed—
(a) after giving full effect to every loss, allowance or deduction referred to in
sub-sections (1) to (3) of section 35, sub-section (1) of section 36 and sections 37 to
40 (both inclusive);
(b) after giving full effect to any deduction allowable under Sub-Chapter IV of
Chapter III in relation to the profits of the business of insurance.
10. The written down value of any business asset used in the business of insurance
shall be computed as if the assessee has claimed and has been actually allowed the deduction
in respect of depreciation under section 38, initial depreciation under section 39 and terminal
allowance under section 40.
11. The amount of common costs (including depreciation) attributable to the business
of insurance shall be determined in such manner as may be prescribed.
12. The successor in a business reorganisation of the business of insurance shall be
allowed a deduction in respect of the unabsorbed current loss of the business of insurance
determined in the case of the predecessor for—
(a) the financial year immediately preceding the financial year in which the
business reorganisation has taken place if the re-organisation is on the first day of
the financial year; and
(b) the period beginning with the first day of the financial year and ending on
the day immediately preceding the date of business re-organisation, in any other
case.
13. In this Schedule—
(a) “business of life insurance” means life insurance business as defined in
clause (11) of section 2 of the Insurance Act, 1938;
(b) “business of insurance” means—
(i) the business of life insurance; and
(ii) the business of any insurance, not being life insurance;
(c) “common costs” means cost or expenditure incurred in the course of carrying
on the business of insurance and any other business; and
(d) world income in relation to the business of insurance of a person not resident
in India shall be computed in the manner laid down in this Code for the computation
of the profits of the business of insurance carried on in India.
4 of 1938.
5
10
15
20
25
30

THE NINTH SCHEDULE
[See section 15(2)]
COMPUTATION OF  INCOME FROM SPECIAL SOURCES
1. The income from any special source shall be computed in accordance with the
provisions of this Schedule.
2. The income from any special sources shall be the aggregate of—
(a) any amount by way of accrual or receipt, as the case may be;
(b) any amount accrued or received as reimbursement of any expenditure in-
curred by the person; and
(c) any tax borne by the person by whom the income is payable.
3. No deduction or allowance or set-off of any loss shall be allowed in computation of
income from the special sources.
4. The income computed under paragraph 2 shall be presumed to have been computed
after giving full effect to every loss, allowance or deduction under this Code.
5. The written down value of any business asset used for the purposes of earning
income from any special source shall be computed as if the person has claimed and has been
actually allowed the deduction in respect of depreciation under section 38, initial deprecia-
tion under section 39 and terminal allowance under section 40.
6. The amount of common costs (including depreciation) attributable to the special
source and presumed to have been allowed under paragraph 4 shall be determined in such
manner as may be prescribed.
246
10
15
20
5

THE TENTH SCHEDULE
[See sections 32 (2) and 314 (262))]
COMPUTATION OF PROFITS OF BUSINESS OF OPERA TING A QUALIFYING SHIP
1. The profits of the business of operating a qualifying ship for a financial year,—
(a) shall be computed in accordance with the provisions of this Schedule, at the
option of the assessee; and
(b) on exercise of the option, shall be determined in accordance with the for-
mula—
A + B - C
Where
A = the total tonnage income of the financial year;
B = the aggregate of the amounts referred to in sub-section (2) of section
33; and
C = the amount of negative profit computed under this Schedule in re-
spect of the business of operating a qualifying ship, for the financial year imme-
diately preceding the relevant financial year.
2. The tonnage income of the financial year in respect of each qualifying ship shall be
the daily tonnage income of the ship multiplied by the number of days during which the ship
is operated by the company as a qualifying ship.
3. The daily tonnage income of a qualifying ship having tonnage referred to in column
(1) of the Table given below shall be the amount specified in the corresponding entry in
column (2) of the said Table:
TABLE
Serial Qualifying ship having Amount of daily tonnage income
Number net tonnage
(1) (2) (3)
1. up to 1,000 tons Rs. 46 for each 100 tons
2. exceeding 1,000 tons but not more than Rs. 460 plus Rs. 35 for each100 tons exceeding
10,000 tons 1,000 tons
3. exceeding 10,000 tons but not more Rs. 3,610 plus Rs. 28 for each 100 tons
than 25,000 tons exceeding 10,000 tons
4. exceeding 25,000 tons Rs.7,810 plus Rs. 19 for each100 tons exceed
ing 25,000 tons.
4. The profits of the business of operating a qualifying ship shall be treated as ‘nil’ for
the financial year if the profits determined under paragraph 1 is negative.
5. The profits computed under this Schedule shall be presumed to have been com-
puted—
(a) after giving full effect to every loss, allowance or deduction referred to in
sections 35 to 40 (both inclusive);
(b) after giving full effect to any deduction allowable under Sub-Chapter IV of
Chapter III in relation to the profits of the business of operating a qualifying ship.
6. The written down value of any business asset used in the business of operating a
qualifying ship shall be computed as if the assessee has claimed and has been actually
allowed the deduction in respect of depreciation under section 38, initial depreciation under
section 39 and terminal allowance under section 40.
247
10
15
20
5
30
35
40
25

248
7. The amount of common costs (including depreciation) attributable to the business
of operating a qualifying ship and any other business shall be determined in such manner as
may be prescribed.
8. The successor in a business reorganisation of the business of operating a qualify-
ing ship shall be allowed a deduction in respect of the negative profit determined in the case
of the predecessor for—
(a) the financial year immediately preceding the financial year in which the busi-
ness reorganisation has taken place if the reorganisation is on the first day of the
financial year; and
(b) the period beginning with the first day of the financial year and ending on the
day immediately preceding the date of business reorganisation, in any other case.
9. A company shall continue to be regarded as an operator of a qualifying ship even in
the case of temporary cessation of operation of the ship.
10. A company shall not be regarded as the operator in respect of a ship if the ship has
been chartered out by it on bareboat charter-cum-demise terms.
11. A ship shall not be considered as qualifying ship if it temporarily ceases to be a
qualifying ship.
12.  The book profit or loss derived from the core shipping activities of a qualifying
shipping company shall be excluded from the book profit of the company for the purposes of
section 104.
13. The provisions of this Schedule shall not apply to a qualifying shipping company
if it is party to any transaction or arrangement which amounts to an abuse of the tonnage
income scheme as provided in this Schedule.
14. The Board may make rules for the purposes of computation of income from the
business of operating a qualifying ship in respect of the following, namely:—
(a) method and time for opting into the tonnage income scheme and the period
for, and circumstances under, which the option shall remain in force;
(b) circumstances under which a company may be excluded from the tonnage
income scheme;
(c) such other conditions for applicability of tonnage income scheme having
regard to the need for generating internal accruals for acquiring new ships and training
of crews;
(d) limits for charter in of tonnage;
(e) prevention of abuse of the tonnage income scheme, having regard to the
need to ensure that no transaction or arrangement results, or but for the rules pre-
scribed hereunder, would have resulted in a tax advantage being obtained for—
(i) a person other than a qualifying shipping company; or
(ii) a qualifying shipping company in respect of its activities other than its
business of operating a qualifying ship;
(f) valuation of goods or services where these are transferred between the busi-
ness of operating a qualifying ship and any other business carried on by a qualifying
shipping company;
(g) determination of arm’s length price of the business transactions if the ar-
rangement of transactions results in abuse of the tonnage income scheme.
10
15
20
5
30
35
40
25

249
15. In this Schedule, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “bareboat charter” means hiring of a ship for a stipulated period on terms
which give the charterer possession and control of the ship, including the right to
appoint the master and crew;
(b) “bareboat charter-cum-demise” means a bareboat charter where the owner-
ship of the ship is intended to be transferred after a specified period to the company
to whom it has been chartered;
(c) “business of operating qualifying ships” means the core shipping activities
and the permitted incidental shipping activities;
(d) “core shipping activities” means—
(i) the activities relating to operation of a qualifying ship;
(ii) the activities in connection with, or for the execution of, a service
contract under which a qualifying shipping company agrees to transport a
specified quantity of specified products at a specified rate, between designated
loading and discharging ports over a specified period by a qualifying ship;
(iii) on-board or on-shore activities of qualifying ship comprising of fares
and food and beverages consumed on board; and
(iv) slot charters, space charters, joint charters, feeder services, or con-
tainer box leasing, of a qualifying ship;
(e) “permitted incidental shipping activity” means any activity relating to char-
tering out of a qualifying ship on bareboat charter terms, maritime consultancy, load-
ing or unloading of cargo, ship management or maritime education or recruitment if the
aggregate accruals or receipts from all such activity does not exceed one-fourth per
cent. of the turnover from the core shipping activities;
(f) “qualifying shipping company” means a company, which fulfils all the
following conditions, namely:—
(i) it is an Indian company;
(ii) the place of effective management of the company is in India;
(iii) it owns at least one qualifying ship; and
(iv) the main object of the company is to carry on the business of operat-
ing ships;
(g)  “qualifying ship” means a ship, which fulfils the following conditions,
namely:—
(i) it is a seagoing ship or vessel of fifteen net tonnage or more;
(ii) it is a ship registered or licensed under, or for the purposes of the
Merchant Shipping Act, 1958;
(iii) a certificate indicating the net tonnage of the ship has been issued
under, or for the purposes of, the Merchant Shipping Act, 1958 and is in force;
(iv) it is owned or chartered in by the qualifying shipping company wholly,
or partly in an arrangement such as slot charter, space charter, or joint charter;
and
(v) the ship is not—
(A) a seagoing ship or vessel if the main purpose for which it is used
is the provision of goods or services of a kind normally provided on land;
(B) a fishing vessel as defined in clause ( 12) of section 3 of the
Merchant Shipping Act, 1958;
44 of 1958.
44 of 1958.
44 of 1958.
10
15
20
5
30
35
40
25
45

250
(C) a factory ship including a vessel providing processing services
in respect of the processing of the fishing produce;
(D) a pleasure craft, being a ship primarily used for the purposes of
sport or recreation;
(E) harbour and river ferries;
(F) offshore installations; and
(G) used as a fishing vessel for a period of more than thirty days
during a financial year;
(h) “seagoing ship” means a ship certified as such by the competent authority of
any country;
(i) “tonnage” shall mean—
(i) the tonnage specified on a certificate issued under, or for the purposes
of, the Merchant Shipping Act, 1958; and
(ii) the deemed tonnage in a case where an arrangement has been entered
into by the qualifying company for purchase of slots, slot charter or sharing of
a qualifying ship, calculated in such manner as may be prescribed;
(j) “tonnage income scheme” means a scheme for computation of profits of the
business of operating qualifying ships under paragraph 1 of this Schedule;
(k) “total tonnage income” shall mean the aggregate of tonnage income from
operating of all the qualifying ships.
44 of 1958.
10
15
20
5

THE ELEVENTH SCHEDULE
[See sections 32(2) 44(8), 314(161) and 318(2)(s)(i)]
COMPUTATION OF PROFITS OF THE BUSINESS OF
MINERAL OIL OR NATURAL GAS
1. The profits of the business of mineral oil or natural gas shall be the gross income
from the business carried on by the assessee at any time during the financial year as reduced
by the amount of business expenditure incurred by the assessee, wholly and exclusively, for
the purposes of the business during the year.
2. The gross income referred to in paragraph 1 shall be the aggregate of,—
(a) the accruals or receipts derived by the assessee from,—
(i) the business of mineral oil or natural gas;
(ii) the leasing or transfer of whole of, or part of, or any interest in, any—
(A) mineral oil or natural gas rights; and
(B) asset used in the business of mineral oil or natural gas; and
(iii) the demolition, destruction, discarding or transferring of any busi-
ness capital asset (other than land, goodwill or financial instrument) in respect
of which deduction has been allowed, or allowable, under paragraph 3 in any
financial year; and
(b) the amounts referred to in sub-section (2) of section 33.
3. The amount of business expenditure referred to in paragraph 1 shall be the aggre-
gate of the amount of,-
(a) operating expenditure referred to in section 35, incurred by the assessee;
(b) finance charges referred to in section 36, incurred by the assessee;
(c) expenditure on any license charges, rental fees or other charges, if actually
paid;
(d) capital expenditure incurred by the assessee;
(e) expenditure on infructuous or abortive exploration of any area;
(f) expenditure referred to in clauses (a) to (e) incurred before the commence-
ment of the business.
(g) payment to Site Restoration Accomulate maintained in State Bank of India in
accordance with the Schemes may be prescribed.
4. The profits computed under paragraph 1 shall be presumed to have been com-
puted,-
(a) after giving full effect to every loss, allowance or deduction referred to in
sub-sections 35 to 40 (both inclusive);
(b) after giving full effect to any deduction allowable under Sub-Chapter-IV of
Chapter III in relation to the profits of the business of mineral oil or natural gas.
5. The written down value of any business asset used in the business of mineral oil or
natural gas shall be computed as if the assessee has claimed and has been actually allowed
the deduction in respect of depreciation under section 38, initial depreciation under section
39 and terminal allowance under section 40.
6. The amount of common costs including depreciation attributable to the business of
mineral oil or natural gas and any other business shall be determined in such manner as may
be prescribed.
251
10
15
20
5
30
35
40
25

252
7. The provisions of this Schedule shall apply to the business referred to in paragraph
1, which fulfils the following conditions, namely:—
(a) it is not set-up by splitting up, or the reconstruction, of a business already in
existence;
(b) it is not set up by the transfer to the business of machinery or plant previ-
ously used for any purpose.
8. In this Schedule, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “business of mineral oil or natural gas” means any business consisting of the
prospecting for or extraction or production of mineral oil or natural gas;
(b) “mineral oil” means crude oil, being petroleum in its natural state before it is
refined or otherwise treated but from which water and foreign substances have been
extracted;
(c) “natural gas” means any sub-soil combustible gaseous fossil fuel;
(d) “oil and gas right” means any reconnaissance permit, technical cooperation
permit, exploration right, or production right assigned under the Oilfields (Regulation
and Development) Act, 1948, or any right or interest therein;
(e) any machinery or plant which was used outside India by any person other
than the assessee shall not be regarded as machinery or plant previously used for any
purpose, if—
(i) the machinery or plant was not, at any time prior to the date of the
installation by the assessee, used in India;
(ii) the machinery or plant is imported into India from any country outside
India; and
(iii) no deduction on account of depreciation in respect of the machinery
or plant has been allowed or is allowable under the provisions of this Code, or
the Income-tax Act, 1961 as it is stood before the commencement of this Code, in
computing the total income of any person for any period prior to the date of the
installation of the machinery or plant by the assessee;
(f) the condition specified in clause (b) of paragraph 7 shall be deemed to have
been complied with if the total value of the machinery or plant or any part thereof,
previously used for any purpose and transferred to the business referred to in para-
graph 1, does not exceed twenty per cent. of the total value of the machinery or plant
used in the business;
(g) the capital expenditure referred to in clause ( d) of paragraph 3 shall not
include any expenditure incurred on the acquisition of any land including long-term
lease, goodwill or financial instrument.
53 of 1948.
43 of 1961.
10
15
20
5
30
35
25

THE TWELFTH SCHEDULE
[See sections 32(2) 44(8) and 318(2)(P) (i)]
COMPUTATION OF PROFITS OF THE BUSINESS OF DEVELOPING OF A SPECIAL ECONOMIC ZONE
MANUFACTURE OR PRODUCTION OF ARTICLE OR THINGS OR PROVIDING OF ANY SERVICE
BY A UNIT ESTABLISHED IN A SPECIAL ECONOMIC ZONE
1. The provisions of this Schedule shall apply to the business specified herein
below—
(a) the business of developing a special economic zone; and
(b) a unit established in a special economic zone engaged in the business of
manufacture or production of article or things or providing of any service.
2. The profits of the specified business under paragraph 1 shall be the gross income
from such business carried on by the assessee at any time during the financial year as
reduced by the amount of business expenditure incurred by the assessee, wholly and exclu-
sively, for the purposes of the business during the year.
3. The gross income referred to in paragraph 2 shall be the aggregate of—
(a) the accruals or receipts derived by the assessee from the specified business;
(b) the accruals or receipts derived by the assessee from the demolition, de-
struction, discarding or transferring of any business capital asset (other than land,
goodwill or financial instrument) in respect of which deduction has been allowed, or
allowable, under paragraph 4 in any financial year; and
(c) the amounts referred to in sub-section (2) of section 33.
4. The amount of business expenditure referred to in paragraph 2 shall be the aggre-
gate of the amount of—
(a) operating expenditure referred to in section 35, incurred by the assessee;
(b) finance charges referred to in section 36, incurred by the assessee;
(c) expenditure on any licence charges, rental fees or other charges, if actually
paid;
(d) capital expenditure incurred by the assessee;
(e) expenditure referred to in clauses (a) to (d) incurred before the commence-
ment of specified business.
5. The profits computed under paragraph 2 shall be presumed to have been
computed—
(a) after giving full effect to every loss, allowance or deduction referred to in
sub-sections (1) to (3) of section 35, sub-section (1) of section 36 and sections 37 to
40 (both inclusive);
(b) after giving full effect to any deduction allowable under Sub-Chapter-IV of
Chapter III in relation to the profits of the specified business.
6. The written down value of any business asset used in the specified business shall
be computed as if the assessee has claimed and has been actually allowed the deduction in
respect of depreciation under section 38, initial depreciation under section 39 and terminal
allowance under section 40.
7. The amount of common costs (including depreciation) attributable to the specified
business shall be determined in such manner as may be prescribed.
253
10
15
20
5
30
35
40
25

254
8. The provisions of this Schedule shall apply to a specified business, which fulfils the
following conditions, namely:—
(a) it is not set-up by splitting up, or the reconstruction, of a business already in
existence; and
(b) it is not set-up by the transfer to the specified business, of machinery or plant
previously used for any purpose.
9. In this Schedule, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) any machinery or plant which was used outside India by any person other
than the assessee shall not be regarded as machinery or plant previously used for any
purpose, if—
(i) the machinery or plant was not, at any time prior to the date of the
installation by the assessee, used in India;
(ii) the machinery or plant is imported into India from any country outside
India; and
(iii) no deduction on account of depreciation in respect of the machinery
or plant has been allowed or is allowable under the provisions of this Code, or
the Income-tax Act, 1961 as it stood before the commencement of this Code, in
computing the total income of any person for any period prior to the date of the
installation of the machinery or plant by the assessee;
(b) the condition specified in clause (b) of paragraph  8 shall be deemed to have
been complied with if the total value of the machinery or plant or any part thereof,
previously used for any purpose and transferred to the specified business does not
exceed twenty per cent. of the total value of the machinery or plant used in the said
business;
(c) the capital expenditure referred to in clause ( d) of paragraph 4 shall not
include any expenditure incurred on the acquisition of any land including long term
lease, goodwill or financial instrument.
43 of 1961.
10
15
20
5
25

THE THIRTEENTH SCHEDULE
[See sections 32(2) 44(8) and 318(o)(i), (q)(i), (r)(i)]
COMPUTATION OF PROFITS OF A SPECIFIED BUSINESS
1. The provisions of this Schedule shall apply to the following specified businesses
which fulfill such conditions as may be prescribed by the Central Government:—
(a) business of generation, transmission or distribution of power;
(b) business of developing, or operating and maintaining, any infrastructure
facility;
(c) business of operating and maintaining a hospital in any area, other than the
excluded area;
(d) business of processing, preservation and packaging of fruits and vegetables;
(e) business of laying and operating a cross country natural gas or crude or
petroleum oil pipeline network for distribution, including storage facilities being an
integral part of the network;
(f) business of setting up and operating a cold chain facility;
(g) business of setting up and operating a warehousing facility for storage of
agricultural produce;
(h) business of building and operating, anywhere in India, a new hotel of two-
star or above category as classified by the Central Government and commences op-
eration on or after the 1st day of April, 2010;
(i) business of building and operating, anywhere in India, a new hospital with at
least one hundred beds for patients and commences operation on or after the 1st day
of April, 2010;
(j) business of developing and building a housing project under a scheme for
slum re-development or rehabilitation framed by the Central Government or a State
Government, as the case may be, and notified by the Board in this behalf in accor-
dance with the guidelines as may be prescribed and commences operation on or after
the 1st day of April, 2010.
2. The profits of every specified business shall be computed separately under this
Schedule.
3. The profits of any specified business shall be the gross income from the business
carried on by the assessee at any time during the financial year as reduced by the amount of
business expenditure incurred by the assessee, wholly and exclusively, for the purposes of
the business during the year.
4. The gross income referred to in paragraph 1 shall be the aggregate of—
(a) the accruals or receipts derived by the assessee from the specified business;
(b) the accruals or receipts derived by the assessee from the transfer, discardment,
destroyal or destruction of any business captial asset (other than land, goodwill or
financial instrument) in respect of which deduction has been allowed, or allowable,
under paragraph  5 in any financial year; and
(c) the amounts referred to in sub-section (2) of section 33.
5. The amount of business expenditure referred to in paragraph 1 shall be the aggre-
gate of the amount of—
(a) operating expenditure referred to in section 35, incurred by the assessee;
(b) finance charges referred to in section 36, incurred by the assessee;
255
10
15
20
5
30
35
40
25
45

256
(c) expenditure on any licence charges, rental fees or other charges, if actually
paid;
(d) capital expenditure incurred by the assessee;
(e) expenditure referred to in clauses (a) to (d) incurred before the commence-
ment of the business.
6. The profits computed under paragraph 1 shall be presumed to have been
computed—
(a) after giving full effect to every loss, allowance or deduction referred to in
sections 35 to 40 (both inclusive);
(b) after giving full effect to any deduction allowable under Sub-Chapter-IV of
Chapter III in relation to the profits of the specified business.
7. The written down value of any business asset used in the specified business shall
be computed as if the assessee has claimed and has been actually allowed the deduction in
respect of depreciation under section 38, initial depreciation under section 39 and terminal
allowance under section 40.
8. The amount of common costs including depreciation attributable to the specified
business and any other business shall be determined in such manner as may be prescribed.
9. The provisions of this Schedule shall apply to the business referred to in
paragraph 1, which fulfils the following conditions, namely:—
(a) it is not set-up by splitting up, or the reconstruction, of a business already in
existence;
(b) it is not set-up by the transfer to the specified business of machinery or plant
previously used for any purpose; and
(c) in a case where the business is of the nature referred to in clause ( e) of
paragraph 1, the business—
(i) is owned by a company formed and registered in India under the Com-
panies Act, 1956 or by a consortium of such companies or by an authority or a
board or a corporation established or constituted under any Central or State
Act;
(ii) has been approved by the Petroleum and Natural Gas Regulatory
Board established under sub-section (1) of section 3 of the Petroleum and Natu-
ral Gas Regulatory Board Act, 2006 and notified by the Central Government in
this behalf;
(iii) has made not less than such proportion of its total pipeline capacity
as specified by the regulations made by the Petroleum and Natural Gas Regula-
tory Board established under sub-section (1) of section 3 of the Petroleum and
Natural Gas Regulatory Board Act, 2006 available for use on common carrier
basis by any person other than the assessee or an associated person; and
(iv) fulfils any other condition as may be prescribed.
10. In this Schedule, unless the context otherwise requires—
(a) an “associated person” in relation to the assessee, means a person—
(i) who participates, directly or indirectly, or through one or more interme-
diaries in the management or control or capital of the assessee;
(ii) who holds, directly or indirectly, shares carrying not less than twenty-
six per cent. of the voting power in the capital of the assessee;
1 of 1956.
19 of 2006.
19 of 2006.
10
15
20
5
30
35
40
25
45

257
(iii) who appoints more than half of the Board of directors or members of
the governing board, or one or more executive directors or executive members
of the governing board of the assessee; or
(iv) who guarantees not less than ten per cent. of the total borrowings of
the assessee;
(b) any machinery or plant which was used outside India by any person other
than the assessee shall not be regarded as machinery or plant previously used for any
purpose, if—
(i) the machinery or plant was not, at any time prior to the date of the
installation by the assessee, used in India;
(ii) the machinery or plant is imported into India from any country outside
India; and
(iii) no deduction on account of depreciation in respect of the machinery
or plant has been allowed or is allowable under the provisions of this Code, or
the Income-tax Act, 1961 as it stood before the commencement of this Code, in
computing the total income of any person for any period prior to the date of the
installation of the machinery or plant by the assessee;
(c) the condition specified in clause (b) of paragraph 9 shall be deemed to have
been complied with if the total value of the machinery or plant or any part thereof,
previously used for any purpose and transferred to the specified business, does not
exceed twenty per cent. of the total value of the machinery or plant used in the
business;
(d) the capital expenditure referred to in clause ( d) of paragraph 5 shall not
include any expenditure incurred on the acquisition of any land including long term
lease, goodwill or financial instrument.
(e) ‘excluded area’ means the areas of—
(i) Greater Mumbai urban agglomeration;
(ii) Delhi urban agglomeration;
(iii) Kolkata urban agglomeration;
(iv) Chennai urban agglomeration;
(v) Hyderabad urban agglomeration;
(vi) Bangalore urban agglomeration;
(vii) Ahmedabad urban agglomeration;
(viii) the District of Faridabad;
(ix) the District of Gurgaon;
(x) the District of Gautam Budh Nagar;
(xi) the District of Ghaziabad;
(xii) the District of Gandhinagar; and
(xiii) the City of Secunderabad;
(f) “urban agglomeration” means the area included in the relevant urban
agglomeration on the basis of the 2001 census.
43 of 1961.
10
15
20
5
30
35
40
25

THE FOURTEENTH SCHEDULE
[See section 32 (2), 86(4), 170(4), (a), 314(220) (e)]
DETERMINA TION OF INCOME ON A PRESUMPTIVE BASIS
1. The income from the business specified in column (2) of  the Table given below,
carried on by the assessee at any time during the financial year, shall, be the amount
specified in column 3 thereof, subject to the conditions specified in column (4) therein:
TABLE
Serial Nature of Business Amount of income Conditions
Number
(1) (2) (3) (4)
1. Buisness of plying, hiring
or leasing of heavy goods
or light goods vehicle.
The aggregate amount of
income from all the heavy
goods vehicles and light
goods vehicle owned by
the assessee, calculated at
the rate of –
(i) five thousand rupees
from each heavy goods
vehicle for every month
or part of a month during
which the vehicle is
owned by the assessee
in the financial year; or
(ii)  four thousand five
hundred rupees from
each light goods vehicle
for every month or part
of a month during which
the vehicle is owned by
the assessee in the finan-
cial year.
The total number of
heavy goods and light
goods vehicles owned by
the assessee in the finan-
cial year should be ten or
less.
2. Any business (other than
a profession and the busi-
ness referred to in serial
number 1).
Eight per cent. of the total
turnover, or gross receipts,
of the assessee in the finan-
cial year from the business.
(i) the assessee is a resi-
dent;
(ii) the assessee is an
individual, a Hindu
undivided family or a firm
excluding a limited
liability partnership; and
(iii) the total turnover or
gross receipts of the
assessee in the financial
year from the business is
one crore rupees or less.
258
10
15
20
5
30
35
40
25

259
3. Business of civil con-
struction in connection
with a turnkey power
project approved by the
Central Government in
this behalf.
The amount shall be a sum
equal to ten per cent. of the
amount paid or payable
(whether in or out of India),
directly or indirectly, to the
assessee or to any person
on his behalf on account of
the civil construction.
The assessee is a foreign
company.
4. Business of erection of
plant or machinery or
testing or commissioning
thereof, in connection
with a turnkey power
project approved by the
Central Government in
this behalf.
The amount shall be a sum
equal to ten per cent. of the
amount paid or payable
(whether in or out of India),
directly or indirectly, to the
assessee or to any person
on his behalf on account of
erection, testing or commis-
sioning.
The assessee is a foreign
company.
5. Business of providing
services or facilities in
connection with the pros-
pecting for, or extraction
or production of, mineral
oil or natural gas.
The amount shall be a sum
equal to fourteen per cent.
of aggregate of—
(i) the amount paid or pay-
able (whether in or out of
India), directly or indirectly,
to the assessee or to any
person on his behalf on ac-
count of the provisions of
services and facilities in
connection with the pros-
pecting for, or extraction or
production of, mineral oils
in India; and
(ii) the amount received or
deemed to be received in
India, directly or indirectly,
by or on behalf of the as-
sessee on account of the
provisions of services and
facilities in connection with
the prospecting for, or ex-
traction or production of,
mineral oils outside India.
The assessee is a non-
resident.
6. Business of supplying
plant and machinery on
hire, used or to be used,
in the prospecting for, or
extraction or production
of, mineral oils or
or natural gas.
The amount shall be a sum
equal to fourteen per cent.
of aggregate of—
(i) the amount paid or pay-
able (whether in or out of
India), directly or indirectly,
to the assessee or to any
person on his behalf on ac-
count of the supply of plant
The assessee is a non-
resident.
        (1) (2) (3) (4)
10
15
20
5
30
35
40
25
45
50
55

260
and machinery on hire,
used or to be used, in the
prospecting for, or extrac-
tion or production of, min-
eral oils in India; and
(ii) the amount received or
deemed to be received in
India, directly or indirectly,
by or on behalf of the as-
sessee on account of the
supply of plant and machin-
ery on hire,  used or to be
used, in the prospecting for,
or extraction or production
of, mineral oils outside
India.
7. Business of operation of
ships (including an ar-
rangement such as slot
charter, space charter or
joint charter).
Ten per cent. of transporta-
tion charges on account of
the carriage of passengers,
live-stock, mail or goods.
The assessee is a non-
resident.
8. Business of operation of
aircraft (including an ar-
rangement such as slot
charter, space charter or
joint charter).
Seven per cent. of the trans-
portation charges on ac-
count of the carriage of pas-
sengers, live-stock, mail or
goods.
The assessee is a non-
resident.
2. The amount of income determined under paragraph1 shall be further increased by
the excess of the amount of income, if any, actually earned by the assessee from the
business over the amount specified in that paragraph.
3. The income computed under paragraph 1 shall be presumed to have been com-
puted after giving full effect to every loss, allowance or deduction under this Code.
4.  The written down value of any business asset used for the purposes of earning
income from the business specified in column (2) of the Table in paragraph 1 shall be
computed as if the person has claimed and has been actually allowed the deduction in
respect of depreciation under section 38, initial depreciation under section 39 and terminal
allowance under section 40.
5. The amount of common costs (including depreciation) attributable to the business
specified in column (2) of the Table in paragraph 1 and presumed to have been allowed
under Paragraph 3 shall be determined in such manner as may be prescribed.
6. The provisions of this Schedule shall not apply to—
(a) any income which is derived from any special source;
(b) any income from ordinary sources in respect of the business referred to in
column (2) of the Table in paragraph 1, at the option of the assessee, if—
(i) the assessee keeps and maintains all the books of account and other
documents referred to in section 87 in respect of the business irrespective of
anything  in that section;
(ii) the assessee gets his accounts audited and obtains a report of such
audit as required under section 88 in respect of the business irrespective any-
thing in that section;
      (1) (2) (3) (4)
10
15
20
5
30
35
40
25
45

261
(iii) the accounts are correct and complete to the satisfaction of the
Assessing Officer;
(iv) the income can be properly deduced from the accounts; and
(v) the assessee produces the books of account and other documents
before the Assessing Officer, as and when called for.5

THE FIFTEENTH SCHEDULE
[See section 38 (1), (4), (a), 39(1) (b), 40 (1) (b), 42 (1)]
DEPRECIATION
1. The allowance under section 37 in respect of depreciation of any block of
assets, specified in column (3) of the Table given below, shall be calculated at the
percentages, specified in corresponding entry in column (4) of the said Table, on
the adjusted value or written down value of such block of assets, as the case may
be, as are used for the purposes of the business of the assessee at any time during
the financial year.
TABLE
R
ATES AT WHICH DEPRECIATION IS ADMISSIBLE
Serial Class of assets Block of assets Depreciation
number allowance as
percentage of
adjusted value
or of written
down value of
block of assets.
(1) (2) (3) (4)
1. Building (1) Buildings which are used mainly  for
residential purposes.
(2) Buildings which are purely temporary
erections such as wooden structures.
(3) Buildings used as, or for-—
(i) hotel or boarding house,
(ii) railway station,
(iii) airport,
(iv) sea port,
(v) bus terminal
(vi) hospital, or
(vii) convention centre
(4) Any other building.
5
100
15
10
2. Furniture and
fittings
Furniture and fittings including electrical
fittings.
10
3. Vehicles (1) Motor buses, motor lorries and motor
cars, used in a business of running
them on hire.
(2) Any other motor bus, motor lorry or
motor car.
30
15
4. Aeroplanes Aeroplanes including aeroengines. 40
5. Rails (1) Engines, coaches and wagons.
(2) Rolling stock.
40
15
6. Ships (1) Ocean-going vessels.
(2) Speed boats ordinarily operating on
inland waters.
(3) Any other vessel ordinarily operating
on inland waters.
20
20
20
262
10
15
20
5
30
35
40
25
45

263
7. Books (1) Annual publications used for carrying
on a profession.
 (2) Any other book used for carrying on a
profession.
(3) Book used for carrying on a business of
running lending libraries .
(4) Any other book .
100
60
100
25
8. Machinery and
Plant
(1) Moulds used in rubber and plastic  goods
factories.
(2) Air pollution control equipment.
(3) Water pollution control equipment.
(4) Solid waste control equipment.
(5) Life saving medical equipment.
(6) Containers made of glass, or plastic, used
as refills.
(7) Computers including computer software.
(8) Energy saving devices.
(9) Renewable energy devices.
(10) Machinery and plant, used in  semicon-
ductor industry.
(11) Wooden parts used in artificial silk
manufacturing machinery.
(12) Bulbs of studio lights used for  cinemato-
graph films.
(13) Wooden match frames used in match
factories.
(14) Tubs, winding ropes, haulage ropes,
sand stowing pipes and safety lamps  used
in mines and quarries.
(15) Salt pans, reservoirs and condensers,
made of earthy, sandy or clayey material  or
any other similar material, used in  salt works.
(16) Rollers used in flour mills or sugar works.
(17) Rolling mill rolls used in iron and steel
industry.
(18) Gas cylinders including valves and  regu-
lators.
(19) Glass manufacturing concerns  direct
fire glass melting furnaces.
(20) Returnable packages used in field  op-
erations (above ground) distribution  by
petroleum or natural gas concerns.
(21) Plant used in field operations  (below
ground) by petroleum or natural  gas con-
cerns.
(22) Machinery and plant acquired and in-
stalled in a water supply project or water
treatment system and which is put to use
for the pupose of business of providing in-
frastructure facility.
(23) Any other machinery or plant.
30
100
100
100
40
50
60
80
80
30
100
100
100
100
100
80
80
60
60
60
60
100
15
(1) (2) (3) (4)
10
15
20
5
30
35
40
25
45
50

264
9. Scientific re-
search assets
All assets, other than land, used for scien-
tific research.
100
10. Family planning
asset
All assets used by a company for the
purpose of promoting family planning.
25
11. Animals  Animals. 0
12. Intangible assets (1) Any right, by way of licence or franchise,
to operate a business or to use a know-how,
 patent, copyright,  trademark or any other
business  or commercial right of similar na-
ture.
(2) Asset or project constructed,  erected or
set up by the assessee if,—
(a) benefit or advantage arises to the  as-
sessee over a fixed period  not exceeding
ten years; and
(b) asset is not owned by the assessee.
(3) Asset or project constructed,
erected or set up by the assessee if,—
(a) benefit or advantage arises to the  as-
sessee over a fixed period  exceeding ten
years;and
(b) asset is not owned by the assessee.
25
20
15
2. No depreciation shall be allowed in respect of any machinery or plant, if the actual
cost thereof is allowed as a deduction in one or more years.
3. The depreciation shall be one hundred per cent. of the adjusted written down value
of  the block of assets referred to in the class of assets at serial number 12 of the Table, if the
adjusted value or written down value of the block of assets is one lakh rupees or less.
4. In respect of any structure, or work, by way of renovation or improvement in, or in
relation to, a building used for the purposes of business of the person, the percentage to be
applied shall be the percentage specified in any sub-item of the block of assets in serial
number 1 of the said Table, as may be appropriate to the class of building in, or in relation to,
which the renovation or improvement is effected.
5. In respect of any structure constructed, or work done, by way of extension of any
building used for the purposes of business of the person, the percentage to be applied shall
be the percentage specified in any sub-item of the block of assets in serial number 1 of the
said Table above, as would be appropriate, as if the structure, or work, constituted a sepa-
rate building.
6. In this Schedule—
(a) “buildings” include roads, bridges, culverts, wells and tubewells;
(b) “building mainly used for residential purpose” means a building where the
built-up floor area thereof used for residential purposes is not less than sixty-six and
two-third per cent. of its total built-up floor area and shall include any such building in
the factory premises;
(c) “water treatment system” includes water treatment system for desalination,
demineralisation and purification of water as well as  pipes needed for delivery from
the source of supply of raw water to the plant and from the plant to the storage facility;
(1) (2) (3) (4)
10
15
20
5
30
35
40
25
45

265
(d) “electrical fittings” include electrical wiring, switches, sockets and other
fittings and fans;
(e) “computer software” means any computer programme recorded on any disc,
tape, perforated media or other information storage device;
(f) “speed boat” means a motor boat driven by a high speed internal combustion
engine capable of propelling the boat at a speed exceeding 24 kilometers per hour in
still water and so designed that when running at a speed, its bow will rise from the
water;
(g) “ocean-going ships” include dredgers, tugs, barges, survey launches, other
similar ships used mainly for dredging purposes and fishing vessels with wooden hull;
(h) “air pollution control equipment” means— 
(i) electrostatic precipitation systems;
(ii) felt-filter systems;
(iii) dust collector systems;
(iv) scrubber-counter current,venture, packed bed, cyclonic scrubbers; and
(v) ash handling system and evacuation system;
(i) “water pollution control equipment” means— 
(i) mechanical screen systems;
(ii) aerated detritus chambers (including air compressor);
(iii) mechanically skimmed oil and grease removal systems;
(iv) chemical feed systems and flash mixing equipment;
(v) mechanical flocculators and mechanical reactors;
(vi) diffused air, mechanically aerated activated sludge systems;
(vii) aerated lagoon systems;
(viii) biofilters;
(ix) methane-recovery anaerobic digester systems;
(x) air floatation systems;
(xi) air, steam stripping systems;
(xii) urea hydrolysis systems;
(xiii) marine outfall systems;
(xiv) centrifuge for dewatering sludge;
(xv) rotating biological contractor or bio-disc;
(xvi) ion exchange resin column; and
(xvii) activated carbon column;
(j) “Solidwaste control equipments” means— 
(i) caustic, lime, chrome, mineral, cryolite recovery systems; and
(ii) solidwaste recycling and resource recovery systems;
(k) “life saving medical equipment” means— 
(i) D.C1015205303540254550. defibrillators for internal use and pace
makers;
(ii) haemodialysors;
10
15
20
5
30
35
40
25

266
(iii) heart lung machine;
(iv) cobalt therapy unit;
(v) colour doppler;
(vi) SPECT gamma camera;
(vii) vascular angiography system including digital substraction angiog-
raphy;
(viii) ventilator used with anaesthesia apparatus;
(ix) magnetic resonance imaging system;
(x) surgical laser;
(xi) ventilators other than those used with anaesthesia;
(xii) gamma knife;
(xiii) bone marrow transplant equipment including silastic long standing
intravenous catheters for chemotheraphy;
(xiv) fibre optic endoscopes including, paediatric resectoscope/audit re-
sectoscope, peritoneoscopes, arthoscope, microlaryngoscope, fibreoptic flex-
ible nasal pharyngo bronchoscope, fibreoptic flexible laryngo bronchoscope,
video laryngo bronchoscope and video oesophago gastroscope, stroboscope,
fibreoptic flexible oesophago gastroscope; or
(xv) laparoscope (single incision);
(l) “energy saving device” means— 
(i) specialised boilers and furnaces, being—
(A) lgnifluid/fluidized bed boilers;
(B) flameless furnaces and continuous pusher type furnaces;
(C) fluidized bed type heat treatment furnaces; or
(D) high efficiency boilers (thermal efficiency higher than 75 per
cent. in case of coal fired and 80 per cent. in case of oil/gas fired boilers);
(ii) instrumentation and monitoring system for monitoring energy flows,
being—
(A) automatic electrical load monitoring systems;
(B) digital heat loss meters;
(C) micro-processor based control systems;
(D) infra-red thermography;
(E) meters for measuring heat losses, furnace oil flow, steam flow,
electric energy and power factor meters;
(F) maximum demand indicator and clamp on power meters;
(G) exhaust gases analyzer; or
(H) fuel oil pump test bench;
(iii) waste heat recovery equipment, being— 
(A) economisers and feed water heaters;
(B) recuperators and air pre-heaters;
10
15
20
5
30
35
40
25

267
(C) heat pumps; or
(D) thermal energy wheel for high and low temperature waste heat
recovery;
(iv) co-generation systems, being—
(A) back pressure pass out, controlled extraction, extraction-cum-condens-
ing turbines for co-generation along with pressure boilers;
(B) vapour absorption refrigeration systems;
(C) organic rankine cycle power systems; or
(D) low inlet pressure small steam turbines;
(v) electrical equipment, being— 
(A) shunt capacitors and synchronous condenser systems;
(B) automatic power cut off devices (relays) mounted on individual
motors;
(C) automatic voltage controller;
(D) power factor controller for AC motors;
(E) solid state devices for controlling motor speeds;
(F) thermally energy-efficient stenters (which require 800 or less
kilocalories of heat to evaporate one kilogram of water);
(G) series compensation equipment;
(H) Flexible AC Transmission (FACT) devices - Thyristor controlled
series compensation equipment;
(I) time of Day (ToD) energy meters;
(J) equipment to establish transmission highways for National Power
Grid to facilitate transfer of surplus power of one region to the deficient
region;
(K) remote terminal units/intelligent electronic devices, computer
hardware/ software, router/bridges, other required equipment and associ-
ated communication systems for supervisory control and data acquisition
systems, energy management systems and distribution management sys-
tems for power transmission systems; or
(L) special energy meters for Availability Based Tariff (ABT);
(vi) burners, being —
(A) 0 to 10 per cent. excess air burners;
(B) emulsion burners; or
(C) burners using air with high pre-heat temperature (above 300°C);
and
(vii) other energy saving device, being —
(A) wet air oxidation equipment for recovery of chemicals and heat;
(B) mechanical vapour recompressors;
(C) thin film evaporators;
(D) automatic micro-processor based load demand controllers;
10
15
20
5
30
35
40
25

268
(E) coal based producer gas plants;
(F) fluid drives and fluid couplings;
(G) turbo charges/super-charges;or
(H) sealed radiation sources for radiation processing plants;
(m) “renewal energy device” means— 
(i) flat plate solar collectors;
(ii) concentrating and pipe type solar collectors;
(iii) solar cookers;
(iv) solar water heaters and systems;
(v) air/gas/fluid heating systems;
(vi) solar crop driers and systems;
(vii) solar refrigeration, cold storages and air-conditioning systems;
(viii) solar steels and desalination systems;
(ix) solar power generating systems;
(x) solar pumps based on solar-thermal and solar-photovoltaic con-
version;
(xi) solar-photovoltaic modules and panels for water pumping and
other applications;
(xii) Wind mills and any specially designed devices which run on
wind mills;
(xiii) Any special devices including electric generators and pumps
running on wind energy;
(xiv) biogas-plant and biogas-engines;
(xv) electrically operated vehicles including battery powered or fuel-
cell powered vehicles;
(xvi) agricultural and municipal waste conversion devices produc-
ing energy;
(xvii) equipment for utilising ocean waste and thermal energy; or
(xviii) machinery and plant used in the manufacture of any of the
above sub-items;
(n) “machinery and plant used in semi-conductor industry” means machinery
and plant used in semi-conductor industry covering all integrated circuits (ICs) (ex-
cluding hybrid integrated circuits) ranging from small scale integration (SSI) to large
scale integration/very large scale integration (LSI/VLSI) as also discrete semi-con-
ductor devices such as diodes, transistors, thyristors, triacs, etc., other than clauses
(h), (i), (j), (l) and (m) referred above.
10
15
20
5
30
35
25

THE SIXTEENTH SCHEDULE
[See section 79(1) and (4)]
PART I
CONTRIBUTIONS OR DONATIONS ELIGIBLE FOR ONE HUNDRED SEVENTY-FIVE PER CENT.
DEDUCTION
Any research association or national laboratory or university, college or other
institution if—
(a) it is engaged in carrying on scientific research and development; and
(b) such association, university, college or other institution is approved in this behalf
subject to conditions and in accordance with  such guidelines and manner  as may be
prescribed.
PART II
C
ONTRIBUTIONS OR DONATIONS ELIGIBLE FOR ONE HUNDRED TWENTY-FIVE PER CENT. DEDUCTION
Any research association or a university, college or other institution if-—
(a) it is engaged in carrying on  statistical research or research in social science;
and
(b) such association, university, college or other institution is approved in this
behalf subject to conditions and in accordance with  such guidelines  as may be
prescribed.
PART III
D
ONATIONS ELIGIBLE FOR HUNDRED PER CENT. DEDUCTION
1. The National Defence Fund set up by the Central Government.
2. The Prime Minister’s National Relief Fund.
3. The Prime Minister’s Armenia Earthquake Relief Fund.
4. The Africa (Public Contributions-India) Fund.
5. The National Foundation for Communal Harmony.
6. Any University or educational institution of national eminence as may be approved
by the prescribed authority in this behalf.
7. Any Zila Saksharta Samiti constituted in any district under the chairmanship of the
Collector of that district for the purposes of improvement of primary education in villages
and towns in such district and for literacy and post-literacy activities.
8. The National Blood Transfusion Council or  any State Blood Transfusion Council
which has as its sole object, the control, supervision, regulation or encouragement in India
of the services related to operation and requirements of blood banks.
9. Any fund set up by a State Government to provide medical relief to the poor.
10. The Army Central Welfare Fund or the Indian Naval Benevolent Fund or the Air
Force Central Welfare Fund established by the armed forces of the Union for the welfare of
the past and present members of such forces or their dependants.
11. The National Illness Assistance Fund.
12. The Chief Minister’s Relief Fund or the Lieutenant Governor’s Relief Fund in
respect of any State or Union  territory, as the case may be, where such Fund is—
269
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

270
(a) the only Fund of its kind established in the State or the Union territory, as the
case may be;
(b) under the overall control of the State or the Union territory, as the case may
be;
(c) administered in such manner as may be specified by the State Government or
the Lieutenant Governor, as the case may be.
13.  The National Sports Fund set up by the Central Government.
14. The National Cultural Fund set up by the Central Government.
15.  The Fund for Technology Development and Application set up by the Central
Government.
16. The National Trust for Welfare of Persons with Autism, Cerebral Palsy, Mental
Retardation and Multiple Disabilities constituted under sub-section (1) of section 3 of the
National Trust for Welfare of Persons with Autism, Cerebral Palsy, Mental Retardation and
Multiple Disabilities Act, 1999.
17. The Government or  any such local authority, institution or association as may be
approved in this behalf by the Central Government, to be utilised for the purpose of promot-
ing family planning.
18. The Indian Olympic Association or to any other association or institution estab-
lished in India, as the Central Government may, having regard to the prescribed guidelines,
by notification, specify in this behalf  for—
(a) the development of infrastructure for sports and games; or
(b) the sponsorship of sports and games, in India and where the sum is paid by
an assessee, being a company.
19. A rural development fund set up and notified by the Central Government.
20.  The National Urban Poverty Eradication Fund set up and notified by the Central
Government.
PART IV
D
ONATIONS ELIGIBLE FOR FIFTY PER CENT. DEDUCTION
1. The Jawaharlal Nehru Memorial Fund referred to in the Deed of Declaration of Trust
adopted by the National Committee at its meeting held on the 17th day of August, 1964.
2. The Prime Minister’s Drought Relief Fund.
3. The National Children’s Fund.
4. The Indira Gandhi Memorial Trust, the deed of declaration in respect whereof was
registered at New Delhi on the 21st day of February, 1985.
5. The Rajiv Gandhi Foundation, the deed of declaration in respect whereof was
registered at New Delhi on the 21st day of June, 1991.
6. Any other fund or any institution or any organisation which is approved under
section 98;
7. The Government or any local authority, to be utilised for any charitable purpose
other than the purpose of promoting family planning.
8. Any authority constituted in India by or under any law enacted either for the
purpose of dealing with and satisfying the need for housing accommodation or for the
purpose of planning, development or improvement of cities, towns and villages, or for both.
44 of 1999.
5
10
15
20
25
35
30
40

271
9. Any corporation established by the Central Government or any State Government
for promoting the interests of  a minority community.
10. A temple, mosque, gurdwara, church or any other place as is notified by the Central
Government  to be of historic, archaeological or artistic importance or to be a place of public
worship of renown throughout a State or States, to be utilised for the renovation or repair of
such temple, mosque, gurdwara, church or other place.
N
OTE:— (a) For the purposes of item 7 of Part III, “town” means a town which has a
population not exceeding one lakh according to the last preceding census of which the
relevant figures have been published before the first day of the financial year;
(b) For the purposes of item 8 of Part III, —
(i) “National Blood Transfusion Council” means a society registered as such
under the Societies Registration Act, 1860 under the administrative control of the
Union Ministry of Health and Family Welfare;
(ii) “State Blood Transfusion Council” means a society registered, in consulta-
tion with the National Blood Transfusion Council, under the Societies Registration
Act, 1860 under the administrative control of the Department of Health of the respec-
tive State Government.
21 of 1860.
21 of 1860.
5
10
15

THE  SEVENTEENTH  SCHEDULE
[See section 53(2)]
DETERMINATION OF COST OF ACQUISITION IN CERTAIN CASES
Serial Nature of Mode of acquisition Cost of acquisition of the
number investment asset investment asset
(1) (2) (3) (4)
1. Shares in an
amalgamated
company, being an
Indian
company or a
successor co-
operative bank.
By way of transfer
referred to in clause
(k) or clause (l), as the
case may be, of sub-
section (1)
of section 47.
The cost of acquisition to
the assessee of the shares
in the amalgamating
company or  predecessor
co-operative bank.
2. Transferable
interest of partner
referred to in
section 42 of the
Limited Liability
Partnership Act,
2008 (6 of  2009).
By way of transfer
referred to in clause (j) of
sub-section ( 1)
of section 47.
The cost of acquisition to
the assessee of the shares
in the company immediately
before its conversion into
limited liability partnership.
3. Shares or debenture
in a company.
By way of transfer
referred to in clause (q)
or clause (r) of sub-
section (1) of section 47.
That part of the cost of bond,
debenture, debenture-stock
or deposit certificates in
relation to which the invest-
ment asset is acquired by the
assessee.
4. Shares in the
resulting
company or co-
operative bank.
By way of a transfer
effected under a scheme
of demerger.
The amount which bears to
the cost of acquisition of
shares held by the assessee
in the demerged company or
co-operative bank,  the same
proportion as the net book
value of the assets
transferred in a demerger
bears to the net worth of the
demerged company  or
co-operative bank immedi-
ately before such demerger.
5. Original shares in
the demerged
company or a
co-operative bank.
By way of transfer in any
manner.
The cost of acquisition of the
original shares held by the
assessee in the demerged
company  immediately before
the demerger  as reduced by
the amount  as so arrived at
under column (4) in respect
of the entry at  serial number
3 of this Table.
272
5
10
15
20
25
35
30
40
45

273
06. Shares or any other
security.
By way of purchase of the
share or such other
security.
The amount actually paid by
the assessee for acquiring the
asset.
07. Any right to
renounce the
entitlement to
subscribe
to shares or any
other
security.
By way of purchase of the
original share or other
security.
Nil
08. Any right to
subscribe to
additional shares or
any other security
on the basis of
holding the original
share or security.
By way of purchase of
the original share or other
security.
The amount actually paid by
the assessee for acquiring the
asset.
09. Shares or any other
security.
By way of allotment on
the basis of holding any
share or any other
security without payment.
Nil
10. Right in the nature
of an entitlement to
subscribe to shares
or any other security.
By way of purchase of
such right from another
person.
The aggregate of the amount
of purchase price paid by the
assessee to the person
renouncing the right and the
amount paid by the assessee
to the company or institution,
as the case may be, for
acquiring the investment
asset.
11. Sweat equity shares. By way of allotment or
transfer, directly or
indirectly, by an employer
to his  employee (including
former employee).
The fair market value of the
sweat equity share  which has
been taken into account while
computing the value of
perquisite for the purposes of
section 22.
12. Shares of a
recognised stock
exchange in India.
Under a scheme of
demutualisation or
corporatisation
approved by the
 Securities and
Exchange Board
of of India.
Cost of  acquisition by the
assessee of his original
membership of the stock
exchange.
13. Trading or clearing
rights of a
recognised stock
exchange in India
acquired by a
shareholder.
Under a scheme of
demutualisation or
 corporatisation
approved by the
 Securities and
 Exchange Board
of India.
Nil
(1) (2) (3) (4)
5
10
15
20
25
35
30
40
45

274
14. Shares or stocks of
a company.
(a) in pursuance of
consolidation or division
or sub-division of all or
any of the share capital of
the company into shares
of larger amount or
smaller amount, as the
case may be, than its ex-
isting shares; or
(b) by way of conversion
of any shares of the com-
pany into stock of the
same company, or re-con-
version thereof; or
(c) by way of conversion
of one kind of shares of
the company into another
kind of shares of the same
company.
Cost of acquisition of the
shares or stock from which the
investment asset is derived.
(1) (2) (3) (4)
5
10
15
20

THE  EIGHTEENTH  SCHEDULE
[See section 314(160)]
MINERALS AND GROUP OF ASSOCIATED MINERALS
PART I
Minerals
1. Aluminium ores.
2. Apatite and phosphatic ores.
3. Beryl.
4. Chrome ore.
5. Coal and lignite.
6. Columbite, Samarskite and other minerals of the “rare earths’’ group.
7. Copper.
8. Gold.
9. Gypsum.
10. Iron ore.
11. Lead.
12. Manganese ore.
13. Molybdenum.
14. Nickel ores.
15. Platinum and other precious metals and their ores.
16. Pitchblende and other uranium ores.
17. Precious stones.
18. Rutile.
19. Silver.
20. Sulphur and its ores.
21. Tin.
22. Tungsten ores.
23. Uraniferous allanite, monazite and other thorium minerals.
24. Uranium bearing tailings left over from ores after extraction of copper and gold,
ilmenite and other titanium ores.
25. Vanadium ores.
26. Zinc.
27. Zircon .
Part II
Groups of Associated Minerals
1. Apatite, Beryl, Cassiterite, Columbite, Emeraid, Felspar, Lepidolite, Mica, Pitchblende,
Quartz, Samarskite, Scheelite, Topaz, Tantalite, Tourmaline.
2. Iron, Manganese, Titanium, Vanadium and Nickel Minerals.
3. Lead, Zinc, Copper, Cadmium, Arsenic, Antimony, Bismuth, Cobalt, Nickel,
Molybenum, and Uranium minerals, and Gold and Silver, Arsinopyrite, Chalcopyrite,
Pyrite, Pyphrotite and Pentalandite.
4. Chromium, Osmiridium, Platinum, and Nickel minerals.
5. Kyanite, Sillimanite, Corrundum,Dumortieite and Topaz.
6. Gold, Silver, Tellurium, Selenioum and Pyrite.
7. Barytes, Flourite, Chalcocite, Selenium, and minerals of Zinc, Lead and Silver.
8. Tin and Tungsten minerals.
9. Limestone, Dolomite and Magnesite.
10. Ilmenite, Monazite, Zircon, Rutile, Garnet and Sillimanite.
11. Sulphides of copper and iron.
12. Coal, Fireclay and Shale.
13. Magnetite and Apatite.
14. Magnesite and Chromite.
15. Talc (Soapstone and Steatite) and Dolomite.
16. Bauxite, Laterite, Aluminous Clays, Lithomorge, Titanium, Vanadum, Galtium and
17. Columbiur minerals.
275
5
10
15
20
25
35
30
40
45
50
55

THE  NINETEENTH  SCHEDULE
[See section 314(18)]
PART—A
APPROVED PROVIDENT FUNDS
1.  A Provident fund shall be granted approval in accordance with the provisions of
this Part.
2.  (1) The Commissioner may accord approval to any provident fund which, in his
opinion, satisfies the conditions prescribed in  paragraph 3 and the rules made by the Board
in this behalf, and may, at any time withdraw such approval if, in his opinion, the provident
fund contravenes any of those conditions.
(2) An order according approval shall take effect on such date as the Commissioner
may fix in accordance with any rules the Board may make in this behalf, such date not being
later than the last day of the financial year in which the order is made.
(3) An order withdrawing approval shall take effect from the date on which it is made.
(4) An order according approval to a provident fund shall not, unless the Commis-
sioner otherwise directs, be affected by the fact that the fund is subsequently amalgamated
with another provident fund on the occurrence of an amalgamation of these undertakings in
connection with which the two funds are maintained, or that it subsequently absorbs the
whole or a part of another provident fund belonging to any undertaking which is wholly or
in part transferred to or merged in the undertaking of the employer maintaining the first-
mentioned fund.
3. In order that a provident fund may receive and retain approval, it shall, subject to
the provisions of paragraph 4, satisfy the conditions set out below and any other conditions
which the Board may, by rules, specify—
(a)  all employees shall be employed in India, or shall be employed by an em-
ployer whose principal place of business is in India;
(b) the contributions of an employee in any year shall be a definite proportion of
his salary for that year, and shall be deducted by the employer from the employee’s
salary in that proportion, at each periodical payment of such salary in that year, and
credited to the employee’s individual account in the fund;
(c) the contributions of an employer to the individual account of an employee in
any year shall not exceed the amount of the contributions of the employee in that year,
and shall be credited to the employee’s individual account at intervals not exceeding
one year;
(d) the fund shall be vested in two or more trustees or in the Official Trustee
under a trust which shall not be revocable, save with the consent of all the beneficia-
ries;
(e) the fund shall consist of contributions as above specified, received by the
trustees, of accumulations thereof, and of interest credited in respect of such contri-
butions and accumulations, and of securities purchased therewith and of any capital
gains arising from the transfer of capital assets of the fund, and of no other sums;
(f) the fund shall be a fund of an establishment to which the provisions of sub-
section (3) of section 1 of the Employees’ Provident Funds and Miscellaneous Provi-
sions Act, 1952 apply or of an establishment which has been notified by the Central
Provident Fund Commissioner under sub-section (4) of section 1 of the said Act, and
such establishment shall obtain exemption under section 17 of the said Act from the
operation of all or any of the provisions of any scheme referred to in that section;
(g) the employer shall not be entitled to recover any sum whatsoever from the
276
Application
of part.
According
approval of
provident
fund and its
withdrawal.
Conditions to
be satisfied by
approved
provident
funds.
19 to 1952.
5
10
15
20
25
35
30
40
45

277
fund, save in cases where the employee is dismissed for misconduct or voluntarily
leaves his employment otherwise that on account of ill-health or other unavoidable
cause before the expiration of the term of service specified in this behalf in the regula-
tions of the fund:
(h) the accumulated balance due to an employee shall be payable on the day he
ceases to be an employee of the employer maintaining the fund;
(i) save as provided in clause ( h) or in accordance with such conditions and
restrictions as the Board may, by rules, specify, no portion of the balance to the credit
of an employee shall be payable to him.
4.  (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in clause (a) of paragraph 3, the Commis-
sioner may, if he thinks fit, and subject to such conditions, if any, as he thinks proper to
attach to the approval, accord approval to a fund maintained by an employer whose principal
place of business is not in India, provided the proportion of employees employed outside
India does not exceed ten per cent.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in clause ( b) of paragraph 3, an employee
who retains his employment while serving in the armed forces of the Union or when taken
into or employed in the national service under any law for the time being in force, may,
whether he receives from the employer any salary or not, contribute to the fund during his
service in the armed forces of the union or while so taken into or employed in the national
service a sum not exceeding the amount he would have contributed had he continued to
serve the employer.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in clause (e) or clause (h) of paragraph 3 —
(a) at the request made in writing by the employee who ceases to be an employee
of the employer maintaining the fund, the trustees of the fund may consent to retain
the whole or any part of the accumulated balance due to the employee to be drawn by
him at any time on demand;
(b) where the accumulated balance due to an employee who has ceased to be an
employee is retained in the fund in accordance with clause (a), the fund may consist
also of interest in respect of such accumulated balance.
(c) the fund may also consist of any amount transferred from the individual
account of an employee in any approved provident fund maintained by his former
employer and the interest in respect thereof.
(4) Subject to any rules which the Board may make in this behalf, the Commissioner
may, in respect of any particular fund, relax the provisions of clause (c) of paragraph 3 —
(a) so as to permit the payment of larger contributions by an employer to the
individual accounts of employees whose salaries do not in each case exceed five
hundred rupees per mensem; and
(b) so as to permit the crediting by employers to the individual accounts of
employees of periodical bonuses or other contributions of a contingent nature, where
the calculation and payment of such bonuses or other contributions is provided for on
definite principles by the regulations of the fund.
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in clause (i) of paragraph 3, in order to enable
an employee to pay the amount of tax assessed on his total income as determined under sub-
paragraph (4) of paragraph 10, he shall be entitled to withdraw from the balance to his credit
in the approved provident fund a sun not exceeding the difference between such amount
and the amount to which he would have been assessed if the transferred balance referred to
in sub- paragraph (2) of paragraph 10 had not been included in his total income.
Relaxation of
conditions.
5
10
15
20
25
35
30
40
45

278
5. That portion of the annual accretion in any financial year to the balance at the credit
of an employee participating in an approved provident fund as consists of —
(a) contributions made by the employer in excess of twelve per cent. of the
salary of the employee or one lakh rupees, whichever is less; and
(b) interest credited on the balance to the credit of the employee in so far as it is
allowed at a rate exceeding the rate as may be fixed by the Central Government by
notification in this behalf
shall be deemed to have been received by the employee in that financial year and shall
be included in total income for that financial year, and shall be liable to income-tax.
6. An employee participating in an approved provident fund shall, in respect of his
own contributions to his individual account in the fund in the financial year, be entitled to a
deduction in the computation of his total income of an amount determined in accordance
with section 69.
7. (1) The accumulated balance due and becoming payable to an employee participat-
ing in an approved provident fund shall be excluded from the computation of his total
income—
(a) if he has rendered continuous service with his employer for a period of five
years or more;
(b) if, though he has not rendered such continuous service, the service has been
terminated by reason of the employee’s ill-health, or by the contraction of discontinu-
ance of the employee’s business or other cause beyond the control of the employee;
or
(c) if, on the cessation of his employment, the employee obtains employment
with any other employer, to extend the accumulated balance due and becoming pay-
able to him is transferred to his individual account in any approved provident fund
maintained by such other employer.
(2) Where the accumulated balance due and becoming payable to an employee partici-
pating in an approved provident fund maintained by his employer includes any amount
transferred from his individual account in any other approved provident fund or funds
maintained by his former employer or employers, then, in computing the period of continu-
ous service for the purposes of clause (a) or clause (b) of sub-paragraph (1), the period or the
periods for which such employee rendered continuous service under his former employer or
employers aforesaid shall be included.
8. Where the accumulated balance due to an employee participating in an approved
provident fund is included in his total income owing to the provisions of paragraph  7 not
being applicable, the Assessing Officer shall calculate the total of the various sums of tax
which would have been payable by the employee in respect of his total income for each of
the years concerned if the fund had not been an approved provident fund, and the amount
by which such total exceeds the total of all sums paid by or on behalf of such employee by
way of tax for such years shall be payable by the employee in addition to pay other tax for
which he may be liable for the financial year in which the accumulated balance due to him
becomes payable.
9. The trustees of an approved provident fund, or any person authorised by the
regulations of the fund to make payment of accumulated balances due to employees, shall, in
cases where paragraph 8 applies, at the time an accumulated balance due to an employee is
paid, deduct therefrom the amount payable under that paragraph and all the provisions of
Chapter XI shall apply as if the accumulated balance were income chargeable under the head
“Income from employment”.
Employer’s
annual
contributions,
when deemed
to be income
received by
employee.
Exemption
for
employee’s
contribution.
Exclusion
from total
income of
accumulated
balance.
Tax on
accumulated
balance.
Deduction at
source of tax
payable on
accumulated
balance.
5
10
15
25
35
30
40
45
20

279
10. (1) Where approval is accorded to a provident fund with existing balances, an
account shall be made of the fund up to the day immediately preceding the day on which the
approval takes effect, showing the balance to the credit of each employee on such day, and
containing such further particulars as the Board may prescribe.
(2) The account shall also show in respect of the balance to the credit of each em-
ployee the amount thereof which is to be transferred to that employee’s account in the
approved provident fund, and such amount (hereinafter called his transferred balance) shall
be shown as the balance to his credit in the approved provident fund on the date on which
the approval of the fund takes effect, and sub-paragraph ( 4) of this paragraph and sub-
paragraph (5) of paragraph 4 shall apply thereto.
(3) Any portion of the balance to the credit of an employee in the existing fund which
is not transferred to the approved fund shall be excluded from the accounts of the approved
fund and shall be liable to income-tax in accordance with the provisions of this Code, other
than this Part.
(4) Subject to such rules as the Board may make in this behalf, the Assessing Officer
shall make a calculation of the aggregate of all sums comprised in a transferred balance which
would have been liable to income-tax if this Part had been in force from the date of the
institution of the fund, without regard to any tax which may have been paid on any sum, and
such aggregate (if any) shall be deemed to be income received by the employee in the
financial year in which the approval of the fund takes effect and shall be included in the total
income of the employee for that financial year, and, for the purposes of assessment, the
remainder of the transferred balance shall be disregarded, but no other exemption or relief, by
way of refund or otherwise, shall be granted in respect of any sum comprised in such
transferred balance.
(5) Nothing in this paragraph shall affect the rights of the persons administering an
unapproved provident fund of dealing with it, or with the balance to the credit of any
individual employee before approval is accorded, in any manner which may be lawful.
11. (1) The accounts of an approved provident fund shall be maintained by the trust-
ees of the fund and shall be in such form and for such periods, and shall contain such
particulars, as the board may prescribe.
(2) The accounts shall be open to inspection at all reasonable times by income-tax
authorities, and the trustees shall furnish to the Assessing Officer such abstracts thereof as
the Board may prescribe.
12. (1) An employer objecting to an order of the Commissioner refusing to approved or
an order withdrawing approval from a provident fund may appeal, within a period of sixty
days of such order, to the Board.
(2) The Appeal shall be in such forms, verified in the manner and accompanied by such
fees as the Board may prescribe.
13.  (1) Where an employer, who maintains a provident fund (whether approved or not)
for the benefit of his employees and has not transferred the fund or any portion of it,
transfers such fund or portion to trustee in trust for the employees participating in the fund,
the amount so transferred shall be deemed to be of the nature of capital expenditure.
(2) When an employee participating in such fund is paid the accumulated balance due
to him therefrom, any portion of such balance as represents his share in the amount so
transferred to the trustees (without addition of interest, and exclusive of the employee’s
contributions and interest thereon) shall, if the employer has made effective arrangements to
secure that tax shall be deducted at source from the amount of such share when paid to the
employee, be deemed to be an expenditure by the employer within the meaning of section 35
incurred in the financial year in which the accumulated balance due to the employee is paid.
 14. The provisions of provisions of paragraphs 2 to 13 shall not apply to a provident
fund established under a schme framed under the following, namely:—
(i) the Provident Funds Act, 1925;
(ii) the Public Provident Fund Act, 1968;
(iii) the Employees Provident Funds and Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1952;
19 of 1925.
23 of 1968.
19 of 1952.
Treatment
of balance in
newly
approved
provident
fund.
Accounts of
approved
provident
funds.
Appeals.
Treatment of
fund
transferred by
employer to
trustee.
Funds
deemed to be
approved.
5
10
15
20
25
35
30
40
50
45

280
(iv) the Coal Mines Provident Fund and Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1948 and
such provident fund shal be deemed to be an approved provident fund if it is notified
by the Board in accordance with the guidelines framed by the Central Government in
this behalf.
15.  The Board may, for the purposes of this Part, prescribe:—
(a) the statements and other information to be submitted along with an applica-
tion for approval;
(b) limiting the contributions to an approved provident fund by employees of a
company who are shareholders in the company;
(c) regulating the investment or deposit or the moneys of an approved provident
fund;
(d) providing for the assessment by way of penalty of any consideration
received by an employee for an assignment of, or creation of a charge upon, his
beneficial interest in an approved provident fund;
(e) determining the extend to and the manner in which exemption from payment
of tax may be granted in respect of contributions and interest credited to the individual
accounts of employees in a provident fund from which approval has been withdrawn;
and
(f) generally, to carry out the purposes of this Part and to secure such further
control over the approval of provident funds and the administration of approved
provident funds as it may deem requisite.
16. In this Part, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “employer” means any person who maintains a provident fund for the ben-
efit of his or its employees, being—
(i) a Hindu undivided family, company, firm or other association of per-
sons, or
(ii) an individual engaged in a business or profession the profits and
gains whereof are assessable to income-tax under the head “Profits and gains of
business or profession”;
(b) “employee” means an employee participating in a provident fund, but does
not include a personal or domestic servant;
(c) “contribution” means any sum credited by or on behalf of any employee out
of his salary, or by an employer out of his own monies, to the individual account of an
employee, but does not include credited interest;
(d) “balance to the credit of an employee” means the total amount to the credit of
his individual account in provident fund at any time;
(e) “annual accretion” in relation to the balance to the credit of an employee,
means the increase to such  balance in any year, arising from contributions and inter-
est;
(f) “accumulated balance due to an employee” means the balance to his credit, or
such portion thereof as may be claimable by him under the regulations of the fund, on
the day he ceases to be an employee of the employer maintaining the fund;
(g) “regulations of a fund” means the special body of regulations governing the
constitution and administration of a particular provident fund; and
(h) “salary” includes dearness allowance, if the terms of employment so provide,
but excludes all other allowances and perquisites.
PART-II
A
PPROVED SUPERANNUATION FUNDS
1.  (1) The Commissioner may accord approval to any superannuation fund or any part
of a superannuation fund which, in his opinion, complies with the requirements of paragraph
2, and may at any time withdraw such approval, if in his opinion, the circumstances of the
fund or part cease to warrant the continuance of the approval.
Provisions
relating to
rules.
Interpretations
in this Part.
Approval of
superannua-
tion fund and
its withdrawal.
19 of 1925.
5
10
15
20
25
35
30
40
45
50

281
(2) The Commissioner shall communicate in writing to the trustee of the fund the grant
of approval with the date on which the approval is to take effect, and, where the approval is
granted subject to conditions, those conditions.
(3) The Commissioner shall communicate in writing to the trustees of the fund any
withdrawal of approval with the reasons for such withdrawal and the date on which the
withdrawal is to take effect.
(4) The Commissioner shall neither refuse nor withdraw approval to any superannua-
tion fund or any part of a superannuation fund unless he has given the trustees or that fund
an opportunity of being heard in the matter.
2. In order that a superannuation fund may receive and retain approval, it shall satisfy
the conditions set out below and any other conditions which the Board may by rule
prescribe—
(a) the fund shall be a fund established under an irrevocable trust in connection
with a trade or undertaking carried on in India, and not less than ninety per cent. of the
employees shall be employed in India;
(b) the fund shall have for its sole purpose the provision of annuities for employ-
ees in the trade or undertaking on their retirement at or after a specified age or on their
becoming incapacitated prior to such retirement, or for the widows, children or
dependants of persons who are or have been such employees on the death of those
persons;
(c) the employer in the trade or undertaking shall be a contributor to the fund;
and
(d) all annuities, pensions and other benefits granted from the fund shall be
payable only in India.
3.  (1) An application for approval of a superannuation fund or part of a superannua-
tion fund shall be made in writing by the trustees of the fund to the Assessing Officer by
whom the employer is assessable, and shall be accompanied by a copy of the instrument
under which the fund is established and by two copies of the rules and, where the fund has
been in existence during any year or years prior to the financial year in which the application
for approval is made, also two copies of the accounts of the fund relating to such prior year
or years (not being more than three years immediately preceding the year in which the said
application is made) for which such account have been made up, but the Commissioner may
require such further information to be supplied as he thinks proper.
(2) If any alternation in the rules, constitution, objects or conditions of the fund is
made at any time after the date of the application for approval, the trustees of the fund shall
forthwith communicate such alteration to the Assessing Officer mentioned in sub-paragraph
(1), and in default of such communication any approval given shall, unless the
Commissioner otherwise orders, be deemed to have been withdrawn from the date on which
the alteration took effect.
4. Where any contributions by an employer (including the interest thereon, if any) are
repaid to the employer, the amount so repaid shall be deemed for the purpose of income-tax
to be the income of the employer of the financial year in which it is so repaid.
5. Where any contributions made by an employer, including interest on contributions,
if any, are paid to any employee during his lifetime, in circumstances other than those
referred to in paragraph 13 of the Sixth Schedule, tax on the amounts so paid shall be
deducted at the average rate of tax at which the employee was liable to tax during the
preceding three years or during the period, if less than three years, when he was a member of
the fund, and shall be paid by the trustees to the credit of the Central Government within the
time and such manner as the Board may direct.
Conditions
for approval.
Application
for approval.
Contribution
by employer,
when deemed
to be income
of employer.
Deduction of
tax on
contributions
paid to an
employee.
5
10
15
20
25
35
30
40
45

282
6. Where an employer deducts from the emoluments paid to an employee or pays on
his behalf any contributions of that employee to an approved superannuation fund, he shall
include all such deductions or payments in the return which he is required to furnish under
section 198.
7.  (1) An employer objecting to an order of the Commissioner refusing to accord
approval to a superannuation fund of an order withdrawing such approval may appeal,
within a period of sixty days of such order, to the Board.
(2) The appeal shall be in such form verified in the manner and accompanied by such
fees as the Board may prescribe.
8. If a fund or a part of a fund for any reason ceases to be an approved superannuation
fund, the trustees of the fund shall nevertheless remain liable to tax on any sum paid on
account of returned contributions (including interest on contributions, if any), in so far as
the sum so paid is in respect of contributions made before the fund or part of the fund ceased
to be an approved superannuation fund under the provisions of this Part.
9. The trustees of an approved superannuation fund and any employer who contrib-
utes to an approved superannuation fund shall, when required by notice from the Assessing
Officer, within such period, not being less than twenty-one days from the date of the notice,
as may be specified in the notice, furnish such return, statement, particulars or information,
as the Assessing Officer may require.
10.  (1) The Board may, for the purposes of this Part, prescribe—
(a) the statements and other information to be submitted along with an applica-
tion for approval;
(b) the returns, statements, particulars, or information which the Assessing
 Officer may require from the trustees of an approved superannuation fund or from the
employer;
(c) limiting the ordinary annual contribution and any other contributions to an
approved superannuation fund by an employer;
(d) regulating the investment or deposit of the moneys of an approved superan-
nuation fund;
(e) providing for the assessment by way of penalty of any consideration re-
ceived by an employee for any assignment of, or creation of a charge upon, his benefi-
cial interest in an approved superannuation fund;
(f) determining the extent to, and the manner in, which exemption from payment
of tax may be granted in respect of any payment made from a superannuation fund
from which approval has been withdrawn;
(g) providing for the withdrawal for approval in the case of a fund which ceases
to satisfy the requirements of this Part or of the rules made thereunder; and
(h) generally, to carry out the purposes of this Part and to secure such further
control over the approval of superannuation funds and the administration of ap-
proved superannuation funds as it may deem requisite.
11. In this Part, unless the context otherwise requires, “employer”, “employee”, “con-
tribution” and “salary” shall have, in relation to superannuation funds, the meaning respec-
tively  assigned to them in paragraph 15 of Part I in relation to provident funds.
Deduction from
pay of  and
contributions
on behalf of
employee to
be included in
return.
Appeals.
Liability of
trustees on
cessation of
approval.
Particulars to
be furnished
in respect of
superannua-
tion funds.
Provision
relating to
rules.
Interpretations
in this Part.
5
10
15
20
25
35
30
40

283
PART III
APPROVED GRATUITY FUNDS
1.  (1) The   Commissioner may accord approval to any gratuity fund which, in his
opinion, complies with the requirements of paragraph 2, and may at any time withdraw such
approval if, in his opinion, the circumstances of the fund or part cease to warrant the continu-
ance of the approval.
(2) The Commissioner shall communicate in writing to the trustee of the fund the grant
of approval with the date on which the approval is to take effect, and, where the approval is
granted subject to conditions, those conditions.
(3) The Commissioner shall communicate in writing to the trustees of the fund any
withdrawal of approval with the reasons for such withdrawal and the date on which the
withdrawal is to take effect.
(4) The Commissioner shall neither refuse nor withdraw approval to any gratuity
fund unless he has given the trustees or that fund an opportunity of being heard in the
matter.
2. In order that a gratuity fund may receive and retain approval, it shall satisfy the
conditions set out below and any other conditions which the Board may prescribe—
(a) the fund shall be a fund established under an irrevocable trust in connection
with a trade or undertaking carried on in India, and not less than ninety per cent. of the
employees shall be employed in India;
(b) the fund shall have for its sole purpose the provision of gratuity to employ-
ees in the trade or undertaking, on their retirement at or after a specified age or on their
becoming incapacitated prior to such retirement or on termination of their employment
after a minimum period of service specified in the rules of the fund, or to the widow,
children or dependants of such employees on their death;
(c) the employer in the trade or undertaking shall be a contributor to the fund;
and
(d) all benefits granted by the fund shall be payable only in India.
3. (1) An application for approval of a gratuity fund shall be made in writing by the
trustees of the fund to the Assessing Officer by whom the employer is assessable and shall
be accompanied by a copy of the instrument under which the fund is established and by two
copies of the rules and, where the fund has been in existence during any year or years prior
to the financial year in which the application for approval is made, also two copies of the
accounts of the fund relating to such prior year or years (not being more than three years
immediately preceding the year in which the said application is made) for which such ac-
count have been made up, but the Commissioner may require such further information to be
supplied as he thinks proper.
(2) If any alternation in the rules, constitution, objects or conditions of the fund is
made at any time after the date of the application for approval, the trustees of the fund shall
forthwith communicate such alteration to the Assessing Officer mentioned in sub-paragraph
(1), and in default of such communication any approval given shall, unless the Commis-
sioner otherwise orders, be deemed to have been withdrawn from the date on which the
alteration took effect.
4. Where any gratuity is paid to an employee during his lifetime, the gratuity shall be
treated as salary paid to the employee for the purpose of this Code.
5. If a gratuity fund for any reason ceases to be an approved gratuity fund, the trustees
of the fund shall nevertheless remain liable to tax on any gratuity paid to any employee.
Approval of
gratuity fund
and its
withdrawal.
Conditions
for approval.
Application
for approval.
Gratuity
deemed to be
salary.
Liability of
trustees on
cessation of
approval.
5
10
15
25
35
30
40
45
20

284
6. Where any contributions by an employer (including the interest thereon, if any) are
repaid to the employer, the amount so repaid shall be deemed for the purposes of income-tax
to be the income of the employer of the financial year in which they are so repaid.
7. (1) An employer objecting to an order of the Commissioner refusing to accord
approval to a gratuity fund or an order withdrawing such approval may appeal, within a
period of sixty days of such order, to the Board;
(2) The appeal shall be in such form, verified in the manner and accompanied by such
fee as the Board may prescribe.
8. The trustees of an approved gratuity fund and any employer who contributes to an
approved gratuity fund shall, when required by notice from the Assessing Officer, furnish
within such period, not being less than twenty-one days from the date of the notice, as may
be specified in the notice, such return, statement, particulars or information, as the Assess-
ing Officer may require.
9. (1) The Board may, for the purposes of this Part, prescribe—
(a) the statements and other information to be submitted along with an applica-
tion for approval;
(b) limiting the ordinary annual and other contributions of an employer to the
fund;
(c) regulating the investment or deposit of the moneys of an approved gratuity
fund;
(d) providing for the assessment by way of penalty of any consideration re-
ceived by an employee for any assignment of, or creation of a charge upon, his benefi-
cial interest in an approved gratuity fund;
(e) providing for the withdrawal for approval in the case of a fund which ceases
to satisfy the requirements of this Part or of the rules made thereunder;
(f) generally, to carry out the purposes of this Part and to secure such further
control over the approval of gratuity funds and the administration of gratuity funds as
it may deem requisite.
10. In this Part, unless the context otherwise requires, “employer”, “employee”, “con-
tribution” and “salary” shall have, in relation to gratuity funds, the meaning respectively
assigned to them in paragraph 15 of Part I in relation to provident funds.
Contributions
by employer,
when deemed
to be income
of employer.
Appeals.
Particulars to
be furnished in
respect of
gratuity funds.
Provisions
relating to
rules.
Interpretation
under this
Part.
5
10
15
20
25
30

THE  TWENTIETH  SCHEDULE
[See sections 58(2)(u)113(2)(k) and 291(9)(c)]
COMPUTATION OF INCOME ATTRIBUTABLE TO A CONTROLLED FOREIGN COMPANY
1. The total income of a resident assessee for a financial year shall include an income
which is attributable to a Controlled Foreign Company as computed in accordance with
paragraph 3.
2. The attributable income referred to in paragraph 1 shall be included in the total
income of the assessee for the financial year, the year in which the accounting period of the
company ends.
3. The amount of attributable income shall be computed in accordance with the
formula—
                           A x 
 B   x  C
                                 100    D
Where   A =  specified income of the Controlled Foreign Company as computed under
paragraph 4;
B =  percentage of—
(i)  value of capital,
(ii) voting share or interest,
whichever is higher, held by the assessee, directly or indirectly, in the Controlled Foreign
Company;
C = number of days out of D, the voting shares or capital or interest has been held by
the assessee in the Controlled Foreign Company;
D = number of days the company remained as a Controlled Foreign Company during
the accounting period;
4. The specified income of the Controlled Foreign Company shall be computed in
accordance with the formula—
                          (A + B – C – D) x  E
                                                          F
Where    A = net profit as per profit and loss account of the Controlled Foreign
Company for the accounting period prepared in accordance with the International Financial
Reporting Standards issued by the International Accounting Standards Board, Generally
Accepted Accounting Principles, International Accounting Standards or accounting stan-
dards notified under the Companies Act, 1956, as the case may be;
B = amounts set aside to provisions made for meeting liabilities or diminution in value
of assets, other than ascertained liabilities;
C = amount or amounts of interim dividend paid out of profits of the  accounting
period, if such dividend is not debited to profit and loss account;
D = the loss to the extent it has not been previously taken into account under this
paragraph in respect of an earlier accounting period, where there is a net loss of the Con-
trolled Foreign Company for such accounting period;
E = number of days during which the company is a Controlled Foreign Company
during its accounting period;
F = number of days in the accounting period.
10 to 1956.
285
5
10
15
20
25
35
30
40

286
5. In this Schedule—
(a) “Controlled Foreign Company” means a foreign company which satisfies
the following conditions, namely:—
(i) for the purposes of tax, it is a resident of a territory with lower rate of
taxation;
(ii) the shares of such company are not traded on any stock exchange
recognised by law of the territory of which it is a resident for the purposes of tax;
(iii) one or more persons, resident in India, individually or collectively
exercise control over the company;
(iv) it is not engaged in any active trade or business;
(v) the specified income of the company determined in accordance with
the provisions of paragraph 4 exceeds twenty-five lakh rupees;
(b) one or more persons resident in India shall be said to exercise control over
the company if —
(i) such persons, individually or collectively possess or are entitled to
acquire directly or indirectly shares carrying not less than fifty per cent. of the
voting power or not less than fifty per cent. capital of the company;
(ii) such persons, individually or collectively are entitled to secure that
not less than fifty per cent. of income or asset of the company shall be applied
directly or indirectly for their benefit;
(iii) such persons, individually or collectively, exercise dominant influ-
ence on the company due to special contractual relationship;
(iv) such persons, individually or collectively, have, directly or indirectly,
sufficient votes to exert a decisive influence in a shareholder meeting of the
company.
(c) a company shall be regarded as a resident of a territory for the purposes of
tax—
(i) if in an accounting period it is liable to tax in the territory by reason of
its place of incorporation or the place of management;
(ii) if in any accounting period there are two or more territories falling in
sub-clause ( i) above, then, the company shall in that accounting period be
regarded for purpose of this Schedule as a "resident" of any one of them—
(A) if, throughout the accounting period, the company’s place of
effective management is situated in one of those territories only, in that
territory; and
(B) if, throughout the accounting period, the company’s place of
effective management is situated in two or more of those territories, then,
in one of them in which, at the end of the accounting period, the greater
amount of the company’s assets is situated; and
(C) if neither item (A) nor item (B) above applies, then, in one of the
territories falling within sub-clause (i) above in which, at the end of the
accounting period, the greater amount of the company’s assets is situ-
ated; and
(iii) if in any accounting period a territory is not falling within sub-clause
(i) above, then, for the purposes of this Schedule it shall be conclusively pre-
sumed that the company is in that accounting period  resident in a territory with
a lower rate of taxation;
5
10
15
20
25
35
30
40
45

287
(d) “territory with a lower rate of taxation” means a country or a territory outside
India in which the amount of tax paid under the law of that country or territory in
respect of profits of a company that accrue in any accounting period, is less than one-
half of the corresponding tax payable on those profits computed under this Code, as if
the said company was a domestic company;
(e) a company shall be deemed to be engaged in active trade or business if and
only if —
(i) it actively participates in industrial, commercial or financial undertak-
ings through employees or other personnel in the economic life of the territory
of which it is resident for tax purposes; and
(ii) less than fifty per cent. of income of the company during the account-
ing period is of the following nature, namely:—
(A) dividend;
(B) interest;
(C) income from house property;
(D) capital gains;
(E) annuity payment;
(F) royalty;
(G) sale or licensing of intangible rights on industrial, literary or
artistic property;
(H) income from sale of goods or supply of services including finan-
cial services to—
(I) persons that directly or indirectly control the company;
(II) persons that are controlled by the company;
(III) other persons which are controlled by persons referred to
in sub-item (I);
(IV) any associated enterprise;
(I) income from management, holding or investment in securities,
shareholdings, receivables or other financial assets;
(J) any other income falling under the head income from residuary
sources;
(f) “associated enterprise” shall have the meaning as  assigned to it in clause (5)
of section 124.
6.  (1) Unless otherwise provided, each period of twelve months ending with the 31st
day of March shall be the accounting period of a company.
(2) Where a company regularly adopts a period of twelve months ending on a day
other than the 31st day of March for the purpose of—
(i) complying with the tax law of the territory of which it is a resident for tax
purposes; or
(ii) reporting to its shareholders,
then the period of twelve months ending with such other day shall be the accounting period
of the company.
5
10
15
20
25
35
30
40

288
(3) The first accounting period of the company begins from the date of its incorpora-
tion and end with the 31st day of March or such other day, as the case may be, following the
date of such incorporation, and the later accounting period shall be the successive periods
of twelve months.
(4) If the company ceases to exist before the end of accounting period, as mentioned
in sub-paragraphs (1), (2) and (3), the accounting period shall end immediately before the
company ceases to exist.
7. A resident assessee shall furnish the details of its investment and interest in any
entity outside India in such form and manner as may be prescribed.
5

THE TWENTY-FIRST SCHEDULE
[See section 178(1)(i)]
ORDERS APPEALABLE BEFORE COMMISSIONER (APPEALS)
Serial Orders against which appeal Section, Chapter Income-tax
number may be preferred or filed or Schedule Authority by
under which whom order
Order is is passed
passed
(1) (2) (3) (4)
1. An intimation, where the assessee objects
to the making of adjustments to its returned
tax bases.
2. An order of assessment (except an order
passed in pursuance of directions of the
Dispute Resolution Panel).
3. An order of best judgment assessment.
4. An order against the assessee where he
denies his liability to be assessed under
this Code.
5. An order of assessment, reassessment or
re-computation (except an order passed in
pursuance of the directions of the Dispute
Resolution Panel).
6. An order made having the effect of enhanc-
ing the assessment or reducing a refund or
an order refusing to allow the claim made
by the assessee under the said section [ex-
cept where such order is passed by the Com-
missioner or Commissioner (Appeals) or by
the Assessing Officer in pursuance of the
directions of the Dispute Resolution Panel].
7. An order made treating the assessee as the
agent of a non-resident.
8. An assessment order made upon business
reorganisation.
9. An assessment order made after partition of
a Hindu undivided family.
10. An assessment order made in respect of a
non-resident engaged in occasional ship-
ping business.
11. An assessment order in respect of persons
leaving India.
12. An assessment order in respect of an
unincorporated body formed for a
particular event or purpose.
149 Assessing Officer
or the Processing
Authority
155 Assessing
Officer
156 Assessing
Officer
Under the
relevant
provisions of
the Code
Assessing
Officer
159 Assessing
Officer
161 Assessing
Officer
164 Assessing
Officer
168 Assessing
Officer
169 Assessing
Officer
170 Assessing
Officer
171 Assessing
Officer
172 Assessing
Officer
289
5
10
15
20
25
35
30
40
45

290
13. An assessment order in respect of persons
likely to transfer property to avoid tax.
14. An assessment order in respect of a discon-
tinued business.
15. An assessment order in respect of an unin-
corporated body in case of change in its
constitution.
16. Assessment order in respect of any two
unincorporated bodies in case of succes-
sion of one unincorporated body by the
other on account of death or retirement of
all or any participant.
17. An assessment order in respect of a deductor
or collector.
18. An order of charging interest on failure to
pay demand raised.
19. An order of charging interest for failure to
deduct or pay tax.
20. An order of refund.
21. An order imposing a penalty or enhancing
the penalty.
22. An order under the Tenth Schedule in rela-
tion to a qualifying shipping company’s
application for opting for tonnage tax
scheme.
23. An order made under the provisions of this
Code in the case of such person or class of
persons, as the Board may, having regard
to the nature of the cases, the complexities
involved and other relevant consideration,
direct.
24. Any order passed under the Income-tax Act,
1961 or the Wealth Tax Act, 1957 and which
was appealable under the said Acts, before
the commencement of this Code.
173 Assessing
Officer
174 Assessing
Officer
175 Assessing
Officer
176 Assessing
Officer
177 Assessing
Officer
213 Assessing
Officer
214 Assessing
Officer
215 Assessing
Officer
Chapter XII Income-tax
Authority below
the rank of
Commissioner or
Commissioner
(Appeals)
Tenth
Schedule
The prescribed
authority.
Under the
relevant provi-
sions of the
Code
Assessing
Officer
Under the
provisions of
the Income-tax
Act, 1961 or
the Wealth-tax
Act, 1957 as it
stood before
the commence-
ment of this
Code
Assessing
Officer or the
authority
passing the
order under the
relevant Acts.
(1) (2) (3) (4)
43 to 1961.
5
10
15
20
25
40
30
35
27 to 1957.

THE TWENTY-SECOND SCHEDULE
[See section 37(5)314(44)(a),(64)(a)]
DEFERRED REVENUE EXPENDITURE ALLOWANCE
1.  The deferred revenue expenditure allowance for a financial year, in respect of an
expenditure of the nature specified in column (2) of the Table given below, shall be the
amount equal to the appropriate fraction of the amount of such expenditure.
2. The appropriate fraction referred to in paragraph 1 shall be the fraction, the nu-
merator of which is one and the denominator of which is the total number of the financial
years specified in column (3) of the said Table against the relevant deferred revenue expen-
diture.
3. The deferred revenue expenditure allowance shall be allowable for such number of
consecutive financial years as specified in column (3) of the said Table against the relevant
deferred revenue expenditure, the first such financial year of allowability being —
(a) in case of expenditure at serial numbers 1, 2, 3 and 5, the year in which such
amount is actually paid;
(b) in case of expenditure at serial number 4, the year in which business
reorganisation takes place;
(c) in case of expenditure at serial number 6, the year in which the loss referred
to therein has been incurred;
(d) in case of expenditure at serial number 7, the year of commencement of the
business or extension of the business or setting up of new business, as the case may be.
4.  The total amount of deferred revenue expenditure allowable under clause (e) of
sub-section (1) of section 37 shall be the aggregate of the amounts under this Schedule.
TABLE
Serial Nature of deferred revenue expenditure Number of
number financial
years for
which
expenditure
is allowable
(1) (2) (3)
1. Non-compete fee 6
2. Premium for obtaining any asset on lease or rent 6
3. Amount paid to an employee in connection with his 6
voluntary retirement in accordance with any scheme of
voluntary retirement.
4. Expenditure incurred by an Indian company wholly and 6
exclusively for the purposes of business reorganisation
5. Expenditure incurred by a person resident in India wholly 10
and exclusively on any operations relating to prospecting
for any mineral or the development of a mine or other
natural deposit of any mineral, to such extent, as may be prescribed.
6. Any loss on account of forfeiture of any agreement entered 6
in the course of the business.
7. Any preliminary expenditure incurred 6
(a) before the commencement of the business; or
(b) in connection with the extension of the business; or
(c) in connection with the setting up of new business,
shall be such as may be prescribed having regand to the
capital employed in the business and the cost of the project.
291
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50

292
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
The Income-tax Act, 1961, has been subjected to numerous amendments since its
passage fifty years ago. It has been considerably revised, not less than thirty-four times, by
amendment Acts besides the amendments carried out through the annual Finance Acts.
These amendments were necessitated by policy changes due to the changing economic
environment, increasing sophistication of commerce, increase in international transactions
as a result of globalisation, development of information technology, attempts to minimise
tax avoidance and in order to clarify the statute in relation to judicial decisions. As a result
of all these amendments, the basic structure of the Income-tax  Act has been over burdened
and its language has become complex. Tax administrators, accountants and tax payers have
raised concerns about the complex structure of the Income-tax  Act. In particular, the numerous
amendments have rendered the Act difficult to decipher by the average tax payer. The
Wealth-tax  Act, 1957 has also witnessed amendments.
The Government, therefore, decided to revise, consolidate and simplify the language
and structure of the direct tax laws. A draft Direct Taxes Code along with a Discussion Paper
was released in August, 2009 for public comments. It proposed to replace the Income-tax
Act, 1961 and the Wealth-tax  Act, 1957 by a single Act, namely the Direct Taxes Code.
Public and stakeholder feedback on the proposals outlined in these documents was analysed
and suggestions for amendments received from members of the public, business associations
and other bodies were taken into account. Thereafter, a Revised Discussion Paper addressing
the major issues was released in June, 2010. The present Bill is the outcome of this process.
The Notes on clauses explain in detail the various provisions contained in the Bill.
N
EW DELHI; PRANAB MUKHERJEE.
The 27th August, 2010
————
PRESIDENT'S RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLES 117 (1) AND 274 (1) OF THE
CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
[Copy of letter No. F. 152/10/2010-TPL, dated the 27th August, 2010 from
Shri Pranab Mukherjee, Minister of Finance to the Secretary General, Lok Sabha].
The President has, in pursuance of clause (1) of article 117, read with clause (1) of
article 274 of the Constitution, recommended to Lok Sabha the introduction of the Direct
Taxes Code, 2010.

293
Notes on clauses
 The Code seeks to consolidate and amend the law relating to direct taxes.
Chapter I deals with Preliminary.
Clause 1  provides the short title, extent and commencement of the Code. The
clause provides that the Direct Taxes Code, 2010, extends to the whole of India. It also
provides that unless otherwise specified, the Code shall come into force on the
1st  April, 2012.
Part A of the Code relates to Income-tax.
Chapter II provides for basis of charge.
Clause 2 provides for liability to pay and charge of income-tax. It provides that
every person shall be liable to pay income-tax in respect of his total income of the
financial year in accordance with the provisions of the Code. “Total income” and
“person” have been defined in clause 314 of the Code.
Clause 2 also provides that subject to the provisions of the Code, income-tax,
including additional income-tax, shall be charged in respect of the total income of a
financial year of every person. The clause provides that where the income-tax is to be
charged in respect of the income of a period other than the financial year, the income-
tax shall be charged accordingly. Such income-tax shall be charged at the rate specified
in the First Schedule in the manner provided therein. The income-tax shall be deducted
or collected at source or paid in advance in respect of the income chargeable to tax in
accordance with the provisions of the Code. The chargeability of income–tax for any
financial year shall be determined in accordance with the provisions of this Code as
they stand on the 1st April of that financial year.
Clause 3  deals with the scope of total income. It provides that subject to the
provisions of the Code, the total income of any financial year of a person, who is a
resident, shall include all income from whatever source derived which—
(a) accrues, or is deemed to accrue, to him in India during the year;
(b) accrues to him outside India during the year;
(c) is received, or is deemed to be received, by him, or on his behalf, in India
during the year; or
(d) is received by him, or on his behalf, outside India during the year.
The said clause also provides that subject to the provisions of the Code, the total
income of any financial year of a person, who is a non-resident, shall include all income
from whatever source derived which—
(a) accrues, or is deemed to accrue, to him in India during the year; or
(b) is received, or is deemed to be received, by him, or on his behalf, in India
during the year.
Any income which accrues to a resident outside India during the year, or is
received outside India during the year by, or on behalf of, such resident, shall be
included in the total income of the resident, whether or not such income has been
charged to tax outside India.
Clause 4  provides for residence in India. It provides that an individual shall be
resident in India in any financial year, if he is in India—
(a) for a period, or periods, amounting in all to one hundred and eighty-two
days, or more, in that year; or

294
(b) for a period, or periods, amounting in all to—
  (i) sixty days, or more, in that year; and
 (ii) three hundred and sixty-five days, or more, within the four years
immediately preceding that year.
The above shall, however, not apply in respect of an individual who is—
(a) a citizen of India and who leaves India in that year as a member of the
crew of an Indian ship; or
(b) a citizen of India and who leaves India in that year for the purposes of
employment outside India.
The clause further provides that a company shall be resident in India in any
financial year, if—
(a) it is an Indian company; or
(b) its place of effective management, at any time in the year, is situated in India.
The said clause also provides that every other person shall be resident in India in
any financial year, if the place of control and management of its affairs at any time in the
year is situated wholly or partly in India.
For this purpose, “Indian company” and “place of effective management” have
been defined in clause 314 of the Code.
Clause 5  relates to income which is deemed to accrue in India. Income shall be
deemed to accrue in India, if it accrues, whether directly or indirectly, through or from:
 (a) any business connection in India;
 (b) any property in India;
 (c) any asset or source of income in India; or
 (d) the transfer, of a capital asset situate in India.
The said clause also provides that in addition to the above, the following income
shall be deemed to accrue in India—
(a) income from employment, if it is for service rendered in India or for
service rendered outside India by a citizen of India and the income is receivable
from the Government; or the rest or leave period preceding or succeeding the
period of service rendered in India and forms part of the service contract of
employment;
(b) any dividend paid by a domestic company outside India;
(c) any insurance premium including re-insurance premium accrued from or
payable by any resident or non-resident in respect of insurance covering any risk
in India;
(d) interest accrued from or payable by any resident or the Government;
(e) interest accrued from or payable by any non-resident, if the interest is in
respect of any debt incurred and used for the purposes of a business carried on
by the non-resident in India or for earning any income from any source in India;
(f) royalty accrued from or payable by any resident or the Government;
(g) royalty accrued from or payable by a non-resident, if the royalty is for
the purposes of a business carried on by the non-resident in India; or for earning
any income from any source in India;
(h) fees for technical services accrued from or payable by any resident or
the Government;

295
(i) fees for technical services accrued from or payable by any non-resident,
in respect of services utilised for the purposes of a business carried on by the
non-resident in India or for earning any income from any source in India;
(j) transportation charges accrued from or payable by any resident or the
Government;
(k) transportation charges accrued from or payable by any non-resident, if
the transportation charges are in respect of the carriage to, or from, a place in India.
The said clause also provides that in the case of a non-resident, income deemed
to accrue in India shall not include the following—
(a) any income accruing through, or from, operations which are confined to
the purchase of goods in India for the purposes of export out of India;
(b) interest accrued from or payable by a resident on any debt incurred and
used for the purposes of a business carried on by the resident outside India or for
earning any income from any source outside India;
(c) royalty accrued from or payable by a resident for the purposes of a
business carried on by the resident outside India or for earning any income from
any source outside India;
(d) royalty consisting of lump sum consideration accrued from or payment
made by a resident for the transfer of any rights (including the granting of a licence)
in respect of computer software supplied by the non-resident manufacturer, along
with a computer or computer-based equipment, under any scheme approved under
the Policy on Computer Software Export, Software Development and Training, 1986;
(e) fees for technical services, accrued from or payable by a resident, in
respect of services utilised for the purposes of a business carried on by the
resident outside India; or for earning any income from any source outside India;
(f) transportation charges for the carriage by aircraft or ship, accrued from
or payable by any resident, if the transportation charges are in respect of the
carriage from a place outside India to another place outside India, except where
the airport or port of origin of departure of such carriage is in India.
(g) income from transfer, outside India, of any share of interest in a foreign
company, unless at any time in the twelve months preceding transfer, the fair market
value of the assets in India owned, directly or indirectly, by the company represent at
least fifty per cent of the fair market value of all assets owned by the company;
(h) interest accrued from, or payable by, non-resident as referred to in sub-item
(ii) of item ( e) of sub-clause (2), if such interest has not been claimed by the non-
resident as a deduction from his tax base chargeable in India.
The clause also provides that in the case of a business of which all the operations are
not carried out in India, the income of the business deemed to accrue in India shall be only
such part of the income as is reasonably attributable to the operations carried out in India.
The clause also provides that income (other than income from employment and
any dividend paid by an Indian company outside India) shall be deemed to accrue in
India, whether or not,—
(a) the payment is made in India;
(b) the services are rendered in India;
(c) the non-resident has a residence or place of business or any business
connection in India; or
(d) the income has accrued in India.
The clause further provides that where the income of a non-resident, in respect of
transfer, outside India, of any share or interest in a foreign company, is deemed to accrue in
India under clause (d) of sub-section (1), it shall be computed in accordance with the formula
'A*B/C', where A denotes income from the transfer computed in accordance with provisions
of this Code as if the transfer was effected in India; B denotes fair market value of the assets
in India, owned, directly or indirectly, by the company; and C denotes fair market value of all
assets owned by the company.

296
“Business connection”, “royalty”, “fees from technical services” and
“transportation charges” have been defined in clause 314 of the Code.
Clause 6 provides that the following income shall be deemed to be received in the
financial year, namely:—
(a) any contribution made by an employer in the financial year to the account
of an employee under a pension fund;
(b) any contribution made by an employer in the financial year to the account
of an employee in any other fund; and
(c) the annual accretion in the financial year to the balance at the credit of any
employee in a fund referred to in item (b) to the extent it exceeds the limit as may be
prescribed.
Clause 7 relates to dividend income. Clause 7 provides that any dividend declared,
distributed or paid by a company shall be deemed to be the income of the financial year in
which it is so declared, distributed or paid. It also provides that any interim dividend shall
be deemed to be the income of the financial year in which the amount of such dividend is
unconditionally made available by the company to the member who is entitled to it.
For this purpose, clause 314 of the Code defines “dividend”.
Clause 8  provides that the total income of a person being a transferor, shall
include the income of any other person if such income accrues to any other person by
virtue of a transfer, without transfer of the asset from which the income accrues; or the
income accrues to any other person by virtue of a revocable transfer of an asset.
However, such income shall not be included in the total income of the transferor
in a case where any income accrues from an asset transferred to any trust or any other
person, if the transfer is not revocable during the lifetime of the beneficiary of the trust
or during the lifetime of such other person.
The clause further provides that a transfer shall be deemed to be revocable if it
contains any provision for the re-transfer, directly or indirectly, of the whole or any part
of the income or assets to the transferor or it, in any way, gives the transferor a right to
re-assume power, directly or indirectly, over the whole or any part of the income or
assets. For the purpose of this clause, a transfer shall include any settlement, trust,
covenant, agreement or arrangement.
Clause 9 provides that the total income of any individual shall, inter alia,  include
all income accruing directly or indirectly—
(i) to the spouse, by way of salary, commission, fees or any other form of
remuneration, whether in cash or in kind, from a concern in which the individual
has a substantial interest;
(ii) from assets transferred, directly or indirectly, to the spouse by the
individual, otherwise than for adequate consideration, or in connection with an
agreement to live apart;
(iii) from assets transferred, directly or indirectly, to the son’s wife by the
individual, otherwise than for adequate consideration; or
(iv) from assets transferred, directly or indirectly, to any other person by the
individual otherwise than for adequate consideration, to the extent to which the income
from such assets is for the immediate or deferred benefit of the spouse or son’s wife.
The income referred to in sub-clause ( i) above shall be included in the total
income of the spouse whose total income is higher. The said clause also provides that
the total income of any individual will not include any income accruing to the spouse
where the spouse possesses technical or professional qualifications and the income is
solely attributable to the application of the technical or professional knowledge and
experience of the spouse. The said clause further provides that the Board may prescribe
the method for determining the income referred to in sub-clauses  (ii) and ( iii) above.

297
The said clause further provides that the total income of any individual shall also
include all income accruing to a minor child (other than a minor child being a person
with disability or person with severe disability) of the individual. Such income shall be
included in the total income of the parent who is the guardian of the minor child or the
parent whose total income is higher, if both the parents are guardians of the child.
Where any such income is once included in the total income of a parent, such income
arising in the succeeding year shall not be included in the total income of the other
parent, unless the Assessing Officer considers it necessary to do so, after giving an
opportunity of being heard, to do so after giving an apportunity of being heard to that
other parent. The clause provides that the total income of any individual shall not
include all income accruing to a minor child on account of any manual work done by the
child or activity involving application of the skill, talent or specialised knowledge and
experience of the child.
The clause also provides that the total income of an individual shall include all
income derived from any converted property or part thereof as a member of a Hindu
undivided family or which is received by the spouse or minor child upon partition of the
said family. In the said clause, “property” has been defined to include any interest in
property whether movable or immovable, the sale proceeds of such property in whichever
form and where the property is converted into any other form of property by any method,
such other property. “Converted property” has been defined in clause 314 of the Code.
Clause 10  provides that the total income of a financial year of a person shall not
include the income enumerated in the Sixth Schedule.
Clause 11  provides that the persons enumerated in the Seventh Schedule shall
not be liable to income-tax under this Code for any financial year, subject to the fulfillment
of conditions specified in the said Schedule.
Chapter III deals with computation of total income. Sub-chapter I relates to general
provisions.
Clause 12  provides that the total income shall be computed in accordance with
the provisions of the Chapter. It also clarifies that unless otherwise provided in the
Code, reference to any accrual, receipt, expenditure, withdrawal, asset or liability shall
be construed to be in relation to the financial year in respect of which, and the person
in respect of whom, the income is computed.
Clause 13  relates to classification of sources of income. It provides that for the
purposes of computation of total income of any person for any financial year, income
from all sources shall be classified as follows:
A.— Income from ordinary sources.
B.— Income from special sources.
Clause 14 deals with computation of income from ordinary sources. It provides that
the income from any source, other than a special source, shall be computed under the class
"income from ordinary sources" and such income shall be classified under the following
heads of income, namely:—
A.— Income from employment.
B.— Income from house property.
C.— Income from business.
D.— Capital gains.
E.— Income from residuary sources.
Clause 15 deals with computation of income from special sources. It provides that
every income listed in column (3) of the Table in Part III of the First Schedule shall be the
income from a special source of the person specified in column (2) of the said Table. It further
provides that the income from any special source shall be computed under the class "income
from special sources" in accordance with the provisions of the Ninth Schedule. It also
provides that in case the income is attributable to the permanent establishment of a non-
resident in India, the income shall not be considered as income from a special source;

298
Clause 16  deals with the apportionment of income between spouses governed by
the system of community of property under the Portuguese Civil Code of 1860 as in
force in the State of Goa and in the Union territories of Dadra and Nagar Haveli and
Daman and Diu. The said clause provides that the income of the husband and wife,
governed by the communiao dos bens, from ordinary sources under each head of
income (other than the head "Income from employment") and from special sources shall
be apportioned equally between the spouses. The income so apportioned shall be
included separately in the total income of the spouses. The clause further provides that
the income under the head “Income from employment” shall be included in the total
income of the spouse who has actually earned it.
Clause 17 deals with avoidance of double taxation. It provides that subject to the
provisions of the Code, any income which is included in the total income of a person for any
financial year shall not be so included again in the total income of such person for the same
or any other financial year. It also provides that any income which is includible in the total
income of any person shall not be included in the total income of any other person, except
where for the purpose of protecting the interest of the revenue, it is necessary to do so.
Clause 18 provides that in computing the total income of a person for any financial
year, the following expenditure shall not be allowed as a deduction, namely:—
 (a) any expenditure attributable to income which is not included in the total
income under the Sixth Schedule, determined in accordance with such method as
may be prescribed;
(b) any expenditure attributable to any income from special sources;
(c) any expenditure which has been allowed as a deduction in any other
financial year;
(d) any expenditure incurred for an activity which is an offence or which is
not permissible by law;
(e) any provision made for any liability, if it remains unascertained by the
end of the financial year; and
(f) any unexplained expenditure referred to in item ( q) of sub-clause ( 2) of
clause 58.
The said clause also provides that any amount allowed as a deduction under any
provision of the Code shall not be allowed as a deduction under any other provision of
the Code. The provisions of this clause shall apply notwithstanding anything contained
in any other provisions of Chapter III.
Clause 19  provides that any amount on which tax is deductible at source under
Chapter XIII during the financial year shall not be allowed as a deduction in computing
the total income if,—
 (a) the tax has not been deducted during the financial year; or
 (b) the tax, after such deduction, has not been paid on or before the due
date specified in sub-clause (1) of clause 144.
The said clause also provides that a deduction shall be allowed to the person in
respect of such amount in any subsequent financial year, if—
(a) tax has been deducted during the financial year, but paid in such
subsequent year after the due date specified in sub-clause ( 1) of clause 144; or
(b) tax has been deducted and paid in such subsequent financial year.
Sub-chapter II relates to heads of income. Part A of sub-chapter II deals with
income from employment.
Clause 20 provides that the income of a person from employment shall be computed
under the head “Income from employment”.
Clause 21  provides for computation of income from employment. The income
computed under the head “Income from employment” shall be the gross salary as
reduced by the aggregate amount of the deductions referred to in clause 23.

299
Clause 22  deals with the scope of gross salary. The gross salary shall be the
amount of salary due, paid, or allowed, whichever is earlier, to a person in the financial
year by or on behalf of his employer or former employer. “Salary” has been defined in
clause 314. It inter alia  includes “perquisites” and “profits in lieu of, or in addition to,
salary”, which have also been defined in clause 314.
Clause 23  provides that the deductions from the gross salary for computation of
income from employment to the extent included in the gross salary shall be the following,
namely:—
(a) any sum paid by the employee on account of a tax on employment within
the meaning of clause ( 2) of article 276 of the Constitution;
(b) any allowance or benefit granted by an employer for journey by an
employee between his residence and office or any other place of work, to such
extent as may be prescribed;
(c) any allowance or benefit granted by an employer to an employee to meet
expenses wholly, necessarily and exclusively in the performance of the duties of
an office or employment of profit, as may be prescribed, to the extent such expenses
are actually incurred for that purpose and to meet personal expenses, considering
the place of parting or nature of duties or place of residence, subject to such
conditions an limits as may be prescribed;
(d) any amount of contribution made by an employer in the financial year to the
account of an employee under an approved pension fund notified by the Central
Government, to the extent it does not exceed ten per cent. of the salary of the employee;
(e) any amount of contribution made by an employer in the financial year to
the account of an employee in an approved superannuation fund;
(f) any amount of contribution by an employer, in the financial year, to an
account of an employee in an approved provident fund to the extent it does not
exceed twelve per cent. of the salary of the employee;
(g) any amount of interest credited, in the financial year, on the balance to
the credit of an employee in an approved fund to the extent it does not exceed the
amount of interest payable at the rate notified by the Central Government;
(h) any allowance provided by an employer to meet the expenditure actually
incurred on payment of rent in respect of residential accommodation occupied by
the employee, to such extent as may be prescribed.
The said clause provides that for the purposes of (d), (f) and (h) above, salary
means basic salary and includes dearness allowance, if the terms of employment so
provide.
Part B of sub-chapter II relates to income from house property.
Clause 24 provides that the income from letting of any house property owned by
any person shall be computed under the head “income from house property”. The said
clause further provides that the income from any house property shall be computed
under this head notwithstanding that the letting, if any, of the property is in the nature of
trade, commerce or business. Where the house property is owned by two or more persons
having definite and ascertainable shares, the clause provides that the income from such
house property shall be computed separately for each such person. Accordingly, in a
case where the shares of the owners of such house property are not definite and
ascertainable, such persons shall be assessed as an association of persons in respect of
such property. The clause also provides that the above provisions shall not apply,—
(a) to the house prperty, or any portion of the house property which is used
by the person as a hospital, hotel, special Economic Zone, convention centre or

300
cold storage and the income from which is computed under the head “Income
from business”;
 (b) to a house property which is not ready for use during the financial year.
For this purpose, “house property” and “owner” have been defined in clause 314.
Clause 25  provides for computation of income from house property. The income
from house property shall be the gross rent as reduced by the aggregate amount of the
deductions referred to in clause 27.
Clause 26  deals with the scope of gross rent. The gross rent in respect of a house
property or any part of the property shall be the amount of rent received or receivable,
directly or indirectly, for the financial year or part thereof, for which such property is let
out. The said clause also provides that where such property was vacant during any
part of the financial year, the gross rent shall be the amount of rent received or receivable
for such part of the financial year for which the house was not vacant.
Clause 27 provides that the deductions from gross rent for computation of income
from house property shall be the following, namely:—
(a) the amount of taxes levied by a local authority in respect of such property,
to the extent the amount is actually paid by him during the financial year;
(b) a sum equal to twenty per cent. of the gross rent determined under
clause 26 towards repair and maintenance of such property;
 (c) the amount of any interest on loan taken for the purposes of acquisition,
construction, repair or renovation of the property or on loan taken for the purpose
of repayment of the said loan. The interest which pertains to the period prior to
the financial year in which the house property has been acquired or constructed
shall be allowed as deduction in five equal instalments beginning from such
financial year. Such interest shall be reduced by any part thereof which has been
allowed as deduction under any other provision of the Code.
Clause 28  provides that the amount of rent received in advance shall be included
in the gross rent of the financial year to which the rent relates.
Clause 29  provides that income in respect of the rent received in arrears in a financial
year shall be computed under the head "Income from house property", whether or not the
person continues to be owner of the property in that year. The said clause also provides that
the amount of rent referred to above shall be included in the gross rent under clause 26 for
that financial year
Clause 14 of the Code seeks to provide that the "income from the ordinary sources"
shall be computed under following heads of income:
A.— Income from employment
B.—Income from house property
C.—Income from business
D.—Capital gains
E.—Income from residuary source.
 Accordingly, Clause 30  seeks to provide that income from any business carried
on by the person at any time during a financial year shall be computed under the head
“Income from business”. The income of distinct and separate business which is specified
in clause 31 shall be computed separately. The said clause also provides that any
income from a business after its discontinuance shall be deemed to be the income of the
recipient in the year of receipt and shall, accordingly, be computed under the head
“Income from business”.

301
Clause 31  seeks to provide that a business shall be distinct and separate from
another business if there is no interlacing or inter-dependence between the businesses.
It further provides that a business shall be deemed to be distinct and separate from
another business, if—
(a) one unit of the business is processing, producing, manufacturing or
trading the same goods as in the other unit of the business and the first-mentioned
unit is located physically apart from the other unit;
(b) one unit of the business is processing, producing or manufacturing the
same goods as in the other unit of the business and the first mentioned unit
utilizes raw material or manufacturing process, which is different from the raw
material or the manufacturing process of the other unit;
 (c) separate books of account are maintained or capable of being maintained,
for any business; or
(d) it is a business in respect of which profits are determined under sub-
clause (2) of clause 32.
The said clause also provides that a speculative business shall also be deemed to
be distinct and separate from any other business or any other speculative business.
Clause 32  provides that the income computed under the head “Income from
business” shall be the profits from the business. The profits from the business of
insurance shall be computed in accordance with the Eighth Schedule. The profits from
the business of operating a qualifying ship shall be computed in accordance with the
Tenth Schedule. The profits from the business of mineral oil or natural gas shall be
computed in accordance with the Eleventh Schedule. The profits from the business of
developing or aporating from a special economic zone or profits from the business of
manufacture or production, or providing of services, by a unit in special economic zone
shall be computed in accordance with the Twelfth Schedule. The profits from the business
of generation and distribution of power, development of infrastructure facility, cold
chain facility, running a hospital, laying and operating a cross country natural gas or
crude or petroleum oil pipeline network shall be computed in accordance with the
Thirteenth Schedule.
 The profits from any business not referred to above shall be the gross earnings
from the business as reduced by the amount of business expenditure incurred by the
person.
Clause 33  seeks to provide that the gross earnings from the business not covered
by the Eighth, Tenth, Eleventh, Twelfth and the Thirteenth Schedule, shall be the
aggregate of the following, namely:—
(i) the amount of any accrual or receipt from, or in connection with, the
business;
(ii) the value of any benefit or perquisite, whether convertible into money
or not, accrued or received from, or in connection with, the business;
(iii) the value of the inventory of the business, as on the close of the
financial year; and
(iv) any amount received from a business after its discontinuance.
 The said clause provides that the accruals or receipts referred to above
shall, inter-alia, include—
(i) any consideration, accrued or received under a non-compete agreement;

302
(ii) any amount or value of any benefit, whether convertible into money or
not, accrued to, or received by a person, being a trade, professional or similar
association, in respect of specific services performed for its members;
(iii) any consideration on sale of a licence, not being a business capital
asset, obtained in connection with the business;
(iv) any consideration on transfer of a right or benefit accrued or received
under any scheme framed by the Government, local authority or a corporation
established under any law for the time being in force;
(v) the amount of cash assistance, subsidy or grant received from any person
or the Government for, or in connection with, the business other than an amount
to meet any portion of the cost of any business capital asset;
(vi) the amount of any remission, drawback or refund of any tax, duty or
cess (not being a tax under this Code), received or receivable;
(vii) the amount of remuneration (including salary, bonus and commission)
or any interest accrued to, or received by, a participant of an unincorporated
body from such body;
(viii) any sum received under a Keyman insurance policy including the sum
allocated by way of bonus on such policy;
 ( ix) the amount of profit on transfer, demolition or destruction of any
business capital asset (other than a business capital asset used for scientific
research and development) computed in accordance with the provisions of clause
42;
(x) any consideration received or receivable on transfer of carbon credits;
(xi) the amount of remission or cessation of any liability by way of loan,
deposit, advance or credit;
(xii) any amount accrued to or received on account of the cessation or
forfeiture of any agreement entered in the course of the business; and
(xiii) any interest accrued to, or received by, a person being a financial
institution, etc.
 However, the gross earnings from business shall not include any dividend, any
interest other than interest accrued to, or received by, a person being a financial
institution, any income from letting of house property which is included under the head
"income from house property" and any income from the transfer of an investment
asset.
Clause 34,  inter alia,  provides that the amount of business expenditure shall be
aggregate of the operating expenditure, finance charges and capital allowances.
Clause 35, inter alia,  provides that  the amount of operating expenditure for the
purposes of clause 34 shall be the aggregate of —
(a) the amount of expenditure specified in sub-clause (2), if it is laid out or
expended, wholly and exclusively, for the purposes of the business and fulfills
specified conditions;
(b) the value of inventory of the business, as at the beginning of the financial
year;

303
(c) loss of inventory, or money, on account of theft, robbery, fraud or
embezzlement, occurring in the course of the business, if the inventory, or the
money, is written off in the books of account;
(d) any amount credited to the provision for bad and doubtful debts account,
not exceeding one per cent. of the aggregate average advances computed in the
prescribed manner, if the person is a financial institution, the amount is charged
to the profit and loss account for the financial year in accordance with the
prudential norms of the Reserve Bank of India in this regard, and the amount of
trade debt or part thereof written off as irrecoverable in the books of the person is
debited to the provision for bad and doubtful debts account;
(e) the debit balance, if any, on the last day of the financial year, in the
provision for bad and doubtful debts account made under clause ( c), if the balance
has been transferred to the profit and loss account of the financial year;
(f) trade debt or part thereof, if the person is not a financial institution, and
the amount is written off as irrecoverable in the books of the person; and
(g) payment to a creditor during the financial year in discharge of any remitted
or ceased liability which has been included in the gross earnings of any financial
year under sub-clause ( 2) of clause 33.
Sub-clause (2) of the said clause, inter alia, provides that the following expenditure
if laid out or expended, wholly and exclusively, for the purposes of the business shall
be allowed,—
(i) purchase of raw material, stores, spares and consumables, or stock-in-
trade;
(ii) rent paid for any premises if it is occupied and used by the person;
(iii) current repairs to buildings if it is occupied and used by the person;
(iv) land revenue, local rates or municipal taxes in respect of premises
occupied and used by the person;
(v) current repair of parts, of machinery, plant or furniture used by the person;
(vi) current maintenance or repairs of computer software or hardware;
(vii) salary or wages of employees;
(viii) sales promotion including advertisement and publicity;
 (ix) use of hotel or boarding and lodging facilities;
 (x) legal services;
(xi) entertainment and provision of hospitality, etc.
The said clause further provides that any expenditure, being in the nature of, or
on account of personal expenses, capital expenditure including expenditure in respect
of which capital allowance is allowable under clause 37, finance charges, any
unascertained liability of the person, remuneration payable to any participant other
than a working participant, any expenditure incurred on advertisement in any souvenir,
brochure, tract, pamphlet or the like published by a political party, any tax, interest or
penalty payable under this Code, any amount paid which is eligible for relief of tax
under section 207 any dividend declared or distributed or paid and any amount of
contributions by an employr during the financial year to an approved superannuation
fund on account of an employee to the extent it exceeds one lakh rupees shall not be
allowed as operating expenditure.
Clause 36  provides the determination of finance charges in relation to business
expenditure which shall be aggregate of the operating expenditure, permitted finance
charges and capital allowances.

304
Clause 36 provides that  the amount of finance charges for the purposes of clause
34 shall be—
(a) the amount of interest paid on any capital borrowed or debt incurred;
(b) the amount of interest paid to trade creditors;
(c) the amount of interest paid to any participant to the extent prescribed
which is in acordance with the agreement of formation of unincorporated body
and relates to the period following year the date of such agreement;
(d) the amount of any charge or fee paid in respect of any credit facility
which has not been utilised;
(e) the amount of any incidental financial charges;
(f) the proportionate amount of discount or premium payable on any bond
or debenture issued by the person, calculated in the manner as may be prescribed.
 Sub-clause (2) of clause 36, inter alia, provides that the amount of finance charges
shall not include any amount paid in respect of capital borrowed or debt incurred for
acquisition of a capital asset, incidental financial charges for issue of convertible
debentures, bonds or share capital and any amount of interest referred to in section 23
of the Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises Development Act, 2006.
 Sub-clause ( 3) of the said clause provides that the amount of interest on any
capital borrowed or debt incurred, which is payable to any financial institution, shall be
allowed as a deduction in the financial year in which the amount is actually paid or in
the financial year in which the liability has accrued, whichever is later.
 Sub-clause ( 4) of the said clause provides that any interest referred to in sub-
clause (3) which has been converted into a loan or borrowing shall not be deemed to
have been actually paid for the purposes of that sub-clause.
 Sub-clause (5) of the said clause provides that, "capital borrowed" shall include
recurring subscriptions received periodically from shareholders, or subscribers, in a
mutual benefit finance company, which fulfils such conditions as may be prescribed.
Clause 34  provides that the amount of business expenditure shall be aggregate of
the operating expenditure, finance charges and capital allowances. Clause 37 seeks to
provide that the amount of capital allowances shall be the aggregate of the amount in
respect of depreciation of business capital assets, initial depreciation of business capital
assets, terminal allowance, scientific research and development allowance and deferred
revenue expenditure allowance.
The said clause further provides that the depreciation, initial depreciation or
terminal allowance shall be allowed in respect of any business capital asset if the asset
is owned, wholly or partly, by the person, and used for the purposes of the business of
the person. However, the condition of ownership, whether whole or in part, shall not
apply in the case of a business capital asset being a capital expenditure on any building
which is held by the person under a lease or other right of occupancy. A business
capital asset shall be deemed to be owned by the person if he is a lessee in terms of a
financial lease.
The said clause also provides that the amount of deferred revenue expenditure
allowance referred to above shall be as specified and computed in accordance with the
Twenty-second Schedule.
Clause 37 provides that the amount of capital allowances shall be the aggregate
of the amount in respect of depreciation of business capital assets, initial depreciation
of business capital assets, terminal allowance, scientific research and development
allowance and deferred revenue expenditure allowance.

305
Clause 38, inter alia , seeks to provide that the amount of depreciation of business
capital assets shall be the aggregate of the following, namely:—
(a) such percentage of the adjusted value of any block of assets as specified
in clause 45 read with the Fifteenth Schedule, in respect of all the business capital
assets forming part of the relevant block of assets specified therein; and
(b) nil, in respect of any other business capital asset not forming part of any
block of assets specified in the Fifteenth Schedule.
The said clause further provides that the deduction under this clause in respect
of such asset shall be restricted to fifty per cent. if the asset is acquired by the person
during the financial year, and is used for the purposes of business for a period of less
than one hundred and eighty days in the relevant financial year.
Clause 38 provides that the depreciation in respect of any business capital asset
shall, notwithstanding anything contained in any other provisions of the Code, not be
deemed to have been actually allowed, if the asset does not form part of any block of
assets specified in the Fifteenth Schedule or the expenditure incurred for acquiring the
asset has been allowed as a deduction under any provision of this Code.
Clause 39 seeks to provide that in addition to depreciation, an initial depreciation
of business capital assets shall be allowed to the person if he is engaged in the business
of manufacture or production of any article or thing, the asset is a new asset (other than
any office appliance) not used either within or outside India by any other person before
its installation by the person and the whole of the actual cost of the asset is not allowed
as a deduction (whether by way of depreciation or otherwise) in computing the income
under the head “Income from business” of any other financial year.
The said clause further provides that the initial depreciation referred shall be an
amount equal to twenty per cent. of the actual cost of the asset and it shall be allowed
in the financial year in which the asset is used for the first time for the purposes of the
business of the person. The deduction under this clause shall be restricted to fifty per
cent of the allowable sum, if the asset is used for the purposes of business for a period
of less than one hundred and eighty days in the relevant financial year.
Clause 40  seeks to provide that terminal allowance shall be allowed in respect of
a block of asset, if the block of assets has ceased to exist by reason of being demolished,
destroyed, discarded or transferred during the financial year and the percentage
specified in the Fifteenth Schedule for computing depreciation in respect of the block
of assets is zero.
The terminal allowance shall be aggregate of the written down value of the block of
asset at the beginning of the financial year and the actual cost of any asset falling within
that block, acquired during the financial year, as reduced by the amount accrued or
received in respect of the assets which are demolished, destroyed, discarded or transferred
during the financial year together with the value of the carcass or the scrap, if any.
The said clause further provides that the terminal allowance shall be treated as
"nil", if the net result of the computation is negative.
Clause 41 seeks to provide that a company shall be allowed a deduction equal to
two hundred per cent. of the expenditure (not being expenditure in the nature of cost of
any land or building) incurred on creating and maintaining an in-house facility for
scientific research and development and carrying out scientific research and
development in the in-house facility.
The deduction under this clause shall be allowed, if the company creates and
maintains an in-house facility for carrying out scientific research and development, the
research facility is approved by the Central Government on the basis of recommendation
of the prescribed authority and the company enters into an agreement with the prescribed
authority for co-operation in the research and development facility and for audit of the
accounts of such facility.
The said clause further provides that in case of business re-organisation the

306
approval granted to a predecessor shall be deemed to have been granted to the successor
if the approval is transferred to the successor.
The said clause also provides that the deduction under this clause shall not be
allowed to a company, if the expenditure is incurred in the course of its business which
is in the nature of scientific research and development.
The Board may for the purposes of this clause, prescribe the nature of business,
conditions and manner as may be considered necessary for grant of approval.
Clause 42  provides for the method of computation of profit on transfer of a
business capital asset in case of amount, which forms part of a block of assets specified
in the fifteenth schedule. It provides that the  amount of profit where such capital asset
is transferred, discarded, destroyed or destructed shall, be the amount accrued or received
in respect of such asset together with the amount of scrap value, if any, as reduced by
the amount of written down value of the block of assets at the beginning of the financial
year together with the actual cost of any asset falling within that block of assets and
acquired during the financial year and in case of any asset not falling in the block of
assets the consideration received on transfer less actual cost will be the profit.
 The said clause further provides that if the net result of the computation is
negative, the profit shall be treated as " nil".
Clause 43 provides for computation of deduction on account of capital allowance
in a case where business reorganisation has taken place during the financial year. The
amount of deduction allowable to the predecessor shall be determined in accordance
with the formula—
A x B
 C
Where
A = the amount of deduction allowable as if the business reorganisation
had not taken place;
 B = the number of days comprised in the period beginning with the
first 
 day of the financial year and ending on the day immediately preceding the
date of business reorganisation;
 C = the total number of days in the financial year in which the business
reorganisation has taken place.
The said clause further provides that the the amount of deduction to the
successor shall be determined in accordance with the formula —
A x B
 C
Where
A = the amount of deduction allowable as if the business reorganisation
had not taken place;
 B= the number of days comprised in the period beginning with the date of
business reorganisation and ending on the last day of the financial year; and
 C = the total number of days in the financial year in which the business
reorganisation has taken place.
Clause 44 seeks to provide the meaning of actual cost for the purposes of
computation of income under the head ‘income from business’. The said clause, inter
alia, provides that the actual cost of a business asset to the person shall be computed
in accordance with the formula—
A-[B+(C x 
A)]
 D
Where
A = cost of the business asset to the person including the interest paid on

307
the capital borrowed for acquiring the asset if such interest is relatable to the
period before the asset is put to use;
B = the amount of additional duty leviable under section 3 of the Customs
Tariff Act, 1975 or the amount of duty of excise, in respect of which a claim of
credit has been made and allowed under the Central Excise Rules, 1944;
C = the amount of subsidy, grant or reimbursement (by whatever name
called) received by the assessee, directly or indirectly, from the Central
Government, State Government, any authority established under any law for the
time being inforce or by any other person in respect of, or with reference to, any
asset including the relevant asset;
D = cost of all the assets in respect of or with reference to which the amount
‘C’ is so received.
The said clause further provides that irrespective of the methodology provided
above, the Assessing Officer may determine, with the prior approval of the Joint
Commissioner, the actual cost if the assets were, at any time before the date of acquisition
by the person, business assets and the Assessing Officer is satisfied that the main
purpose of the transfer of the assets to the person was to reduce the income-tax liability
by claiming depreciation with reference to an enhanced cost.
The said clause also provides that the actual cost of the business asset to the
person shall be the deemed written down value, if the asset is acquired by way of gift or
inheritance, the asset is converted into a business asset in any financial year or the
person  is transferee holding company or a transferee subsidiary company. The deemed
written down value of a business asset shall be the actual cost to the person or the
previous owner, as the case may be, when he first acquired the asset as reduced by the
aggregate amount of depreciation that would have been allowable to the person or the
previous owner, as the case may be, for the preceding financial year as if the asset was
the only asset in the relevant block of assets.
The said clause further provides that in the case of sale and buy back transaction in
the business asset, the actual cost of a business asset shall be the actual price for which
the asset is re-acquired by him or the deemed written down value, whichever is lower.
The said clause also provides that where a business capital asset is acquired by the
person and subsequently it is transferred back to the transferor by way of lease, hire or
otherwise, the actual cost of the asset in the hands of the person shall be the written down
value of the asset in the hands of the transferor at the beginning of the financial year in which
the acquisition of the asset by the person has taken place.
It is further provided that where the person is a non-resident and a business capital
asset, having been acquired by him outside India, is brought by him to India, the actual cost
of the asset for the person shall be the cost of acquisition of the asset by him, as reduced by
an amount equal to the amount of depreciation which would have been allowable, had the
asset been used in India for the purposes of the business of the person since the date of
such acquisition.
The clause provides that the actual cost of an asset shall be treated as 'nil', if deduction
in respect of the cost of the asset has been allowed or is allowable to the person under the
Eleventh Schedule or the Twelfth Schedule or the Thirteenth Schedule, or deduction in
respect of the cost of the asset has been allowed or is allowable under any of the aforesaid
Schedules to any other person and the person has acquired or received the asset by any of
the "special modes of acquisition".
The said clause also provides that the Board may, for the purposes of determining the
actual cost of a business asset, prescribe any other cost which may be included in determining
the actual cost and the method of determining the actual cost in the circumstances which are
not provided for under the said clause. It is provided that in the said clause, deemed written
down value of a business asset shall be the actual cost to the person or the previous owner,
as the case may be, when he first acquired the asset as reduced by the aggregate amount of
depreciation that would have been allowable to the person or the previous owner, as the case

308
may be, for the preceding financial years as if the asset was the only asset in the relevant
block of assets.
Clause 45 relates to the meaning of the written down value and adjusted value of
assets.  The said clause, inter alia,  provides that the written down value of any block
of assets at the beginning of the financial year shall be the written down value of the
block of assets at the close of the immediately preceding financial year.
 The written down value of the block of assets at the close of the immediately
preceding financial year shall be the adjusted value of the block of assets in the
immediately preceding financial year as reduced by the amount of capital allowance, if
any, allowed under clause 37 during that year together with any expenditure incurred
for acquiring the asset to the extent allowed as a deduction in the financial year under
any provision of the Code.
 The adjusted value of any block of assets for any financial year shall be computed
in accordance with the formula—
(A+B) - (C+D+E)
Where
A= the written down value of the block of assets at the beginning of the
financial year;
B = actual cost of any asset falling within the block, acquired during the
financial year;
C = moneys receivable in respect of any asset falling within the block,
which is sold or discarded or destroyed or destructed during the financial year;
D = amount of the scrap value, if any;
E = the aggregate of the deemed written down value of the assets transferred
by any of the modes referred to in sub-clause ( 3) of clause 44.
The said clause further provides that the adjusted value of any block of asset
shall be " nil" if the amount (C+D+E) exceeds the amount (A+B).
 The said clause also provides that the adjusted value of the block of assets,
acquired by a successor in a business reorganisation, for the financial year in which the
business reorganisation has taken place shall be the amount which would have been
taken as the adjusted value of the block of assets as if the business reorganisation had
not taken place.
The said clause also provides the formula for determining the written down value of
the block of assets, acquired by a successor in a business reorganization, on the last day of
the financial year in which the business reorganization has taken place as well as for computing
the adjusted value of the block of assets where a block of assets comprises of any asset
acquired in any financial year from a country outside India for the purposes of business and
there is variation in liability in respect of acquisition of the asset after the date of such
acquisition.
It has been provided in the said clause that the amount of liability of the person,
expressed in Indian rupees at the time of making payment referred to above shall in a case
where the person has entered into a forward contract, be computed with reference to the rate
of exchange specified in such forward contract.
The said clause also provides that the Board may prescribe the method of
determining the written down value or the adjusted written down value of the block of
assets as on the first day of the first financial year, the method of determining the
allocation of the written down value or the adjusted written down value of the assets
between the different businesses carried on by the person and the method of determining
the written down value or the adjusted written down value of the block of assets in the
circumstances which are not provided for in the said clause.

309
Accordingly, Clause 46  provides that the income from the transfer of any
investment asset shall be computed under the head “Capital gains”. In addition to such
income, the income under the head “Capital gains” shall also include—
(a) income from the transfer referred to in item ( d) or item (e) of sub-clause
(1) of clause 47, if the parent company or its nominee ceases to hold the whole of
the share capital of the subsidiary company or the investment asset is converted
by the transferee into, or treated by it as, its business trading asset, before the
expiry of a period of eight years from the date of such transfer;
(b) the income from the transfer referred to in item ( f) of sub-clause ( 1) of
clause 47, if any of the conditions laid down in sub-clause ( 16) or sub-clause ( 74)
of clause 314 is not complied with;
 (c) the income from the transfer referred to in item ( j) or item ( n) of sub-
clause (1) of clause 47, if any of the conditions laid down in the said clauses is not
complied with;
(d) the amount of withdrawal referred to in sub-clause ( 4) of clause 55 to the
extent of deduction allowed under sub-clause ( 2) thereof, if the condition laid
down in the said sub-clause ( 4) is not complied with;
(e) the amount of deposit referred to in sub-clause ( 5) of clause 55 to the
extent of deduction allowed under sub-clause ( 2) thereof, if the condition laid
down in the said sub-clause is not complied with.
(f) the amount of deduction allowed under sub-section (1) of section 55, if any of
the conditions specified in sub-section (6) of the section  (55) is not complied with.
Clause 47  provides that the income from certain transfers shall not be treated as
capital gains. It, inter alia,  provides that the following transfers shall not be included
in the computation of income under the head “Capital gains”, namely:—
(a) distribution of any investment asset on the total or partial partition of a
Hindu undivided family;
(b) gift, or transfer under an irrevocable trust, of any investment asset (other
than sweat equity share);
(c ) transfer of any investment asset under a will;
(d) transfer of any investment asset by a company to its Indian subsidiary
company, if the parent company or its nominees hold the whole of the share
capital of such subsidiary and such subsidiary treats the asset as an investment
asset;
(e) transfer of any investment asset by a subsidiary company to the Indian
holding company, if the whole of the share capital of the subsidiary company is
held by such holding company or its nominees and the holding company treats
the asset as an investment asset;
(f) transfer of any investment asset by a predecessor to a successor Indian
company in a scheme under a business reorganisation;
(g) transfer of any investment asset by a private company or unlisted public
company to a limited liability partnership or any transfer of a share held in the
company by a shareholder as a result of conversion of the company into a limited
liability partnership, subject to the fulfillment of the conditions specified therein;
 (h) transfer of shares of a predecessor co-operative bank by a shareholder
under a scheme of business reorganisation, if the transfer is made in consideration
of the allotment to the shareholder of shares in the successor co-operative bank;
 ( i) transfer of any investment asset by a sole proprietary concern to a
company, subject to the fulfillment of the conditions specified therein;

310
 (j) transfer of any work of art, archaeological, scientific or art collection,
book, manuscript, drawing, painting, photograph or print, to the Government or a
University or any public museum or institution of national importance or of renown
throughout any State or States and notified by the Central Government;
(k) transfer of any investment asset by a company to its shareholders on its
liquidation;
(l) transfer of any investment asset in a transaction of reverse mortgage
under a scheme notified by the Central Government;
(m) transfer of any beneficial interest in a security by a depository.
The said clause also defines “banking company”, “banking institution”, “private
company”, “public unlisted company” “depository” and “security”.
Clause 48  provides that the financial year of taxability of the income from the
transfer of an investment asset shall be the financial year in which the transfer takes
place and income shall be taxable in the hands of the transferor. However, such income
shall be deemed to be the income of the recipient in the following cases for the financial
year specified below—
 (a) in the case of any money or asset received under an insurance from an
insurer on account of damage or destruction of an insured asset, the financial
year in which the money or asset is received;
(b) in the case of any money or asset received by the participant on account
of his retirement from a unincorporated body, the financial year in which the
money or asset is received;
(c ) in respect of any money or asset received by the shareholder on account
of liquidation or dissolution of a company as reduced by the amount assessed as
dividend within the meaning of item ( c) of sub-clause ( 81) of clause 314, the
financial year in which the money or asset is received.
The said clause also provides that any consideration from transfer made by the
depository or participant of any beneficial interest in a security shall be deemed to be
the income of the beneficial owner of the financial year in which such transfer took
place.
The said clause further provides that the amount referred to in item ( d) of sub-
clause (2) of clause 46 shall be the income of the financial year in which such amount is
withdrawn and the amount referred to in item ( e) of sub-clause ( 2) of clause 46 shall be
the income of the third financial year immediately following the financial year in which
the transfer of the original asset is effected. The amount referred to in item ( f) of sub-
clause ( 2) of clause 46 shall be the income of the financial year in which any condtions
referred to in sub-clause ( 6) of clause 55 is not complied with.
The said clause also defines the term “beneficial owner”.
Clause 49  relates to the computation of income from transfer of any investment
asset. The income from the transfer of any investment asset during the financial year
shall be the full value of the consideration accrued or received as a result of the transfer,
as reduced by the aggregate amount of the deductions referred to in clause 51. The said
clause further provides that for the purpose of such computation, where the investment
asset is any beneficial interest in respect of securities referred to in item ( d) of sub-
clause ( 2) of clause 48, the cost of acquisition and the period of holding of such
securities shall be determined on the basis of first-in-first-out method.
Clause 50  provides that the full value of the consideration shall be the amount
received by, or accruing to, the transferor or the recipient, as the case may be, directly
or indirectly, as a result of the transfer of the investment asset. The said clause also

311
specifies as to what amount would constitute the full value of consideration in respect
of transfers made under certain specific circumstances.
Clause 51  relates to deduction for cost of acquisition of an investment asset.
Sub-clause ( 1) of the said clause provides that for the purpose of computation of
income from transfer of an investment asset, the cost of acquisition of an investment
asset, the cost of improvement of such asset and the amount of expenditure incurred
wholly and exclusively in connection with the transfer of such asset, shall be allowed
as deduction.
Sub-clause (2) of the said clause provides that in the case of an equity share in a
company or a unit of an equity oriented fund, transferred at any time after one year from
the end of the financial year in which such asset is acquired and such transaction is
chargeable to securities transaction tax under Chapter VII of the Finance (No.2) Act,
2004, if the income computed after giving effect to sub-clause ( 1) is a positive income,
a deduction amounting to hundred per cent. of  the income so arrived at shall be
allowed and if the income computed after giving effect to sub-clause ( 1) is a negative
income, hundred per cent. of the income so arrived at shall be reduced from such
income.
Sub-clause ( 3) of the said clause provides that if an investment asset, not being
an equity share or a unit of an equity oriented fund referred to in sub-clause ( 2) or
referred to in sub-clause ( 5) of clause (53) is transferred at any time after one year from
the end of the financial year in which the asset is acquired by the persons, the following
deductions shall be allowed for the purposes of computation of income from the transfer
of such asset :—
 ( i) the indexed cost of acquisition, if any, of the asset;
( ii) the indexed cost of improvement, if any, of the asset;
( iii) the amount of expenditure, if any, incurred wholly and exclusively in
connection with the transfer of the asset; and
(iv) the amount of relief for rollover of the asset, as determined under clause 55.
Clause 52  relates to indexed cost of acquisition or improvement. The indexed
cost of acquisition of an investment asset referred to in sub-clause ( 3) of clause 51 for
the purposes of computation of income from transfer of such asset shall be the amount
determined in accordance with the formula specified in sub-clause ( 1) of the said clause.
The said clause further provides that the indexed cost of improvement of an
investment asset referred to in sub-clause ( 3) of clause 51 shall be in accordance with
the formula specified in sub-clause ( 2) of the said clause.
Clause 53  relates to cost of acquisition of an investment asset. It, inter alia,
provides that the cost of acquisition of an investment asset, shall be—
(a) the purchase price of the asset, or
(b) at the option of the person, the fair market value of the asset on the first
day of  April, 2000, if the asset was acquired by the person before such date.
Sub-clause (2) of the said provides that the cost of acquisition of an investment asset
specified in column ( 2) of the Seventeenth Schedule, acquired by the mode specified in
column (3) of the said Schedule, shall be the cost specified in column (4) therein.
The said clause further provides that the cost of acquisition of an investment asset
acquired by a person by any of the special modes of acquisition, shall be the cost at

312
which the asset was acquired by the previous owner or at the option of the person, the
fair market value of the asset on the 1st day of April, 2000, if the asset was acquired by
the previous owner or the person before such date.
The said clause also provides that the cost of acquisition of an investment asset
referred to in items ( h), (i) or (j) of sub-clause ( 2) of clause 58 shall be the fair market
value or the stamp duty value, as the case may be, which has been taken into account
for the purposes of the said clauses.
The said clause further provides that the cost of acquisition of an investment
asset being an undertaking or division of a business transferred by way of a slump sale
referred to in sub-clause (267) of clause 314 shall be the net worth of such undertaking
or division.
The said clause also provides that the cost of acquisition of an investment asset
forming part of a bundle of investment assets acquired by any participant, on distribution
of the asset to him on account of his retirement from any unincorporated body, shall be
the amount determined in accordance with the formula specified therein.
Further the cost of acquisition of an investment asset shall be “ nil”, in relation
to,—
(a) an investment asset, where such asset has been acquired by self-
generation;
(b) the asset which is acquired by way of compulsory acquisition and the
compensation or consideration for such acquisition is enhanced or further
enhanced by any court, tribunal or other authority; or
(c) the asset, where the cost of acquisition to the person or the previous
owner, if any, cannot be determined or ascertained, for any reason.
The said clause also defines the terms “previous owner” and “net worth”.
Clause 54 provides that the cost of improvement of an investment asset shall be any
expenditure of a capital nature incurred in making any additions or alterations to the asset by
the person or by the previous owner, if the asset is acquired by any special mode of acquisition
referred to in sub-clause (237) of clause 314.
 The said clause also provides that the cost of improvement of the investment asset, in
a case where the asset became the property of the person or the previous owner before the
first day of April, 2000, shall be any capital expenditure incurred for any addition or alteration
to such asset on or after the first day of April, 2000.
The said clause further provides that the cost of improvement of an investment asset
shall be “nil ”  in relation to—
(a) an investment asset acquired by self-generation;
(b) an investment asset being an undertaking or division transferred by way of
a slump sale; or
(c) any investment asset if the cost of improvement cannot be determined or
ascertained, for any reason.
 The said clause also provides that any expenditure deductible in computing the income
under any other head of income shall not be taken into account while computing the cost of
improvement.
Clause 55 relates to relief for rollover of investment asset. It provides that an individual
or a Hindu undivided family shall be allowed a deduction, in respect of rollover of any
original investment asset referred to in sub-clause ( 3) of clause 51, from the capital gain
arising from the transfer of the asset. Such deduction shall be computed in accordance with
the formula—

313
A X (B+C+D)
E
Where A  = the amount of capital gains arising from the transfer of the
original investment asset;
B = the amount invested for purchase or construction of the new asset
referred to in sub-clause ( 6) within a period of one year before the date of transfer
of original investment asset;
C = the amount invested for purchase or construction of the new asset
referred to in sub-clause ( 6) by the end of the financial year in which the transfer
of the original investment asset is effected or six months from the date of transfer,
whichever is later;
D = the amount deposited in an account in any bank by the end of the
financial year in which the transfer of the original investment asset is effected or
six months from the date of transfer, whichever is later, in accordance with the
Capital Gains Deposit Scheme framed by the Central Government in this behalf;
E = the net consideration received as a result of the transfer of the original
investment asset.
The said clause further provides that such deduction shall not exceed the amount of
capital gains arising from the transfer of the investment asset. Further, any amount withdrawn
from an account under the Capital Gains Deposit Scheme shall be utilised within one month
from the end of the month in which the amount is withdrawn, for the purposes of purchase or
construction of the new asset. Also, the amount deposited in the account under the Capital
Gains Deposit Scheme shall be utilised for the purposes of purchase or construction of the
new asset within three years from the end of the financial year in which the transfer of the
original asset is effected.
The said clause further provides that such deduction shall be allowed if—
(a) the transferred investment asset (original investment asset) was an agricultural
land during two years immediately preceding the year of transfer and the person, being
an individual or Hindu undivided family, acquires one or more pieces of agricultural
land at least one year before the beginning of the financial year in which the transfer of
the asset took place subject to the condition that the new asset shall not be transferred
within one year from the end of the financial year in which the new asset is acquired;
(b) the transferred investment asset (original investment asset) was any asset
acquired at least one year before the beginning of the financial year of transfer and the
new investment asset is a residential house and the person does not own more than
one residential house, other than the new investment asset on the date of transfer of
the original asset subject to the condition that a new asset shall not be transferred
which one year from the end of the financial year in which the new asset is acquired or
constructed;
The said clause also defines the term “net consideration”.
Clause 56  provides that the income of every kind falling under the clause "Income
from ordinary sources", shall be computed under the head "Income from residuary sources".
if it is not required to be included in computing the Income under any of the heads of Income
specified in items A to D of section 14.
Clause 57 deals with computation of income from residuary sources. It provides that
the income computed under the head “Income from residuary sources” shall be the gross
residuary income as reduced by the amount of deductions referred to in clause 59.

314
Clause 58 deals with scope of gross residuary income. It provides that the gross
residuary income shall include all accruals or receipts in the nature of income, which do
not form part of income from special sources and income under any of the heads
specified in items A to D of section 14. In addition to such income, gross residuary
income shall, inter alia, include—
(a) dividends (other than dividends in respect of which dividend distribution tax
has been paid under clause 109);
(b) interest (other than interest accrued to or received by financial institutions);
(c) interest received on compensation or on enhanced compensation;
(d) income from the activity of owning and maintaining horses for the purpose of
horse race;
(e) any amount received from employees as contributions to any fund set up for
their welfare, if not included under the head “Income from business”;
(f) income from machinery, plant or furniture belonging to the person and let on
hire, if not included under the head “Income from business”;
(g) any amount received under a Keyman insurance policy (including the sum
allocated by way of bonus on such policy) if not included under the heads “Income
from employment” or “Income from business”;
(h) the aggregate of any moneys and the value of any specified property, other
than immovable property, received for inadequate consideration or without consideration
by an individual or a Hindu undivided family;
(i) the value of any immovable property received without consideration by an
individual or a Hindu undivided family;
(j) the value of any investment made by the person in the financial year to the
extent for which he offers no explanation about the nature and source of the investments
or offers an explanation but fails to substantiate it or such explanation offered by him
is not satisfactory in the opinion of the Assessing Officer;
(k) the value of any money, bullion, jewellery or other valuable article owned by
the person to the extent for which he offers no explanation about the nature and source
of acquisition of the same or offers an explanation but fails to substantiate it or such
explanation is not satisfactory in the opinion of the Assessing Officer;
(l) the amount of any expenditure incurred by the person in the financial year, if
he offers no explanation about the source of such expenditure or offers an explanation
but fails to substantiate it or such explanation is not satisfactory in the opinion of the
Assessing Officer;
(m) any amount of income of a controlled foreign company attributable to a
resident in accordance with the Twentieth Schedule;
(n) any amount received as advance, security deposit or otherwise from the
long-term leasing or transfer of whole or part of or any interest in any investment
asset;
(o) any sum received as family pension.
The said clause provides that the value of any property referred to in (h) or (i) above
shall be the stamp duty value in the case of an immovable property as reduced by the amount
of consideration, if any, paid by the person and the fair market value in the case of any other
property as reduced by the amount of consideration, if any, paid by the person.

315
The said clause further provides that the amount referred to in ( h) above shall not
include any amount received —
(a) from any relative;
(b) on the occasion of the marriage of the individual;
(c) under a will or by way of inheritance;
(d) in contemplation of death of the payer;
(e) from any local authority; or
(f) from any non-profit organisation.
Further,  “relative” and “specified property” have been defined in the said clause.
Clause 59 provides for deductions from gross residuary income. The deductions for
the purposes of computation of income from residuary sources shall be the aggregate of —
(a) the amount of expenditure specified in sub-clause ( 2), if the expenditure
(other than capital expenditure) is laid out or expended, wholly and exclusively, for the
purposes of making or earning the gross residuary income and it fulfills the conditions
specified therein; and
(b) the amount of deductions specified in sub-clause (3) subject to the fulfilment
of the conditions specified therein.
(c) any amount received during the year as divident from a controlled foreign
company as referred to in clause (u) of sub-section (2) of section 58, to the extend such
amount has been included in the total income of the person in any preceding financial
year in accordance with provisions of the said clause.
The said clause further provides certain monetary limits for allowable deduction in
respect of certain income from residuary sources. It also inter alia  provides that any amount
relating to personal expenses and any amount of tax, interest or penalty paid under this Code
or the Income-tax Act, 1961 or the Wealth Tax Act, 1957 as it stood before the commencement
of this Code and any payment or aggregate of payments made to a person in a day, otherwise
than by an account payee cheque drawn on a bank or account payee bank draft subject to
the conditions specified in the said clause shall not be allowed as a deduction. The said
clause also defines the term “capital sum assured’’ in relation to a life insurance policy.
Sub-chapter III of Chapter III deals with aggregation of income computed under various
heads of income as provided under sub-chapter II.
Sub-chapter III of Chapter III deals with aggregation of income computed under various
heads of income as provided under sub-chapter II.
Clause 60 seeks to provide the manner in which the income under each head of income
is to be aggregated for a financial year so as to result in the income from any particular head
of income for that financial year. Thus, the income for a financial year under each of the five
heads of income would be determined in accordance with the provisions of this clause.
The said clause further provides for the computation of the income from capital gains,
speculative business and income from the activity of owning and maintaining horses for the
purpose of horse race in such a manner that any loss from such sources shall be set off only
against positive income from such sources.
Clause 61 seeks to provide the manner in which the current income from ordinary
sources for a year is to be computed. The classification of income as “Income from ordinary
sources”   and “Income from special sources” has been provided in clause 13 of the Code.
The said clause further provides that the current income of a financial year under each
head of income is to be aggregated to arrive at the current income from ordinary sources.

316
This current income is to be further aggregated with the unabsorbed preceding year loss
from ordinary sources to arrive at the gross total income from ordinary sources.
The said clause also provides that if the gross total income from ordinary sources so
arrived at is negative then it shall be treated as nil and the absolute value of the negative
income shall be the unabsorbed current loss from ordinary sources.
Clause 62 seeks to provide for the aggregation of income from special sources. The
aggregate income from a special source in a financial year would be the current income from
the special source for that financial year. The incomes from special sources are enumerated
in Part III of the First Schedule to the Code.
The said clause further provides that the current income from the special source in a
financial year shall be aggregated with the unabsorbed preceding year loss from the special
source to arrive at the gross total income from the special source for that financial year.
The said clause also provides that if the gross total income from the special source so
arrived at is negative then it shall be treated as nil and the absolute value of the negative
income shall be the unabsorbed current loss from the special source for the financial year.
The said clause further provides that the gross total income from special source in
respect of each special source shall be aggregated and the net result of the aggregation shall
be the total income from special sources for the financial year.
Clause 63 seeks to provide the manner in which the total income of any person in a
financial year is to be determined. For the sake of simplicity, the clause provides for the
determination of total income by means of a mathematical formula. The clause provides that
the total income of a person for a financial year is to be determined by adding the total income
from ordinary sources with the total income from the special sources. The total income from
ordinary sources shall, however, be reduced by the amount of deductions available to the
person under sub-chapter IV of Chapter III before it is aggregated with the total income from
special sources.
Clause 64 seeks to provide the manner in which income is to be aggregated in case of
a business reorganisation or where a company is converted into a limited liability partnership.
In such cases, the unabsorbed current loss from ordinary sources of the predecessor in the
financial year in which the business reorganisation takes place, shall be treated as the
unabsorbed preceding year loss from ordinary sources of the successor in business in that
year and the provisions of clause 61 shall apply. Similarly, the unabsorbed current loss from
special sources of the predecessor in the financial year in which the business reorganisation
takes place, shall be treated as the unabsorbed preceding year loss from special sources of
the successor in business in that year and the provisions of clause 62 shall apply.
Sub-clause (2) of the said clause provides that the benefit of taking over the loss of the
predecessor by the successor shall not be available to the latter in a case of business
reorganisation if it does not satisfy the test of continuity of business. Test of continuity of
business has been defined in clause 314 of the Code as a set of conditions which the
successor must fulfill to satisfy the test.
Sub-clause (2) further provides that the said benefit shall not be available to a successor
in case of a business reorganisation if the predecessor is a sole proprietary concern or an
incorporated body and the share holding of the sole proprietor ceases to be less than fifty
per cent. of the total value of the shares of the successor company at any time during the
period of five years immediately succeeding the financial year in which the business
reorganisation takes place.
Sub-clause (3) of the said clause provides that the benefit of taking over the loss of the
predecessor by the successor in a case of conversion of a company into a limited liability
partnership shall not be available to the successor if any of the conditions, specified in item
(j) of sub-clause (1) of clause 47 of the Bill are not fulfilled.

317
Sub-clause (4) of the said clause provides that the total income of the financial year, in
which the business reorganisation or the conversion took place, and all the subsequent
financial years shall, notwithstanding anything in this Code, be rectified as if the provisions
of this clause had never been given effect to in those financial years if the conditions
specified therein are not fulfilled at any time during five financial years immediately succeeding
the financial year in which the business reorganisation or conversion took place.
Clause 65 provides that in the event of a change in the constitution of an unincorporated
body, due to death or retirement of a participant, the unabsorbed current loss from ordinary
or special sources shall be reduced in proportion to the percentage of share holding of such
deceased or retired participant for the financial year ending on the date of death or retirement
of the participant.
The said clause further provides that such reduced loss shall be the unabsorbed
preceding year loss of the unincorporated body for the financial year beginning on the date
immediately following the date on which the death or retirement of the participant took place.
Clause 66  seeks to provide that a closely held company shall not be allowed to
aggregate the unabsorbed preceding year loss from ordinary or special sources with the
income of the current financial year unless it satisfies the test of continuity of ownership.
The said clause further provides that the closely-held company shall satisfy the test of
continuity of ownership if the shares of the company beneficially held by persons, carrying
not less than fifty-one per cent. of the voting power on the last day of the financial year
immediately preceding the relevant financial year, are held by the same persons on the last
day of the relevant financial year.
The said clause also provides that while calculating the percentage of voting power—
(a) any change in the voting power in the relevant financial year due to the death
of a shareholder or on account of transfer of shares by way of gift to any relative of the
donor shareholder shall be ignored;
(b) any change in the shareholding of an Indian company, which is a subsidiary
of a foreign company, as a result of amalgamation or demerger of a foreign company,
shall be ignored, if fifty-one per cent shareholders of the amalgamating or demerged
foreign company continue to be the shareholders of the amalgamated or the resulting
foreign company.
Clause 67 seeks to provide that aggregation of losses generated in a financial year
shall not be allowed if the return of tax bases for the said year is not furnished by the due
date. Thus, the losses generated in the current year shall not be taken into consideration for
any purposes of the Code.
Sub-chapter IV of Chapter III of the Bill deals with tax incentives. Tax incentives are the
deductions available to a person while computing his total income for a financial year.
Clause 68 provides that the deductions under this sub-chapter are available only in
respect of “gross total income from ordinary sources” and the aggregate amount of such
deductions shall not exceed the gross total income from ordinary sources.
The said clause further provides that any sum which qualifies for a deduction under
this sub-chapter in any financial year, shall not qualify for deduction under any other provision
of the Code for the same or any other financial year or in the case of any other person even
if full deduction of the sum referred therein has not been allowed.
Clause 69 seeks to provide that a person, being an individual, shall be allowed a
deduction of a maximum of one lakh rupees for savings made by him in respect of the amount
paid or deposited by the person in a financial year, as his contribution to any approved fund
to an account of the individual, spouse or any child of such individual.

318
Clause 70 seeks to provide that a person, being an individual or a Hindu undivided
family, shall be allowed a deduction in respect of any sum paid or deposited during a financial
year to effect, or keep in force, an insurance on the life of certain specified persons. The
persons specified are the individual, his spouse and children and the members of a Hindu
undivided family.
The said clause further provides that the insurance policy, to be eligible for this
deduction, should be one where the amount of the annual premium payable should not
exceed five per cent. of the capital sum assured in any year during the term of the policy.
Clause 71 seeks to provide that a person, being an individual or a Hindu undivided
family, shall be allowed a deduction in respect of any sum paid during a financial year to
effect, or to keep in force, an insurance on the health of certain specified persons. The
persons specified are the individual, his spouse, dependant children and parents, and the
members of a Hindu undivided family.
The said clause further provides that in the case of an individual, an additional deduction
shall be allowed in respect of any contribution made to the Central Government Health
Scheme.
The said clause also provides that the health insurance scheme should be framed by
an insurer which is approved by the Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority.
Clause 72 seeks to provide a deduction to a person, being an individual or a Hindu
undivided family, in respect of any sum paid during the financial year as tuition fee to any
school, college, university or other educational institution situated within India for the
purpose of full-time education of any two children of such individual or Hindu undivided
family.
The said clause further provides that tuition fee shall not include any payment towards
any development fee or donation or any payment of similar nature. It also clarifies that full-
time education shall include education in a play school or pre-school.
Clause 73 seeks to provide a maximum limit on the amount of deduction available
under clauses 70, 71 and 72. It lays down a ceiling of fifty thousand rupees on the amount of
deduction available in respect of payments made for a life insurance policy, health insurance
policy and education of children.
Clause 74 seeks to provide that a person, being an individual or a Hindu undivided
family, shall be allowed a deduction in respect of an amount paid or payable by way of
interest on loan taken for the purpose of acquisition, construction, repair or renovation of a
house property in the financial year in which such property is acquired or constructed or any
subsequent financial year, subject to certain conditions specified therein.
Sub-clause (2) of the said clause specifies the conditions by providing that the deduction
shall be available if —
(a) the house property is owned by the person and not let out during the financial
year;
(b) the acquisition or construction of the house property is completed within
three years from the end of the financial year in which the loan was taken; and
(c) the person obtains a certificate from the financial institution to whom the
interest is paid or payable on the loan taken.
Sub-clause (3) of the said clause provides that the interest, which pertains to the
period prior to the financial year in which the house property has been acquired or constructed,
shall be allowed as deduction in five equal installments beginning from such financial year.
For example, if the total amount of interest paid prior to the financial year in which the house
property has been acquired or constructed is one lakh rupees, then, the person would be
eligible for a deduction of twenty thousand rupees every year for five years starting from the
year in which the house property is acquired or constructed.

319
Sub-clause (4) of the said clause provides that the interest for such prior period shall
be reduced by any part thereof which has been already allowed as a deduction under any
other provision of this Code.
Sub-clause (5) lays down the maximum limit of deduction that can be claimed under
this clause. This limit has been specified as one lakh and fifty thousand rupees.
Clause 75 provides that a person being an individual, would be allowed a deduction of
any amount of interest paid on a loan taken by him from any financial institution for financing
the higher education of himself or of his relatives.
Sub-clause (2) of the said clause provides that the deduction shall be allowed for eight
years beginning from the initial year of repayment of interest or till the interest is repaid in
full, whichever is earlier.
Sub-clause (3) of the said clause provides the definitions of certain expressions used
in the clause like, “financial institution”, “higher education”, etc. It clarifies that the term
relative means the spouse and the child of the individual and also a student for whom the
individual is the legal guardian.
Clause 76 provides that a person, being a resident individual or Hindu undivided
family, shall be allowed a deduction in respect of any amount paid during the financial year
for medical treatment of the prescribed disease or ailment of any specified person.
Sub-clause (2) of the said clause provides that the deduction available shall be a
maximum of sixty thousand rupees in case the payment is made for a senior citizen and forty
thousand rupees if the payment is made for any other person.
Sub-clause (3) of the said clause provides that the deduction allowable shall be reduced
by the amount received, if any, under an insurance from an insurer, or reimbursed by an
employer, for the medical treatment of the specified person.
Sub-clause (4) of the said clause provides that the deduction shall not be allowed
unless the person obtains a certificate from a prescribed specialist working in a Government
hospital.
Sub-clause (5) of the said clause defines the terms “specified person” and “Government
hospital”.
Clause 77 seeks to provide a deduction to a person, being a resident individual and
having a disability, subject to certain conditions. The deduction shall be allowed if the
person obtains a certificate from a medical authority in the prescribed form and manner and
the certificate remains valid during the relevant financial year or part thereof.
The said clause further provides that the amount of deduction shall not exceed—
(a) one lakh rupees, if he is a person with severe disability; and
(b) fifty thousand rupees, if he is a person with disability.
Clause 78 seeks to provide a deduction to a person, being a resident individual or Hindu
undivided family, in respect of —
(a) any expenditure incurred during the financial year for the medical treatment,
nursing or training and rehabilitation of a dependant person with disability; or
(b) any amount paid or deposited during the financial year under a scheme
framed by any insurer and approved by the Board in this behalf, for the maintenance of
a dependant person with disability.
Sub-clause (2) of the said clause provides that the deduction available shall be one
lakh rupees in case the dependant person is a person with severe disability and fifty thousand
rupees if he is a person with disability.

320
Sub-clause (3) of the said clause provides that the deduction in respect of the payment
under the insurance scheme referred to in sub-clause (1) shall be allowed only if the scheme
referred to therein provides for payment of an annuity or a lump sum amount for the benefit
of the dependant person with disability, in the event of the death of the individual or the
member of the Hindu undivided family who subscribes to such scheme.
Sub-clause (4) of the said clause provides that the deduction under this clause shall be
allowed only if the person claiming the deduction obtains a certificate from a medical authority
in the prescribed form and manner and the certificate remains valid during the relevant
financial year or part thereof.
Sub-clause (5) of the said clause provides that in the event of the dependant person
with disability predeceasing the individual or the member of the Hindu undivided family who
has subscribed to the insurance scheme referred to in sub-clause (1), any amount received
by such individual or Hindu undivided family shall be deemed to be his or its income for the
financial year in which the amount is received.
Sub-clause (6) of the said clause defines the term “dependant”.
Clause 79 seeks to provide that a person shall be allowed a deduction of —
(a) one hundred and seventy-five per cent. of the amount of money paid by him
in the financial year as contribution or donation to any person specified in Part-I of the
Sixteenth Schedule;
(b) one hundred and twenty-five per cent. of the amount of money paid by him
in the financial year as contribution or donation to any person specified in Part-II of
the Sixteenth Schedule;
(c) one hundred per cent. of the amount of money paid by him in the financial
year as donation to any person specified in Part-III of the Sixteenth Schedule;
(d) fifty per cent. of the aggregate amount of money paid by him in the financial
year as donation to any person specified in Part-IV of the Sixteenth Schedule.
Parts I, II, III and IV of the Sixteenth Schedule to the Bill contain the names of the
organisations/institutions/funds to which such contribution or donation is to be made so as
to be eligible for the deduction under this clause.
Sub-clause (2) of the said clause provides that the aggregate of the amount of money
paid to persons specified in Part IV of the Sixteenth Schedule shall be limited to ten per cent.
of the gross total income from ordinary sources, if the aggregate exceeds ten per cent. of
such gross total income from ordinary sources.
Sub-clause (3) of the said clause provides that the deduction under this clause shall
not be allowed in respect of any amount of money paid to any person referred to in sub-
clause (1) if the amount is utilized by such person (the donee) for any religious activity or for
the benefit of any particular caste other than the Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled Tribes.
Sub-clause ( 4) of the said clause provides that the donation to any organisation/
institution/fund specified in Part IV of the Sixteenth Schedule shall be eligible for deduction
under sub-clause (1) only if such organisation/institution/fund obtains the approval of the
prescribed authority.
Sub-clause ( 5) of the said clause provides that deduction to a donor shall not be
denied merely on the ground that, subsequent to the donation, the donee has ceased to be
a non-profit organisation. Thus, this provision protects the donor in a situation where the
donee may lose its status of being a non-profit organisation for any reason whatsoever.
Clause 80 seeks to provide that a person, being an individual and not in receipt of any
house rent allowance, shall be allowed a deduction of any expenditure incurred by him in
excess of ten per cent. of his gross total income from ordinary sources towards payment of

321
rent in respect of any furnished or unfurnished accommodation occupied by him for his own
residence.
The said clause further provides that the deduction shall be allowed up to a maximum
limit of two thousand rupees per month and shall be subject to such other conditions as may
be prescribed having regard to the area in which the accommodation is situated.
The said clause also provides that deduction under this clause shall not be available to
a person if any residential accommodation is owned by him or by his spouse or minor child
in the same place where he ordinarily resides or performs duties of his office or employment
or carries on his business.
Clause 81 seeks to provide that a person shall be allowed a deduction in respect of
any contribution made by him in a financial year to a political party or electoral trust.
The said clause further provides that the deduction shall not exceed five per cent. of
the average of the net profit determined in accordance with the provisions of sections 349
and 350 of the Companies Act, 1956 during the three immediately preceding financial years,
in the case of a company and five per cent. of the gross total income from ordinary sources,
in any other case.
The clause also defines the term “contribution”.
Clause 82 seeks to provide that a person, being an Investor Protection Fund, shall be
allowed a deduction of the amount of contribution received from any recognised stock
exchange, or recognised commodity exchange, and the members thereof if such amount is
included in its gross total income from ordinary sources.
The said clause further provides that the deduction shall be allowed if the Investor
Protection Fund is set up, either jointly or separately, by recognised stock exchanges or
recognised commodity exchanges and such Investor Protection Fund is notified by the
Central Government.
Clause 83  seeks to provide a deduction of up to three lakh rupees to a resident
individual, who is an author, in respect of income earned by him as a lump sum consideration
for the assignment or grant of any of his interest in the copyright of the book written by him
or as a royalty or copyright fee in respect of the said book, if such income is included in his
gross total income from ordinary sources.
The said clause further provides that the book should be of literary, artistic or scientific
nature.
The said clause also provides that brochures, commentaries, diaries, guides, journals,
magazines, newspapers, pamphlets and tracts, etc., shall not be eligible for deduction under
this clause.
Clause 84 seeks to provide a deduction to a resident individual, who is a patentee, in
respect of income earned by him by way of royalty in respect of a patent registered on or after
the 1st day of April, 2003 under the Patents Act, 1970, if such income is included in his gross
total income from ordinary sources.
The said clause further provides that the deduction under this clause shall be equal to
the amount of royalty allowable under the terms and conditions of a licence settled by the
Controller under the Patents Act, 1970, if a compulsory licence is granted in respect of any
patent under that Act or three lakh rupees, whichever is lower.
The terms like, “patent”, “patentee”, “royalty”, etc., have also been defined in the said
clause.
Clause 85 seeks to provide that a primary co-operative society shall be eligible for a
deduction of the entire amount of its income from the business of providing banking, or
credit, facility to its members.

322
The said clause further provides that a primary cooperative society means a “primary
agricultural credit society” within the meaning of Part V of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949
or a “primary co-operative agricultural and rural development bank” having its area of
operation confined to a taluk and being mainly engaged in providing long-term credit for
agricultural and rural development activities.
Clause 86 seeks to provide that a primary co-operative society shall be eligible for a
deduction of the entire amount of its income from agriculture or agriculture-related activities.
It shall also be eligible for a deduction of a maximum of one lakh rupees in respect of income
derived by it from any other activity.
The said clause further provides the meaning of the terms “agriculture-related activities”
and “primary co-operative society”.
Clause 87 seeks to provide for the system and procedure of maintenance of accounts.
Accordingly, the said clause provides that every person shall keep and maintain such books
of account and other documents which would enable the Assessing Officer to compute his
total income in accordance with the provisions of this Code. Any person carrying on legal,
medical, engineering, architectural, accountancy, technical consultancy, interior decoration
or any other notified profession or carrying on business shall keep and maintain such books
of account if —
(i) his income from the business exceeds two lakh rupees;
(ii) his total turnover or, gross receipts as the case may be, in the business
exceeds ten lakh rupees in any one of the three financial years immediately preceding
the relevant financial year; or
(iii) his income or, total turnover as the case may be, his in a case of a newly set
up business in any financial year, is likely to exceed two lakh rupees or ten lakh rupees,
respectively, during such financial year.
The said clause further provides that every person who has entered into an international
transaction shall keep and maintain such information and documents in respect of such
transactions, as may be prescribed.
The said clause also provides that the Board may prescribe the books of account other
than those enumerated in the clause and also the period for which the books of account and
other documents required to be kept and maintained under this clause shall be retained.
Clause 88 seeks to provide the method, manner and mechanism for audit of accounts
and reporting of international transactions.
Accordingly, the said clause provides that every person, who is required to keep and
maintain books of account under clause 87, shall get his accounts for the financial year
audited if the gross receipts from the profession exceed twenty-five lakh rupees in the
financial year or the total turnover or gross receipts of the business exceed one crore rupees
in the financial year. The audit of the accounts shall be carried out by an accountant and the
report of the audit should be obtained by the person before the due date in the prescribed
form duly signed and verified by such accountant and setting forth such particulars as may
be prescribed.
The said clause further provides that a person who has entered into an international
transaction during a financial year shall furnish a report of such transaction to the Transfer
Pricing Officer, on or before the due date, obtained from an accountant in the prescribed form
duly signed and verified in the prescribed manner by such accountant.
Clause 89 relates to the method of accounting.
Sub-clause (1) of the said clause provides that the income chargeable under the head
“Income from business” or “Income from residuary sources” shall, except as otherwise

323
provided in the clause, be computed in accordance with either cash or mercantile system of
accounting regularly employed by the person.
Sub-clause (2) of the said clause provides that the Central Government may from time
to time notify the accounting standards to be followed by any class of persons or in respect
of any class of income.
Sub-clause (3) of the said clause provides that the valuation of purchase of goods and
inventory for the purposes of determining the income chargeable under the head “Income
from business” shall be in accordance with the method of accounting regularly employed by
the person and further adjusted to include the amount of any tax, duty, cess or fee actually
paid or incurred by the person to bring the goods to the place of its location and condition
as on the date of its valuation.
Sub-clause (4) of the said clause provides that the value of sale of goods for the
purposes of determining the income chargeable under the head “Income from business”
shall be determined in accordance with the method of accounting regularly employed by the
person and further adjusted to include the amount of any tax, duty, cess or fee leviable on the
sale of the goods.
Sub-clause (5) of the said clause provides that the interest on bad or doubtful debts of
any financial institution shall be included in its total income of the financial year in which the
interest is credited to the profit and loss account or is actually received, whichever is earlier.
Sub-clause (6) of the said clause provides that the interest received by a person on
compensation or on an enhanced compensation shall be included in the total income of the
financial year in which it is received.
Sub-clause (7) of the said clause defines the term “bad or doubtful debts”.
Chapter IV deals with special provisions relating to the computation of total income of
non-profit organisations.
Clause 90  provides that Chapter-IV shall be applicable to a non-profit organisation,
other than any organisation of public importance, specified in the Seventh Schedule. It also
provides that the Central Government may, subject to such conditions as may be considered
necessary, notify a person as a non-profit organisation of public importance for the purpose
of the Seventh Schedule.
For this purpose, a non-profit organisation has been defined in clause 314 to mean an
organisation, by whatever name called, including a trust, if—
(i) it is not established for the benefit of any particular caste or religious
community;
(ii) it does not provide any benefit for the members of any particular caste or
religious community;
(iii) it is established for the benefit of the general public or for the benefit of the
Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes, backward classes, women or children;
(iv) it is established for carrying on charitable activities;
(v) it is not established for the benefit of any of its members;
(vi) it actually carries on the charitable activities during the financial year;
 (vii) the actual beneficiaries of its activities are the general public, Scheduled
Castes, the Scheduled Tribes, backward classes, women or children; and
(viii) it is registered as such under clause 98.
Clause 91 provides that the total income of a non-profit organisation shall be computed
in accordance with the provisions of Chapter IV.

324
Clause 92 provides for the computation of total income of a non-profit organisation. It
provides that subject to the provisions of section 8, the total income of any non-profit
organisation in relation to any charitable activity during the financial year shall be the gross
receipts as reduced by the amount of outgoings, computed in accordance with the cash
system of accounting. The said clause also provides that where the non-profit organisation
is a company registered under section 25 of the Companies Act, 1956, such total income shall
be computed in accordance with the mercantile system of accounting.
Clause 93 provides that the gross receipts of the non-profit organisation from any
charitable activity shall be the aggregate of the following, namely:—
(a) the amount of voluntary contributions received;
(b) any rent received in respect of a property held by it consisting of any building
or landappurtenant thereto;
(c) the amount of income derived from any business carried on by it, if the
business is incidental to any charitable activity so carried on;
(d) income from transfer of any capital asset computed in accordance with the
provisions of sections 46 to 54 (both inclusive) where the asset is not used for the
purposes of any charitable activity or any business incidental to such charitable
activity;
(e) full value of the consideration received from the transfer of any business
capital asset, other than the asset referred to clause ( d);
(f) the amount of income received from investment of its funds or assets; and
(g) the amount of any incoming, realisation, proceeds, or subscription received
from any source.
(h) any amount, which was received in the last month of the immediately preceding
financial year and was deposited in a specified deposit account as referred to sub-
items (e) of clause 94.'
The said clause further provides that such gross receipts shall not include any loan
taken during the financial year and voluntary contributions received with a specific direction
that they shall form part of the corpus of the non-profit organisation.
Clause 94  provides that for the purpose of computation of the total income, the
amount of outgoings during the financial year of a non-profit organisation shall be the
aggregate of —
(a) the amount paid for any expenditure incurred wholly and exclusively for
earning or obtaining any receipts referred to in clause 92;
(b) the amount paid for any expenditure, other than capital expenditure, incurred
for the purposes of carrying out any charitable activity;
(c) the amount paid for any capital expenditure for the purposes of any business,
if the business is incidental to any charitable activity carried on by the non-profit
organisation;
(d) any amount applied outside India, if the amount is applied for an activity
which tends to promote international welfare in which India is interested and the non-
profit organisation is notified by the Central Government in this behalf;
(e) any amount which is received during the last month of the financial year and
has been deposited on or before the last day of the financial year in a specified deposit
aacount under such Deposit Account Scheme as may be prescribed; and
(f) any amount accumulated or set apart for carrying on any charitable activity—
(i) to the extent of fifteen per cent. of the total income (before giving effect
to the provisions of this clause) or ten per cent. of the gross receipts, whichever
is less; and

325
(ii) invested or deposited in the modes specified in clause 95, for a period
not exceeding three years from the end of the financial year.
Clause 95 stipulates that the modes of investing or depositing the money referred to
in sub-clause (f) of clause 94. It also provides that the funds or the assets of the non-profit
organisation (other than any assets forming part of its corpus as on the 1st day of June, 1973)
shall be invested or held, at any time during the financial year, in any of the said modes.
Clause 96 provides that any amount referred to in sub-clause (f) of clause 94 shall be
deemed to be the income of the non-profit organisation, if the amount is not utilised for the
purpose for which it was accumulated or set apart during the period specified therein or the
amount ceases to remain invested or deposited in any of the modes specified in clause 95.
The said clause further provides that for the purposes of this clause, the amount shall
be deemed to be the income of the financial year immediately following the expiry of the
specified period if the amount is not utilised during the financial year for the purpose for
which it was accumulated or set apart, or in which the amount ceases to remain so invested
or deposited in any of the specified modes.
Clause 97 relates to use or application of funds or assets for the benefit of an interested
person. It provides that the funds or the assets of the non-profit organisation shall not be
used or applied, directly or indirectly, for the benefit of an interested person. The said clause
further provides that the funds or assets of the non-profit organisation shall be deemed to
have been used or applied for the benefit of an interested person, if —
(a) its funds or assets are lent to any interested person, for any period during the
financial year without either adequate security or adequate interest or both;
(b) its land, building or other asset is made available for the use of any interested
person for any period during the financial year without charging adequate rent or
other compensation;
(c) any amount is paid by way of salary, allowance or otherwise during the
financial year to any interested person for services rendered to the non-profit
organisation and the amount so paid is in excess of what may be reasonably paid for
such services;
(d) the services of the non-profit organisation are made available to any interested
person during the financial year without adequate remuneration or other compensation;
(e) any share, security or other property is purchased by or on behalf of the non-
profit organisation from any interested person during the financial year for consideration
which is more than adequate;
(f) any share, security or other property is sold by or on behalf of the non-profit
organisation to any interested person, during the financial year, for consideration
which is less than adequate;
(g) any fund or asset of the non-profit organisation are diverted during the
financial year in favour of any interested person if the aggregate of the funds and
value of assets exceeds one thousand rupees;
(h) any funds of the non-profit organisation are, or continue to remain, invested
for any period during the financial year in any concern in which any interested person
has a substantial interest and such investment exceeds five per cent. of the capital of
that concern.
The term “interested person” has been defined in clause 103.
Clause 98 provides the procedure for registration of a non-profit organisation. Any
non-profit organisation which has been granted approval or registration under the Income

326
tax Act, 1961, as it stood immediately before the commencement of this Code, will not be
required to apply for registration under the Code, if it fulfils the prescribed conditions. Any
other non-profit organisation shall make an application for its registration in the prescribed
form and manner to the Commissioner.
The said clause also provides that on receipt of such application, the Commissioner
shall call for such documents or information as he considers necessary in order to satisfy
himself about the objects and genuineness of its activities and may make such further
inquiries as may be required. Thereafter, the Commissioner shall, within a period of six
months from the end of the month in which such application was received, pass an order in
writing registering the non-profit organisation if he is satisfied about its objects and the
genuineness of its activities or refusing to register it, if he is not so satisfied, after giving the
organisation an opportunity of being heard.
The said clause further provides that the registration so granted shall be valid from the
financial year in which the said application was made. However, where the Commissioner is
satisfied that the activities of the non-profit organisation are not genuine or are not being
carried out in accordance with its objects or are not being carried out in accordance with the
any other law which is applicable to it or under which it is registered or approved, he shall
pass an order in writing cancelling the registration or withdrawing the approval, after giving
the organisation an opportunity of being heard.
Clause 99 provides that a non-profit organisation shall keep and maintain the prescribed
books of account. It shall also maintain separate books of account in respect of business
incidental to charitable activity. The said clause further provides that if the gross receipts
referred to in clause 93 of the non-profit organisation in any financial year exceed five lakh
rupees, it shall obtain an audit report from an accountant in the prescribed form before the
due date of filing of the return of tax bases.
Clause 100 deals with anonymous donations received by a non-profit organisation.
The said clause defines “anonymous donation” to mean any voluntary contribution, where
a person receiving such contribution does not maintain a record of the identity indicating the
name and address of the person making such contribution and such other particulars as may
be prescribed. The said clause provides that where the total income of a non-profit organisation
includes any anonymous donation, the income-tax payable shall be the aggregate of —
(a) the amount of income-tax calculated at the rate of thirty per cent. on the
aggregate of anonymous donations received in excess of five per cent. of the total
donations received by it or one lakh rupees, whichever is higher, and
 (b) the amount of income-tax with which the organisation would have been
chargeable on its balance income.
The said clause also provides that the above provisions shall apply even if the
anonymous donation has been made with a specific direction that it shall form part of the
corpus of the non-profit organisation. Besides, no outgoings shall be allowed in respect of
any anonymous donation received.
Clause 101 deals with the consequences of conversion of a non-profit organisation.
The clause provides that a non-profit organisation shall be liable to income-tax at the rate of
thirty per cent. in respect of its net worth if—
(a) it converts into any form of organisation which does not qualify as a non-
profit organisation;
 (b) it merges with any form of organisation which does not qualify as a non-
profit organisation;
 (c) it fails to transfer upon dissolution all its assets to any other non-profit
organisation, within a period of three months from the end of the month in which the
dissolution takes place.

327
The net worth of the non-profit organisation shall be computed as on the date of
conversion or merger in a case falling under (a) or (b) above and the date of dissolution in a
case falling under (c) above. “Net worth” has been defined in the said clause to mean the
aggregate value of its total assets as reduced by its liabilities computed in accordance with
such rules of valuation as may be prescribed.
Clause 102 provides that the provisions of Chapter IV shall not apply to any person
who—
(a) holds any business under trust, notwithstanding any specific direction that
the business shall form part of the corpus of such person or that the income from the
business shall be applied only for charitable activity;
(b) fails to comply with the conditions specified in clause 96;
(c) ceases to be a non-profit organisation at any time during the financial year,
irrespective of registration granted under clause 97; or
(d) carries on any business which is not incidental to charitable activity.
The said clause further provides that the non-profit organisation which ceases to be a
non-profit organisation on account of conversion, merger or dissolution as referred to in
sub-clause (1) of clause 101 shall be liable to income-tax in respect of its net worth in
accordance with that section. The said clause also provides that the total income of any
person falling under (a), (b), (c) or (d) above shall be computed in accordance with the other
provisions of the Code.
Clause 103  provides the meaning of certain terms used in Chapter-IV. It defines
“charitable activity” to mean the following activities carried out in India, namely:—
(i) relief of the poor;
(ii) advancement of education;
(iii) medical relief;
(iv) preservation of environment including watersheds, forests and wildlife;
(v) preservation of monuments or places or objects of artistic or historic interest;
or
(vi) advancement of any other object of general public utility, not involving the
carrying on of any activity in the nature of trade, commerce or business or any activity
of rendering any service in relation thereto, for a cess, fee or any other consideration
(irrespective of nature of use, application or retention of the income from such activity)
and where the gross receipts during the financial year from such activity exceed ten
lakh rupees.
The said clause also defines the phrases “business incidental to charitable activity”
and “general public”.
Clause 104 seeks to provide the method of computation of book profit in case of a
company for the purposes of computation of the tax payable on such book profit.
The said clause provides that notwithstanding of anything in this Code, where the
normal income-tax payable for a financial year by a company is less than the tax on book
profit, then the book profit shall be deemed to be the total income of the company for such
financial year and it shall be liable to income-tax on such total income at the rate specified in
Paragraph A of the Second Schedule. This is essentially the concept of a Minimum Alternate
Tax. The terms “normal income-tax” and “tax on book profit” used in this sub-clause have
been defined in sub-clause ( 6) of the said clause. Paragraph A of the Second Schedule
provides for a rate of tax of twenty per cent. on such deemed total income.

328
The clause further provides a formula for the calculation of the book profit. The formula’s
starting point is the net profit of the company computed in accordance with the provisions
of Parts II and III of Schedule VI to the Companies Act, 1956. The sub-clause provides for
various adjustments to be made to the net profit to determine the book profit. The adjustments
have the effect of both increasing and decreasing the net profit. The book profit would be
higher than the net profit if the adjustments have a net positive impact and vice versa.
The said clause also provides that every company, to which this clause applies, shall
obtain a report in the prescribed form from an accountant certifying that the book profit has
been computed in accordance with the provisions of this clause.
Clause 105 relates to preparation of profit and loss account for computing book profit.
The said clause seeks to provide the manner in which a company has to prepare its profit and
loss account for the purposes of computation of its book profit under clause 104.
Accordingly, the clause provides that the profit and loss account of the company for
a financial year shall be in accordance with the provisions of Parts II and III of Schedule VI
to the Companies Act, 1956. For the purposes of this clause, the accounting policies, the
accounting standards adopted for preparing such accounts (including profit and loss account)
and the method and rates adopted for calculating the depreciation shall be the same as have
been adopted by the company for the purpose of preparing and laying of such accounts at
its annual general meeting in accordance with the provisions of section 210 of the Companies
Act, 1956.
The said clause further provides that where the company has adopted or adopts a
financial year under the Companies Act, 1956, which is different from the financial year under
this Code, then the accounting policies, the accounting standards adopted for preparing
such accounts (including profit and loss account) and the method and rates adopted for
calculating the depreciation shall correspond to the accounting policies, accounting standards
and the method and rates for calculating the depreciation which have been adopted for
preparing such accounts for such financial year or part of such financial year falling within
the relevant financial year.
Clause 106 seeks to provide the manner in which tax credit for a financial year, arising
due to payment of income-tax on book profit in such year, is to be calculated and carried
forward and the manner in which such tax credit is to be allowed in succeeding years.
The said clause, inter alia,  provides that the tax credit of a financial year to be allowed
under this clause shall be the excess of tax on book profit over the normal income-tax. In
other words, a tax credit would arise only in a year where the company pays income-tax on its
book profit. Further, the amount of such tax credit shall be equal to the amount by which the
income-tax on book profit exceeds the income-tax on income computed in accordance with
the provisions of Part A of the Code (other than the provisions of this Chapter).
The clause also provides that no interest shall be payable on the tax credit allowed
under this clause.
The clause further provides that the tax credit shall be allowed in a financial year in
which the normal income-tax exceeds the tax on book profit and the credit shall be allowed to
the extent of the excess of the normal income-tax over the tax on book profit. In other words,
the credit shall be allowed only in respect of the amount of income-tax payable over and
above the amount of income-tax that was payable on the book profit. For example, if the
normal income-tax payable is one lakh rupees and the income-tax payable on book profit is
sixty thousand rupees, then tax credit shall be allowed to the extent of forty thousand rupees
only. The balance amount of sixty thousand rupees shall be carried forward for the remaining
period.
The clause also provides that the tax credit determined under this clause shall be
carried forward and allowed not beyond the fifteenth financial year immediately succeeding
the financial year for which the tax credit becomes allowable.

329
Clause 107 provides that apart from the specific exclusions provided in this Chapter
from the application of certain provisions of the Code, all other provisions of the Code shall
apply to a company referred to in this Chapter.
Clause 108 seeks to provide that notwithstanding anything in this Code, any income
received by a person out of investments made in a venture capital company or venture
capital fund shall be chargeable to income-tax in the same manner as if it were the income
received by such person had he made investments directly in the venture capital undertaking.
In other words, this clause provides a pass through status to venture capital companies and
funds and they would have no income-tax liability on any income received on account of
investments made by them in any venture capital undertaking.
The said clause further provides that the venture capital company, the venture capital
fund or the person responsible for making payment of the income on behalf of such company
or fund shall furnish, within the prescribed time limit, a prescribed statement giving the
details of the nature of the income paid during the financial year and other relevant details, to
the person receiving such income and to the prescribed income-tax authority.
The said clause also provides that the income paid by the venture capital company
and the venture capital fund shall be deemed to be of the same nature and in the same
proportion in the hands of the person receiving such income as it had been received by the
said company or the fund during the financial year.
The said clause also clarifies that the provisions of Part B (Tax on distributed profits of
domestic companies) or Part C (Tax on distributed income of mutual funds or life insurers) of
the Code shall not apply to the income paid by a venture capital company or venture capital
fund.
Clause 109 is the only clause of Part B and Chapter VII of the Bill and deals with tax on
distributed profits of domestic companies or dividend distribution tax. The said clause provides
that every domestic company shall be liable to pay tax on the amount of dividend declared,
distributed or paid (whether interim or otherwise) to its shareholders, whether out of current
or accumulated profits. The dividend distribution tax shall be charged on the dividend
declared, distributed or paid at the rate specified in Paragraph B of the Second Schedule to
the Bill.
The said clause further provides that the dividend on which the tax is to be levied shall
be reduced by the amount of dividend, if any, received by the domestic company during the
financial year if —
(i) such dividend is received from its subsidiary; and
(ii) the subsidiary has paid tax under this clause on such dividend.
The said clause also provides that the the tax on dividend shall be paid to the credit of
the Central Government within fourteen days from the date of declaration, distribution or
payment of such dividend, whichever is earliest.
The clause also provides that the dividend distribution tax paid by the domestic
company shall be treated as the final payment of tax in respect of the dividend declared,
distributed or paid and no further credit shall be claimed by the domestic company or by any
other person in respect of such tax. Further, no deduction on the amount of dividend charged
to tax or the tax paid shall be allowed either to the company or to the shareholder.
The clause further provides that if the domestic company or the principal officer of
such company fails to pay the whole or any part of the dividend distribution tax within a
period of fourteen days then, it or he shall be deemed to be an assessee in default and also
be liable to pay simple interest at the rate of one per cent. for every month or part thereof on
the amount of such tax for the period of default.
The clause also defines the terms “subsidiary company” and “dividend”.

330
Clause 110 is the only clause of Part C and Chapter VIII of the Bill and deals with tax
on distributed income of mutual funds and insurance company. The said clause provides
that every mutual fund shall be liable to pay tax on any amount of income distributed or paid
to the unit holders of an equity oriented fund and every life insurer shall be liable to pay tax
on any amount of income distributed or paid to the policy holders of an approved equity
oriented life insurance scheme. The tax shall be charged on the distributed income at the rate
specified in Paragraph C of the Second Schedule.
The said clause also provides that the tax on distributed income shall be paid to the
credit of the Central Government within fourteen days from the date of distribution or payment
of such income, whichever is earlier.
The clause further provides that the tax paid by the mutual fund or the life insurer on
distributed income shall be treated as the final payment of tax in respect of such income and
no further credit shall be claimed by either of them or by any other person in respect of the tax
so paid. Besides, no deduction under any other provision of this Code shall be allowed to the
mutual fund or the life insurer in respect of the distributed income charged to tax or the tax
paid.
The said clause also provides that if the mutual fund or the life insurer or the person
who is responsible for making payment of distributed income on its behalf fails to pay the
whole or any part of the tax on distributed income within a period of fourteen days, then, it or
he shall be deemed to be an assessee in default and shall also be liable to pay simple interest
at the rate of one per cent. for every month on the amount of such tax for the period of default.
The terms “equity oriented fund” and “approved equity oriented life insurance scheme”
have also been defined in the said clause.
Clause 111 is the only clause of Part D and Chapter IX of the Bill and deals with tax on
branch profits of a foreign company. The said clause provides that every foreign company
shall be liable to branch profits tax in respect of branch profits of a financial year and such tax
shall be charged at the rate specified in Paragraph IV of the Second Schedule. This tax shall
be in addition to any income-tax payable by the said foreign company.
The clause further provides that the branch profits shall be the income attributable,
directly or indirectly, to the permanent establishment or to an immovable property situated in
India and included in the total income of the foreign company for the financial year, as
reduced by the amount of income-tax payable on such attributable income.
The said clause also provides that the liability to branch profits tax shall be discharged
by payment of pre-paid taxes and the tax charged under this clause shall be collected after
allowing credit for such pre-paid taxes, if any, in accordance with the provisions of the Code.
Clause 112 provides that every person, other than a non-profit organisation, shall be
liable to pay wealth-tax on his net wealth as on the valuation date of a financial year and such
wealth-tax shall be charged at the rate specified in Paragraph V of the Second Schedule in the
manner provided therein.
The said clause further provides that the liability to wealth-tax shall be discharged by
payment of pre-paid taxes and the wealth-tax charged under this clause shall be collected
after allowing credit for such pre-paid taxes, if any, in accordance with the provisions of this
Code.
Clause 113 provides the manner in which the net wealth is to be computed. For the
sake of simplicity, the manner has been expressed as a formula. The formula provides that the
net wealth shall be the aggregate value of all the specified assets of the person on the date
of valuation as reduced by the aggregate value of all the debts owed by the person, which
have been incurred in relation to the specified assets.
The said clause further provides a detailed list of all the specified assets and also lists
out certain assets that shall not be treated as specified assets for the purposes of this clause.

331
It also lists the categories of houses which shall be excluded from the specified asset, being
“house”.
The clause also provides that the value of any specified asset, other than cash, shall
be determined in such manner as may be prescribed and clarifies that the term “valuation
date” means the 31st day of March in every financial year.
Clause 114 provides that if the specified assets are held by certain relatives, such as
spouse or minor child, associates or associated entities of a person, then they shall be
deemed to be belonging to such person if they fulfill certain conditions specified therein and
shall be charged to wealth-tax in his hands.
The said clause further provides that if a minor child holds a specified asset which has
been acquired from his own income, it shall not be deemed to be belonging to his parent or
parents.
Clause 115 relates to disallowance of expenditure having regard to fair market value
and seeks to provide that a person shall not be allowed a deduction under the Code in
respect of any expenditure, whether capital or revenue in nature, which is considered by the
Assessing Officer to be excessive or unreasonable if the payment in respect of the expenditure
has been made to any associated person and it is excessive, or unreasonable, having regard
to—
(i) the fair market value of the goods, services or facilities for which the payment
is made;
(ii) the legitimate needs of the business of the person; or
(iii) the benefit derived by, or accruing to, the person from such payment.
Clause 116 seeks to provide that the amount of any income, or expense, arising from
an international transaction shall be determined having regard to the arm’s length price. The
term “arm’s length price” has been defined in clause 124 and means a price which is applied
in a transaction between unrelated persons in uncontrolled, unrelated or independent
conditions.
The said clause further provides that the allocation or apportionment of, or any
contribution to, any cost or expense incurred in connection with a benefit, service or facility
provided to any associated enterprise shall be determined having regard to the arm’s length
price of such benefit, service or facility if—
(a) two or more associated enterprises have entered into a mutual agreement or
arrangement for the allocation or apportionment of, or any contribution to, such cost
or expense; and
(b) the benefit, service or facility provided to any one or more associated
enterprises involves an international transaction.
The clause also provides that its provisions shall not apply in a case where the
determination of any income or allocation of any expense has the effect of reducing the
income chargeable to tax, or increasing the loss computed, on the basis of entries made in the
books of account for the financial year in which the international transaction was entered.
Clause 117 relates to determination of arm’s length price. The said clause seeks to
provide that the arm’s length price in relation to an international transaction shall be determined
in accordance with the most appropriate method out of all the prescribed methods. The most
appropriate method shall be determined having regard to the nature of transaction, class of
transaction, class of associated enterprises or functions performed by such enterprises or
such other relevant factors as may be prescribed.
The said clause further provides that the arm’s length price shall be the price determined
by the most appropriate method if only one price is determined by such method or the
arithmetical mean of the prices determined by the most appropriate method if more than one

332
price is determined by such method. Further, the price at which the international transaction
has actually been undertaken shall be deemed to be the arm’s length price if the variation
between the arm’s length price and the actual price does not exceed five per cent. of the latter.
The clause also provides that no deduction under Sub-chapter IV of Chapter III (tax
incentives) shall be allowed in respect of the amount of income by which the total income of
the person is enhanced after computation of income under this clause.
The said clause further provides that the determination of arm’s length price shall be
subject to the prescribed safe harbour rules.
Clause 118 seeks to provide that the Central Board of Direct Taxes, with the approval
of the Central Government, may enter into an advance pricing agreement with any person,
specifying therein the manner in which arm’s length price is to be determined in relation to an
international transaction to be entered into by that person.
The said clause further provides that the arm’s length price of any international
transaction, in respect of which the advance pricing agreement has been entered into, shall
be determined in accordance with such advance pricing agreement. The advance pricing
agreement shall be valid for a period as specified in the agreement but shall not exceed five
consecutive financial years.
The said clause also provides that the advance pricing agreement entered into shall be
binding only on the person in whose case, and only in respect of the transaction in relation
to which, the agreement has been entered into. It shall be binding on the Commissioner and
the income-tax authorities subordinate to him only in respect of the said person and the said
transaction. However, the agreement shall not be binding if there is any amendment to the
Code which has a bearing on it.
The clause also provides that the Board may declare an agreement to be void ab initio
if it has been obtained by the person by fraud or misrepresentation of facts.
Clause 119 relates to avoidance of income-tax by transactions resulting in transfer of
income to non-residents and seeks to provide that the total income of a person shall include
all income accruing to any non-resident, if—
(a) the income accrues by virtue of a transfer of any asset by the person to the
non-resident;
(b) the person acquires any rights by virtue of which he has power to enjoy such
income or is entitled to receive, or has received, any capital sum, the payment of which
is in any way connected with the transfer; and
(c) the income would have been included in the total income of the person, had
the transfer not taken place.
The said clause further provides that to determine whether a person has power
to enjoy the income, the substantial result and effect of the transfer and all benefits
which may at any time accrue to such person as a result of the transfer shall be taken
into account.
The said clause also provides that this clause shall not apply if the person
referred herein shows to the satisfaction of the Assessing Officer that the transfer and
all associated operations were bona fide  commercial transactions and were not designed
for the purpose of avoiding any tax liability.
Clause 120  relates to avoidance of tax by sale and buy-back transaction in a
security and provides that the total income of any person shall include any interest

333
accruing from any security owned by any other person if the transaction relating to
sale and buy back of the security has been undertaken by the other person, if the
interest accrues to the other person as a result of such transaction and if the transfer
had not taken place, the income would have been included in the total income of the
first-mentioned person.
Clause 121  seeks to provide that the transaction relating to buy and sale back
of security under clause 120 shall, in the case of the other person referred to therein, be
ignored and shall not be taken into account if the interest accruing to the other person
is not included in his total income by virtue of the provisions of that clause.
The said clause further provides that the loss, if any, arising to a person on
account of any buy and sale back transaction in any security undertaken by him, shall
be ignored for the purposes of computing his total income, if any other income accruing
to the person on such security is not included in his total income and the loss shall be
ignored to the extent it does not exceed the amount of any other income referred to
therein.
Clause 122  provides that the income accruing from a debt instrument, transferred
by a person at any time during the financial year, shall not be less than the amount of
broken-period income from the instrument. The term “broken-period income” has been
defined in clause 124.
Clause 123  seeks to provide that any arrangement entered into by a person may
be declared as an impermissible avoidance arrangement and the consequences, under
this Code, of such arrangement may be determined by—
(a) disregarding, combining or re-characterising any step in the
arrangement;
(b) treating the arrangement as if it had not been entered into or carried
out or in such other manner as in the circumstances of the case, the
Commissioner deems appropriate for the prevention or reduction of the relevant
tax benefit;
(c) disregarding any accommodating party or treating any accommodating
party and any other party as one and the same person;
(d) deeming persons who are connected persons in relation to each other
to be one and the same person;
(e) re-allocating, amongst the parties to the arrangement, any accrual, or
receipt, of a capital or revenue nature or any expenditure, deduction, relief or
rebate; or
(f) re-characterising any equity into debt or vice versa, any accrual, or
receipt, of a capital or revenue nature, or any expenditure, deduction, relief or
rebate .
The clause further provides that the above provisions may be applied in
the alternative for, or in addition to, any other basis for determination of tax
liability and they shall apply in accordance with such guidelines as may be
prescribed.
Clause 124  seeks to define various terms used in Chapter XI such as
“accommodating party”, “arm’s length price”, “asset”, “associated enterprise”,

334
“impermissible avoidance arrangement”, “international transaction”, “round trip
financing”, “safe harbour”, “tax benefit”, etc.
Clause 125 relates to presumption of the purpose for which an arrangement is entered
into and seeks to provide that an arrangement shall be presumed to have been entered into,
or carried out, for the main purpose of obtaining a tax benefit unless the person obtaining the
tax benefit proves that obtaining such benefit was not the main purpose of the arrangement.
The term “arrangement” has been defined in clause 124.
Clause 126 seeks to provide for the classes of income-tax authorities for the purpose
of the Code. The income-tax authorities provided in the clause are—
(a)  The Central Board of Direct Taxes constituted under the Central Boards of
Revenue Act, 1963,
(b) Chief Commissioners of Income-tax or Directors-General of Income-tax,
(c) Commissioners of Income-tax or Directors of Income-tax or Commissioners of
Income-tax (Appeals),
(d) Additional Commissioners of Income-tax or Additional Directors of Income-
tax,
(e) Joint Commissioners of Income-tax or Joint Directors of Income-tax,
(f) Deputy Commissioners of Income-tax or Deputy Directors of Income-tax,
(g) Assistant Commissioners of Income-tax or Assistant Directors of Income-
tax,
(h) Income-tax Officers,
(i) Tax Recovery Officers,
(j) Inspectors of Income-tax.
Clause 127  relates to appointment and control of income-tax authorities listed in
clause 126.
The said clause provides that the Central Government may appoint such persons as it
thinks fit to be income-tax authorities. Subject to the rules and orders of the Central Government
regulating the conditions of service of persons in public services and posts, the Central
Government may also authorise the Board, or a Director-General, a Chief Commissioner or a
Director or a Commissioner to appoint income-tax authorities below the rank of an Assistant
Commissioner.
Further an income-tax authority authorised in this behalf by the Board may appoint
such executive or ministerial staff as may be necessary to assist it in the execution of its
functions.
The said clause also provides that the Board may direct by way of notification that any
income-tax authority will be subordinate to the other.
Clause 128 relating to power of higher authorities, seeks to provide that any income-
tax authority, above the rank of Assessing Officer, shall have all the powers that an Assessing
Officer has in relation to the making of inquiries.
Clause 129 relates to powers of the Board to issue instructions.
The said clause seeks to provide that the Board may, from time to time, issue such
orders, instructions, directions or circulars to other income-tax authorities as it may consider
expedient or necessary for the proper administration of the provisions of the Code.
The said clause further provides that the Board shall not exercise its powers so as to
require any income-tax authority to make a particular assessment or to dispose of a particular

335
case in a particular manner, or require the Commissioner of Income-tax (Appeals) to dispose
off any matter before it in a particular manner.
The said clause also empowers the Board to issue general or special orders in respect
of—
(a) any class of tax bases or class of cases, explaining the principles, specifying
the guidelines or procedures to be followed by other income-tax authorities in the work
relating to assessment or collection of revenue including charging of interest or the
initiation of proceedings for the imposition of penalties;
(b) any case or class of cases, for avoiding genuine hardship, authorising any
income-tax authority (other than Commissioner of Income-tax (Appeals)) to admit any
application or claim for any exemption, deduction, refund or any other relief under the
Code after the expiry of the period specified by or under the Code for making the
application or claim and deal with the same on merits in accordance with law;
(c) any case or class of cases, relaxing any requirement or conditions contained
in the Code in relation to grant of any relief , on fulfillment of certain conditions.
The said clause also provides that the orders, instructions, directions and circulars
issued by the Board under this clause shall be binding on all other income-tax authorities and
other persons employed in the execution of the provisions of the Code.
Clause 130 relates to the jurisdiction of income-tax authorities. The said clause seeks
to provide that the income-tax authorities shall exercise its powers and performs its functions
in accordance with the directions of the Board. The Board may in turn authorise any other
income-tax authority to issue orders in writing for the exercise of the powers and perfor-
mance of the functions by all or any of its other income-tax authorities who are subordinate
to it.
The orders of jurisdiction shall be made having regard to territorial area, persons or
classes of persons, incomes or classes of income or cases or classes of cases.
The said clause further provides that a higher income-tax authority can exercise the
powers and perform the functions of the lower income-tax authority, if so directed by the
Board.
The said clause also provides that the Assessing Officer being lower in rank shall
follow the directions of the Assessing Officer being higher in rank, if two or more Assessing
Officers of different class have been assigned concurrent jurisdiction.
Further any income-tax authority, being an authority higher in rank, can exercise the
powers and perform the functions of the income-tax authority being an authority lower in
rank, if so directed by the Board.
Clause 131 relates to jurisdiction of Assessing Officers. The said clause provide that
the Assessing Officer having jurisdiction over an area shall, within the limits of such area,
have jurisdiction in respect of any person carrying on a business if his principal place of
business is situated within that area or any other person residing within the area. Any
dispute in the matter shall be decided by the concerned Chief Commissioner. However, if the
dispute relates to areas within the jurisdiction of different Chief Commissioners, it will be
decided by consensus and if there is no agreement, by the Board or the Chief Commissioner
so directed by it.
The said clause further provides that the jurisdiction of an Assessing Officer cannot
be challenged after the specified time.
Clause 132 relates to power to transfer cases. The said clause seeks to provide that
the Chief Commissioner or the Commissioner may order transfer of a case from one Assessing
Officer to other Assessing Officer if both are subordinate to him. The Chief Commissioner
may also order transfer cases from one Assessing Officer subordinate to him to another
Assessing Officer subordinate to any other Chief Commissioner, if both Chief Commissioners

336
are in agreement with such transfer. However, if both the Chief Commissioners are not in
agreement with a transfer, the Board, or the Chief Commissioner as may be authorised by the
Board, may transfer the case in certain circumstances.
The said clause also provides that the transfer of a case may be made at any stage of
the proceedings, and it shall not be necessary to re-issue any notice already issued by the
transferor Assessing Officer.
The said clause also seeks to define the expression “case” for the purposes of  Chapter
XII relating to Tax Administration and procedure.
Clause 133 relating to change of incumbent seeks to provide that the income-tax
authority who succeeds another authority as a result of change in jurisdiction or for any
other reason, shall continue the proceeding from the stage at which it was left by his
predecessor. The assessee in such a case may be given, if so requested, an opportunity of
being heard before passing any order under this Code in his case.
Clause 134 relating to powers regarding discovery and production of evidence, etc.,
seeks to provide that the prescribed income-tax authorities and the Dispute Resolution Panel
shall, for the purposes of the Code, have the same powers as are vested in a court under the
Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 when trying a suit, in respect of the following matters—
(a) discovery and inspection;
(b) enforcing the attendance of any person, including any officer of a banking
company and examining him on oath;
(c) compelling the production of books of account and other documents; and
(d) issuing commissions.
The said clause further provides that for the purposes of making any inquiry or
investigation, the prescribed income-tax authority shall be vested with the powers referred
above, whether or not any proceeding is pending before it.
The said clause also provides that any prescribed income-tax authority may, subject to
the rules made in this behalf, impound any books of account or other documents produced
before it and retain them in its custody for such period as it thinks fit if such authority is of
rank of Joint Commissioner and above. Any income-tax authority below the rank of Joint
Commissioner shall not retain in his custody any impounded books or documents for a
period exceeding thirty days without obtaining the approval of the Chief Commissioner or
the Commissioner.
Clause 135 relates to search and seizure. It inter alia, provides that the Competent
Investigating Authority may authorise any Authorised Officer to carry out search and seizure
if the Competent Investigating Authority has, in consequence of information in his
possession, reason to believe that,—
(a) any person to whom a summons or notice was issued under the specified
sections or the clauses of the Income-tax Act, 1961 or the Wealth-tax Act, 1957 or the
Code, as the case may be, has omitted or failed to furnish the material as required by
such summon or notice; or
(b) any person to whom a summons or notice as aforesaid has been or might be
issued will not, or would not, produce or cause to be produced, any material which will
be useful for, or relevant to, any proceeding under the Income-tax Act, 1961, or the
Wealth-tax Act, 1957, or under the Code; or
(c) any person is in possession of any tax bases or property which has not been,
or would not be, disclosed for the purposes of the Income-tax Act, 1961, or the Wealth-
tax Act, 1957, or the Code.
The said clause also provides that the authorised officer may, while carrying out the
search and seizure, enter and search any building, place, vessel, vehicle or aircraft where he

337
has reason to suspect that any material are kept, or break open the lock of any door, box,
locker, safe, almirah etc., or search any person and seize any such material, not being stock-
in-trade, found as a result of such search. He may also place marks of identification on any
books of account or other documents and make a note or an inventory of any such material
including stock in trade.
Sub-clause (3) of the said clause provides that the Competent Investigating Authority
may exercise the powers of search and seizure over a person on whom he exercises jurisdiction.
The said clause also provides that the Authorised Officer may requisition the services
of any police officer or of any officer of the Central Government to assist him and it shall be
the duty of every such officer to comply with such requisition.
The said clause also provides that the Authorised Officer may serve an order on the
owner or the person, who is in immediate possession or control of any material, that he shall
not remove or part with it except with his prior permission, if the Authorised Officer considers
that it is not possible or practicable to take physical possession of such material, not being
stock-in-trade, to a safe place due to its volume, weight or other physical characteristics
(including its dangerous nature) and such action of the authorised officer shall be deemed to
be seizure.
The said clause also provides that the authorised officer may, during the course of the
search or seizure, examine on oath any person who is found to be in possession or control of
any material and any statement made by such person during such examination may thereafter
be used in evidence in any proceeding under the Income-tax Act, 1961, or the Wealth-tax Act,
1957, or under the Code, as the case may be. Further the provisions of the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973, relating to search and seizure shall apply, so far as may be, to search and
seizure under this clause.
Clause 136  relates to powers to requisition material taken into custody. The said
clause seeks to provide that the Competent Investigating Authority may authorise any
income-tax authority to require any officer or authority to deliver the material, which have
been taken into custody by such officer or authority under any other law for the time being
in force, to the Requisitioning Officer.
The said clause further provides that the authorisation could be issued in cases and
circumstances similar to the ones as for search and seizure referred to in clause 135.
The said clause also provides that the officer or authority in whose custody the
material exists, shall deliver the material to the Requisitioning Officer either forthwith or when
such officer or authority is of the opinion that it is no longer necessary to retain the same in
his or its custody.The provisions of clause 135 shall apply to this clause also.
Clause 137 relates to retention and release of books of account or documents seized
or requisitioned. The said clause seeks to provide that the Authorised Officer or the
Requisitioning Officer shall hand over the books of account or documents seized under
clause 135 or delivered under clause 136, as the case may be, within a period of sixty days
from the date on which the last of the authorisations for search was executed or the books of
account were received, to the Assessing Officer having jurisdiction over the case.
However, the Authorised Officer or the Requisitioning Officer may allow the assessee
to make copies or take extracts of the books of account or documents seized or requisitioned
on his making an application. It is further provided that the assessing officers may retain the
books of account or documents, seized or requisitioned, up to a period of thirty days from
the date of assessment and beyond this period after obtaining the approval of the Chief
Commissioner or the Commissioner. The retention, however, cannot be allowed beyond a
period of thirty days from the date on which the proceedings under the Code are completed.
Clause 138 relating to delivery of material belonging to other persons, seeks to provide
that the Assessing Officer, having jurisdiction over the person in whose case search and

338
seizure was carried out under section 135, or requisition was made under section 136, shall
hand over any material to the Assessing Officer having jurisdiction over another person, if
he is satisfied that the material seized, or requisitioned, belongs to the other person.
Clause 139 relates to retention and application of seized or requisitioned assets. The
said clause seeks to provide that the Assessing Officer may recover the amount of any
liability existing till the date of search or requisition or determined after such date till the
release of assets out of assets seized or requisitioned or by any other mode. It further
provides that the Assessing Officer may recover the existing liability and release the remaining
portion of the asset, if any, within a period of one hundred and twenty days from the date on
which the last of the authorisations for search under clause 135 was executed, to the person
from whose custody the assets were seized, on fulfillment of certain conditions.
Clause 140 relating to power to call for information seeks to provide that for the
purposes of the Code, the Board may require —
(a) any prescribed person to furnish information within such time and in such
form and manner as may be prescribed; and
(b) any prescribed income-tax authority to call for the prescribed information in
such form and manner as may be prescribed.
The said clause further provides that any income-tax authority, not below the rank of
an Income-tax Officer, may require any person, including a banking company or any officer
thereof, to furnish any information as may be useful for, or relevant to any enquiry or
proceeding, pending before him under this Code, in such form, manner and within such time
as may be specified by him.
The said clause also provides that the expression ‘‘person’’ in this clause shall include
a banking company or any officer thereof.
Clause 141  relates to power of survey. The said clause seeks to provide that the
prescribed income-tax authority may within his jurisdiction enter, or authorise any other
income-tax authority to enter, any place at which a business is carried out by a person, if he
has reason to suspect that the person has not complied with the provisions of this Code. The
income-tax authority shall enter any place of business referred to therein only after sunrise
and before sunset, or during the hours at which such place is open for the conduct of
business. The income-tax authority may, upon entering the place, inspect the books of
account or documents available there and check or verify the cash, stock or other valuable
article or thing found there.
The income-tax authority may place marks of identification on the books of account,
documents or record inspected by him and take extracts, or copies, therefrom, impound any
books of account, documents or record inspected by him, after recording the reasons for
doing so, make an inventory of cash, stock or valuables and also examine on oath any person
if his statement would be useful for, or relevant to, any proceeding under the Code.
The said clause also provides that the prescribed income-tax authority, for the purpose
of verifying the expenditure made by the person  in connection with any function, ceremony
or event, after such function, ceremony or event, may require the person by whom such
expenditure has been incurred or any other person who is likely to posess the information
regarding such expenditure, to furnish such information which may be useful for, or relevant
to, any proceeding under this Code and record the statements of the person or any other
person in this behalf.
While exercising the power under this clause, the income-tax authority shall not remove
any cash, stock or other valuable article or thing from such place.
Clause 142 relates to power to disclose information in respect of any person. This
clause seeks to provide that the Board, or any person specified by it by an order in this
behalf, may furnish any information in respect of an assessee to other person who is performing
any functions under any law relating to the imposition of any tax, duty or cess, or dealings in

339
foreign currency or a person who is performing any function under any other law and
notified by the Central Government.
The said clause further provides that the Chief Commissioner or the Commissioner
may furnish, or cause to be furnished, to any person any information relating to any assessee
received or obtained by any income-tax authority in the performance of his functions under
this Code, if—
(a) the person makes an application to the Chief Commissioner  or the
Commissioner in the prescribed form; and
(b) the Chief Commissioner or the Commissioner is satisfied that it is in the
public interest so to do.
The said clause also provides that such decision of the Chief Commissioner or the
Commissioner shall be final and shall not be called in question in any court of law.
Further, it is provided that the Central Government may direct by notified order that no
information shall be furnished under sub-clauses (2) or (4) in respect of such matters relating
to such class of assessees, or to such authorities, as may be specified in the order.
Clause 143 seeks to provide that any proceeding under the Code before an income-tax
authority shall be deemed to be a judicial proceeding within the meaning of section 193 and
section 228 and for the purposes of section 196 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860. Further, every
income-tax authority shall be deemed to be a Civil Court for the purposes of section 195, but
not for the purposes of Chapter XXVI of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.
Clause 144 relates to self-reporting of tax bases. The clause, inter alia, provides that
every person who is liable to pay income-tax under this Code or who intends to carry forward
any loss shall furnish a return of tax bases on or before the due date to the Assessing Officer
or the prescribed authority or agency.
The said clause further provides that a company resident in India, a mutual fund or a
life insurer who distributes dividend or income, as the case may be, and is liable to pay tax on
dividend or income distributed, is also required to file the return of tax bases on or before the
due date.
The said clause also provides that in relation to net wealth, every person (other than a
non-profit organisation) in whose case the net wealth exceeds the maximum amount which is
not chargeable to wealth-tax is required to furnish the return of tax bases on or before the due
date.
The said clause provides that the return of tax bases shall also be a return of tax bases
of any other person of which such person is a representative assessee. The return of tax
bases shall be furnished in the prescribed form and manner. The said clause also specifies
the person who is required to sign and verify such return.
The said clause provides that if a person discovers any omission or any wrong statement
in the return of tax bases furnished by him, he may revise such return at any time before the
expiry of one year from the end of the financial year in which the return was due or before the
completion of the assessment, whichever is earlier.
The said clause provides that any person who is otherwise not required to furnish a
return of tax bases under the Code may furnish such return before the expiry of one year from
the end of the financial year to which it pertains. It also provides that a person may furnish
the return for any financial year at any time before the expiry of one year from the end of the
financial year in which the return was due or before the completion of the assessment,
whichever is earlier, if he has not furnished a return by the due date and no notice under
clause 146 has been served on him.
Clause 145 relates to tax return preparers. The clause provide that the Board may
frame a tax return preparer Scheme allowing a tax return preparer to prepare and furnish the
return of tax bases of any specified class of persons.

340
Clause 146 relates to the issue of notice to furnish the return of tax bases. It provides
that the Assessing Officer may serve on a person in whose case the due date of furnishing
such return has expired, a notice requiring such person to furnish the return for the relevant
financial year. Such notice may be issued within a period of twenty-one months from the end
of the financial year in which the return was due. The said clause further provides that the
person in receipt of such notice shall furnish the return in the prescribed form and manner
within fourteen days from the date of such receipt.
Clause 147 relates to self-assessment tax. It provides that the assessee shall be liable
to pay self-assessment tax before furnishing the return of tax bases. The amount paid as self-
assessment tax for any financial year shall first be adjusted towards the interest payable
under the Code and the balance shall be adjusted towards the tax payable. The said clause
further provides that after a regular assessment has been made under clause 154 or clause
155, any amount paid as self-assessment tax shall be deemed to have been paid towards such
assessment. The clause also provides that if any assessee fails to pay such self-assessment
tax, he shall be deemed to be an asssessee in default and all the provisions of the Code shall
apply accordingly.
Clause 148 provides that on receipt of any return of tax bases for any financial year,
the Assessing Officer or any other authorised person shall issue an acknowledgement for
receipt of the return.
Clause 149 relates to processing of returns. It provides that the Assessing Officer or
any authorised person shall process the return received under clause 144 or clause 146. For
this purpose, the tax and interest shall be computed on the basis of the tax bases, after
making adjustments relating to any arithmetical error in the return or an incorrect claim
apparent from the existence of any information in the return. The said clause further provides
that the sum payable or refundable shall be determined after giving credit for taxes paid or
relief allowable under clause 207.
The said clause also provides that the processing authority shall send intimation to
the assessee specifying the sum payable by, or refundable, to him. The processing authority
shall also send an intimation to the assessee where the loss declared in the return is adjusted,
but no tax or interest is payable or refundable. The said clause also provides that the
processing authority shall not send any intimation in respect of any sum payable, if the
return is processed after the expiry of twelve months from the end of the financial year in
which the return is furnished. It provides that the acknowledgement of the return shall be
deemed to be the intimation where no sum is payable or refundable and where no adjustment
has been made.
The said clause provides that the Board may make a scheme for centralised processing
of returns for expeditious determination of the tax payable or refundable.
For this purpose, “return of tax bases” and “due date” have been defined in clause 314.
In relation to adjustments, clause 149 defines “an incorrect claim apparent from the existence
of any information in the return”.
Clause 150 relates to notice for inquiry before assessment. It provides that the
Assessing Officer may make an assessment on receipt of return under clause 144 or clause
146, if he considers it necessary or expedient to ensure that the assessee has not understated
his tax bases or computed excessive loss or allowance or under-paid the tax in any manner.
The said clause provides that the Assessing Officer shall serve on the assessee a notice
requiring him, inter alia, to furnish necessary information and to produce evidence, accounts
or documents (not relating to a period more than six years prior to the relevant financial year).
Besides, the Assessing Officer may make necessary inquiry in order to obtain full information
in respect of tax bases of any person for the relevant financial year.
The said clause also provides that no such notice shall be served on the assessee after
the expiry of six months from the end of the financial year in which the return is furnished.

341
Clause 151 deals with special audit. It provides that the Assessing Officer may direct
the assessee to get his accounts audited by an accountant, if he is of the opinion that
considering the nature and complexity of the accounts and in the interests of revenue, it is
necessary to do so. It further provides that the Assessing Officer shall not issue any such
direction unless the assessee has been given an opportunity of being heard and prior
approval of the Chief Commissioner or Commissioner has been obtained.
The said clause also provides that the accountant, who shall be nominated by the
Chief Commissioner or Commissioner, shall furnish his report to the Assessing Officer and to
the assessee, within the time allowed by the Assessing Officer, which shall not exceed one
hundred and eighty days from the date on which the direction for audit of accounts is
received by the assessee. It also provides that the remuneration of the accountant and other
expenses of the audit shall be determined and paid in accordance with prescribed rules.
Clause 152 deals with determination of value of assets. It, inter alia, provides that for
the purposes of assessment, the Assessing Officer may require a valuation officer to make
and report to him an estimate of the value of any asset, property, investment or expenditure.
The said clause provides specific powers to the valuation officer for this purpose, subject to
the rules in this behalf.
The said clause also provides that after taking into account such evidence as the
assessee may produce and the material in his possession or gathered by him, the valuation
officer shall estimate the value of the asset, property, investment or expenditure, after giving
an opportunity of being heard to the assessee, or to the best of his judgment if the assessee
does not co-operate or comply with his direction.
The said clause further provides that the valuation officer shall furnish a copy of such
estimate to the Assessing Officer and the assessee within a period of six months from the end
of the month in which the reference was made.
 Clause 153 deals with the determination of arm’s length price. It, inter alia, provides
that the Assessing Officer may, with the prior approval of the Commissioner, refer to the
Transfer Pricing Officer, the computation of arm’s length price under clause 117 in relation to
any international transaction entered into by the assessee in any financial year. The said
clause further provides that upon such reference, the Transfer Pricing Officer shall determine
the arm’s length price in relation to the international transaction in accordance with the
provisions of clause 117 and shall send a report of his determination to the Assessing Officer
and the assessee before the expiry of a period of forty-two months from the end of the
financial year in which the international transaction is entered into.
Clause 154 deals with the determination of an impermissible avoidance agreement and
consequences thereof. It provides that the Commissioner shall, for the purposes of clause
123, serve on the assessee a notice requiring him,  inter alia,  to produce any evidence or
particulars in support of his claim that the provisions of clause 123 are not applicable to him.
It further provides that after taking into account such particulars and evidence, the
Commissioner shall pass an order, before the expiry of twelve months from the end of the
month in which such notice is issued, declaring an arrangement as being an impermissible
avoidance agreement or otherwise for the purposes of clause 123.
The said clause also provides that upon declaring an arrangement as an impermissible
avoidance agreement, the Commissioner shall issue directions to the Assessing Officer to
make necessary adjustments to the total income or tax liability and shall forward a copy of
such order to the assessee and to the jurisdictional Commissioner of the other party to the
arrangement for taking necessary action in accordance with the provisions of this clause.
Clause 155 relates to assessment. It provides that consequent to a notice issued
under sub-clause (1) of clause 150, the Assessing Officer shall, by an order in writing, make
an assessment of the tax bases of the assessee after taking into account the evidence
furnished by the assessee, any report of audit under clause 151, any report of the valuation

342
officer, any order of the Transfer Pricing Officer, any direction of the Commissioner under
clause 154, any direction of the Joint Commissioner under clause 157 and the material in his
possession, in respect of which an opportunity of being heard has been provided to the
assessee.
The said clause further provides that on the basis of such assessment, the Assessing
Officer shall determine the sum payable or refundable after adjusting the sum paid by, or
refunded to, the assessee in pursuance of the intimation issued under sub-clause (2) of
clause 149.
The said clause also provides that the Assessing Officer shall forward the draft order
to the eligible assessee if he proposes to make any variation in the income or loss returned
which is prejudicial to the interests of such assessee, who may within thirty days of receipt
of the draft order, file his acceptance to the Assessing Officer or file his objections to such
variations to the Dispute Resolution Panel and the Assessing Officer. Thereafter, the Assessing
Officer shall complete the assessment on the basis of the draft order, if the assessee accepts
it, or in conformity with the direction of the Dispute Resolution Panel within a period of one
month from the end of the month in which such direction is received.
The said clause also defines the term “eligible assessee”.
Clause 156  relates to best judgment assessment. It, inter alia, provides that the
Assessing Officer shall make the assessment of the tax bases to the best of his judgment,
if—
(a) the assessee fails to furnish the return required under clause 144 or clause
146 or to comply with all the terms of a notice issued under sub-clause (1) of clause 150
or to comply with a direction issued under clause 151 or to make the return in response
to notice under clause 159;
(b) the assessee fails to regularly follow the accounting standards or the method
of accounting laid down in clause 89; or
(c) he is not satisfied about the correctness or completeness of the accounts of
the assessee.
The said clause further provides that in making the assessment, the Assessing Officer
shall take into account all relevant material which he has gathered or is available on record.
Clause 157 relates to directions for assessment by Joint Commissioner. It provides
that a Joint Commissioner may, on a reference made to him by the Assessing Officer or on an
application of an assessee or on his own motion, call for and examine the record of any
proceeding in which an assessment is pending and issue such directions as he thinks fit for
the guidance of the Assessing Officer so as to enable him to complete the assessment. The
Joint Commissioner shall not issue any direction prejudicial to the assessee unless an
opportunity of being heard is given to him. The said clause further provides that any such
direction issued shall be binding on the Assessing Officer.
Clause 158 deals with directions for assessment by Dispute Resolution Panel. It, inter
alia, provides that where any objection is received under sub-clause (5) of clause 155, the
Dispute Resolution Panel may call for and examine the record of any proceeding relating to
the draft order or make, or cause to be made, any such enquiry and issue directions for the
guidance of the Assessing Officer, within a period of nine months from the end of the month
in which the draft order is forwarded to the assessee.
The said clause further provides that the Dispute Resolution Panel may confirm, reduce
or enhance the variations proposed in the draft order, but shall not set aside any proposed
variation or issue any direction for further enquiry before passing of the assessment order.
Besides, any difference of opinion among the members of the Dispute Resolution Panel on
any issue shall be decided according to the opinion of the majority. The direction issued by
the Dispute Resolution Panel shall be binding on the Assessing Officer.

343
Clause 159 deals with reopening of assessment. It, inter alia, provides that the
Assessing Officer shall reopen a case for reassessment, for reasons recorded in writing, if he
has reason to believe that any tax bases chargeable to tax have escaped assessment for the
relevant financial year. The said clause lists the circumstances under which the tax bases
chargeable to tax shall be deemed to have escaped assessment.
 The said clause also provides that the notice for reopening of assessment shall be
issued for the seven financial years immediately preceding the financial year in which the
search and seizure has been carried out or the material has been requisitioned, and within a
period of seven financial years from the end of the relevant financial year in any other case.
The said clause also provides that where an assessment has been made under clause
155 or clause 156 or under this clause, no such notice shall be issued by an Assessing Officer
below the rank of Joint Commissioner—
(i) within a period of four years from the end of the relevant financial year, unless
the Joint Commissioner is satisfied on the reasons recorded by such Assessing Officer
that it is a fit case for issue of such notice;
(ii) after the expiry of a period of four years from the end of the relevant financial
year, unless the Commissioner is so satisfied;
The said clause further provides that in any other case, no such notice shall be issued
by an Assessing Officer below the rank of Joint Commissioner after the expiry of a period of
four years from the end of the relevant financial year, unless the Joint Commissioner is
satisfied on the reasons recorded by such Assessing Officer that it is a fit case for issue of
such notice.
The said clause also provides that any assessment proceeding relating to any financial
year falling within the abovementioned period of seven financial years shall abate, if it is
pending on the date of the initiation of the search or on the date of requisitioning the material
in the case of the person on whom search has been conducted or to whom such material
pertains.
The said clause also provides that on receipt of a return in pursuance of the notice for
re-opening of assessment, or after the expiry of the time specified therein for furnishing the
return, the Assessing Officer shall, by an order in writing, make the re-assessment of the total
income. It provides that in the re-assessment so made, the tax shall be chargeable at the rate
or rates at which it would have been charged had the tax base not escaped assessment. The
said clause also provides for certain circumstances under which re-assessment proceedings
shall be dropped.
Clause 160 relates to approval for search assessment. It provides that no order of
search assessment or re-assessment shall be passed by an Assessing Officer without the
approval of the Joint Commissioner.
Clause 161 deals with rectification of mistake. It, inter alia, provides that an income-
tax authority may amend any order passed or intimation issued by it in order to rectify any
mistake apparent on the face of the record within a period of four years from the end of the
financial year in which the order sought to be amended was passed.
 The said clause also provides that the income-tax authority may make an amendment
on its own motion or on an application made by the assessee or the Assessing Officer. It
provides that such application shall be decided within a period of six months from the end of
the month in which the application is received by it. It also provides that where the order has
been decided in an appeal or revision, the power of the authority to so amend shall be
restricted to matters not decided in appeal or revision.
Clause 162 relates to notice of demand. It provides that any sum payable in consequence
of any order made or intimation issued under this Code shall be demanded by an income-tax

344
authority by serving upon the assessee a notice of demand in the prescribed form and
manner. It also provides that the intimation issued under sub-clause (2) of clause 149 shall be
deemed to be the notice of demand for this purpose.
Clause 163 provides time limits for completion of assessment or re-assessment. It also
provides that such time limit shall not apply in respect of assessment, re-assessment or
recomputation to be made in consequence of, or to give effect to, any finding or direction
contained in any order of specified appellate authorities or of any court in a proceeding
otherwise than by way of appeal or reference under this Code.
The said clause also provides that in computing such period of limitation, certain
specified time periods shall be excluded. It provides that the period of limitation available to
the Assessing Officer for making an order of assessment, re-assessment or recomputation
shall be extended to sixty days, if the period immediately after the exclusion of the specified
time periods is less than sixty days.
Clause 164  seeks to provide that for the purposes of this Code, “representative
assessee” in respect of an assessee means—
(a) the agent of a non-resident, if the assessee is a non-resident;
(b) the guardian, or manager, of a minor, lunatic or idiot, if the assessee is a minor,
lunatic or idiot;
(c) the Court of Wards, the Administrator-General, the Official Trustee, any
receiver or manager (including any person who manages property on behalf of the
assessee) appointed by, or under, any order of a court, if such person receives, or is
entitled to receive, income on behalf, or for the benefit, of the assessee;
(d) a trustee appointed under an oral trust, or a trust created under an instrument
in writing and entitled to receive, income on behalf or for the benefit of any person, if
the assessee is a trust;
(e) the legal representative, or the executor, if the assessee dies;
(f) a participant, or the legal representative of the deceased participant, in the
case of dissolution of an unincorporated body; and
(g) the liquidator appointed under section 448, or section 490, of the Companies
Act, 1956 in the case of a company.
The said clause further provides as to who could be “agent” in relation to a non-
resident and executor in relation to a deceased person.
Clause 165 , inter alia,  provides that every representative-assessee shall, in his
representative capacity, be liable to assessment only in respect of the tax bases of the person
represented by him.
The said clause further provides that every representative-assessee shall be subject
to the same duties, responsibilities and liabilities as if the tax bases accrued to him and the
taxes shall be levied upon him in the manner as it would have been leviable upon the
principal.
The said clause also provides that any proceeding initiated, or which could have been
initiated, before the death or dissolution of the principal or the appointment of the liquidator,
shall be deemed to have been taken against, or can be initiated in case of, the representative
assessee.
Clause 166 provides that nothing in the Sub-chapter shall prevent the direct assessment
of the principal or the recovery of any sum payable under this Code from the principal.
Clause 167 seeks to provide that the Assessing Officer shall have the same remedy
against all property of any kind vested in any representative-assessee as he would have
against the property of the principal.

345
Clause 168 relates to assessment in the event of business reorganisation and provides
the manner in which the predecessor and the successor in a business reorganisation shall be
assessed.
The said clause provides that the predecessor shall be assessed in respect of the
income for the period beginning with the first day of the financial year and ending on the day
immediately preceding the date of business reorganisation and the successor shall be assessed
in respect of the income for the period beginning with the date of business reorganisation
and ending on the last day of the financial year.
The said clause further provides that any proceeding taken against the predecessor
shall be deemed to have been taken against the successor and may be continued against the
successor from the stage at which it stood on the date of the business reorganisation.
Clause 169 relates to assessment of a Hindu undivided family after its partition and
provides that such a family shall be deemed to continue as such except where a finding of
partition has been given under this clause in respect of the Hindu undivided family.
The said clause provides that the Assessing Officer, after making necessary inquiries,
shall record a finding as to whether there has been a total, or partial, partition of the joint
family property and, if there has been such a partition, the date on which it has taken place.
The clause clarifies that no claim of partial partition of a family shall be inquired into or
recognised as a partition. Further, all provisions of the Code as they applied to the Hindu
undivided family prior to its total partition, shall continue to apply till the date on which the
total partition of such family has taken place.
The clause further provides that in case of a partial partition of a Hindu undivided
family, the family shall continue to be assessed under this Code as if no partial partition had
taken place and the liability of that family or its members shall remain the same.
The clause also seeks to define the terms “partition” and “partial partition”.
Clause 170 relates to assessment of the income of a non-resident from the occasional
business of operation of ships and provides that such assessment shall be made in accordance
with the provisions contained therein.
The said clause, inter alia, provides that the master of a ship belonging to, or chartered
by, a non-resident shall, before the departure of the ship, furnish to the Assessing Officer a
return of the full amount of transportation charges accrued to, or received by, the owner or
charterer, since the last arrival of the ship in that port.
The clause further provides that on receipt of the return, the Assessing Officer shall
assess the income in accordance with serial number 7 of the Table under paragraph 1 of the
Fourteenth Schedule and the tax determined shall be payable by the master of the ship or any
other person authorised by him. Further, a port clearance shall be granted to the ship after the
tax has been duly paid or satisfactory arrangements have been made for the payment.
The clause also provides that the assessment of the income for the relevant financial
year of the owner, or charterer, of the ship can also be made, at his option, in accordance with
the other provisions of the Code.
Clause 171 seeks to provide that the tax bases of an individual for part of a financial
year may be chargeable to tax in that financial year, if it appears to the Assessing Officer that
the individual may leave India during or shortly after the expiry of the financial year and has
no intention of returning to India.
The said clause further provides that the Assessing Officer may require the individual
to furnish the return of tax bases for the purposes of assessment and may estimate the tax
bases of the individual for part of a financial year if it cannot be readily determined in
accordance with the Code. Further, the tax payable on the tax bases computed under this
clause shall be in addition to the tax, if any, payable under any other provision of the Code.

346
Clause 172  provides that where it appears to the Assessing Officer that an
unincorporated body formed for a particular event or purpose in a financial year is likely to be
dissolved in the financial year or shortly thereafter, then he may charge to tax in that financial
year the tax bases of the unincorporated body for the period beginning from the first day of
the financial year to the likely date of its dissolution. Further, the provisions of clause 171
shall apply to any proceeding under this clause as they apply in the case of a person leaving
India.
Clause 173 provides that where it appears to the Assessing Officer that any person is
likely to charge, sell, transfer, dispose of or otherwise part with any of his assets, in any
financial year, with a view to avoiding payment of any liability under this Code, then he may
charge to tax in that financial year the tax bases of such person for the period beginning from
the first day of the financial year to the date when the Assessing Officer commences
proceedings under this clause. Further, the provisions of clause 171 shall apply to any
proceeding under this clause as they apply in the case of a person leaving India.
Clause 174 relates to discontinued business and provides that where any business is
discontinued in any financial year, the Assessing Officer may charge to tax in that financial
year the tax bases of such business for the period beginning from the first day of the financial
year to the date on which the business has been discontinued.
The said clause further provides that any person discontinuing any business shall
give notice of the discontinuance to the Assessing Officer within a period of fifteen days
from such discontinuance.
The clause also provides that the Assessing Officer may require the person whose
business has been discontinued to furnish the return of tax bases and, upon receipt of the
return or after the expiry of the notice period to file such return, he shall proceed to make the
assessment in accordance with the provisions of the Code. Further, the tax payable on the tax
bases computed under this clause shall be in addition to the tax, if any, payable under any
other provision of the Code.
Clause 175 relates to assessment of an unincorporated body in case of change in its
constitution and provides that the Assessing Officer shall, in such a case, make a single
assessment in respect of the entire financial year in which the change has occurred. A
change is said to have taken place if existing participants move out or new participants are
admitted or all the participants continue with a change in their respective shares or in the
shares of some of them.
The said clause further provides that its provisions shall not apply if the change in
constitution is on account of the death of a participant or the retirement of all the participants.
Clause 176 seeks to provide that the Assessing Officer shall make separate assessments
on any two unincorporated bodies, if—
(a) one unincorporated body succeeds another unincorporated body; and
(b) the succession is by virtue of retirement of all participants in the
unincorporated body or death of any of the participants.
The said clause also provides that the separate assessments shall be made in
accordance with the provisions of clause 168 as if the unincorporated body, succeeding the
other unincorporated body, is the successor and the unincorporated body being succeeded
is the predecessor.
Clause 177 provides that the Assessing Officer shall assess every return filed by a
deductor or collector as if it were a return of tax bases. Further, where a person has failed to
file such return, the Assessing Officer shall issue a notice to the person requiring him to
furnish the return within the time specified therein. All the other provisions of this Code shall
apply as if the return referred to herein were a return of tax bases.

347
Clause 178 relates to appeals before the Commissioner (Appeals) and provides that
an assessee may prefer an appeal to the Commissioner (Appeals) where he is aggrieved by
an order passed by any income-tax authority below the rank of the Commissioner as specified
in the Twenty-first Schedule to the Code or by an intimation issued under clause 149.
The said clause further provides that the assessee may also prefer an appeal where an
application filed by him under clause 161 has not been disposed of by the Assessing Officer
within a period of six months from the date of filing of the application or where he is required
to bear the liability in respect of the tax deductible on the income payable to a non-resident
under any agreement or other arrangement and he claims that no tax was deductible by him
on such income and he has deposited the tax to the credit of the Central Government.
Clause 179  provides the manner in which appeals are to be preferred before the
Commissioner (Appeals). The appeal by an assessee shall be preferred within the specified
time limit and should be in the prescribed form and accompanied by the prescribed fee.
The clause further provides that the Commissioner (Appeals) may admit an appeal
after the expiry of the specified time if he is satisfied that the appellant had sufficient cause
for not preferring it within that time and the delay in preferring the appeal does not exceed a
period of one year.
Clause 180 relates to the procedure to be followed in case of an appeal before the
Commissioner (Appeals). It, inter alia, provides that the Commissioner (Appeals) may, before
disposing of any appeal, make such inquiry as he thinks fit or direct the Assessing Officer to
do so. He may also allow the appellant to go into any new ground of appeal if he is satisfied
that the omission was not wilful or unreasonable.
Clause 181  relates to the powers of the Commissioner (Appeals) and, inter alia,
provides that, in case of an appeal before him, he shall have the power to confirm, reduce,
enhance or annul an assessment or to confirm or cancel a penalty or enhance or reduce it.
The said clause further provides that the Commissioner (Appeals) may consider and
decide any matter which was not considered by the Assessing Officer.
Clause 182 relates to the constitution of the Appellate Tribunal and provides that the
Central Government shall constitute an Appellate Tribunal consisting of a President and as
many judicial and accountant members, as it thinks fit, to exercise the powers and discharge
the functions conferred on the Appellate Tribunal by this Code.
The said clause also provides as to who shall be eligible to be the President, a Vice-
president, a judicial member or an accountant member of the Appellate Tribunal.
Clause 183 seeks to provide that an assessee may prefer an appeal to the Appellate
Tribunal if he is aggrieved by any of the orders specified therein. Similarly, the Commissioner
may, if he is not satisfied with the order passed by the Commissioner (Appeals), direct the
Assessing Officer to prefer an appeal to the Appellate Tribunal against such order.
The said clause further provides that no appeal shall lie to the Appellate Tribunal
against the order of the Commissioner (Appeals) or Commissioner in the case of a public
sector company.
The clause also provides that every appeal shall be preferred within the time period
specified therein and allows the respondent to file a memorandum of cross-objection against
any part of the order of the Commissioner (Appeals). The Appellate Tribunal may admit an
appeal, or a memorandum of cross-objection, after the expiry of the period specified if it is
satisfied that the appellant had sufficient cause for not preferring it within that time and the
delay in filing the appeal does not exceed a period of one year.

348
Clause 184 relates to an order of stay of demand by the Appellate Tribunal. The said
clause inter alia provides that the Tribunal may grant a stay of demand to the assessee for
a period of one hundred and eighty days in the first instance and extended up to a maximum
period of three hundred and sixty-five days and endeavour to dispose of the appeal in such
time.
Clause 185 deals with the orders of the Appellate Tribunal and, inter alia, provides
that the Tribunal may, after hearing both parties, pass such orders as it thinks fit. It shall also
have the power to rectify any mistake apparent on the face of the record within the period of
four years from the date of such order and, accordingly, amend any order passed by it.
Clause 186 deals with constitution of Benches and procedure of the Appellate Tribunal.
The said clause seeks to provide that the powers and functions of the Tribunal may be exercised
and discharged by its Benches constituted by the President from among the members. Each
Bench shall consist of one judicial member and one accountant member. The President may
constitute a Special Bench consisting of three or more members, one of whom shall necessarily
be a judicial member and one an accountant member. If on any point the members of a Bench
differ in opinion, it shall be decided according to the opinion of the majority.
The said clause further provides that any proceeding before the Appellate Tribunal
shall be deemed to be a judicial proceeding within the meaning of section 192 and section 228
and for the purpose of section 196 of the Indian Penal Code. The Appellate Tribunal shall
also have powers to regulate its own procedure and procedure of Benches.
Clause 187 deals with appeals to the High Court and seeks to provide that an appeal
shall lie to the High Court from every order passed in appeal by the Appellate Tribunal, if the
High Court is satisfied that the case involves a substantial question of law.
The said clause further provides that the Chief Commissioner or the Commissioner or
an assessee may file an appeal to the High Court within the specified period and in the
specified form. The High Court may admit an appeal after the expiry of the specified period if
it is satisfied that there was sufficient cause for not filing the appeal within that period.
The said clause also provides that the High Court may exercise its power to hear the
appeal on any other substantial question of law not formulated by it, if it is satisfied that the
case involves such question of law, and shall decide the question of law so formulated and
deliver such judgment as it deems fit. Effect to such order shall be given by the Assessing
Officer on the basis of a certified copy of the judgment.
The said clause also provides that the provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908,
relating to appeals to the High Court shall apply in the case of appeals under this clause.
Clause 188 provides that an appeal filed before the High Court to be heard by a Bench
of not less than two Judges of the High Court and shall be decided in accordance with the
opinion of such Judges or of the majority of such Judges.
Clause 189 deals with appeals before the Supreme Court and provides that an appeal
shall lie to the Supreme Court from any judgment of the High Court delivered under clause
187 which the High Court certifities to be a fit case for appeal to the Supreme Court.
Clause 190 relates to hearing before the Supreme Court and seeks to provide that the
provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, relating to appeals to the Supreme Court
shall apply in the case of appeals under section 189 as they apply in the case of appeals from
decrees of a High Court.
The said clause also provides that where the judgment of the High Court is varied or
reversed in the appeal, effect shall be given to the order of the Supreme Court in the manner
provided in section 187.
Clause 191 deals with revision of orders prejudicial to revenue and, inter alia, seeks
to provide that the Commissioner may revise any order passed by any income-tax authority
subordinate to him after examining all available records, hearing the assessee and making

349
such inquiries as he considers necessary if he is satisfied that the order sought to be revised
is erroneous in so far as it is prejudicial to the interests of the revenue.
The said clause also provides that the revision order may have the effect of enhancing
or modifying the assessment but shall not be an order cancelling the assessment and directing
a fresh assessment. Further, the power of the Commissioner for revising an order shall not
extend to certain orders specified therein. Besides, no order shall be made after the expiry of
a period of two years from the end of the financial year in which the order sought to be
revised was passed.
The said clause also provides that an order passed by an income-tax authority shall be
deemed to be erroneous in so far as it is prejudicial to the interests of the revenue, if it falls in
any of the specified categories of orders. It also provides that an order shall not be considered
to be erroneous in so far as it is prejudicial to the interests of the revenue if the order has been
made by holding a view sustainable in law and the Commissioner is not in agreement due to
the existence of another view sustainable in law.
The clause also defines the expression ‘‘record’’.
Clause 192 seeks to provide that the Commissioner may revise any order passed by
an income-tax authority subordinate to him, other than an order to which clause 191 applies,
after examining all available records. However, such revision order shall not be prejudicial to
the assessee.
The said clause further provides that the power of the Commissioner for revising an
order shall not extend to such orders as specified therein.
This clause also provides that the assessee should make an application for revision of
any order within the specified time, accompanied by the prescribed fee. Further, the revision
order shall not be passed after the expiry of a period of one year from the end of the financial
year in which such application is made or a period of one year from the date of the order
sought to be revised if the Commissioner revises the order suo motu.
Chapter XIII of the Code deals with the provisions relating to collection and recovery.
Part A of this Chapter deals with deduction at source.
Clause 193 relates to deduction or collection of tax at source or advance payment. The
clause seeks to provide that the tax on any income shall be payable by deduction or collection
at source or by advance payment, as the case may be, in accordance with the provisions of
this Chapter, notwithstanding that the regular assessment in respect of such income is to be
made in a later financial year.
Sub-clause (2) of the said clause is an overriding provision stipulating that nothing in
this clause shall prejudice the charge of tax on such income under the provisions of sub-
clause (2) of clause 2.
Clause 194 relating to direct payment seeks to provide that the tax on income has to be
paid directly by the person if there is no provision under this Chapter for deduction or
collection of income-tax at the time of payment or income-tax has not been deducted or
collected in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter.
Sub-clause (2) of the said clause provides that any person who is required to deduct or
collect any sum in accordance with the provisions of the Code does not deduct or collect, or
after so deducting or collecting fails to pay the whole or any part of the tax required to be
collected or deducted under the Code, and where the assessee has also failed to pay such tax
directly, then, such person shall, without prejudice to any other consequences which he may
incur, be deemed to be an assessee in default in respect of such tax.
Clause 195 relating to liability to deduct tax at source seeks to provide that any person
responsible for making a specified payment shall, at the time of payment, deduct income-tax
therefrom at the appropriate rate. The clause further provides that the specified payment and

350
the appropriate rate shall be such as are listed in the Third Schedule in the case of a resident
deductee and in Fourth Schedule in the case of a non-resident deductee.
The said clause further provides that in the case of a non-resident deductee, where a
rate in respect of such specified payment has been provided in the relevant agreement
entered into by the Central Government under clause 291, the appropriate rate shall be lower
of the Scheduled rate or the rate provided in such agreement.
The said clause also provides that if the deductee is required to obtain permanent
account number and does not furnish such number to the deductor, deduction of tax at
source in such case shall be at the rate of twenty per cent. or at the rate specified in the said
clause, whichever is higher.
Clause 196 relating to payment of income and deduction of tax, inter alia, provides
that deduction at source shall have to be made at the earliest point of the making of payment
in cash, by issue of a cheque or draft, by credit to any account, whether called suspense
account or by any other name, or by any other prescribed mode.
The clause further provides that where the payment is wholly or partly in kind, the
deductor should ensure the payment of tax deductible at source before making the payment.
It is further provided that where the payment is to be taxed under the head “Income from
employment” or is in nature of interest, the deductor can adjust the amount of deduction to
offset any deficiency or excess of previous deduction or non-deduction during the financial
year. The said clause further enjoins the deductor to take into account any other income from
employment and tax deducted thereon of the deductee from any other employer and also the
tax relief for arrears or advance receipts.
The said clause also provides that in a case where the tax payable on any payment is
to be borne by the deductor in pursuance of an agreement or arrangement, the payment has
to be grossed up to such amount as would, after deduction of tax thereon at the appropriate
rate, be equal to the net amount payable under such agreement or arrangement.
Clause 197 seeks to empower the Assessing Officer to give a certificate for lower or no
deduction of tax to the deductee where the deductee is a resident or to the deductor where the
deductee is a non-resident, if the Assessing Officer is satisfied that the total income of the
deductee justifies deduction of tax at a lower or nil rate. Accordingly, the clause provides that
deduction shall be made in accordance with the certificate, until such certificate is cancelled by
the Assessing Officer or the expiry of the validity of the certificate, whichever is earlier.
Clause 198 relating to obligations of deductor, seeks to provide that every deductor
shall pay the sum deducted to the credit of the Central Government within the prescribed
time and manner, furnish a certificate to the deductee and also deliver a return of tax deduction
in the manner provided in clause 199.
Clause 199 relates to payments to resident without deduction of tax. The said clause
seeks to provide that every deductor, being a financial institution or cooperative society or
any other notified deductor, shall deliver, or cause to be delivered, a return in respect of
payment of interest to residents without deduction of tax. The clause further empowers the
Board inter alia to provide for the period of such return, its form, manner of verification, time
in which it is to be filed, medium of filing.
Clause 200 seeks to provide for the cases in which no deduction of tax shall be made. It,
inter alia, provides that in the case of resident deductee, no deduction of tax shall be made if —
(a) any payment, other than salary, is made by an individual or a Hindu undivided
family who is not required to get its accounts audited for the financial year immediately
preceding the financial year in which the payment is made;
(b) any interest payable on any security,—
(i) of the Central Government or a State Government; or
(ii) issued by a company, if such security is in dematerialized form and is
listed on a recognised stock exchange in India;

351
(c) any interest on certain debenture payable to an individual, if the aggregate
amount payable during the financial year does not exceed five thousand rupees;
(d) any interest on certain time deposits with a bank or a housing-finance public
company, if the aggregate amount payable by the branch of the bank or company
during the financial year, does not exceed ten thousand rupees;
(e) any interest payable to any banking company, co-operative bank, financial
corporation established by or under a Central or State or Provincial Act, insurer, mutual
fund or any notified institution, association or body;
(f) any interest payable by a firm to a partner of the firm;
(g) any amount payable on maturity, or redemption, of a zero coupon bond;
(h) any payment for carriage of goods by road transport if the payee furnishes
his Permanent Account Number to the payer;
(i) any payment to a contractor in respect of works contract, service contract,
advertising, broadcasting and telecasting, supply of labour for carrying out any works,
or service, contract or carriage of goods or passengers by any mode of transport, other
than by railways, if —
(i) the amount of any payment during the financial year does not exceed
thirty thousand rupees; and
(ii) the aggregate amount of the payments during the financial year does
not exceed seventy-five thousand rupees;
(j) any payment of rent, if the aggregate amount of the payments during the
financial year does not exceed one lakh eighty thousand rupees;
(k) any payment of compensation on compulsory acquisition of immovable
property, if the aggregate amount of the payments during the financial year does not
exceed two lakh rupees;
Further, in the case of a non-resident deductee, being a foreign institutional investor,
deduction shall not be made on any payment made to it as a consideration for sale of
securities listed on a recognised stock exchange.
Clause 201 relating to credit for tax deducted, seeks to provide that for the purposes
of computing total income of a deductee, the sum deducted on payments made to him shall
be deemed to be his income received. Further the clause seeks to provide that the sums
which have been deducted and paid to the Central Government, shall be treated as a payment
of tax on behalf of the deductee. The clause further seeks to empower the Board to prescribe
the procedure for giving credit to the deductee, the financial year for which such credit may
be given and any other matter connected therewith.
Clause 202,  seeks to inter alia  provide that any person, being a seller, lessor or
licensor, who is responsible for collecting any amount on account of—
(a) sale of alcoholic liquor for human consumption, tendu leaves, timber obtained
under a forest lease or otherwise, any other forest produce not being timber or tendu
leaves, or scrap; or
(b) granting of lease or licence or contract or transfer of any right or interest,
either in whole or in part, for a parking lot or toll plaza or for mining or quarrying,
shall collect three per cent. of such sum as income-tax.
The said clause further provides that the collection should be made at the earliest of
the time when the the payment is received in cash, by way of a cheque or draft, by debit to
any account, whether called “suspense account” or by any other name or by any other

352
prescribed mode. It is further provided that the sum so collected has to be paid to the credit
of the Central Government within prescribed time and manner. The person responsible for
collecting any amount is also required to furnish to the buyer, lessee or licensee, a certificate
of tax collection within prescribed time, and to file a return of tax collected at source in the
form and manner as prescribed by the Board.
Clause 203 relating to credit for tax collected seeks to provide that all sums collected
from a collectee and paid to the credit of the Central Government shall be deemed to be a
payment of tax on behalf of the person from whom such amount has been collected. The
clause further seeks to empower the Board to prescribe the procedure for giving credit to the
collectee, the financial year for which such credit may be given and any other matter connected
therewith.
Clause 204 relates to interpretations under the Sub-chapter A and B. For this purpose
the said clause, inter alia, defines the terms “broadcasting and telecasting”, “professional
or technical services”, “service contract”, “work”, “buyer”, “lessee”, “licensee”, “lessor”,
“licensor”, “scrap” and “seller”.
Clause 205 relates to the liability to pay advance tax. The said clause seeks to provide
that every person shall be liable to pay advance-tax during any financial year if the amount
of advance income-tax payable by him exceeds ten thousand rupees. For ascertaining the
liability to pay advance-tax, the tax on estimated total income is reduced by the tax deductible
or collectible at source and the amount of any tax credit available under clause 207.
The said clause further provides that persons other than companies are liable to pay
advance income-tax, in three instalments i.e. on or before 15th September, 15th December and
15th March. Amount payable by these three dates should amount to 30 per cent., 60 per cent.
and 100 per cent of the advance-tax payable. Similarly for a company, there are four instalments,
the dates being on or before 15th June, 15th September, 15th December and 15th March. The
corresponding percentages in the case of a company are 15 per cent., 45 per cent, 75 per cent
and 100 per cent. It is further provided that any amount of advance income-tax paid after
15th March but before the expiry of the financial year shall be treated as advance income-tax
paid during the financial year.
The said clause also empowers the Assessing Officer to issue an order to an assessee
(not after last date of February of the financial year) to pay advance income-tax in such
instalments as specified in the order, if in the opinion of the Officer, the assessee is liable to
pay such amounts as advance income-tax. However, the assessee may still pay the advance
tax in accordance with his estimation after filing such estimation to the assessing officer.
Clause 206  seeks to provide that the Assessing Officer shall grant relief in the
prescribed manner to a person if he is in receipt in any financial year of any arrears, or
advance, of salary or family pension relating to any other financial year. An application is
required to be made to avail of such relief. Such relief, however, would not be allowed in
respect of any compensation received towards retrenchment, voluntary retirement or
termination of service.
Clause 207 relates to foreign tax credit allowable to an assessee, being a resident in
India in any financial year on income which is taxed in India as well as outside India.
The said clause further provides that where the assessee is required to pay Indian
income-tax in respect of an income which has been taxed in any specified territory or other
country with which India has an agreement under clause 291, the foreign tax credit shall be
allowed in accordance with the agreement entered into with such specified territory or country.
Where there is no such agreement, the tax credit shall be determined at the Indian rate of tax
or the rate of tax of the other country, whichever is lower. The credit, in either case shall not

353
exceed the Indian income-tax payable in respect of income which is taxed outside India and
the Indian income-tax payable on total income of the assessee.
Clause 208 of the Bill seeks to provide that wealth-tax referred to in clause 112 shall be
payable by the due date of filing of the return of tax-bases.
Clause 209 relates to interest for default in furnishing return of tax-bases and it, inter
alia, provides that for default in furnishing return of tax bases, the assessee shall be liable to
pay simple interest at the rate of one per cent. per month, in specified circumstances.
This clause further provides the method of computation of the period for which the
interest shall be payable, the amount on which the interest shall be chargeable etc. The
interest shall be increased or reduced, in accordance with the variation in the amount of tax
on which interest was payable under this clause.
Clause 210 relates to interest for default in payment of advance income-tax. The
circumstances specified in which this interest is chargeable are where the assessee is liable
to pay advance income-tax and has failed to pay such tax, or where the advance income-tax
paid by such assessee is less than ninety per cent. of the assessed tax.
This clause further provides the method of computation of the period for, and the
amount on, which the interest is chargeable. The interest is payable at the rate of one per
cent. per month. The interest shall be increased or reduced, in accordance with the variation
in the amount of tax on which interest was payable under this clause.
Clause 211 relates to interest for deferment of advance income-tax. The clause seeks
to provide that where an assessee who is liable to pay advance income-tax has failed to pay
such tax or has paid lesser advance tax before the due dates as specified, he shall be liable to
pay simple interest at the rate of one per cent. per month for a period of three months.
The said clause also specifies the manner in which the interest has to be calculated.
The interest shall not be payable on any shortfall in the advance income-tax payable on
account of under-estimation or failure to estimate the amount of capital gains and income of
the nature listed at serial number 4 in the Table in Part III of the First Schedule.
Clause 212 relating to interest on excess refund, seeks to provide that an assessee
shall be liable to pay simple interest at the rate of one-half per cent. per month on the excess
amount of refund granted to him in specified circumstances and for the period as mentioned
in this clause.
Clause 213 relating to interest payable on demand raised seeks to provide that an
assessee shall be liable to pay simple interest at the rate of one per cent. per month for the
delay in payment of any demand after the expiry of the notice period for such payment.
Clause 214 relates to interest for failure to deduct or pay tax. The said clause seeks to
provide that where any person who is required to deduct or collect any tax in accordance
with the provisions of the Code, does not deduct or collect the whole or any part of the tax,
or after deduction or collection fails to pay the tax, he shall be liable to pay simple interest —
(a) at the rate of one per cent. per month on the amount of such tax for the period
from the date on which such tax was deductible or collectible to the date on which such
tax is deducted or collected, as the case may be; and
(b) at the rate of one and one-half per cent. per month on the amount of such tax
for the period from the date on which such tax was deducted or collected, as the case
may be, to the date on which such tax is paid.
Clause 215, inter alia, provides that an assessee shall be entitled to a refund of the
excess of any amount paid by him for any financial year over the amount with which he is
liable under the Code. However, where an assessment is set aside or cancelled or an order of

354
fresh assessment is directed to be made in an appeal, etc., he shall be entitled to the refund
only on the making of the fresh assessment.
Clause 216  relates to interest on refunds. The said clause seeks to provide that
assessee shall be entitled to receive simple interest at the rate of one-half per cent. per month
on any amount refundable to him under clause 215 in respect of any financial year for the
period specified in the said clause.
The said clause further provides that no interest shall be payable if the amount of
refund is less than ten per cent. of the tax determined under clause 149 or on regular
assessment. The specified period shall not include the period of delay attributable to the
assessee.
The said clause also provides that an assessee shall be entitled to receive simple
interest at the rate of one-half per cent. per month on the amount of interest receivable by him
under this clause for the period from the date of grant of refund to the date of actual payment
of such interest, if such interest is not paid to him along with the refund.
Clause 217 seeks to provide for persons who shall be entitled to claim refund in
certain special cases like on account of death, incapacity, insolvency, liquidation, etc., of the
person entitled to claim the refund in first place.
Clause 218 relating to recovery by Assessing Officer seeks to provide that any amount
specified as payable in a notice of demand, otherwise than by way of advance tax, shall be
paid within thirty days of the service of the notice, to the credit of the Central Government.
This period, however, can be reduced with the previous approval of the Joint Commissioner
if the Assessing Officer has reason to believe that full period shall be detrimental to the
interest of revenue.
The said clause further provides that the Assessing Officer can extend the time for
payment, or allow payment by instalments during the pendency of appeal with the
Commissioner (Appeals) on such conditions as he thinks fit. On default in payment of
instalments, the assessee shall be deemed to be an assessee in default in respect of the
whole of the amount outstanding. The recovery in such cases may be made by any of the
modes provided in clause 220.
The said clause also provides that the assessing officer shall cease to exercise power
for recovery of any amount after the Tax Recovery Officer is vested with the powers to
recover the tax arrear.
Clause 219 relating to recovery by Tax Recovery Officer seeks to provide that such
officer may draw up under his signature a statement of tax arrears (certificate) and shall
proceed to recover from the assessee the amount specified in the certificate by one, or more,
of the modes referred to in clause 220 or in the Fifth Schedule.
Clause 220 seeks inter alia to provide for the modes of recovery for the Assessing
Officer or the Tax Recovery Officer. The recovery of tax arrears can be made through employer,
debtor or by applying to the court which has custody over the money belonging to the
assessee.
Clause 221, inter alia, seeks to provide as to who shall be the Tax Recovery Officer
competent to take action under clause 219. Such Tax Recovery Officer shall be the one within
whose jurisdiction the assessee carries on his business or the principal place of the business
of the assessee is situate or the assessee resides or any movable or immovable property of
the assessee is situate or who has been assigned jurisdiction under clause 130.
The said clause also provides that if the Tax Recovery Officer competent to take action
under clause 219 is not able to recover the tax arrears, he may send a certificate to the other
Tax Recovery Officer in whose jurisdiction the assessee resides or has property and then
such Tax Recovery Officer shall assume jurisdiction for recovery of tax arrears.

355
Clause 222 seeks to provide that the amount of tax arrears due from a non-resident
may be recovered from any asset of the non-resident, wherever located or from any amount
payable by any person to the non-resident.
Clause 223  relates to recovery in the case of a company in liquidation. The said
clause, inter alia, provides that the liquidator shall inform the concerned Assessing Officer
of his appointment within a period of thirty days and thereafter, the Assessing Officer shall
intimate to the liquidator, within a period of three months the amount sufficient to provide for
any tax arrears or any amount which is likely to become payable thereafter by the company.
The liquidator shall not part with any of the assets of the company, or the properties, in his
custody until he has been intimated by the Assessing Officer. The amount so intimated shall
be the first charge on the assets of the company remaining after payment of the workmen’s
dues and debts due to secured creditors to the extent specified.
Clause 224 relating to liability of manager of a company, seeks to provide that every
person being a manager at any time during the financial year shall be jointly and severally
liable for the payment of any amount due under the Code in respect of the company for the
financial year, if the amount cannot be recovered from the company. These provisions shall
not apply, if the manager proves that non-recovery cannot be attributed to any neglect,
misfeasance or breach of duty on his part in relation to the affairs of the company. The
provisions of this section shall prevail over anything to the contrary contained in the
Companies Act, 1956.
Clause 225 relates to joint and several liability of participants. It seeks to hold every
person, being a participant in an unincorporated body at any time during the financial year,
or the representative assessee of the deceased participant, jointly and severally liable, along
with the unincorporated body, for payment of any amount payable by the unincorporated
body under the Code.
The said clause further provides that in case of a limited liability partnership, these
provisions shall not apply, if the partner proves that non-recovery cannot be attributed to
any neglect, misfeasance or breach of duty on his part in relation to the affairs of the
partnership.
Clause 226 seeks to provide that if the recovery of tax in any area has been entrusted
to a State Government under clause (1) of article 258 of the Constitution, the State Government
may direct that the recovery shall be made in the same manner and by the same person as the
recovery of municipal tax or local rate.
Clause 227 relates to recovery of tax in pursuance of agreements with foreign countries
or specified territory and inter alia  provides for procedure to be followed by the Board and
the Tax Recovery Officer for recovery of tax in this regard.
Clause 228 relating to tax clearance certificate in certain cases, seeks to provide that
no person shall leave the territory of India unless he furnishes to the notified authority an
undertaking to the effect that he has made satisfactory arrangement for discharging his tax
liability, if any, in respect of any income or wealth liable to tax in India. Such person shall be
one who is not domiciled in India, who has come to India in connection with a business or
employment, and who has income derived from any source in India.
The said clause further provides that every person, who is domiciled in India at the
time of his departure from India, shall furnish to the notified authority prescribed particulars
and obtain a certificate that he has no liability, if in the opinion of the Assessing Officer it is
necessary to do so. The Central Government may notify the classes of persons to whom the
above provisions shall not apply.
The said clause also provides that the owner or charterer of any ship, or aircraft, shall
be personally liable (and also deemed to be an assessee in default in respect of the liability)
to pay the whole, or any part, of the amount payable under the Code by any person required
to obtain a no objection certificate if the person leaves India without obtaining the certificate.

356
Clause 229 relates to recovery by suit not with any other law. The said clause seeks to
provide that the several modes of recovery specified in this Chapter shall not affect in any
way any other law for the time being in force relating to the recovery of debts due to
Government, or the right of the Government to institute a suit for the recovery of the tax
arrears from the assessee.
Clause 230 deals with penalty for under-reporting of tax bases. It provides that a
person shall be liable to a penalty, if he has under reported the tax bases for any financial
year, of a sum which shall not be less than, but which shall not exceed two times, the amount
of tax payable in respect of the amount of tax bases under reported for the financial year.
The said clause provides that the amount of tax bases under reported shall be the
aggregate amount of the addition or disallowance made by the Assessing Officer, the
Commissioner or the Commissioner (Appeals), as the case may be. It lists the circumstances
under which a person shall be considered to have under reported the tax bases as well as the
circumstances under which he shall not be so considered. The said clause, inter alia, provides
that no addition or disallowance shall form the basis for imposition of penalty, if it has been
the basis of imposition of penalty in the case of the person for the same or any other financial
year.
The said clause also provides that the penalty shall be imposed by the Assessing
Officer, Commissioner or Commissioner (Appeals), as the case may be.
Clause 231  relates to penalty where search has been initiated.  It provides that  a
person shall be liable to a penalty in respect of the undisclosed tax bases for the specified
financial year, if a search and seizure has been conducted under clause 135 in his case. Such
penalty shall be imposed  by the Assessing Officer. It also provides the quantum of penalty
imposable in such case.
The said clause defines the terms “undisclosed tax bases” and “specified financial
year”.
Clause 232 relates to penalty for other defaults. It provides that a person shall be
liable to a penalty if he has, without reasonable cause, committed the defaults that have been
listed therein. The said clause also provides the quantum of penalty imposable for different
defaults.
Clause 233 deals with the procedure for imposition of penalties. It provides that the
specified income-tax authority shall issue a notice within the stipulated time period to any
assessee requiring him to show cause why the penalty should not be imposed on him. It
further provides that no order imposing a penalty under this Chapter shall be made unless
the assessee has been given an opportunity of being heard. The said clause also lays down
the procedure for approval of an order imposing penalty by the Joint Commissioner.
Clause 234 provides the time limits for passing the penalty orders. It also provides
that in computing such period of limitation, certain specified time periods shall be excluded.
Clause 235 provides that the provisions of Chapter XV shall be in addition to, and not
in derogation of, the provisions of any other law for the time being in force relating to
prosecution for offences.
 Clause 236 deals with contravention of any restraint order. It provides that whoever
contravenes any restraint order referred to in sub-clause (7) of clause 135 shall be punishable
with rigorous imprisonment and with fine. The said clause also provides the term and quantum
of such punishment.
 Clause 237 provides that if a person who is required to afford the authorised officer
the necessary facility to inspect the books of account or other documents under item (d) of

357
sub- clause (2) of clause 135, fails to afford such facility, he shall be punishable with rigorous
imprisonment and with fine. The said clause also provides the term and quantum of such
punishment.
 Clause 238 deals with removal, concealment, transfer or delivery of property to thwart
tax recovery. It provides that whoever fraudulently removes, conceals, transfers or delivers
to any person, any property or any interest therein, with the intention of preventing such
property or interest therein from being taken in execution of a certificate under the provisions
of the Fifth Schedule shall be punishable with rigorous imprisonment and with fine. The said
clause also provides the term and quantum of such punishment.
Clause 239 provides that if a person fails to give information as required by sub-
clause (1) of clause 223 or fails to set aside the amount as required by sub-clause (3) of that
clause or parts with any of the assets of the company or the properties in his custody in
contravention of the provisions of the said sub-clause (3), he shall be punishable with
rigorous imprisonment and with fine. The said clause provides the term and quantum of such
punishment. It also provides that no person shall be punishable for any such failure to pay
tax deducted or collected, if he proves that there was reasonable cause for the same.
Clause 240 deals with failure to pay the tax deducted or collected at source or to pay
the dividend or income distribution tax under the provisions of this Code. It provides that if
a person fails to pay such tax to the credit of the Central Government, he shall be punishable
with rigorous imprisonment and with fine. The said clause provides the term and quantum of
such punishment. It also provides that no person shall be punishable for any such failure, if
he proves that there was reasonable cause for the same.
 Clause 241 provides that if a person wilfully attempts in any manner to evade any tax,
penalty or interest chargeable or imposable under this Code, he shall be punishable with
rigorous imprisonment and with fine. It provides that such punishment shall be without
prejudice to any penalty that may be imposable on him under any other provision of this
Code. The said clause also provides for separate term and quantum of such punishment in
respect of a case where the amount sought to be evaded exceeds one lakh rupees and other
cases where it does not.
The said clause also provides that if a person wilfully attempts in any manner to evade
the payment of any tax, penalty or interest under this Code, he shall be punishable with
rigorous imprisonment and shall in the discretion of the court also be liable to fine. It provides
that such punishment shall be without prejudice to any penalty that may be imposable on
him under any other provision of this Code. The said clause provides the term of such
punishment.
The said clause defines the phrase “wilful attempt to evade”.
Clause 242 deals with failure to furnish return of tax bases. It provides that if a person
wilfully fails to furnish in due time the return of tax bases under sub-clause (1) of clause 144
or in response to a notice under clause 146 or clause 159, he shall be punishable with
rigorous imprisonment and with fine. The said clause also provides for separate term and
quantum of such punishment in respect of a case where the amount sought to be evaded
exceeds one lakh rupees and other cases where it does not.
The said clause also provides that a person shall not be so proceeded against for
failure to furnish in due time the return of tax bases under certain specified circumstances.
Clause 243 provides that if a person wilfully fails to produce, or cause to be produced,
the accounts and documents on or before the specified date as required by any notice
served on him under sub-clause (2) of clause 150, he shall be punishable with rigorous
imprisonment or with fine or with both. The said clause provides the term and quantum of
such punishment.
Clause 244 provides that if a person wilfully fails to comply with a direction issued to
him under sub-clause (1) of clause 151, he shall be punishable with rigorous imprisonment or
with fine or with both. The said clause provides the term and quantum of such punishment.

358
Clause 245 provides that if a person makes a statement in any verification under this
Code or under any rule made thereunder or delivers an account or statement which is false
and which he either knows or believes to be false, or does not believe to be true, he shall be
punishable with rigorous imprisonment and with fine. The said clause also provides for
separate term and quantum of such punishment in respect of a case where the amount
sought to be evaded exceeds one lakh rupees and other cases where it does not.
Clause 246 deals with wilful falsification of books of account or documents by any
person in order to enable any other person to evade any tax or interest or penalty chargeable
and imposable under this Code. It provides that such person shall be punishable with
rigorous imprisonment and with fine. The said clause also provides that for establishing the
charge under this clause, it shall not be necessary to prove that the other person has actually
evaded such tax, penalty or interest.
Clause 247 provides that if a person abets or induces in any manner another person to
make and deliver an account, statement or declaration relating to any tax bases chargeable to
tax which is false and which he either knows to be false or does not believe to be true or to
commit an offence under sub-clause (1) of clause 241, he shall be punishable with rigorous
imprisonment and with fine. The said clause also provides for separate term and quantum of
such punishment in respect of a case where the amount sought to be evaded exceeds one
lakh rupees and other cases where it does not.
Clause 248  deals with offences by companies. In respect of any such offence, it
provides that the company as well as every person who, at the time the offence was committed,
was in charge of and was responsible for the conduct of the business of the company shall
be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and
punished accordingly. However, the said clause also provides that any such person shall not
be so liable if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge or that he had
exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of the offence.
The said clause provides that where an offence under this Code has been committed
by a company and it is proved that the offence has been committed with the consent or
connivance of or is attributable to any neglect on the part of any director, manager, secretary
or other officer of the company, such person shall also be deemed to be guilty of that offence
and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.
The said clause also provides that where an offence under this Code has been
committed by a company and the punishment for such offence is imprisonment and fine,
then the company shall be punished with fine and every person referred to in the preceding
paragraphs shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished in accordance with the
provisions of this Code.
The said clause defines the terms “company” and “director”.
Clause 249 deals with proof of entries in records or documents.  It provides that
entries in the records or other documents which are in the custody of an income-tax authority
shall be admitted in evidence in any proceeding for the prosecution of any person for an
offence under this Chapter. The said clause further provides that the entries may be proved
by the production of the records or other documents (containing such entries) which are in
the custody of the income-tax authority or by the production of a copy of the entries certified
by that authority under its signature as true copy of the original entries.
Clause 250 deals with presumption as to assets, books of account, etc., in certain
cases. It provides that where during the course of any search made under clause 135, any
material has  been found in the possession or control of any person and such material  is
tendered by the prosecution in evidence against such person, or against such person and
the person referred to in clause 247 for an offence under this Code, the provisions of clause
311 shall accordingly apply in relation to such material.

359
The said clause also provides that where any  material taken into custody from the
possession or control of any person,  is delivered to the requisitioning officer under clause
136 and such  material  is tendered by the prosecution in evidence against such person, or
against such person and the person referred to in clause 247 for an offence under this Code,
the provisions of clause 311 shall accordingly apply in relation to such material.
Clause 251 relates to presumption as to culpable mental state.  It provides that in any
prosecution for any offence under this Code which requires a culpable mental state on the
part of the accused, the court shall presume the existence of such mental state. However, the
said clause also provides that it shall be a defence for the accused to prove the fact that he
had no such mental state with respect to the act charged as an offence in that prosecution.
The said clause provides that a fact is said to be proved only when the court believes
it to exist beyond reasonable doubt and not merely when its existence is established by a
preponderance of probability.
The said clause defines the term “culpable mental state”.
Clause 252, inter alia,  provides that no person shall be proceeded against for an
offence under clauses 236 to 247, except with the previous sanction of the Commissioner or
Commissioner (Appeals), as the case may be.
The said clause further provides that the Chief Commissioner may issue such
instructions or directions to such Commissioner or Commissioner (Appeals) as he may think
fit for institution of proceedings under this clause. It also provides that the Chief Commissioner
may compound any offence under this Chapter under the prescribed circumstances and for
the prescribed amount, either before or after the institution of proceedings. However, an
offence in relation to which a punishment has been awarded by a court shall not be
compounded.
Clause 253 deals with punishment for second and subsequent offences. It provides
that if any person convicted of an offence under clauses 240, 241, 242, 243, 245, 246 and 247
is again convicted of an offence under any of the said provisions, he shall be punishable for
the second and every subsequent offence with rigorous imprisonment and with fine. The
said clause provides the term of such punishment.
Clause 254 provides that any offence punishable under this Chapter shall be deemed
to be non-cognizable within the meaning of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973,
notwithstanding anything contained in that Code.
Clause 255 deals with disclosure of information by public servants. It provides that if
a public servant furnishes any information or produces any document in contravention of
the provisions of clause 142, he shall be punishable with imprisonment and with fine. It also
provides the term of such punishment.
The said clause provides that no prosecution shall be instituted under this clause
except with the previous sanction of the Central Government. It also provides that such
sanction may be accorded only after giving the public servant an opportunity of being
heard.
Chapter XVI of the Code deals with advanced rulings and disputes resolutions.
Clause 256 relates to the scope of ruling and dispute resolution available with the
Authority for Advance Rulings and Dispute Resolution. The said clause provides that an
applicant or an appellant may seek a ruling or, as the case may be, a resolution of dispute on
matters specified therein. The applicant or appellant, as the case may be, who may seek an
advance ruling could be a non-resident, a resident any class of residents as notified by the
Central Government a public sector company or a Commissioner.
Clause 257  relates to the constitution of the Authority for Advance Rulings and
Dispute Resolution. The said clause, inter alia, provides that the Central Government shall
constitute an Authority for Advance Rulings and Dispute Resolution for the purposes of

360
pronouncing an advance ruling and resolution of dispute and such Authority shall consist
of a Chairperson and such number of Vice-chairpersons and  legal and revenue members as
the Central Government may deem fit.
The said clause further provides that a Bench shall consist of the Chairperson or the
Vice-chairperson and one legal member and one revenue member. The principal Bench of the
Authority shall be located at Delhi and other Benches of the Authority shall be located at
such places as deemed fit by the Central Government.
Clause 258 relates to the procedure of the Authority in dealing with advance ruling
and, inter alia, provides that an applicant may make an application for seeking an advance
ruling in the prescribed form and accompanied by the prescribed fees.
The said clause further provides that the Authority may, after examining the application
and the records called for, either allow or reject the application by an order in writing. The
Authority shall not allow the application in the circumstances as specified therein.
The said clause also provides that where an application is allowed, the Authority shall
pronounce its advance ruling on the question specified in the application after examining all
relevant material and after hearing the applicant and the Commissioner.
Clause 259 seeks to provide that no income-tax authority, or the Appellate Tribunal,
shall proceed to decide any issue in respect of which an application has been made by a
person falling within the class of persons notified under clause 256.
Clause 260 provides that the advance ruling pronounced by the Authority shall be
binding only on the applicant in whose case, and in respect of the transaction in relation to
which, the ruling has been pronounced. It shall also be binding on the Commissioner, and the
income-tax authorities subordinate to him, in respect of the applicant and the said transaction.
The said clause further provides that the advance ruling shall not be binding if there is
a change in law, or fact, on the basis of which the advance ruling has been pronounced.
Clause 261 seeks to provide that the Authority may declare an advance ruling to be
void ab initio  if it finds that the ruling has been obtained by the applicant by fraud or
misrepresentation of facts and in such case, all the provisions of the Code shall apply to the
applicant as if such advance ruling had never been made.
Clause 262 relates to the procedure for dispute resolution. The said clause, inter alia,
provides that a public sector company or Commissioner may file an appeal against the orders
referred to in clause 256 for seeking resolution of a dispute and such appeal shall be preferred
within the specified period. Further, it allows the respondent to file a memorandum of cross-
objection against any part of the order of the Commissioner (Appeals).
The said clause also provides that the Authority may admit an appeal, or a memorandum
of cross-objection, after the expiry of the period specified in specified circumstances. The
clause further provides that the orders passed by the Authority shall be final and binding on
both the parties.
Clause 263 relates to an order of stay of demand by the Authority. The said clause
provides that the Authority may grant a stay of demand to the public sector company for a
period of one hundred and eighty days in the first instance and may extend such stay, on an
application being made by the public sector company, to a maximum of three hundred and
sixty-five days, if it is satisfied that the delay in disposing of the appeal is not attributable to
the company.
Clause 264 seeks to provide that the Authority shall have the power to rectify any
mistake apparent from the record and may, accordingly, amend any order passed by it under
clause 262. However, no such order shall be passed after a period of four years from the date
on which the order sought to be amended was made.

361
Clause 265 provides that the Authority shall have all the powers of a civil court under
the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 as are referred to in clause 134 of this Code and shall be
deemed to be a civil court for the purposes of section 195 of the Code of Criminal Procedure,
1973.
The said clause further provides that every proceeding before the Authority shall be
deemed to be a judicial proceeding within the meaning of sections 193 and 228 of the Indian
Penal Code, and for the purposes of section 196 of the said Code.
Clause 266 provides that the Authority shall have the powers to regulate its own
procedure in all matters pertaining to it.
Clause 267 defines certain terms that have been used in the Chapter, such as “advance
ruling”, “appellant”, “application”, “Authority”, “Chairperson”, etc.
Clause 268 seeks to provide that the Central Government will constitute an Income-
tax Settlement Commission for the settlement of cases, consisting of a Chairperson and as
many Vice-Chairpersons and other members as the Government deems fit who shall function
within the Department of the Central Government dealing with direct taxes. These persons
would be appointed from amongst the officers of the Indian Revenue Service who have
served for at least 28 years in the service, including at least 5 years in the rank of Commissioner
or above.
Clause 269 relates to jurisdiction and powers of the Settlement Commission. The said
clause seeks to provide that a Bench of the Commission would be presided over by the
Chairperson or a Vice-Chairperson, and would consist of two other members. However, if
third member is unable to discharge his functions or in case of vacancy, the Bench may
function with only two members.  The Bench headed by the Chairperson will be the principal
Bench and other Benches will be called Additional Benches. The Chairperson may, for the
disposal of any particular case, constitute a Special Bench consisting of more than three
Members. These Benches would sit at the notified places except a Special Bench which will
sit at a place to be fixed by the Chairperson.
Clause 270  seeks to provide that if there is vacancy in the office of Chairperson or if
he is not in a position to discharge his duties, the notified Vice-Chairperson shall act as the
Chairperson.
Clause 271 seeks to provides for  power of Chairperson to transfer cases from one
Bench to another which can be done on the application of the assessee or the Chief
Commissioner or Commissioner or on his own motion, after recording the reasons.
Clause 272 seeks to provide that the Benches shall take decision by majority and on
equal division, will make a reference to the Chairperson. The clause further seeks to provide
the procedure to be adopted subsequently.
Clause 273  relates to application for settlement of cases. The said clause, inter-alia,
provides that the application should contain full and true disclosure of income or wealth, its
manner of deriving and the additional amount of tax payable, etc. The application can be
made only after furnishing return of tax bases and payment of income-tax or wealth-tax on
income or wealth disclosed in the application. The clause further seeks to provide that the
additional tax should be a minimum of fifty lakh rupees in a case of search or requisitioning
of material and ten lakh rupees in any other case, for making the application. An application
once made cannot be withdrawn.
Clause 274  seeks to provide working for calculating the additional amount of
income-tax.
Clause 275 relates to admission of application. The said clause seeks to provide that
the Settlement Commission would issue notice of hearing to applicant within ten days and
after hearing him, within a period of twenty days will reject or allow his application. However,
if no such order is passed, the application shall be deemed to be allowed. The said clause

362
further provides that the Commission shall call for the report of the Commissioner within
forty-five days of the making of application and within a period of fifteen days of the said
report may declare an application as invalid on the basis of such report.
Clause 276  relates to further inquiry into the case. For this purpose the Commission
is empowered to call for records from the Commissioner, direct him to make further enquiries,
submit reports, etc.
Clause 277 relates to order of settlement. Such order shall provide for the terms of
settlement including any demand by way of tax, penalty, etc. The settlement will  be avoid if
later it is found that it was obtained by fraud or misrepresentation. The order is to be passed
within a period of eighteen months  from the end of the month  in which the application was
made. The order may also cover any other matter relating to the case not covered by the
application.
Clause 278  relates to payment of tax on settlement and specifies the time limit for
payment of tax in pursuance of the order of the Settlement Commission under section 277,
circumstances of its extension, etc. It also provides that simple interest at the rate of fifteen
per cent. per annum shall be payable on any default from the date of the expiry of period of
thirty days of the receipt of the order of Settlement Commission under clause 277.
Clause 279 relates to power of Settlement Commission to order provisional attachment
to protect revenue and, inter alia, provides for time limits for which such attachments shall
be effective.
Clause 280 relates to revival of proceedings before Assessing Officer. The said clause
provides that if the order passed by the Settlement Commission becomes void in the
circumstances where it was obtained by fraud or misrepresentation, the proceedings before
the Assessing Officer with respect to the matters covered by the settlement shall be deemed
to have been revived from the stage at which the application was admitted by the Settlement
Commission and the Assessing Officer will get twenty-one months from the end of the
financial year in which the order becomes void, to frame the assessment.
Clause 281 relates to powers of Settlement Commission after admission. The said
clause seeks to provide that the Commission would have powers as are vested in an income-
tax authority. It also provides the time period up to which the Settlement Commission will
have current jurisdiction with the assessing officer and thereafter exclusive jurisdiction.
Clause 282 relates to inspection and furnishing of reports. The said clause empowers
the Commission to provide copies of reports submitted before it, on payment of prescribed
fee.
Clause 283 relates to power of Settlement Commission to grant immunity. The said
clause seeks to provide that the Commission may, subject to certain conditions, grant
immunity from penalty and prosecution with respect to the case covered by the Settlement.
The immunity can be withdrawn in the circumstances specified.
Clause 284 relates to abatement of proceeding before Settlement Commission . The
said clause seeks to provide that the proceedings before the Settlement Commission shall
abate if the application has not been allowed or declared as invalid or the order has not been
passed within the time specified. In such circumstances, the Assessing Officer will pass
order as if no application has been made. The time taken in proceedings before the Commission
would be excluded for assessment purposes and the material available before the Commission
can be used by the assessing officer in proceedings before him.
Clause 285 relates to  credit for tax paid in case of abatement of proceedings. The said
clause seeks to provide that in a case of abatement, the Assessing Officer shall allow the
credit for the tax and interest paid on or before the date of making the application before the
Settlement Commission or during the pendency of the case before the Commission.

363
 Clause 286 relates to  recovery of sums due under order of settlement. The said
clause seeks to provide that the jurisdictional Assessing Officer may recover any sum specified
in an order of settlement and any penalty for default in making payment of such sum may be
imposed and recovered in accordance with the provisions of Chapter XIII.
Clause 287 relates to  order of settlement to be conclusive. The said clause seeks to
provide that every order of Settlement will be conclusive on the matters stated therein.
Clause 288 relates to  bar on subsequent application. The said clause seeks to provide
the circumstances when a person shall not be entitled to file subsequent application before
the Settlement Commission and the exceptions in this regard.
Clause 289 seeks to provide that any proceeding before the Settlement Commission
shall be a judicial proceeding within the meaning of sections 193 and 228, and for the purposes
of section 196 of the Indian Penal Code.
Clause 290 seeks to provide certain interpretations relevant for Chapter XV .
Part—H and Chapter XVIII of the Code deal with general provisions.
Clause 291 relates to agreement with specified territory or foreign countries. The said
clause seeks to provide that the Central Government may enter into an agreement with the
Government of any country or specified territory for the granting of relief or avoidance of
double taxation, for exchange of information for the prevention of evasion or avoidance of
income-tax or wealth-tax, for tax recovery, etc. Where for such agreements, the other country
has designated certain associations, the clause provides that any specified association in
India may enter into such agreement with the specified association of the specified territory
outside India and the Central Government will notify the agreement for adopting it.
The said clause further provides that where such an agreement has been entered into,
then the provisions of this Code will apply to the assessee to whom the agreement is
applicable, if such provisions are more beneficial to him except for provisions regarding
General Anti Avoidance Rule, levy of Branch Profit Tax and Control Foreign Company Rules
which will apply, whether or not such provisions are beneficial to him.
Clause 292 relates to permanent account number. The said clause, inter alia, provides
that every person fulfilling prescribed requirements has to apply for the allotment of a
permanent account number which shall be allotted to him. Any other person may also apply
for such allotment. The number is required to be quoted in prescribed transactions. The
Board has been empowered to prescribe rules with regard to form of application, the categories
of transactions, and the income-tax authority authorized to receive such application etc.
Clause 293 relates to tax account number. The number is required to be obtained by a
deductor or collector of tax at source and has to be quoted in prescribed transactions or
documents.
Clause 294 relates to  mode of acceptance or repayment of certain loans or deposits.
The said clause provides that loans or deposits with aggregate amount in a financial year
exceeding  fifty thousand rupees, shall not be accepted or repaid otherwise than by an
account payee cheque or bank draft. The clause will not apply to any loan or deposit taken
or accepted from, the Government, any banking company, post office savings bank or co-
operative bank and other listed entities.
Clause 295 relates to  obligation to furnish annual information return. The said clause
seeks to provide that every person  responsible for registering or maintaining books of
account or other documents containing a record of any specified financial transaction would
be furnish an annual information return in respect of such specified financial transaction.
Such persons, inter alia, are Registrar or Sub-Registrar appointed under Registration Act,
1908, the registering authority empowered to register motor vehicles, the Post Master General,
the Collector, the recognised stock exchange, a depository, etc.
The said clause further provides that “specified financial transaction” will mean a
transaction of purchase, sale of property, a transaction by way of an investment made or an

364
expenditure incurred, etc. The return is required to be furnished for transactions above a
specified limit.
The said clause also provides the time and manner of filing of such return, the
circumstances in which it would be treated as defective, etc.
Clause 296 relates to  certain transfers to be void. The said clause seeks to provide
that a transfer of asset or creation of charge on it during the pendency of any proceeding
under the Code or after completion shall be void as against any claim in respect of any sum
payable unless made for  adequate consideration and without knowledge of the pendency of
such proceeding or of any such sum payable by the person or with the previous permission
of the Assessing Officer. However, the provisions of this clause shall not apply to transfer of
any business trading asset.
Clause 297 relates to  provisional attachment to protect revenue in certain cases. The
said clause seeks to provide that  the Assessing Officer can provisionally attach any property
belonging to the assessee to protect interest of revenue, with prior  approval of the Chief
Commissioner or Commissioner. The said clause further provides for time limits for which
such attachments would be effective.
Clause 298 relates to  service of notice generally. The said clause seeks to provide for
the manner of service of any notice, summons, requisition, order, etc., made under the Code.
Clause 299 relates to  authentication of notices and other documents. The said clause
seeks to provide the manner of authentication of a notice or any other document issued or
served for the purposes of the Code.
Clause 300 relates to notice deemed to be valid in certain circumstances. The said
clause seeks to provide that a notice would be deemed to be duly served if the person has
appeared in any proceeding or co-operated in any inquiry relating to an assessment. The
provision will not apply if the person has raised the objection before the completion of the
assessment.
Clause 301 relates to service of notice when family is disrupted or unincorporated
body is dissolved. The said clause seeks to provide that in such cases, the notice can be
served on the last manager of the Hindu Undivided Family or its adult member in specified
circumstances and on a participant of an unincorporated body before its dissolution.
Clause 302 relates to publication of information respecting assessees in certain cases.
The said clause seeks to empower the Central Government to publish in public interest
particulars like name, etc., relating to any proceeding or prosecution. Certain exceptions
have been provided in case of penalty.
Clause 303 relates to appearance by registered valuer in certain matters. The said
clause seeks to provide that an assessee entitled or required to attend before any income-tax
authority or the Appellate Tribunal, in connection with valuation of any asset, may attend
through a registered valuer except where he is required to attend personally.
Clause 304  relates to appearance by authorised representative.  The said clause,
inter alia, seeks  to provide that an assessee entitled or required to attend before any income-
tax authority or the Appellate Tribunal, in connection with any proceeding under the Code,
may attend through an authorised representative except where he is required to attend personally.
The said clause further seeks to provide meaning of “authorised representative” and
person not qualified to represent an assessee.
Clause 305 relates to rounding off of tax bases, tax, etc. It provides for rounding off of
tax-bases to the nearest multiple of hundred rupees and amount payable or receivable by an
assessee to the nearest multiple of ten rupees.
Clause 306 relates to indemnity. The said clause seeks to provide that every person
deducting, retaining, or paying any tax in pursuance of the Code in respect of income
belonging to another person is indemnified for the deduction, retention, or payment thereof.

365
Clause 307 relates to power to tender immunity from prosecution.  The said clause
seeks to empower the Central Government to tender immunity to any person from prosecution
and the imposition of penalty on fulfilment of certain conditions.  The immunity can also be
withdrawn also in specified circumstances like concealment of particulars for obtaining
immunity, giving of false evidence, etc.
Clause 308 relates to cognizance of offences.  The said clause seeks to provide that
no court inferior to that of a metropolitan magistrate or a magistrate of the First Class will try
any offence under the Code.
Clause 309 seeks to provide that the provisions of section 360 of the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973, or the Probation of Offenders Act, 1958, shall apply to a person convicted
of an offence under this Code, unless the person is of eighteen years of age or more.
Clause 310 relates to return of tax bases, etc., not to be invalid on certain grounds. The
said clause seeks to provide that no return of tax-bases, assessment, notice, summons, etc.,
shall be invalid merely by reason of any mistake, defect or omission if in substance and effect
it is in conformity with the intent and purpose of the Code.
Clause 311 relates to presumption as to material found. The said clause seeks to
provide that where any material is found in the possession or control of any person during
search or survey, it shall be presumed that the material belongs to such person, the contents
of the material, being books of account and other documents, are true, etc. Presumption as
regards search will also apply to a case of requisition under provisions of clause 136.
Clause 312 relates to bar of suits in civil courts. The said clause seeks to provide that
no suit shall be brought in any civil court to set aside, or modify, any proceeding taken or
order made under the Code and that no prosecution, suit or other proceeding shall lie against
the Government, or any officer of the Government, for anything in good faith done, or
intended to be done, under the Code.
Clause 313 seeks to provide power to rescind to the Central Government or the Board
or an income-tax authority regarding any notification or order, or approval or registration in
respect of an assessee. The power shall be exercised after recording reasons in writing and
giving the  assessee a reasonable opportunity of showing cause against the proposed
rescindment.
Clause 314 deals with interpretations. The said clause provides definitions of terms
used in this Code and which have not been separately provided in the respective Chapters.
Certain definitions correspond to the definitions provided in the Income-tax Act, 1961 as it
stood before the commencement of this Code. Other definitions are new and have been
provided for the first time in this Code.
Clause 315 provides the rule of construction for interpreting the provisions of this
Code. It provides that a reference to any income or to the result of any computation shall be
construed as a reference to both the negative and positive variation of the income or the
result. The said clause further provides that any direction for aggregation of two or more
items expressed as amounts shall be construed also to include a direction for aggregation of
negative and positive amounts in all their combinations. The said clause also provides that
the value of any variable in a formula shall be deemed to be nil, if the value of such variable
is indeterminable or unascertainable.
Clause 316 relates to power to make rules and seeks to empower the Board to notify
rules for the purposes of the Code subject to the control of the Central Government.
The said clause seeks to provide power in general terms as well as in specific matters
mentioned therein like the ascertainment and determination of any class of income, the
manner of arriving at the income in case of agriculture, a person residing outside India, the

366
form and manner in which any document, application, claim, return or information may be
made or furnished, the fee that may be payable, the authority to be prescribed for any of the
purposes of the Code, the procedure of giving effect to the terms of any agreement for
avoidance of double taxation etc.
The clause further seeks to provide that the power to make rules will include the power
to give retrospective effect, from a date not earlier than the date of commencement of the
Code. However, no retrospective effect will be given to any rule so as to prejudicially affect
the interests of the assessees.
Clause 317  relates to rules, scheme and certain notifications to be placed before
Parliament.  The said clause seeks to provide that every rule and scheme made and notification
issued under this Code shall be laid before each House of Parliament within time as specified
and that if both Houses agree in making any modification or annulment, the rule, scheme or
notification will be modified to that extent so, however, that any such modification or annulment
shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule, scheme
or notification.
Clause 318 relates to repeal and savings. The said clause seeks to repeal the Income-
tax Act, 1961 and the Wealth-tax Act, 1957.
The said clause further provides for savings of certain specified proceedings,
agreements, appointments, orders, declaration, etc., under the Acts sought to be repealed.
The said clause, inter alia, provides for saving of certain deductions like the deduction
under section 80-IA, section 80-IAB, section 80-IB, section 80-IC, section 80-ID, section 80-IE
or section 80JJA or section 80JJAA of the Income-tax Act, 1961 if the assessee is eligible for
such deduction for the assessment year beginning on the 1st day of April, 2012 and subject
to certain conditions.
Clause 319 relates to power to remove difficulties. The said clause seeks to empower
the Central Government for the purpose of removing any difficulty which arises in giving
effect to the provisions of the Code.
SCHEDULES
The First Schedule of the Code seeks to provide various rates for calculating income-
tax payable on total income. The Schedule is divided into three Parts. Part I provides rates of
income-tax on total income from sources other than a special source. The income of a society,
other than a co-operative society, unincorporated body, local authority, and a company is
proposed to be taxed at a flat rate whereas, tax slabs have been provided for individual, co-
operative society, Hindu undivided family and artificial juridical person. Further, for resident
individuals, different slabs have been provided for women tax-payers and senior citizens as
relief is proposed to be provided to them vis-à-vis other resident tax-payers. The Schedule
also provides for a flat rate of tax for a non-profit organisation after a threshold limit.
Part II of the Schedule seeks to provide the method of aggregation of agricultural
income for rate purposes in a case where the person to whom Part I is applicable, has net
agricultural income during a year exceeding 5000 rupees, and total income exceeds the
threshold limit.
Part III seeks to provide rates of taxation if the person has income from any special
source. The rates listed pertain to a non-resident or where the person, whether resident or
non-resident, has income by way of lottery, crossword puzzle, race, including horse race or
card game or any other game or gambling or betting.
The Second Schedule seeks to provide rates of other taxes, namely, tax on book profit,
tax on distributed profits (dividend) of a domestic company tax on distributed income-tax on
branch profits and tax on net wealth.
The Third Schedule seeks to provide a list of specified payments and the appropriate
rates on which deduction of tax at source is required to be made in the case of a resident
deductee.

367
The Fourth Schedule  seeks to provide a list of specified payments and the appropriate
rates on which deduction of tax at source is required to be made in the case of a non-
resident deductee.
Clause 219, inter alia, provides that the Tax Recovery Officer shall proceed to recover
from the defaulter, the amount specified in the certificate of tax arrears by the modes referred
to in the Fifth Schedule.
Accordingly, the Fifth Schedule provides the procedure for recovery of tax. It
corresponds to the Second Schedule of the Income-tax Act, 1961, as it stood before the
commencement of this Code.
Part I of the Schedule contains general provisions of the procedure for recovery of tax.
It provides the manner of execution of a certificate by the Tax Recovery Officer and the
various modes of realisation of the amounts mentioned in the certificate. It further provides
that in discharging his duties, the Tax Recovery Officer may seek assistance of the police.
Part II of the Schedule provides the procedure for attachment and sale of movable property.
Part III thereof provides the procedure for attachment and sale of immovable property.
Part IV thereof contains the procedure for distraint and sale of movable property. It provides
that such distraint and sale shall be made in the same manner as attachment and sale of any
movable property attachable by actual seizure.
Part V of the Fifth Schedule relates to the appointment of receiver for business and for
immovable property. It provides that the receiver shall have such powers as may be necessary
for the proper management of the property and realisation of the profits or rents thereof. Part
VI thereof provides the procedure for arrest and detention of the defaulter for certain acts
committed by such defaulter which impede recovery of tax arrears.
Part VII of the Fifth Schedule contains miscellaneous provisions for recovery of tax
relating to evidence, appeals, review etc. It also provides that the Board is empowered to
make any rules for regulating the procedure under this Schedule.
Clause 10 of this Code provides that the total income for a financial year of a person
shall not include certain specified incomes.
Accordingly, the Sixth Schedule of the Code lists such income. In certain cases, such
income is exempt subject to the fulfilment of the conditions stipulated therein. In other cases,
the income is exempt without any conditions. The Schedule also provides for notification of
income in certain cases by the Central Government for this purpose.
Clause 11 of this Code provides that certain persons shall not be liable to income-tax
for any financial year.
Accordingly, the Seventh Schedule of the Code enumerates such persons. In certain
cases, the Schedule provides that the persons shall not be so liable to income-tax, subject to
the fulfilment of conditions stipulated therein. In other cases, the entity shall be completely
exempt from tax without any conditions.
Sub-clause (2) of  clause 32 of this Code, inter alia, provides that the income from the
business of insurance is to be computed in accordance with the Eighth Schedule.
Accordingly, the Eighth Schedule seeks to provide that the profits of the business of
life insurance shall be the profit determined in the Shareholders’ Account (Non-Technical
Account) in accordance with the Insurance Act, 1938 as increased and reduced by items
specified in the said Schedule. Similarly, it is provided that the profits of the business of
insurance other than life insurance shall be the profits disclosed in the annual accounts,
copies of which are required to be furnished under the Insurance Act, 1938, to the Controller
of Insurance as increased and reduced by items specified in the said Schedule. The profits of
business of insurance will be the aggregate of the aforesaid amounts. The said Schedule
further provides that the loss from any business of insurance shall be allowed to be set off
from the profits of the same business of the succeeding years. The Schedule also seeks to
define certain terms relevant to the Schedule.
Sub-clause (2) of clause 15 provides that the income from any special source shall be
computed under the class “Income from special sources” in accordance with the provisions
of the Ninth Schedule.

368
Accordingly, the Ninth Schedule provides for the computation of income accrued or
received from any special source. It further provides that income from special source shall be
presumed to have been computed after giving effect to loss, allowance or deduction under
this Code. It also provides that the amount of common costs attributable to any special
source which are presumed to have been allowed shall be determined in the prescribed
manner.
Sub-clause (2) of clause 32 of this Code, inter alia, provides that the profits from the
business of operating a qualifying ship shall be computed in accordance with the provisions
contained in the Tenth Schedule.
Accordingly, the Tenth Schedule provides that the profits of the business of operating
a qualifying ship for a financial year shall be determined in accordance with the formula
specified therein. It further provides that the computation of such profits shall be presumed
to have been made after giving effect to loss, allowance or deduction under this Code. It also
provides that the amount of common costs attributable to such business shall be determined
in the prescribed manner.
The said Schedule further provides that the Board may make rules for the purpose of
computation of income from the business of operating a qualifying ship. It also defines
various terms for the purpose of computation of such income.
Sub-clause (2) of clause 32, inter alia, provides that the profits from the business of
mineral oil or natural gas shall be computed in accordance with the provisions contained in
the Eleventh Schedule.
Accordingly, the Eleventh Schedule provides that the profits of the business of mineral
oil or natural gas for a financial year shall be the gross income from such business as reduced
by the amount of the business expenditure incurred by the assessee wholly and exclusively
for the purpose of such business. It further provides that the computation of such profits
shall be presumed to have been given after giving effect to loss, allowance or deduction
under this Code. It also provides that the amount of common costs attributable to such
business shall be determined in the prescribed manner. The circumstances under which the
provisions of this Schedule shall apply have also been specified therein. It also defines
various terms for the purpose of computation of such profits.
Sub-clause (2) of clause 32, inter alia, provides that the profits from the business of
developing a Special Economic Zone or manufacture or production of article or things or
providing of any service by a unit established in a Special Economic Zone shall be computed
in accordance with the provisions contained in the Twelfth Schedule.
Accordingly, the Twelfth Schedule provides that the profits of the business of
developing or operating from a Special Economic Zone or manufacture or production of
article or things or providing of any service by a unit established in a Special Economic Zone
for a financial year shall be the gross income from such business as reduced by the amount
of the business expenditure incurred by the assessee wholly and exclusively for the purpose
of such business. It further provides that the computation of such profits shall be presumed
to have been made after giving effect to loss, allowance or deduction under this Code. It also
provides that the amount of common costs attributable to such business shall be determined
in the prescribed manner. The circumstances under which the provisions of this Schedule
shall apply have also been specified therein.
Sub-clause (2) of clause 32, inter alia, provides that the profits from the business
specified in paragraph 1 of the Thirteenth Schedule shall be computed in accordance with
the provisions contained in the said Schedule.
Accordingly, the Thirteenth Schedule provides the list of such specified businesses.
The provisions of this Schedule shall apply to the said specified businesses which fulfil the
prescribed conditions and are notified by the Central Government.

369
The said Schedule further provides that the profits of every specified business shall
be computed separately. The profits of any specified business shall be the gross income
from such business as reduced by the amount of the business expenditure incurred by the
assessee wholly and exclusively for the purpose of such business. It further provides that
the computation of such profits shall be presumed to have been made after giving effect to
loss, allowance or deduction under this Code. It also provides that the amount of common
costs attributable to such business shall be determined in the prescribed manner. The
circumstances under which the provisions of this Schedule shall apply have also been
specified therein.
Sub-clause (2) of clause 32, inter alia, provides that the profits from the business
listed in Fourteenth Schedule where income is determined on presumptive basis shall be
computed in accordance with the provisions contained in the said Schedule.
Accordingly, the Fourteenth Schedule provides the list of such businesses. It provides
that the income from such business carried on by the assessee at any time during the financial
year shall be the amount specified therein and subject to the conditions specified therein.
The said Schedule further provides that the computation of such income shall be
presumed to have been made after giving effect to loss, allowance or deduction under this
Code. It also provides that the amount of common costs attributable to such business shall
be determined in the prescribed manner. The circumstances under which the provisions of
this Schedule shall not apply have also been specified therein.
The Fifteenth Schedule relates to depreciation. Depreciation of business capital assets
is one of the capital allowances allowed under clause 37 of the Code. The manner of calculation
of depreciation of business capital assets is provided in clause 38 of the Code. The said
clause makes a reference to Fifteenth Schedule. In respect of any block of assets , the
depreciation is to be allowed at the percentages specified against such block of assets in the
Table given in the said Schedule on the adjusted value or written down value of such block
of assets, as the case may be, as are used for the purposes of the business of the person at
any time during the financial year. The said Table broadly divides business capital assets,
into twelve classes of assets. These are building, furniture and fittings, vehicles, aeroplanes,
rails, ships, books, machinery and plant, scientific research assets, family planning asset,
animals and intangible assets. Depreciation shall not be allowed, in respect of any other
business capital asset not forming part of any block of assets specified in the Fifteenth
Schedule. The said Schedule further provides that no depreciation shall be allowed in respect
of any machinery or plant, if the actual cost thereof is allowed as a deduction in one or more
years. It is also provided that the depreciation shall be one hundred per cent. of the adjusted
written down value of the block of assets, being intangible assets, if the adjusted value or
written down value of the block of assets is one lakh rupees or less. The Schedule also seeks
to provide list of various items included in the assets listed in the table in the Schedule.
Clause 79 of this Code provides that a person shall be allowed a deduction of a
specified sum of the amount of money paid by him in the financial year as contribution or
donation to any person specified in the Sixteenth Schedule.
Accordingly, the Sixteenth Schedule provides the list of such persons. Parts I, II, III
and IV thereof enumerate the entities in respect of whom contributions or donations are
eligible for deduction of one hundred and seventy-five per cent., one hundred and twenty-
five per cent., one hundred per cent. and fifty per cent, respectively.
Sub-clause (3) of clause 53 of this Code, inter alia, provides that the cost of acquisition
of an investment asset specified in the Seventeenth Schedule and acquired by the specified
mode shall be the cost specified in the said Schedule.
Accordingly, the Seventeenth Schedule provides the method of determination of the
cost of acquisition of investment asset being shares or certain rights which have been
acquired by the various modes specified therein.

370
Sub-clause (160) of clause 314 of this Code defines “mineral” as including a group of
associated minerals specified in the Eighteenth Schedule.
Accordingly, Part I and Part II of the Eighteenth Schedule respectively provide the list
of such minerals and group of associated minerals.
The Nineteenth Schedule to the Bill deals with three types of funds, i.e., approved
provident fund, approved superannuation fund and approved gratuity fund and seeks to
provide the guidelines that would govern their approval and functioning. The said Schedule
has three parts. Part I deals with approved provident funds, Part II with approved
superannuation funds and Part III with approved gratuity funds.
Part I relating to approved provident funds, provides that the Commissioner shall accord
or withdraw approval to a provident fund and the conditions, upon the satisfaction of which he
will accord approval to such fund, have been specified. In certain circumstances, the conditions
can also be relaxed. This Part also provides that certain funds established under a scheme of
other specified Acts will be deemed to be approved if notified in this behalf.
The said Part also provides that contribution by an employer in excess of twelve per
cent. of the salary or one lakh rupees, whichever is less, and interest credited in excess of the
rate of interest prescribed by the Central Government for this purpose, shall be deemed to be
the income of the concerned employee and shall be liable to income-tax. Besides, an employee
will be entitled to a deduction in computation of his income in respect of his contribution to
his account, subject to a specified limit.
Part II of the Schedule relates to approved superannuation funds. As in case of
provident funds, the Commissioner shall accord or withdraw approval to a superannuation
fund. The conditions, upon the satisfaction of which an approval shall be accorded by the
Commissioner, have also been specified.
The said Part further provides as to when the contribution by an employer shall be
deemed to be the income of an employer and also for deduction of tax on contributions paid
to an employee. It also provides that deduction from the pay of, and contributions on behalf
of, employees is to be included in the return to be filed by the employer. The Part also
specifies the liability of trustees on cessation of approval given to a superannuation fund
and provides for the particulars to be furnished in respect of such funds.
Part III of the Schedule relates to approved gratuity funds. As in case of provident
funds, the Commissioner shall accord or withdraw approval to a gratuity fund. The conditions,
upon the satisfaction of which an approval shall be accorded by the Commissioner, have
also been specified. Further, it has also been provided as to when the contribution by an
employer shall be deemed to be the income of an employer. It also specifies the liability of
trustees on cessation of approval given to a gratuity fund and provides for the particulars to
be furnished in respect of such funds.
In the Nineteenth Schedule, for all three Parts, it has also been provided that an
aggrieved employer may file an appeal before the Central Board of Direct Taxes within sixty
days from the date of the Commissioner’s order of not according an approval to a fund or of
withdrawal of approval. Further, the Board may make rules for the smooth regulation of the
funds. Besides, some relevant terms like ‘’employer”, “employee”, “contribution”, “balance
to the credit of an employee”, “annual accretion”, etc. have been defined.
The Twentieth Schedule provides the method and manner for computation of income
attributable to a Controlled Foreign Company, which shall be included in the total income of
an assessee, who is resident in India, for a financial year, in accordance with clause 58. The
said Schedule, for the sake of simplicity, has provided formulae for the determination of the
amount of income attributable to a Controlled Foreign Company and for the specified income
of such a company.
The said Schedule has also defined certain terms like “Controlled Foreign Company”,
“territory with a lower rate of taxation” and “associated enterprise”.

371
Clause 178 provides that an assessee may prefer an appeal to the Commissioner
(Appeals) where he is aggrieved by an order passed by an income-tax authority below the
rank of Commissioner, as specified in the Twenty-first Schedule. Accordingly, the Schedule
provides a list of orders that are appealable before the Commissioner (Appeals).
Clause 37 of this Code, inter alia, provides that one of the items of capital allowances
viz. deferred revenue expenditure allowance shall be such proportion of the expenditure as
specified and computed in accordance with the Twenty-second Schedule. Accordingly, the
said Schedule seeks to provide the items of deferred revenue expenditure on which deferred
revenue expenditure allowance would be available for a financial year. The items provided,
inter alia, are non-compete fee, premium for obtaining any asset on lease or rent, amount
paid to an employee in connection with his voluntary retirement, expenditure incurred by an
Indian company, any loss on account of forfeiture of any agreement entered in the course of
the business and prescribed preliminary expenditure incurred before the commencement of
the business, or in connection with the extension of the business, or in connection with the
setting up of new business.

FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
This Bill seeks to replace the Indian Income-tax Act, 1961 and the Wealth Tax Act, 1957
and thus no additional expenditure of significance, apart from what is being spent on the
administration of these Acts, is contemplated by reason merely of the passing of this Bill.
372

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
1. Clause 6 of the Bill provides that the following income shall be deemed to be
received in the financial year—
(a) any contribution made by any employer, in the financial year, to the account
of an employee under a pension fund;
(b) any contribution made by any employer, in the financial year, to the account
of an employee in any other fund;
(c) the annual accretion, in the financial year, to the balance at the credit of any
employee in a fund referred to in clause (b) to the extent it exceeds the limit as may be
prescribed.
Accordingly, it is proposed to empower the Central Government to make the rules in
this regard for the purposes of this clause.
2. Clause 9 of the Bill provides that the total income of any individual shall include,
besides other income, all income which accrues, directly or indirectly from assets transferred,
directly or indirectly, to the spouse by the individual, otherwise than for adequate
consideration, or in connection with an agreement to live apart; and from assets transferred,
directly or indirectly, to the son’s wife by the individual, otherwise than for adequate
consideration. It has been further provided that the Board may prescribe the method for
determining the income referred to above.
Accordingly, it is proposed to empower the Board to make rules in this regard for the
purposes of this clause.
3. Clause 18 of the Bill provides that in computing the total income of a person for any
financial year, any expenditure attributable to income which is not included in the total
income under the Sixth Schedule, and determined in accordance with such method as may
be prescribed, shall not be allowed as a deduction.
Accordingly, it is proposed to empower the Central Government to make rules in this
regard for the purposes of this clause.
4. Clause 23 of the Bill provides for the deductions from the gross salary for
computation of income from employment. These deductions include - any allowance or
benefit granted by an employer for journey by an employee between his residence and
office or any other place of work, to such extent as may be prescribed; any allowance or
benefit granted by an employer to an employee to meet expenses wholly, necessarily and
exclusively in the performance of the duties of an office or employment of profit, as may be
prescribed, to the extent such expenses are actually incurred for that purpose, and to meet
personal expenses, considering the place of posting or nature of duties or place of residence,
subject to such conditions and limits as may be prescribed; any amount of interest credited,
in the financial year, on the balance to the credit of an employee in an approved fund to the
extent it does not exceed the amount of interest payable at the rate notified by the Central
Government; any allowance provided by an employer to meet the expenditure actually
incurred on payment of rent in respect of residential accommodation occupied by the
employee, to such extent as may be prescribed.
Accordingly, it is proposed to empower the Central Government to make the rules
and notify the “rate of interest” in this regard for the purposes of this clause.
5. Clause 33 of the Bill provides that the gross earnings referred to in clause 32 shall
also include any payment or aggregate of payments made to a person in a day, in respect of
an expenditure incurred during the financial year or in respect of a liability incurred and
allowed as a deduction in any preceding financial year, which has been made otherwise
than by an account payee cheque drawn on a bank or by an account payee bank draft;
exceeds a sum of thirty-five thousand rupees if the payment is made to transporter for
373

374
carriage of goods by road, or a sum of twenty thousand rupees in any other case; and has
not been made in such cases and in such circumstances as may be prescribed.
Accordingly, it is proposed to empower the Central Government to make the rules in
this regard for the purposes of this clause.
6. Clause 35 of the Bill specifies the operating expenditure with respect to business
expenditure and includes remuneration to any working participant or partner to the extent
prescribed which it is in accordance with the agreement of the unincorporated body or the
Limited Liability Partnership, as the case may be, association and relates to the period
falling after the date of such agreement; contribution by a person, being an employer, to an
approved fund subject to such limits and conditions, as may be prescribed and to the extent
the amount is actually paid;
7. Clause 35 further specifies the deductions for the purpose of determination of
operating expenditure, which include contribution by the person, being an employer, to an
approved fund subject to such limits and conditions, as may be prescribed and to the extent
the amount is actually paid; as well as, any amount credited to the provision for bad and
doubtful debts account, no exceeding one per cent. of the aggregate average advances
computed in the prescribed manner if the person is a financial institution or a non-banking
finance company as may be notified.
Accordingly, it is proposed to empower the Central Government to make rules and
issue notifications in this regard for the purposes of this clause.
8. Clause 36 of the Bill specifies the finance charges with respect to business
expenditure and includes the amount of interest paid to any participant to the extent
prescribed which it is in accordance with the agreement of formation of unincorporated
body and relates to the period falling after the date of such agreement; the proportionate
amount of discount or premium payable on any bond or debenture issued by the person,
calculated in the manner as may be prescribed.
Accordingly, it is proposed to empower the Central Government to make rules in this
regard for the purposes of this clause.
9. Clause 37 of the Bill provides deduction of an amount in accordance with such
deposit scheme in respect of the person carrying on business of growing and manufacturing
tea or coffee or rubber in India, as may be prescribed.
Accordingly, it is proposed to empower the Central Government to make the rules in
this regard.
10. Clause 41 of the Bill provides that a company shall be allowed a deduction equal
to two hundred per cent. of the expenditure (not being expenditure in the nature of cost of
any land or building) incurred on creating and maintaining an in-house facility for scientific
research and development; and carrying out scientific research and development in the in-
house facility, if—
(a) the company creates and maintains an in-house facility for carrying out
scientific research and development;
(b) the research facility is approved by the Central Government on the basis of
recommendation of the prescribed authority; and
(c) the company enters into an agreement with the prescribed authority for
co-operation in the research and development facility and for audit of the accounts
maintained for such facility.
Accordingly, it is proposed to empower the Central Government to make rules
in this regard for the purposes of this clause.

375
11. Clause 41 of the Bill further provides that for the purposes of granting approval to
a research facility for claiming deduction for scientific research and development allowance,
the Board may prescribe the nature of business, conditions and manner as may be considered
necessary for grant of such approval.
12. Accordingly, it is proposed to empower the Board to make rules in this regard for
the pu12. rposes of this clause.
13. Clause 44 of the Bill provides that the Board may, for the purposes of determining
the actual cost of a business Capital asset, prescribe- (a) any other cost which may be
included in determining the actual cost; and (b) the method of determining the actual cost
in the circumstances which are not provided for in this section.
Accordingly, it is proposed to empower the Board to make rules in this regard for the
purposes of this clause.
14. Clause 45 of the Bill provides that the Board may prescribe-( a) the method of
determining the allocation of the written down value or the adjusted written down value of
the assets between the different businesses carried on by the person; and (b) the method of
determining the written down value or the adjusted written down value of the block of
assets in the circumstances which are not provided for in this section.
Accordingly, it is proposed to empower the Board to make rules in this regard for the
purposes of this clause.
15. Clause 47 of the Bill provides that the income from the transfer of any work of art,
archaeological, scientific or art collection, book, manuscript, drawing, painting, photograph
or print, to the Government or a University or any public museum or institution of national
importance or of renown throughout any State or States and notified by the Central
Government, shall not be included in the computation of income under the head “Capital
gains”.
Accordingly, it is proposed to empower the Central Government to issue notification(s)
in this regard for the purposes of this clause.
16. Clause 47 further provides that the transfer of any investment asset in a transaction
of reverse mortgage under a scheme notified by the Central Government shall not be included
in the computation of income under the head “Capital gains”.
Accordingly, it is proposed to empower the Central Government to frame the scheme
in this regard for the purposes of this clause.
17. Clause 58 of the Bill provides that the gross residuary income shall inter alia
include any payment or aggregate of payments made to a person in a day, otherwise than by
an account payee cheque drawn on a bank or account payee bank draft, if it has not been
incurred in such cases and under such circumstances, as may be prescribed.
Accordingly, it is proposed to empower the Central Government to make rules in this
regard for the purposes of this clause.
18. Clause 59 of the Bill provides that for the purposes of computation of income from
residuary sources, any payment or aggregate of payments made to a person in a day,
otherwise than by an account payee cheque drawn on a bank or account payee bank draft,
if it has not been incurred in such cases and under such circumstances, as may be prescribed,
shall not be allowed as a deduction.
Accordingly, it is proposed to empower the Central Government to make rules in this
regard for the purposes of this clause.
19. Clause 69 of the Bill provides that a person, being an individual, shall be allowed
a deduction for savings in respect of the aggregate of the sums specified in the said clause
as does not exceed to the extent of one lakh rupees paid or deposited by the person in a

376
financial year. The specified sums include any sum as a contribution to any provident fund
set up and notified by the Central Government where such contribution is to an account of
the individual, spouse or any child of such individual; any sum to effect or keep in force a
contract for any annuity plan of any insurer as approved by the Board in accordance with
the prescribed guidelines; any sum as a contribution to a pension scheme, approved and
notified by the Board in accordance with the prescribed guidelines.
Accordingly, it is proposed to empower the Board to issue notification in this regard
for the purposes of this clause.
20. Clause 75 of the Bill provides that a person, being an individual, shall be allowed
a deduction in respect of any amount paid by him in the financial year by way of interest on
loan taken by him from any financial institution for the purpose of- (a) pursuing his higher
education; or (b) higher education of his relatives. For the purposes of this clause, “financial
institution” means a banking company or any other financial institution which the Central
Government may, by notification, specify in this behalf.
Accordingly, it is proposed to empower the Central Government to issue notification
in this regard for the purposes of this clause.
21. Clause 76 of the Bill provides that a person, being resident individual of Hindu
undivided family, shall be allowed a deduction in respect of any amount paid during the
financial year for medical treatment of the prescribed disease or ailment of any specified
person. This deduction shall not be allowed unless the person obtains a certificate in the
prescribed form from a prescribed specialist working in a Government hospital.
According, it is proposed to empower the Central Government to make rules in this
regard for the purposes of this clause.
22. Clause 77 of the Bill provides that a person, being resident individual, shall be
allowed a deduction of one lakh rupees, if he is a person with severe disability; and of fifty
thousand rupees, if he is a person with disability. This deduduction shall be allowed if the
person obtains a certificate from a medical authority in the prescribed form and manner and
the certificate remains valid during the relevant financial year or part thereof.
Accordingly, it is proposed to empower the Central Government to make rules in this
regard for the purposes of this clause.
23. Clause 78 of the Bill provides that the deduction under this clause shall be allowed
if the person, claiming a deduction under this section, obtains a certificate from a medical
authority in such form and manner as may be prescribed and the certificate remains valid
during the relevant financial year or part thereof.
Accordingly, it is proposed to empower the Central Government to make rules in this
regard for the purposes of this clause.
24. Clause 79 of the Bill provides that the donation to any person specified in Part IV
of the Sixteenth Schedule shall be eligible for deduction under sub-clause (1), if the donee
obtains the approval of the prescribed authority in accordance with the procedure and
subject to such conditions, as may be prescribed.
Accordingly, it is proposed to empower the Central Government to make rules in this
regard for the nominee of this clause.
25. Clause 80 of the Bill provides that a person, being an individual and not in receipt
of any house rent allowance, shall be allowed a deduction of any expenditure incurred by
him in excess of ten per cent. of his gross total income from ordinary sources towards
payment of rent in respect of any furnished or unfurnished accommodation occupied by
him for his own residence. This deduction shall be allowed up to a maximum of two thousand
rupees per month and shall be subject to such other conditions as may be prescribed
having regard to the area or place in which the accommodation is situated.
Accordingly, it is proposed to empower the Central Government to make rules in this
regard for the purposes of this clause.

377
26. Clause 82 of the Bill provides for a deduction of income of Investor Protection
Fund, if the Fund is notified by the Central Government.
Accordingly, it is proposed to empower the Central Government to issue notification
in this regard for the purposes of this clause.
27. Clause 87 of the Bill provides that every person who has entered into an
international transaction shall keep and maintain such information and document in respect
thereof, as may be prescribed.
Accordingly, it is proposed to empower the Central Government to make rules in this
regard for the purposes of this clause.
28. Clause 87 of the Bill further provides that any person carrying on legal, medical,
engineering, architectural profession or profession of accountancy, technical consultancy,
interior decoration or any other profession as is notified by the Board, shall keep and
maintain such books of account and other documents as may enable the Assessing Officer
to compute his total income in accordance with the provisions of the Code.
Accordingly, it is proposed to empower the Board to issue notifications in this regard
for the purposes of this clause.
29. Clause 87 of the Bill further provides that in respect of the maintenance of accounts,
the bills or receipts issued to any person shall contain the name, address and such other
particulars as may be prescribed.
Accordingly, it is proposed to empoer the Central Government to make rules in this
regard for the purposes of thi clause.
30. Clause 87 of the Bill further provide that the Board may, having regard to the
nature of the business carried on by any class of persons, prescribe- (a) any other books of
account and documents to be kept and maintained; (b) the particulars to be contained in the
books of account and documents; and (c) the form and the manner in, and the place at,
which the books of account and other documents shall be kept and maintained. The Board
may, also prescribe the period for which the books of account and other documents required
to be kept and maintained under this section shall be retained.
Accordingly, it is proposed to empower the Board to make rules in this regard for the
purposes of this clause.
31. Clause 88 of the Bill provides that every person, who is required to keep and
maintain books of account under clause 87 shall get his accounts for the financial year
audited. The report of this audit shall be obtained in the prescribed form duly signed and
verified by such accountant and setting forth such particulars as may be prescribed. A person
shall be deemed to have complied with the provisions of this clause if the person gets the
accounts of his business audited as required by, or under, any other law for the time being in
force, before the due date; and obtains by the due date the report of the audit as required
under such other law and a further report by an accountant in the form prescribed under this
clause. Further, a person who has entered into an international transaction shall furnish a
report of the international transaction entered into during the financial year to the Transfer
Pricing Officer on or before the due date. This report shall be obtained from an accountant in
the prescribed form duly signed and verified in the prescribed manner by such accountant.
Accordingly, it is proposed to empower the Central Government to make rules and
forms in this regard for the purposes of this clause.
32. Clause 89 of the Bill provides that the income chargeable under the head “Income from
business” or “Income from residuary sources” shall, except as otherwise provided in this section,
be computed in accordance with either cash or mercantile system of accounting regularly employed
by the person. The Central Government may from time to time notify accounting standards to be
followed by any class of persons or in respect of any class of income.
Accordingly, it is proposed to empower the Central Government to make rules and
issue notifications in this regard for the purposes of this clause.

378
33. Clause 89 of the Bill further specifies that for the purposes of this clause, “bad or
doubtful debts” shall be such debts as may be prescribed, having regard to the guidelines
issued by the Reserve Bank of India or the National Housing Bank, as the case may be, in
relation to such debts.
Accordingly, it is proposed to empower the Central Government to make rules in this
regard for the purposes of this clause.
34. Clause 90 of the Bill provides that the Central Government may, subject to such
conditions as may be considered necessary, notify a person as a non-profit organisation of
public importance for the purpose of the Seventh Schedule.
Accordingly, it is proposed to empower the Central Government to issue notifications
in this regard for the purposes of this clause.
35. Clause 94 of the Bill provides that the amount of outgoings during the financial
year for the purpose of computation of the total income shall include any amount applied
outside India, if - (i) the amount is applied for an activity which tends to promote international
welfare in which India is interested; and (ii) the non-profit organisation is notified by the
Central Government in this behalf.
Accordingly, it is proposed to empower the Central Government to issue notifications
in this regard for the purposes of this clause.
36. Clause 94 of the Bill further provides that the amount of outgoings during the financial
year for the purpose of computation of the total income shall be the aggregate of the amounts
specified therein. These amounts include any amount accumulated or set apart for carrying on
any charitable activity- (i) to the extent of fifteen per cent. of the total income (before giving
effect to the provisions of this clause) or ten per cent. of the gross receipts, whichever is less;
and (ii) invested or deposited in the modes specified in clause 95, for a period not exceeding
three years from the end of the financial year. The modes of investing or depositing the money
in such activity include any other mode of investment or deposit as may be prescribed.
Accordingly, it is proposed to empower the Central Government to make rules in this
regard for the purposes of clause 95.
37. Clause 98 of the Bill provides that a non-profit organisation shall make an application
for its registration in the prescribed form and manner to the Commissioner. These provisions
shall not apply to any non-profit organisation which has been granted approval or
registration under the Income Tax Act, 1961 before the commencement of the Code, if the
organisation fulfils such conditions as may be prescribed.
Accordingly, it is proposed to empower the Central Government to make rules and
forms in this regard for the purposes of this clause.
38. Clause 99 of the Bill provides that the non-profit organisation shall keep and
maintain such books of accounts, in the manner as may be prescribed. Further, the non-
profit organisation shall obtain a report of audit in the prescribed form from an accountant
before the due date of filing of the return of tax bases , if the gross receipts referred to in
clause 93 in any financial year exceed five lakh rupees.
Accordingly, it is proposed to empower the Central Government to make rules and
forms in this regard for the purposes of this clause.
39. Clause 100 of the Bill defines “anyonmous donation for the purpose of he said
clause to mean any voluntary contribution, where a person receiving such contribution
does not maintain a record of the identity indicating the name and address of the person
making such contribution and such other particulars as may be prescribed.
Accordingly, it is proposed to empower the Central Government to make rules in this
regard for the purposes of this clause.
40. Clause 101 of the Bill provides that a non-profit organisation shall be liable to
income-tax at the rate of thirty per cent. in respect of its net worth subject to the conditions

379
specified in the said clause. “Net worth” of the non-profit organisation has been defined to
mean the aggregate value of the total assets of the non-profit organisation a reduced by the
liabilities of such organisation computed in accordance with such rules of valuation as may
be prescribed.
Accordingly, it is proposed to empower the Central Government to make rules in this
regard for the purposes of this clause.
41. Clause 104 of the Bill provides that every company to which this clause in respect
of computation of book profit applies, shall obtain a report in such form as may be prescribed
from an accountant certifying that the book profit has been computed in accordance with
the provisions of this clause.
Accordingly, it is proposed to empower the Central Government to make rules and
issue forms in this regard for the purposes of this clause.
42. Clause 108 of the Bill provides that the venture capital company, the venture
capital fund or the person responsible for making payment of the income on behalf of such
company or fund shall furnish, within such time as may be prescribed, to the person receiving
such income and to the prescribed income-tax authority, a statement in the prescribed form
and manner, giving details of the nature of the income paid during the financial year and
such other relevant details as may be prescribed.
Accordingly, it is proposed to empower the Central Government to make rules in this
regard for th purposes of this clause.
43. Clause 110 of the Bill provides that every life insurer shall be liable to pay tax on
any amount of income, computed in the manner prescribed, distributed or paid to the policy
holders of an approved equity oriented life insurance scheme.
Accordingly, it is proposed to empower the Central Government to make rules in this
regard for the purposes of this clause.
44. Clause 110 of the Bill further to provide that in this clause “approved equity
oriented life insurance scheme” means—
(i) a life insurance scheme where more than sixty-five per cent. of the total
premia received under such scheme are invested by way of equity shares in domestic
companies; and
(ii) such scheme is approved by the Board in accordance with such guidelines
as may be prescribed.
Accordingly, it is proposed to empower the Board to frame the guideline in this regard
for the purposes of this clause.
45. Clause 113 of  the Bill provide that in relation to computation of net wealth for the
purposes of targeability of wealth-tax, the value of any specified asset, other than cash,
referred to in the said clause, shall be determined in such manner as may be prescribed.
Accordingly, it is proposed to empower the Central Government to make rules in this
regard for the purposes of this clause.
46. Clause 117 of the Bill provides that the arm’s length price in relation to an
international transaction shall be determined in accordance with any of the methods as may
be prescribed, being the most appropriate method; the most appropriate method shall be
determined having regard to the nature of transaction, class of transaction, class of associated
enterprises or functions performed by such enterprises or such other relevant factors as
may be prescribed; and the most appropriate method determined as above shall be applied
for determination of arm’s length price in such manner as may be prescribed.
Accordingly, it is proposed to empower the Central Government to make rules in this
regard for the purposes of this clause.

380
47. Clause 116 of the Bill further provides that the determination of arm’s length price
shall be subject to safe harbour rules, as may be prescribed in this behalf.
Accordingly, it is proposed to empower the Central Government to make rules in this
regard for the purposes of this clause.
48. Clause 118 of the Bill provides that the Board may, by notification, frame a Scheme
for advance pricing agreement in respect of an international transaction.
Accordingly, it is proposed to empower the Board to frame the scheme in this regard
for the purposes of this clause.
49. Clause 123 of the Bill provides that the provisions in respect of general anti-
avoidance rule shall apply in accordance with such guidelines as may be prescribed.
Accordingly, it is proposed to empower the Central Government to frame the guidelines
in this regard for the purposes of this clause.
50. Clause 124 of the Bill provides that for the purposes of the Chapter on “Special
Provisions Relating To Avoidance Of Tax”, two enterprises shall be deemed to be associated
enterprises at any time during the financial year, if they are associated with each other by
virtue of the conditions specified in the said clause. These conditions include – ‘any
specific or distinct location of either of the enterprises as may be prescribed’; ‘any other
relationship of mutual interest, existing between the two enterprises, as may be prescribed’.
Accordingly, it is proposed to empower the Central Government to make rules in this
regard for the purpose of this clause.
51. Clause 127 of the Bill further provides that the Board may, by notification, direct
that any income-tax authority or thorities specified in the n ification shall be subordinate to
such other income-tax authority or authorities as may be specified in such notification.
Accordingly, it is proposed to empower the Board to issue notification in this regard
for the purposes of this clause.
52. Clause 133 of the Bill provides in relation to retention and application of seized
assets, the Assessing Officer shall release, within the time and subject to such conditions
prescribed, to the person from whose custody the assets were seized, any asset or proceeds
thereof, which remains after the liabilities referred to in the said clause are discharged.
Accordingly, it proposed to empower the Central Government to make rules in this
regard for the purposes of this clause.
53. Clause 135 of the Bill provides that in relation to search and seizure, the Board may
make rules —
(a) to provide for the procedure to be followed by the Authorised Officer —
(i) for obtaining ingress into any building, place, vessel, vehicle or aircraft
to be searched where free ingress thereto is not available; and
(ii) for ensuring safe custody of any material seized; and
(b) any other matter in relation to search and seizure under this clause.
Accordingly, it is proposed to empower the Board to make rules in this regard for the
purposes of this clause.
54. Clause 140 of the Bill provides that for the purposes of the Direct Taxes Code, the
Board may, notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force,
require —
(a) any prescribed person to furnish such information within such time and in
such form and manner as may be prescribed; and
(b) any prescribed income-tax authority to call for such information in such
form and manner as may be prescribed.
Accordingly, it is proposed to empower the Board to make rules in this regard for the
purposes of this clause.

381
55. Clause 142 of the Bill provides that the Chief Commissioner or the Commissioner
may furnish, or cause to be furnished, to any person any information relating to any assessee
received or obtained by any income-tax authority in the performance of his functions under
this Code, if the person makes an application to the Chief Commissioner or the Commissioner
in the prescribed form; and the Chief Commissioner or the Commissioner is satisfied that it
is in the public interest so to do.
Accordingly, it is proposed to empower the Central Government to issue the form in
this regard for the purposes of this clause.
56. Clause 142 of the Bill further provides that the Board, or any person specified by
it by an order in this behalf, may furnish, or cause to be furnished, any information in
respect of an assessee to any other person performing any functions under any other law
as the Central Government may, if in its opinion it is necessary so to do in the public interest
specify by notification in this half.
Accordingly, it is proposed to empower the Central Government issue notification in
this regard for the purposes of this clause.
57. Clause 144 of the Bill provides that every person shall furnish a return of tax bases
on or before the due date to the Assessing Officer or such other authority or agency as may
be prescribed.
Accordingly, is proposed to empower the Central Government to make rules in this
regard for the rposes of this clause.
58. Clause 144 of the Bill further provides that the person required to furnish a return
of tax bases in relation to income shall also include; besides those enumerated in the said
clause, any class or classes of persons as may be prescirbed.
Accordingly, it is proposed to empower the Central Government to make rules/issue
notification in this regard for the purposes of this clause.
59. Clause 144 of the Bill further provides that the return of tax bases shall be furnished
in such form, verified in the manner and setting forth such particulars, as may be prescribed.
Accordingly, it is proposed to empower the Central Government to make rules in this
regard for the purposes of this clause.
60. Clause 145 of the Bill provides that the Board may, without prejudice to the
provisions of frame a Tax Return Preparer Scheme so as to allow a Tax Return Preparer to
prepare and furnish the return of tax bases of any specified class of persons, in accordance
with the Scheme.
Accordingly, it is proposed to empower the Board to frame the Tax Return Preparer
Scheme in this regard for the purposes of this clause.
61. Clause 149 of the Bill provides that the Board may make a scheme for centralised
processing of returns for expeditious determination of the tax payable by, or the refund due
to, the assessee.
Accordingly, it is proposed to empower the Board to frame the scheme in this regard
for the purposes of this clause.
62. Clause 151 of the Bill provides that the Asessing Officer may direct the assessee to
get his accounts audited by an accountant, if, at any stage of the proceding, he is of the
opinion that, having regard to the nature and complexity of the accounts of the assessee and
the interests of revenue, it is necessary to do so. The accountant shall furnish the report of the
audit in such form, duly signed and verified by him, and setting forth such particulars as may
be prescribed and such other particulars as the Assessing Officer may require.
Accordingly it is proposed to empower the Central Government to make rules/forms
in this regard for the purposes of this clause.
63. Clause 154 of the Bill further provides that the remuneration of the accountant and
other expenses the special audit shall be determined and paid by the Chief Commissioner or
Commissioner in accordance with such guidelines as may be prescribed. Accordingly, it is
proposed to empower the Central in accordance Government to frame the rules this regard
for the purposes of this clause.

382
64. Clause 155 of the Bill provides that for the purpose of assessment, “eligible
assessee” includes any class or classes of persons as may be prescribed.
Accordingly, it is proposed to empower the Central Government to make rules in this
regard for the purposes of this clause.
65. Clause 159 of the Bill provides that for reopening a case, the Assessing Officers all
serve on the assessee a notice requiring him to furnish, within a period of thirty days, a
return of tax bases for any financial year, in such form, verified in the manner and setting
forth such other particulars as may be prescribed.
Accordingly, it is proposed to empower the Central Government to make rules/forms
in this regard for the purposes of this clause.
66. Clause 162 of the Bill provides that any sum payable in consequence of any order
made, or intimation issued, under this Code shall be demanded by an income-tax authority
by serving upon the assessee a notice of demand in such form and manner as may be
prescribed.
Accordingly, it is proposed to empower the Central Government to make rules/forms
in this regard for the purposes of this clause.
67. Clause 179 of the Bill provides that every appeal under clause 178 to Commissioner
(Appeals) shall be in such form and verified in such manner and accompanied by a fee as
may be prescribed.
Accordingly, it is proposed to empower the Central Government to make rules/forms
in this regard for the purposes of this clause.
68. Clause 182 of the Bill provides that an appeal or the memorandum of cross-
objection to the Appellate Tribunal shall be in such form and be verified in such manner as
may be prescribed. The appeal by an assessee shall be accompanied by such fees as may be
prescribed.
Accordingly, it is proposed to empower the Central Government to make rules/forms
in this regard for the purposes of this clause.
69. Clause 184 of the Bill provides that an assessee may make an application to the
Appellate Tribunal for stay of demand in relating to the appeal preferred by him under 183
and such application shall be accompanied by such fees as may be prescribed.
Accordingly, it is proposed to empower the Central Government to make rules in this
regard for the purposes of this clause.
70. Clause 192 of the Bill provides that every application by an assessee for revision
of any order passed by an authority subordinate to the Commissioner, other than an order
to which section 190 applies, shall be accompanied by such fees as may be prescribed.
Accordingly, it is proposed to empower the Central Government to make rules in this
regard for the purposes of this clause.
71. Clause 196 of the Bill provides that for the purposes of the liability to deduct tax at
source, the specified payment shall be deemed to have been made, if the payment has been
made in cach; by issue of a cheque or draft; by credit to any account, whether called
‘suspense accout’ or by any other name; or by any other mode as may be prescribed.
Accordingly, it is proposed to empower the Central Government to make rules in this
regard for the purposes of this clause.
72. Clause 196 the Bill further provides that for the purposes of making any deduction
of tax from the payment liable to be taxed under the head “Income from employment”, the
deductor shall take into account the specified particulars, if any, furnished by the deductee
in such form and manner as may be prescribed.
Accordingly, it is proposed to empower the Central Government to make rules/forms
in this regard for the purposes of this clause.

383
73. Clause 197 of the Bill provides that the deductee may make an application, in such
form and manner, as may be prescribed, to the Assessing Officer seeking a certificate for
deduction of income-tax at a lower rate or, as the case may be, no deduction of income-tax
from payments to be received by him. Further, the deductor may make an application, in
such form and manner as may be prescribed, to the Assessing Officer seeking a certificate
for deduction of income-tax at a lower rate or, as the case may be, no deduction of income-
tax from payments to be made by him to a non-resident deductee.
Accordingly, it is proposed to empower the Central Government to make rules/forms
in this regard for the purposes of this clause.
74. Clause 197 of the Bill further provides that the Board may prescribe the
circumstances and the cases in which an application may be made for the grant of the
certificate for lower or no deduction of tax and the conditions subject to which such certificate
may be granted and provide for all other matters connected therewith.
Accordingly, it is proposed to empower the Board to make rules in this regard for the
purposes of this clause.
75. Clause 198 of the Bill provides that every deductor shall pay the sum deducted to
the credit of the Central Government with such time and manner as may be prescribed.
Further, every deductor shall furnish to the deductee a certificate to the effect that tax has
been deducted within such time and containing such particulars as may be prescribed.
Accordingly, it is proposed to empower the Central Goernment to make rules in this
regard for the purposes of this clause.
76. Clause 199 of the Bill provides that the Central Government may, by notification in
the official Gazette, require any deductor to deliver, or cause to be delivered, a return in
respect of any payment without deduction of tax.
Accordingly, it is proposed to empower the Central Government to issue notifications
in this regard for the purposes of this clause.
77. Clause 199 of the Bill further provides that the Board shall, in respect of the return
of tax-deduction and the return under this clause, prescribe the following:
(a) the period in respect of which the return is to be furnished;
(b) the form of the return and the particulars therein;
(c) the manner of verification of the return;
(d) the time by, and the medium in, which the return is to be delivered;
(e) the income-tax authority, or any other person, authorised to receive the
return; and
(f) any other matters connected therewith.
Accordingly, it is proposed to empower the Board to make rules in this regard for the
purposes of this clause.
78. Clause 200 of the Bill provides that no tax shall be deducted at source, where the
payee is a resident, from any interest payable to any institution, association or body, or
class of institutions, associations or bodies, which the Central Government may, for reasons
to be recorded in writing, notify in this behalf. Further, the same shall also apply for any
interest payable in respect of deposits under any scheme framed by the Central Government
and notified by it in this behalf.
Accordingly, it is proposed to empower the Central Government to issue notifications
and make scheme in this regard for the purposes of this clause.
79. Clause 201 of the Bill provides that for the purposes of giving credit in respect of
tax deducted, the Board may prescribe —
(a) the procedure for giving credit to the deductee, or any other person;

384
(b) the financial year for which such credit may be given; and
(c) any other matter connected therewith.
Accordingly, it is proposed to empower the Board to make rules in this regard for the
purposes of this clause.
80. Clause 201 of the Bill provides that for the purposes of tax collection at source, the
collection of an amount shall be deemed to have been made, if the amount has been received
in cash; by way of a cheque or draft; by debit to any account, whether called “suspense
account” or by any other mode as may be prescribed, whichever is earlier.
Accordingly, it is proposed to empower the Central Government to make rules in this
regard for the purposes of this clause.
81. Clause 202 of the Bill further provides that any person collecting any amount in
the form of tax collected at source shall pay the sum so collected to the credit of the Central
Government within such time and manner as may be prescribed. Also, every person
responsible for collecting any amount the form of tax collected at source shall furnish to the
buyer, lessee or licensee a certificate of tax collection within such time as may be prescribed.
Accordingly, it is proposed to empower the Central Government to make rules in this
regard for the purposes of this clause.
82. Clause 202 of the Bill further provides that the Board shall prescribe the following
in respect of the return of tax collection:—
(a) the period in respect of which the return is to be furnished;
(b) the form of the return and the particulars therein;
(c) the manner of verification of the return;
(d) the time by, and the medium in, which the return is to be delivered;
(e) the income-tax authority, or any other person, authorised to receive the
return; and
(f) any other matter connected therewith.
Accordingly, it is proposed to empower the Board to make rules in this regard for the
purposes of this clause.
83. Clause 203 of the Bill provides that for the purpose of giving credit in respect of tax
collected, the Board may prescribe —
(a) the procedure for giving credit to the collectee, or any other person;
(b) the financial year for which such credit may be given; and
(c) any other matter connected therewith.
Accordingly, it is proposed to empower the Board to make rules in this regard for the
purposes of this clause.
84. Clause 204 of the Bill provides that for the purposes of the Chapter on “Collection
at Source”, ‘professional or technical services’ means services rendered by a person in the
course of carrying on legal, medical, engineering, architectural or accountancy profession,
technical consultancy, interior decoration or any other profession as notified by the Board.
Accordingly, it is proposed to empower the Board to make rules/issue notifications in
this regard for the purposes of this clause.
85. Clause 205 of the Bill provides that where in the opinion of the Assessing Officer
may, any person is liable to pay advance income-tax, he may by an order in writing - require
such person to pay advance income-tax calculated in such manner as may be prescribed;
and issue to such person a notice of demand under section 168 specifying the instalments

385
in which such tax is to be paid. Further, the person, who has been served with such an order,
may file an estimation, in such form as may be prescribed, to the Assessing Officer, if in his
estimation, the advance tax payable by him is lower than the amount specified in the said
order, and pay the advance tax in accordance with his estimation on or before the due dates
specified in this section.
Accordingly, it is proposed to empower the Central Government to make rules and
forms in this regard for the purposes of this clause.
86. Clause 206 of the Bill provides that the Assessing Officer shall, on an application
made to him by any person, grant such relief as may be prescribed, if the person is in receipt
in any financial year of any arrears, or advance, of salary or family pension relating to any
other financial year.
Accordingly, it is proposed to empower the Central Government to make rules in this
regard for the purposes of this clause.
87. Clause 207 of the Bill provides that the Central Government may, for the relief or
avoidance of double taxation, prescribe,—
(a) the method for computing the amount of credit;
(b) the manner of claiming credit; and
(c) such other particulars as may be considered necessary.
Accordingly, it is proposed to empower the Central Government to make rules in this
regard for the purposes of this clause.
88. Clause 210 of the Bill provides that in relation to interest for default in furnishing
return of tax-bases, the Assessing Officer shall serve on the assessee a notice of demand,
in such form as may be prescribed, specifying the sum payable on account of increase in the
interest payable as a result of modification in the assessed income on account of any
rectification, revision or appellate order under the Code, and such notice shall be deemed to
be a notice under section 168.
Accordingly, it is proposed to empower the Central Government to issue the forms in
this regard for the purposes of this clause.
89. Clause 210 of the Bill provides that in relation to interest for defaults in payment of
advance income-tax, the Assessing Officer shall serve on the assessee a notice of demand
in such form as may be prescribed specifying the sum payable on account of increase in the
interest on account of any rectification, revision or appellate order under the Code and such
notice shall be deemed to be a notice under section 168 and the provisions of this Code
shall apply accordingly.
Accordingly, it is proposed to empower the Central Government to issue the forms in
this regard for the purposes of this clause.
90. Clause 215 of the Bill provides that an assessee shall be entitled to a refund of the
excess of any amount paid by him or on his behalf, or treated as paid by him or on his behalf,
for any financial year over the amount with which he is liable under the Code, and every
claim for refund shall be made within such time and such form and manner, as may be
prescribed.
Accordingly, it is proposed to empower the Central Government to make rules in this
regard for the purposes of this clause.
91. Clause 216 of the Bill provides that in relation to interest on refunds, the Assessing
Officer shall serve on the assessee a notice of demand in such form as may be prescribed
specifying the amount of excess interest paid to him where interest is reduced in accordance
with the variation in the amount on which the interest was payable as a result of any
rectification, revision or appellate order under the Code, and such notice shall be deemed to
be a notice under section 161.

386
Accordingly, it is proposed to empower the Central Government to issue the forms in
this regard for the purposes of this clause.
92. Clause 218 of the Bill provides that any amount specified as payable in a notice of
demand, otherwise than by way of advance tax, shall be paid within thirty days of the
service of the notice, to the credit of the Central Government in such manner as may be
prescribed.
Accordingly, it is proposed to empower the Central Government to make rules in this
regard for the purposes of this clause.
93. Clause 219 of the Bill provides that the Tax Recovery Officer may draw up under
his signature a statement of tax arrears of an assessee in default referred to in sub-section
(3) or sub-section (4) of section 213, in the prescribed form.
Accordingly, it is proposed to empower the Central Government to issue the forms in
this regard for the purposes of this clause.
94. Clause 220 of the Bill provides that the Assessing Officer or the Tax Recovery
Officer may require the employer of the assessee to deduct from any payment to the assessee
such amount as is sufficient to meet the tax arrear from the assessee. Upon such requisition,
the employer shall comply with the requisition and shall pay the sum so deducted to the
credit of the Central Government in the prescribed manner.
Accordingly, it is proposed to empower the Central Government to make rules in this
regard for the purposes of this clause.
95. Clause 220 of the Bill further provides that the Assessing Officer or the Tax
Recovery Officer may, by notice in writing, require any debtor of the assessee to pay such
amount, not exceeding the amount of debt, as is sufficient to meet the tax arrear of the
assessee. Upon receipt of such notice, the debtor shall comply with the requisition and
shall pay the sum to the credit of the Central Government in such manner as may be
prescribed within the time (not being before the debt becomes due to the assessee) specified
in the notice.
Accordingly, it is proposed to empower the Central Government to make rules in this
regard for the purposes of this clause.
96. Clause 221 of the Bill provides that the Tax Recovery Officer, may send a certificate,
in such manner as may be prescribed, specifying the tax arrear to be recovered, to another
Tax Recovery Officer within whose jurisdiction the assessee resides or has property, if the
first-mentioned Tax Recovery Officer is not able to recover the entire amount by sale of the
property, movable or immovable, within his jurisdiction; or is of the opinion that, for the
purpose of expediting, or securing, the recovery of the whole, or any part, of the amount
under this chapter, it is necessary so to do.
Accordingly, it is proposed to empower the Central Government to make rules in this
regard for the purposes of this clause.
97. Clause 228 of the Bill provides that every person, who is domiciled in India at the
time of his departure from India, shall furnish to the notified authority such particulars as
may be prescribed; and obtain a certificate from the notified authority that he has no
liability, if in the opinion of the Assessing Officer it is necessary for such person to obtain
such certificate.
Accordingly, it is proposed to empower the Central Government to make rules in this
regard for the purposes of this clause.
98. Clause 228 of the Bill further provides that no person shall leave the territory of
India unless he furnishes to such authority, as may be notified, an undertaking to the effect
that he has made satisfactory arrangement for discharging his tax liability, if any, in respect
of any income or wealth liable to tax in India.
Accordingly, it is proposed to empower the Central Government to notify the authority
in this regard for the purposes of this clause.

387
99. Clause 228 of the Bill further provides direct Board may having regard to the
interesting revenue may prescribe—
(a) the circumstances
(b) the form and manner in which the under taking is so be furnished and
(c) any other manner connected therewith accordingly it is proposed to empower
the poorer to make rules and issue forms in this regard for purposes of this clause.
100. Clause 252 of the Bill provides that the Chief Commissioner may compound,
either before or after the institution of proceedings, any offence under Chapter XV , under
the circumstances and for the amount, as may be prescribed.
Accordingly, it is proposed to empower the Central Government to make rules in this
regard for the purposes of this clause.
101. Clause 256 of the Bill provides that an applicant or appellant, being any class of
residents as notified by Central Government in the Official Gazette in this behalf, may seek
a ruling or, as the case may be, a resolution of dispute on matters concerning a determination
in respect of an issue relating to computation of tax bases is pending before any income-tax
authority, or the Appellate Tribunal, and such determination shall include the determination
of any question of law or of fact relating to such computation of tax bases specified in the
application.
Accordingly, it is proposed to empower the Central Government to make rules and
issue notifications in this regard for the purposes of this clause.
102. Clause 257 of the Bill provides that in respect of the Authority for Advanced
Rulings and Dispute Resolution, the salaries and allowances payable to, and the terms and
conditions of service of, the Members shall be such as may be prescribed.
Accordingly, it is proposed to empower the Central Government to make rules in this
regard for the purposes of this clause.
103. Clause 258 of the Bill provides that in respect of the procedure for advance
ruling, the application shall be made in such form and manner as may be prescribed, and be
accompanied by such fees as may be prescribed.
Accordingly, it is proposed to empower the Central Government to make rules in this
regard for the purposes of this clause.
104. Clause 258 of the Bill further provides that in respect of the procedure for advance
ruling, a copy of the advance ruling pronounced by the Authority, duly signed by the
Members and certified in such manner as may be prescribed shall be sent to the applicant
and to the Commissioner, as soon as may be, after such pronouncement.
Accordingly, it is proposed to empower the Central Government to make rules in this
regard for the purposes of this clause.
105. Clause 262 of the Bill provides that in respect of the procedure for dispute
resolution, the appeal, or the memorandum of cross objections, shall be in such form and
manner and be verified in such manner as may be prescribed. Further, the appeal by the
public sector company shall be accompanied by such fees as may be prescribed.
Accordingly, it is proposed to empower the Central Government to make rules in this
regard for the purposes of this clause.
106. Clause 263 of the Bill provides that a public sector company may make an
application to the Authority for Advanced Rulings and Dispute Resolution for stay of
demand relating to the appeal preferred by it under section 256 and such application shall
be accompanied by such fees as may be prescribed.
Accordingly, it is proposed to empower the Central Government to make rules in this
regard for the purposes of this clause.

388
107. Clause 269 of the Bill provides that the principal Bench and the additional Benches
of the Settlement Commission shall ordinarily sit at such places as the Central Government
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify.
Accordingly, it is proposed to empower the Central Government to issue notifications
in this regard for the purposes of this clause.
108. Clause 270 of the Bill provides that in respect of the Settlement Commission, the
Vice-Chairperson or, as the case may be, one of the Vice-Chairperson as the Central
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, authorise in this behalf, shall act as
the Chairperson.
Accordingly, it is proposed to empower the Central Government to issue notifications
in this regard for the purposes of this clause.
109. Clause 273 of the Bill provides that an assessee may, at any stage of a case
relating to him, make an application to the Settlement Commission in such form and manner
as may be prescribed, to have the case settled. Such application shall contain, besides the
specified particulars, such other particulars as may be prescribed.
It has also been provided that every application made to the Settlement Commission
shall be accompanied by such fees as may be prescribed. Further, the assessee shall, on the
date on which he makes such an application to the Settlement Commission, also intimate the
Assessing Officer in such manner as may be prescribed, of having made such application to
the Settlement Commission.
Accordingly, it is proposed to empower the Central Government to make rules and
forms in this regard for the purposes of this clause.
110. Clause 282 of the Bill provides that no person shall be entitled to inspect, or
obtain copies of, any reports made by any income-tax authority to the Settlement Commission;
but the Settlement Commission may, in its discretion, furnish copies thereof to any such
person on an application made to it in this behalf and on payment of such fee as may be
prescribed. Further, for the purpose of enabling any person whose case is under consideration
to rebut any evidence brought on record against him in any such report, the Settlement
Commission shall, on an application made in this behalf, and on the payment of such fee as
may be prescribed, furnish such person with a certified copy of any such report or part
thereof relevant for the purpose.
Accordingly, it is proposed to empower the Central Government to make rules in this
regard for the purposes of this clause.
111. Clause 291 of the Bill provides that in respect of any agreement with foreign
countries or specified territory, the Central Government may, by notification in the Official
Gazette, make such provisions as may be necessary for implementing the agreements.
Accordingly, it is proposed to empower the Central Government to issue notifications
in this regard for the purposes of this clause.
112. Clause 291 of the Bill further provides that in respect of any agreement with
foreign countries or specified territory, a person shall not be entitled to claim relief under the
provisions of the agreement unless a certificate of his being a resident in the other country
or specified territory is obtained by him from the tax authority of that country or specified
territory, in the prescribed form.
Accordingly, it is proposed to empower the Central Government to make rules in this
regard for the purposes of this clause.
113. Clause 292 of the Bill provides that every person who fulfils such conditions and
requirements as may be prescribed shall make an application for the allotment of a permanent
account number and the applicant shall be allotted a permanent account number. Further, a
permanent account number may, having regard to the nature of transactions as may be
prescribed, be allotted to any other person, whether or not an application is made by him.

389
Also, any person who has been allotted a permanent account number shall quote the
number in the transactions, or documents, as may be prescribed.
Accordingly, it is proposed to empower the Central Government to make rules in this
regard for the purposes of this clause.
114. Clause 292 of the Bill further provides that the Board shall prescribe the following
in respect of the permanent account number:
(a) the form and the manner in which an application may be made for the allotment
of a permanent account number and the particulars which such application shall
contain;
(b) the income-tax authority, or any other person, authorised to receive the
application or allot the permanent account number;
(c) the categories of transactions in relation to which Permanent Account
Numbers shall be quoted by every person in the documents pertaining to such
transactions;
(d) the categories of documents in which such numbers shall be quoted by
every person;
(e) class, or classes, of persons to whom the provisions of this section shall not
apply;
(f) the form and the manner in which the person who has not been allotted a
Permanent Account Number shall make his declaration;
(g) the manner in which the Permanent Account Number shall be quoted in
respect of the categories of transactions referred to in clause (c); and any other
matters connected therewith.
Accordingly, it is proposed to empower the Board to make rules in this regard for the
purposes of this clause.
115. Clause 293 of the Bill provides that any person who has been allotted a tax
account number shall quote the number in the transactions, or documents, as may be
prescribed.
Accordingly, it is proposed to empower the Central Government to make rules in this
regard for the purposes of this clause.
116. Clause 294 of the Bill provides that no person shall accept from, or repay to, any
other person any loan or deposit otherwise than by an account payee cheque or bank draft,
if the aggregate amount of such loan or deposit in a financial year exceeds fifty thousand
rupees. However, these provisions shall not apply to any loan or deposit taken or accepted
from, or by such other institution, association or body or class of institutions, associations
or bodies which the Central Government may, for reasons to be recorded in writing, notify.
Accordingly, it is proposed to empower the Central Government to issue notifications
in this regard for the purposes of this clause.
117. Clause 295 of the Bill provides that every person responsible for registering or
maintaining books of account or other documents containing a record of any specified
financial transaction, under any law for the time being in force, shall furnish an annual
information return, in respect of such specified financial transaction. Such person will also
include a designated person in the case of an office of Government.
Accordingly, it is proposed to empower the Central Government to make rules in this
regard for the purposes of this clause.
118. Clause 295 of the Bill further provides that the annual information return in
respect of the specified financial transactions shall be furnished to such authority, in such
form and manner (including on a floppy, diskette, magnetic cartridge tape, CD-ROM or any
computer readable media) and within such time as may be prescribed.

390
Accordingly, it is proposed to empower the Central Government to make rules in this
regard for the purposes of this clause.
119. Clause 295 of the Bill further provides that for the purposes of furnishing the
annual information return, “specified financial transaction” shall include any other transaction
as may be prescribed.
Accordingly, it is proposed to empower the Central Government to make rules in this
regard for the purposes of this clause.
120. Clause 295 of the Bill further provides that the annual information return in
respect of the financial transactions shall be furnished if the aggregate value of each such
transaction in any financial year exceeds the amount as may be prescribed.
Accordingly, it is proposed to empower the Central Government to make rules in this
regard for the purposes of this clause.
121. Clause 295 of the Bill further provides that the prescribed income-tax authority
may, if he considers that the annual information return furnished is defective, intimate the
defect to the person who has furnished such return and give him an opportunity of rectifying
the defect within a period of one month from the service of such intimation. Further, the
prescribed income-tax authority shall treat the annual information return as invalid if such
defect is not removed within the time allowed, and the provisions of the Code shall apply as
if such person had failed to furnish the annual information return.
Accordingly, it is proposed to empower the Central Government to make rules in this
regard for the purposes of this clause.
122. Clause 295 of the Bill further provides that if a person who is required to furnish
an annual information return under the said clause has not furnished the same within the
prescribed time, the prescribed income-tax authority may serve upon such person a notice
requiring him to furnish such return within a period not exceeding sixty days from the date
of service of the notice and such person shall furnish the annual information return within
the time specified in the notice.
Accordingly, it is proposed to empower the Central Government to make rules in this
regard for the purposes of this clause.
123. Clause 304 of the Bill provides that any assessee who is entitled, or required, to
attend before any income-tax authority, or the Appellate Tribunal, in connection with any
proceeding under this Code, may attend through an authorised representative. An
“authorised representative” means a person authorised by the assessee in writing to appear
on his behalf, including any person who has acquired such educational qualifications as
may be prescribed for this purpose.
Accordingly, it is proposed to empower the Central Government to make rules in this
regard for the purposes of this clause.
124. Clause 304 of the Bill further provides that a person, not being a legal practitioner
or an accountant, who is found guilty of misconduct in connection with any income-tax
proceedings by the prescribed authority, shall not be qualified to represent an assessee as
his authorised representative.
Accordingly, it is proposed to empower the Central Government to make rules in this
regard for the purposes of this clause.
125. Clause 305 of the Bill provides that the method of rounding off of the amount of
tax bases to the nearest multiple of hundred rupees, and any amount payable, or receivable,
by the assessee, to the nearest multiple of ten rupees under the provisions of the Code shall
be such as may be prescribed.
Accordingly, it is proposed to empower the Central Government to make rules in this
regard for the purposes of this clause.

391
126. Sub-clause (18) of clause 314 of the Bill defines “approved fund” to also mean a
provident fund, superannuation fund, gratuity fund, pension fund, or any other fund, as
approved by the Board in accordance with the scheme framed and prescribed by the Central
Government in this behalf;
Accordingly, it is proposed to empower the Central Government to frame the scheme
in this regard for the purposes of this clause.
127. Sub-clause (31) of clause 314 of the Bill defines “backward classes” to mean such
classes of citizens, other than the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes, as may be
notified, from time to time, by the Central Government or any State Government.
Accordingly, it is proposed to empower the Central Government and the State
Governments to issue notifications in this regard for the purposes of this clause.
128. Sub-clause (34) of clause 314 of the Bill defines “Board” to mean the Central
Board of Direct Taxes constituted under the Central Boards of Revenue Act, 1963 and
notified by the Central Government for the purposes of this Code.
Accordingly, it is proposed to empower the Central Government to issue notification
in this regard for the purposes of this clause.
129. Sub-clause (36) of clause 314 of the Bill defines “broken-period income” to mean
the income for the period commencing from the date on which the debt instrument is
acquired by the person or the beginning of the financial year, whichever is later, and ending
on the date on which the security is sold, and calculated in such manner as may be prescribed.
Accordingly, it is proposed to empower the Central Government to make rules in this
regard for the purposes of this clause.
130. Sub-clause (55) of clause 314 of the Bill defines “Competent Investigating
Authority” to mean any income-tax authority not below the rank of Joint Commissioner
prescribed as such.
Accordingly, it is proposed to empower the Central Government to notify/make rules
in this regard for the purposes of this clause.
131. Sub-clause (57) of clause 314 of the Bill defines “computer software” to mean any
computer programme recorded on any disc, tape, perforated media or other information
storage device; or any customised electronic data or any product or service of similar
nature, as may be notified by the Board.
Accordingly, it is proposed to empower the Board to issue notification in this regard
for the purposes of this clause.
132. Sub-clause (63) of clause 314 of the Bill defines “Cost Inflation Index” in relation
to a financial year as the index as the Central Government may specify by Notification,
having regard to seventy-five per cent. of the average rise in the consumer price index for
non-urban manual employees for the immediately preceding financial year.
Accordingly, it is proposed to empower the Central Government to notify the “index”
in this regard for the purposes of this clause.
133. Sub-clause (74) of clause 314 of the Bill provides that the transfer, in relation to
“demerger”, shall be in accordance with such other conditions as may be notified by the
Central Government having regard to the necessity to ensure that the transfer is for genuine
business purposes. It is further provided that the splitting up or the reconstruction of any
authority or a body constituted or established under a Central, State or Provincial Act, or a
local authority or a public sector company to form a resulting company, shall be in accordance
with the conditions as may be notified by the Central Government.
Accordingly, it is proposed to empower the Central Government to make rules in this
regard for the purposes of this clause.

392
134. Sub-clause (86) of clause 314 of the Bill defines “due date” in relation to any
other return, other than the return of tax bases, to mean such date as may be prescribed.
Accordingly, it is proposed to empower the Central Government to make rules in this
regard for the purposes of this clause.
135. Sub-clause (87) of clause 314 of the Bill defines “electoral trust” to mean a trust
so approved by the Board in accordance with the scheme made in this regard by the Central
Government.
Accordingly, it is proposed to empower the Central Government to make the scheme
in this regard for the purposes of this clause.
136. Sub-clause (93) of clause 314 of the Bill defines “fair market value”, in relation to
an asset, to mean the price determined in such manner as may be prescribed.
Accordingly, it is proposed to empower the Central Government to make rules in this
regard for the purposes of this clause.
137. Sub-clause (112) of clause 314 of the Bill defines “head office expenditure” to
mean executive and general administration expenditure incurred by the assessee outside
India, including expenditure incurred in respect of, in addition to the matters specified
therein, such other matters connected with administration as may be prescribed.
Accordingly, it is proposed to empower the Central Government to make rules in this
regard for the purposes of this clause.
138. Sub-clause (159) of Clause 314 of the Bill defines “medical authority” as - (i) the
medical authority referred to in clause (p) of section 2 of the Persons with Disabilities (Equal
Opportunities, Protection of Rights and Full Participation) Act, 1995; or (ii) such other
medical authority as may be notified by the Central Government for this purpose.
Accordingly, it is proposed to empower the Central Government to notify the “medical
authority” in this regard for the purposes of this clause.
139. Sub-clause (166) of clause 314 of the Bill defines “net worth” in relation to an
undertaking or division transferred under slump sale, to mean the value determined in such
manner as may be prescribed.
Accordingly, it is proposed to empower the Central Government to make rules in this
regard for the purposes of this clause.
140. Sub-clause (191) of clause 314 of the Bill provides that the value of the perquisites
defined therein shall be computed in such manner as may be prescribed.
Accordingly, it is proposed to empower the Central Government to make rules in
respect of the manner of computation of the value of perquisites for the purposes of this
clause.
141. Sub-clause (211) of clause 314 of the Bill defines “recognised stock exchange” to
mean a recognised stock exchange as referred to in clause (f) of section 2 of the Securities
Contracts (Regulation) Act, 1956 and which fulfils such conditions as may be prescribed
and notified by the Central Government for this purpose.
Accordingly, it is proposed to empower the Central Government to make rules in this
regard for the purposes of this clause.
142. Sub-clause (213) of clause 314 of the Bill defines “registered valuer” to mean a
person registered as such by the Board for determining the value of any asset in accordance
with the procedure as may be prescribed.
Accordingly, it is proposed to empower the Central Government to make rules in this
regard for the purposes of this clause.

393
143. Sub-clause (239) of clause 314 of the Bill defines “specified association” to mean
any institution, association or body, whether incorporated or not, functioning under any
law for the time being in force in India or the laws of the specified territory outside India and
notified as such by the Central Government.
Accordingly, it is proposed to empower the Central Government to issue notification
in this regard for the purposes of this clause.
144. Sub-clause (241) of clause 314 of the Bill defines “specified knowledge-based
industry or service” to mean any other industry or service, other than those specified
therein, as may be notified by the Central Government.
Accordingly, it is proposed to empower the Central Government to issue notification
in this regard for the purposes of this clause.
145. Sub-clause (242) of clause 314 of the Bill defines “specified territory” to mean
any area outside India and notified as such by the Central Government.
Accordingly, it is proposed to empower the Central Government to issue notification
in this regard for the purposes of this clause.
146. Sub-clause (250) of clause 314 of the Bill defines “State Pooled Finance Entity” to
mean such entity which is set up in accordance with the guidelines for the Pooled Finance
Development Scheme notified by the Central Government.
Accordingly, it is proposed to empower the Central Government to make rules in this
regard for the purposes of this clause.
147. Sub-clause (259) of clause 314 of the Bill defines “Tax Recovery Officer” to mean
any Income-tax Officer who may be authorised by the Chief Commissioner or the
Commissioner, by general or special order in writing to exercise the powers of a Tax Recovery
Officer to exercise or perform such powers and functions which are conferred on, or assigned
to, an Assessing Officer as may be prescribed.
Accordingly, it is proposed to empower the Central Government to make rules in this
regard for the purposes of this clause.
148. Sub-clause (260) of clause 314 of the Bill provides that “test of continuity of
business” stands satisfied, in case of a successor, if he, in addition to fulfiling the conditions
specified therein, fulfils such other conditions as may be prescribed to ensure the revival of
the business of the predecessor or to ensure that the business reorganisation is for genuine
business purpose.
Accordingly, it is proposed to empower the Central Government to make rules in this
regard for the purposes of this clause.
149. Sub-clause (284) of clause 314 of the Bill defines “urban area” as an area within
such distance from the local limits of any municipality or cantonment board referred to in
item (a), as the Central Government may having regard to the extent of, and scope for,
urbanisation of that area and other relevant considerations, specify in this behalf by
notification.
Accordingly, it is proposed to empower the Central Government to issue notification
in this regard for the purposes of this clause.
150. Sub-clause (289) of clause 314 of the Bill provides that “value of sweat equity
shares” shall be the value of the sweat equity shares on the date on which the option is
exercised by the assessee, determined in accordance with the method as may be prescribed,
as reduced by the amount actually paid by, or recovered from, the assessee in respect of
such shares.
Accordingly, it is proposed to empower the Central Government to make rules in this
regard for the purposes of this clause.

394
151. Sub-clause (290) of clause 314 of the Bill defines “venture capital company” to
mean a company,—
(a) which has been granted a certificate of registration as a venture capital
company under the Securities and Exchange Board of India Act, 1992; and
(b) which fulfils all other conditions as may be prescribed in this behalf.
Accordingly, it is proposed to empower the Central Government to make rules in this
regard for the purposes of this clause.
152. Sub-clause (291) of clause 314 of the Bill defines “venture capital fund” to mean
a fund,—
(a) which has been granted a certificate of registration as a venture capital fund
under the Securities and Exchange Board of India Act, 1992; and
(b) which fulfils all other conditions as may be prescribed in this behalf.
Accordingly, it is proposed to empower the Central Government to make rules in this
regard for the purposes of this clause.
153. Sub-clause (292) of clause 314 of the Bill defines “venture capital undertaking” to
mean such domestic company whose shares are not listed in a recognised stock exchange
in India and which is engaged in the business of—
(a) nanotechnology;
(b) information technology relating to hardware and software development;
(c) seed research and development;
(d) bio-technology;
(e) research and development of new chemical entities in the pharmaceutical
sector;
(f) production of bio-fuels;
(g) dairy or poultry;
(h) building and operating composite hotel-cum-convention centre with seating
capacity of more than three thousand;
(i) development of infrastructure facility; or
(j) any other business as may be prescribed.
Accordingly, it is proposed to empower the Central Government to make rules in this
regard for the purposes of this clause.
154. Sub-clause (297) of clause 314 of the Bill defines “zero coupon bond” to mean a
bond issued by any company, fund or scheduled bank in accordance with a scheme notified
by the Central Government; in respect of which no payment and benefit is received or
receivable before maturity or redemption from the company, fund or scheduled bank; and
which the Central Government may, by notification, specify in this behalf.
Accordingly, it is proposed to empower the Central Government to frame and notify
the scheme in this regard for the purposes of this clause.
155. Sub-clause 316 of the Bill provides that the Board may, subject to the control of
the Central Government, make rules for the whole or any part of India for carrying out the
purposes of this Code. It has been further provided that in particular, and without prejudice
to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may provide for all or any of the
following matters namely:—
(a) the ascertainment and determination of any class of income;

395
(b) the manner in which and the procedure by which the income shall be arrived
at, in the case of—
(i) agriculture income;
(ii) a person residing outside India;
(iii) a person whose total income includes income referred to in section 8;
(c) the determination of the amount of expenditure allowable under this Code in
such manner, to such extent, and on such basis and conditions, as appears to the
Board to be proper and reasonable;
(d) the methods by which an estimate of any income liable to tax, or expenditure
liable to deduction, may be made, if such income or expenditure cannot be definitely
ascertained, or can be ascertained only with an amount of trouble and expense to the
assessee which in the opinion of the Board is unreasonable;
(e) the form and manner in which any document, application, claim, return or
information may be made or furnished and the fees that may be levied in respect of
any document, application or claim;
(f) the class or classes of persons who shall be required to furnish any document,
application, claim, return or information in electronic form;
(g) the form and manner in which a document, application, claim, return or
information may be furnished electronically;
(h) the document, statement, receipt, certificate or report which, regardless of
anything to the contrary contained in this Code, may not be furnished along with the
return but shall be produced before the Assessing Officer on demand;
(i) the computer resource or the electronic record to which a document,
application, claim, return or information may be transmitted electronically;
(j) the manner in which any document, application, claim, return or information
required to be filed under this Code may be verified;
(k) the authority, agency or organisation who may receive any application,
claim, return or information on behalf of the Board or the Department;
(l) the procedure to be followed in calculating interest payable by assessees or
interest payable by Government to assessees under any provision of this Code,
including the rounding off of the period for which such interest is to be calculated in
cases where such period includes a fraction of a month, and specifying the
circumstances in which and the extent to which petty amounts of interest payable by
assessees may be ignored;
(m) the form and manner in which any appeal or cross-objection may be filed
under this Code and the manner in which intimation of any such order as is referred to
in clause (d) of sub-section (3) of section 184 may be served;
(n) the circumstances in which, the conditions subject to which and the manner
in which, the Commissioner (Appeals) may permit an appellant to produce evidence
which he did not produce or which he was not allowed to produce before the Assessing
Officer;
(o) the fee payable in respect of any appeal, application, reference or ruling;
(p) the maintenance of a register of persons referred to in section 270, other
than legal practitioners or accountants, practicing before income-tax authorities and
for the constitution of and the procedure to be followed by the authority referred to in
sub-section (4) of that section;
(q) the issue of certificate verifying the payment of tax by assessees;

396
(r) the authority to be prescribed for any of the purposes of this Code;
(s) the procedure for giving effect to the terms of any agreement for the granting
of relief in respect of double taxation or for the avoidance of double taxation which
may be entered into by the Central Government under this Code; and
(t) any other matter which by this Code is to be, or may be, prescribed.
The aforesaid clause also provides that any order made, proceeding initiated or
conducted, or liability or obligation discharged, in accordance with the Rules framed under
this section shall be deemed to be duly made, initiated, conducted or discharged, in
accordance with the provisions of the Code. It has also been provided that the power to
make rules conferred by this clause shall include the power to give retrospective effect,
from a date not earlier than the date of commencement of the Code, to the rules or any of
them and, unless the contrary is permitted, no retrospective effect shall be given to any rule
so as to prejudicially affect the interests of assessees.
Accordingly, it is proposed to empower the Board to make rules and notifications in
this regard for the purposes of this clause.
156. Paragraph 93 of the Fifth Schedule of the Bill provides that the Board may
prescribe the form to be used for any order, notice, warrant, or certificate to be issued under
the Fifth Schedule.
Accordingly, it is proposed to empower the Board to prescribed forms in this regard
for the purposes of this clause.
157. Paragraph 4 of the Sixth Schedule of the Bill provides that the amount of family
pension received by the widow or children or nominated heirs, as the case may be, of a
member of the armed forces (including para-military forces) of the Union, if the death of
such member has occurred in the course of operational duties, in such circumstances and
subject to such conditions, as may be prescribed.
Accordingly, it is proposed to empower the Central Government to frame the scheme
and make rules in this regard for the purposes of this clause.
158. Paragraph 5 of the Sixth Schedule of the Bill provides that income not included
any income arising to a foreign company, as the Central Government may, by notification,
specify in this behalf, by way of royalty or fees for technical services received in pursuance
of an agreement entered into with the Government for providing services in or outside India
in projects connected with security of India.
Accordingly, it is proposed to empower the Central Government to issue notification
in this regard for the purposes of this clause.
159. Paragraph 6 of the Sixth Schedule of the Bill provides that income not included
in the total income shall also comprise any income of the European Economic Community
(established by the Treaty of Rome of 25th March, 1957), derived in India by way of
interest, dividends or capital gains from investments made out of its funds under such
scheme as the Central Government may, specify in this behalf.
Accordingly, it is proposed to empower the Central Government to frame the scheme
and issue notification in this regard for the purposes of this clause.
160. Paragraph 10 of the Sixth Schedule of the Bill provides that income not included
in the total income shall also comprise any income, the nature and extent, accruing to a body
or authority which is notified by the Central Government in this behalf if such body or
authority—
(a) has been established or constituted or appointed under—
(i) a treaty or an agreement entered into by the Central Government with
two or more countries; or

397
(ii) a convention signed by the Central Government; and
(b) is not established, constituted or appointed for the purposes of profit.
Accordingly, it is proposed to empower the Central Government to issue notification
in this regard for the purposes of this clause.
161. Paragraph 12 of the Sixth Schedule of the Bill provides that income not included
in the total income shall also comprise any payment from a provident fund to which the
Provident Funds Act, 1925, applies or from any other provident fund set up by the Central
Government and notified by it in this behalf.
Accordingly, it is proposed to empower the Central Government to issue notification
in this regard for the purposes of this clause.
162. Paragraph 27 item (a) of the Sixth Schedule of the Bill provides that income not
included in the total income shall also comprise any amount received by way of pension by
an individual, who had been in the service of the Central Government or State Government
and has been awarded “Param Vir Chakra” or “Maha Vir Chakra” or “Vir Chakra” or such
other gallantry award as the Central Government may, by notification, specify in this
behalf.
Accordingly, it is proposed to empower the Central Government to issue notification
in this regard for the purposes of this clause.
163. Paragraph 31 of the Sixth Schedule of the Bill provides that income not included
in the total income shall also comprise any amount of interest on bonds issued by a local
authority or by a State Pooled Finance Entity as a public sector company and specified by
the Central Government by notification.
Accordingly, it is proposed to empower the Central Government to make rules and
issue notification in this regard for the purposes of this clause.
164. Paragraph 34 of the Sixth Schedule of the Bill provides that income not included
in the total income shall also comprise any income and amount thereof notified by the
Central Government accruing to any person from any international sporting event held in
India, if such event is approved by the international body regulating the international sport
relating to such event; has participation of more than two countries; and is notified by the
Central Government for the purposes of this paragraph.
Accordingly, it is proposed to empower the Central Government to issue notification
in this regard for the purposes of this clause.
165. Paragraph 41 of the Sixth Schedule of the Bill provides that income not included
in the total income shall also comprise any payment received by any employee, from one or
more employers, as the cash equivalent of the leave salary in respect of the period of earned
leave at this credit at the time of this retirement, to the extent the aggregate of such amount
does not exceed the limit as may be prescribed.
Accordingly, it is proposed to empower the Central Government to make rules in this
regard for the purposes of this clause.
166. Paragraph 42 of the Sixth Schedule of the Bill provides that income not included
in the total income shall also comprise any payment received by any employee, from one or
more employers, by way of gratuity on his retirement, or on his becoming incapacitated
prior to such retirement, or on termination of his employment; or any gratuity received by
the family on the death of the employee, to the extent the aggregate of such amount does
not exceed the limit as may be prescribed.
Accordingly, it is proposed to empower the Central Government to make rules in this
regard for the purposes of this clause.
167. Paragraph 43 of the Sixth Schedule of the Bill provides that income not included
in the total income shall also comprise any amount received by any employee, from one or

398
more employers, in connection with his voluntary retirement or termination of his service or
voluntary separation under any scheme framed for this purpose in accordance with such
rules as may be prescribed, to the extent the aggregate of such amount does not exceed the
limit as may be prescribed.
Accordingly, it is proposed to empower the Central Government to make rules in this
regard for the purposes of this clause.
168. Paragraph 47 of the Sixth Schedule of the Bill provides that income not included
in the total income shall also comprise income of a co-operative society from such activities
and to such extent as may be prescribed.
Accordingly, it is proposed to empower the Central Government to make rules in this
regard for the purposes of this clause.
169. Paragraph 22 of the Seventh Schedule of the Bill provides that any electoral trust
so approved by the Board in accordance with the scheme made in this regard by the Central
Government, shall not be liable to income-tax, if ninety five per cent. of the aggregate of all
voluntary contributions received by it during the financial year and the surplus, if any,
brought forward from any preceding financial year is distributed to political parties.
Accordingly, it is proposed to empower the Central Government to frame the scheme
in this regard for the purposes of this clause.
170. Paragraph 24 of the Seventh Schedule of the Bill provides that any corporation
established by the Central or State Government for promoting the interests of the members
of a minority community notified as such by the Central Government, shall not be liable to
income-tax.
Accordingly, it is proposed to empower the Central Government to issue notification
in this regard for the purposes of this clause.
171. Paragraphs 3 and 4 of the Eighth Schedule of the Bill provides that the profits of
the business of insurance other than life insurance shall be the profits disclosed in the
annual accounts, copies of which are required to be furnished under the Insurance Act,
1938, to the Controller of Insurance. Such profits shall also be decreased by such amount
carried over to a reserve for unexpired risks as may be prescribed.
Accordingly, it is proposed to empower the Central Government to make rules in this
regard for the purposes of this clause.
166. Paragraph 11 of the Eighth Schedule of the Bill provides that the amount of
common costs (including depreciation) attributable to the business of insurance shall be
determined in such manner as may be prescribed.
Accordingly, it is proposed to empower the Central Government to make rules in this
regard for the purposes of this clause.
172. Paragraph 6 of the Ninth Schedule of the Bill provides that the amount of
common costs (including depreciation) attributable to the special source and presumed to
have been allowed under paragraph 4  thereof shall be determined in such manner as may be
prescribed.
Accordingly, it is proposed to empower the Central Government to make rules in this
regard for the purposes of this clause.
173. Paragraph 7 of the Tenth Schedule of the Bill provides that the amount of common
costs (including depreciation) attributable to the business of operating a qualifying ship
and any other business shall be determined in such manner as may be prescribed.
Accordingly, it is proposed to empower the Central Government to make rules in this
regard for the purposes of this clause.

399
174. Paragraph 13 of the Tenth Schedule of the Bill provides that the Board may make
rules for the purposes of computation of income from the business of operating a qualifying
ship in respect of the following:—
(a) method and time for opting into the tonnage income scheme and the period
for, and circumstances under, which the option shall remain in force;
(b) circumstances under which a company may be excluded from the tonnage
income scheme;
(c) such other conditions for applicability of tonnage income scheme having
regard to the need for generating internal accruals for acquiring new ships and training
of crews;
(d) limits for charters of tonnage;
(e) prevention of abuse of the tonnage income scheme, having regard to the
need to ensure that no transaction or arrangement results, or but for the rules prescribed
hereunder, would have resulted in a tax advantage being obtained for—
(i) a person other than a qualifying shipping company; or
(ii) a qualifying shipping company in respect of its activities other than its
business of operating a qualifying ship;
(f) valuation of goods or services where these are transferred between the
business of operating a qualifying ship and any other business carried on by a
qualifying shipping company;
(g) determination of arm’s length price of the business transactions if the
arrangement of transactions results in abuse of the tonnage income scheme.
It is proposed to empower the Board to make rules in this regard for the purposes of
this clause.
176. Paragraph 16 of the Tenth Schedule of the Bill further provides that the ‘deemed
tonnage’ in a case where an arrangement has been entered into by the qualifying company
for purchase of slots, slot charter or sharing of a qualifying ship, calculated in such manner
as may be prescribed.
Accordingly, it is proposed to empower the Central Government to make rules in this
regard for the purposes of this clause.
177. Paragraph 3 of the Eleventh Schedule of the Bill provides that for the purpose of
computing the profits of the business of mineral oil or natural gas, the amount of business
expenditure shall be the aggregate of the amounts specified therein, payment to Site
Restoration Account maintained in State Bank of India in accordance with the Scheme as
may be prescribed.
Accordingly, it is proposed to empower the Central Government to frame the Scheme
in this regard for the purposes of this clause.
178. Paragraph 6 of the Eleventh Schedule of the Bill provides that the amount of
common costs including depreciation attributable to the business of mineral oil or natural
gas and any other business shall be determined in such manner as may be prescribed.
Accordingly, it is proposed to empower the Central Government to make rules in this
regard for the purposes of this clause.
179. Paragraph 7 of the Twelfth Schedule of the Bill provides that the amount of
common costs (including depreciation) attributable to the specified business referred to
that Schedule shall be determined in such manner as may be prescribed.
Accordingly, it is proposed to empower the Central Government to make rules in this
regard for the purposes of this clause.

400
180. Paragraph 1 of the Thirteenth Schedule of the Bill provides that the provisions of
that Schedule shall apply to the specified businesses enumerated therein which fulfil the
prescribed conditions and are notified by the Central Government in the Official Gazette.
Accordingly, it is proposed to empower the Central Government to make rules in this
regard for the purposes of this clause.
181. Paragraphs 1, item (j) of the Thirteenth Schedule of the Bill further provides that
‘specified business’ for the purposes of that Schedule shall, inter alia, include the business
of developing and building a housing project under a scheme for slum redevelopment or
rehabilitation framed by the Central Government or a State Government, as the case may be,
and notified by the Board in this behalf in accordance with the guidelines as may be
prescribed.
Accordingly, it is proposed to empower the Central Government and the State
Governments to make the scheme and guidelines and the Board to issue notifications and
prescribe rules in this regard for the purposes of this clause.
182. Paragraph 8 of the Thirteenth Schedule of the Bill provides that the amount of
common costs including depreciation attributable to the specified business and any other
business referred to in that Schedule shall be determined in such manner as may be prescribed.
Accordingly, it is proposed to empower the Central Government to make rules in this
regard for the purposes of this clause.
183. Paragraph 9 of the Thirteenth Schedule of the Bill provides that the provisions of
that Schedule shall apply to the business referred to in paragraph (1) therein, which fulfils
the conditions specified therein along with any other condition as may be prescribed.
Accordingly, it is proposed to empower the Central Government to make rules in this
regard for the purposes of this clause.
184. Item (ii) and (iii) of paragraph 9 of the Thirteenth Schedule of the Bill provides
that the provisions of that Schedule shall apply to the specified business of laying and
operating a cross country natural gas or crude or petroleum oil pipeline network for
distribution, including storage facilities being an integral part of the network, which fulfils
the condition that it has been approved by the Petroleum and Natural Gas Regulatory Board
established under sub-clause (1) of clause 3 of the Petroleum and Natural Gas Regulatory
Board Act, 2006 and notified by the Central Government in the Official Gazette in this behalf.
Accordingly, it is proposed to empower the Central Government to issue notification
in this regard for the purposes of this clause.
185. Paragraph 5 of the Fourteenth Schedule of the Bill provides that the amount of
common costs (including depreciation) attributable to the business specified in column 2 of
the Table in paragraph 1 and presumed to have been allowed under Paragraph 3 shall be
determined in the prescribed manner.
Accordingly, it is proposed to empower the Central Government to make rules in this
regard for the purposes of this clause.
186. Part I of the Sixteenth Schedule of the Bill specifies the contributions or donations
eligible for one hundred seventy-five per cent. deduction. This includes any research
association or National Laboratory or university, college or other institution if it is engaged
in carrying on scientific research and development; and such association, university, college
or other institution is approved in this behalf subject to conditions and in accordance with
such guidelines and manner as may be prescribed.
Accordingly, it is proposed to empower the Central Government to make rules in this
regard for the purposes of this clause.
187. Part II of the Sixteenth Schedule of the Bill specifies the contributions or donations
eligible for one hundred twenty-five per cent. deduction. This includes any research
association or a university, college or other institution if it is engaged in carrying on statistical

401
research or research in social science; and such association, university, college or other
institution is approved in this behalf subject to conditions and in accordance with such
guidelines and as may be prescribed.
Accordingly, it is proposed to empower the Central Government to make rules in this
regard for the purposes of this clause.
188. Part III of the Sixteenth Schedule of the Bill specifies the contributions or donations
eligible for one hundred per cent. deduction. This includes any University or educational
institution of national eminence as may be approved by the prescribed authority in this
behalf; the Government or any such local authority, institution or association as may be
approved in this behalf by the Central Government, to be utilised for the purpose of promoting
family planning; the Indian Olympic Association or to any other association or institution
established in India, as the Central Government may, having regard to the prescribed
guidelines, by notification, specify in this behalf for— (a) the development of infrastructure
for sports and games; or (b) the sponsorship of sports and games, in India and where the
sum is paid by an assessee, being a company; a rural development fund set up and notified
by the Central Government; the National Urban Poverty Eradication Fund set up and notified
by the Central Government.
Accordingly, it is proposed to empower the Central Government to make rules and
issue notifications in this regard for the purposes of this clause.
189. Part D of the Sixteenth Schedule of the Bill specifies the contributions or donations
eligible for fifty per cent. deduction. This includes a temple, mosque, gurdwara, church or
any other place as is notified by the Central Government to be of historic, archaeological or
artistic importance or to be a place of public worship of renown throughout a State or
States, to be utilised for the renovation or repair of such temple, mosque, gurdwara, church
or other place.
Accordingly, it is proposed to empower the Central Government to issue notification
in this regard for the purposes of this clause.
190. Paragraph 3 of Part-I of the Nineteenth Schedule of the Bill provides that in order
that a provident fund may receive and retain approval, it shall, subject to the provisions of
Paragraph 5, satisfy the conditions set out thereunder and any other conditions which the
Board may, by rules, specify. It further provides that the Board may by rules specify the
conditions and restrictions in respect of portion of balence to the credit of employees
payable to him.
Accordingly, it is proposed to empower the Board to make rules in this regard for the
purposes of this clause.
191. Paragraph 4 of Part-I of the Nineteenth Schedule of the Bill further provides that
where approval is accorded to a provident fund with existing balances, an account shall be
made of the fund up to the day immediately preceding the day on which the approval takes
effect, showing the balance to the credit of each employee on such day, and containing
such further particulars as the Board may prescribe.
 Accordingly, it is proposed to empower the Board to make rules in this regard for the
purposes of this clause.
192. Paragraph 6 of Part-I of the Nineteenth Schedule of the Bill provides that that
portion of the annual accretion in any financial year to the balance at the credit of an
employee participating in an approved provident fund as consists of – (a) contributions
made by the employer in excess of twelve percent of the salary of the employee or one lakh
rupees, whichever is less; and (b) interest credited on the balance to the credit of the
employee in so far as it is allowed at a rate exceeding such rate as may be fixed by the Central
Government in this behalf by notification, shall be deemed to have been received by the
employee in that financial year and shall be included in total income for that financial year,
and shall be liable to income-tax.

402
Accordingly, it is proposed to empower the Central Government to fix the rate and
issue notification in this regard for the purposes of this clause.
193. Paragraph 11 of Part-I of the Nineteenth Schedule of the Bill provides that the
accounts of an approved provident fund shall be maintained by the trustees of the fund and
shall be in such form and for such periods, and shall contain such particulars, as the Board
may prescribe. It is further provided that the accounts shall be open to inspection at all
reasonable times by income-tax authorities, and the trustees shall furnish to the Assessing
Officer such abstracts thereof as the Board may prescribe.
Accordingly, it is proposed to empower the Board to make rules in this regard for the
purposes of this clause.
194. Paragraph 13 of Part-I of the Nineteenth Schedule of the Bill provides that an
employer objecting to an order of the Commissioner refusing to approve or an order
withdrawing approval from a provident fund, may appeal, within sixty days of such order, to
the Board. The Appeal shall be in such form and shall be verified in such manner and shall
be subject to the payment of such fee as the Board may prescribe.
Accordingly, it is proposed to empower the Board to make rules in this regard for the
purposes of this clause.
195. Paragraph 15 of Part-I of the Nineteenth Schedule of the Bill provides that in
addition to any power conferred by that Part, the Board may make rules—
(a) prescribing the statements and other information to be submitted along with
an application for approval;
(b) limiting the contributions to an approved provident fund by employees of a
company who are shareholders in the company;
(c) regulating the investment or deposit or the moneys of an approved provident
fund;
(d) providing for the assessment by way of penalty of any consideration received
by an employee for an assignment of, or creation of a charge upon, his beneficial
interest in an approved provident fund;
(e) determining the extend to and the manner in which exemption from payment
of tax may be granted in respect of contributions and interest credited to the individual
accounts of employees in a provident fund from which approval has been withdrawn;
and
(f) generally, to carry out the purposes of this part and to secure such further
control over the approval of provident funds and the administration of approved
provident funds as it may deem requisite.
Accordingly, it is proposed to empower the Board to make rules in this regard for the
purposes of this clause.
196. Paragraph 3 of Part-II of the Nineteenth Schedule of the Bill provides that in order
that a superannuation fund may receive and retain approval, it shall satisfy the conditions
set out therein and any other conditions which the Board may, by rules, prescribe.
Accordingly, it is proposed to empower the Board to make rules in this regard for the
purposes of this clause.
197. Paragraph 6 of Part-II of the Nineteenth Schedule of the Bill provides that where
any contributions made by an employer, including interest on contributions, if any, are paid
to any employee during his lifetime, in circumstances other than those referred to in paragraph
(13 of the Sixth Schedule, tax on the amounts so paid shall be deducted at the average rate
of tax at which the employee was liable to tax during the preceding three years or during the
period, if less than three years, when he was a member of the fund, and shall be paid by the
trustees to the credit of the central government within the prescribed time and in such
manner as the Board may direct.

403
Accordingly, it is proposed to empower the Board to make rules in this regard for the
purposes of this clause.
197. Paragraph 8 of Part-II of the Nineteenth Schedule of the Bill provides that an
employer objecting to an order of the Commissioner refusing to accord approval to a
superannuation fund of an order withdrawing such approval may appeal, within sixty days
of such order, to the Board. The appeal shall be in such form and shall be verified in such
manner and shall be subject to the payment of such fee as may be prescribed.
Accordingly, it is proposed to empower the Board to make rules in this regard for the
purposes of this clause.
199. Paragraph 10 of Part-II of the Nineteenth Schedule of the Bill provides that in
addition to any power conferred by that Part, the Board may make rules—
(a) prescribing the statements and other information to be submitted along with
an application for approval;
(b) prescribing the returns, statements, particulars, or information which the
Assessing Officer may require from the trustees of an approved superannuation fund
or from the employer;
(c) limiting the ordinary annual contribution and any other contributions to an
approved superannuation fund by an employer;
(d) regulating the investment or deposit of the moneys of an approved
superannuation fund;
(e) providing for the assessment by way of penalty of any consideration received
by an employee for any assignment of, or creation of a charge upon, his beneficial
interest in an approved superannuation fund;
(f) determining the extent to , and the manner in , which exemption from payment
of tax may be granted in respect of any payment made from a superannuation fund
from which approval has been withdrawn;
(g) providing for the withdrawal for approval in the case of a fund which ceases
to satisfy the requirements of this Part or of the rules made thereunder; and
(h) generally, to carry out the purposes of this Part and to secure such further
control over the approval of superannuation funds and the administration of approved
superannuation funds as it may deem requisite.
Accordingly, it is proposed to empower the Board to make rules in this regard for the
purposes of this clause.
200. Paragraph 7 of Part-III of the Nineteenth Schedule of the Bill, inter alia, provides
that in order that a gratuity fund may receive and retain approval, it shall satisfy the conditions
set out below and any other conditions which the Board may, by rules, prescribe—
(a) the fund shall be a fund established under an irrevocable trust in connection
with a trade or undertaking carried on in India, and not less than ninety per cent. of
the employees shall be employed in India;
(b) the fund shall have for its sole purpose the provision of gratuity to employees
in the trade or undertaking on their retirement at or after a specified age or on their
becoming incapacitated prior to such retirement or on termination of their employment
after a minimum period of service specified in the rules of the fund on to the widows,
children or dependants of such employees on their death;
(c) the employer in the trade or undertaking shall be a contributor to the fund;
and
(d) all benefits granted by the fund shall be payable only in India.

404
Accordingly, it is proposed to empower the Board to make rules in this regard for the
purposes of this clause.
201. Paragraph 9 of Part-III of the Nineteenth Schedule of the Bill provides that an
employer objecting to an order of the Commissioner refusing to accord approval to a gratuity
fund or an order withdrawing such approval may appeal, within sixty days of such order, to
the Board. The appeal shall be in such form and shall be verified in such manner and shall
be subject to the payment of such fee as may be prescribed.
Accordingly, it is proposed to empower the Board to make rules in this regard for the
purposes of this clause.
202. Paragraph 9 of Part-III of the Nineteenth Schedule of the Bill provides that in
addition to any power conferred by that Part, the Board may make rules—
(a) prescribing the statements and other information to be submitted along with
an application for approval;
(b) limiting the ordinary annual and other contributions of an employer to the
fund;
(c) regulating the investment or deposit of the moneys of an approved gratuity
fund;
(d) providing for the assessment by way of penalty of any consideration received
by an employee for any assignment of, or creation of a charge upon, his beneficial
interest in an approved gratuity fund;
(e) providing for the withdrawal for approval in the case of a fund which ceases
to satisfy the requirements of this part or of the rules made thereunder;
(f) generally, to carry out the purposes of this Part and to secure such further
control over the approval of gratuity funds and the administration of gratuity funds
as it may deem requisite.
Accordingly, it is proposed to empower the Board to make rules in this regard for the
purposes of this clause.
203. Paragraph 7 of the Twentieth Schedule of the Bill provides that a resident assessee
shall furnish the details of its investment and interest in any entity outside India in such
form and manner as may be prescribed.
Accordingly, it is proposed to empower the Central Government to make rules in this
regard for the purposes of this clause.
204. Paragraph 22 of the Twentieth Schedule of the Bill provides that an order under
the Tenth Schedule in relation to a qualifying shipping company’s application for opting for
tonnage tax scheme, passed by an authority as may be prescribed, shall be an appealable
order before Commissioner (Appeals).
Accordingly, it is proposed to empower the Central Government to make rules in this
regard for the purposes of this clause.
205. Paragraph 3 of the Twenty-Second Schedule, inter alia,  provides that the deferred
revenue expenditure allowance shall be allowable for ten consecutive financial years, the
first such financial year of allowability being the year in which such amount is actually paid,
in case of expenditure incurred by a person resident in India wholly and exclusively on any
operations relating to prospecting for any mineral or the development of a mine or other
natural deposit of any mineral, to the extent prescribed.
Accordingly, it is proposed to empower the Central Government to make rules in this
regard for the purposes of this clause.

405
206. Paragraph 3 of the Twenty Second Schedule further provides that in the case of
expenditure incurred by a person resident in India wholly and exclusively on any operations
relating to prospecting for any mineral or the development of a mine or other natural deposit
of any mineral, to the extent as may be prescribed, the deferred revenue expenditure allowance
shall be allowable for ten consecutive financial years, the first such financial year of
allowability being the year in which such amount is actually paid. Further, the deferred
revenue expenditure allowance shall be allowable for six consecutive financial years, the
first such financial year of allowability being the year of commencement of the business or
extension of the business or setting up of new business, as the case may be, in case of any
preliminary expenditure incurred—
(a) before the commencement of the business; or
(b) in connection with the extension of the business; or
(c) in connection with the setting up of new business,
which shall be such as may be prescribed having regard to capital employed in the business
and cost of the project.
Accordingly, it is proposed to empower the Central Government to make rules in this
regard for the purposes of this clause.
207. The rules and scheme made and notification issued under the proposed legislation
shall be required to be laid before the Parliament.
208. The matters in respect of which rules or scheme may be made or notifications
issue are matters of procedure and administrative detail and it is not practicable to provide
for them in the Bill itself. The delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal
character.

LOK SABHA
—————
A
BILL
to consolidate and amend the law relating to direct taxes.
—————
(Shri Pranab Mukherjee, Minister of Finance )
GMGIPMRND—4316LS(S1)—28-08-2010.