1
THE DELHI METRO RAILWAY (OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE)
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 2017
By
SHRI P. KARUNAKARAN , M.P .
A
BILL
further to amend the Delhi Metro Railway (Operation and Maintenance) Act, 2002.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-eighth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Delhi Metro Railway (Operation and Maintenance)
Amendment Act, 2017.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification,
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. After section 63 of the Delhi Metro Railway (Operation and Maintenance)
Act, 2002, the following section shall be inserted, namely:—
"63A. If any passenger travels by sitting on the floor of the train after being
warned by any metro railway official to desist, he shall be punishable with imprisonment
for a term which may extend to one month, or with fine which may extend to five
hundred rupees, or with both, and shall also be liable to be removed from the train by
any metro railway official authorised by the metro railway administration in this behalf.".
Short title and
commencement.
Bill No.  110 of  2017
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Insertion of new
section 63A.
Penalty for
travelling by
sitting on the
floor of a
train.
5
10
60 of 2002.

2
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
The growing incidents of people travelling in Metro trains especially in Delhi Metro
by sitting on the floor of the train despite repeated announcements have been causing
severe problems for co-passengers. They not only block the passage between two bogies
of the train but, during the peak hours, also cause congestion and difficulty for co-passengers
to find a space for standing in coach. Therefore, it is necessary to provide immediate
remedy for this growing menace. Accordingly, it is proposed that sitting on floor while
travelling be made punishable offence so that this menace can be tackled more effectively
before it becomes a bigger problem.
The Bill, therefore, seeks to amend the parent Act with a view to provide that if any
passenger travels by sitting on the floor of the train after being warned by any metro railway
official to desist, he shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend upto
one month, or with fine which may extend upto five hundred rupees, or with both, and such
passenger shall also be liable to be removed from the train.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; P. KARUNAKARAN
July 5, 2016.

3
ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE DELHI METRO RAILWAY (OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE) ACT, 2002
* * * * * * * * *
63. Penalty for travelling on roof, etc. of a train.—If any passenger travels on the roof
of a train or persists in travelling in any part of a train not intended for the use of passengers
or projects any part of his body out of a train after being warned by any metro railway
official to desist, he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to
one month, or with fine which may extend to fifty rupees or with both, and shall also be
liable to be removed from the train by any metro railway official authorised by the metro
railway administration in this behalf.
* * * * * * * * *

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Delhi Metro Railway (Operation and Maintenance) Act, 2002.
————
(Shri P . Karunakaran, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—4242LS(S3)—10-07-2017.