As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

1) 1 pec 1999

Bill No. 110 of 1999

THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1999
By:
‘Sunt RAGHUVANSH PRASAD SINGH, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fiftieth Year of the Republic of India as

follows:—
1. This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 1999. Short title.
2. In article 85 of the Constitution, — Amendment of
5 (0 in the marginal heading, for the word ‘dissolution’, the word ‘suspension’ shall be ii
substituted;
(ii) for sub-clause (0), the following sub-clause shall be substituted, namely:—

"(b) suspend the House of the People.".


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

India is the largest democracy in the world. Thousands of crores of rupees are spent in
an election. It is being observed that the party system is resulting in hung Parliament after
the elections. As a result, Lok Sabha needs to be dissolved many a time within a period of
five years and the nation has to bear the burden of heavy expenditure on mid-term elections,
Ultimately democracy means the rule of the ballot. The system of ballot cannot be given up.
Therefore, some people advocate Presidential system in place of Parliamentary system to
avoid frequent dissolution of Lok Sabha before completing five years term and mid-term
polls. Multi-party system leads to division of seats resulting in hung Lok Sabha and the
country gets caught up in the whirlpool of political instability. Minor amendments in the
Constitution can tackle such a situation.

Article 85(2)(b) of the Constitution should be amended by incorporating the words
‘The President may from time to time suspend the Lok Sabha’ in place of the words ‘the
President may from time to time dissolve the Lok Sabha’. Such a provision will give us two
benefits, Firstly, the business of suspended Lok Sabha will get suspended as is the case
with the provision made in case of Legislative Assemblies in States and it will make way for
political polarisation. Thus the country could be saved from facing unnecessary elections. In
the event of Lok Sabha not being dissolved before five years there would be no elections’
before the expiry of its term of five years. In the event of the President suspending the
Lok Sabha, on the advice of the Prime Minister, immediately thereafter the President will
administer the country with the help of caretaker Prime Minister. The President, on being
satisfied that any party or a combination of parties is in a position to form the Government,
will revoke the suspension of Lok Sabha and invite the concerned party to form the
Government.

The Bill seeks to make an amendment to the Constitution mainly to save the country
from the burden of unnecessary election expenses and to avoid holding of the election
before the period of five years under any circumstances.

New Deuui; RAGHUVANSH PRASAD SINGH
November 15, 1999.


ANNEXURE .
EXTRACT FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA.

* * * * *

85. (1) The President shall from time to time summon each House of Parliament to
‘meet at such time and place as he thinks fit, but six months shall not intervene between its
sitting in one session and the date appointed for its first sitting in the next session.

(2) The President may from time to time—
(a) prorogue the Houses of either House;

(b) dissolve the House of the People.
A के * * #

Sessions of

and dissolution,


LOK SABHA.

A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.

(Shri Raghuvansh Prasad Singh, M.P.)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—1 974LS—30.11.1999.