1
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2016
By
SHRI KUNWAR PUSHPENDRA SINGH CHANDEL, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2016.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In article 80 of the Constitution, in clause (3), after the word  "Literature", the words
"public knowledge, philosophy," shall be inserted.
Short title and
commencement.
Bill No. 110 of  2016
Amendment
of article 80.
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Since ancient time, public knowledge and philosophy have been formulated in the
Indian society to address social problems covering different periods of time. After the
process of liberalization there has been an increase in demand for public knowledge and
philosophy. The demand for sustainable and proper utilization of local resources have also
intensified. Support has also been extended to traditional knowledge at Panchayat level. It
is, therefore, necessary to incorporate a people-friendly attitude. Therefore, the
representation of persons having special knowledge or practical experience in "public
knowledge and philosophy" in the Council of States has become necessary.
The Bill, therefore, seeks to amend the Constitution with a view to provide that
persons having special knowledge or practical experience in public knowledge and
philosophy be nominated in the Council of States.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW D ELHI;
April 12, 2016. KUNWAR PUSHPENDRA SINGH CHANDEL
2

ANNEXURE
* * * * * * *
80. (1)* * * * * *
(3) The members to be nominated by the President under sub-clause ( a) of
clause (1) shall consist of persons having special knowledge, or practical experience in
respect of such matters as the following, namely:—
Literature, science, art and social service.
* * * * * * *
Composition
of the Council
of States.
3

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
————
(Shri Kunwar Pushpendra Singh Chandel, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—368LS(S3)—03-05-2016.