1
THE PROHIBITION OF RAGGING AND UNFAIR PRACTICES IN
EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTIONS AND UNIVERSITIES BILL, 2014
By
SHRI RAKESH SINGH, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for prohibition of ragging and unfair practices in educational
institutions and universities and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-fifth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Prohibition of Ragging and Unfair Practices in
Educational Institutions and Universities Act, 2014.
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Bill No. 110 of  2014
TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) ‘‘appropriate Government’’ means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(b) ‘‘appropriate statutory authority’’ means any authority established under
any law for the time being in force for co-ordinating or determining or maintaining the
standards of education including technical and medical education and education in
universities;
(c) ‘‘capitation fee’’ means any amount (by whatever name called),—
(i) demanded or charged or collected, directly or indirectly, for, or, on
behalf of any institution, or paid by any person in consideration for admitting
any person as student in such institution; and which is in excess of the fee
payable towards tuition fee and other fees and other charges declared by any
institution in its prospectus for admitting any person as student in such
institution; or
(ii) paid or demanded or charged or collected, by way of donation, for, or,
on behalf of any institution, or paid by any person in consideration for admitting
any person as a student in such institution;
(d) ‘‘educational institution’’ means a technical educational institution or medical
educational institution or any such institution, whether registered under the Societies
Registration Act, 1860 or not, and recognized as such, by the appropriate statutory
authority or a university as defined in section 2 of the University Grants Commission
Act, 1956 and includes an institution deemed to be a University under section 3 of that
Act or under any other law for the time being in force;
(e) "prospectus" includes any publication, whether in print or displayed in internet
or in any electronic device for public consumption, otherwise, issued for providing fair
and transparent information, relating to an institution, to the general public (including
to those seeking admission in such institution) by the management of such institution
or any other authority or person authorised by such institution to do so;
(f) "ragging" means an act by a student or group of students inside or outside
the educational institution which causes or is likely to cause physical or psychological
harm or bring embarrassment to or creates fear in another student and includes acts of
teasing, abusing, causing hurt or making one to do any act or perform something
which he will not willingly do in the ordinary course.
(g) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act; and
(h) "unfair practice" includes—
(i) charging of capitation fee;
(ii) charging of exorbitant fee;
(iii) lack of transparency in conducting entrance test;
(iv) recruiting teaching and office faculty with low salary;
(v) recruiting teachers without adequate qualification;
(vi) exploitation of teachers;
(vii) allowing students to take examination without adequate attendance;
(viii) malpractice in evaluation;
(ix) advertising falsely about infrastructure or institution with the intention
to induce students to take admission;
5
Definitions.
10
15
20  21 of 1860.
25
30
35
40
45
3 of 1956.

3
(x) exorbitant charges for prospectus;
(xi) accepting any fee or charge without proper receipt;
(xii) admitting ineligible students;
(xiii) allowing students to copy;
(xiv)  victimizing students, particularly those belonging to the Scheduled
Castes, the Scheduled Tribes, the Other Backward Classes and the weaker
sections of society;
(xv) withholding educational certificates to eligible students; and
(xvi) impounding of educational certificates or passports of teachers and
office staff without valid reasons or compelling teachers to award pass marks to
certain students.
3. Ragging in educational institutions is hereby prohibited.
4. (1) Any act of ragging brought to the notice of the head of the educational institution
or any other person responsible for the management of the educational institution shall be
inquired into expeditiously.
(2) Where after conclusion of enquiry, a student is found guilty of committing or
participating in or abetting the act of ragging, he shall be expelled from the educational
institution and shall not be admitted in any other educational institution.
(3) Where the findings of the inquiry report are disputed by the expelled student, the
educational institution shall forward the enquiry report to the Redressal Committee
constituted under section 11.
5. (1) No educational institution shall, for admission in any course or programme of
study, accept any payment, other than the fee and charges mentioned in its prospectus.
(2) Every educational institution shall issue a proper receipt of the fee and charges to
the students admitted in the institution.
6. (1) No educational institution shall, directly or indirectly, demand or charge or
accept any capitation fee or donation, as a consideration for admission in a course or
programme of study.
(2) No person shall, directly or indirectly, offer or pay any capitation fee or donation,
either in cash or kind, for obtaining admission in a course or programme of study.
7. Any educational institution, which violates the provisions of section 6, shall, without
prejudice to proceedings for prosecution under any other law for the time being in force, be
liable to a penalty which may extend to one lakh rupees.
8. Every educational institution shall, before the expiry of ninety days prior to the date
of commencement of admission process to any of its course or programme of study, publish
a prospectus containing all such minute details, as may be prescribed, regarding admission.
9. Any educational institution, which does anything contrary to the information
published by it in its prospectus or resort to any unfair practice, shall, without prejudice to
any proceedings for prosecution any other law for the time being in force, be liable to a
penalty which may extend to ten thousand rupees.
10. Any aggrieved person or any other person, on behalf of such aggrieved person,
may make complaint of ragging or unfair practice or demand of capitation fee or donation, in
such form and manner, as may be prescribed, to the Redressal Committee constituted under
section 11.
Prohibition of
ragging.
Inquiry on
ragging.
Educational
institutions
not to accept
fee and
charges not
mentioned in
prospectus.
Prohibition of
capitation fee.
Penalty for
demanding or
accepting
capitation fee.
Mandatory
publication of
prospectus.
Penalty for
doing contrary
to information
in prospectus.
Complaint of
unfair
practice.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

4
11. (1) The appropriate Government shall constitute, in every district having any
educational institution, a Committee to be known as the Redressal Committee.
(2) The Committee shall consist of—
(a) a Chairperson;
(b) two judicial members;
(c) two academic members; and
(d) two administrative members.
(3) The terms and conditions of service of the Chairperson and other members of the
Committee shall be such as may be prescribed.
(4) The Committee shall have such number of officers and staff as may be required for
its efficient functioning.
12. (1) The Committee shall—
(i) enquire into every case of ragging referred to it by the educational institutions
within its territorial jurisdiction or received directly from any aggrieved person or any
other person on behalf of such person;
(ii) enquire into every complaint of unfair practice or demand of capitation fee or
donation by an educational institution within its territorial jurisdiction;
(iii) recommend punitive action against the erring educational institution; and
(iv) recommend compensation to the victims of ragging or unfair practices by
the institution concerned.
(2) The Committee shall dispose of every complaint within a period of ninety days from
the date of receipt of such complaint.
(3) The Committee shall afford an opportunity of being heard to every person or
institution against whom a complaint is made.
(4) The Committee shall forward its report of enquiry into a complaint to the appropriate
statutory authority, which shall recommend such action against the institution, as may be
prescribed.
13. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent
therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force.
14. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Constitution
of the
Redressal
Committee in
every district.
Functions of
the
Committee.
Act to have
overriding
effect.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
There has been mushrooming growth of higher educational institutions in recent
years especially, the technical and medical educational institutions.
There have been allegations that these educational institutions are resorting to unfair
practices such as charging of capitation fee, demanding donations, not issuing receipt in
respect of payments made by or on behalf of students, low quality delivery of education
services, false claims of quality education through misleading advertisement, etc. There is
no law to check the malpractices in such educational institutions. A mechanism to provide
for speedy resolution of matters relating to malpractices in higher educational institutions is
required to be in place in order to provide relief to the victims of such malpractices. The Bill,
therefore, seeks to provide, inter alia, for—
(1) banning of acts of ragging within or outside the educational institutions;
(2) prohibition of capitation fee and unfair practices by educational institutions; and
(3) constitution of Redressal Committee for early disposal of complaints.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; RAKESH  SINGH
July  14, 2014.
_______
5
PRESIDENT'S RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLE 117(3)
 OF THE CONSTITUTION
_______
[Copy of D.O. No. 9-14/2012-U. Policy dated 26 September, 2014 from
Shrimati Smriti Zubin Irani, Minister of Human Resource Development to the
Secretary-General, Lok Sabha].
The President, having been  informed of the subject matter of the Prohibition of
Ragging and Unfair Practices in Educational Institutions and Universities Bill, 2014 by
Shri Rakesh Singh, Member of Parliament, recommends to the House the consideration of
the Bill under clause (3) of article 117 of the Constitution.

6
FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 11 of the Bill provides for constitution of the Redressal Committees in every
district of the country to enquire into malpractices by educational institutions. The
State Governments will have to bear the expenditure in respect of educational institutions
established under Act of Legislative Assembly from their respective Consolidated Funds.
However, the Central Government shall have to bear the expenditure in respect of educational
institutions established by or under an Act of Parliament as well as educational institutions
in the Union territories.
The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of
India. It is estimated that a sum of rupees three crore may be involved as recurring expenditure
per annum.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees five crore is also likely to be involved.

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 14 of the Bill gives power to the Central Government to make rules for carrying
out the purposes of the Bill. The rules will relate to matters of detail only.
The delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character.
7

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for prohibition of ragging and unfair practices in educational
institutions and universities and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Rakesh Singh, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—2390LS(S3)—31-10-2014.