Bill No. - of 2024
THE BANKING LAWS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 202
(ASP A S S E DB YT H EHOUSES OF PARLIAMENT
SABHA ON , 2024
SABHA ON
)

Bill No. 110 of 202
THE BANKING LAWS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 202
A
BILL
further to amend the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934, the Banking
Act, 1949, the State Bank of India Act, 1955, the Banking Companies
(Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings ) Act, 1970 and the Banking
Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings ) Act, 1980.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy- th Year of the Republic of India
as follows:
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1.( 1) This Act may be called the Banking Laws (Amendment) Act, 202 .
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint:
Short title and
commencement.

2
Amendment of
section 42.
Amendment of
section 5.
Amendment of
section 10A.
Amendment of
section 16.
Amendment of
section 18.
Provided that different dates may be appointed for different provisions of this
Act, and any reference in any such provision to the commencement of this Act, shall
be construed as a reference to the coming into force of that provision.
CHAPTER II
AMENDMENT TO THE RESERVE BANK OF INDIA ACT, 1934
2. In the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934, in section 42,
(a)i ns u b - s e c t i o n(1), in the Explanation, for clause ( b), the following
clause shall be substituted, namely:
b
day of each calendar month or sixteenth day to the last day of each
(b)i ns u b - s e c t i o n(2),
(i) in the long line,
(A
(B)f
be substituted;
(ii) in the second proviso,
(A
(B) the last day of
(iii) the third proviso shall be omitted;
(c) sub-section ( 2A) shall be omitted.
CHAPTER III
AMENDMENTS TO THE BANKING REGULATION ACT, 1949
3. In the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 (hereafter in this Chapter referred to
as the Banking Regulation Act of 1949), in section 5, in clause ( ne), in
sub-clause (i
such other amount as may be notified in the Official Gazette by the Central
4. In the Banking Regulation Act of 1949, in section 10A, in sub-section ( 2A),
in clause ( i
ac o - e inserted.
5. In the Banking Regulation Act of 1949, in section 16, in sub-section ( 3),
-operative bank elected to the Board of the
state co-operati
6. In the Banking Regulation Act of 1949, in section 18,
(a)i ns u b - s e c t i o n(1),
(i substituted;
(ii day of the
2o f1 9 3 4 .
10 of 1949.

3
(iii
be substituted;
(b)i nt h e Explanation, for clause ( b), the following clause shall be
substituted, namely:
b
fifteenth day of each calendar month or sixteenth day to the last day of
7. In the Banking Regulation Act of 1949, in section 24,
(a)i ns u b - s e c t i o n(2A
substituted;
(b)i ns u b - s e c t i o n(3
the last day of each fortnight during
(c)i ns u b - s e c t i o n(4),
(i)i nc l a u s e(a
r, if the last day of any
(ii)f o rc l a u s e(b), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:
b) if the default occurs again on the last day of the next
succeeding fortnight, or, if the last day of such fortnight is a public
holiday, on the preceding working day, and continues on the last
day of the succeeding fortnights or preceding working days, as the
case may be, the rate of penal interest shall be increased to a rate
of five per cent. per annum above the bank rate on each such
shortfall in respect of last day of that fortnight and last day of each
succeeding fortnight or preceding working day, if last day of such
(d)i ns u b - s e c t i o n(7),
(i
substituted;
(ii
8. In the Banking Regulation Act of 1949, in section 25,
(a)i ns u b - s e c t i o n(1
substituted;
(b)i ns u b - s e c t i o n(2
shall be substituted.
9. In the Banking Regulation Act of 1949, in section 27, in sub-section ( 1), for
10. In the Banking Regulation Act of 1949, in section 45ZA,
(a)i ns u b - s e c t i o n(1
be substituted;
Amendment of
section 24.
Amendment of
section 25.
Amendment of
section 27.
Amendment of
section 45ZA.

4
Amendment of
section 45ZC.
Amendment of
section 45ZE.
Insertion of
new section
45ZG.
Priority of
successive
nominations.
(b) after sub-section ( 1), the following sub-sections shall be inserted,
namely:
1A) Where the nomination is made successively in favour of
more than one person under sub-section ( 1), the nomination shall be
effective only in favour of one person in the order of priority specified
in section 45ZG.
(1B) Where the nomination is made simultaneously in favour of
more than one person under sub-section ( 1), the nomination shall be
effective in favour of all such persons in proportion to which it is
declared, and the following terms and conditions shall apply, namely:
(a) the nomination shall not be made in favour of more than
four persons;
(b) the nomination shall explicitly state the proportion of
amount of deposit in percentage in favour of each nominee;
(c) the nomination shall be made in respect of the whole
amount of deposit;
(d) if any nominee dies before receiving deposit from the
banking company, the nomination in respect of such nominee
alone shall become ineffective and the amount of deposit
purported to be nominated in favour of deceased nominee shall be
treated as if nomination had not been made in respect of that
portion of deposit,
and any nomination which does not comply with any of the terms and
conditions specified in clauses ( a)t o( c), shall be invalid, as if nomination had
not been made by the depositor or all the depositors together, as the case may
11. In the Banking Regulation Act of 1949, in section 45ZC, in sub-section (1),
12. In the Banking Regulation Act of 1949, in section 45ZE, for sub-section (1),
the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:
1) Where one or more individuals hire a locker from a banking
company, whether such locker is located in the safe deposit vault of such
banking company or elsewhere, the individual or, as the case may be, all the
individuals together, may nominate one or more persons not exceeding four,
successively, to whom, in the event of the death of the sole hirer or the death
of all the hirers, the banking company may give access to the locker and liberty
to remove th
13. In the Banking Regulation Act of 1949, after section 45ZF, the following
section shall be inserted, namely:
1) Where the nomination is made in favour of more than one
person successively under sub-section ( 1)o fs e c t i o n4 5 Z Ao rs u b - s e c t i o n(1)
of section 45ZC or sub-section ( 1) of section 45ZE, the nomination shall be
effective only in favour of one person in the following order of priority,
namely:
(a) nomination of the first nominee shall be effective if that
nominee survives the person or persons who made the nomination;
(b) nomination of the second nominee shall become effective only
after the death of the first nominee;

5
23 of 1955.
18 of 2013.
(c) nomination of any nominee lower in the order of nomination
shall become effective only after the death of all the nominees whose
names are higher in the order of nomination.
(2) Where the order of nomination is not mentioned, persons shall be
deemed to have been nominated in the order in which their names appear in
the nomination.
(3) The provisions of this section shall not apply to the nominations
made simultaneously in favour of more than one person under sub-section ( 1)
14. In the Banking Regulation Act of 1949, in section 56,
(a)i nc l a u s e(c), for sub-clause ( ii), the following sub-clause shall be
substituted, namely:
ii)c l a u s e(nb
(b)i nc l a u s e(j) relating to substitution of section 18, in sub-section (1),
(i)
substituted;
(ii)
(iii
be substituted;
(iv)i nt h eExplanation, for clause (b), the following clause shall be
substituted, namely:
b
the fifteenth day of each calendar month or sixteenth day to the last
CHAPTER IV
AMENDMENTS TO THE STATE BANK OF INDIA ACT, 1955
15. In the State Bank of India Act, 1955, in section 38A,
(a)i nt h em a r g i n a lh
shall be substituted;
(b) for sub-section ( 3), the following sub-sections shall be substituted,
namely:
3) The State Bank shall transfer, in accordance with the rules
made under section 124 of the Companies Act, 2013, to the Investor
Education and Protection Fund established under section 125 of the
said Act,
(i) any money which remains unpaid or unclaimed for a
period of seven years from the date of its transfer in the Unpaid
Dividend Account of the State Bank;
(ii) all shares in respect of which dividend has not been paid
or claimed for a period of seven consecutive years, along with a
statement thereof containing the details specified in the said rules;
(iii) any interest or redemption amount upon any bond issued
by the State Bank which remain unpaid or unclaimed for a period
of seven years from the date such interest or such redemption
amount became due for payment.
Amendment of
section 56.
Amendment of
section 38A.

A
BILL
further to amend the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934, the Banking Regulation
Act, 1949, the State Bank of India Act, 1955, the Banking Companies
(Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1970 and the Banking
Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1980.
)