IOK SABRA 
CORRIGENDA 
to 
THE COCONUT DEVELCPMENT BOARD BILL, 1978 
(~..l?!LAs introduced in Lok Sabha) 
1. Page 4, line 35,-
for "leave, pension, provident fund," 
read "pension, leave, provident fund and" 
2. Page 6, line 33,-
"(f)" read "(j)" 
-
3. Page 1 0, line 11,-
after "clause (g)" insert "of sub-section (2)" 
4. Page 10, line 14,-
~fore "se ction" insert "sub- se ction (2) of" 
5. Page 1 0, line 48,-
fo r II ( 9 ) " re ad "( 1 0) " 
NEW DELHI; 
July 19 1978 
Asadha 28, 1900 (saka) 

6'", • 
.A. INTRODUCED IN LOK $A8HA ON 
f S 
BiD No. 110 of 1118 
THE COCONUT DEVELOPMENT BOARD BILL, 1978 
A 
BILL 
to provide JOT the development under the control of the Union oj tM 
coconut indu.stry and for matteTS ronnected therewith. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twenty-ninth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
5 1. (l) This Act may be called the Coconut Development Board Act, Short title, 
10 
15 
1978. extent aad 
Com-
(2) It extends to the whole of India. 
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government 
may, t-y notification in the OIIieial Gazette, appoint. 
2. It is hereby declared that it is expedient in the public interest that 
the Union should take under its control the coconut industry. 
3. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
mence_ 
ment. 
Declara_ 
tion a. to 
expediency 
of control 
by the 
Union. 
Deftni-
d tion •. (CII) "Board" means the Coconut Development Board establishe 
under section 4; 
(b) "Chairman" means the Chairman of the Board; 
(c) "coconut" means the fruit of coconut palm and includes green 
coconut, ripe coconut and copra. 

Establish-
ment and 
consti-
tution 
of the 
Board. 
Explanation.-"Coconut palm" means the coconut tree, Cocos 
Nucifera. Linn; . 
(d) "coconut industry' does not include-
(i) coir industry; or 
(ii) an industry from which products (including by-pro- S 
ducts) out of coconut oil are manufactured; 
(e) "member" means a member of the Board and includes the 
Caairman; 
(f) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act. 
CHAPTER II 
THE COCONUT DEVELOPMENT BOARD 
4. (1) With effect from such date as ,the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette appoint in this behalf, there shall be 
established for the purposes of this Act, a Board to be called the Coconut 
10 
Development Board. J S 
.(2) The Boar4 shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid, 
,having. ,~petWllsuccession and common seal, with power to acquire, 
hold and dispose of property. both movable and immovable, and to con-
tract, and shall by the said name sue and be sued. 
(3) The head office of the Board shall be at such place as the Central 20 
Government may, by notification in the Oflicial Gazette, specify. 
(4) The Board shall consist of the following memben, namely:-
(a) a Chainnan, to be appointed by the Centlral Government; 
(b) the Agriculture Commissioner to the Government of India, 
~d~; ~ 
(c) the Director, Central Plantation Crops Research Institute 
(Indian Council of Agricultural Research) ex ofti.:io; 
(d) the Chairman of the Coir Board constituted under section 4 
of the Coir Industry Act, 1953, ex officio; 45 Of 1953 
(e) three members to be appointed by the Central Government 30 
to represent respectively the Ministries of the Central Government 
dealing with-
• (i) Revenue; 
(ii) Industry; and 
(iii) Civil Suppli~ and C.-operation; 
(f) three members to be appointed by . the Central Government 
one each to represent the Governments ot, the States _ Kerala, 
Tamil Nadu and Karnataka, being States wherein coconut is grown on 
a large scale; 
3S 
: (g) ·three members to be appointeCl by the centr,al Government 40 
by rotation in the alphabetical order to represent the Governments 
of the States of Andhra Pradesh, Assam, Maharasbira, Orissa and 
West Be",~"nd the Union territoriea. of the Andaman and Nicobar 
Islands, Goa, Daman and Diu and Lakshadw8epj 

(k) ,three members to be appointed hy the Central Government 
one eacb. to repre&ent the coconut growers of the States of Kerala, 
Tamil Nadu and Kamataka; 
1 " ,.' 
(i) .oaeilDf'mber to be appointed by the Central Governm~nt to '~" 
, 5 represent tl;l.e coco.ut proeessin&, industry: 
·frovided that every appointment under clauses (f) and (g) 
shall be made on the recommendation of the State Government or, 
as the case may be, of the Union territory concerned. 
(.'H The Board shall elect, from amongst its members, a Vice-Chair-
10 roan who shall ,exercise such of the powers and perform such of the func-
tions of the Chairrp~n as may be prescribed or as may be delegated to 
him.Qy ,~e ~,itman. 
(6) ,The term of office of the members and the manner of filling 
va,cancies among, and the procedure to be followed in the discharge of 
15 their functions by, the members shall be such as may be prescribed. 
{7) Any officer of the Central Government, Dot being a member of 
the Board, when deputed by that Government in this behalf, shall have 
the right to attend the meetings of the Board and take part in the pro-
ceedings thereof but shall not be entitled to vote. 
20 (8) jThe Bo .... d may associate with itself in such manner, subject to 
ach conditioas and fOl' such purposes as may be preeeribed, any person 
whose assistance.r advice it may 'desire in c&mplying with any of the 
provisions of this Act and ,8 person so associated shall have the right to 
take part in the discussions of the Board relevant to the purposes for 
25 which be has been associated but shall not havelthe right to vote and 
shall be entitled to receive such allowances or fees as may be fixed by the 
Central Government. 
(9) No act or proceeding of the Board or any committee appointed by 
it under section 9 shall be invalidated merely by reason of-
10 (a) any vacancy in, or any defect in the constitution of, the Board 
or such committee; or 
(b) any defe(..1: in the appointment of a person acting as a member 
of the Board or such committee; or 
(c) any irregularity in the procedure of the Board or such com-
35 rnittee not affecting the merits of the case. 
(10) The Board shall meet at such times and places and shall observe 
such rules of procedure in regard to the transaction of business at its 
meetings (including the quorum at meetings) as may be provided by 
regulations made by the Board under this Act. 
40 5. (1) The Chainnan shall be entitled to such salary and aUowanee5 
and shall be subject to such conditions of serviCe in respect of leave, 
pension, provident fund and other matters as may, from'time to time,be 
fixed by the Central Government. 
(2) The members of the Board shall receive such allowaaces •• may 
45 be fixed by the Central Government. 
Salary and 
allowances 
and other 
conditions 
of service 
of Chair_ 
man and 
allow-
ances of 
members. 
6. A merp.ber, other than an ex officio member, may resign his office by 
giving notice thereof in writing to' the Central Government and on such 
resignation being accepted, he shall be deemed to have vacated his offi~e 
Resig_ 
nation of 
members. 

OfBcera of 
the Board 
and other 
ltd. 
Special 
provilion 
for tranl-
fer of 
mlployeea 
t" the 
Board. 
4 
7. (1) The Chairman shall be the chief executive of the Board and 
shall exercise such powers and perform such duties as may be prescribed. 
(2) The Central GoverDment shall appoint a Chief Coeoaut Develop-
ment OfBcer to exercise such powers and perform IUch duties .. may be 
prescribed or u may be delegated to him by the Chairman. S 
(3) The Chief Coconut Development Officer appointed under lub-
section (2) shall have the right to attend the meetings of the Board and 
its committees appointed under section 9 and take part in the proceed-
ings thereof but shall not be entitled to vote. 
(4) The Central Government shan appoint a Secretary to the Boud 10 
who shall exercise such powers and perform such duties as may be pres-
cribed or as may be delegated to him b) the Board or the ChairmaD. 
(5) The Chief Coconut Development Officer and the Secretary Ihall 
be entitled to sueh salary and al1owanc~s and shall be subject to Bueh eon-
ditions of service in respect of leave, pension, provident fund and other IS 
matters as may, from time to time, be fixed by the Central Government. 
(6) Subject to such control an~ restrictions as may be preseribed, the 
Board may appoint such other officers and employees as may be neces-
sary for the efBdent performance of its functions and the method of 
appointment, the eonditions of service and the scales of pay and allowanc- 20 
es of such other oftieers and employees of the Board shall be sueh u may 
be provided by the Board by reguletions made under this' Act. 
(7) The Chairman, the Chief Coconut Development Officer, the 
Secretary and other officers and employees of the Board shall not 
undertake any work unconnected with their duties under this Act. 2S 
except with the permission of the Central Government. 
S. (1) On the establishment of the Board, it shall be lawful for the 
Central Government to transfer to the Board, by order, and with effect 
from such date or dates as may' be specified in the order, any officer or 
other employee holding office as such in the Directorate of Coconut De- 30 
velopment immediately before the date on which the Board is established: 
Provid-ed that the scale of pay of the post to which such officer or 
other employee is transferred shall not be lower than the scale of pay of 
the post he was holding immediately before such transfer and the other 
terms and conditions of service (including leave, penSion, provident fund, 3S 
medical benefits) of the post to which he is transferred shall not be l-e8S 
favourable than the terms and conditions of service in relation to the 
post held by him immediately before such transfer: 
Provided further that if. immediately before the date of his transfer, 
any such officer or other employee is officiating in a higher post under the 40 
Central Government either in a leave vacancy or in any vacancy of speci-
fied duration, his pay and other allowances, if any, on transfer, shall be 
protected for the unexpired period of such vacancy and thereafter he 
shall be entitled to the scale of pay applicable to the post under the Cen-
tral Government to which he would have reverted. 4S 
(2) Before any order is issued under sub-section (1), all officers and 
other employees of the Directorate of Coconut Development shall be given 
an option in 8uch form as may be prescribed, and within such time as may 
be specified in that behalf by the Central Government, to express their 
willingness or otherwise to become employees of the Board and such So 
option once exercised shall be final: 

s 
Provided that no order under sub-section (1) shall be made in relation 
to any officp.r or other employee of the Directorate of Coconut Develop-
ment who has intimated his intention of not becoming an employee of the 
Board within the time specified in that behalf: 
5 Provided further that such of the persons employed by the Central 
Government in the said Directorate, who do not express, within the time 
specified in that behalf, their intention of becoming the employees of the 
Board, shall be dealt with in the same manner and in accordance with 
the same rules as would apply to the employees of the Central Govem-
10 ment in the event of the reduction of the strength of the Department 
in which such persons have been employed. 
(3) An officer or other employee transferred by an order made under 
sub-.c;ection (11) shall, on and from. the date of transfer, cease to be an 
emplbyee of the Central Government and become an officer or other em-
15 ployee of the Bf1ard with such designation as the Board may determine 
and shall, subject to the provisions of the first and second provisos to 
sub-section (1), be governed by the regulations made by the Board under 
this Act in respect of remuneration and other c'"lnditirms of service (in-
cluding pension, leave, provident fund and medical benefits) and shall 
20 continue to be an officer or other employee of the Board unless and until 
his employment is duly terminated by the Board: 
Provided that till such time as the regulations referred to aboye 
governing the conditions of service of its officers or. other employees are 
framed by the Board, the relevant rules and orders framed by the Central 
2S Government shall continue to be applicable to such officers or other 
employees. 
(4) If a question arises whether the terms and conditions of sen-lce 
prescribed in the regulations framed by the Board in respect of any 
matter. including remuneration. pension, leave, provident fund and medi-
30 cal benefits are less favourable than those attached to the post held by 
an officer o~ other employee immediately before his transfer to the Board, 
the decision of the Central Government in the matter shall be final. 
.:..... .. -:-'..- ----_. 
9. (1) The Board may appoint sueh eommittees as may be necessary Commit. 
for the eRlcient diseharge of its duties And perfonnanee of its fundions tt>es of 
35 under this Ad. the Board. 
(2)' The Board shall have the power to eo.-opt as members of any 
eommittee appointed under subl-sedion (1) sueh number of persons who 
a,re not members of the Board as it may think flt and the persons 10 
eo-optea shall have the right to attend meetings of the eommittee and take 
40 part in its proeeedings but shall not have the right to vote . ............. ~ .~, 
....... (3) The persons eo-opted as members of a eommittee under sub-see-
tion (2) shall be entitled to reeeive sueh allowanees or fees for attending 
meeting" of the eommittee as may be flxed by the Central Government. 
10. (1) It shall be the duty of the Board to promote, by such measures 
45 as it thinks fit, the development under the control of the Central Govern-
ment of the coconut industry. 
(2) loVithout prejudice to the generality of the provisions of sub-sec-
tion (1), the measures referred to therein may provide for-
(a) adopting measures for the development of coconut industry 
,0 so that farmers, particuhrly small farmers, may become participants 
Functions 
of the 
Board. 

6 
in, and beneficiaries of, the development and growth of coconut 
industry; 
(b) recommending meoasures for improving the marketing of 
coconut and its products in India; 
«(') imparting technical advice to any person who is engaged in S 
the cultivation of coconut or the processing or marketing of coconut 
and its products; 
(d) providing financial or other assistance for the development 
of high yielding coconut hybrids, adoption of improved methods of 
cultivation of coconut, modern technology for processing of coconut 10 
and extension of areas under coconut cultivation (including replant-
ing) with a view to improving the growth of coconut industry; 
(el adopting such measures as may be practicable for assisting 
coconut growers to get incentive prices including recommending, as 
and when necessary. minimum and maximum prices for coconut and 15 
its products; 
(f) reeommending measures for regulating import and export 
of coconut and its products; 
(g) collecting statistics from growers of coconut, dealers in coco-
nut, manufacturers of coconut products and such other persons and 20 
institutions as may be prescribed, on any matter relating to coconut 
industry and publishing the statistics so collected or portions thereof 
or extracts therefrom; 
(h) fixing grades, specifications and standards for coconut and its 
products; 25 
(i) financing suitable schemes in consultation with the Central 
Government and the Governments of the States where coconut is 
grown on a large scale, so as to increase the production of c:>conut Rnd 
to improve its quality and yield; and for this purpose evolving schemes 
f lr award of prizes or grant of incentives to growers of coconut and 30 
the manufacturers of its products and for providing marketing facili-
ties for coconut and its proiucts; 
(f) assisting, enc)uraging, promoting or financing agricultural, 
. te;:hnological, industrial or economic research on coconut and its 
products in such manner as the Board may deem fit by making use 3S 
of available institutions; 
(k) undertaking such publicity and publishing such periOdicals, 
books or bulletins, on the reseail"ch and development of coeonut and 
'its products, as may be found necessary; 
(1) setting up of regional offices and other agencies for the pro- 40 
motion and development of production, grading and marketing of 
,cOCOllut and its products in coconut growing States and Union te.rll'i-
tories for the efficient discharge of the functions and obj.ectives of the 
Board; 
(m) such other measures as may, having regard to the purposes 
of this Act, be prescribed by the Central Government in consultation 45 
with the Governments of t~e States where coconut is grown on a 
large sc~e. 

(3) The Board shall perform its functions under this section in 
,accordance with, and subJect to, such rules as may be made by the 
Central Government. . 
11. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Dissolution 
S Gazette and for reasons to be specified therein, direct that the Board of the 
shall be dissolved from such date and for such period as may be specified Board. 
in the notification: 
Provided that before issuing any such notification, the Central Gov-
ernment shall give a reasonable opportunity to the Bo~d to make repre-
10 sentations against the proposed dissolution and shall consider therepre-
sentations, if any, of the Board. 
IS 
20 
(2) ~hen the Board is diss'Jlved under the provisions of sub-section 
(1).-
(a) all members, notwithstanding that their term of office has 
not expilfed, shall, from the date of dissolution, vacate their offices 
as such members; 
(b) all powers and duties of the Board shall, during the period 
of dissolution, be exercised and performed by such person Or persons 
as the Central Government may appoint in this behalf and their re-
mWleration shaH be such as may be prescribed; 
(c) all funds and other properties vested in the Board shall, 
during the period of dissolution, vest in the Central Government; and 
(d) as soon as the period of dissolution expires, the Board shall 
be reconstituted in accordance with the provisions of this Act. 
CHAPTER III 
FINANCE, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT 
12. The Central Government may, after due appropriation made by 
Parliament by law in this behalf, pay to the Board by way of grants or 
loans such sums of money as the Central Government may thiuk fit for 
30 being utilised for the purposes of this Act. 
Grants and 
loans 
by the 
Central 
Govern-
ment. 
13. (1) There shall be formed a Fund to be called the Coconut Deve- Constitu. 
lopment Fund and there shall be credited thereto- tion of 
Coconut 
(a) any sums of money which the Central Government may, Develop-
after due appropriation made by Parliament by law in this behalf, ment 
35 provide from and out of the proceeds of cess credited under section 4 Fund. 
of the Copra Cess Act, 1978, after deducting therefrom the expenses 
of collection of the cess and the amount, if any, refunded; 
(b) any grants or loans granted by the Central Government for 
the purposes of this Act; 
(c) any grants Or loans that may be made by any person for the 
purposes of this Act including loans under section 14; 
(d) any grants cr donations kom State Governments, voluntary 
organisations or other institutions: 
Provided that no such grant, loan or donation shall be credited to 
4S the ,l4'und except with the prior approval of. the Central Government. 

Borrowing 
powers 
of the 
Board. 
Accounts 
and 
audit. 
Directions 
b,.een.. 
tralGov-
_omen\' 
(2) The Fund shall be applied-
(0) fOtt meeting the cost of the measures referred to in section 10; 
(b) for meeting the salaries, allowances and other remuneratioD 
of the members, officers and other employees, as the case ma, be, 
of the Board; 5 
(c) for meeting the other administrative expenses of the Board 
and any other expenses authorised by or under this Act; 
(d) for repayment of any loans. 
U. (1) The Board may, for the purposes of carrying out its functions 
under this Act, and with the previous approval of, and subject to the 10 
directions of the Central Government, borrow money from-
(a) the public by the issue or sale of bonds or debentures or both, 
carrying interest at such rates as may be spec.fied therein; 
(b) any bank or other institution; 
(c) such other authority, organisation or institution as may be 15 
approved by the Central Government in this behalf. 
(2) The Central Government may guarantee the repayment of the 
monies borrowed by the Board under sub-section (1) and the payment 
of interest thereon and other incidental charges. 
15. (1) The Board shall maintain proper accounts and other relevant 20 
records and prepare an annual statement of accounts, in such form as 
may be prescribed by the Central Government in consultation with the 
Comptroller and Auditor-General of India. 
(2) The accounts of the Board shall be audited by the Comptroller 
and Auditor-General of India at such intervals as may be specified by 25 
him and any expenditure incuNed in connection with such audit shall 
be payable by the Board to the Comptroller and Auditor-General. 
(3) The Comptroller and Audi tor-General of India and any person 
appointed by him in connection with the audit of the accounts of the 
Board ihall have the same rights and privilege:> and authority in connec- 30 
tion with such audit as the Comptroller and Auditor-General generally 
has in connection with the audit of the Government accounts and, in 
particular, shall have the right to demand the production of books, 
accounts, connected vouchers and other documents and papers .. and to 
inspect any of the offices of the Board. 3S 
(4) The accounts of the Board as certified by the Comptroller and 
Auditor-General of India or any other person appointed by him in this 
behalf together with the audit report thereon shall be forwarded annually 
to the Central Government and that Government shall cause the same 
to be laid before each House of Parliament. 40 
CHAPTER IV 
CONTROL BY CENTRAL GovERNMENT 
US. The Board shall carry out such directions as may be issued to it 
from time ito time by the Central Government for the efficient adminis-
tration ol this Act 45 

9 
17. (1) The Board shall furni.h to the Central Government at such 
time and in such form and manner as may be prescribed or as the Central 
Government may direct, such returns and statements and such parti-
culars in regard to any proposed or existing programme for the promo-
, Uon and development of the coconut Industry, as the Central Govern-
ment may, from time to time, require. 
(2) The Board shall furnish a programme of its activities for each 
financial year to the Central Government for their information ana 
directions, if any. 
10 (3) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-section (1), the Board 
shall, as soon as possible, a&r the pnd of each financial year, submit to 
,the Central (;()vemmenot a report in such form and before such date, as 
may be prIeI!JC'libed, giving a true and full account of its activities, policy 
and programmes during the previous financial year. 
IS (4) A copy of the report received under sub-section (3) shall be laid, 
as soon as may be, after it is received, before each House of Parliament. 
CHAPTER V 
MIscElLANEOUS 
18. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against the 
20 Central Government, or'the Board or any committee appointed by it, or 
any member of the Board or such commit.tee, or any officer or other em-
ployee of the Cenrtral Government or of It he Board or any other person 
authorised !by the Central Government or the Board, for anything which 
is in good. faith done or intended to be done under this Act or the rules 
25 made thereunder. 
19. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, make rules to carry out the provisions of this Act. 
(2) In 'particular and without prejudice to the generality of the fore-
going power, Sllch rules may provide for all or any of the following 
30 matters, namely:-
35 
40 
45 
(a) the powers which may be exercised and functions whicb may 
be performed by the Vice-Chairman of the Board under sub-section 
(5) of section 4; 
(b) the term of office CYf the members, the manner of filling 
vacancies among, and the procedure to be followed in the discharge 
of their fUnctions by, the members, under sub-section (6) of 
section 4; 
(c) the manner in which and the purposes for which any person 
may be associated by the Board under sub-section (8.) of section 4; 
(d) the powers which may be exercised and the duties which 
may be performed by the Chairman as the chief executive of the 
Board under sub-section (1) of section 7; 
(e) the powers which may be exercised and the duties which 
may be performed by the Chief Coconut Development Oftlcer ot the 
Board under sub-section (2) of section 7; 
Returna 
and 
reporta, 
Protec-
tion Of 
actiOn 
takenia 
iOOd 
faith. 
P(lwer 
to 
make 
rules. 

Power to 
make 
regula-
tions. 
10 
(f) the powers, which may be e«erdsed and the duties WJtich 
may be pertormed ~ ,thEf Secretary at the Board under sllb ... ct~ 
(4) of section 7; '. 
(g) ,the eontrQI and restrieUons IIUb;eat to which officers .acl 
other employees may be appointed by the Board under 8ub-eectiOlt ~ 
(6) of section 7; 
(h) the form in which option may be given by the ofAcers and 
other employees of the Directorate of Coconut Development under 
lIUb-section (2) of section 8; 
(I) the collecti,on of statistics in respect of any matter relatinl 10 
to coconut industry under clause (9) of section 10; 
(3) the matters in respect of whlich the Board may undertake 
measures in the discharge of its functions under clause (m) of 
section 10; 
(k) the remuneration and other allowances payable to the person IS 
or persons referred to in clause (b) of sub-section (2) of section 11 i 
(1) the form in which the accounts of the Board shall be main-
t.ained under sub-section (1) of section 15; 
(m) the form and manner in which and the time at which the 
Board may furnish returns and reports to the Central Government 20 
under sub-section (1) 'of section 17; 
(n) the form in which and the date before which the Board shall 
furnish to the Central Government the report of its activities and 
programmes under sub-section (3) of section 17; 
(0) any other matter which has to be, or may be, prescribed by 2$ 
rules under this Act. 
(3) Every rule made under this Act 'shall be laid, as soon as may be 
after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, 
for a totaliperiod of thirty days which may be comprised in one sessiolli 
or in two, or more successive sessicns, and if, before the expiry of the 30 
session immediately following the session or the successive sessions afore. 
said, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both 
Houses agJn!e that the rule should not be made, the rule sball thereafter 
have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, u the case may 
be; so, howeveT, th~.t any such modi1reation or annulmem shall be with- 3S 
out prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule. 
ZOo (1) The Board may, with the previous sanction of the Central 
Government, by notification in the Official Gazette, malr.e regulations not 
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act and the rules made there-
under, to provide for all matters for which provision is necessary or 40 
expedient for the purposes of giving effect to the provisions of this Act. 
(2) In par1:icular, and withon.t pre-judice to the generality of the fore-
going powers, suc~ regulations may provide for all or any of the follow-
ing matters, namely:-
(4) the times and places at which meetiligs of -the Board or any 4S 
committee th~f, Bhall be held and the prooe:dure to be followed 
thereat,'and the number of. members which shall.form, a quorum at & 
meeting under sub-section (9) of section 4; 

tr 
(I» the method of appointment, the conditions o~ service and the 
lCales of pay and allowances of any of the ·ofticers and other em-
ployees of the Board under sub-section (6) of section 7; 
(c) generally, for the efficient conduct of the affairs of the Board. 
S (3) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, modify or rescind any regulation sanctioned by it and the 
regulation so modified or rescinded shall have effect only in such modi-
fied form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so however, that any 
such modification or rescission shall be without prejudice to the validity 
10 of anything done under the regulation before its modification or 
rescission. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
India is one of the largest coconut producing countries in the worlel, 
with coconut cultivation spread over nearly 1.1 million hectares and an 
annual prodUction 'Of about 6,000 million nuts. By virtue of its being 
an important commercial crop, providing direct and indirect employ-
ment and income through a very large number of people engaged in 
its cultivation and in the processing industries based on coconut, It 
holds a unique position in the life and economy of our people, parti-
cularly in the coastal States where it is concentrated. 
2. Coconut is a crop of great economic potential. Copra, oil, coir 
and shell products are the major coconut products of commercial 
importance. But except in oil milling and coir industry, no major 
developments have taken place in the coconut product diversification 
and by-product utilisation. Even copra making, a traditional rural 
industry, remains to be developed on modern lines. The manufacture 
of desiccated coconut, a product of commercial importance with world-
wide demand, is still in its infancy. The new processing techniques for 
the conversion of wet coconut kernel into various edible products such 
as protein, oil, flour etc. have not yet been adopted for commercial 
purposes. Effective processing techniques have also to be developed 
for the profitable utilisation of other by-products such as shell, pith, 
coconut water etc. 
3. The individual coconut holdings are small and invariably held by 
poor farmers who by themselves are not able to undertake the task of 
developing coconut industry as such, much less to modernise it. It is 
felt that an integrated development Of coconut industry would boost 
the income and employment potential and thereby bring about a 
significant impact on the economic conditions of the people. 
4. The Bill seeks to provide for the integrated development of the 
coconut industry (excluding coir and coconut oil products industry) under 
the control of the Union and for the establishment of a Board to be known 
as the Coconut Development Board. The Board shall have representatives 
of the concerned Ministries of the Central Government, the coconut 
growing States and Union territories, and the growers of coconut and 
coconut processing industry. It is proposed to vest the Board with ade-
quate p'Owers to deal with various aspects of the coconut industry. 
5. The finances of the Board will consist of sums provided by the Cen .. 
tral Government out of the proceeds of cess on copra (vide Copra Cess 
Bill, 1978), grants or loans made by the Central Government, or any 
person and grants or donations from the State Governments, voluntary 
organisations or other institutions. The Board will also borrow money, 
with the approval of the Central Government, from the public by the 
issue or sale of bonds and debentures, from apy bank or any other autho-
rity, organisation or institution. 
6. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects. 
NEW DELHI; SURJIT SINGH BARNALA. 
The 7th July, 1978. 
J3 

PRESIDENT'S RECOMMENOAtI6N UNDEi\ ARTICLE 117 OF THE 
CONSTITUTION OF INDIA 
[Copy of letter No. 12(2)/77"CA.I, dated the 13th July, 1978 from 
Shri 'Surjit Singh Bamala, Minister of Agriculture and Irrigation to !be 
Secretary, Lot Sabha.] 
The President, having been informed of the 'Subject matter of the 
Coconut Development Board .Bill, 1978, recommends under clause (1) of 
article 117 of the Constitution of India, the introduction of the Bill in 
Lok Sabha and also recommends under clause {3) of article 117 of the 
Coutttution ot India, the <:onsideration of the Bill by Lok Sabha . 
• 
13 

Sub-clauses (1), (3) and (4) of clause 4 of the Bill provide respectively 
for the .~blishment and constitution of the Coconut Dev~qpment.,~d. 
Sub-clause (1) of clause 5 provides that the Chairman, ofth~ Boar4 ~ 
be entitled to such salary and allowances and be subj~t \q such C~diUODS 
of service in respect of leave, pension, and provident fund and other 
matters that may be fixed by the Central Govel'llolDent, whi1etbe allow-
ances payable to the otbet members will h~ve k> be fixed b, the Central 
Government under aub-da.use (2). Clause 'l Pl'ovidesfor iheapplOint-. 
~t of UJe Chief Coconut Development Ofticer, the Secretary and other 
officers and employees of the Board. The Chief Coconut Davelopmcmt 
Officer and the Secretary will be entitled to such salaries and allowances 
as may be determined by the Central Government. The other officers 
and employees of the Board will be entitled to such salaries and allow-
ances as may be provided for by regulations under clause 20(2) (b). 
Provision has also been made in clause 4(8) for fixing the allowances or 
fees for the persons associated with the Board or co-opted to committees 
of the Board under sub-clause (3) of clause 9. 
2. Provision has been made in clause 19(2) (k) for prescribing by rules 
for remuneration and other allowances to the person or persons who may 
be appointed by the Central Government under clause U(2)(b) to exer-
cise and perform the powers and duties of the Board when the Board is 
dissolved. • _ .J 
3. Clause 10 provides for the functions of the Board and these include, 
inter alia, technical, financial and other assistance for development of 
coconut industry, financing suitable schemes for this purpose in consulta-
tion with the Central and State Governments and assisting, encouraging, 
promoting or financing agricultural, technological, industrial and economic 
research on coconut and coconut products. 
4. The aforementioned provisions of the Bill involve expenditure 
towU"Ci8- '; , • t ... "", .. ..al 
(a) payment of salaries, allowances, etc., of the Chairman and 
members of the Board, persons associated with the Board or co-opted 
to the committees of the Board, persons appointed to exercise the 
powers and duties of the Board when the Board is dissolved and 
ofllcers and employees of the Board; and 
r:' (b) meeting the other administrative expenses of the Board and 
any other expenses authorised by or under this Bill. 
5. Clause 13 of the Bill provides for the constitution of a Fund to be 
known as the Coconut Development Fund and the Fund is to be applied 
for meeting the aforementioned expenditure. The Fund will consist, 
tnter alia, of the sums realised by the Central Government by way of cess 
on copra under the Copra Cess Bill, grants or loans made by the Central 
Government, any person, institution and grants and donations from the 
State Governments or any other institution. 
" 
~¥7" -. ' ... ...,. ..... 1. •• 
~. 1"" .. 

15 
6. Clause 14 empowers the Board to borrow money from the public 
by the iisue or I8le. ef bond4 or debentures, or both, a~y bank ar other 
institution or such other authority, organisa.tion or institution, as may 
be approved by the Central Government. Sub-clause (2) of clause 14 
-pr.~ .tit8t'. the· Central Govenunent will guat'antee' the rep8ymeJlt of 
the monilil bol'J.'iOwed by the Board andinterellt thereoa . 
. ". 
7. ,··Jt • 4Jlot '])OISible at the present ·stage to indicate precisely the ex-
'pendi~ :tnvobtecL, Howe'9'er·, it is estimated that a non-recurring ex-
:pendltantof'Rs.tl",OOO ls·likely:to be tneur~cUnittanyOl'1 the establish-
ment ()ftM, Board. A recurring expenditure of· about RI.· ,8,00,000 is 
. likely .to be'lncUfted by the Board during 19'1&.;79. 'When the Board ex-
. pahda its It!UVtt1es, its ~dlture may also increase. As already men-
tioned, the:<BGard will have to meet the expenditure from its own Fund 
and 'an,· payments made to the Board by the Central Gover'BMent WIll 
. have to ;~ made only after due a,pptoprilltion made by PbrUament b1 
law in that 'behalf. . ,. 
I.t 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Sub-clause (~) of clause 19 of the Bill empower. the Central Govera-
ment to frame rules to carry out the provisions of the BilL The m.~ 
in respect of which rules may be made. Wer alUl, relate to the powers 
and functions of the Chairman, Vice-Chairman, and other ofllcera and 
employees of the Board, the term of office and the maDDer of fllling of 
vacancies of the members, the conditions subject to which the oftlcers and 
other employees shall be appointed by the Board, the mllDJler and the 
purpose for which any person may be associated by the Board with its 
discussions, the form, the manner in which the Board shall maintain 
accounts, collection of statistics and the matters in respect of which the 
Board may undertake measures in the dischaTge of its functions under 
clause 10(m). As the rules relate generally to the matter. of procedure 
or detail. the delegation of legislative power is of a normal character. 
2. Clause 20 of the Bill empowers the Board to make regulations with 
the previous sanction of the Central Government not inconsistent with 
the provisions of the Bill for enabling the Board to discharge its functions. 
These matters inter alia relate to the times and places at which meeting, 
of the Board and the committees under it shall be held and the procedure 
to be followed in this regard and the method of appointment, the condi-
tions of service and the scales of pay of any of the officers and other em-
ployees of the Board. As the matten in respect of which a regulation 
may be made under clause 20 are matters of procedure and detail, the 
delegation of legislative power is of a normal character. 
16 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the development under the control of the Union of the 
coconut industry and for matters connected therewith. 
(Shri Surjit Singh Barnal4, Miniater of Agriculture and Irrigation.) 