s 
80 of 1952 
As INTRODUCED IN LoK SABRA 
Bill No. 110 of 1969 
THE REQUISITIONING AND ACQUISITION OF IMMOV-
ABLE PROPERTY (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1969 
BILL 
further to amend the Requisitioning and Acquisition of Immovable 
Property Act, 1952. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twentieth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
1. This Act may be called the Requisitioning and Acquisition of 
Immovable Property (Amendment) Act, 1969. 
Z. In 8edIcm 1 of the Requisitioning and Aequisition of 
Property Act, 1952 (hereinafter referred to as the principal 
sectioa. (3) shall be omitted. 
Immovable 
Act), sub-
Short 
tide. 
Amend-
ment of 
Section 

Amend-
ment of 
lection 
«I 
Amend-
ment of 
section 
8 
2 
3. In section 6 of the principal Act,-
«(1) after sub-section (1), the following sub-..eetion shall be 
inserted, namely:-
"(IA) Notwithstanding any thina' contained in sub-section 
(1), the Central Government shall release from requisition,- S 
(a) any property requisitioned or deemed to be requisi-
tioned undl'r this Ad before the commencement of the lte-
quisitionillg and AC<juisiiion of Immovable Property (Amend-
ment) Act, 1969, on or before the expiry of a period of ten 
years from such commencement: 10 
(b) any property requisitioned under this Act after such 
commencement, on or before the expiry of a period of ten 
years from the date on which possession of such property 
was surrendered or delivered to, or taken by. the competent 
authority Wlder section 4, IS 
unless such propert~' is acquired under section 7 within the 
period of ten ye~n·s aforesaid.". 
(b) in sub-section (2), after the words "released from requisi-
tion", the words, brackets, figures and letter "under sub-section (1) 
or sub-section (lA)" shall be inserted. 20 
4. In section 8 of the principal Act,-
(a) in sub-section (2), for the words "compensation payable for 
the requisitioning of any property shall consist of l' ,the words, 
brackets, figures and letters "compensation payable for the requisi-
tioning of any property shall, subject to the provisions of sub-sections ~5 
(2A) and (2B), consist of" shall be substituted; 
(b) after sub-section (2), the following sub-sections shall be 
~d, q.p"~y;-
"(2A) Th~ recur.r.in, paymen~ referred. to iJJ. cll!1Ue. (al ,~r 
sub-section (2), in respect of any property subject to requisitiCIII 30 
shall; unless the property is soeaer I'eleia&ed fMDl.requiaition under 
section 6 or acquired under section 7, be revised in a~ordance 
with tbe provisions of sub-section (2B) with effect from the date 
of expiry of a period of fivey_rs from the date on which pos-
session of such property was surrendered or delivered to, or 3S 
t .. b,., the competent 8Utherit,. un4.r ~tiOA 4: 
Provided that in the case of any property subject to requisi-
tioQr.iDv.J;leJljateI,. befq,re the. CQDUpJ'"Ce~ of: tJie; ~~iU8n-
ing and Acquisition of Immovable Property (A~ndmel1t). A~t, 
1969 (including any property deemed to be requisitioned 1Dlder 40 
this A~t), such recu"ringpeym~nt shall, ~less the pro"rty. is 
sooner released from requisition under section 6 or acquired under 
sectiOD 7, be so revised,-
«(1) with alIect fro ... the. date o£ SJJPh eo~D~~OI' 
the .date of eqiry of a.period ofive y~ fr.o,m(he dat~ 0 .... 4S 
which possession of such property was SUl"l'tmdered or .tell:-
vered to, or taken by, the com.,eteDt authority UDder HdIeIl 

4 or, liS the case may be, the appropriate authority under the 
law in pursuance of which such property was originally re-
quisitioned, whichever is later; and 
(b) again, on the expiry of a period of five years from 
the date on which the revision made under clause (a) takes 
effect. 
(2B) The recurring payment in respect of any propertysball 
be revised by l'e-determining such payment in the manner 'and in 
accordance with the principles set out in sub-section (1) read 
10 'With elause (a) of su~seetion (2) as jf such property had been 
'requfsftf6n~d under tbis Ad on the date with effect from 'which 
the revision has to be made under sub-section (2A).". 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The power to requisition and to acquire immovable properties for a 
public purpose was first provided in the Defence of India Act, 1939 which 
came to end on the 30th September, 1946. It was, however, found neces-
sary to retain some of the properties for a longer period in the occupation 
of the Government. Therefore, it was provided in the Requisitioned 
Land (Continuance of Powers) Act, 1947 that any property which had 
been requisitioned under the Defence of India Act, 1939 would continue 
to remain under requisition. Subsequently, the Requisitioning and 
Acquisition of Immovable Property Act, 1952 was enacted to confer 
powers on the Government in this regard. Section 24 of the Act provided 
that any property which was subject to requisition under the Act of 
1947 shall be deemed to have been requisitioned under the Requisitioning 
and Acquisition of Immovable Property Act, 1952. This Act was initially 
to remain in force for six years and was to expire on the 13th March, 
1958. The life of the Act was, however, extended from time to time 
and it will now remain in fmce up to the 13th March, 1970. 
2. Chapter VI of the Defence of India Act, 1962 provided for the requi-
sitioning and acquisition of immovable property. The Act ceased to have 
effect with effect from the 10th July, 1968, namely six months after Pro-
clamation of Emergency which was revoked with effect from the 10th 
January, 1968. As there were numerous properties requisitioned under 
the Defence of India Act, 1962, it was not found possible either to release 
them or to acquire them by the payment of compensation. The Requisi-
tioning and Acquisition of Immovable Property (Amendment) Act, 1968, 
was, therefore, enacted to provide that the properties requisitioned under 
the Defence of India Act, 1962 shall be deemed to have been requisitioned 
under the Requisitioning and Acquisition of Immovable Property Act, 
1952. Many properties which have been requisitioned under the Defence 
of India Act, 1962 and the Requisitioning and Acquisition of Immovable 
Property Act, 1952 are in t.he possession of the Ministry of Defence and 
also of some other Ministries. Although the Government is expeditiously 
implementing the policy of acquiring or de-requisitioning the requisi-
tioned properties, a large number which are expected to be needed even 
after the 13th March, 1970 for public purposes will not have been acquir-
ed by then. On many of these properties, valuable constructions of a 
permanent nature connected with national defence or the conduct of 
military operations or other important public purpose have been put up. 
It will not be expedient to remove these structures for the purpose of 
release of the properties to the owners pending ;. decision to acquire or 
release the properties. In addition, it is felt that there will always be 
need foIj requisitioning or acquiring immovable properties for public 
purposes. The Law Commission of India had recommended, in their 
Tenth Report, that the law of requisitioning should be embodied in a 
permanent code. It is accordingly proposed that the Requisitioning and 
Acquisition of Immovable Property Act, 1952, should be made a perma-
nent piece of legislation. 
S. Compensation once fixed under the Act cannot be revised during 
the entire period of the requisitioning, a~ it is based on the rent that the 
4 

S 
property would have fetched if it had been leased out on the date of the 
requisitioning. It is felt that it will be fair to the owners if the amount 
of compensation is reviewed quinquennially with reference to the cir-
cumstances prevailing at the time of the review. 
4. The Law Commi~on of India also recommended that no property 
should be kept under requisition for a period longer than five years and 
if, before the expiry of that period, the Government considered it neces-
aary to acquire the property, they should be at libEriy to do so. If, how-
ever, they decided not to acquire the property, it would not be proper 
to keep the property indefinitely under requisition. The period of five 
years is, however, considered inadequate for the purpose and it is pro-
posed that the maximum period of requisitioning should be 10 years from 
the date of commencement of the proposed legislation in the case of 
properties already under requisition and 10 years from the date on which 
the possession is taken in the case of properties which may be requisi-
tioned after such commencement. 
5. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects. 
NEW DJ:LHI; K. K. SHAH. 
The 2nd December, 19&~. 
PRESIDENT'S RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLE 117 OF THE 
CONSTITUTION OF INDIA 
[Copy of letter No. 19012 (3) 168-Po1.IV, dated the' 8th December, 1969 
from Shri K. K. Shah, Minister of Health and Family Planning and 
Works, Housing and Urban Development to the Secretary, Lok Sabha.] 
The President· having been informed about the subject matter of the 
RequiSitioning and Acquisition of Immovable Property (Amendment) 
Bill, 1969, has recommended to the House the considerati<tn of the Bill 
under article 117 (3) of the Constitution. 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Clause 2 of the Bill seeks to make the principal Act a permanent one. 
This by 'itself 'w011ld not necessarily involve anyaddltfon'alexpendlture 
'~m theConsalidated Fund of India. The' number of p~perttes' U!'i&!r 
requisition varies 'from time to time and tis requisitioned pt'Opertil!!s can 
be 'aequired it is diftlcult to estimate, the actual expenditure 'for dY 
future period. At the moment the annual expenditure '(towards pay-
,nient of compensation,etc.) under the Act is aboutnupeesninety-seven 
lakhs. 
2. Clause 3 of the Bill pnwides that the maximum period of 
requisitioning should be ten years from the date of enactmest of the Bill 
mUle case of properties already under requisition and ten years from 
the date on which possesSion is taken in the ca,;e of properties which may 
be requisitioned after that date unless such property is acquired under 
section 7 within the period of ten years aforesaid. The ttquiiUtiOn of 
immovable properties within the prescribed period will involve a non-
reeurring expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of IncKa. In't!8te all 
the properties now under requisition are to bellCquired under section 7 
of the principal Act, the total non-recurring expenditure will be approxi-
mately Rs. 33 crores. This expenditure will be spread over a number 
of years. Moreover, it is not intended to acquire a11 the requisitioned 
properties and some of the propertie.; will be de-requisitioned as and 
when possible. 
3. Clause 4 (b) of the Bill seeks to insert a new sub-section (2A) in 
section 8 of the principal Act which provide; that the amount of com-
pensation shall be reviewed quinquennially. In accordance with the 
proviSiOns of new sub-section (2A) , the amount of compensation payable 
for properties under requisition before and after the commencement of 
the legislation will have to be revised in the manner indicated in sub-
section (2B). This provision will involve additional expenditure of a re-
curring nature. It is estimated that during 1970-71, such additional ex-
llenditure win approximately 'be rupees one crore. There would 'oMi-
nanly be gradual reductitm of this amount in subsequent years due to 
. acquisition or de-requisitioning of the properties now under requisition. 

1001 
1887. 
AlitfEXUB£ . 
EXTRACTS FROM THE REQUISITIONING AND ACQUISmON OF IMMOVABLE 
PROPERTY ACT, 1952 
(30 OF 1952) 
1. (1) • • • • 
(3) It shall cease to have effect on the, 14th day of March, 1970, except 
as respects things done or omitted to be done before such cesser of opera-
tion of this Act, and section 6 of the General Clauses Act, 1897, shall 
apply upon such cesser of operation as if it had then been repealed by 
a Central Act. 
• • • • 
8. (1) • • • • • 
(2) Where any property is to be released from requisition, the com-
petent authority may, after such inquiry if any, as it may in any case 
consider necessary to make or cause to be made, specify by order in 
writing the person to whom possession of the property shall be given 
and such possession shall, as far as practicable, be given to the person 
from whom possession was taken at the time of the requisition or to ;he 
successors-in-interest of such person. 
• • • • • 
8. (1) • • • • 
(2) The amount of compensation payable for the requisitioning of 
any property shall consist of-
(a) a recurring payment, in respect of the period of requi&ition, 
of a sum equal to the rent which would have been payable for the 
. 1WI.~ O«!uP.~,tiop, of the pJ;o~rty, if it, had b~~-1;aJten, ,o~, l~e! 
for that period; and 
(b) such sum or sums, if any, as may be found necessary to 
compensate the person interested for all or any of the following 
matters, namely:-
(i) pecuniary loss due to requisitioning; 
(it) expenses on account of vacating the requisitioned pre-
mises; 
(iii) expenses on account of re-occupying the premises upon 
release from requisition; and 
(iv) damages (other than normal wear and tear) caused to 
the property during the period of requisition, including the ex-
penses that may have to_ Q~. incurred for :estoring th~ .p~operty 
to the condition in which it was at the tune of reqUiSition . 
• • • • • 
Short 
title, ex-
tent and 
dUJ;ation. 
Releue 
from re-
quilition-
ing. 
Princi-
plea and 
methOd 
ot deter-
mininc 
compen_ 
sation. 

A 
Bll.L 
funher to amend the Requisitioning and Acquisition of Immovable Property Act, 19S.2 
(Shri K. K. Shah, 
Minister of Health and 
Family Planning, and 
Works, Housing & Urban 
DefJelopment) 