10K SABHA 
-
CORR I GEND4 
to 
THE COPRA CESS BILL, 1978 
j-IQ bgLAs in trQduced :in !.ok Sal>!l.a. J 
1. Page 4, line 14,-
!su: "sub- section (2)" ~ "sub.a8ction (1) II 
2. Page 7, line ,,-
for "amounts areS! ~ "a,m()unt.i,s'l 
NE\.f DELHI; 
.Tul.:v 19. 1978 
Asad'fia. 28, 1900 ( sika) 

As INTRODUCED IN THE LoK SABHA 
Bill No. 111 of 1978 
• 
THE COPRA CESS BILL, 1978 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the impoBition of cess on copra for the developmen.t of; 
the coconut industry and for matters connected theretc?ith. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twenty-ninth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows: - . 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Copra Cess Act, 1978. 
(2) It extends to the whole of India. 
(3) it shall come into force on such date as the Central Government 
5 may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
10 
15 
2. (1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
(a) "Board" means the Coconut Development Board established 
under section 4 of the Coconut Development Board Act, 1978; 
(b) "Collector" means the officer appointed by the Central Gov· 
ernment to perform in any specified area the duties of a Collector 
under the provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder, and 
includes any officer subordinate to that officer whom he may, by order 
in writing, authorise to perform his duties under tnose provisions; 
(c) "copra" means the dry kernel of coconut and includes edible 
copra and desiccated coconut; 
Short 
title, 
extent 
and com-
mence. 
ment. 
De1lnL 
tion •. 

Imposi-
tion of 
cess. 
Applica_ 
tion of 
proceeds 
of cesa. 
OccaPier 
to sup-
ply cer-
tain~llrtl 
culars'to 
COllec_ 
tor. 
2 
(d) "managing agent" has the meaning assigned to it in the 
Companies Act, 1956; 
(e) "mill" means any premises in which or in any part of which, 
copra is crushed, or is ordinarily crUShed, with the aid of power for 
the extraction of oil or is otherwise processed with the aid of power. S 
ExpZanation.-"Power" means electrical energy or any other 
form of energy, which is mechanically transmittea and is not gene-
rated by human or animal agency; 
(f) "occupier", in relation to any mill, means the person who has 
the ultimate control over the affairs of the mill or the owner of the 10 
mill in case he is not the occupier or where the said affairs are en-
trusted to a managing agent, such agent shall be deemed to be the 
occupier of the mill; 
(g) "oil" means oil extracted from copra; 
(h) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act. IS 
(2) All other words and expressions used in this Act and not defined, 
but defined in the Coconut Development BoaI'j Act, 1978, shall have the 
meanings respectively assigned to them in that Act. 
3. (1) There shall be levied and collected as a cess, for the purposes 
of this Act, on copra consumed in any mill in India with a view to pro- 20 
ducing or manufacturing any goods therefrom, a duty of excise at such 
rate, not exceeding five rupees per quintal of copra, as the Central Gov-
~rntn~t may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify: 
Provided that until such rate is specified by the Central Government, 
the duty of excise shtHl be levied and cullected st'the Il'ate 01 sixty paise 2S 
per quintal of copra. 
(2) The duty of excise leviable under sub-section (1) shall be payable 
by the occupier of the mill in which the copra is consumed. 
4:fte--pl'eeeelis'ofihe"dtity of exehe \.levied lIDdeoUeded UJlder'this 
Act shall IBnt lite tredtted to' the 'ConiMlidatedPUDd of 'India, ,aDd the 30 
C.atal·Government may, if Parliament, by 1tPPr.QPl'iation made .bylaw 
in this behalf, so provides, pay to the Board, from time .to, _e,.famo"t 
of such proceeds, after deducting the expenses on collection and the 
amount, if any, it'elMtied:'UIlCier •• dion I, , .. hIUIIII;1Of. 1mOlley .dt lDay 
tllink fit for being utilised for the .purposes of the Coconut Development 3S 
Board Act, 1978. 
5. The occupier of every mill shall,-
(a) if the mill was established before the commencement of this 
Act, within fourteen days from such commencement, and 
-(b) 'if . the mill..is established after the 'commencement of this 40 
. ~~t, within .I:fourt~fm (days ,from such estatiliihment, 
ftltnisb 'to :tke' Colh!ctor 8<-.sta,tement eontaimug the following particulars, 
nmnely:-
'(i) the natne and situation of the 'mill; 
(ii) the name and address of the occupter; 45 
(iii) the address to which the communications Il'elating to 'the mlll 
may be sent; anti 
(iv) the total capacity of the mill. 
1 of 195f:' 

3 
8. (1) Ewery occupier of a mill shall fUrnish to the Collector e.w;~ 
ml)nth a' return, statina the total amount 9f copra consumed bl the min 
during the preceding month. 
(2) The return referred to in sub-section (1) shall be furnished be-
5 fore the seventh day of eaah month together with such other informa-
tion as may be prescribed. 
(3) Every such return shall be made in such form and shall be veri-
fied in. such manD.er as may be prescribed. 
7. (1) On. receiving any return made under section 6, the CoYect.oc 
10 shall assess the duty of excise in respect of the period to which the re-
turn relates, and if the amount has not already been paid, shall caURe a 
notice to be served upon the occupier of the mill requidng him to make 
payment of the 8RWUftt assessed within ten days of the service- of the 
notice. 
IS (2) If the occupier of any mill fails to furnish in due time the return 
referred to in section 6 or furnishes a return which the Collector has 
reason to believe is incorrect or defective, the Collector shan assess the 
amount payable by him in such manner, if any, as may be prescribed, 
ar.d the provisions of sub-section (1) shall thereupon apply as if such 
20 assessment had been made on the basis of a return 'furnished by the 
occupier: -
Provided that, in the case of a return which he has reason to belliieve 
is incorrect or defective, the Collector shall not assess the duty of excise 
at an amount bigher than that at which it is aese9SalDle on the basis of 
25 the retUf'n without giving to the occupier a reasOl'lable opportunity of 
proving the correctness or completeness of the return. 
(3) A notice under sub-section (1) may1)e served on the oecl\pier 
of a mill either by registered post or by delivering or tendering it to the 
oecupier or his agenr1l at lIhe mill 
3CI 8. (1) Any occup'er of a mill who is aggrieved by an assessment made 
UDder section 7. may, wi-thin three months of service of tDe nQtice refer-
red to in sub-section ,1) of that secti{)n, appeal to such au.thot'ity as the 
Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint 
in this behalf, for the cancellation or modifi~ation of the assessmeBrt anti, 
35 on s.uch appeal, the said authority may cancel or modify the u,seaament 
and order the refund to such occupier of the whole or part, as the case 
may be, of the amount paid, thereunder: 
Provided that the authority so appointed shall not be inferior in rank 
to the Collector by whom the assessme,nt was made. 
4'0 (2) The appellate authority may, if it is satisfied that· the appellant 
Delivery 
ot 
monthly 
returns. 
Collec-
tion ot 
cell. 
Finality 
of assess-
ment. 
was prevented by sufficient cause from presenting the appeal within the. -, 
aforesaid period of three months, allow it t{) be presented within a fup.. 
tiler period of one month. 
(3) Where the. appellate authority is. 01 GpiniGft th&~ ey duty of exeise 
4S has been short.levied, no order enhancing the duty ot excise shall be. 

Refund of 
cess on 
oil ex-
ported 
from 
India. 
Recovery 
of sum. 
due to 
Govern-
ment. 
Power to 
Inapeet 
mill, 
and 
tlke 
COpiell of 
account. 
, 
~. 
made unless the appellant has been given notice to show cause, within 
one month from the date of service thereof, against the proposed order. 
(4) The Central Government may, on the application of any person 
aggrieved by any order made under sub-section (1) or sub-section (3), 
cancel or modify such order, if such application is made within six S 
months from the date of the order made under sub-section (1) or sub-
section (3), as the case may be. 
(5) The Central Government may, if it is satisfied that the applicant 
was prevented by sufficient cause from presenting the application within 
the aforesaid period of six months, allow it to be presented within a 10 
further period of one month. 
(6) The decision of the CentTal Government under sub-section (4) 
and subject to the decision of the Central Government, the decision oi 
the appellate authority under sub-section (2), shall be final. 
9. Where any cess on copra is levied and collected under this Act and IS 
the oil extracted from the whole or any part of such copra is exported 
from India, then, the Central Government shall, subject to such condi-
tions as may be prescribed, refund so much amount of eess as is equal 
to the cess collected in respect of the copra from which the oil 80 exported 
was extracted, to the occupier of the mill from whom such cess was 20 
coHected, whether or not such copra is produced in or imported into 
India. 
10. Where any duty of excise demanded from any person or any 
other sum payable by any person under this Act is not paid,-
(a) the Collector may deduct the amount so payable from any 2S 
money owing to such person which may be under the control of the 
Collector or any other officer; or 
(b) the Collector may recover the amount so payable by detain-
ing and selling any grods belonging to such person which all'e under 
the cont'rol of the Collector or any other officer; or 30 
(c) if the amount cannot be recovered from such person in the 
manner provided in clause (a) or clause (b), the CollectOll' may 
prepare a certificate signed by him specifying the amount due from 
such person and send it to the Collector of the district in which such 
penon owns any property or resides or carries on his business and the 3S 
said Collector shall, on receipt of such certificate, pro(!eed h reCover 
from the said person the amount specified therein as if it were an 
arrear of land revenue. 
11. (1) The Collector or any otftcer empr'wered by a Ileneral or special 
order of the Central Government in this behalf shall have free access 40 
at all reasonable times during working hou~s to any mill or any part 
nf a mill. 
(2) The Collector or any other officer may, at any time durinll work-
ing hours, with or without notice to the occupier, examine the purchase, 
sale and stock records and accounts of any mill and take copies of or 45 
extracts from all or any of the said records or accounts for the purpose 

of . testing the accuracy of any return or of infc,·rming himself as to the 
pB4"ticul~rs regarding which information is required for the purposes of 
this Act or any rules made thereunder: -
Provided that nothing in this section shall be deemed to authorise 
5 the examination of any description or form'Jlae of any trade process. 
12. (1) All such copies and extracts and all information acquired by 
a Collector or any other officer from any inspection of any mill or from 
any return submitted under this Act shall be treated as confidential. 
(2) If the Collector or any such officer discloses to any person, other 
10 than a superior officer, any such information as aforesaid, without the 
previous sanction of the Central G)vernment or such other authority as 
may be prescribed, he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term 
which may extend to six months and shall also be liable to ftne: 
Provided that nothing in this section shall apply to the disclosure of 
I S any such information for the purpose of a pre s~cution in respect of the 
making of a false return under this Act. 
I of 1944. 13. The provisions of the Central Excises and Salt Act. 1944, and the 
rules made thereunder including those relating to refunds and exemp-
tions from duty, shall, so far as may be, apply in relation to the levy and 
20 collection of duty of excise on copra under this Act, as they apply in re-
lation to the levy and collection of duty payable to the Central Govern-
ment under that Act. 
14, (1) Whoever-
(a) evades the payment of any duty of excise payable under 
2S this Act, or 
(b) fails to furnish any return or information which it is his 
duty to furnish as provided by or under this Act, or furnishes a 
return or information which is false in material particulars or which 
he does not believe to· be true, or 
30 (c) obstructs the Collector or any other officer in the perform-
ance of his duties under this Act or any rules made thereunder, 
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend 
to six months, or with fine which may extend to two thousand rupees, 
or with both. 
35· (2) Any court trying an offence under this Act may direct that the 
copra in re6pect of which it is satisfied that an offence punisbRble 
under this Act has been committed, shall be forfeited to Government 
and may also direct that all packages or coverings in which the copra is 
contained and every an'mal, vehicle, vessel or other conveyance used in 
40 C8r'l'yingsuch copra shall be forfeited to Government. 
Informa_ 
tion ac_ 
quired to 
be con-
fidential, 
Provi-
sions Of 
Central 
Excises 
and 
Salt 
Act. 
1944, 
etc .. to 
apply. 
Offences. 
15. (1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a Offences by 
company, every person who, at the time the offence was committed, WIiS com-
in charge of. and was resp:>nsible to, the company for the conduct of the panies 
business of the company as well as the company, shall be deemed to be 
guilty 01 the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and 
45 punished accordingly: 

., 
PR>y1deci-that nothing. cOlltaimeci in this BUD-seetion shall rendelta., 
lNoR. pe!'8OD liable to any punishment, if he p!'(nJes that the ofhnee was 
committed without his knowledge or that he- had, exercised all due dili-
gence to prevent the commission of such offence. 
(2)' ~twithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), where 5 
any offence under this Act has been committed by a company and it is 
proved that the offence has been committed with the consent or con-
nt\'&n"Ce 01, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of, any director. 
mstmger, secretary or other offtcer of the company, such director, 
lMfteaetr. seel'etal'y 01' other oftieer shail al80 be deemed'to. be gu4t.ty of 10 
tNtt O_Me and shaD be liable to be proceeciecl against atId p\miMed 
acctGrciUfll~· 
ExplMati6n..-For the ptlrp08es (}f this seetion,-
(II) "'company" means any body corporate and includes a firm 
01' ~tber association of individuals; and 15 
(b) "director", in relation to a firm, means a partner in the 
ftnn. 
Li~ 16. No prosecution for any offence punishable under tllis Act ~kall 
of prOle-< lle instituted against any person except by. or with the consent of, the 
cution. Collector. 20 
COfftpoei'-
tion'61 
oftencu-.· 
Protection 
of action 
taken in 
good 
faith. 
.. 
Power to 
make 
rules. 
17. Any offence punishable under this Act may, either befor~ or 
after the institution of the prosecution, be compounded by the Col:ector 
or any other officer authorised by him in this behalf on paym£Ont to 
~ CeMrat Government, for the purposes of this Act, of such sum as 
the Collector or such officer, as the case may be, thinks fit. 25 
Ie. No snit, prosec:aticm, or legal proceeding 'shall lie agam.. the 
cem.trld GvYernment or any person authorised by the CeDtrat Govern-
ment for anything which is in good faith dbne OT intended to be done 
under this Act or any rule or order made thereunder. 
1 •. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Offi.cial 30 
Ga:..:.tte, mak.e rules to carry out the provisions of this Act. 
(J~ In parttcular, and without prejudice to the generality of the 
fttNU'''' poWer, 8Uch rules may provide for an or any of the follnwiftg 
iiiMteH, namely:-
(a) informat!()!\ to beo furftfshed by an occupier of' a mm in thl"' 3S 
1IlIl~ return under lUb-seC1ion (2) of section 6; 
(b) the form of the monthly return which every ~cupierof a 
mitt shall submit to the Collector and the manner in which such re-
turn shall be verified under sub-section (3) of section 6; 

-{c) the lftallJler in whioh .aesessment of dvty f)f exoise'shan be 
made Where no 1"etum bas been fumished or ·the -retum wld.h 
has been ·ful'nighedis believed ,by :theCollectorto ·be inoorweet « 
.defective under sltb.osection (2-) ·af sectien 7; 
S 1(d) the conditions subject ,to which tberefund of amounts ax:e 
made .under section 9; 
,,~) tae alHbority wWlout the pRe~iousl8llction of ,wbich JIl-
!formation may not be .disclosed under aWHection (2) of aecUonU; 
:(f) any other matter which is -required to be, or may "be, 
10 prescribed. 
~) E"ery -rule ~macie by the Central Government . under ~ ,Act 
·shan .be .laid, as 110Q1l 88 may be after . it.is made, befoJ!e "eaoh . ~use Df 
cP.Blffiament,wlUle it is measion for a total period of thirty clay .. which 
may be aomp'tiled in one leas ion or in two :or more II.lccessi.ve-.i~, 
IS and if, before the expiry of the session immediatelyfollowmg t.ae 
session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making 
any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the JrWe '. sht-uld 
not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified 
fQlll1;or'De t«lf :no effect, .as the case may be; so, howe\ler, -that'any 
20 such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the 
validity of anything previously done unaer that rule. 
20. In the Produce Cess Act, 1966,- Amend-
mentof 
(a) in sub-clause (ii) of clause (g) of section 2,- Act 15 of 
30 
(i) the words "copra or", in both the places where they 
occur, shall be omitted; 
(ii) the words "as the case may be," shall be omitted: 
(b) in section 6, the words "or copra", in both the plaees where 
they occur, shall be omitted; 
(c)-in the Second Schedule, selial number 2 and .the ·u.tries 
relating thereto in 'columns 2, 3 and 4sbaU,be omitted. 
1966. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Bill is complementary to the Coconut Development Bpard Bill, 
1978. The Coconut Development Board Bill, 1978 seeks to provide for the 
development under the control of the Union, of the Coconut industry 
(excluding coir and coconut oil products industry). For the purpose, 
the Bill seeks to provide for the establishment of a Board to be called 
the Coconut Development Board. In order to ensure that the said 
Board has the necessary resources to discharge its functions, the Bill 
seeks to provide far the imposition of a cess on copra. At present the 
cess on copra is being levied under the Produce Cess Act, 1966 (15 of 
1966) at the rate of 60 paise per quintal. The Bill empowers the Cent-
ral Government to levy cess on copra at a maximum rate of Rs. 5 pEr 
quintal. In view of this provision, cOpTa is being excluded from the 
&!cond Schedule to the Produce Cess Act, 1966 by suitably amending the 
Act. The intention is to make over, after due appropriation by Parlia-
ment, by law. such amount 8S the Central Government may deem itt, to 
the Coconut Development Board, so as to ens·ble it to discharge its func-
tions effectively. 
2. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects. 
NEW DELHI; 
The 7th July, 1978. 
SURJIT SINGH BARNALA. 
PRESIDENT'S RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLE 117 OF THE 
CONSTITIJTION OF INDIA 
[Copy of letter No. 12(2) /77-CA. I, dated the 13th July, 1978 from 
Shri Surjit Singh Barnala, Minister of AgricultU'l'e and Irrigation to the 
Secretary, Lok Sabha.] 
The President, having been informed of the subject matter of the 
Copra Cess Bill, 1978, recommends under clause (1) of article 117 of the 
Constitution of India, the introduction of the Bill in Lok Sabha and 
also recommends under clause (3) of article 117 of the Constitution of 
India, the consideration of the Bill by Lok Sabha. 
8 

FINANCIAL MEltIORANDUM 
With • view to eusutin. that the CDODIlut Development Board estab-
ltabed ,under tke Cocomit :I>aweleipBlent ~rd Bill, 1m, has necessary 
retounttll to disC881'g. itl funetiDDS, this Bill seeks to pravide for levy 
of at. on OGpta, a duty of excise, at aueh rate not sCleeding as. 5 per 
quiDW 81 the Central Government may, by notification in the Official 
Goette, lpecify. 
2. Tbe proc~ds of the aforementioned cess will be paid Into the Con-
,diid.ted Fund of Iheile. Under clause 4 of the Bl11 the CentrAl Govern-
ment may, if i'arliament, by appropriation mac!e by law, in this behalf, 
so provides, pay to the said Boai'd from time to time, out of such pro-
cEie<1tt, af~~ dedUcting the expenses 'on collection, such ,lIms of money 
ai that Government may think fit. 
3. The ~l8CtiOll of the aferementiOl)ed C8SI will involve BOmA ex-
peDditure from the Consolidated Fund Bl India. It is Det pouible, at 
thO stage, tcJ estimate tile IID9Wlt ol. 81Mb 8KpenditUl"e. However, it is 
tentatively ettlmateG tllat the coat eI. ,*leetion of ceae would ~ about 
2 per cent. of the proceeds. The total proceeds from this cess collection 
would be about Rs. 80 lakhs to Rs. 100 lakhs. The expenses of collf!Ction 
would be about Rs. 1.60 lakhs to Rs. 2 lakhs. As only the balance of the 
proceeds, after deducting the cost of collection, may be utilised for 
making payments to the Coconut De\relopment Board, there will, in 
effect, be no net out-go from the Consolidated Fund of India. The ex-
penditure on the collection Of the cess will be of a recurring nature. 
4. The Bill does not involve any other expendit11l"e whether of 0 re-
curring or non-recurring nature. 
9 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 19 of the Bill seeks to empower the Central Government to 
make rules to carry out the provisions of the Bill. The matters in res-
pect of which rules may be so made relate, inter alia, to the conditJons 
subject to which the refund of amounts are made under clause 9; infor-
mation to be furnished by the occupier of a mill in the monthly ~turn 
under sub-clause (2) of clause 6; the form of the monthly return which 
every occupier of a mill may submit to the Collector and the manner 
in which such return may be verified under sub-clause (3) of clause 6; 
the manner in which assessment of duty of excise shall be made where 
no return has been furnished or the return which has been furnished 
is believed by the Collecbr to be incorrect or defective under sub-clause 
(2) of clause 7; and the authority without the previous sanction of 
which information may not be disclosed under sub-clause (2) of clause 
12. As the matters in respect of which rules may be made pertain to 
matters of procedure or detail and· as the maximum limits of punish-
ments which may be provided for by rules are laid down in the cJaU88 
itself, the delegation of legislative power is of a normal character. 
10 

.. 
ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS FROM THE PRODUCE CESS ACT, 1966 
(15 OF 1968) 
.. .. .. 
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
.. .. .. .. 
(g) "mill" means,-
.. .. .. .. 
(it) in relation to copra or oil-seed and oil, any premises 
in which or in any part of which, copra or oil-seed, as the 
case may be, is crushed, or is ordinarily crushed, with the 
aid of power for the extraction of oil. 
Ezplana.tion.-"Power" means electrical energy or any 
other form of energy, which is mechanically transmitted and is 
Dot generated by human or animal agency . 
.. .. .. .. 
, G. There shall be refunded from out of the proceeds of cess levied 
'and collected under this Act, on' such conditions as may be prescribed, 
all sums collected as cess on the quantity of oils exported from India, 
if such oils have been extracted from oil-seed or copra crushed in a 
mill in India, irrespective of whether the oil-seed or copra is produced 
:in, or imported into, India. 
's. 
:No. 
.. .. .. 
THE SECOND SCHEDULE 
[See section 3 (2) ] 
Name of the produce The maximum rate 
at which duty of 
excile may be 
collected 
• 3 
'. • 
' . 
• 
Actual rate at 
which duty of 
excite is to be 
collected until a 
dift'erent rate is 
ipeCified by the 
Central Government 
• 
~Q. Copra consumed in any mill Seventy-five paise per quintal Sixty paise per quintal of 
lD India with a view to pro- of copra. copra. 
ducing or manufacturinr 
any goods therefrom. 
• .. .. ' . 
II 
II 
Definitions 
Refutld 
oleesl 
on oils 
exported 
from 
India. 

LOK SABHA 
A 
, 
BILL 
tQ pr9~,ide f.o)" ~e i~s,iijoa. of C,", ,on ,cop.a. for the i1evelo~toJ 
th~:co~on1.1t ind1,1,~ and fo)" xnat..r$ ,C@l).ected tJae.rewitb. 
(Shri Suriit Singh Barnala, Min-later of Agriculture and Zrrig4ticm) 