As iNTRODUCED IN LoK SABH.'\ 6N' 
l@'O. III of ." 
THE DISPLACED PERSONS (COMPEN~Tt8N AND 
REHABltITATION)AMENDMftNT BILL, 1967 
." . 
BILL 
furthtr to amend the Displaced Persons (Compensation and Rellabili-
. tation) Act, 1814. 
,lb it. enacted, by. P.arliament in the Eighteenth ,Year of the 
,aepublic .of/India..as. followa:-
1. This Act may be called the Displaced Persons' (CGMpenaation 
and Rehabilitation) Amendment Act, 1967. Short 
title. 
, Z. In the Displaced Persons (Compensation and Rehabilitation) 
10 
Act, 19M, after section 8, the following section shall be, and shall be 
deemed always to have been, inserted, namely:-
"SA. (1) Where any compensation is payable to any dis- Payment 
placed person in lieu of property abandoned by him in West Of aom. 
Pakistan which on the date of his migration from West Pakistan penaation 
was subject to a mortgage in favour of a person who is not in c .... 
of mort-
,qed pro-
perti ... 

2 
resident in India, the Settlement Commissioner shall, after giv-
ing a reasonable· notice to the displaced person, determine the 
principal sum for which the property was so mortgaged and 
such portion of the principal sum 1>0 determined as bears the 
lamc proportion as the compensation payable to the displacea 5 
person bears to the value of the verified claim of the displaced 
perflon in respect of that mortgaged property shall be deductible 
from the compensation payable in respect of the mortgaged 
property: i 
Provided that where compensation has ocen paid to any 10 
displac'ed person without such deduction having been made, the 
displaced person shall pay to the Central Government the 
amount of such deduction within three months of the determi-
nation thereof or such longer period as may be prescribed: 
Provided further that where compensation has been paid to IS 
any displaced person by sale or any other modI" of transfer 10 
him of any property from the compensation pool, the rlisplaced 
person may, within the aforesaid period of three months or, all 
the case may be, within the aforesaid prescribed period,-
(a) either retain the property on his paying in cash the 20 
aforesaid' amount, or 
'(Ib) surrender a portion 'of tha·t property of a value 
equivalent to the amount of such deduction, su::h value bcing 
determined by the Settlement Commissioner in the prescribed 
manner. 
(2) If any displaced person fails to pay any amount which 
is liable to be deducted from his compensation under sub-sec-
tion (1), or fails to surrender the property of the value equivalent 
to such amount, such amount may be recovered in the aame 
manner ~ an arrear of land. revenW!.". 
3Q. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS J\ND REASONS 
Certain difficulties are being experienc'ed in the administration 
of the Displaced Persons (Comp~nsation and Rehahilitation) Act, 
1954 and the early completion of the ccmpensation scheme is thus 
impeded. Some of the properties left by the displaced persons in 
'West Pakistan were subject to mortgages with the nationals of 
West Pakistan and it was therefore considered that proportionate 
deductions should be made from the compensation due to them on 
that account. Accordingly with a view to recovering the amounts 
of such deductions executive directions were issued in this behalf 
by the Punjab Government. In a writ p ... tition before thp. High 
Court of Punjab the issue of these directions was challenJted. The 
High Court held that the departmental authorities had not been 
f'mpowered by law to realise the amounts of such deductions. It ill, 
therefore, necessary that a suitable provision should be made in the 
Act for enecting th~ recovery of a portion of the compensation already 
paid to the displact'd persons in lieu of the mortgage amount's re-
ceived by them. Option is being givI'n to :the displaced p'Cr80M 
either to retain the property on their paying in cash the amount 80 
deductible or to surrf'nder th'e portion of the property of a value 
equivalent to the amount of such deduction and on failure of pay~ 
ment of such amount. it is proposed tn recover the amount in th. 
,arne manner as an arrear of land revenuf'. 
The Bill seeks to achieve these objects. 
NEW DELHI; JAISUKHLAL HATHI. 
The 14th lut'll. 1967. 
PRESIDENT'S RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLE 117 
OF THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA 
[Copy of letter No. 3(8)/L&n·f)2, dared the 27th July, 1967 from 
Shri Jai Sukh Lal Hathi, Minister of Labcur and Rehabilitation to 
the Secretary, Lok Sabha]. 
The President having been informed of the subject matter of the 
proposed Bill further to amend the Displaced Persons (Compensa-
tion and Rehabilitation) Act, 1954, recommends under article 117 (1) 
of the Constitution of India the introduction of the But in the Lok 
Sabh~. 
3 

. Clau.i8 2 of . .the. Bill inserts a new section 8A in which it .is. pro-
" \Tided. that wb:ere carnpensation has been .paid to a displaced per8Ql'l 
· without.any. deduction having been made on account of the mOX:~Ne 
money received. by him, such displaced person ,shall pay to. the 
· Central Government the amount of such deduction within three 
· mont.hJ of the· detennination thereof or such longer period ,as may 
Oe''Preacribed. There may be cases where it may be more ~ppro-
· pJliate to allow longer period for the discharge of. the . aforesaid 
liability. 
The aforesaid new section giV'es option to a displaced 'pt-rson' to 
surrender a portion of the property allotted to him of a 'value 
equivalent to the amount deductible under the section, SUch value 
being determined in the prescribed marmer. 
''1'he'.legation of the aforesaid power relates to matierl'1Ohietail 
or'procWdureandil thu~ of a normal-cl1uact~. 
4 

LOI( SABRA 
A 
BtLt 
further to ameod the Displaced. PelSOllS (CompCll'UHltioo 
and Rehabilitation) Ad:, I gS4. 
(Shri 1ai Sukh Lal HIIlhi, 
Millis,. oJ·lAIxMr GIld 
lUIatI6ifltatu..) 