5

As IntRopucED IN LoK SABHA

28 101 20m

Bill No. 111 of 2000.

THE RURAL AREAS (ELECTRICITY SUPPLY)
BILL, 2000
By
Simi RaMDAS ATHAWALE, M.P.
A
* BILL

to provide for establishment of a Rural Electricity Authority to ensure continuous electric
supply to farmers for their agricultural activities and for providing atleast single

Point connection to every dwelling unit in rural areas of the country and for matters
connected therewith.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-first Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—

1. (7) This Act may be called the Rural Areas (Electricity Supply) Act, 2000.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
2, In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—

(०) “Authority” means the Rural Electricity Authority established under
section 3;

(b) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act; and

Short title and
extent.

Definitions,


Establishment
ofa Rural
Electricity
Authority,

Functions of
the Authority.

Staff,

Central
Government to
provide
moneys,

Development
Fund.

Electricity at
subsidised
rates to
farmers.

Single point
connection free

2

(©) words and expressions used but not defined in this Act and defined in
Electricity Act, 1910 and the Electricity (Supply) Act, 1948, shall have the meanings
respectively assigned to them in those Acts.

3. (2) The Central Government shall establish a Rural Electricity Authority
having its headquarter at Mumbai in the State of Maharashtra,

(2) The Authority shall consist of five members to be appointed by the Central
Government and of whom atleast two members shall be from amongst the farmers,

(3) The Central Government shall appoint one of the members as the Chairman of
the Committee.

(4) All the members of the Authorit

'y including the Chairman shall hold office for a
period as may be prescribed.

4. The Authority shall exercise such functions and perform such duties in such
manner as the Central Government may prescribe or direct and in particular to

(2) develop a sound, adequate and uniform national policy in order to provide—

(0 continuous power supply to the farmers for irrigation and other agricultural
purposes;

(ii) continuous power supply to the village and cottage industries and also to
village artisans engaged in self-employment; and

atleast single point connection of electricity in every dwelling unit of
each village in the country.

(2) establish new power generating station in any area in which it is required by
any scheme of the Authority.
(3) invite and promote private sector in e:

stablishing power units exclusively for the
use of rural sector in the country,

(4) coordinate the activities of the national and state planning agencies in relation
to control and utilisation of power resources for rural sector.

(S) carry out investigation and to collect and record the data concerning the

Beneration, distribution and utilisation of power in the rural sector and the development
of power resources in the rural areas,

5. The Authority may appoint a Secretary and such other officers and staff as it
may consider necessary on such terms and conditions as may be prescribed.

6. The Central Government shall provide, from time to time after due appropriation
made by Parliament by law, adequate moneys for the rural electricity works to be
undertaken by the Authority and for the administrative expenses of the Authority.

7. The Authority shall have a fund to be called by the name of Rural Electricity
Development Fund into which shall be credited all moneys received from the Central
and State Governments and from all other sources such as rural consumers, private sector

Benerating electricity for rural sector and all payments by the Authority towards electricity
expenditure shall be made therefrom.

8. The Authority may supply electricity to the farmers at subsidised rates as may be
prescribed from time to time.

9. It shall be the duty of the Authority to provide single point connection and
supply of electricity thereto free of cost to the Scheduled Caste, Scheduled Tribe and
other backward class families residing in rural areas of the country.


3

10. Save as otherwise provided in this Act, the Provisions of this Act shall be in
addition to and not in derogation of the Electricity Act, 1910 and Electricity (Supply)
Act, 1948.

11, The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make
5 rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.

‘Act not to be in
derogation of
other laws.

Power to make
rules.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

‘There is an acute shortage of power in our country which is the primary cause of
our backwardness because due to power shortage the industrial sector, the agricultural
sector and the household cannot make progress at the desired levels resulting in ultimate
backwardness. Our Power stations whether these are thermal, hydel or atomic are
producing electricity much below their generating capacity whereas the demand for
electricity is increasing day-by-day in all the sectors. It has been observed that while
distributing the generated electricity, the Electricity, Boards and Undertakings give priority
to the urban areas and the industrial sector thereby neglecting the rural areas particularly
the agricultural sector. Very often it has been seen that the electricity meant for rural
areas is diverted to the urban areas, Hue and cry is raised by the people, by the print and
the electronic media if there is a load shedding for few hours in the cities but nobody
bothers when the electricity is cut off to the rural areas for months together even if the
crops of the hapless farmer are withering in the absence of water as he cannot run the
tubewell without electricity.

Since more than 80 percent of our population is engaged in agriculture and
agriculture-related activities, small and cottage industries, it is our national duty to give
uninterrupted electricity supply to the agricultural sector, it is also necessary to provide
at least Ek Batti connection to every dwelling unit in the country to remove their darkness.
To achieve these objects it is proposed to establish a Rural Electricity Authority to provide
electricity exclusively to the rural areas and uninterrupted electricity supply to the
agricultural sector and to give at least one bulb connection to every household in the
villages. The Authority will also give special attention towards drought prone areas in
the country.

Hence this Bill.

New DELHI; RAMDAS ATHAWALE
February 28, 2000.


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM.

Clause 3 of the Bill provide for the establishment of a Rural Electricity Authority,
Clause 4 provides for establishment of new power generating stations. Clause 5 provides
for the appointment of a Secretary, officers and other staff. Clause 6 provides for the
moneys to be provided by Central Government to the Rural Electricity Development
Fund. The Bill, if enacted and brought into operation will involve recurring expenditure
of rupees five hundred crore from the Consolidated Fund of India every year.

A non-recurring expenditure of about one hundred crore rupees is also likely to be
involved.


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 11 of the Bill gives power to the Central Government to make rules for
carrying out the purposes of the Bill.

The rules will relate to the matters of detail only.

The delegation of legislative power, therefore, is of a normal character.


LOK SABHA

A
BILL

to provide for establishment of a Rural Electricity Authority to'ensure
continuous electric supply to farmers for their agricultural activities
anid for providing atleast single point connection to every
dwelling unit in rural areas of the country and for
matters connected therewith.

(Shri Ramdas Athawale, M.P.)
MGIP(PLU)MRND—1540LS—10-07-2000,