1
THE HEALTH INSURANCE (FOR PERSONS LIVING BELOW
POVERTY LINE) BILL, 2011
By
DR. AJAY KUMAR , M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for health insurance for the benefit of persons living below poverty line and
for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-second Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Health Insurance (For  Persons Living Below Poverty
Line) Act, 2011.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force at once.
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Bill No.  111 of  2011
5
1
As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(i) "persons living below poverty line" means persons, whose annual income
from all sources is less than rupees fifty thousand; and
(ii) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. The Central Government shall frame a health insurance scheme for persons living
below poverty line.
4. (1) The Central Government shall, through the State Government or the Union
territory Administration, as the case may be, issue a health card to every citizen living
below poverty line.
(2) The health card shall contain the details such as name and age, address details of
family members, annual income and such other information as may be prescribed.
5. Any citizen, who is entitled to a health card but has not been issued the same, he
may approach the district administration, which shall, after necessary verification, issue the
health card.
6. (1) Any person, who has been issued a health card, may approach any hospital,
including a privately run hospital for treatment of self or any of his family members, whose
name has been included in the health card.
(2) The hospital shall not charge any fees from the cardholder for his treatment or
treatment of any member of his family and shall also provide the prescribed medicines free of
charge.
(3) The hospital shall make entries in the health card regarding the total expenditure
incurred by it in the treatment of the cardholder or his family members and send a copy of the
detailed expenses to the Central Government in such manner as may be prescribed.
7. The total expenditure on the treatment in respect of a health cardholder and his
family members shall not exceed rupees twenty-five thousand per year:
Provided that the cardholder may submit an application in the form as may be prescribed
to the Central Government for enhancing the limit in case of any critical illness and the
Central Government may allow an enhanced expenditure for the treatment of the particular
disease.
8. Subject to the provisions of section 7, no hospital shall refuse treatment of any
cardholder, on the ground that the cardholder has not made any advance deposit with the
hospital for treatment.
9. The hospital shall make its claim for reimbursement of expenses in connection with
treatment of a cardholder or a member of his family to the Central Government in such manner
as may be prescribed.
10. The Central Government on receipt of a claim under section 9 shall process the
same and reimburse the expenses within a month of receipt of the claim to the hospital
concerned.
11. (1) Every cardholder shall be insured for a sum of rupees twenty-five thousand.
(2) The amount of insurance shall be paid to a nominee of  the cardholder  in case of his
death.
(3) The premium for insurance of the cardholder shall be paid by the Central
Government.
Definitions.
Health
Insurance
Scheme.
Health cards
to persons
living below
poverty line.
Citizens to
approach
District
Administration
if card is not
issued to them.
Right of health
cardholders to
get treatment
from hospitals.
Limit of
expenditure on
the treatment
of cardholders.
Hospitals not
to refuse
treatment to
cardholders.
Procedure for
reimbursement.
Reimbursement
to be made
within a
month.
Life insurance
for nominee of
the cardholder.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
12. If any hospital refuses to treat any cardholder or member of his family without any
valid reason, the Central Government shall issue directions for cancellation of the licence of
the hospital.
13. (1) The Central Government may, by  notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of the Act.
(2) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Penalty for
violation.
Power to make
rules.5
10

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Poor people cannot afford treatment in hospitals as it has become a costly affair. Huge
crowds in Government hospitals discourage  elderly, physically challenged persons and
women from taking treatment there. As a result, they are left uncared for. Even in Government
hospitals, they have to spend money on purchasing medicines, etc.
India, being a welfare State, care has to be taken by the Government of the under
privileged sections of the society. It is proposed to provide that persons living below poverty
line will be allowed to take free treatment in hospitals including private hospitals and there is
also a provision  for their life insurance.
This, it is hoped, will mitigate the hardship of the poor people to some extent.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; AJAY KUMAR
November 9, 2011.
4

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for a health insurance scheme for all persons living below
poverty line. Clause 4 provides for issuance of health cards to all persons living below
poverty line to enable them to take treatment in hospitals. Clause 10 provides for reimbursement
of expenses by the Central Government to the hospitals concerned. There is also a provision
for life insurance of the cardholder under clause 11.
The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure from  the Consolidated fund
of India. It is likely to involve a recurring expenditure of about rupees five thousand crore
per annum.
A non- recurring expenditure of about rupees one thousand crore will also be involved
for issuing health cards.
5

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 13 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill.
As the rules will relate to matters of detail  only, the delegation of legislative power is
of a normal character.
6

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for health insurance for the benefit of persons living below poverty line and for
matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Dr. Ajay Kumar, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—2741LS(S3)(F)—30-11-2011.