1 
5 
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA 
Bill No. 111 of 2025 
THE CONSTITUTION (ONE HUNDRED AND THIRTIETH 
AMENDMENT) BILL, 2025 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Constitution of India. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-sixth Year of the Republic of India 
as follows:–– 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (One Hundred and Thirtieth
Amendment) Act, 2025. 
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
Short title and 
commencement. 

2 
 
Amendment of 
article 75. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Amendment of 
article 164. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Amendment of 
article 239AA. 
 
 2. In article 75 of the Constitution, after clause (5), the following clause shall 
be inserted, namely:–– 
“(5A) A Minister, who for any period of thirty consecutive days during 
holding the office as such, is arrested and detained in custody, on allegation of 
committing an offence under any law for the time being in force, which is 
punishable with imprisonment for a term  which may extend to  five years or 
more, shall be removed from his office by the President on the advice of the 
Prime Minister to be tendered by the thirty-first day, after being taken in such 
custody: 
Provided that if the advice of the Prime Minister, for the removal of such 
Minister is not tendered to the President by the thirty-first day, he shall cease 
to be a Minister, with effect from the day falling thereafter: 
Provided further that in case of the Prime Minister, who for any period 
of thirty consecutive days during holding t he office as such, is arrested and 
detained in custody, on allegation of committing an offence under any law for 
the time being in force, which  is punishable with imprisonment for a term 
which may extend to  five years or more, shall tender his resignation by the 
thirty-first day after such arrest and detention, and if he does not tender his 
resignation, he shall cease to be the Prime Minister with effect from the day 
falling thereafter: 
Provided also that nothing in this clause shall prevent such  Prime 
Minister or Minister from being subsequently appointed as the Prime Minister 
or a Minister, by the President, on his release from custody, as per clause (1).”. 
3. In article 164 of the Constitution, after clause (4), the following clause shall 
be inserted, namely:–– 
“(4A) A Minister, who for any period of thirty consecutive days during 
holding the office as such, is arrested and detained in custody, on allegation of 
committing an offence under any law for the time b eing in force, which  is 
punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to five years or more, 
shall be removed from his office by the Governor on the advice of the Chief 
Minister to be tendered by the thirty-first day, after being taken in such custody: 
Provided that if the advice of the Chief Minister, for the removal of such 
Minister is not tendered to the Governor by the thirty-first day, he shall cease 
to be a Minister, with effect from the day falling thereafter: 
Provided further that in case of a Chief Minister, who for any period of thirty 
consecutive days during holding the office as such, is arrested and detained in 
custody, on allegation of committing an offence under any law for the time being 
in force, which is punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to 
five years or more, shall tender his resignation by the thirty-first day after such 
arrest and detention, and if he does not tender his resignation, he shall cease to be 
the Chief Minister, with effect from the day falling thereafter: 
Provided also that nothing in this clause shall prevent such Chief 
Minister or Minister from being subsequently appointed as the Chief Minister 
or a Minister, by the Governor, on his release from custody, as per clause (1).”. 
4. In article 239AA of the Constitution, after clause (5), the following clause 
shall be inserted, namely:— 
“(5A) Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, if a Minister,  who 
for any period of thirty consecutive days during holding the office as such, is 
arrested and detained in custody, on allegation of committing an offence under 
any law for the time be ing in force, which is punishable with imprisonment 
for a term which may extend to five years or more, shall be removed from his 
office, by the President on the advice of the Chief Minister to be tendered by 
the thirty-first day, after being taken in such custody: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10 
 
 
 
 
 
 
15 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
20 
 
 
 
 
 
 
25 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
30 
 
 
 
 
 
 
35 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
40 
 
 
 
 
 
 
45 
 
 
 
 
 
 
50 
 

3 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10 
Provided that if the advice of the Chief Minister for removal of such 
Minister is not tendered to the President by the thirty-first day, he shall cease 
to be a Minister, with effect from the day falling thereafter: 
Provided further that in case of the Chief Minister, who for any period 
of thirty consecutive days during holding the office as such, is arrested and 
detained in  custody, on allegation of committing an offence under any law for 
the time being in force, which is punishable with imprisonment for a term 
which may extend to  five years or more, shall tender his resignation by the 
thirty-first day after such arrest and detention, and if he does not tender his 
resignation, he shall cease to be the Chief Minister, with effect from the day 
falling thereafter: 
Provided also that nothing in this clause shall prevent such Chief 
Minister or Minister from being subsequently appointed as the Chief Minister 
or a Minister, by the President, on his release from custody, as per clause (5).”. 
  
 

4 
 
 
   
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The elected representatives represent hopes and aspirations of the people of 
India. It is expected that they rise above political interests and act only in the public 
interest and for the welfare of people. 
2. It is expected that the character and conduct of Ministers holding the office 
should be beyond any ray of suspicion. 
3. A Minister, who is facing allegation of serious criminal offences, arrested 
and detained in custody, may thwart or hinder the canons of constitutional morality 
and principles of good governance and eventually diminish the constitutional trust 
reposed by people in him. 
4. There is however, no provision under the Constitution for removal of a 
Minister who is arrested and detained in custody on acc ount of serious criminal 
charges. 
5. In view of the above, there is a need to amend articles 75, 164 and 239AA 
of the Constitution, for providing legal framework for removal of the Prime Minister 
or a Minister in the Union Council of Ministers and the Chief Minister or a Minister 
in the Council of Ministers of States and  the National Capital Territory of Delhi in 
such cases. 
6. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives. 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                                                                                           AMIT SHAH. 
The 19th August, 2025. 
  
  

LOK SABHA 
———— 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Constitution of India. 
———— 
(Shri Amit Shah, Minister of Home Affairs and Cooperation)