LOK SABHA 
CORRIGENDA 
to 
THE LEG ISLAT IVE ASSEMBLY OF NAGALAND (CHANGE IN 
REPRESENTATION) BILL, 1968 
(To be/As introduced in Lok Sabha) 
1. Page 1, on the top,-
for "INRTODUCED" !~ "INTRODUCEDII 
2. Page 2, line 18,-
for "sub-section 1" ~ IIsub-section (1)" 
3. Correct line number on page 2. 
NEW DELHI; 
December 5. 1968 
Agrahayana-l~f, -~nf9c'-lSaka) 

As INTRODUCED IN LoK SABIIA ON 
Bm No, III of 1268 
THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF NAGALAND 
(CHANGE IN REPRESENTATION) BILL, 1968 
A 
BILL 
to provide for a change in repre.ent4tion in the Legislativc ABBcmb-
ty of Na.gawnd and for that purpose to make consequential 
amendments in the State of Na.galand Act, 1962 and the RepTe-
sentation of the People Act, 1950. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in tale Nineteenth Year of the 
Republic of India as follows:- .. 
1. This Act may be called the Legislative Assembly of Nagaland Short 
(Change in Representation) Act, 1968. title. 
S 2. For the period referred to in clause (2) of article 371 A of the Chance 
Constitution, tIhe total number of seats allotted to the Legisllltive in repre-
sentation 

in the 
Legisla-
tive As-
semblyof 
Nagaland. 
Amend-
ment of 
Act 27 
of 1962. 
Amend-
ment of 
Act 43 
of 1950. 
Saving 
as to 
present 
Legisla-
tive As-
~mbly. 
Assembly of Nagaland shall be increased from forty-six to fifty-two, 
of which-
(a) the seats allocated to the Tuensang district shall be in-
creased from six to twelve and shall be filled by persons chosen 
by the members of the regional council, referred to in that am- 5 
cle, from amongst themselves in such manner as the Governor 
of Nagaland, after consulting that council may, by notification in 
the Official Gazette, specify, and 
(b) the remaining forty seats shall be filled by persons cho-
sen by direct election from assembly constituencies in the rest 10 
of th'e State of Nagaland. 
3. In the proviso to sub-section (/) of section 11 of the St.ate of 
N agaland Act, 1962,-
(i) for the figures "46", the figures "52" shall be substituted; 
(ii) for the words "six seats". the words "twelve seats" shall 15 
be substituted. 
4. In the Representation of the People Act, 1950,-
(a) in the proviso to sub-section I of section 7,---
(i) for the word "forty-six", the word "fifty-two" shall 
be substituted; 20 
(ii) for the words "six seats", the words "twelve seats" 
shall be substituted; 
(b) in the Second Schedule. in the entries relating to "11. 
N'alaland", in column 5, for the figures "46", the figures "52" 
shall be substituted. 25 
5. Nothing in this Act Shall affect any representation in the pre-
sent Legislst1ive Assembly of Nagaland until its dissolution. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
In clause (2) of article 37lA of the Constitution, special provisions 
have been made for the administration of Tuensang district of Naga-
land being carried on by the Governor for a period of ten years from 
the date of the formation of the State of Nagaland or for $uch fur-
ther period as the Governor may, on the recommendation of the 
Regional Council, by public notification specify in this behalf .. 
2. Under section 11 (1) of the State of Nagaland Act, 1962, the 
total number of seats to be filled hy persons chosen by direct elec-
tion in the Legislative Assembly of Nagaland shall be 60, but for the 
period referred to in article 371A (2), tJle total number of seats in 
the Legislative Assembly of Nagaland shall be 46 of which 6 seats 
sruul be allocated to the Tuensang district to be filled by persons 
chosen by the members of the Regional Council from amongst them-
selves and the remaining 40 seats shall be filled by persons chos'8n 
by direct election from Assembly constituencies in the rest of the 
State of Nagaland. 
3. Since the total number of seats in the Legislative Assembly 
of Nagaland has been fixed at 60 and since the State of Nagaland. 
other than the Tu.emang district, has been allocated 40 Assembly 
seats, ~e &que of ~g diStrict should, on the basis of its popu-
lation, be 2.0 against which they are allocated, for the duration of 
the peri04 r~fer:r~ to ~bove, only ~ seats. Jt has been felt that this 
representation· of Tuensang district in the Legislative Assembly of 
Nagalan~, eluring t;h.e period aforesaid, is inadequate even consider-
ing that special arrangements have be'en made for the administration 
of that district for this period and that u provided in cl~u .. e (2) (c) 
of artiele 371A, no Act of the Legislature of N~galand can automati-
cally apply to that district. Accordingly, the Legislative Assembly 
of liagaland hu, .on the reco~mendation of the Regional Council of 
Tuensang district, passed a ~lutioJl. . recommending that the allo-
cation of seats to Tuensang district in the State Assembly be increas-
ed for the period aforesaid from 6 to 12 and all these may .continue 
to be filled by persons chosea by members of the Regional Council 
from amonpt themselves. 
4. The Bill seeks to achieve the above object. 
NEW DELm; SuRENPRA PAL SINGH. 
The 2St4 NovembeT, I •. 
ie.t---- 3 

Strength 
of Legis-
lative 
Assem-
bly. 
Total 
number of 
... 
ANNEXURE 
EXTRACT FROM THE STATE OF NAGALAND AcT, 1962 
(27 OF 1962) 
... ... ... 
PART ITI 
REPRESENTATION IN THE LEGISLATURES 
... ... ... 
The Legislative Assembly 
... 
... 
11. (1) The total number of seats to ,be filled by persons chosen 
by direct election in the Legislative Assembly of N agaland shall be 
60: 
Provided that for the period referred to in clause (2) of article 
371A, the total number of seats in the Legislative Assembly of 
Nagaland shall be 46, of which-
(a) six seats shall be allocated to the Tuensang dis-
trict and shall be filled by persons chosen by the members 
of the regional council from amongst themselves in such 
manner as the Governor, after consulting that council, may 
by notiftcation in the Official Gazette speclfy, and 
(b) the remaining forty seats shall be filled by persons 
chosen by direct election from assembly constituencies in 
the rest of the State of Naga1and, 
• • • ... • 
EXTRACTS FROM THE Rl:PRJ:nNTATION OF THE PI:oPLE Act, 1950 
(43 OF 1950) 
... • • ... • 
PART n 
ALLocATION 0 .. SEATS AND DELIMITATION OF CoNSfitUENCIES 
... • • • 
' . 
The State Legislative Assemblies 
7. (1) The total number of seats in the Legislative ~sembly of 
each State specified in the Second Schedule, to be fUled by persons 
- '" 

• 1 ' :' ~ .', ,} 
l:i1USCll by direct election from assembly constituencies, and the gt!llts ill 
llumbt!r of seats, if any, to be reserved for the Scheduled Castes Legislu-
and f01' the Scheduled Tribes of the State, shall be as shown in tive As-semblie, 
\.hat Schedule: and 
assembly 
Provided that for the period referred to in clause (2) of article ('onsti-
371A, the total number of seats allotted to the Legislative Assem- t llt'nl'il'" 
bly of the State of Nagaland shall be forty-six, of which-
(4) six seats shall be allocated to the Tuensang dis-
trict and shall be fUledby persons chosen by the members 
of the regional council, referred to in that article, from 
amongst themselves in such manner as the Governor, after 
consulting that council may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, specify, and 
(b) the remaining forty seats shall be filled by personR 
chosen by direct election from assembly constituencies in 
the rest of the State. 
.. .. .. " . 
THE SECOND SCHEDULE 
(See section 7) 
Total number of seats in the Legislative As.embZi:es 
N"mc of the Stale/Union 
territory 
I. STATES: 
• 
11. N agaland 
' .. 
• 
.. 
Number ot seats in the 
LeaiJ1ative Assembly 
II constltuttd OD the 
lit Ncwernbcr. 1966 
Rcecrved Reserved 
Number of scats in th~ 
Lelislative Auembly Il~ 
sub"4uently constituted 
Reserved Reiervcd 
Tatal tor the lor the Total for the: for the 
Scheduled SCheduled Scbtdulfd Scheduled 
CaltcB Tribes ealteR Tribes 
2 4 Ii 7 
• .. • 
46 
• • • 

LOK SAHHA 
A 
BILL 
[() provide t()f a change in ft!presemlttion in the Legislative 
Assembly of Nagaland and for that putposc to make con-
sequential amendments in th~ State of Nagaland Act, J 962 
and thn Repre~ntation of the People Act, 1950. 
(Shr; StJretzdra Pal'S itigh, 
Deputy Minister in the 
Ministry of External Affairs.) 