BUI No. III of' 196:z 
THE CONSTITUTION (FIFTEENTH 
AMENDMENT) BILL, 1962 
(As INTRODUCED IN Lol{ SABRA 
ON aI:SIP NOVEMBBR, 1962) 
,-~Mi . 

Bln'No. III of I. 
THE CONSTITUTION (FIFfEENTH AMENDMENT) 
BILL, 1962 
(As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABRA) 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Constitu.tion of India. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirteenth Year of the Repub-
lic of India as follows:-
1. This Act may be called the Constitution (Fifteenth Amend- Short tide. 
ment) Act, 1962. 
, 2. In article 124 of the Constitution, after clause (2), the follow- Ame~dmeDc 
ing clause shall be inserted, namely: - ~i:. tlCIe 
10 
I' 
"<2A) If any question arises as to the age of a Judge of the 
Supreme Court, the question shall ·be decided by the President 
after making such inquiry as he may deem necessary and his 
decision shall be fina!.". 
3. In article 128 of the Constitution, after the words "Fedenl Am .a __ en.uw;11t Court", the words "or who has held the office of a Judge of a HiP ofarticle 
Court and is . duly qualified for appointment as a Judge of the uB. 
Supreme Court" shall be inserted. 
4. In article 217 of the Constitution,- Amendment 
_. _' <a) in clause (1), for the words "sixt, 7"'", the words ~;rtkle 
"sixty-two years" shall be substituted; . 
(b) after clause (2), the following clause shan be iIlserted 
and shall be deemed always to have been insert'ed, namely:-
. 
"(3) If any question arises as to the age of • Judge of 
a High Court, the question shall be decided by the PnII1dent 
20M (B) LS-l. 

2 
after making such inquiry as he may deem necessary and 
his decision shall be fina!.". 
Amendment 5. In article 220 of the Constitution, the following proviso shall be 
of article inserted before the Explanation, namely:-
220. 
Amendment 
of article 
222. 
Amendment 
of article 
224· 
Insertion of 
new article 
224A. 
Appoint. 
ment of 
retired 
Judges at 
sittings 
of High 
Courts. 
Amendment 
of Article 
226. 
"Provided that where a Judge is transferred from one High S 
Court to another High Court and he serves as a Judge of that 
High Court for a period of not less than five years immediately 
before retirement, he shall be entitled, on retirement, to plead 
or act in the Supreme Court and all the High Courts except the 
High Court to which he was so transferred.". 10 
6. In article 222 of the Constitution, after clause (1), the follow-
ing clause shall be inserted, namely:-
"(2) When a Judge is so transferred, he shall, during the 
period he serves as a Judge of the other High Court, be entitled 
to receive in addition to his salary such compensatory allowance IS 
as may be determined by Parliament by law and, until so deter-
mined, such compensatory allowance as the PreSident may by 
order fix.". 
7. In arUcle 224 of the Constitution, in clause (3), for the words 
"sixty years", the words "sixty-two years" shall be substituted. 20 
8. After article 224 of the Constitution, the following article shall 
be inserted, namely:-
"224A. Notwithstanding anything in this Chapter, the Chief 
Justice of a High Court for any State may at any time, with the 
previous consent of the President, request any person who has 2S 
held the office of a Judge of that Court or of any other High 
Court to sit and act as a Judge of the High Court for that State, 
and every such person so requested shall, while so sitting and 
acting, be entitled to such allowances as the President may by 
order determine and have all the jurisdiction, powers and pri- 30 
vileges of, but shall not otherwise be deemed to be, a Judge of 
that High Court: 
Provided that nothing in this article shall be deemed to 
require .any such person as afaresaid to sit and act as a Judge 
of that High Court unless he consents so to do.". 
9. In article 226 of the Constitution,-
• (a) after clause (1), the following clause shall be inse~ 
_, namely:-
"(lA) The power conferred by clause (1) to issue 
3S 

10 
3 
directions, orders. or writs to any Government, authority or .. 
person may also be exercised by any High Court exercising' 
jurisdiction in relation to the territories within which the 
cause of action for the exercise of such power arises, not-
withstanding that the seat of such Government or authority 
or the residence of such person is not within those 
tenitories." ; 
(b) in clause (2), for the word, brackets and ft~re "clause 
(1) ". the words, bra<!kets, figures and letter IIclause (1) or clause 
(IA)" shall be substituted. 
10. In article 276 of the Constibltion, in c1RuS'e (2), for tlie words Afmend.mleent o arne "two hundred a.nd fifty rupees". wherever they occur, the words ufive a7C5. 
hundred rupees" shall be substituted. 
11. In article 297 of the Constitution. Rfter the words "territorial Amcndmeat 
IS waters", the words "or the continental shelf" shall be inserted. ~~7' article 
12. In article 311 of the Constitution, for clauses (2) and (3), the !Fe=:nt 
following clauses shall be substituted, namely:- suo 
"(2) No such person as aforesaid shan be dismissed or 
removed except after an inquirv in which he has been informed 
of the cliarRes against him and given a reasonable opportunity 
of being heard in respect of those charges: 
Provided that this clause shall not apply-
(a) where a person is dismissed or removpd on tlie 
ground of conduct which has led to his conviction on a 
35 criminal charge; or 
(b) where the authority empo~red to dismiss or 
remove a person is satfsfled that for some reason. to be 
recorded bv that authority in writing, it is not reasonably 
1)raeticable to hold such inquiry; or 
30 (c) where the President or the Governor. as th", case may 
be, is satisfied that in the interest of the security of the State 
it is not expedient to hold such inquiry. 
(3) If. in re9Dect of any such person as flforpc;~id. a oUecltion 
arises whether it is reasonably practicRble to hold such inol1lry 
35 as is referred to in clause (2), the decision thereon of the Autho-
rity empowered to dismiss or remove such person shall be final.". 

AmeadmcDt 
oltbe 
SCftDtb .Ic:beclale. 
4 
13. In artfele SUI of the Constitution, after clause (1), the following 
clause shall be inserted, nam~ly:-
.. (lA) If the oftice of the Chairman of the Commission be-
COmel vacant or if any such Chairman is .by reason of absence or 
for any other reason unable to perform the duties of his office, S 
those duties shall, until some person appointed under clause (1) 
to the vacant office has entered on the duties thereof or, as the 
case may be, until the Chairman has resumed his duties, be 
perfonned by such one of the other members of the Commission 
as the President, in the case of the Union Commission or a Joint 10 
Commission, and the Governor of the State in th~ case of a State 
Commission, may appoint for the purpose.". 
U. In the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution, in List I, in 
eJ\try 78, after the word "organisation", the brackets and words 
"(including vacations)" shall be inserted and shan be cb!emed alwa71 IS 
to have been inserted. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Several amendments to the Constitution have been under consi-
deration for a long time. The Constitution (Fifth Amendment) Bill 
was introduced in Lok Sabha in November, 1955, to give effect to 
some of them. For various reasons, the Bill could not be proceeded 
with, and it was allowed to lapse except the one relating to the 
amendment of article 3 of the Constitution. This article was amend-
ed separately by the Constitution (Fifth Amendment) Act, 1955. 
The present Bill contains some of the proposals included in the 
Constitution (Fifth Amendment) Bill and, in addition, there are a 
few more proposals for amendment of the Constitution. The pro-
posals relating to articles 276, 297, 311 and 316 of the Constitution 
were contained in the Constitution (Fifth Amendment) Bill and they 
have been adopted with some minoJ:l modifications. The new pro-
posals relate to articles 124, 128, 217, 220, 222 224A, 226 and entry 78 
of the Union List. 
2. It is proposed to amend article 217 so as to raise the age of 
retirement of High Court Judges from sixty years to sixty-two years. 
When any question arises to the cerrect age of a Judge of the Supreme 
Court or of a High Court, the question has to be decided by the Presi-
dent. It is proposed to make the position clear by making a specific 
provision in articles 124 and 217. It is considered desirable in the 
public interest that Judges should be transferred from one High Court 
to another. Such transfer is expected to impose additional financial 
burden on the Judge who is so transferred. It is, therefore, proposed 
to pay him some compensatory allowance in addition to his salary. 
When a Judge is transferred from one High Court to another, he 
cannot, in view of the provisions of article 220, resume practice in 
any of the High Courts in which he has held oftlce as a Jud~e. The 
provisions of article 220 therefore put a check on the proposal for the 
transfer of any Judge of a High Court. It is, therefore, proposed 
to amend article 220 so that the restriction re~arding resumption of 
practice should apply only to the High Court from which the Ju~"" 
retires, provided that he had served in that High Court for a period 
of at least five years immediately before retirement. Such a provi-
sion would facilitate the transfer of Judges. Under the existing 
article 226 of the Constitution, the only High Court which has juris-
diction with respect to the Central Government is the Punjab High 
Court. This involves considerable hardship to litigAnts from distant 
5 

6 
places. It is, therefore, proposed to amend article 226 so that when 
any relief is sought against any Government, authority or person for 
any action taken, the High Court within whose jurisdiction the cause 
of action arises may also have jwisdiction to issue appropriate direc-
tions, orders or writs. The other new proposals are of a minor char-
acter. 
3. The notes on clauses appended to the Bill explain the provi-
sions thereof. 
NEW DELHI; A. K. SEN. 
The 14th Novembe1', 1962. 

Notes Ott elauses 
Cla.'U8e 2.-Under:c1ause (2) of article 124, a Judge of the Supreme 
Court holds office until he attains the age of 65 years. When, how-
ever, any question arises as to the correct age, of a Judge, it has to be 
decid&d by the President. It is considered desirable to have a specific 
provision to make the position clear. This clause seeks to achieve 
this object. 
Cla.'U8e 3.-Cases have arisen when, due to the absence of a Judge 
or Judges of the Supreme Court for any reason, it has become neces-
sary to require the attendance of a retired Judge of the Supreme 
Court at the sittings of the Court. The number of retired Supreme 
Court Judges being small, and in view of the age of retirement pro-
vided for Supreme Court Judges, this field cannot be expected to be 
wide at any time. It is, therefore, necessary to suitably amend article 
128 so as to enable the Chief Justice of India, with the previous con-
sent of the President, to require the attendance of a retired Judge 
of a High Court, who is duly qualified for appointment as a Judge 
of the Supreme Court, at the sittings of the Supreme Court. This 
clause seeks to amend article 128 for achieving the above mentioned 
object. 
Clause 4.-Under article 217, a Judge of a High Court is entitled 
to hold office until he attains the age of 60 years. The Law Commis-
sion in their Fourteenth Report had recommended that the retiring 
age be raised to sixty-five years. It was felt that the retiring age 
should be raised to sixty-two years. It is proposed to amend clause 
(1) of article 217 to raise the retiring age from 60 to 62 years. 
It is also proposed to insert a new clause (3) in article 217 to make 
a specific prOvision enabling the PreSident to determine the age of 
a Judge of a High Court. In some cases, decision has already been 
taken by Government determining the age of a Judge .. It is, there-
fore, proposed to give retrospective effect to this clause. 
Clause 5.-If a permanent Judge of a High Court is transferred 
to one or more High Courts, he cannot, in view of the provisions at 
article 220, resume practice after retirement in any of the High 
Courts in which he had held office as a Judge. The provisions of 
article 220, therefore, put a check on the proposal for the transfer of 
any Judge of a High Court. It is considered that a provision should 
7 

he made to the effect that when a Judge is transferred from one High 
Court to another, the restriction regarding resumption of practice, 
after retirement, should apply only to the High Court from which the 
Judge retires, provided that the Judge had served in the High Court 
for a period of at least five years immediately before retirement. 
Such a provision would facilitate the transfer of Judges of the High 
Courts: This clause seeks to achieve this object. 
Clause 6.-The transfer of a Judge from one High Court to another 
is expected to impose additional financial burden on the Judge who 
is transferred. Hence it is proposed to pay to the Judge some com-
pensatory allowance in addition to his salary. It is proposed 
that such compensatory allowance may be fixed by Parliament by 
law and until so determined, it may be fixed by an order of the Presi-
dent. This clause seeks to amend article 222 for the purpose. 
Clause 7.-This clause amends article 224 on the lines proposed in 
respect of clause (1) of article 217. 
Clause a.-This clause seeks to insert a new article, namely, article 
224A, which would enable the Chief Justices of the State High Courts, 
with the previous consent of the President, to require the attendance 
of retired High Court Judges at the sittings of the High Courts. 
Clause 9.-The recent decision of the Supreme Court, reported in 
A.I.R. (1961) S.C. 532, has established beyond doubt that as the seat 
of the Government of India is in New Delhi, the only High Court 
which will have jurisdiction under article 226 with respect to the 
Central Government would be the Punjab High Court. This would 
involve hardship to litigants from distant places. It is, therefore, 
necessary to amend article 226 so that the High Court within whose 
jurisdiction the cause of action arises may abo have jurisdiction to 
issue directions, orders or writs to any Government, authority for 
person, notwithstanding that the seat of such Government or autho-
rity or the residence of such person is outside the territorial jurisdic-
tion of the High Court. 
Clause lO.":"'The ceiling of Rs. 250/- fixed by clause (2) of article 
276 as the maximum leviable by way of taxes by local authorities on . 
professions~trades, callings and employmtmts in respect of any person 
is considered to be ,too low. It is, therefore, proposed to raise the 
limit toRs. 500/.,. 
Clause H.-India's sovereign rights under International Law over 
the sea-bed and sub-soil of the continental shelf adjoining its terri-
tory and beyond its territorial waters have already been asserted 

in a President's proclamation. As a corollary to that proclamation, 
article 297 is sought to be amended suitably by this clause. 
Clause 12.-Article 311 is being amended so as-
(a) to make it clear that only one opportuni~y should be 
·given,·to a Government servant in respect of any departmental 
enquiry against him; and 
(b) to ensure that reduction in rank does not stand on a 
par with the more severe punishments of dismissal or removal 
'from . service and thus get a .. constitutional safeguard. 
Clause 13.~There is no provision in article 316 for the appoint-
ment of an . ac.ting Chairman of a Public Service Commission when 
that office is vacant or when the permanent Chairman is on: leave 
or is· otheI'W'ise unable to perform the duties of his oftlce. It is 
accordingly proposed to amend article 316 to provide for such 
appointment. 
Clause 14,-A special Bench of the Calcutta High Court made an 
observation in .the case reported in 65 C.W.N. 920, to the effect that 
the expression "organisation" occurring in entry 78 of List I of the 
SevenllhSchedule to the Constitution does not include "vacations". 
The present clause 'seeks to amend the said entry with a view to 
make it clear that the expression "organisation" occurring therein 
includes "vacations". It is proposed to give retrospective effect to 
the proposed amendment. 

FINANCIAL MEMoRANDUM 
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the appointment of a retired 
Judge of a High Court to sit and act as a Judge of the Supreme Court. 
This only enlarges the field of appointment of Judges already exist-
ing under Article 128 of the Constitution and does not involve any 
additional expenditure. 
2. Clause 4 of the Bill provides for the raising of the age of 
retirement of a High Court Judge from 60 to 62 years. Clause 7 
similarly provides that an Additional Judge cah continue to hold 
office llP to the age of 62. This would result in increased pensions in 
certain cases. The pensions payable to the Judges are first charged 
on the Consolidated Fund of India under Article 112(3) (d) of the 
Constitution, but these amounts are subsequently recovered from the 
States concerned under Article 290 of the Constitution. 
3. Clause 6 of the Bill provides for the payment of compensatory 
allowance to a Judge on his transfer from one High Court to another. 
The additional expenditure on this account will depend on the 
number of Judges transferred and the exact allowances fixed. It is 
not possible to give an accurate estimate of the amount of extra 
expenditure involved. This addition, however, would not be on the 
Consolidated Fund of India but on the Consolidated Fund of the 
States concerned. 
4. Clause 8 of the Bill provides for the appointment of a retired 
High Court Judge to sit and act as a Judge of a High Court. Some 
additional expenditure will be involved when such an appointment 
is made, and it will be a charge on the Consolidated Fund of the 
State concerned. 
5. It will thus appear that ultimately no additional expenditure 
from the Consolidated Fund of India would be involved. 
10 .' 
-

ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS FROM THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA 
• • • • 
PART V 
THE UNION 
• • • • 
CHAPTER IV.-THE UNION JUDICIARY 
=~li!i 124. (1) There shall be a Supreme Court of India consisting of a 
Coutitudon Chief Justice of India and, until Parliament by law prescribes a 
~!rcme larger number, of not more than seven other Judges. 
(2) Every Judge of the Supreme Court shall be appointed by the 
President by warrant under his hand and seal after consultation with 
such of the Judges of the Supreme Court and of the High Courts in 
the States as the President may deem necessary for the purpose and 
shall hold office until he attains the age of sixty-five years: 
Provided that in the case of appointment of a Judge other than 
the Chief Justice, the Chief Justice of India shall always be ~nsult­
ed: 
Provided further that-
(a) A Judge may, by writing under his hand addressed to 
the President, resign his office; 
(b) a Judge may be removed from his office in the manner 
provided in clause (4). 
(3) A person shall not be qualified for appointment as a Judge of 
the Supreme Court unless he is a citizen of India and-
(a) has been for at least five years a judge of a High Court 
or of two or more such Courts in succession; or 
(b) has been for at least ten years an advocate of a High 
Court or of two or more such Courts in succession; or 
(c) is, in the opinion of the President, a distinguished jurist. 
Ezplanation I.-In this clause 'lHigh Court" means a High Court 
which exercises, or which at any time before the commencement of 
11 

12 
this Constitution exercised, jurisdiction in any part of the territory 
of India. 
Explanation II.-In computing for the purpose of this clause the 
period during which a person has been an advocate, any period during 
which a person ~as held judicial office not inferior to that of a district 
judge after he became an advocate shall be included. 
(4) A Judge of the Supreme Court shall not be removed from his 
office except by an order of the President passed after an address by 
each House of Parliament supported by a majority of the total 
membership of that House and by a majority of not less than tw~ 
thirds of the members of that House present and voting has been 
presented to the President in the same session for such removal on " ... 
the ground of proved misbehaviour or incapacity. 
(5) Parliament may by law regulate the procedure for the pre-
sentation of an address an«:i for the investigation and proof of the 
misbehaviour or incapaclty of a Judge under clause (4). 
(6) Every person appointed to be a Judge of the Supreme Court 
shall, before he enters upon his office, make and subscribe before the 
President, or some person appointed in .that behalf by him, an oath Or 
aftlrmation according ,to the fonn set out for the purpose in the Third 
Schedule. 
(7) No person who has held office as a Judge of the Supreme' 
Court shall plead or act in any court or before any authority within 
the territory of India. 
• • • • 
128. "Notwithstanding anything in this Chapter, the Chief JUltice Attendance 
of India may at any time, with the previous consent of the President, J~dge~etjr~ 
request any person who has held the office of a Judge of the Supreme sittings 
Court or oi the Federal Court to sit and act as a Judge of the S~pr~:e 
Supreme Court, and every such person SO requested shall, while so Court. 
sitting and acting, be entitled to such allowances as the President 
may by order determine and have all the jurisdiction, powers and 
privileges of, but shall' not otherwise be deemed to be, a Judge of 
that Court: 
Provided that nothing in this article shall be deemed to require 
any such person as aforesaid to si~ and act as a Judge of that Court 
unless he consents 10 to do . 
• • • • 

• 
PART VI 
THE STATES 
CHAPTER V.-THE HIGH CouRTs IN THE STATES 
• • • • • • 
-:~~lnt- and 217. (1) Every Judge of a High Court shall be appointed by the 
conditions, President by warrant under his hand and seal after consultation with 
~~at~~d~~~f the Chief Justice of India, the Governor of the State, and, in the case 
a High of appointment of a Judge other than the Chief Justice, the Chief 
Court. Justice of the High Court, and shall hold office, in the case of an addi-
tional or acting Judge, as provided in article 224, and in any other 
case, until h~ attains the age of sixty years; 
Provided that-
(a) a Judge may, by writing under his hand addressed to the 
President, resign his office; 
(b) a Judge may be removed from his office by the President 
in the manner provided' in clause (4) >'of article 124 'for the re-
moval of a Judge of the Supreme Court; 
(e) the office of a Judge shall be vacated by his being 
appointed by the President to be a Judge of the Supreme Court 
or by his boeing transferred by the President to any other High 
Court within the territory of India. 
(2) A person shall not be qualified for appointment as a judge of 
a High Court unless he is a citizen of India and-
(a) has. for at least ten years helq, a Judicial oftice in the 
territory of India; or 
(b) has for at least ten ~ars been an advocate of a High 
Court or of two or more such Courts in succession. 
Explanation.-For the purposes of this clause--
(a) in computing the period. during which a person has 
been an advoeate of a High Court" there shall be included any 
period during which the person has held judicial office after he 
became an advocate; 
(b) in computing the period during which a person has held 
judicial office in the territory of India or been an advocate of a 
High Court, there shall be included any period before the com-
mencement of this Constitution during which he has held judi-
cial office in any area which was comprised before the fiftl!enth 
13 

14 
day of August, 1947, within India as defined by the Government 
of India Act, 1935, or has been an advocate of any High Court 
in any such area, as the case may be. 
• • • • 
220. No person who, after the commencement of this Constitu- Restriction 
tion, has held office as a permanent Judge of a High Court shall ~Rer p=ce 
plead or act in any court or before any authority in India except the. permanent 
Supreme Court and the other High Courts. Judse. 
Explanation.- In this article, the expression "High Court" does 
not include a High Court for a· State specified in Part B of the First 
Schedule as it existed before the commencement of th~ Constitu-
tion (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956. 
• • • • 
222. (1) The President may, after consultation with the Chief Transfer 0( 
Justice of India, transfer a Judge from one High Court to any other rJ:!dae one 
High Court. High Coun 
to another • 
• • • 
224. (1) If by reason of any temporary increase in the business of Appoint-
a High Court or by reason of arrears of work therein, it appears to ~~~~iu~f 
the President that the number of the Judges of that Court should be and actina 
for the time being increased, the Presid~nt may appoint duly quali- Jud,CI. 
fled persons to be additional Judges of the Court for such period not 
exceeding two years as he may specify. 
(2) When any Judge of a High Court other than Chief Justice 
is by reason of absence or for any other reason unable to perform th~ 
duties of his office or is appointed to act temporarily as Chief Justice, 
the President may appoint a duly qualified person to act as a Jud~ 
of that Court until the permanent Judge has resumed his duties. 
(3) No person appointed as an additional or acting Judge of a 
High Court shall hold office after attaining the age of sixty years . 
• • • • 
Z2J6. (1) Notwithstanding anything in article 32, every High Court P~wer or 
shall have power, throughout the territories in relation to which it ~1~~.~. 
exercises jurisdiction, to issue to any person or authority, including cer~ain 
in appropriate ca~s any Government, within those territories direc- writs. 
tions, orders or writs, including writs in the natur·e of habeas corpus, 
mandamus, prohibition, quo warranto and certiorari, or any of them, 
for the enforcement of any of the rights conferred by Part III and for 
any other purpose. 

! . 
(2) The power conferred on a High Court by clause (1) shall not 
be in derogation of the power conferred on the Supreme Court by 
clause (2) of article 32. ' 
• • • • • 
PART XU 
FINANCE, PROPERTY, CONTRACTS AND SUITS 
CHAPTER I.-FINANCE 
General 
• • • • 
:=8ion~n 276. (1) Notwithstanding anything in article 246, no law of the 
~e., ~l- Legislature of a State relating to taxes for the benefit of the State or 
!:~loy- and of a municipality, district board, local board or other looal authority 
menta. therein in respect of professions, trades, callings or employment shall 
be invalid on the ground that it relates to a tax on income. 
(2) The total amount payable in respect of anyone person to the 
State or to eny one municipality, district board, local board or other 
local authority in the State by way of taxes on professions, trades, 
calling and employments shall not exceed. two hundred and fifty 
rupees per annum: 
Provided that if in the financial year immediately preceding the 
commencement of this Constitution there was in force in the case of 
eny State or any such municipality .. board or authority·a tax on 
professions, trades, callings or employments the rate, or the maxi-
mum rate, of which exceeded two hWldred and fifty rupees per 
annum, such tax may continue to be levied until provision to the 
contrary is made by Parliament by law, and any law so made by 
Parliament may be made either generally or in relation to any 
specified States, municipalities, boards or authorities. 
(3) Thf' power of thE> Legislature of a State to make laws as afore-
said with respect to taxes on professions, trades, callings and employ-
ments shall not be construed as limiting in eny way the power of 
Parliament to make laws with respect to taxes on income accruini 
from or arising out of professions, trades, callings and employments. 
• • • • 
CHAPTER III.-PROPERTY, CONTRACTS, RIGHTS, LIABILITIES, OBLIGATIONS 
AND SUITS . 
• * . • • 
~'!" I . of %97. All lands, minerals and! other things of value underlying the 
within yang ocean within the territorial waters of Indie. shall vest in the Union 
teftteitorial t and be held for the purposes of the Union. we n 0 
veat in the * * • • UaiOD. 

!6 
PUT XIV 
SERVICES UNDER THE UNION AND THE STATES 
CHAPTER I.-SERVICES 
311. (1) No person who is a.member of a civil service of the Union Dismi~al, 
11 I d · . "1' f S h Id "1 rcmov or or an a • n 18 service or a CIVl serVIce 0 a tate or 0 s a CIVl reduction in 
post under the' Union or a State shall be dismissed or removed by rank of .. . . persons 
an authonty subordmate to that by which he was appomted. emplo}cd in 
civilcapa-
(2) No such person as aforesaid shall be dismissed or removed or ~~~eu';ti~~r 
reduced in rank until he has been given a reasonable opportunity of or a State. 
showing oause against the action proposed. to be taken in J1egard to . 
him: 
Provided that this clause shall not apply-
(a) where a person is dismissed or removed or reduced in 
rank on the ground of conduct which has led to his convi(ftion 
on a criminal charge; 
(b) where an authority empowered to dismiss or remove a 
person or to reduce him in rank is satisfied that for some reason, 
to be recorded by that authority in writing, it is not reasonably 
practicable to give to that person an opportunity of showing 
cause; or 
(c) where the President or Governor, as the case may be, is 
satisfied that in the interest of the security of the State it is not 
expedient to give to that person such an opportunity. 
(3) If any question arises whether it is reasonably practicable to 
give to any. person an opportunity of showing cause under clause (2) 
the decision thereon of the authority empowered to dismiss or remove 
such person or to reduce him in rank, as the case may be, shall be 
final. 
• • • • • 
CHAP'l'ER n.-PuBLIC SERVICE COMMISSIONS 
• • • • • 
316. (1) The-. Chairman and Qther members of a Public Service APjointmen} 
Commission shall be appointed, in the caSe of the Union Commission ~cet~r 0 
or a Joint C.qmmission, by,the President, and in the case of a State memhers. 
Commission, by the Governor of the State: 
Prov~d that as nearly as may be one-half of the members of 
every Public Service Commission shall be persons who at the dates 
of their respective appOintments have held office for at least ten years 
either under the Government of India or under the Government of a 

State. and in computing the said period of ten years any period before 
the commencement of this Constitution during which a person hu 
held office under the Crown in India or under the Government of an 
Indian State shall be included. 
(2) A member of a Public Service Commission shall hold office for 
a term of six years from the date on which he enters upon his office 
or until he attains, in the case of the Union Commission, the age.of 
sixty-five years, and in the case of a State Commission or a Joint 
Commission, the age of sixty years, whichever is earlier: 
Provided that-
(a) a member of a Public Service Commission may. by writ-
ing under his hand addressed. in the case of the Union Commis-
sion Qr a Joint Commission, to the President, and in the case of 
a State Commission, to the Governor of the State, resign his 
office; 
(b) a member of a Public Service Commission may be re-
moved from his office in the manner provided in clause (1) or 
clause (3) of article 317. 
(3) A person who holds office as a member of a Public Service 
Commission shall, on the expiration of his term of office, be ineligible 
for re-eppointment to that office . 
• • • • • • • 
• 

• 
SEVENTH SCHEDULE 
[Article 246] 
List I-Union List 
• • • 
78. Constitution and organisation of the High Courts except pro-
visions u to ofBcers and lIIel'Vants of High Courts; persons entitled 
to practise before the High Courts. 
• • • • 
18 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Constitution of India. 
The President has, in pursuance of clauses (I) and (3) of article 
117 of the Constitution of India, reoommended to Lok 
Sabha the introduction and consideration of the Bill. 
M.N. KAUL, 
Secretary. 
(Shri Asoke K. S~, 
Minister of LarD.) 