As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

") f= At lam Pym Ree
t डे | f ¥ t }
हर न | ४
/ i

& Ks 2 58)

Bill No. 111 of 2005

THE FOREST (CONSERVATION) AMENDMENT BILL, 2005
By
SHRI BACHI SINGH Rawat, M.P.
f |
BILL
further to amend the Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—

1. (1) This Act may be called the Forest (Conservation) Amendment Act, 2005. Short title and

° $ : P commencement.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification

in the Official Gazette, appoint.

2. In section 2 of the Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980, in the Explanation, forthe words Amendment
beginning with "but does not include" and ending with the words "like purposes", the of section 2.
words "but does not include any work relating or ancillary to mining, conservation,
development and management of forests and wild-life, namely, the establishment of check-
posts, fire lines, wireless communications and construction of fencing, bridges and culverts,
dams, waterholes, trench marks, boundary marks, pipelines or other like purposes or
construction of roads, water tanks in rural areas or laying of pipelines for sewer/drinking
water or erection of poles for transmission and distribution of electricity or telecommunications

- or any other developmental activity or schemes" shall be substituted.



STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

The Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980 has put some restrictions on the dereservation
of forests or use of forest land for non-forest purposes. The explanation below section 2 of
the Act, however, makes some exception and permits the use of forest land for certain
purposes like establishment of check-posts, fire lines, wireless communications and
construction of fencing, bridges and culverts, dams, waterholes, trench marks, boundary
marks, pipelines or other like purposes. But there is no provision in the Act to cover utility
services like construction of public roads, laying of sewer lines, construction of water tanks,
construction of electric poles for transmission and distribution of electric supply and laying
telephone lines, etc. All such proposals have to be referred to the Central Government for
approval. 7

Under section 3 of the Act, the approval in such cases has to be accorded by the
Central Government on the advice of a Committee to be constituted for the purpose. This
causes undue delay in the clearance of projects in various parts of the country which
hampers the development of the region. It is, therefore, proposed to amend the Act and make
a provision that the proposal for clearance of forest land for some specified utility shall not
require any prior approval of the Central Government.

Hence this Bill.

New DELHI; BACHI SINGH RAWAT
July 25, 2005.



ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE Forest (CONSERVATION) AcT, 1980

(69 oF 1980)

* * * * * *

2. Restriction on the dereservation of forests or use of forest land for non-forest
purpose.—Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in.
force in a State, no State Government or other authority shall make, except with the prior ..
approval of the Central Government, any order directing, : .

(i) that any reserved forest (within the meaning of the expression “reserved
forest” in any law for the time being in force in that State) or any portion thereof,
shall cease to be reserved;

_ (a1) that any forest land or any portion thereof may be used for any non-forest |
purpose

(iii) that any forest land or any portion thereof may be assigned by way of
lease or otherwise to any private person or to any authority, corporation, agency or
any other organisation not owned, managed or controlled by Government;

(iv) that any forest land or any portion thereof may be cleared of trees which
have grown naturally in that land or portion, for the purpose of using it for
reafforestation.

Explanation.—For the purposes of this section “non-forest purpose” means the
breaking up or clearing of any forest land or portion thereof for—

(a) the cultivation of tea, coffee, spices, rubber, palms, oil-bearing plants,
horticulture crops or medicinal plants; _

(b) any purpose other than reafforestation,

but does not include any work relating or ancillary to conservation, development and
management of forests and wild-life, namely, the establishmezz of check-posts, fire lines,
wireless communications and construction of fencing, bridges and culverts, dams,
waterholes, trench marks, boundary marks, pipelines or other like purposes

* . x * * * *


LOK SABHA

A
BILL
further to amend the Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980.

(Shri Bachi Singh Rawat, M.P_)

MGIPMRND—2219LS(S3)—1 2-08-2005.