Bill No. 111 of  2018
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Short title and
commencement.
Amendment of
section 2.
THE NATIONAL FOOD SECURITY (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2018
By
DR. KIRIT PREMJIBHAI SOLANKI, M.P.
A
BILL
to amend the National Food Security Act, 2013.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the National Food Security (Amendment) Act, 2018.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government, may by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2.  In section 2 of the National Food Security Act, 2013, (hereinafter referred to as the
principal Act),—
(a) after clause (7), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
"(7a) "high risk districts" means those vulnerable districts identified by
the District Nutrition Monitoring Committee and the State Food Commission as
520 of 2013.

2
well as corroborated by the National Nutrition Monitoring and Surveillance
System.".
(b) after clause (8), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
"(8A) ''malnutrition" means,—
(i) in the case of adult with a Body Mass Index (BMI) of below 18.5
and suffering from chronic energy deficiency and under nutrition; or
(ii) in the case of children who have a height-for-age z-score that is
at least 2 standard deviation (SD) below the median for the World Health
Organisation Child Growth Standards and/or have a weight-for-height
z-score that is at least 2 SD below the median for the WHO Child Growth
Standards and/or have a weight-for-age z-score that is at least 2 SD below
the median for the WHO Child Growth Standards;"; and
(c) after clause (20), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
“(20A) “social nutrition audit" means the surveys conducted by the District
Nutrition Monitoring Committee to study the prevalence of under nutrition
in a district, specifically amongst women and children, in order to suggest
qualitative and quantitative remedies and interventions;.".
3.  After Chapter IV of the principal Act, the following Chapters and sections thereunder
shall be inserted, namely:—
"CHAPTER IVA
NATIONAL NUTRITION MONITORING AND SURVEILLANCE SYSTEM
11A. ( 1) The Central Government shall, with the assistance of the State
Government concerned create a district-level geographic information and digital
tracking system to be known as the National Nutrition Monitoring and Surveillance
System (hereinafter referred to as the System) in respect of every State based on the
information collected and supplied by the State  Governments on eligible beneficiaries
under sections 9 and 10 of the Act to monitor nutrition level in the country.
(2) The System shall use indicators and tools such as dashboards and score cards to
map and track associated indicators and factors of malnutrition including but are not limited
to, the following:—
(a) socio-economic deprivation;
(b) agrarian distress;
(c) seasonal migration;
(d) disruptions in access to services;
(e) lack of access to social protection measures;
(f) disease outbreaks;
(g) endemic disease areas; and
(h) natural disasters.
11B. The System shall—
(a) undertake real-time digital tracking of the nutrition levels of the population;
(b) identify districts, blocks and States that are failing to meet the nutritional
standards and are at high risk;
(c) formulate an early warning system to identify nutritional vulnerabilities and
ensure timely corrective action; and
Insertion of new
Chapter IVA
and IVB.
Creation of a
National
Nutrition
Monitoring
and
Surveillance
System.
Functions of
the System.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
(d) create dissemination of the System on Government websites for transparency
and accountability.
CHAPTER IVB
DISTRICT NUTRITION MONITORING COMMITTEE
11C.  (1) Every State Government shall, by notification, in the Official Gazette, establish
a District Nutrition Monitoring Committee in each district of the State for district-level
monitoring of the implementation of the provisions of this Act.
(2) The District Nutrition Monitoring Committee shall consist of—
(a) Chairperson;
(b) the District Grievance Redressal Officer, as appointed under section 15;
(c) one member from the civil services of  the Union or the State having knowledge
and experience in matters relating to food security, policy making and administration
in the field of agriculture, civil supplies, nutrition, health or any allied field, as appointed
by the State Food Commission under section 16;
(d) one eminent and/or academic expert with a proven record of work relating to
the improvement of food and nutrition rights of the poor; and
(e) five members from the local authorities including municipal corporations,
nagar palikas and panchayati raj institutions:
to be appointed by the State Government in such manner as may be prescribed.
(3) The Chairperson shall be elected from amongst the persons appointed under clause
(c) to (e) of sub-section (2).
(4) The salary and allowances payable, method of appointment and other terms
and conditions of the Chairperson and other Members of the District Nutrition
Monitoring Committee time, place and procedure of meetings of the District Nutrition
Monitoring Committee (including the quorum at such meetings) and its powers, shall
be such as may be prescribed.
11D. The District Nutrition Monitoring Committee shall,—
(a) monitor and evaluate the implementation of the Act in the district and provide
a monthly report and feedback to the State Food Commission in such manner as may
be prescribed;
(b) conduct annual social nutrition audit at a district-level to assess the nutritional
standards and vulnerabilities of the district population; and
(c) provide nutrition counselling to pregnant and lactating mothers, including
fixed Monthly Health and Nutrition Days, as a part of a behavioural change and
communication strategy.”.
4.  In section 16 of the principal Act, in sub-section (6), after clause (f), the following
clauses shall be inserted, namely:—
“(g) appoint one member to the District Nutrition Monitoring Committee, from
the civil services of the Union or the State having knowledge and experience in matters
relating to food security, policy making and administration in the field of agriculture,
civil supplies, nutrition, health or any allied field; and
(h) process the monthly reports submitted by the District Nutrition Monitoring
Committees, identify the 'high risk' districts, if any, and provide the Central Government
with the details of these 'high risk' districts, if any, on a bi-annual basis.”.
Establishment
of a District
Nutrition
Monitoring
Committee.
Functions of
the District
Nutrition
Monitoring
Committee.
Functions of
the State Food
Commission.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

4
5. In section 22 of the principal Act, in sub-section (4), after clause (e), the following
clauses shall be inserted, namely:—
“(f) provide additional financial and infrastructural support to high risk
districts as identified by the concerned District Nutrition Monitoring Committee
and the State Food Commission and corroborated by the National Nutrition
Monitoring and Surveillance System; and
(g) provide non-financial incentives, as decided upon by the Central Government,
to high-performing State Governments, on the basis of the digital and geographic
information based on National Nutrition Monitoring and Surveillance System.”.
Amendment of
section 22.
5

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
With the release of the NITI Aayog's National Nutrition Strategy 2017, the Central
Government has introduced a renewed focus on the issue of malnutrition in India. While the
most recent National Family Health Survey — shows an overall decline in the levels of
under nutrition in women and children, the pace of decline has been slow. According to the
United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF), India has the 10th highest number of underweight
children in the world.
As reiterated in the National Nutrition Strategy and the National Health Policy 2017,
addressing the problems of malnutrition and under nutrition requires a comprehensive and
concerted effort. With the aim of reducing all forms of malnutrition by the year 2030,
a decentralized approach is required that can ensure the provision of nutrition to women and
children, especially to protect maternal health. An identification of the most vulnerable sections
and districts needs to be carried out in order to create a plan that can target those who need
it the most.
The National Food Security Act, 2013 has been enacted to provide for food and
nutritional security in human life cycle approach, by ensuring access to adequate quantity of
quality food at affordable prices to people to live a life with dignity. However, with increased
resources at the State and local self-governments level, a coordinated action plan across
different branches of the Government, which includes health services, food, drinking water,
sanitation facilities and regular income for livelihoods is required.
The Bill therefore, seeks to amend the National Food Security Act, 2013 with a view
to—
(a) define “malnutrition” in adults and children;
(b) create a National Nutritional Monetary and Surveillance System; and
(c) establish a District Nutrition Monetary Committee in each district.
However, increased resources at the State and local self-governments level,
a coordinated action plan across different branches of the Government, which includes health
services, food, drinking water, sanitation facilities and regular income for livelihoods, is
required.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; KIRIT PREMJIBHAI SOLANKI
January 5, 2018.
5

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for setting up of National Nutrition Monitoring and
Surveillance System at district level in every State.  It also provides for setting up of a
District Nutrition Monetary Committee in each district. Clause 5 provides that the Central
Government to provide additional financial and infrastructural support to 'high risk' district
as identified by the District Nutrition Monitoring Committee and the State Food Commission
and corroborated by the National Nutrition Monitoring and Surveillance System.
The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund
of India in implementing the provisions of the Bill. It is likely to involve an annual recurring
expenditure of about rupees five hundred crore from the Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure to the tune of rupees five hundred crore is likely to be
involved.
6

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE NATIONAL FOOD SECURITY ACT, 2013
[NO. 20 OF 2013]
********
********
2. (7) “food security allowance” means the amount of money to be paid by the concerned
State Government to the entitled persons under section 8;
(8) “local authority” includes Panchayat, municipality, district board, cantonment board,
town planning authority and in the States of Assam, Manipur, Meghalaya, Mizoram, Nagaland
and Tripura where Panchayats do not exist, the village council or committee or any other
body, by whatever name called, which is authorised under the Constitution or any law for the
time being in force for self-governance or any other authority or body vested with the control
and management of civic services, within a specified local area;
(20) “social audit” means the process in which people collectively monitor and evaluate
the planning and implementation of a programme or scheme;
********
16. (1) Every State Government may, by notification, constitute a State Food
Commission for the purpose of monitoring and review of implementation of this Act.
(a)* * * * *
(b)* * * * *
(c)* * * * *
(d)* * * * *
(e)* * * * *
(f)* * * * *
********
22. (4) Without prejudice to sub-section (1), the Central Government shall,—
(a)* * * * *
(b)* * * * *
(c)* * * * *
(d)* * * * *
(e)* * * * *
********
Definitions.
State Food
Commission.
Central
Government to
allocate
required
quantity of
foodgrains
from central
pool to State
Governments.
7

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to amend the National Food Security Act, 2013.
————
(Dr. Kirit Premjibhai Solanki, M.P .)
MGIPMRND—301LS(S3)—03-07-2018.