As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

Bill No. 111 of 1999

‘THE NATIONAL CHILD WELFARE BOARD BILL, 1999
By
‘Suri Vitas MutTemwar, M.P.
A
BILL

provide for the establishment of a National Welfare Board for the welfare of children and
(for matters connected therewith.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fiftieth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—

1. (7) This Act may be called the National Child Welfare Board Act, 1999.

(2) It extends to the whole of India.

2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, “Child’’ means a person who
has not attained the age of eighteen years.

3. (1) There shall be established by the Central Government a Board to be known
‘as the “National Child Welfare Board” (hereinafter referred to as the “National
Board”), which shall consist of a Chairman and four other members having special
knowledge or practical experience in the field of education, medicine, sports, culture
and social services.

(2) It shall be the duty of the Board to enunciate the national policy for the
development of child.

_ Short title and

extent,
Definition.

Establishment
of National
Child Welfare
Board. ~


Establishment
of State or Un-
ion territory
Child Welfare
Boards.

Duties of State
or Union
territory
Boards.

carry out the
policy of Na-
tional Board.

‘Constitution of
‘Child Welfare
Fund.

Power to make
Rules.

2

4. There shall be established by every State Government or the Union ter
Administration as the case may be a Board to be known as the “State or Ur
territory Child Welfare Board’’ as the case may be (hereinafter referred to
“State Board”’ or “Union territory Board’’) which shall consist of a Chairm
such number of other members, as the State Government or the Union
Administration may determine who, shall have special knowledge or p
experience in the field of education, medicine, sports, culture and social

5. It shall be the duty of every State and Union territory Board to—

(/) make recommendations to the National Board as regards—
(a) the ways to improve the health and proper maintenance of the child

(b) the type of education which is to be imparted to each child, includi
technical education and vocational training;

(2) provide education, uniform, transportation and meals, ete. free of ७;
every child upto the twelfth standard;

(3) select children for higher and technical education and to meet all tl
expenses;

(4) select talented children in different sports and to train them;

(5) provide free hostel facilities; and

(6) provide scholarship to deserving children.

6. It shall be the duty of the Central Government to carry out the policy of
National Board into effect through release of funds and materials.

7. The Central Government shall constitute a fund to be called the Chil
Welfare Fund.

8. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, mak
rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.

(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing
such rules may provide for—

(a) The salary and other allowance payable to the members of
National Board, State Boards and Union territory Boards;

(७) the appointment of other staff and provision of office and
ete. for the Boards;

(c) any other matter which has to be, or may be, prescribed.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

| is a developing country and a large number of people are uneducated,
employed and poor. Moreover, the children, who are the future of the country, are
-nourished and education is not being imparted to them as per the requirement of
present times. The rich people can spend money for better education of their children
as the large majority of the poor people can not afford to utilise the natural
tentialities of their children. Due to the lack of proper nourished diet and health care,
children become victims of a number of incurable diseases. Therefore, there is an
॥ need to formulate a national policy for the development of children. In this
tion it is proposed to establish Child Welfare Board at the national and State
. The Child Welfare Boards will examine the capability and capacity of a child and
recommendations for the better development of the child. This will also result in
1 drop-outs from schools. Children will also get employment oriented education
talented children in sports will be trained so that they can perform better in the
tional arena of sports.

Hence this Bill.

New DELHI; VILAS MUTTEMWAR


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the establishment of the National Child We
Board, Clause 4 provides for the establishment of State or Union territory Child We |
Boards. Clause 5 provides for provision of education, uniform etc. free of cost to al
children upto 12th standard. It further provides for selection of children for higher
technical education and for meeting of all their expenditure by the State or Union territe
Boards. Clause 6 provides that it shall be the duty of the Central Government to
out the policy of National Board by means of funds and materials. Clause 7 provides fo
establishment of Child Welfare Fund. Clause 8 provides for appointment of other
and provision of office furniture, etc. for the Boards. The Bill, therefore, if enacted,
likely to involve a recurring expenditure of about rupees one crore per annum from ||
Consolidated Fund of India.

It is also likely to involve a non-recurring expenditure of about rupees fifty |



MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

| 8 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying
purposes of the Bill. Sub-clause (2) of that clause enumerates the various matters
of which rules may be made. The matters in respect of which rules may be

are matters of procedure only. The delegation of legislative power is, thus, of a
character.



LOK SABHA

A
BILL
to provide for the establishment of a National Welfare Board for the welfare of
and for matters connected therewith.

(Shri Vilas Muttemwar, M.P.)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—1962LS—30.11.1999.