Short title and
commencement.
THE SPECIAL FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE TO THE NATIONAL CAPITAL
TERRITORY OF DELHI BILL, 2016
By
SHRI RAMESH BIDHURI, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for special financial assistance to National Capital Territory of Delhi for the
purpose of development works related to roads, housing, health care centres,
 schools, skill development and training centres, development and welfare
schemes for women, children and poor people living in the backward
regions and urban poor villages of the National Capital Territory
of  Delhi and for the matters connected therewith.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Special Financial Assistance to the National Capital
Territory of Delhi Act, 2016.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. There shall be paid such sums of money out of the Consolidated Fund of India, every
year, as Parliament may by due appropriation provide, as special financial assistance to the
National Capital Territory of Delhi to meet the costs of such development works and welfare
schemes, as may be undertaken by the Government of National Capital Territory of Delhi
with approval of the Central Government for the purposes of—
Bill No. 111 of 2016
5
Special
financial
assistance to
the National
Capital
Territory of
Delhi.
10
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

(i) developing good quality infrastructure, roads, street lights, school, college,
health centres and transport facilities;
(ii) providing clean drinking water and sanitation in backward urban villages;
(iii) constructing community centres in urban villages;
(iv) improving the health standards of children and women living in backward
urban villages;
(v) improving educational standards of the children living in urban villages;
(vi) skill development of unemployed youth members of families living below
poverty line;
(vii) providing employment to the members of families living below poverty line;
(viii) undertaking measures for lowering of infant mortality rate, improving
maternal health and promoting safe and institutional delivery;
(ix) creating awareness about the disaster preparedness plan and training
people to deal with disaster;
(x) providing social security benefits to the old aged persons living in backward
regions;
(xi) implementing welfare schemes for workers, labourers and migrants;
(xii) implementing Swachch Bharat Abhiyan in backward urban villages;
(xiii) implementing rural tourism in urban villages of historical importance;
and
(xiv) promoting the entrepreneurial works in urban villages.
3. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other
law for the time being in force.
Act not to be
in derogation
of other laws.
5
10
15
20
2

3
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The backward urban villages of Delhi is needed to be developed. The backward regions
of Delhi need financial assistance from the Central Government for the successful completion
of various development works and welfare schemes of Central Government as well as the
Delhi Government. Urban villages within Delhi are not much developed due to inappropriate
financial assistance provided to these villages. The basic development indicators of these
villages are very low and alarming. The villages are noq at the edge of loosening the track of
development. The unplanned expansion of Delhi is creating some critical juncture in path of
development of these backward urban villages. Many villages in Delhi located near the
Haryana-Delhi border and Uttar Pradesh-Delhi border are witnessing lack of basic development
infrastructure, education and health facilities. Special focus is also required for improving
the educational facilities for children, welfare of labourers and daily wage workers, well being
of girl child, social securities to old age persons in the backward urban villages of the
National Capital Territory of Delhi. It is, therefore, necessary that the Union Government
should provide special financial assistance to these regions of the National Capital Territory
of Delhi.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; RAMESH BIDHURI
April 11, 2016.

4
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill provides that there shall be paid such sums of money out of the
Consolidated Fund of India, every year, as Parliament may be due appropriation provide, as
special financial assistance to the National Capital Territory of Delhi to meet the costs of
such development works and welfare schemes, as may be undertaken by the Government of
National Capital Territory of Delhi with approval of the Central Government.
The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure out of the Consolidated Fund of
India. It is not possible, at present, to give estimates of recurring expenditure, which would
be involved out of the Consolidated Fund of India.
No non-recurring expenditure is likely to be incurred from the Consolidated Fund of
India.

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for special financial assistance to National Capital Territory of Delhi for the
purpose of development works related to roads, housing, health care centres,
 schools, skill development and training centres, development and welfare
schemes for women, children and poor people living in the backward
regions and urban poor villages of the National Capital Territory of
Delhi and for the matters connected therewith.
————
(Shri Ramesh Bidhuri, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—248LS(S3)—02-05-2016.