59 of 1980. 
8 of 1987. 
As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA ON 
,'. 
Bill No. 111 of 1987. 
THE AUROVILLl!: (EMERGENCY PROVISIONS) AMENDMENT 
Bn.L, 1987 
,A 
BILL 
further to amend the AuroviHe (Emergency Provisions) Act, 1980. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty-eighth Year of the 
Republic of India as follows:-
1. (1) This Act may be called the Auroville (Emergency Provisions) Short 
Amendment Act, 1987. title and 
5 (2) It shall be deemed to have come into force 'on the 28th day of mont. 
10 
October, 1987. 
2. In section 3 of the Aurl)ville (Emergency Provisions) Act, 1980 
(hereinafter refelll'ed to as the principal Act), in sub-section (1), in the 
proviso, for the words "seven years", the words "eight years" shall be 
substituted. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 3. 
3. (1) The Auroville (Emergency Provisions) Amendment Ordinance, Repeal 
1987, is hereby repealed. and 
SBYiDa. 
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anyting done or any action takea. 
under the principal Act, as amended by the said O.rdinance, shall be 
15 deemed to have been done or taken under the principal Act, as amended 
by this Act. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Under the provisions of the Auroville (Emergency Provisions) Act, 
1980, the management of Auroville vested in the central Government in 
1980 for a maximum period of five years. However, the vires of the Act 
had been challenged in the Calcutta High Court and later in the Supreme 
Court. Though the management vested in the Central Govemment in 
1980. till the Supreme Court upheld. the validity of the Act in November, 
1982. the Act could not be brought in operation in full. In order that 
the progress registered between 1982 and 1985 could be further consoli-
dated and since earnest efforts were being made to place the manage-
ment on a sound footing. the Act was amended in August, 1985 so as 
to extend the period of the Act for a further period of two years beyond 
9th November, 1985. 
2. After urgent administrative aspects were attended to, the Auroville 
International Advisory Council constituted by the Central Govern-
ment under section 6 of the Auroville (Emergency Provisions) 
Act, 1980, had its Sixth Meeting at Auroville in August, 1986, and 
initiated efforts to arrive at a solution, in consultation with the concerned 
parties (residents of Auroville and Sri Aurobindo Society), to provide 
for a permanent arrangement for the management of Auroville. Efforts 
have continued since then, and although some progress has been achieved, 
no satisfactory formula has finally emerged as yet.. It is felt that some 
more time would be needed to allow for the continuance of these efforts 
and until then the management of Auroville should be carried on as per the 
Auroville (Emergency Provisiona) . Act. As the term of the Auroville (Em-
ergency Provisions Act, 1980 expires on the 9tb November, 198'7, the Presi-
dent promulgated the Auroville (Emergency Provisions) Amendment 
Ordinance, 1987, on the 28th October, 1987, to continue the period of man-
agement for a further period of one year. 
3. The Bill seeks to replace the above-mentioned Ordinance. 
NEW Dam; P. V. NARASIMHA RAO. 
The 31st October, 1987. 
2 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Under section 6 of the Auroville (Emergency Provisions) Act, 1980, 
an Advisory Council has been constituted by the Central Government. 
Sub-section (6:) of section 6 provides for payment of allowances and 
other .remuneration to the Members of the Council. Section 9 of the Act 
also provides for the appointment of a Tribunal to adjudicate on certain 
disputes and for tiefraying of expenditure incurred in connection there-
with out of the. Consolidated Fund of India. 
2. It is estimated that the total expenditure on these accounts is 
likely to be of the order of Rs. 1.5 lakhs for the period of one year during 
which the management of Auroville may continUe to vest in the Central 
Government under section 3, as amended by clause 2 of the Bill. 
3. No other recurring or non-recurring expenditUl'e is likely to be 
involved. 
3 

Manage· 
ment of 
Auroville 
to vest 
in the 
Central 
Govern-
ment 
for a 
limited 
period. 
ANNEXURE 
EXTRACT FROM THE AUROVILLE (EMERGENCY PRoVISIONS) ACT, 1980 
(59 OF 1980) 
• * • * * 
3. (1) On and from the appointed day and for a period of two year. 
thereafter, the management of Auroville shall vest in the Central 
Government: 
Provided that where the Central Govemment is of opinion that in 
order to secure the proper mana~ent of Auroville, it is expedient 
that such management should continue to vest in that Government after 
the expiry of the said period of two years, it may, from time to time, 
issue directions for the continuance of such management for such period, 
not exceeding one year at a time, as it may think fit; so, however. that 
the total period for which such management shall continue to vest in 
the Cent.ral Government shall not, in any case, exceed seven years . 
• • * 

WK SABRA .. 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Auroville (Emergency Provisions) Act, 1980. 
(;Shri P. V. Narasimha. Roo, 
MiniBter of Humnn Resources 
Development and Minister of 
Health & Family Welfare.) 