Bill No. Jl2 of 1,62 
THE TEXTILES COMMITTEE 
BILL, 1962 
(As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABIIA 
on 23RD NOVEMBER, 1962) 

Bill No. liZ of I"Z 
THE TEXTILES COMMfITEE BILL, 1962 
(As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA) 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the establishment of a Committee for ensuring the 
quality of textiles and textile machinery and for matters connect-
ed therewith. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirteenth Year of the 
Republic of India as follows:-
1. (1) This Act may be called the Textiles Committee Act, 1962. Short title. 
extent and 
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu =~ence-
5 and Kashmir. 
(3) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Govern-
ment may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
z. In this Act, unless there is anything repugnant in the subject Definitiona 
or context,-
10 (a) "Chairman" means the Chairman of the Committee: 
(b) "Committee" means the Committee established under 
section 3; 
(c) "Fund" :rqeans the Texti1e~ Fund referred to in sectioD 7; 
(d) "member" means a member of the Committee and 
J, includes the Chairman and the Vice-Chairman; 
(e) "presc::ribeg" 1D~I;ln.s pres~rU~)~c1 by rulelS 1l1l~Qe 1.lP~r 
this Act; 

(f) "textile machinery" means the equipment employed 
directly or indirectly for the processing of textile fibre into yarn 
and for the manufacture of fabric therefrom by weaving or 
knitting and includes equipment used either wholly or partly 
for the finishing, folding or packing of textiles; S 
(g) "textiles" means any fabric or cloth or yam made wholly 
or in part of cotton, or wool or silk or artificial silk or other 
fibre; 
(h) "Vice-Chairman" means the Vice-Chairman of the 
Committee. 10 
BatabU.h· 3. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the 
=t~!~- Official Gazette, establish with effect from such date as may be 
mittee. specified in the notification, a Committee to be known as the Textiles 
Punctlona 
of the Com-
IIIIUee. 
Committee, which shall be a body corporate having perpetual succes-
sion and a common seal with power to acquire, hold and ~ispose of IS 
property and to contract and may, by that name, sue or be sued. 
(2) The Head Oftlce of the Committee shall be in Bombay. 
(3) The Committee shall consist of-
(a) a Chairman to be appointed by the Central Government; 
(b) a Vice-Chairman who shall be the Textile Commissioner, 20 
ex officio; 
(c) a Joint Secretary to the Government of India to be 
appointed by the Central Government, ex officiO; 
(d) such other members as the Central Government may 
think ·fit to appoint who, in the opinion of that Government, have 2S 
special knowledge or practical experience in matters relating to 
the textile industry and trade and the manufacture of textile 
machinery. 
4. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the functions of the 
Committee shall generally be to ensure by such measures, a8 it 30 
thinks fit, standard qualiUes of textiles both for internal markeUng 
and export purposes and the manufacture and use of standard type 
of textile machinery. 
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of sub-
section (1), the Committee may- 35 
(a) undertake, assist and encourage scientific. technoloRfcal 
~nd economic research in textile industry an~ te"ti}e machinery; 

· 3 
(b) promote export of. textiles and textile machinery and 
carryon propaganda for that purpose; 
(c) evolve standard varieties of textiles for internal con-
sumption and for the purposes of export and for affixing suitable 
marks registered under the Trade and Merchandise Marks Act, 
1958 on such standardised varieties of textiles; 
(d) evolve standards of inspection of textiles and textile 
machinery; 
(e) provide for the inspection and examination of-
10 (i) textiles; 
(ii) textile machinery at any stage of manufacture and 
also while it is in use at mill-heads; 
(f) establish laboratories and test houses for the testing of 
textiles; 
IS (g) provide for testing textiles and textile machinery in 
laboratories and test houses other than those established under 
clause (I); 
(h) collect statistics for any of the above mentioned pur-
poses from-
(i) manufacturers of, and dealers in, textiles; 
(ii) manufacturers of textile machinery; and 
(iii) such other persons as may be prescribed; 
(i) advise on all matters relating to the development of 
textile industry and the production of textile machinery; 
as (j) provide _ for such other matters as may be prescribed. 
(3) In the discharge of its functions, the Committee shall be 
bound by such directions as the Central Government may, for reasons 
to be stated in writing, give to it from time to time. 
5. The Committee may exercise all such powers as may be neces- Powers of 
30 sary or expedient for the purpose of carrying out its functions under ~:.Commit­
this Act. 
8. For the purpose of enabling the Committee to discharge its Grants by 
functions under this Ad, the Central Government may, after due ~~:tC::\" 
appropriation made by Parliament by law in this behalf, pay to the the Commit-
JoS OoDnnittee in each financial year such sums of money as that Gov- tec. 
emment considers necessary by way of grant, loan or otherwise. 

4 
ConltituUon 
of Fund. 7. (1) The Committee shall have a Fund to be called the Textiles 
Fund and there shall be credited thereto-
StandinJ or 
fIIlltoc Com-
mittee •• 
(a) all moneys transferred to it u·nder clause (a) of sub-
section (2) of section 24; 
(b) all moneys paid by the Central Government under 5 
section 6; 
(c) all fees and other charges levied under this Act; 
(d) all moneys received QY the Committee by way of grant, 
gift, donation, contribUtion, transfer or otherwise. 
(2) The moneys in the Fund shall be applied for- 10 
(a) meeting the pay and allowances of the officers and other 
employees of the Committee and other administrative expenses 
of the Committee; 
(b) carrying out the purposes of this Act. 
(3) All moneys in the Fund shall be deposited in the State Bank 15 
of India or be invested in such securities as may be approved by the 
Central Government. 
8. (1) The Committee may constitute Standing Committees or 
ad hoc Committees for exercising any power or discharging any duty 
of the Committee or fol' inquiring into or reporting and advising on 20 
any matter which the Committee may refer to them. 
(2) ~ Standing Committee shall consist exclusively of members 
of the Committee. . 
(3) An ad hoc Committee may include persons who are not 
members of the Committee but their number shall not exceed one 25 
half of its strength. 
~~e~l:' t. (1) The Central Government shall, in consultation with the 
fees o~ tIfe Committee, appoint a person to be the Secretary of the Committee. Committee. 
(2) Svbject to such rules as may be made by the Central Gov-
ernment in this behalf, the Committee may appoint such other 30 
officers and employees as it considers necessary for the efficient 
performance of its func!tions. 
(3) The methods of appointment, the conditions of service and 
the scales of pay of the officers and other employees of the 
Committee shan,- .35 
(a) as respects the Secretary, be such as may be prescribedi 
and 

340(1944-
(b) as respect the other officers and employees, be such as 
may be determined by regulations made by the Committee under 
this Act. 
10. Subject to the provisions of this Act, every person employed Tralllfer Of 
S by the Cotton Textiles Fund Committee constituted under section 5 :r.:Fn,:n-
of the Cotton Textiles Fund Ordinance, 1944, immediately before the ployees t.o. 
date of establishment of the Committee shall, on and from such date, ~. Comnllt-
become an employee of the Committee with such designation as the 
Committee may determine and shall hold his office or service therein 
10 by the same tenure, at the same remuneration and upon the same 
terms and conditions as he would have held on such date if the 
Committee had not been established and shall continue to do so 
unless and until his employment in the Committp.e is terminated or 
until such tenure, remuneration and terms and conditions are duly 
IS altered by the Committee: 
Provided that the tenure, remuneration and terms and conditions 
of service of any such person shall not be altered to his disadvantage 
without the previous approval of the Central Government. 
11. (1) The Committee may, on application made to it or other- Inspection. 
20 wise, direct officer specially authorised in that behalf to examine 
the quality of textiles or the suitability of textile machinery for use 
at the time of manufacture or while in use in a textile mill and sub-
mit a report to the Committee. 
(2) Subject to any rules made under this Act, such an oftlcer 
25 shall have power to-
(a) inspect any operation c"arried on in connection with 
the manufacture of textiles or textile machinery in relation to 
which construction particulars, marks or inspection standards 
have been specified; 
(b) take samples of any article or of any material or 
substance used in any article Or process in relation to which 
construction particulars marks or inspection standards have been 
specuaed; I 
(c) exercise such other powers as may be prescribed. 
35 (3) On receipt of the report referred to in sub-section (1), the 
Committee may tender such advice, as it may deem fit, to the manu-
facturer of textiles, the manufacturer of textile machinery and the 
applicant. ' 

Levy of feca 12. (1) The Committee may levy such fees as may be prescrib-for inspec-
tion and cx- ed-
amination. 
Accounts 
and audit. 
Delegation 
of/owen an duties. 
(a) for inspection and examination of textiles, 
(b) for inspection and examination of textile machinery. 
(c) for any other service which the Committee may render 5 
to the manufacturers of textiles and textile machinery: 
Provided that the Central Government, may by notification in 
the Official Gazette, exempt from the payment of fees, generally or 
in any particular case. 
(2) Any sum payable to the Committee under sub-section (1) 10 
may be recovered as an arrear of land revenue. 
13. (1) The Committe shall maintain proper accounts and other 
relevant records and prepare an annual statement of accounts, in-
cluding a balance-sheet in such form as may be prescribed by rules 
made under this Act. IS 
(2) The accounts of the Committee shall be audited annually 
by the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India or by such other 
auditors qualified to act as auditors of companies under the law for 
the time being in force relating to companies, as the Government 
may appoint. . 20 
(3) The auditors shall, at all reasonable times, have access to 
the books of accounts and other documents of the Committee and 
may, for the ·purposes of the audit, call for such explanation and in-
formation as they may require or examine any member or oftlcer of 
the Committee. 2S 
(4) The auditors shall forward to the Government a copy of their 
report together with an audited copy of the accounts of the Com-
mittee. 
(5) The cost of the audit as determined by the Central Govern-
ment shall be paid out of the Fund. 30 
14. The Committee may, by general or special order in writin" 
direct that all or any of the powers or duties which may be exercised 
or discharged by it shall, in such circumstances and under such 
conditions, if any, as may be specified in its order, be exercised or 
discharged also by any officer or employee of the Committee speci- 3S 
fled in this behalf in the order. 
A 15. ~o act or proceeding of the Committee shall be invalidated cts or pro-
ceedings of merely by reason of-
~::;cc (a) any vacancy in, or any defect in the constitution of, the 
iovalidated. Committee; or 40 

7 
(b) any defect in the appointment of a person acting as a 
member of the Committee; or 
(c) any irregularity in the procedure of the Committee not 
affecting the merits of the case. 
S 16. All officers and employees of the Committee shall, while Ofllcen and 
acting or purporting to act in pursuance of the provisions of this =P~~i~! 
Act or of any rule or regulation made thereunder, be deemed to be tee . to be 
45 of 1860. public servants within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal ~~tl;~ aero 
Code. 
10 17. (1) Where the Committee has evolved any standard variety PowertoplO 
of textiles either for internal consumption or for the purposes of ~~it i:~~~tI 
export or has evolved standard type of textile machinery and on the marketinl of 
recommendation made to it in this behalf, the Central Government ~~:I:lma~h~ 
is of opinion that any textiles or textile machinery which iller')'. 
I S do not conform to the standards laid by the Committee 
in respect thereof, should not be exported or sold for internal con-
sumption, the Central Government may, by order published in the 
Official Gazette, prohibit such export or sale. 
(2) If any person contravenes any order issued under sub-
20 section '(1) probibiting-
30 
(a) the export of any textiles or textile machinery, or 
(b) the sale of any textiles or textile machinery far internal 
consumption, 
he shall, on conviction, be punishable,-
(i) for the first offence with imprisonment for a term which 
may extend to one year or with fine or with both; 
(it) for the I8COIld or a subsequent offence with imprison-
ment for a term which may extend to one year and also with 
fine and in the absence of special and adequate reasons to be 
mentioned in the judgment of the court, such imprisonment 
shall not be less than three months. 
(3) All textiles and textile machinery to which an order prohibi-
ting export ap~ies under sub-section (1), shall be deemed to be 
textiles or textile machinery of which the export has been prohibited 
I or 1878. 35 under section 19 of the Sea Customs Act, 1878 and all the' provisions 
of that Act shall have effect accordingly. 
(4) Nothing in clause (a) of sub-section (2) shan affect any 
confiscation or penalty to which the person may be liable UIlder the 
: or 1878. provisions of the Sea Customs Act, 1878 as applied by sub-section (3). 

8 
(5) Any court trying the contravention of an order prohibiting 
the marketing of textiles or textile machinery under sub-section (1) 
may. without prejudice to the provisions of clause (b) of sub-section 
(2).. direct that the textiles or textUe machinery in respect of which 
the court is satisfied that such contravention has been committed, S 
shall be forfeited to the Central Government. 
Offences by 18. (1) If the person committing any offence under this Act is a 
companies. company, every person who, at the time the offence was committed 
was in charge of, and was responsible to, the company for the con-
duct of business of the company, as well as the company, shall be 10 
deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be pro-
ceeded against and punished accordingly: 
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render 
any such person liable to such punishment provided in this Act if 
he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge or 15 
that he exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of such 
offence. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), 
where an offence under this Act has been committed by a company 
and it is proved that the offence has been committed with the con- 20 
sent or connivance of, or is attributable to any negligence on the 
part of,. any director, manager, secretary or other officer of the com-
pany, such director, manager, secretary or oth.er oftlcer sh,all also be 
deemed to be guilty of that. offence and shall be liable to be proceeded 
against and punished accordingly. 2S 
Ezplanation.-For the purposes of this section-
(4) '~comP'D7" meBDI a body corporate ~ includes a. firm 
or other association of individuals; and 
(b) "director". in relation to a finn, means a partner in the 
~. 30 
Procedure 11. No prosecution for any offence punishable under this Act 
~~~cution. shall be instituted except by or with the conaent of the Central 
Government. 
Jurisdiction ZOo No court inferior to that cd a Presidency Magistrate or a 
of CO\I11I. Magistrate of the fJnt clus,shaU try any oftence punishable under 35 
.·~Act •. 
PrC?tection of 21. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shaUli. against 
~:: teen the Committee or any member, officer or employee of the Committee 
Act. for anything which is in good faith done OJ.' intended to be done in 
pursuance of this Act or of any rule or regulation made thereunder. 40 

• 
ZZ. (1) The Central Govemment may, subject to the condition Power to 
of previous publication, by notification in the OfBcial Gagette, make nate .. 
make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the 
5 foregoing power, such rules may provide for-
10 
(a) the number of members and the composition of the 
Committee and the manner in which the members shall be 
chosen; 
(b) the term of office of and the manner of ftlling casual 
vacancies among the members of the Com!D-ittee; 
(c) the auowances, if any, payable to the members of the 
Committee; 
(d) the disqualification for membership of the Com-
mittee; 
IS (e) the scale of fees that may be levied for inspection 
and examination under section 12. 
(I) the fonn in which the Committee shall prepare its 
annual statement of accounts and balanc~heet; 
(g) the method of appointment, the conditions of service 
:10 and the scale of pay of the Secretary of the Committee; 
(h) the collection of any information or statistics in respect 
of textile industry and trade and thCL manufacture of textile 
machinery; 
(i) the mode of inspection by the Committee and the man-
:1S ner in which samples may be taken by it. 
(3) Every rule made under this section by the Central Govern-
ment shall be laid as soon as may be after it is made before each 
House of Parliament while it is in session for a total period of thirty 
clays which may be comprised in one session or in two successive 
30 sessions, and if before the expiry of the session in which it is so laid 
or the session immediately following, both Houses agree in making 
any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule 
should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in 
such modified form or be of no effect, as the caSe may be; So however 
3S that any such modification or annulment shall be without prej'udice 
to the validity of anything previously done under that rule. 
23. (1) The Committee may, with the previout sanction of the Power to 
Central Government, by notification in the Oftlcial Gazette, make =:. regula-
regulations, not inconsistent with this Act and the rules made 

10 
thereunder to provide for all matters for which provision is neces-
sary or expedient for the purpose of giving effect to the provisions 
of this Act. 
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the 
fop-going power, such regulations may provide· for- 5 
(a) the meeting of the COmmittee, Standing Committees 
and ad hoc Committees, the quorum for· such meetings and the 
conduct of business thereat; 
(b) the allowances payable to the members of the Standing 
Committees or the ad hoc Committees; 10 
(c) the methods of appointment, the conditions of service 
and the scales of pay of the ofticoers (other than the Secretary) 
and other employees of the Committee; 
(d) the duties and conduct of officers and other employees . . of the OolDlDltteej and IS 
(e) any ather matter in respect of which the Committee is 
empowered or required to make regulations under this Act. 
(3) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, amend, vary or rescind any regulation which it bas sanc-
tioned; and thereupon the regulation shall have effect accordingly. 20 
but without prejudice to the exercise of the powers of the Committee 
under sub-section (1). 
24. (1) With effect from the date on which the Committee is 
es1Bblished under section 3, the Cotton Textiles Fund Ordinance, 
1944 9hall stand repealed. 2S 34 of J944. 
(2) Notwilthstanding the repeal of the said Ordfnance,-
(a) all moneys at the credit of the Cotton Textiles Fund 
established under ,the repealed Ordinance immediately before the 
said date shall with effect from the said date stand transferred 
to and form part of the Textiles Fund referred to in section '1; 30 
(b) any rules made or deemed to have been made or any-
thing done or any action taken in exercise of any of the powers 
conferred by or under the said Ordinance shall be deemed to 
have been made, done or taken in exercise of the powers con-
ferred by or under this Act, as if this Act were in force on the 35 
day on which such rules were made, such thing was done or such 
&etion was taken. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Cotton Textiles Fund Ordinance, 1944 provides for the esta-
blislunent of a cotton teJcl;iles Fund and the constitution of a Com-
mittee to administer the Fund. This Fund was originally created 
from the proceeds of the levy of a duty of customs at 3% on the ex-
mill prices of cloth and yarn exported, and later on, the Central 
Government used to make contributions to the Fund. The Cotton 
Textiles Fund Committee has been doing useful work and the inspec-
tion .scheme of the Committee has found increasing popularity and 
authenticity in trade circles, both in India and abroad. 
2. In recent years, however, conditions in the textiles industry 
have changed. Indian cloth is facing ever-increasing competition in 
the international markets from other exporting countries like Japan, 
China, etc. The Millowners Association and the manufacturers of 
textile machinery in India have been stressing the necessity of an 
independent Inspectorate for indigenous textile machinery. In artier 
to meet their needs, the Tarift Commission recommended in 1960 that 
adequate arrangements should be made for an impartial investigation 
of all complaints from the consuming industries about tbe quality of 
indigenous products and. for keeping a continuous watch over the 
pIIogress of the textile machmery as a whole. Under the existing 
Ordinance, the powers of the Committee have not been clearly defined 
and ,they are also restricted in scope. 
3. It 1& theftfore considered J!ecessary that in the interests of 
textile industry the Committee should be re-constituted and its func-
tions should be enlarged. It is accordingly proposed to establish a 
Commi·ttee which shall be a body corporate and it should be vested 
with enl.-ged statu1Xllry powers. Under the existing Ordinance, the 
functions of the Committee were restricted to cloth and yarn only. 
It is proposed to empower the Committee to ensure the quality of 
all textiles, whether made wholly or partly of cotton, wool, silk, 
artificial silk or fibre. It is further considered that the work of 
inspection of indigenous textile machinery and stores should also be 
mtrusted to the Commi'btee. The functions of the Committee should 
generally be to ensure standard qualities of textiles for internal 
marketing and export purposes and the manufacture and use of 
standard type of textne machinery. 
4. The present Bill seeks to achieve the above objects and to replace 
the existing Cotton Textiles Fund Ordinance, 1944. 
NEW DELHI; MANUBHAI SHAH. 
The 14th Nooembe7', 1962. 
I 
11 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Clause 6 of the Bill provides for the Central Government making 
grants to the Textiles Committee. This Is intended to enable the 
Committee to meet the pay and allowances of the officers and other 
employees of the Committee and other administrative expenses of 
the Committee and also to ensure by such measures, as it thinks fit, 
standard qualities of textiles both for internal marketing and~export 
purposes and the manufacture and use of standard type of textile 
machinery. 
2. The balance standing at the credit of the Cotton Textiles ~'L1nd 
established under the Cotton Textiles Fund Ordinance, 1944 as on 
the 10th October, 1962 was of the. order of ,Rs. 78 lakhs. By virtue 
of clause 24(2) of the Bill all moneys standing at the credit of the 
Cotton Textiles Fund shall stand transferred to and form part of the 
Textiles Fund with effect fro~ the date on which the Cotton 
Textiles Fund Ordinance, 1944 is repealed. Besides under clause 
12(1) of the Bill the Committee may levy such fees as may be pre-
scribed for inspection and examination of textiles, for inspection and 
examination of textile machinery and for any other service which 
the Committee may render to the manufacturers of textiles and 
textile machinery. It is not possiple to give precisely at this stage 
the amount of fees that the Committee may collect for inspection 
of textiles, etc. However, it is expected that the scheme of in-
spection of the Committee will be a self-supporting one. 
3. The non-recurring and recurring expenditure of the Com-
mittee is estimated at about Rs. 4 lakhs and Rs. 26:3 lakhs res-
pectively. For the present the need for making any specific grant 
by the Central Government to the Fund may not arise. 
11, 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 22 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make 
rules for carrying out the Pll.l'pOSeS of the Act. The matters in respect 
of which such rules may be made relate, inter alia, to the composition 
of the Textile Conunilttee, the manner in which. the members shall be 
chosen, the tenn of office, the allowances, if any, payable to the mem-
bers and simil8ll" matters of detail. 
2. Clause 23 of the Bill enables the Committee to make regulation •. 
The matters in respect of which regulations may be made relate to 
procedure like the conduct of meetings, methods of appointment, con-
ditions of service, of ofBcers and. other employees of the Committee. 
3. The matters in respect of which rules and regulattons can be 
made are thus matters of procedure or administrative detail. The 
delegation of powers is thus of • Donnal ehancter. 
11 

LOK SABHA 
.. 
BILL 
to provide for establishment of a Committee for UlSUl'ing the 
quality of textiles and textile machinery and for matters 
connected therewith. 
The President bas, in pursuance of clauses (I) and (3) of article 
117 of the Constitution of India, recommended to Lok 
Sabha the introduction and consideration of the BID. 
M. N. KAUL, 
Secretary. 
(Shri Manubhai Shah, 
Minister of International 
Trade in the Ministry of 
Commerce and Industry.) 