1
Bill  No. 112 of  2019
THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2019
By
SHRI P. P. CHAUDHARY, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India .
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventieth Year of  the Republic of India as follows:—
1. This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2019.
2. After article 21A of the Constitution, the following article shall be inserted, namely:—
“21B. The State shall provide adequate quantity of  safe drinking water and
sanitation facilities to all citizens.".
Short title.
Right to safe
drinking water
and sanitation
facilities.
Insertion of
new article
21B.
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Drinking water and Sanitation are basic necessities for sustaining life. Right to life and
other guarantees for the well-being of citizens enshrined in the Constitution are meaningless
unless a person has access to safe drinking water and sanitation. In 2010, the UN General
Assembly recognized the human rights to safe drinking water and sanitation and the Human
Rights Council reaffirmed this recognition. The water and sanitation should be treated as
two distinct human rights, both included within human right to an adequate standard of
living and with equal status. It is, therefore, necessary that human right to safe and adequate
drinking water and sanitation is made available to all citizens by the State. The right to safe
drinking water and sanitation should be included in part III of the Constitution as a
fundamental right of the citizens.
The Bill seeks to amend the Constitution with a view to make it a duty of the State to
provide adequate quantity of safe drinking water and sanitation facilities to all citizens.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; P.  P.  CHAUDHARY
June  6, 2019.
2

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill seeks to insert a new article 21B to the Constitution, with a view to
provide safe drinking water and facility for sanitation to the Citizen of India. The Bill, therefore,
if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that
a recurring expenditure of Rupees five hundred crore will be involved from the Consolidated
Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of  Rupees five hundred crore is also likely to be involved.
3

LOK  SABHA
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India
————
(Shri P. P . Chaudhary, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—575LS(S3)—24-06-2019.
————