As INTRODUCED IN LOR SABRA ON 
Bm No. 112 of 1983 
THE CHANDIGARH DISTURBED AREAS BILL, 1983 
A 
BILL 
to make better provision for the su.ppression of disorder and for the 
restoration and maintenance of public order in disturbed 4r8GB in 
Chandigarh. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty-fourth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
1. (1) This Act may be called the Chandigarh Disturbed Areas Act, Short, 
1983. title, u-
10 
(2) It extends to the whole of the Union territory of Chandigarh. 
(3) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 7'th day of 
October, 1983. 
2. In this Act,-
(a) "Administrator" means the Administrator of the Union 
territory of Chandigarh appointed under article 239 of the Constitu-
tion; 
(b) "disturbed area" means the area which is for the time being 
declared by notification under section 3 to be a disturbed area. 
3. The Administrator may, by notification in the Oftlcial Gazette, 
15 declare that the whole or any part of the Union territory of Chandigarh 
as may be specified in the notification, is a disturbed area. 
tent and 
com-
mence-
ment. 
Deftn1-
tioD'. 
Powers 
to declare 
areaato 
be dis-
turbed 
1IreU. 

Power to 
ftreupon 
perllOIlS 
contra-
vening 
certain 
orders. 
Powers to 
destroy 
arms· 
dump, 
fortlfled 
poli-
tiOIlll, etc. 
Protec-
tion of 
persona 
act1nl 
under 
HCtiona 
4 and I. 
Repeal 
ancl 
uvine· 
•. Any Magistrate or Police Officer not below the rank of Sub-Inspector 
or Havildar in case of the Armed Branch of the Police may, If he is of 
opinion that it is necessary so to do for the maintenance of public order, 
after giving such due warning, as he may consider necessary, fire upon, 
or otherwise USe force, even to the causing of death, against any person 5 
who is acting in contravention of any law or order for the time being in 
force in the disturbed area, prohibiting the assembly of five or more 
persons or the carrying of weapons or of things capable of being used 
as weapons or of fire-arms, ammunition or explosive substances. 
5. Any Magistrate or Police Officer not below the rank of a Sub- 10 
Inspector may, if he is of opinion that it is necessary so to do, destroy 
any arms dump, prepared or fortified position or shelter from which 
armed attacks are made or are likely to be made or are attempted to be 
made or any structure used as training camp for armed volunteers or 
utilised as a hideout by armed gangs or absconders wanted for any 15 
offence. 
6. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceedings shall be instituted 
except with the previous sanction of the Administrator against any 
person in respect of anything done or purporting to be done in exer~ 
of the powers conferred by sections 4 and 5. 80 
'1. (1) The Chandigarh Disturbed Areas Ordinance, 1983, is hereby 8 of 1918. 
repealed. 
(~) Notwithstanding suah repeal, anything done or any action taken 
un~r the said Ordinance shall be deemed to have been done or tabn 
under the co~nding proviSions of this Act. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The activities of the extremists, terrorists and secessionist elements 
in the State of Punjab and the Union territory of Chandigarh have been 
a matter of serioUs concern. These persons have been indulging in 
violent activities, terrorist methods and encouraging illegal ac-
tivities. In order to arm the police authorities in Chandigal'h 
with additional powers to deal with the situation which had arisen as 
a result of these activities and to restore conditions of peace and nor-
malcy in Chandigarh" the lPresident promulgated on the 7th day of 
October, 1983, the Chandigarh Disturbed Areas Ordinance, 1983 (No.6 
of 1983). 
2. The Bill seeks to replace the Ordinance. 
NEW 'DEIHl; P. C. SETHI. 
The 8th November, 1983. 
., 

A 
BILL 
• 
to make better provision for the Buppr88lion of disorder and for the 
reatoration and maintenance of public order in diBturbed are.. in 
Chandigarh. 
(Shri P. C. Sethi, Minuter of Home Atilt,.,.) 