As uvrropucep in Lox SABHA

४४४७.

2 2 AUG 1991

Bill No, 112 of 1991

THE CENTRAL EXCISES AND CUSTOMS LAWS (AMENDMENT)
BILL, 1991

A
BILL

further to amend the Central Excises and Salt Act, 1944 and the Customs
Act, 1962.

Br it enacted by Parliament in the Forty-second Year of the Republic
of India as follows:—

CHAPTER I

‘PRELIMINARY

5 1. (1) This Act may be called the Central Excises and Customs Laws

(Amendment) Act, 1991.

(2) It shall come into force on such date as ihe Central Government
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.

CHAPTER II
-
10 AMENDMENTS To THE CENTRAL Excises AND Sau Act, 1944
2. In section 2 of the Central Excises and Salt Act, 1944 (hereafter in

this Chapter referred to as the Central Excises Act), after clause (e), the
following clause shall be inserted, namely:—

Short
title and
commen-
cement.

Amend-
ment of
atonal

‘(ee) “Fund” means the Consumer Welfare Fund established _

15 under section 1207.


Amend-
ment of

1B,

2
3. In section 11B of the Central Excises Act,— .

(०) in sub-section (1),—

6) after the words “from the relevant date”, the following
shall be inserted, namely:—

‘in such form as may be prescribed and the application 5
shall be accompanied by such documentary or other evidence
(including the documents referred to in section 12A) as
the applicant may furnish to establish that the amount of
duty of excise in relation to which such refund is claimed
was collected from, or paid by, him and the incidence of 10

such duty had not been passed on by him to any other
person:

Provided that where an application for refund has been
made before the commencement of the Central Excises and
Customs Laws (Amendment) Act, 1991, such application 15
shall be deemed to have been made under this sub-section
as amended by the said Act and the same shall be dealt
with in accordance with the provisions of sub-section (2)
substituted by that Act”;

(ii) im the existing proviso, for the words “Provided that” 20
the words “Provided further that” shall be substituted;

(०) for sub-section (2) to (5), the following sub-sections shall
be substituted, namely:—

“(2) If, on receipt of any such application, the Assistant Col-
lector of Central Excise is satisfied that the whole or any part 35
of the duty of excise paid by the applicant is refundable, he may
make an order accordingly and the amount so determined shall
be credited to the Fund:

Provided that the amount of duty of excise as determined by
the Assistant Collector of Central Excise under the foregoing 30
provisions of this sub-section shall, instead of being credited to
the Fund, be paid to the applicant, if such amount is relatable to—

(a) rebate of duty of excise on excisable goods exported
out of India or on excisable materials used in the manufac-
ture of goods which are exported out of India; 35

(b) unspent advance deposits lying in balance in the
applicant’s account current maintained with the Collector of
Central Excise;

(०) refund of credit of duty paid on excisable goods used 40
as inputs in accordance with the rules made, or any notifica-
tion issued, under this Act;

(4) duty of excise paid by the manufacturer, if he had
not passed on the incidence of such duty to any other person;

(९) the duty of excise borne by the buyer, if he had not
passed on the incidence of such duty to any other person; 45


10

15

20

25

35

45

_ 3

@) the duty of excise borne by any other such class of
applicants as the Central Government may, by notification in
the Official Gazette, specify:

Provided further that no notification under clause (f) of the
first proviso shall be issued unless in the opinion of the Central
Government the incidence of duty has not been passed on by
the persons concerned to any other person,

(3) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in
any judgment, decree, order or direction of the Appellatte Tri-
bunal or any Court or in any other provision of this Act or the
tules made thereunder or any other law for the time being in
force, no refund shall be made except as provided in sub-section
(2).

(4) Every notification under clause (f) of the first proviso
to sub-section (2) shall be laid before each House of Parliament,
if it is sitting, as soon as may be after the issue of the notifica-
tion, and, if it is not sitting, within seven days of its Te-assembly,
and the Central Government shall seek the approval of Parlia-
ment to the notification by a resolution moved within a period

(5) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that any
notification issued under clause (f) of the firs! Proviso to sub-
Section (2), including any such notification approved or modified

under sub-section (4), may be rescinded by the Central Govern-
ment at any time by notification in the Official Gazette.”;

(०) in the Explanation, in clause (B), for sub-clause (e), the
following sub-clause shall be substituted, namely: —

“(@) in the case of a person, other than the manufacturer,
the date of purchase of the goods by such person;”

4. In section 11C of the Central Exeises Act, for sub-section (2), the

following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:

“@) Where any notification under sub-section (1) in respect of
any goods has been issued, the whole of the duty of exeise paid on
Such goods or, as the case may be, the duty of excise paid in excess
of that payable on such goods, which would not have been paid if the
said notification had been in force, shall be dealt with in accordance

with the provisions of sub-section (2) of section 118.

Provided that the person claiming the refund of such duty or,
as the case may be, excess duty, makes an application in this behalf
to the Assistant Collector of Central Excise, in the form referred to
in sub-section (1) of section 11B, before the expiry of six months
from the date of issue of the said notification,”,

Amend-
ment of
section
वाट,


Insertion
of new
section
11D.

Duties of
excise
collected
from the
buyer to
be deposi-
ted with
the
Central
Govern-
ment.

Insertion
of new
Chapter
112.

Price of
goods to
indicate
the
amount
vf duty
paid
thereon.

Presump-
tion that
the inci-
dence of
duty has
been
passed
on tothe
buyer,

Consumer
Welfare
Fund,

4

5. After section 11C of the Central Excises Act, the following section

shall be inserted, namely:—

“11D. (1) Notwithstanding anything to the conrtrary contained
in any order or direction of the Appellate ‘Tribunal or any Court or
in any other provision of this Act or the rules made thereunder, every
person who hes collected any amount from the buyer of any goods
in any manner as representing duty of excise, shall forthwith pay
the amount so collected to the credit of the Central Goverament.

(2) The amount paid to the credit of the Central Government
under sub-section (1) shall be adjusted against the duty of excise
payable by the person on finalisation of assessment and where any
surplus is left after such adjustment, the amount of such surplis
shall either be credited to the Fund or, as the case may be, refunded
to the person who has borne the incidence of such amount, in accord-
ance with the provisions of section 11B and the relevant date for
making an epplication uncer that section in such cases shall be the
date of the public notice to be issued by the Assistant Collector of
Central Exvise.”.

6. After Chapter II of the Central Excises Act, the following Chapter

shall be inserted, namely:—

“CHAPTER TIA

INDICATING AMOUNT OF DUTY IN THE PRICE OF 6005, ETC., FOR PURPOSE
OF REFUND AND CREDITING CERTAIN AMOUNTS TO THE FUND

124. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act or any
other law for the time being in force, every person who is liable to
pay duty of excise on any goods shall, at the time of clearance of the
goods, prominently indicate in all the documents relating to assess-
ment, sales invoice, and other like documents, the amount cf such
duty which will form part of the price at which such goods are to be
sold.

12B. Every person who has paid the duty of excise on any goods
under this Act shall, unless the contrary is proved by him, be deemed
to have passed on the full incidence of such duty to the buyer of such
goods.

120. (1) There shall be established by the Central Government
a fund, to be called the Consumer Welfare Fund.

(2) There shall be credited to the Fund, in such manner as may
be prescribed, —

(a) the amount of duty of excise referred to in sub-section
(2) of section 11B or sub-section (2) of section 11C or sub-section
(2) of section 11D; i

0

20

30

35

40


5

(b) the amount of duty of customs referred to in sub-section
(2) of section 27 or sub-section (2) of section 28A, or sub-section
(2) of section 28B of the Customs Act, 1963;

(c) any income from investment of the amount credited to
5 the Fund and any other monies received by the Central Govern-
ment for the purposes of this Fund.

12D. (1) Any money credited to the Fund shall be utilised by
the Central Government for the welfare of the consumers in accord-
ance with such rules as that Government may make in tnis
10 behalf.

(2) The Central Government, shall maintain or, if it thinks fit,
specify the authority which shall maintain, proper and separate ac-
count and vther relevant records in relation to the Fund in such form
as may be prescribed in consultation with the Comptroller and Audi-

15. tor-General of India.”.

7. In Chapter III of the Central Excises Act, existing section 124
shall be renumbered as section 128,

8. In section 37 of the Central Excises Act, in sub-section (2), after
clause (ezii), the following clauses shall be inserted, namely: —
20 “(aeiii) specify the form in wh'ch application for refund shall
be made under section 11B;
(eziv) provide for the manner in which money is to be credited
to the Fund;

(xxv) provide for the manner in which the Fund shall be utili-
25 sed for the welfare of the consumers;

(avi) specify the form in which the account and records relat-
ing to the Fund shall be maintained.”.
CHAPTER III
AMENDMENTs To THE Customs Act, 1962
30 9. In section 2 of the Customs Act, 1962 (hereafter in this Chapter

referred to as the Customs Act), after clause (21), the following clause
shall be inserted, namely: —

*(21A) “Fund” means the Consumer Welfare Fund established
under section 12C of the Central Excises and Salt Act, 1944)’.

35 10, For section 27 of the Customs Act, the following section shall be
substituted, namely:—

‘a7, (1) Any person claiming refund of any duty—
(i) paid by him in pursuance of an order of assessment; or
(ii) borne by him,

Utilisation
of the
Fund.

Renum-
bering
of
exist-
ing Sec-
tion 124,
as sec-
tion 128.

Amend-

ment uf

section 27.

Amend-
ment of
section 2.

1of 1944,

Substisu-
tion of
new sec-
tion for
section 27,
Claim

for
refund

of duty.


may make an application for refund of such duty to the Assistant
Collector of Customs—

(a) in the case of any import made by any individual for
his personal use or by Government or by any educational, re-
search or charitable institution or hospital, before the expiry 5
of one year;

(b) in any other case, before the expiry of six months,

from the date of payment of duty, in such form as may be specified
in the regulations made in th’s behalf and the application shall be
accompanied by such documentary or other evidence (including the 10
documents referred to in section 28C) as the applicant may furnish
to establish that the amount of duty in relation to which such re-
fund is claimed was collected from or paid by, him and the incidence
of such duty had not been passed on by him to any other person:

Provided that where an application for refund has been made
before the commencement of the Central Excises and Customs Laws
(Amendment) Act, 1991, cuch application shall be deemed to have
been made under this sub-section and the same shall be dealt with
in accordance with the provisions of sub-section (2):

5

Provided further that the limitation of one year or six months, 20
as the case may be, shall not apply where any duty has been paid
under protest.

Explanation.—For the purposes of this sub-section, “the date of
Payment of duty”, in relation t> 2 person, other than the importer,
shall be construed as “the date of purchase of goods” by such person. 25

(2) If, on receipt of any such application, the Assistant Collector
of Customs is satisfied that the whole or any part of the duty paid
by the applicant is refundable, he may make an order accordingly
and the amount so determined shall be credited to the Fund:

Provided that the amount of duty as determined by the Assistant 30
Collector of Customs under the foregoing provisions of this sub-
section shall, instead of being credited to the Fund, be paid to the
applicant, if such amount is relatable to—

(a) the duty paid by importer, if he had not passed on
the incidence of such duty to any other person; 35

(b) the duty on imports made by an individual for his
personal use; ae

(c) the duty borne by the buyer, if he had not passed on
the incidence of such duty to any other person;

(d) the export duty as specified in section 26; 40
(e) drawback of duty payable under sections 74 and 15;

(f) the duty borne by any other such class of applicants as
the Central Government may, by notification in the Official
Gazette, specify:

Provided further that no notification under clause (f) of the 45
first proviso shall be issued unless in the opinion of the Central


7

Government the incidence of duty has not been passed on by the
Persons concerned to any other person.

(3) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in any

judgment, decree, order or direction of the Appellate Tribunal or

5 any Court or in any other provision of this Act or the regulations

made thereunder or any other law for the time being in force, no
refund shall be made except as provided in sub-section (2).

(4) Every notification under clause ([) of the first proviso to
sub-section (2) shall be laid before each House of Parliament, if it
is sitting, as soon as may be after the issue of the notification, and,
if it is not sitting, within seven days of its re-assembly, and the
Central Government shall seek the approval of Parliament to the
notification by a resolution moved within a period of fifteen days
beginning with the day on which the notification is so laid before
15 the House of the People and if Parliament makes any modification

in the notification or directs that the notification should cease to
have effect, the notification shall thereatfer have effect only in such
modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be, but without
prejudice to the validity of anything previously done thereunder.

10

20 (5) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that any
notification issued under clause (f) of the first proviso to sub-section
(2), including any such notification approved or modified under sub-
section (4), may be rescinded by the Central Government at any
time by notification in the Official Gazette.’.

25 11. In section 28A of the Customs Act, for sub-scction (2), the fol-
lowing sub-section shall be substituted, namely:—

“(2) Where any notification under sub-section (1) in respect
of any goods has been issued, the whole of the duty paid on such
goods, or, as the case may be, the duty paid in excess of that payable

30 on such goods, which would not have been paid if the said notification
had been in force, shall be dealt with in accordance with the pro-
visions of sub-section (2) of section 2

Provided that the person claiming the refund of such duty or,
as the case may be, excess duty, makes an application in this behalf
35 to the Assistant Collector of Customs, in the form referred to in
sub-section (1) of section 27, before the expiry of six months from
the date of issue of the said notification."

12. In Chapter V of the Customs Act, after section 28A, the following
section shal] be inserted, namely: —

40 “28B. (1) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained
in any order or direction of the Appellate Tribunal or any Court or
in any other provision of this Act or the regulations made there-
under, every person who has collected any amount from the buyer
of any goods in any manner as representing duty of customs, shall

45 forthwith pay the amount so collected to the credit of the Central
Government.

Amend-
ment of
section
284.

Insertion
of new
section
288.

Duties col-
lected
from the
buyer to
‘be deposit-
ed with
the
Central
Govern-
ment.


Insertion
of new
Chapter
vA.

Price of
goods to
indicate
the
amount
of quty

paid
thereon,

Presump-
tion that
incidence
of duty
has been
passed on
to the

buyer,

Amend-
ment of
section

157.

Amend-
ment of
section
159.

8

(2) The amount paid to the credit of the Central Government
under sub-section (1) shall be adjusted against the duty payable by
the person on finalisation of assessment and where any surplus is
left after such adjustment, the amount of such surplus shall either
be credited to the Fund or, as the case may be, refunded to the
person who has borne the incidence of such amount, in accordance
with the provisions of section 27 and the application under that
section in such cases shall be made before the expiry of six months
from the date of the public notice to be issued by the Assistant
Collector of Customs.”.

13. After Chapter V of the Customs Act, the following Chapter shall

be inserted, namely:—

“CHAPTER VA

INDICATING AMOUNT OF DUTY IN THE PRICE OF 60005, ETC.,
FOR PURPOSE OF REFUND

28C. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act or any
other law for the time being in force, every person who is liable
to pay duty on any goods shall, at the time of clearance of the
goods, prominently indicate in all the documents relating to assess-
ment, sales invoice and other like documents, the amount of such
duty which will form part of the price at which such goods are to
be sold.

28D. Every person who had paid the duty on any goods under
this Act shall, unless the contrary is proved by him, be deemed to
have passed on the full incidence of such duty to the buyer of such
goods.”.

14. In section 157 of the Customs Act, in sub-section (2), after

clause (a), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—

“(aa) the form in which an application for refund shall be
made under section 27;”.

15. In section 159 of the Customs Act, for the word “rule”, wherever

it occurs, the words “rule or regulation” shall be substituted.

30

14 4


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

The question of “unjust enrichment” in cases of goods subject to
duty of excise or customs has been the subject-matter of discussion for
quite sometime now. The concept of “unjust enrichment”, in so far as
it relates to the said duties, is that any refund of these duties made to
any manufacturer or importer, who may have initially paid these duties
but had passed on the same to the buyers, would be in the nature of a
windfall gain to such manufacturer or importer.

2. The Public Accounts Committee made an inquiry into all aspects
of the issue relating to refund of central excise duty. The Committee
presented its report to the Parliament on the 11th day of March, 1991.
The Committee has also recommended for the introduction of suitable
legislation to amend the Central Excises and Salt Act, 1944 and the
Customs Act, 1962 to deny refunds in cases of unjust enrichment.

3. The Bill aims at giving effect to the aforesaid recommendation of
the Connnittee and proposes the following main amendments in the said

Acts, namely: —

(a) the manufacturer or importer of goods shall not be — en-
titled to refund of the duty of excise or, as the case may be, the
duty of customs if he has already passed on the incidence of such

duty to the buyer; |
(0) the burden of proof that the incidence of the duty has not

been passed on to the buyer shall be on the person claiming the
refund; ' |

(०) every person, who is liable to pay duty of excise or, as the
case may be, the duty of customs on any goods, shall be under an
obligation to prominently indicate, at the time of clearance of the
goods, in all the documents relating to assessment, etc., the amount
of duty which will form part of the price at which such goods will
be sold; है

(4) the refund of any of the said duties is proposed to be
made only to the person who has ultimately borne the incidence
of such duty; |

(e) it is proposed to establish a Consumer Welfare Fund where-
in the amount of duty of excise or, as the case may be, the duty
of customs, which is not refundable to the manufacturer or importer
or the buyer in accordance with the proposed provisions, shall be
credited. In addition, any income from investment of the amount
credited to the Fund and any other monies received by the Central
Government for the purposes of the Fund will be credited to the


10

Fund. The Fund will be utilised by the Central Government for

the welfare of the consumers in accordance with the rules to
be made in this behalf; |

(0) it is also proposed to provide that notwithstanding anything
to the contrary contained in any judgment, decree, order or direc-
tion of the Appellate Tribunal or any Court or in any other pro-
vision of the said Acts, ete, no refund shall be made except as
provided in new sub-section (2) of section 11B of the Central Ex-

cises and Salt Act, 1944 or new sub-section (2) of section 27 of the
Customs Act, 1962; | |

(9) it is also proposed to provide that where any manufacturer
or importer of goods has collected any amount in any manner from
the buyer as representing the duty of excise or, as the case may be,
the duty of customs, he shall pay the said amount to the credit
of the Central Government and the said amount shall be utilised
in adjusting the duty payable by the manufacturer or importer on
finalisation of assessment. The surplus, if any, will be dealt with
in accordance with the aforesaid provisions of section 11B of the

Central Excises and Salt Act, 1944 and section 27 of the Customs
Act, 1962, ।

4. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects,

New Dewnr;

The 12th August, 1991.

MANMOHAN SINGH.


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 8 of the Bill seeks to amend sub-section (2) of section 37 of
the Central Excises and Salt Act, 1944 so as to enable the Central
Government to make rules for specifying the form in which an appli-
cation for refund shall be made under sub-section (1) of section UB
of the Act, providing the manner in which money is to be credited to
the proposed Consumer Welfare Fund, providing the manner in which
the said Fund shall be utilised for the welfare of the consumers and
specifying the form in which the account and records relating to the
Fund shall be maintained.

2. Clause 14 of the Bill secks to amend sub-section (2) of section
157 of the Customs Act, 1962 so as to enable the Central Board of Ex-
cise and Customs to make regulations for specifying the form in which
an application for refunds shall be made under section 27 of the Act.

3. The matters in respect of which the rules or regulations may be
made under the aforesaid provisions are matters of administrative detail
or procedure and it is not practicable to provide for them in the Bill
itself, The application of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal
character 1 |


Definitions

Claim for
refund of
duty.

| | ANNEXURE
EXxtRACTS FROM THE CENTRAL EXcISEs AND SALT Act, 1944

| i (1 ot 1944)

* * * * *

2. In this Act, unless there is anything repugnant in the subject or
context,— !

= * * * *

11B. (1) Any person claiming refund of any duty of excise may
make an application for refund of such duty to the Assistant Collector

of Central Excise before the expiry of six months from the relevant
date:

Provided that the limitation of six months shall not apply where
any duty has been paid under protest.

(2) T£ on receipt of any such application, the Assistant Co'lector of
Central Excise is satisfied that the whole or any part of the duty of
excise paid hy the applicant should be refunded to him, he may make
an order accordingly.

(3) Where as a result of any order passed in appeal or revision
under this Act refund of any duty of excise becomes due to any person.
the Assistant Collector of Central Excise may refund the amount to
such person without his having to make any claim in that behalf.

(4) Save as otherwise provided by or under this Act. no claim for
refund of any duty of excise shall be entertained.

(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law, the pro-
visions of this section shall also apply to a claim for refund of any
amount collected as duty of excise made on the ground that the goods
in respect of whick such amount was collected were not excisable or
were entitled to exemption from duty and no court shall have any juris-
diction in respect of such claim. | ‘

Explanation—For the purposes of this section —

(A) “refund” includes rebate of duty of excise on excisable
goods exported out of India or on excisable materials used in the
manufacture of goods which are exported out of India;

(B) “relevant date” means,—

* * * * *

(०) in a case where duty of excise is paid provisionally
under this Act or the rules made thereunder, the date of adjust-
ment of duty after the final assessment thereof:

* * * * *

12


lic.) * * * *

1 CHAPTER गा
POWERS AND DUTIES OF OFFICERS AND LANDHOLDERS
(2) Where any notification under sub-section (7) in respect of any
goods has been issued, the whole of the है
or, as the case may be, the duty of exci id ii
णा such goods, which would not have

had’ been in force, shall be refunded in accordance with the said notifica-
tion:

12A. (1) A Central Excise Officer may exercise the powers and dis-
charge the duties conferred or imposed under this Act om any other Cen-
tral Excise Officer who is subordinate to him.

* * . .
CHAPTER VIT
SurpLemeNtat Provistons
37. (1) * . Ps

* *

(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the
foregoing power, such rules may—

. * * * .
EXTRACTS FROM THE CUSTOMS Acr, 1962
(52 oF 1962)
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, —
. * * * *

27. [(7) Any person cla‘ming refund of any duty paid by him in
Pursuance of an order of as“2ssment made by an officer of ciistoms lower
in rank than an Assistant Collector of Customs may make an application
for refund of such duty to the Assistant Collector of Customs.

(व) in the case of any import made by any individual for his
personal use or by Government or by any educational. research or
charitable institution or hospital, before the expiry of one year;

*
Power
not to

recover
duty of

excise not
levied or

short-
levied as

aresult of

general
practice.

1

Power of
Central
Govern-
ment to
make
rules.

Definii-
tions. .

Claim for
refund of
duty,


Power
not to
recover
duties

not levied
or short-
levied as
a result of
general
practice.

General
power to
make
regula-
tions.

4

(b) in any other case, before the expiry of six months, rrom thc
date of payment of duty: 1

Provided that the limitation of one year or six months, as the case
may be, shall not apply where any duty has been paid under protest.

Explanation—Where any duty is paid provisionally under section
18, the period of one year or six months, as the case may be, shall be
computed from the date of adjustment of duty after the final assessment
thereof. LS _ al

(2) If on receipt of any such application the Assistant Collector of
Customs is satisfied that the whole or any part of the duty paid by the
applicant should be refunded to him, he may make an order accordingly.

(3) Where, as a result of any order passed in appeal or revision
under this Act, refund of any duty becomes due to any person, the pro-
per officer may refund the amount to such person without his having to
make any claim in that behalf.

(4) Save as provided in section 26, no claim for refund of any duty
shall be entertained except in accordance with the provisions of this
section.

(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law, the pro-
visions of this section shall also apply to a claim for refund of any
amount collected as duty of customs made on the ground that the goods
in respect of which such amount was collected were not leviable to
such duty or were entitled to exemption from duty and no court shall
have any jurisdiction in respect of such claim.

* * * * *
28A.(1) * * * * *

(2) Where any notification under sub-section (1) in respect of any
goods has been issued, the whole of the duty paid on such goods, or
as the case may be, the duty paid in excess of that payable on such goods,
which would not have been paid if the sai notification had been in force,
shall be refunded in accordance with the said notification:

Provided that the person claiming the refund of such duty or, as
the case may be, excess duty, makes an application in this behalf to
the Assistant Collector of Customs before the expiry of six months from
the date of issue of the said notification and proves to the satisfaction
of the Assistant Collector of Customs that the incidence of such duty had
not been passed on to any other person.

* * * * *

157. (1) * * * no

(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the
foregoing power, such regulations may provide for all or any of the
following matters, namely:—

* * * * *


h

15

159. Every rule made under this Act and every notification issued
under sections 11, 11B, 11H, 111, 11K, 11N, 14; 25, 28A, 43, 66, 69, 70, 74,
75, 76, 98, 101 and 123 shall be laid as soon as may be after it is made or
issued before each House of Parliament wl it is in session for a total period
of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or
more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session im-
mediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both
Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or notification or
both Houses agree that the rule should not be made or the notification
should not be issued, the rule or notification shall thereafter have effect
only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so,
however, that any such modification of annulment shall be without pre-
judice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule or
notification.

* * * * *

Rules
and
certain
notifiea-
tions
laid.
before
Parlia-
ment.


LOK SABHA

A
BILL
further to amend the Central Excises and Salt Act, 1944 and the Customs
Act, 1962. sae
—

(Dr. Manmohan Singh, Minister of Finance.)