34 of 2019. 
5 
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA 
Bill No. 112 of 2025 
THE JAMMU AND KASHMIR REORGANISATION 
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 2025 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Jammu and Kashmir Reorganisation Act, 2019. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy -sixth Year of the Republic of 
India as follows:–– 
1. ( 1) This Act may be called the Jammu and Kashmir Reorganisation
(Amendment) Act, 2025. 
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, b y
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
2. In section 54 of the Jammu and Kashmir Reorganisation Act, 2019, after
sub-section (5), the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:–– 
Short title and 
commencement. 
Amendment of 
section 54. 

2 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
“(5A) A Minister, who for any period of thirty consecutive days during 
holding the office as such, is arrested and detained in custody, on allegation 
of committing an offence under any law for the time being in force, which is 
punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to five years or 
more, shall be removed from his office, by the Lieutenant Governor on the 
advice of the Chief Minister to be tendered by the thirty-first day, after being 
taken in such custody: 
Provided that if the advice of the Ch ief Minister, for the removal of 
such Minister is not tendered to the Lieutenant Governor by the                                    
thirty-first day, he shall cease to be a Minister, with effect from the day 
falling thereafter: 
Provided further that in case of the Chief Minister, who for any period 
of thirty consecutive days during holding the office as such, is arrested and 
detained in custody, on allegation of committing an offence under any law 
for the time being in force, which is punishable with imprisonment for a term  
which may extend to five years or more, shall tender his resignation by the                              
thirty-first day after such arrest and detention, and if he does not tender his 
resignation, he shall cease to be the Chief Minister, with effect from the day 
falling thereafter: 
Provided also that nothing in this sub -section shall prevent such Chief 
Minister or Minister from being subsequently appointed as the Chief 
Minister or a Minister, by the Lieutenant  Governor, on his release from 
custody, as per sub-section (1).”. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10 
 
 
 
 
 
 
15 
 
 
 
 
 
 
20 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

3 
 
 
   
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The elected representatives represent hopes and aspirations of the people of 
India. It is expected that they rise above political interests and act only in the 
public interest and for the welfare of people. 
2. It is expected that the character and conduct of Ministers holding the office 
should be beyond any ray of suspicion. 
3. A Minister, who is facing allegation of serious criminal offences, arrested 
and detained in custody, may thwart or hinder the canons of constitutional morality 
and principles of good governance and eventually diminish the constitutional trust 
reposed by people in him. 
4. However, there is no provision under the Jammu and Kashmir 
Reorganisation Act, 2019 (34 of 2019) for removal of the Chief Mini ster or a 
Minister who is arrested and detained in custody on account of serious criminal 
charges. 
5. In view of the above, there is a need to amend section 54 of the Jammu 
and Kashmir Reorganisation Act, 2019, for providing legal framework for removal 
of the Chief Minister or a Minister in such cases. 
6. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives. 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                                                                                    AMIT SHAH. 
The 19th August, 2025. 
  

LOK SABHA 
———— 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Jammu and Kashmir Reorganisation Act, 2019. 
———— 
(Shri Amit Shah, Minister of Home Affairs and Cooperation) 