 AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Bill No. 1 12 of 2021
THE HIGHER AND TECHNICAL EDUCATION (EXEMPTION
FROM PAYMENT OF OUTSTANDING FEES AND
EDUCATION LOAN) BILL, 2021
By
SHRI H ASMUKHBHAI S OMABHAI P ATEL, MP
A
BILL
to provide for the exemption from payment of outstanding education
fees to educational institutions or education loan to banks
taken for pursuing higher studies in the event of death
of student or physical or mental disability of
student due to any reason and for matters
connected therewith.
BE it enacted by the Parliament in the Seventy-second Year of the
Republic of India as follows :–
1. (1) This Act may be called the Higher and Technical Education
(Exemption from Payment of Outstanding Fees and Education Loan)
Act, 2021.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title,
extent  and
commencement.5

2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires:-
(a) ‘‘appropriate Government’’ means in the case of a State and Union
territory with Legislative Assembly, the State Government and the Government
of the Union territory, respectively, and in all other cases, the Central
Government;
(b) “bank” means any nationalized or commercial bank and includes a
private or foreign bank;
(c) “education loan” means any type of loan offered by the banks to students
for payment of tuition fee or living expenses or  purchasing of books and
study material for pursuing higher or technical education;
 (d) “fee” means any amount demanded or charged or collected, directly
or indirectly, for, or, on behalf of any institution, or paid by any person in
consideration for admitting any person as student in an institution;
(e) “Fund” means the Educational Loan Fund constituted under section 6;
(f) “higher and technical education” means education beyond senior
secondary level and includes education in the fields of law, theology, medicine,
technology, business, music or art;
(g) “institution” means a technical educational institution or medical
educational institution or any such institution registered under the Societies
Registration Act, 1860 and recognised as such by the appropriate statutory
authority or a university as defined in section 2 of the University Grants
Commission Act, 1956 and includes an institution deemed to be a university
under section 3 of that Act or under any other law for the time being in
force; and
(h) “parent” in relation to a student includes guardian and every person
who has the actual custody of the child for the time being;
(i) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act; and
(j) “student” means any citizen who has taken admission in higher and
technical educational institution;
3. Notwithstanding anything contained in any judgement or order of any
Court or Tribunal, regulations and law for the time being in force dealing with
payment of education loan to bank or tuition fee or any other fee
to educational institution, no student or his parent shall be liable for payment
of ,–
(a) any outstanding fee or any other charges to an educational institution;
(b) any outstanding education loan to any bank or financial institution from
where the student or his parents have borrowed educational loan;
in case of untimely death or physical disability or mental disability of the
student due to any reason.
4. (1) It shall be the responsibility of every higher and technical educational
institution to waive  the outstanding dues of tuition or any other fee consequent
of  untimely death or physical or mental disability of the student due to any
reason.
(2) Every higher and technical educational institution shall forward the
details of students covered under sub-section (1) to the appropriate
Government.
(3) The appropriate Government shall, on receipt of details of students
under sub-section (2), pay the outstanding dues of tuition fee or any other
fee to the education institution in such manner as may be prescribed.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
2
Definitions.
Exemption
from payment
of fees and
education
loan by
students and
parents in
case of death
or physical
disability or
mental
disability of
the student.
Responsibility
of Educational
Institutions to
waive off
education fee
in case of death
or physical
disability or
mental
disability of
the student.

5. Every higher and technical educational institution shall refund tuition
or any other fee, if any, deposited by the student in advance during the academic
year to the parents consequent of untimely death or physical or mental disability
of such student due to any reason.
6. The appropriate Government shall implement an insurance scheme
to extend life insurance cover to every student who borrows education
loan to pursue higher or technical education.
7.  (1) It shall be the responsibility of every bank to write off the outstanding
dues of education loan amount consequent of death or physical disability or
mental disability of the borrower student due to any reason.
(2) Every bank shall forward the details of students covered under sub-
section (1) to the appropriate Government.
(3) The appropriate Government shall, on receipt of details of students
under sub-section (2), pay the outstanding dues of education loan to the
bank in such manner as may be prescribed.
8. (1) The Central Government shall constitute a Fund to be known as
the Educational Loan Fund for carrying out the provisions of this Act.
(2) The Fund constituted under sub-section (1) shall be utilised for
payment of–
 (i)  premium of life insurance of students;
(ii) outstanding dues of tuition fee or any other charges to the
educational institution in case of death or  physical disability or mental
disability of the borrower student due to any reason; and
(iii) outstanding loan to banks in case of death or  physical disability
or mental disability of the borrower student due to any reason.
9. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation
of any other law for the time being in force.
10. (1) The Central Government may by notification in the official Gazette
make rules for carrying out of purpose of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it
is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total
period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or
more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately
following the session or the successive session aforesaid, both Houses agree
in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the rule
should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified
form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything
previously done under that rule.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
Act not to be
in derogation
of any other
law.
Power to
make rules.
Educational
Institutions to
refund
advance fee in
case of death
or physical or
mental
disability of
the student.
Appropriate
Government
to provide
life insurance
cover.
Responsibility
of banks to
waive of
education
loan on
certain
grounds.
Constitution
of Education
Loan Fund.
3

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
 Education is the fulcrum of any society. It is the responsibility of the
State to provide quality education to all the citizens. As per the scheme of
the Constitution, free education is being imparted at the elementary level.
For the higher and technical education, the students and their parents have
to strive for  arranging of a lot money for payment of coaching fees, college
fees and other expenditure to take admission in institutions of higher
education. Our higher and technical education system is very expensive and
all citizens cannot afford it. The poor parents with meagre incomes are
unable to send their children for pursuing higher and technical and medical
education.
Students and their parents take education loan for higher studies. The
educational loans are given by banks to students for pursuing higher education.
However, the policy of providing education loan is defective on many counts.
In case of any disability arising due to any reason to students during the
course of their study, they are bound to leave their study in the mid way. In
such a difficult time, students as well as their parents find themselves in
difficult situations to pay off their education loan to banks and outstanding
fees to the educational institutions.
At present there is no statutory backing or proper guidelines regarding
exempting students and parents from payment of outstanding education loan
or education fees in case of untimely death, physical or mental disability of
the student due to any reason.
There is need to provide for a mechanism regarding waiving off
outstanding education loan and outstanding tuition fee or any other charges
in case of untimely death, physical or mental disability of the student due to
any reason. It will provide a relief to the affected families in their distressed
time when they have become incapable to pay any outstanding education
loan or fee due to any reason. There is also need for providing life insurance
cover to students who seek education loan for pursuing higher education so
that affected families may not face financial difficulties in the event of untimely
death of students or other eventuality.
Hence this Bill.
   NEW DELHI;    HASMUKHBHAI SOMABHAI PA TEL
July 5, 2021
4

 FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 4 of the Bill provides for payment of such amount of the
outstanding dues of tuition fee or any other fee to the educational institutions
in respect of those students who become physically or mentally disabled or
have died due to any reason,  as may be prescribed.  Clause 6 provides for
life insurance cover to every student who borrows education loan.
Clause 7 provides for payment of such amount of the outstanding dues of
education loan to the bank in respect of those students who become
physical or mental disabled or died due to any reason.  Clause 8 provides
that the Central Government shall constitute an Educational Loan Fund for
the payment of  premium of insurance of student and outstanding dues to
educational institutions and banks in case of untimely death, physical
disability or mental disability of the student due to any reason. The Bill,
therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated
Fund of India. It is estimated that an annual recurring expenditure of about
rupees five hundred crore may be involved from the Consolidated Fund of
India.
No non-recurring expenditure is likely to be involved.
5

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 10 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules
for carrying out of purpose of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters
of detail  only, the delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal
character.
6

LOK SABHA
_______
A
BILL
to provide for the exemption from payment of outstanding education
fees to educational institutions or education loan to banks
taken for pursuing higher studies in the event of death
of student or physical or mental disability of
student due to any reason and for matters
connected therewith.
————
(Shri Hasmukhbhai Somabhai Patel, M.P.)