I 
~kW~~ 
THE mON AND STEEl.; COMPANIES AMALGAMATION 
BILL,195 2 
[As lNTBODtJOBD IN 1'IIB Hous. OF TBII PEOPLE] 
A 
BlLI1 
to make special prooisWn, in the interests of the general public and the 
Union, for the amalgamation of certain companies closely connected 
with each other in the manufacture and production of iron and steel, 
and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto. 
WHEREAS for the purpose of securing, in the interests of the general 
public and the Unidn, the efficient and economical expansion and work-
ing of the iron and steel industry in India, it is essential that the Steel 
Corporation of Bengal, Limited, and the Indian Iron and Steel Company, 
Limited, which are engaged in the manufacture and production of iron 5 
and steel, should be amalgamated; 
AND WHEREAS to give effect to the scheme of the Central Gdvernment 
,for the expansion of the iron and steel industry and to make available 
further resources for such expansion, it is necessary that the said com-
I panies should be amalgamated with as little delay as possible; 10 
AND WHEREAS the amalgamation of the said companies is also in pur-
suance of successive recctmmendations made by the Tariff Board and the 
Tariff Commission; 
BE it enacted by Parliament as follows:-
1. Short title and commencement.-(l) This Act may be called. the l:i 
Iron and Steel Companies Amalgamation Act, 1952 . 
. ' (2) It shall be deemed to 'have come into force on the 29th day of 
October, 1952. 
2. DeflnltloDS.-In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
(a) "appointed day" means the 1st day of January, 1953; 20 
(b) "the dissolved company" means the Steel Corporation of 
Bengal, Limited, formed and registered under the Indian Companies 
Act, 1913 (VII of 1913); 
(c) "the Iron and Steel Company" means the Indian Irdn and 
Steel Company, Limited, formed and registered under the Indian 25 
Companies Act, 1913 (VII of 1913); 
(d) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this 
,.1 Act. 
S. Amalgamation of certain companies engaged In the Iron and steel 
Industry.-(l) As from the appointed day, the undertaking of the Steel 30 
Corporation of Bengal, Limited, shall be transferred to and shall vest in 
the Iron and Steel Company. 

2 
(2) The undertaking of the dissolved company shall be .... deemed to 
include all rights, powers, authorities and privileges and all property, 
movable or immovable, including cash balances, reserves, revenue 
balances, investments and all other interests and rights in or arising out 
6 of such property as may belong to, or be in the possession of, the dissolved 
company immediately before the appointed day, 0 and all books, accounts 0 0 
',10 
and documents relating thereto, and 0 shall also, be deemed to iriclude-_l 
debts, liabilities and obligations of whatever kind then existing of the 
dissolved company. 
4. Special provision for the transfer of certalD: items of property.-
For the purposes of this Act, all the profits of the dissolved company for 
the year 1952 and the revenue reserves of the dissolved company, when 
transferred to the Iron and Steel Company under the provisions of this 
Act, shall be deemed to be respectively the profits of the Iton and Steel 
15 Company for the sai~ year and revenue reserves of the said company: 
Provided that nothing in this section shall entitle a director or a 
managing agent of the Iron and Steel Company to any commission or 
other remuneration in res'pect of any profits so transferred. 
. 5. Saving of contracts, etc., to which the dissolved compauy Is a 
20 party.-Subject to the other provisions contained in this Act, all contracts, 
deeds, bonds, agreements and other instruments of whatever nature to 
which the dissolved company is a party, subsisting or having effect iJrone-
diately before the appOinted day, shall be of as full force and effect against 
or in favour of the Iron and Steel Company, as the case may be, and may 
25 be enforced as fully and effectually as if, instead of the dissolVed com-
pany, the Iron and Steel Company had been °a party thereto. i 
6. Saving of legal proceedings to which the dissolved company Is a' 
party.-If, on the appointed day, any suit, appeal or other legal proceed-
ing of whatever nature by or against the dissolved company is pending, 
30 the same shall not abate, be discontinued or be in any way prejudicially 
affected by reason of the transfer to the Iron and Steel Company of the 
undertaking of the dissolved cctmpany or of anything contained in this 
Act, but the suit, appeal or other proceeding may be continued, prosecuted 
and enforced by or against the Iron aQ,d Steel Company, in the same 
manner and to the same extent as it would or may be continued, 
36 prosecuted and enforced by or against the dissolved company if this 
Act had not been passed. . 
7. Tetms of transfer as respects shareholders In the dissolved com-
pany.-(l) As soon as may be after the appointed day, the Iron and Steel 
40 Company shall, subject to the rules, if any, made in this behalf, allot to 
every person registered as a shareholder in the dissolved company imme-
diately before the appointed day,-
50 
(a) if he is the holder of preference shares, as many preference 
shares in the Iron and Steel Company as are equivalent in number 
and value to the preference 0 shares held by him in the dissolved com-
pany immediately before the appointed day, and 
(b) if he is the holder of ordinary shares, four ordinary shares for 
rupees ten each in the Iron and Steel Company for every five ordinary 
shares for rupees ten each held by him in the dissolved company 
immediately before the appointed day, being the relative values of 
the two shares as determined by the Tariff Commission established 
under 1hc Tariff Commission Act, 19M (L df 1951). 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time 
being in force, any report made by the Tariff Com~ission before the com-
55 mencement of this Act respecting the value of ordmary shares in the Iron 

a~d Steel Company in relation to the value Of ordinary shares in the 
dIssolved company shall be decmed to have been validly made and shall 
not be called in question in any court. 
(3) Every shareholder in the dissolved company to whom a prefer-
ence share has been allotted. under this section shall be entitled-. ~ 
(i) to receive a fixed cumulative preferential dividend at the 
rate of five per cent. per annum as from the 1st day of January, 1953. 
on the capital for the time being paid up or credited as having been 
fully paid up thereon without deduction of Indian income-tax paid by 
the company; 10 
(ii) subject to the provisions of clause (i), to rank for dividend 
equally with the holders of preference shares in the Iron and Steel 
Company immediately before the appointed day, and in priority to 
all ather shareholders in that company; 
(iii) to be repaid, in the winding up of the Iron and Steel Com- 15 
pany, the amounts paid up or credited as having been fully paid up 
thereon, together with any arrears of dividends (whether earned or 
not), calculated to the date of repayment of capital, equally with the 
holders of preference shares in the Iron and Steel Company imme-
diately before the appointed day, and in priClI'ity to all other share- 20 
holders in that company; 
(iv) to exercise the same voting rights at general meetings of 
the Iron and Steel Company as are conferred on the holders of pre-
ference shares in that company immediately before the appointed 
day. 25 
(4) The Iron and Steel Company shall cause a notice to be published 
in the Gazette of India and shall also send by post to every person whose 
name was entered immediately before the appointed day in the registf"T 
of shareholders in the dissolved company, a notice giv.ng particulars C1f 
the terms hereinbefore set out as to the allotment of new shares and the 30 
disposal in the prescribed manner of fractional shares and an allotment 
letter for the new shares which shall also contain a statement of the frac-
tional shares (if any) to which a shareholder would be entitled if fraction-
al shares are to be allotted. 
(5) Every shareholder in the dissolved company whose name appears 36 
in the register of the dissolved company immediately before the appoint-
ed day shall be entitled, on presentation within the prescribed period of 
the allotment letter and the share certificate in respect of the shares 
held by him in the dissolved campany, to receive in due course share 
certificates of the Iron and Steel Company in accordance with the provi- !2 
sions of this Act and the rules made thereunder. 
(6) Any rights specified in sub-section (5) shall, d~ring the period 
beginning with the appointed day and ending with the day on which the 
Iron and Steel Company issues fresh share certificates to the shareholders 
of the dissolved company, be transferable in like manner as the shares ,0 
in the Iron and Steel Company themselves are" transferable, and the 
transferees of such rights shall be entitled, upon submission of the letter 
of allotment, the relative share certificate in the dissolved Company and 
the document of transfer, to share certificates in th~ same manner and to 50 
the same extent as the transferors would have been entitled. 
8. PrIority as between secured creditors of the dissolved company and 
secured ered1tors of the Iron and Steel Company.-Creditors of the dis-
solved company whose debts are secured by a mortga~e, ch~l'ge or lien .on 
the property of the dissolved company or any part thereof shall, WIth 

5 
4 
leferenc~ t~ si~ilar secured creditors of the Iron and Steel Company, have 
such prlOrtty In the repayment cJf. the debts as may be determined by 
agreement between the Iron and Steel Company and the secured credi-
tors of the dissolved company: 
Provided that in the absence of any such agreement the matter shall 
be "referred by the Iron and Steel Company to the determination of such 
person as may be appointed by the Central Government in this behalf, 
and the decision of such persdn shall be final and binding on the Iron 
and Steel Company and the secured creditors concerned. . 
lO 9. Provisions with respect to taxation.-(l) The Iron and Steel Com-
pany shall be taxable in respect of the profits and gains of th~ business 
carried on by the dissolved company before the appointed day td the 
saMe extent as the dissolved company would have been taxable if this 
Act had not been passed, ap.d the Iron and Steel Company shall, in its 
15 assessment, be entitled to claim all such allowances under sub-section (2) 
of section 10 of the Indian Income-tax Act, 1922 (XI of 1922) as the dissolv-
ed company could have claimed in its assessment if this Act had not been 
passed. 
(2) For the purposes of any law relating to taxation on inCdme, the 
20 original cost to the Iron and Steel Company of the buildings, machinery, 
plant or furniture of the dissolved company transferred to it by virtue 
of this Act shall be deemed to be the written down value thereof, as 
reduced by the initial depreciation permitted by sub-section (2) of section 
10 of the Indian Income-Tax Act, 1922 (XI of 1922), which has been or 
25 could have been computed by the dissolved company on the appointed 
day if this Act had not been passed. 
10. Payment of int.im dividends to shareholders In the dissolved com-
paDy.-If the profits of the dissolved company warrant such a course, the 
directors of the dissolved company may, at any time before the appointed 
30 day, declare the following dividends as being payable-
35 
(a) to the holders df preference share~ immediately before the 
appointed daYI a dividend at the rate of five per cent. per annum dn 
the amount paid up without deduction of Indian income-tax payable 
by the dissolved· company for the period commencing on the 1st day 
of June, 1952, and ending with the 31st day of December, 1952; 
(b) to the holders of ordinary shares whose names appear on 
the register of the company on the date of such payment, an interim 
dividend not exceeding two and a half per cent. on the amount paid 
up or credited as having been fully paid up thereon without deduction 
of Indian income-tax payable by the dissolved company for the period 
commencing on the 1st day of January, 1952, and ending with the 
31st day of December, 1952. 
11. Provisions respecting exlstlng ofIlcers and other servants of the 
diuolved company.-Every officer or other servant (including within 
45 that expression auditors but excluding therefrom directors, managing 
agents and Ldndon Committee Members) employed immediately before 
the appointed day in the dissolved company shall, as from the appointed 
day, become an officer or other servant, as the case may be, of the Iron 
and Steel Company and shall hold his office or service therein by the 
same tenure and upon the same terms and conditions and with the same 
rights and privileges as to pensicln or gratuity as he would have held the 
same under the dissolved co~pany if this A.;:t h~d. Q.ot been passed, and 

5 
shall continue to do so unless and until he is duly removed from .his 
employment in the Iron and Steel Company or until his terms and condi-
tions of employment are duly altered by that Company. 
12. Position of directors of the dissolved. company.-Every director of I} 
the dissolved company holding office as such immediately before the 
appointed day shall become, as from the appointed day, a director of the 
Iron and Steel Company, in addition to the other directors of the Iron 
and Steel Cctmpany holding office as such before the appointed day, and 
shall, subject to the provisions of the articles of association of the Iron 10 
and Steel Company, hold his office and act in all respects as if he had 
been duly appointed under the said articles. 
13., Dissolution of the Steel Corporation of Bengal, Llmlted.-As from 
the appointed day-
(a) the Steel Corporation of Bengal, Limited, shall be dissolved lr 
and thereafter no person shall make, assert or take any claims, de-
mands or proceedings against the dissolved company cJr against a 
director or officer thereof in his capacity as such director or officer, 
except in so far as may be necessary, for enforcing the provisions of 
this Act; 
(b) the right of every shareholder to or in respect of any share 
in the dissolved company shall be extinguished, and thereafter no 
such shareholder shall make, assert or take any claims or demands or 
proceedings i~ respect of any such share except as provided in this 
Act. 
14. Power to make rules for facllitating amalgamatlon.-The Central 26 
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make such inci-
dental, consequential or supplementary provisions as in its opinion are 
necessary for fully and effectually carrying out the purposes of this Act, 
and without prejudice to the generality of such power, provision may be 30 
made in such rules-
(a) for the allotting or appropriation by the Iron and Steel Com-
pany of any shares, debentures, policies or other like interests in that 
company which are to be allotted or appropriated under this Act by 
that company to or from any person; 
(b) for the disposal of shares in the dissolved company which do 
~ 
not represent me fully paid up share in the Iron and Steel Company 
under clause (b) of sub-section (1) of section 7, whether by the sur-
render to the Iron and Steel Company of the fractional certificates 
relating thereto with other fractional certificates so as to represent .a 
in all one fully paid up share, or, at the option of the sliareholder, by 
the surrender of the fractional certificates to the Iron and Steel Com-
pany for sale by the company on his account; 
(e) for fixing the period within which any action required to be 
taken under this Act may be taken; 
(d) for the alteration, notwithstanding anything to the contrary 
contained in the Indian Companies Act, 1913 (VII of 1913), of the 
memctrandum or articles of association of the Iron and Steel Com-
pany for the purpose of increasing the capital of the com-
pany or the borrowing powers of the directors thereof or for the pur- 60 
pose of securing the representation of the Central Government on 
the Board of Directors of the cO'mpany or for any other purpose; 

6 
(e) for requiring any person concerned ·with the keeping 01 the 
register of the holders of any shares, securities eft investments now, 
transferred to and vesting in the Iron and Steel Company to forth-
with register the name of the Iron and Steel Company therein, and td 
6 issue to the Iron and Steel Company the appropriate documents of 
title relating to the shares, securities or investments transferred to 
and vesting in it. 
15. Repeal of Ordinance VOl of 1952.-The Iron and Steel Companies 
Amalgamation Ordinance, 1952 (VIII of 1952), is hereby repealed. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Tariff Board and the Tariff Commission recommended on successive 
occasions that in the larger interests of the steel industry in India. the 
Indian Iron and Steel Co., Ltd., should be amalgamated with the Steel 
Corporation of Bengal, Ltd. as such amalgamation would eliminate dupli-
cation and waste and ultimately tend to reduce costs of production. In 
view of the serious shortage of steel in India for essential nation-building 
activities, it has also become i,mperative that the schemes approved by 
Government for the expansion of th~ steel production capacity of these 
Companies should be given effect to without further delay and that neces-
sary financial and other resources should be made available to thero.. 
Effective action in this behalf is possible only after the amalgamation of 
the Companies. In view of the urgency of the matter, and the desirability 
of avoiding any speculation in the market. it was decided that an Ordi-
nance should be promulgated. for securing th~ amalgamation. The Gov-
ernment of India accordingly promulgated the Iron and Steel Companies 
Amalgamation Ordinance, 1952, on the 29th October 1952. 
The present Bill is intended to replace the Ordinance. 
T. T. KRISHNAMACHARI. 
NEW'DELHI; 
The 6th November, 1952. 

HOUSE OF THE PEOPLE 
A 
BILL 
to make special provision, m the interests of the general 
public and the Union, for· the amalgamatiQn of certain com" 
panies closely connected with each other in the manufacture 
a.nd production of iron and steel, and for matters connected 
therewith or incidental thereto. 
(8hri T. T. K rishnama,ch,ari, 
Minister for Oommerce and Indu8try) 
aIPD ···LAD-B73 M of Law-l 4· 11·52-1.500 