1
THE NURSING PROFESSION (ABOLITION OF SERVICE BOND
AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS) BILL, 2014
By
SHRI ANTO ANTONY, M.P.
A
BILL
to regulate the nursing profession by providing for abolition of requirement of service
bond or withholding of original educational documents of students or employees by
institutions, hospitals or establishments in nursing sector and to safeguard the
interests of employees and nursing students from all kinds of harassment
and exploitation and for matters connected therewith.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-fifth  Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Nursing Profession (Abolition of Service Bond and
Miscellaneous Provisions)  Act, 2014.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Bill No. 112 of  2014
TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Short title,
extent and
commence-
ment.
5

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(i) “appropriate Government” means in the case of a State, the State Government
and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(ii) “service bond” in relation to a nursing profession refers to a system whereby
a person, who is a qualified nursing service provider or a student of a nursing course
in an institution, is compelled to enter into an agreement with an employer or an
institution engaged in nursing profession, as the case may be, with any of the following
obligations,—
(a) minimum period of service to be rendered by an employee or a student
on successful completion of nursing course;
(b) depositing of original mark sheets, certificates or other such documents
and withholding the same beyond a reasonable period required for verification
of such documents or obtaining any other form of sureties from a student or an
employee, as the case may be; and
(c) payment of compensation to an institution or an employer in case the
student or employee leaves prior to completion of period stipulated in the
agreement by way of signing a bond by whatever name called;
(iii) “certificate” means original mark sheet, degree or provisional certificate
showing the qualification of a student or an employee and includes conduct certificate,
transfer certificate and experience certificate;
(iv) “employee” means a person who possesses qualification of Auxiliary Nursing
Midwife or General Nursing and Midwifery or Bachelor's or Master's degree in a
nursing course and is rendering service as a nurse in a hospital, nursing home or
nursing institution;
(v) “employer” means a person who owns or is in-charge of a hospital or nursing
home or clinical establishment or nursing institution or who is authorised to make
appointments, promotions or monitor the performance of the employees;
(vi) “institution” means an institution offering courses such as Auxiliary Nursing
Midwife, General Nursing and Midwifery, Bachelor's or Master's degree in nursing or
any other equivalent course connected with nursing;
(vii) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act; and
(viii) “student” means a student pursuing any course such as Auxiliary Nursing
Midwife, General Nursing and Midwifery, Bachelor's or Master's degree in nursing or
any other equivalent course connected with nursing.
3. (1) The practice of obtaining service bond from students or employees by nursing
institutions, nursing homes, clinical establishments or hospitals is hereby abolished.
(2) No institution or employer shall—
(a) compel or force any student or employee to execute service bond in any
form;
(b) force or compel any employee to execute service bond to continue in service;
(c) withhold any certificate or other such documents of any student or employee
on any ground beyond a period of thirty days from the date of submission of certificates;
(d) demand any compensation, damage or surety amount claim for release of the
certificates or other such documents from any employee or student who wish to be
relieved from the service of such institution or employer; and
(e) take any step, directly or indirectly, which aims at promoting the practice of
obtaining service bond.
Definitions.
Abolition of
service bonds.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
4. (1) The appropriate Government shall, as soon as may be, designate an officer not
below the rank of District Magistrate, in every district for the purpose of implementing the
provisions of this Act.
(2) The officer designated under sub-section (1) shall be assisted by such number of
officers and staff as may be prescribed by the appropriate Government.
(3) The designated officer shall perform the following functions—
(i) provide a helpline number to the students and employees to lodge complaints
against harassment or exploitation by the institutions or employers;
(ii) entertain complaints of continuance of practice of obtaining service bonds
by nursing institutions, hospitals, nursing homes or clinical establishments;
(iii) issue show cause notices to the institutions or employers on finding
prima facie evidence of violation of the provisions of this Act;
(iv) conduct inspections of the institutions or employers, as the case may be, on
the basis of complaints received from the students or employees, as the case may be;
(v) compile and maintain a database of students and employees of nursing
profession;
(vi) recommend compensation to the family of those students or employees who
commit suicide due to harassment by institutions or employers or become incapacitated
due to any reason; and
(vii) recommend to the appropriate Government such action, as it may deem
appropriate, including cancellation of registration or withdrawal of affiliation of such
institutions, hospitals, nursing establishments or nursing homes which work in violation
of the provisions of this Act:
Provided that before recommending cancellation of registration or withdrawal of
affiliation of any institution or employer, such institution or employer shall be given
reasonable opportunity of being heard in the matter.
5. (1) Whoever violates the provisions of section 3, shall be punished with a fine,
which may extend to rupees five lakh.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Indian Penal Code, 1860, whoever
abets the suicide of a student or an employee by harassing such student or employee, shall
be punished with imprisonment for a term of two years, and with fine which may extend to
rupees ten lakh.
6. (1) the appropriate Government may confer, on Executive Magistrate, the powers of
Judicial Magistrate of the first class or of the second class for the trial of offences under this
Act; and, on such conferment of powers, the Executive Magistrate, on whom the powers are
so conferred, shall be deemed, for the purposes of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, to
be a Judicial Magistrate of the first class, or of the second class, as the case may be.
(2) An offence under this Act may be tried summarily by a Magistrate.
7. (1) The appropriate Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make
rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act by the Central Government shall be laid, as soon as
may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total
period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or
both the Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect
only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such
Designating an
officer for
implementation
of provisions of
this Act.
Punishment.
Offences to be
tried by
Executive
Magistrate.
Power to make
rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
45 of 1860.
2 of 1974.

4
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously
done under that rule.
(3) Every rule made by the State Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as
may be after it is made, before the State legislature.

5
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Nursing profession is the backbone of health sector of a country and offers abundant
career opportunities both within the country and overseas. However, at the same time,
exploitation of nursing staff is also increasing. Many nursing institutions, hospitals and
nursing homes are exploiting employees on pretexts such as bond, internship, skill training,
etc.
The bond system forces the nursing staff to render 12-14 hours work continuously in
a day or two shifts at one stretch without reasonable hours of rest. Employees are paid very
meagre salary and are deprived of service benefits, medical leaves and protection from
communicable diseases. They are subjected to constant harassment by the employer.
Employees have to work even if they are not keeping well. Factors such as increasing work
load, harassment, insecure job environment, meagre salary and lack of maintaining reasonable
nurse-patient ratio are causing adverse effect on the physical and mental health of employees.
The working environment is also seriously affecting their personal and family life, which is a
matter of serious concern as majority of the employees in this profession are women and
come from economically weaker sections of the society. Due to bond conditions and
impounding of certificates by the employers, employees have no option other than submitting
themselves to the exploitation which is in violation of their fundamental rights.
Increasing number of work-induced diseases as well as deaths and suicides among
nursing staff shows their pathetic condition which cannot be allowed to continue in a
welfare State. Drastic decline in enrollment in nursing courses shows the changed attitude
towards nursing profession which may result in dearth of nursing professionals in future.
This trend is bound to adversely affect our health sector.
Frequent strikes by the nursing staff in various hospitals is seriously affecting the
health sector and high incidence of suicides among nurses due to stress urgently demand
for certain protective and welfare measures for the nursing staff to address their genuine
grievances in an effective manner. In order to regain the reputation of nursing profession and
for maintaining standard of nursing profession within the health sector in the country,
provisions to safeguard the employees from the threat of bonded labour and harassment are
urgently required to be enacted.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; ANTO  ANTONY
July  17, 2014.

6
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 4 of the Bill provides for providing of helpline number, compilation of data of
nursing students and employees by the designated officer. The expenditure relating to
States shall be borne out of the Consolidated Funds of the respective States. However, the
expenditure in respect of Union territories shall be borne out of the Consolidated Fund of
India. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of
India. However, at this stage, it is not possible to quantify the exact amount of recurring and
non-recurring expenditure likely to be involved. However, it is estimated that a recurring
expenditure of rupees two hundred crore will  be incurred per annum.
A non-recurring expenditure of rupees two hundred crore is also likely to be involved.

7
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 7 of the Bill empowers the appropriate Government to make rules for carrying
out the purposes of the Bill. The rules will relate to matters of detail only. The delegation of
legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character.

GMGIPMRND—2466LS(S3)—05-11-2014.
LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to regulate the nursing profession by providing for abolition of requirement of service
bond or withholding of original educational documents of students or employees by
institutions, hospitals or establishments in nursing sector and to safeguard the
interests of employees and nursing students from all kinds of harassment
and exploitation and for matters connected therewith.
————
(Shri Anto Antony, M.P .)