1
THE POST-POLIO SYNDROME (EDUCATION, TRAINING AND
AWARENESS) BILL, 2010
By
SHRI BALKRISHNA KHANDERAO SHUKLA, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for education and training in and creating awareness about post-polio
syndrome and for matters connected therewith.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-first Year of  the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Post-Polio Syndrome (Education, Training and
Awareness) Act, 2010.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and
commence-
ment.
Bill No. 112 of 2010
TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, "post-polio syndrome" means a
medical condition where such symptoms of polio as progressive muscle and joint weakness,
pain or muscle atrophy, breathing or swallowing problems, sleep related breathing disorders
or general fatigue and exhaustion with minimal activity occur at a later stage in a person
affected by polio.
3. On and from the date of commencement of this Act, the Central Government shall—
(i) provide education and training in the field of post-polio syndrome to health
professionals;
(ii) create awareness in general public about post-polio syndrome;
(iii) make study of post-polio syndrome an integral part of the healthcare system
and medical education in the country;
(iv) provide incentives to non-Governmental Organisations working in the field
of post-polio syndrome; and
(v) take such other steps, as it may deem necessary, to provide adequate care
and to promote the welfare of persons suffering from post-polio syndrome.
4. It shall be compulsory for every medical college or institution to provide teaching
and training in post-polio syndrome within a period of two years from the date of
commencement of this Act.
5. (1) The Central  Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Definitions.
Certain steps
to be taken by
Central
Government
in regard to
post-polio
syndrome.
Medical
colleges to
impart
teaching in
post-polio
syndrome.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Post-Polio Syndrome (PPS) is a condition that affects polio survivors years after their
recovery from an initial acute attack of the poliomyelitis virus. Post-Polio Syndrome is mainly
characterized by new weakening in muscles that were previously affected by polio infection
and also in muscles that were seemingly unaffected.
Post-Polio Syndrome is rarely life-threatening. However, untreated respiratory muscle
weakness may result in life-threatening condition of the patients and weakness in swallowing
muscles may result in aspiration pneumonia.
The severity of residual weakness and disability after acute poliomyelitis tends to
predict the development of post-polio syndrome. Patients who had minimal symptoms from
the original illness will most likely experience only mild post-polio syndrome symptoms.
People originally hit hard by the polio virus and who attained a greater recovery may develop
a more severe case of post-polio syndrom with a greater loss of muscle function and more
severe fatigue.
Through years of studies, scientists at the National Institute of Neurological Disorders
and Stroke and at other institutions have shown that the weakness of post-polio syndrome
is a very slowly progressing condition marked by periods of stability followed by new
declines in the ability to carry out usual daily activities.
At present, there is no effective pharmaceutical or specific treatment for the syndrome
itself. Although there is no cure, there are recommended management strategies. Seeking
medical advice from a physician experienced in treating neuromuscular disorders is one of
them. Learning about post-polio syndrom is important for polio survivors and their families.
Management of post-polio syndrome may involve changes in lifestyle. Support groups that
encourage self-help, group participation and positive action can be helpful. Presently, no
medical intervention has been found to stop the deterioration of surviving neurons.
Presently, there are eight million polio patients in India. But, unfortunately, society is
largely ignorant about the onset of post-polio syndrome. Therefore, it is the responsibility of
the Central Government to provide education, training and create awareness about the
disease among the medical professionals and people particularly among persons suffering
from post-polio syndrome in the country. With right kind of education and awareness, a large
number of people can be saved from the sufferings of post-polio syndrome. Therefore, there
is an urgent need to bring a legislative proposal on the subject to address this problem.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; BALKRISHNA  KHANDERAO  SHUKLA
August 10, 2010.
3

FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides that the Central Government shall take steps to provide
education and training in post-polio syndrome to health professionals, create awareness
among general public and provide incentives to Non-Governmental Organisations working
in the field of post-polio syndrome. Clause 4 provides for medical colleges to impart teaching
in post-polio syndrome. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the
Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that an annual recurring expenditure of about
rupees five crore will be involved.
An non-recurring expenditure of about rupees one hundred crore is also likely to be
involved.
4

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGA TED  LEGISLATION
Clause 5 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of the
legislative power is of a normal character.
5

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for education and training in and creating awareness about post-polio
syndrome and for matters connected therewith.
————
(Shri Balkrishna Khanderao Shukla, M.P. )
GMGIPMRND—4657LS(S3)—22-10-2010.