1
THE RIGHT TO INFORMATION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2013
A
BILL
to amend the Right to Information Act, 2005.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-fourth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Right to Information (Amendment) Act, 2013.
(2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 3rd day of June, 2013.
2. In section 2 of the Right to Information Act, 2005 (hereinafter referred to as the
principal Act), in clause (h), the following Explanation shall be inserted, namely:––
‘Explanation. ––The expression “authority or body or institution of self-
government established or constituted” by any law made by Parliament shall not
include any association or body of individuals registered or recognised as political
party under the Representation of the People Act, 1951.’.
3. After section 31 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted, namely:—
“32. Notwithstanding anything contained in any judgment, decree or order of
any court or commission, the provisions of this Act, as amended by the Right to
Short title
and com-
mencement.
Amendment
of section 2.
22 of 2005.
43 of 1951.
Insertion of
new section 32.
Validation.
Bill No. 112 of 2013
5
10
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
Information (Amendment) Act, 2013, shall have effect and shall be deemed always to
have effect, in the case of any association or body of individuals registered or recognised
as political party under the Representation of the People Act, 1951 or any other law for
the time being in force and the rules made or notifications issued thereunder.”.
43 of 1951.

3
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Right to Information Act, 2005 was enacted by the Government for setting out a
framework for effectuating the right to information for citizens and to secure access to
information under the control of public authorities, in order to promote transparency and
accountability in the working of every public authority.
2. The Central Information Commission in one of its decision dated 03.06.2013 has held
that the political parties namely AICC/INC, BJP , CPI (M), CPI, NCP and BSP are public
authorities under section 2(h) of the said Act. The Government considers that the CIC has
made a liberal interpretation of section 2(h) of the said Act in its decision. The political parties
are neither established nor constituted by or under the Constitution or by any other law
made by Parliament. Rather, they are registered or recognised under the Representation of
the People Act, 1951 and the rules/orders made or issued thereunder.
3. It has also been observed that there are already provisions in the Representation of
the People Act, 1951 as well as in the Income-tax Act, 1961 which deals with the transparency
in the financial aspects of political parties and their candidates.
4. Declaring a political party as public authority under the RTI Act would hamper its
smooth internal working, which is not the objective of the said Act and was not envisaged by
Parliament under the RTI Act. Further, the political rivals may misuse the provisions of RTI
Act, thereby adversely affecting the functioning of the political parties.
5. In view of above, the Government has decided to amend the RTI Act to keep the
political parties out of the purview of the RTI Act, with a view to remove the adverse effects
of the said decision of the CIC. It is also necessary to give retrospective effect to the
proposed amendment with effect from the date of the said decision of CIC, that is, 3rd day of
June, 2013.
6. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects.
V . NARAYANASAMY
N
EW DELHI;
The  5th August, 2013.

ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE RIGHT TO INFORMATION ACT, 2005
( 22 OF 2005)
* * * * *
2.   In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, —
* * * * *
(h) “public authority” means any authority or body or institution or self-govern-
ment established or constituted—
(a) by or under the Constitution;
(b) by any other law made by Parliament;
(c) by any other law made by State Legislature;
(d) by notification issued or order made by the appropriate Government,
and includes any—
(i) body owned, controlled or substantially financed;
(ii) non-Government organisation substantially financed,
directly or indirectly by funds provided by the appropriate Government;
* * * * *
Definitions.
4

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to amend the Right to Information Act, 2005.
————
(Shri V . Narayanasamy, Minister of State in the Ministry of Personnel,
Public Grievances and Pensions)
GMGIPMRND—1750LS(S4)—07-08-2013.