As INTRODUCED IN Lok SABHA

28 10७५ 2०४

Bill No._113 of 2000

THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2000
By
Seri Vitas Murremwar, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Constitution of India.
Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-first Year of the Republic of India as follows: —
1. (0) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2000.
2. After article 151 of the Constitution, the following heading and articles shall be
inserted, namely:—
5 CHAPTER VI — PLANNING COMMISSION OF INDIA

151A. (1) There shall be set up by the Government of India a Planning
Commission which shall consist of a Chief Planning Commissioner and two other
Planning Commissioners.

(2) The Chief Planning Commissioner and two other Planning Commissioners shall
10 be appointed for a term of five years or until they attain the age of sixty-five years, whichever

Short title.

Insertion of
new articles
ISIA to ISIC.

Setting up of
Planning
‘Commission.


Duty of
Planning
Commission.

Planning
Commission
Secretariat,

2

(3) The appointment of the Chief Planning Commissioner and two other Planning
Commissioners shall be made by President on the advice of a Committee comprising the
Chairman of the Council of States, the Prime Minister, the Speaker of the House of the
People and Leaders of Opposition of both Houses of Parliament.

(4) The terms and conditions of the appointment of the Chief, Planning Commissioner
and two other Planning Commissioners shall be such as may be prescribed by or under any
law made by Parliament.

118. (1) Tt shall be the duty of the Planning Commission to prepare plans at the
expiration of every five year or at such earlier time as it may consider necessary for the
economic and alround development of the country,

(2) While preparing plans, the Planning Commission may take into consideration the
following factors, namely:—

(a) the sectors which require urgent attention;

(b) the views of all the Chief Ministers of the States and Administrators of the
Union Territories, as the case may be;

(c) the backwardness of different areas of the country:

Provided that the Planning Commission may while declaring an area as a backward
area, take into account the industrialisation, agricultural production in that area and such
other factors as it may consider necessary.

(3) The Planning Commission shall, after preparation of the plans, forward the same
to the Government of India.

(4) It shall be the responsibility of the Government of India to allocate sufficient
funds for the implementation of all the plans framed by the Planning Commission,

(S) It shall be the responsibility of the Planning Commission to monitor the progress
of each project and plan framed by it and recommend improvements to the Government of
India for carly implementation of those plans.

1516. (1) There shall be set up a Secretariat to be known as Planning Commission
Secretariat.

(2) The Secretariat shall be headed by a Chief Advisor and shall consist of such
number of Joint Advisors, Assistant Advisors and such other officers and staff as may
be necessary for the efficient functioning of the Secretariat.

(3) The terms and conditions of appointment of Officers and other staff of the Planning
Commission Secretariat shall be such as may be prescribed by or under any law made by
Parliament in this behalf.

(4) The Secretariat shall assist the Planning Commission in carrying out its functions.


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

Since the last fifty years of our Independence, eight five year plans have been
implemented and ninth five year plan is under implementation. The country has not been
able to make much progress despite all these plans, Although the Planning Commission
has been framing plans and projects, yet they are not implemented due to insufficient
allocation of funds by the Government. Moreover, the recommendations of the Planning
Commission are purely recommendatory in nature and are not binding on the Government.

‘The plans and projects framed by the Planning Commission remain only on paper as
the Government does not allocate sufficient funds for their implementation, Even for those
projects for which sufficient funds have been allocated, the progress has been very slow and
as a result the cost of project is escalating. Among those plans and projects of which could
not he implemented are power projects and projects which are connected with infrastructural
facilities.

Majority of population of our country lives in utter poverty and does not have even

basic facilities of life. The purpose of which the Planning Commission was set up has not
been achieved in as much as the plans and projects framed by them are not at all implemented.

The Planning Commission does not have a statutory status at present. It is, therefore,
proposed to amend the Constitution with a view to giving the present Planning Commission
a statutory status. And also to provide that the Central Government shall allocate sufficient
funds for implementing the plans framed by the Planning Commission, ‘This measure
would accelerate our economic progress.

Hence this Bill.

New DELHI; VILAS MUTTEMWAR
26 June, 2000


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM.

Clause 2 of the Bill provides for the establishment of an independent Planning
Commission consisting of a Chief Planning Commissioner and two other Planning
Commissioners. It also provides for the establishment of a Planning Commission Secretariat
consisting of such officers and staff as may be required.

Already a Planning Commission consisting of members and other officers is in
existence, Therefore, no expenditure will be involved from the Consolidated Fund of India
in respect of the proposed Planning Commission. However, additional expenditure may be
involved from the Consolidated Fund of India in respect of salary etc. to be paid to some
more officers who may have to be appointed for efficient discharge of the functions of the
Planning Commission. Some more office accommodation, furniture etc, may also have to
be provided for this purpose. It is estimated that an annual recurring expenditure of about
Rs. 10 crore is likely to be involved from the Consolidated Fund of India.

A non-recurring expenditure of about Tupees 3 crore is also likely to be involved.


LOK SABHA

A
BILL

further to amend the Constitution of India.

(Shri Vilas Muttemwar, 34.72)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—1628LS—13-7-2000.

०८८...