AS INTRODUCED IN LoK SABHA

10६६ 1993

Bill No, 113 of 1999

THE COMPULSORY VOTING BILL, 1999
* By
‘Suri Vitas Murremwar, M.P.
A
BILL

| provide for compulsory voting by the electorate in the country and for matters
connected therewith.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fiftieth Year of the Republic of India as

1. (0) This Act may be called the Compulsory Voting Act, 1999. Shortti le,
and
(2) It extends to the whole of India, Sas

(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
ion in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. (J) It shall be compulsory for every voter, who is eligible to vote at an election, to Compulsory
his right to vote when called for by the Election Commission
Provided that a voter may be exempted from exercising his vote when he is physically
tated from an illness of a serious nature and produces a medical certificate from a
medical practitioner testifying to such incapacity.


Reward for
voting.

Power to make
rules.

2

>
constituency for the casting of votes by those persons who are not in a position to a
their votes at polling booths.

3. Any person, who fails 10 cast his vote shall be liable to—
( a fine of rupees one hundred, or
(ii) one day imprisonment, or

(iii) both, in case of deliberate avoidence;
(iv) forfeiture of his ration card, and
(0) be ineligible for contesting any election for a period of six years from:
date of conviction:

Provided that if such person is an employee of the Union Government or any
sector undertaking owned or controlled by Union Government, such person shall also!

punished with—
(@) forfeiture of four days salary,

(0) delay in promotion for a period of one year.

4. Any person who inspite of his illness or physical incapacity has exercised his rig

to vote at an election or any person who has exercised his right to vote at all elections

during a period of twenty years preceding the commencement of this Act without a

break shall be—

(a provided with a certificate of reward of value of rupees one

(ii) given preference in jobs in the services under the Central Govern

(iii) given preference in admission to the institutions of higher technical

5. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make

carrying out the purpose of this Act.



STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

| is very sad feature that is revealed at all elections that the number of voters who
ly cast their votes is far less than those eligible. The average number of votes polled
‘around 50 per cent. It is a glaring commentary on the responsibility of citizens that the
of the country's democratic institutions has been left to be decided by about 50 per
of the electorate. Since the trend of voting from time to time does not show any
jable increase in the number of those who exercise their franchise, time has come
o ensure that all the citizens exercise their sovereign right to choose their representatives, so
the elections may reflect the will of the whole electorate and not merely that of a part of
During the previous elections, in number of States the voting was less than 40 per cent.
in number of cases people had boycotted elections and thus did not vote deliberately.

With a view to increasing the voting percentage, the present Bill purports to make it
sory for every eligible voter to vote and to provide for exemption only in cases
the voter is physically incapacitated due to illness of serious nature. In these cases
also Election Commission shall arrange for mobile booths who are unable to cast their
yotes at polling booths.

Since the provision is being made compulsory, punishment is also to be given to those
who do not vote at elections. However, reward is also proposed to be given to those
persons who vote at elections insptie of their illness or without any break.

Hence this Bill.

New DELHI, VILAS MUTTEMWAR
November 8, 1999.


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 2 of the Bill provides that the Election Commission shall make arran; |
for mobile vans for the purpose of casting of votes by those persons who are not in
position to cast their votes at polling booths, in each constituencies. Clause 4 of the Bil
provides for certificate of reward of value of rupees one thousand to those persons who
inspite of their illness or physical incapacity, excercise their right to vote at an election or to
those who exercise their right at all elections held during a period of twenty years it
the commencement of this Act without any break.

This Bill, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. | [|
is likely to involve a recurring expenditure of about rupees one crore per annum.

‘A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees one lakh is also likely to be invol



MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

| 5 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
ses of the Bill which will relate to matters of detail only. The delegation of legislative

is, therefore, of a normal character.



LOK SABHA

A
BILL.

to provide for compulsory voting by the electorate in the country and for
connected therewith.

(Shri Vilas Muttemwar, M.P.)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—1971LS—30-11-1999.