As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

25 Bye ४५००)

Bill No. 113 of 2005

THE INDIAN PENAL CODE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2005
By
Suri C.K. CHANDRAPPAN, M.P.

A

BILL
further to amend the Indian Penal Code, 1860.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as

follows:——
1. (/) This Act may be called the Indian Penal Code (Amendment) Act, 2005. Short title and
? commencement.
(2) It shall come into force at once.
of 1860 5 2. In section 375 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860,— Amendment

(i) in the thirdly description, after the words, "any person in whom she is interested sa eid
y ? yp

in fear of death or of hurt" the words;
"or when her consent has been obtained by a person using his position in
the Government, business or public life or by luring her by offer of monetary or
10 other gains in lieu of her consent.”. shall be added; and
(ii) Inthe sixthly description, for the words, "sixteen years", the words "eighteen
years" shall be substituted.



STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

The principle of gender justice and equality has been given paramount importance in
our Constitution. But, in practice it is regularly flouted. This amendment is moved with a
purpose to ensure gender justice and equality before law without any discrimination based
on sex. Incidents of rape in the country are increasing day by day. And in many cases, it has
been found that the victim is lured into giving consent by using the influentiai position, the
man is enjoying in Government, business or in public life. It is also a known fact that the
consent is obtained by offering woman huge amount of money and wealth or other gains. It
happens generally when the woman is employed in some organisation. It also happens when
the woman is relatively poor and needy.

As per law, a person is considered major only when he or she completes the age of
eighteen. When a person is major, he or she can freely decide about his or her marriage,
property transactions, etc. But, it is strange to note that the Indian Penal Code takes a
different view and section 375 says that sexual intercourse with a woman under sixteen years
of age, 7.९. when she is a minor, whether with or without her consent would be treated as rape.

This contradiction should be removed. At the age of sixteen, no law considers a
person major or adult. If a girl is married by the parents at the age of sixteen, it is considered
as child marriage and hence an offence.

In this context it is high time that the Indian Penal Code, 1860 is amended to provide
that sexua! intercourse with a woman under eighteen years of age, with or without her
consent, would be considered as rape.

As it is today, section 375 of Indian Penal Code is heavily tilted against women and it
provides loopholes for the rapist to escape punishment. It may be noted that in a recent case
of rape, the judgment of Kerala High Court let the rapists escape punishment as the girl was
sixteen. In this context, it is necessary that justice is ensured to women.

Hence this Bill.

New DELHI; ; C.K. CHANDRAPPAN
July 26, 2005.



ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE INDIAN PENAL CODE
(45 of 1860)
(Sexual offences)

* * * * % *

375. A man is said to commit "rape" who, except in the case hereinafter excepted, has
sexual intercourse with a woman under circumstances falling under any of the six following
descriptions: —

* 4 हा * * *

Thirdly.—With her consent, when her consent has been obtained by putting her or
any person in whom she is interested in fear of death or of hurt.

* * 2 * * *

Sixthly.—With or without her consent, when she is under sixteen years of age.

cd * * cos ¥ *

* * * * * *

Rape.


LOK SABHA

A
BILL

further to amend the Indian Penal Code, | 860

(Shri CLK. Chandrappan, M.P.)

MGIPMRND—2221LS(S$1)—12-8-2005.