5 
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA 
Bill No. 113 of 2025 
THE GOVERNMENT OF UNION TERRITORIES (AMENDMENT) 
BILL, 2025 
A  
BILL 
further to amend the Government of Union Territories Act, 1963. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-sixth Year of the Republic of India 
as follows:–– 
1. ( 1) This Act may be called the Government of Union Territories
(Amendment) Act, 2025. 
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
Short title and 
commencement. 

2 
Amendment of 
section 45. 
2. In section 45 of the Government of Union Territories Act, 1963, after
sub-section (5), the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:–– 
“(5A) A Minister, who for any period of thirty consecutive days during 
holding the office as such, is arrested and detained in custody, on allegation of 
committing an offence under any law for the time being in force, which is 
punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to  five years or 
more, shall be removed from his office, by the President on the advice of the 
Chief Minister to be tendered by the thirty-first day, after being taken in such 
custody: 
Provided that if the advice of the Chief Minister, for the removal of such 
Minister is not tendered to the President by the thirty-first day, he shall cease 
to be a Minister, with effect from the day falling thereafter: 
Provided further that in case of the Chief Minister, who for any period 
of thirty consecutive days during holding the office as such, is arrested and 
detained in custody, on allegation of committing an offence under any law for 
the time being in force, which is punishable with imprisonment for a term 
which may extend to  five years or more, shall tender his resignation by the 
thirty-first day after such arrest and detention, and if he does not tender his 
resignation, he shall cease to be the Chief Minister, with effect from the day 
falling thereafter: 
Provided also that nothing in this sub -section shall prevent such 
Chief Minister or Minister from being subsequ ently appointed as the 
Chief Minister or a Minister, by the President, on his release from custody, as 
per sub-section (1).”. 
5 
10 
15 
20 
20 of 1963. 

3 
 
  STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The elected representatives represent hopes and aspirations of the people of 
India. It is expected that they rise above political interests and act only in the 
public interest and for the welfare of people. 
2. It is expected that the character and conduct of Ministers holding the 
office should be beyond any ray of suspicion. 
3. A Minister, who is facing allegation of serious criminal offences, arrested 
and detained in custody, may thwart or hinder the canons of consti tutional 
morality and principles of good governance and eventually diminish the 
constitutional trust reposed by people in him. 
4. There is, however, no provision under the Government of Union 
Territories Act, 1963 (20 of 1963) for removal of the Chief Mini ster or a Minister 
who is arrested and detained in custody on account of serious criminal charges. 
5. In view of the above, there is a need to amend section 45 of the 
Government of Union Territories Act, 1963, for providing legal framework for 
removal of the Chief Minister or a Minister in such cases. 
6. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives. 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                                                                                          AMIT SHAH. 
The 19th August, 2025. 
  
  
 

  LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
———— 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Government of Union Territories Act, 1963. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
———— 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Shri Amit Shah, Minister of  Home Affairs and Cooperation) 
 
 
  
 