     
A
S
 I
NTRODUCED
 
IN
 L
OK
 S
ABHA
                                                              
Bill No. 1
13 of 2021
THE SPECIAL FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE TO THE STATE OF
BIHAR (FOR THE WELFARE OF FARMERS) BILL, 2021
B
y
D
R
. 
A
LOK
 K
UMAR
 S
UMAN
, M.P
.
A
BILL
to provide for special financial assistance to the State of Bihar for overcoming the
current agrarian crisis in State caused by the unseasonal rains, hailstorms,
deficit rainfall and consistently rising input prices forcing farmers into
debt trap;  providing relief and loan waivers to farmers, compensation
for failed crops, promotion of sustainable farming, rainwater
harvesting, creation of grain and fodder banks, skill development,
research and development and welfare schemes for farmers,
agricultural labourers and other marginalized sections of
society in State of Bihar and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto
.
B
E
 
it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-second Year of the Republic
of India as follows
:–
1.
(1)
This Act may be called the Special Financial Assistance to the
State of Bihar (For the Welfare of Farmers) Act, 2021.
(2)
 It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title
and
commencement.
5

2.
(1)
Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the
time being in force, there shall be paid such sums of money out of the
Consolidated Fund of India, every year, which shall not be less than eighty
thousand crore rupees, as Parliament may by due appropriation by law
provide, as special financial assistance to the State of Bihar to meet the
cost of such schemes and works aimed at overcoming the ongoing agrarian
crises and welfare of farmers, as may be undertaken by the State with
the approval of Union Government for carrying out the purposes of this
Act.
(2)
Without prejudice to generality of the provisions of
sub-section 
(1)
, the schemes and works to overcome the agrarian crisis
may include,—
(i)
settling the debt of farmers;
(ii)
providing compensation and relief to farmers and
agricultural labourers for any damage to crops caused due to
rainfall deficit, pest attack, flood, hailstorm or any other natural
calamity;
(iii)
providing assistance to small and marginal farmers;
(iv)
encouraging and providing modern irrigation facilities
like drip irrigation and sprinklers to farmers;
(v)
promotion of rainwater harvesting and conserving the
groundwater;
(vi)
promoting less water intensive crops like pigeon pea or
tur, urad, mustard, sunflower and jawar bajra;
(vii)
promotion of growing fodder and establishing fodder
banks;
(viii)
 establishment of grain banks;
(ix)
establishment of warehouses and cold storages;
(x)
promotion of research and development for better and
inexpensive inputs like seeds, fertilizers and pesticides;
(xi)
training of farmers in new crops and new agricultural
techniques;
(xii)
introducing agricultural education in school curriculum;
(xiii)
afforestation of barren and waste land;
(xiv)
promoting food processing industries based on local
agricultural products;
(xv)
providing skill development and training to farmers; and
(xvi)
such other provisions as the State Government of Bihar
may deem necessary for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
3.
If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act,
the Central Government may, by order, make such provisions not inconsistent
with provisions of this Act, which appear to it to be necessary or expedient
for removing the difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of three years
from the date of commencement of this Act.
4.
The provisions of this Act shall be in addition and not in derogation
of any other law for the time being in force dealing with the subject matter
of this Act.
Special
Financial
Assistance to
the State of
Bihar for the
welfare of
farmers.
Act not in
derogation of
other laws.
Power to
remove
difficulty.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
2

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The State of Bihar has been at the forefront of the agricultural
production in the country and has been pioneer in country’s journey to
achieve food security. Hard work of Bihar’s farmers has made it the bread
basket of the nation. But in last decade, stagnation of growth in agricultural
sector has adversely affected the whole State. Farmers, who form the
backbone of State’s economy have suffered the most, alongwith agricultural
labourers who belong to the Dalit and marginalized sections of society.
Prices of inputs like seeds, fertilizers, pesticides etc. have skyrocketed in
recent years but prices of their agricultural produce have not increased
proportionately. This has made farming a non-remunerative and non-viable
profession, pushing the farmers into borrowing for day to day expenses,
eventually falling in debt trap. Above mentioned problems have been
exacerbated in recent years by the unseasonal hailstorm destroying the
crops, whitefly attack on crops and impending water crisis as the ground
water levels continue to plummet. There has been no worthwhile research
in the agricultural universities in Bihar that can help the farmers to mitigate
these crises. State has not invested enough to provide modern facilities like
drip irrigation, sprinklers that can help farmers improve their productivity.
Lack of modern supply chain like cold storage prevents farmers from
getting fair price for their produce. There is also a need to promote
diversity in agriculture and incentivize farmers to grow new crops that can
help them generate additional income. Desertification is another threat that
makes hard working farmers of the Bihar vulnerable and the State needs to
combat it.
All the above mentioned interventions cannot be implemented
without cooperation of farmers, therefore there is an urgent need to train
farmers in the newer and productive ways of agriculture and allied activities
so that it can generate more income and employment.
Unfortunately, mismanagement of State finances by the Government
has resulted in a massive public debt over the State. Through its own ill
devised policies, State Government has hamstrung itself and is not able to
take up the schemes for welfare of farmers, agricultural labourers and develop
agriculture sector in State.
In such a situation, most marginalized and most vulnerable farmers
of Bihar, that are the 
Annadata
 (food provider) of the nation, need an
immediate help from the Union Government to alleviate their distress. The
Bill seeks to ensure that appropriate financial resources are allocated to
farmers of the State of Bihar which would go a long way in building a more
powerful nation.
Hence this Bill.
   N
EW
 D
ELHI
;
         ALOK KUMAR SUMAN
July
 6, 2021.
3

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill provides that there shall be paid such sum of
money out of the Consolidated Fund of India, every year which shall not
be less than eighty thousand crore rupees, as Parliament may by due
appropriation provide, as special financial assistance to the State of Bihar
to meet the cost of schemes and works aimed at overcoming the ongoing
agrarian crises and welfare of farmers in the State. The Bill, therefore,
if enacted would involve recurring expenditure of a minimum rupees eighty
thousand crore per annum from the Consolidated Fund of India.
No non-recurring expenditure is likely to be incurred from the
Consolidated Fund of India.
4

LOK SABHA
_______
A
BILL
to provide for special financial assistance to the State of Bihar for overcoming the
current agrarian crisis in State caused by the unseasonal rains, hailstorms,
deficit rainfall and consistently rising input prices forcing farmers into
debt trap;  providing relief and loan waivers to farmers, compensation
for failed crops, promotion of sustainable farming, rainwater
harvesting, creation of grain and fodder banks, skill development,
research and development and welfare schemes for farmers,
agricultural labourers and other marginalized sections of
society in State of Bihar and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto
.
————
(Dr. Alok Kumar Suman, M.P.)