1
THE  GIRL CHILD (PROVISION OF EXTRA  AMENITIES) BILL, 2015
By
SHRI PRALHAD JOSHI, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for extra amenities to the girl child having no male siblings in the family
including incentives to parents of girl child irrespective of their financial status
and for matters connected therewith.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Girl Child (Provision of Extra Amenities) Act, 2015.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title,
extent and
commencement.
Bill No.  113 of  2015
5
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires—
(a) "appropriate Government" means in the case of a State, the Government of
that State and in all other cases, the Central Government;
(b) "extra amenities" in relation to a girl child include—
(i) free railway pass to the girl child till she attains the age of twenty five
years or gets married, whichever is earlier;
(ii) priority in admission in educational institutions irrespective of
percentage of marks;
(iii) reservation in posts and services under the State; and
(iv) relaxation in age upto the age of forty years and relaxation in eligibility
criteria for appointment to posts and services under the State;
(c) "girl child" means a girl who has no male sibling; and
(d) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
3. (1) It shall be the duty of the Central Government to formulate and implement
schemes aimed at the welfare of girl child and take steps to ensure provision of extra
amenities to every girl child.
(2) For the purposes of sub-section ( 1), the Central Government shall designate an
officer not below the rank of Joint Secretary—
(i) to look after the implementation of welfare schemes and provision of extra
amenities;
(ii) to issue special identity card to every girl child;
(iii) to maintain a register of families of every girl child; and
(iv) to undertake such other programmes and schemes for the welfare of girl
child as may be prescribed.
4. Every girl child shall be entitled to the following amenities, namely:—
(i) free education from primary to higher secondary level;
(ii) educational loan for higher and technical education at concessional rate of
interest;
(iii) reservation in admission to educational institutions;
(iv) opportunities for employment and self employment;
(v) reservation in posts and services under the Central and the State
Governments;
(vi) free healthcare facilities;
(vii) financial assistance to the girl child for setting up self-employment units;
and
(viii) such other amenities as may be necessary for the all-round development
of the girl child.
5. The appropriate Government shall, by notification in the official Gazette, constitute
a Girl Child Wing for the following purposes, namely:—
(i) to conduct survey every year at Panchayat level and District level to count the
number of families having girl child;
(ii) to co-ordinate with the local authorities for implementing welfare measures
for the girl child; and
Definitions.
Central
Government
to formulate
and
implement
schemes
aimed at the
welfare of girl
child.
Amenities to
the girl child.
Constitution
of a Girl
Child Wing.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
(iii) to undertake such other functions as may be assigned to it from time to time
by the appropriate Government.
6. A married couple having girl child, shall be given the following incentives by the
appropriate Government,—
(i) one time special promotion to either of the parents if either or both of them
are Government employee;
(ii) such amount of money as is equivalent to twice the amount of bonus being
paid to Government employees to the parents, if neither of them is in Government
service; and
(iii) such other incentives as may be prescribed.
7.  Any person including a parent, who indulges in any act of abuse of a girl child shall
not entitled to get any incentive or benefit under this Act.
8. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law
in this behalf, provide requisite funds to the State Governments for carrying out the purposes
of this Act.
9. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other
law for the time being in force dealing with any of the matters dealt with in this Act.
10. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purpose of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Incentives to
parents of
girl child.
Disincentives
for abusing
girl child.
Central
Government
to provide
funds.
Act not to be
in derogation
of any other
law for the
time being in
force.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
Inspite of Government's strenuous efforts to maintain or restore demographic balance,
the percentage of girl child is decreasing and there is considerable difference in the male-
female ratio in the country.
The discrimination against girl child or female infanticide widely prevails in middle
income families, upper middle income families and rich families, as the technology of pre-
natal sex determination is easily accessible to them. The Central and State Governments have
undertaken a number of measures to improve survival and status of girl children in the
country.
The enactment of Pre-Natal Diagnostic Techniques (Prohibition of Sex Selection) Act,
1994 is one of the key initiatives to prevent female foeticide but it has not achieved its
objective. The Government had set up a Sectoral Innovation Council for improving child sex
ratio and while acting upon its recommendations, a pilot scheme 'Sabla' was launched for a
comprehensive intervention for adolescent girls in the age group of 11-18 years. Moreover,
Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan (SSA), Rashtriya Madhyamik Shiksha Abhiyan, Kasturba Gandhi
Balika Vidyalaya (KGBV), Kishori Shakti Yojana (KSY), National Nutritional Programme for
Adolescent Girl (NPAG), Ujjawala scheme for prevention of trafficking and for rescue,
rehabilitation and reintegration of trafficked victims, Dhanlakhsmi—a conditional Cash
Transfer Scheme for girl child with insurance cover, Indira Gandhi Scholarship for Single Girl
Child for pursuing higher and technical education and Pragati Scholarship for single girl
child to pursue technical education have been launched by the Government of India to
encourage and empower the girl child. The Government has also set-up a Fund called the
Nirbhaya Fund with a corpus of one thousand crore rupees for empowerment, safety and
security of women and girl children.
The State Governments are also implementing their own schemes to incentivize the
birth of a girl child and encourage families to place a premium on her education and development
through conditional Cash Transfer Schemes like 'Mukhya Mantri Kanya Suraksha Yojna' of
Bihar Government, 'Majoni' of Assam, 'Bhagyalakshmi Scheme' of Karnataka, 'Ladli Scheme
Yojna' of Madhya Pradesh, 'Balika Samridhi Yojna' of Gujarat and Himachal Pradesh, 'Balri
Rakshak Yojana' and 'Kanya Jagriti Jyoti Scheme' of Punjab, 'Kanyadan Scheme' of Madhya
Pradesh, 'Kalyanalakshimi' of Telangana, the Girl Child Protection Scheme of Andhra Pradesh,
'Bangaru Thalli' welfare scheme of Government of Andhra Pradesh, Shiksha Karmi, District
Primary Education Programme (DPEP), National Programme for Education of Girls at Elementary
Level (NPEGEL), Lok Jumbish Yojana (Rajasthan), Padhe Bitiya Badhe Bitiya (Uttar Pradesh),
Ladli Scheme, Mamta-Taruni Programme to ensure adequate healthcare and timely counselling
to adolescent girls and 'Hunar Scheme' of Bihar to empower the adolescent girls belonging to
the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes and minority communities.
Recently launched schemes 'Beti Bachao—Beti Padhao' and 'Sukanya Samriddhi
Account' are a bid to encourage birth and education of girls and tackle the abysmally low
child sex ratio of 918 female to 1000 male.
But all these schemes could not bring any considerable change in the mindset of
people. The Census-2012 has revealed that there has been sharp decline in child sex ratio in
the age-group of 0-6 years, declining from 927 girls per thousand boys in 2001 to 919 in 2011.
This decline has been continuing unabated since 1961.
To reset the feeling that girl child is a burden, protect the rights of the girl child, provide
social and financial empowerment to girl child, eliminate negative cultural attitudes practices
against girls, strengthen the role of the family in improving the status of the girl child, show
unflinching support to the girl child to improve the social status of the girls/women and to
4

5
prevent gender discrimination by empowering and protecting the rights of the girl children,
there is an absolute need to sensitize the people of middle and rich class, where the core
issue is swirling.
Therefore, it is an opportune time to take stock of the situation of grave concern to
save girl child and create awareness by sensitizing targeted groups and provide generous
incentives to the families of only girl children for upbringing of their girl child in a respectable
manner.
The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
N
EW DELHI; PRALHAD JOSHI
March 12, 2015.

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides that the Central Government shall formulate and implement
schemes aimed at the welfare of girl child. It further provides for issuing of special identity
card and maintenance of a register of families of every girl child. Clause 4 provides for certain
amenities like free education, health care facilities and financial assistance to the girl child for
setting up self-employment units. Clause 5 provides for conduct of survey every year at
Panchayat and District level to count the number of families having girl child. Clause 6
provides for incentives to the parents of girl child. Clause 8 provides that the Central
Government shall provide requisite funds to the State Governments for carrying out the
purpose of the Bill.
The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of
India. It is estimated that an annual recurring expenditure of about rupees one thousand
crores will be involved.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees one hundred crore is also likely to be
involved.
6

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 10 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative powers is of normal character.
7

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for extra amenities to the girl child having no male siblings in the family
including incentives to parents of girl child irrespective of their financial
status and for matters connected therewith.
————
(Shri Pralhad Joshi, M.P.)
GMGIPMRND—74LS(S3)—20-04-2015.