• 
" 
Bill No. 113 ., 1_ 
THE STATE FINANCIAL CORPORATIONS (AMBNDMl!:NT), 
Bn.L,I985 
A 
BILL 
further to a.mend the State Financial Corpor.ationa Act, 1951. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty-sixth Year of the RepubHCI 
of India as foIlows:-
1. This Act may be called the State Financial Corporations (Amend- Short 
ment) Act, 1985. title. 
83 Itf 1861. 5 Z. In 'SeCtion 2 of the State Financial Corporations Act, 1951 (herem- Amend-
. after referred to as the principal Act), in clause (c),- meat of 
sectlCIIl Z. 
10 
110 
(a) for sub-clause (ii), the foLlowing SUb-elaWle shall be sub-
stituted, namely:-
" (ii), mining or development of mines;"; 
(b) in sub-clause (it»,after the words "or by air". the worda 
"or by ropeway or by lltt" shall be iDBerted; 
(e) for sub-clauie (mii). the following sub-clauae shall be .IIb-
stituted, name1y:-
CI (viii) the setting up or development of an industrial area or 
industrial estate;"; 
(d) in sub-clause (i,r), ~ word "or" occurring at the end shall 
be omitted; 
(e) after sub-claUSe (x), the following aub-clauses shall be 
inserted, namely:-
CI (zi) providing weigh bridge facilities; 
(zii) the research and development of any process or pro-
duct in relation to any of the matters aforesaid; or 

Amend-
ment of 
aection 
IA. 
Amend-
ment of 
a.ectiOQ •. 
.. 2 
(xii). the research and development of any process or pro-
duct in relation to any of the matters aforesaid; OJ" 
(xiii) such ether activity as may be approved by the Deve-
lopment Bank."; 
(1) the ExpZanatio"l. shall be numbered as Explanation 1 thereof 
and after Explanation 1 as so numbered, the following Explanation 5 
shan be Inserted, namely:-
"Explanation Z.-If any doubt arises as to whether a con-
cem is an industrial concern or not, the same shall be referred 
to the Development Bank for its decision and the decision of 10 
the Development Bank the.reon shall be final .... 
3. In section 3A of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), clause (e) 
shall be omitted. 
4. In section 4 of the principal Act,-
(a) in sub-section (1), for the words "but it shall in no case be 15 
leas than fifty lakhs of rupees or exceed ten Cl'ores of rupees", the 
following shall be substituted, namely:-
"but it shall not be less than fifty lakhs of rupees or exceed 
ftfty crores of rupees: 
Provided that the Central Government may, on the recom- 20 
mendation of the Development Bank, by notification in the Oftl-
cial Gazatte, increase the authorised capital up to one hundred 
crores of rupees."; 
. (b) for sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be sub-
stituted, namely:- 25 
-(2) The authorised capital shall be divided into such num-
ber of fully p!dd-up shares of the same face value and shall be 
issued to the parties mentioned in 'Sub-section (3) at such timet 
and in such manner a~ the State Government may, by notifica-
tion in the Official Gazette, determine: 30 
Provided that no such notification shall be necessary 
when the shares are to be issUed to the parties mentioned in 
clauses (a) and (ba)' of sub-section (3)."; 
(c) in sub-section (3), in clause (e), for the words "or other 
financial institutions,", the words ", other .... financial institutions or 35 
mch I')thcr institutions as the Central Government may notify in 
this behalf in the Official Gazette" shall be substituted; 
(d) for sub-section (5) :"the following sub-section shall be sub-
stituted, namely:-
"(5) If any shtwes allocated to any of the parties referred 40 
to in claU8el (e) and (d) of8U!b.sec&n (3) remain un'SUbscrib-
ed, they shall be subscribed for equally by the State Govem-
ment and the Development Bank .... 

r- --
~ __ ~-__ ~ ____ ----~I~~BHA 
..... :. ... ..-"*' ••..•. --i- ____ 
ConRI GEt-l'DA 
( 
to 
---------' .. 
'lBK STA.TE-.F.rNA.NCIAL tXJR,PORATIONS (AM~@.1T), BILL, ~ 1985 
'\ - . 
(To be/As :1n:troduced in I.e k $bha) 
J l' 
I 
·1~. PJ8.~e·1,-
• I ~ lines 21 and 22~ 
2. page' 2;· line 22,-
lcl: " C3.?B. t te" . ~ '''CB. ze t te " . ' 
, 3. page 3, -a.gi1nst line 16 in the iIarg1n,-., 
QJD;U n 10 0 f 19lt9." 
-. 
*. page 6, line 18,-
1.!2r. "1984" read~5u-· 
5. yage 7, _.J,in.e--44r- ,)' . 
,I' 
.I .. 
.--
..nu:- "sub-section "'lItlall'jeaa ~~ 
_~ge'8, against line 33 in ~in,-
-. ~ "4.1 of" ~ "4·3 of 19-61.H 
7. ?age 8, lin the 
. . ... , 
8. Pa ~ 9, line 9,-
. m "sectiol) 49" .r.ud "section 48 II 
, 9. Pa ge 11, ·line 11,-
read "<b.rpo.ra.;t1on s " 
10. page 19, against line 7 .tro.m-bcftto.m jn the-mrgin,..-, 
, . 
in s et t "11 0 f 1922. '! 
I:. 
NEW """uI·· . _ JJAUa, 
, # 
.......... 1'/ ... 
.. 

5 
10 
15 
JO of 1949. 
ao 
25 
30 
35 
40 
45 
! 
5. In section 5 of the principal Act.-
(a) in sub-section (1), after the words "or any other dnancfal 
inatitution or class of financial institutions recognised in this behalf 
by the State Government",' the words, brackets, letter and figures 
"or other institutions notified under clause (c) of su\)..section (3) 
of section 4" E>hall be inserted; 
(b) SUb-section (2) shall be omitted. 
6. In section 6 of the prinCipal Act, in sub-section' '(2)-
(a) for the words -'''the shares of the Corporation shall", the 
words "the shares of the Financial Corporation. and such of the bonds 
and debentures issued by it as are guaranteed by the State Govern-
ment as to the repaym~t of the principal and payment of interest, 
and receipts issued. by it for such of the deposits as are guaranteed 
by the State Govemment as to the repayment of the principal and 
payment of interest, shall" shall be substituted. 
(b) for the words and figures "Banking Companies Act. 1949", 
the words and figures "Bimking Regulation Act, 1949" shall be sub-
stituted. . 
'1. In section 7 of the principal Act,-
(a) in sub-aection (1)',-
(i) for the worc1s,,"shall be guaranteed by the State Govern-
ment", the words "s~. if so required by t~ Financial Corpora-
tion, be guaranteed by the State Government" shall be substitu-
ted; 
(ii) the words "at the time the bOnds a~d debentures are 
issued" ,!Shall, be omitted; 
~ (b) in sub-section (2" in the proviSo, for the words "ninety 
per cent. of", the word :: twice" shall be substituted; 
(c) in SUb-section (5), th~ words "at any time" shall be omitted 
and the followirig provisu shall be added at the end, nat:nely: - , 
"Provided that the Financial Corporation may, with the 
prior appr~al of t~ Development Bank, exceed the aforesaid 
limit up to thirty times the amount of the paid-up share capital 
and reserve fund of the Financial Corporation.". 
Amead .. 
mat of 
sec:rion 6. 
Ameud· 
meat of 
section 7. 
.. 
"J. 
.i 
8. In section 8 of the principal Act,- Ameacl. 
meat C'!I. I'" 
(a) in sub-section (1), for the proviso, the following provisos 
shall be substituted, namely:- section •. 
"Provided that the tot~ amount of such deposits shall not 
exceed twice the paid-up share capital of the FinancW Corpora-
tion: 
Provided further that the Central Government Play permit 
the Financial Coreoration to .• 8CCept deJlO1lits up ~ B higher 
. limit 'not exceeding ten times the paid-qp share c~pital of the 
. '.,. Financial Corporation. "; 
" (b) for "sub-section (2), the following sub-sectio~ shall be sub-
stituted, namely:- : • 
. " (2) Any deposit accepted ul'lder sub-sectiori (1). other than 
a deposit from the ,State Governp1e!lt shall, if so required by the 
Fin~~ial CQrporation, be guaran.teed by the St~ Government 
as to the repayment of the principal and the payment of interest.". 

Amea4- . 
meat of 
-=tloDl0. 
1 .. 11100 
of new 
section 
lOA. 
Vacation 
of oftlce 
by an 
elected 
dlnctI,lr. 
Amend-
IIIeI1t of 
l8Ction 
U. 
Amerad-
ment of 
section 
18. 
Amend-
ment ot 
aeetion 20. 
AmeDd-
meat of 
IIdiaD 
21. 
.Amend-
JII8Dt of 
aeetlon 
II. 
9. In section 10 of the princiral Act, in clause (d). for the \Vords 
"financial institutions", the words ccdnancial institutions and other insti-
tutions" shall be substituted. 
10. After section 10 of the principal Act, the following section shall 
be inserted, namely:- 5 
"lOA. The oftlce of a director elected under clause (d) of sec-
tion 10 shall become vacant if he ceases to hold any oft1ce in the 
IChe4u1ed bank, insurance company, investment trust, co-operative 
bank, financial or other institution in which he held any office at 
the time of his election as iuchdlrector.... 10 
11. In section 15 of the principal Act. in sub-section. (1),-
(a) the words \", not lJeing the managing director," shall be 
omitted; 
(b) after the proviso, the following proviso shall be inserted, 
namely: - .i.... 15 
"Provided further that the same person may be appointed to 
function both as Chairinan and as managing director.". 
12. In section 19 of the principal Act, in sub-section (5), in clause (a), 
the words ", not being the managing director," shall be omitted. 
13. In section 20 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), for the 110 
words "shall be laid", the worde "shall, after confirmation thereof at 
the next meeting of the Executive Committee, be laid" shall be substi-
tuted!".. :.: ;: 
14. In section 21 of the principal Act. for the words "one or more 
advisory committee or committees", the words "one or more committee !IS 
or committees consisting wholly of directors o~ wholly of other persons 
or partly of directors and partly of other persons" shall be substituted. 
15. In section 25 of the principal Act,-
(4) in BUb-section (1»)-
(iI) in sub-clause (i\) of clause (a), after the words "State 30 
co-operative banks", the words "or other financial institutions" 
shall be inserted; 
(ii) in clause (d), after the words "or arising out of, the 
grant of loans or advances to an industrial concern, or subscrip-
tion to debentures of an industrial concern", the words "or relat- 35 
ing . to the business of the Development Bank, Industrial Finance 
Corporation of India or finan~ial institution". shan. be inserted; 
(iii) for clause (da.), the following clause shall be substi-
tuted, namely:~ 
.. (cia) subscribing to, or purchasing of, the stock, shares, 40 
bonds or debentures 01 an industrial concern or any other 
concern with the prior approval of the Development Bank;"; 

5 
10 
iO 
30 
35 
45 
(iv) for clause (J), the foUowing clause shall be substituted, 
namely:-
,I (f) retaining as part of its assets any stock, shares, 
bonds or debentures which it may acquire by subscription or 
in fulfilment of its underwriting liabilities and disposing of 
the stock, shares, bonds or debentures so acquired;"; 
(v) in clause (g) ,-
(a) in the first proviso for the words "Provided that!', the 
following shall be substituted, namely:-
"Provided that the Financial Corporation may, with 
the prior approval of the Development Bank, exceed. the 
said limit of twenty years up to a further period of ten 
years: 
Provided further that"; 
(0) in the second proviso.-
(i) for the words "Provided further that", the 
words "Provided also that" shall be substituted; 
(ii) for the words "convert such debentures or 
loans", the words "convert the amounts outstanding on 
such debentures or loans" shall be substituted';' 
(iii) the follOWing Explanation shall be inserted at 
the end, namely:-
"Erplanation,-In this clause, the expression "the 
amounts outstanding on such debentures or loans" shall 
mean the principal, interest and other charges payable 
on such debentures or loans as at the time when the 
amounts are sought to be converted into stock or shares."; 
(vi) after clause (g), the following clauses shall be inserted, 
namely:-
"(ga) accepting or discounting promissory notes and 
bills of exchange made, drawn, accepted or endorsed by in-
dustrial concerns or by any person selling capital goods 
manufactured by one industrial concern to another industrial 
concern; 
(gb) undertaking research and surveys for evaluating or 
dealing with marketing or investments and undertaking and 
carrying on techno-economic studies or other activities in 
('onnection with the development of any industry; 
(ge) providing technical and administrative assistance 
to any industrial c~cern or any person for the promotion, 
1n8J1agement or expansion of any industry; 
(gel) planning and assisting in the promotion and deve-
lopment of industries; 
(ge) doing such other business as the Development Bank 
may authorise;"; 
(b) lUlHec:tion (2) shall be omitted. 

insertion 
01 new 
MCticm 
UA. 
........ -
8Idt .f 
ICCtlOa 16. 
Aaud-
8IeDt of 
IeCtioIl 2B. 
& 
18. After section 25 of the principal Act, the foUowinl section aha1i be 
iDJerted, namely:-
"25A. The Financial Corporation shall 'have the right to acquire, 
by transfer or assignment, the rights. and interests of any such 
financial institution as may be notified by the Central Government .5 
(including any other rights inciderttal thereto) in relation to any 
loan or advance granted or any amount recoverable by such institu;-
tion! either in whole or in part, by the execution or issue of any ins-
tru~ent or by the transfer of any instrument by endorsement oI;. in 
any other manner: '10 
Provided that such loan or advanc~ or amount relates to any 
business which the Financial Corporation may transact under this 
Act." . 
17. In ~tion 26 of the principal ~cti-
(a.) in sub-section (1),- 15 
\ (i) for the words, brackets and figures,' "state Financial 
Corporations (Amendment) Act, 1972", the words, brackets and 77 of 1972-
ft~ures "State Financial Corporations (Amendment) Act, 1984" 
shall be substituted; " . 
,I 
II, 
(ii) in clause (i) • .for the words."thirty lakhs of rupees in 20 
the case of", the words "sixty lakhs of rupees in the case of a 
corporation.:-established. by or under any other law or" shall be 
subs.tituted; 
:. 
(iii) in clause (ii), for the words "fifteen lakhs", the words 
"thirty lakhs" shall be substituted; 25 
(iv) the following proviso shall be inserted at the end, 
namely:-
"Provided that the Financial Corporation may, with 
the prior approval of the Development Bank, exceed t11e 
limit under clause (i) Qr clause (ii) up to four times."; 30 
(b-) sub-section (2) shall be omitted. 
18. In section 28 of the principal Act, in sub-sectiOn (1), in clause 
(d)'" for' the words "one crore of rupees", the words "three crores of 
rupees or' such higher amount not exeeeding thirty crores of rupees as 
the Central GOvernment may, by notification in the Oftlelal Gazette, 35 
specify" shall be sub~ituted. 
19. In section 31 of the principal Act, in sub-section" '(1.), after clause 
(a.), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:-:-
Ie (44) for enforcing the Uability of any surety; or". 

7 
:1.', ...... 
20. In section 32 of the principal Act,-
ment of 
(ta.) after sub-section (1), the following sub-section shall be section 31. 
inserted, namely:-
"(1A) When the application is for the relief mentioned in 
5 clause (aa) of sub-section (1) of section 31, the district judp 
shall issue a notice calling upon the surety to show cause OD a 
date to be specified in the notice why his liability should not 
be e~forced."; 
(b) In !Mlb-section (3), after the words, brackets and figure 
'10 '" "or sub-section (2) ,", the words, brackets, ,figure and letter "or 
iSSUing a notice under sub-section (lA) ," shall be inserted; 
(c) fQ1: sub-section (4), the following sub-sections shall be 
substituted, namely:-
" (4) At the same time as he passes an order uh.d~r sub-
15 section (1). the district judge shall issue to theiniustrial 
,concern or to the owner of the security attached a notice 
accompanied by copies of the order, the application and the 
evidence, if any, recorded by him calling upon it or him to show 
cause on a date to be specified in the notice why the ad interim. 
20 order of attachment should not be made absolute or the injunc-
tion confirmed. 
(4A) If no cause is shown on or before the date specified in 
the notice under SUb-section (lA), the district judge shall forth-
with o~r the enforcement of the liability of the surety."; 
25 (d) in sub-section (7) ,-
35 
(i) in clause (d), the word "or" occurring at ,the end shall 
be omitted; , 
(ii) after clause (d), the following clause shall be inserted, 
namely:-
"(dc) direct the enforcement of the liability of the 
surety or reject the claim made in this behalf; or"; 
(iii) in the first proviso, after the words, brackets and 
Jetter "under clause (c)", the words, brackets and letters "or 
making an order rejecting the claim to enforce the liability of 
the surety under clause (M) or making an order rejecting the 
claim to transfer the management of the industrial concern to 
the Finanelal Corporation under clause (e)" shall be inserted; 
(i,,) in the Recond proviso, after the words 'cfrom attach-
, ment", the words "or rejecting the claim to enforce the liability 
of the surety or rejecting the clafm to transfer the industrial 
concern to the Financial Corporation," shall be inserted; 
(e) in sub-section (9), for the words. hrackets and figure "under 
sub-sectton (")", the words, brackets, figures 8!nd letter "UIlder sub-
seM~ ... ., (4A), sub-section (~, ,. shan be substituted. 

Insertion 
of new 
aectkm 
320. 
Recovery 
of am-
ounts due 
to the 
Financial 
Corpora-
tion as an 
arrear of 
land re-
venue. 
Amead-
ment of 
section 33. 
AmoDl!-
meat of 
eeetloD 
3 SA. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 36. 
Amend-
ment of 
section 31. 
Amend-
mentof 
Section 
43. 
Amend-
ment of . 
acetion 
43A. 
rnsertion 
of DeW 
IeCtIon 
438. 
Reports to 
tbt Board 
21. After section 32F of the principal Act, the following section .hall 
be inserted, namely:-
1/320. Where any amount is .due to the Financla1 Corporation in 
respect of flny accommodation granted by it to any industrial con-
cern, the Financial Corporation or any person authorised by it in 5 
writing in this behalf, may, without prejudice to any other mode of 
recovery, make an application to the State Government for the re-
covery of the amount due to it, and if the State Government or such 
authority, as that Government may specify in this behalf, is satil-
fied, after following such procedure as may be prescribed, that any 10 
amount is so due" it may issue a certificate for that amount to tile 
Collector, and the Collector shall proceed to recover that amount in 
the same manner as an arrear of land revenue.". 
ZZ. In section '33 of the principal Act, in sub-section (~), after the 
words. brackets and figures "the Banking Companies (Acquisition and Is 
Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1970". the words, figures and brackets 5 of 1970. 
"or any of the banks specified in column 2 of the First SChedule to the 
Banking Companies (Acquisiffon and Transfer of Undertakil)gs) Act, 40 of 1910. 
1980" shall be inserted. 
23. In section 35A of the principal Act, in sub-section (I), the first 20 
proviso shall be omitted. 
X. In section 36 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1) , for the 
words "three months", the words "four months" shall be substituted. 
25. In section 38 of the principal .Act, for sub-sections (1) and (2), 
the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:- liS 
" (1) The Financial Corporation shall furnish to the StAte 
Government, the Development Bank and the Reserve Bank such 
statements and returns in such form as the state Government, the 
Development Bank or the Reserve Bank may require from time to 
time.". 30 
26. In section 43 of the principal Act, for the words and fi~\l~e;C/I;'-' 
dian Income-tax Act, 1922", the words and figures "Income-tax Act 1961" 
shall be substituted. 
27. In section 43A of the principal Act, after the word's "Financial 
Corporation", the words "or to any committee appointed under sectfon 35 
21" shall be inserted. ' 
28. After section 43A of the principal Act, the f?l1owfn.l! section 
shall be inserted, namely:-
"43B. (1) The minut~ of every meeting of the committee ap-
pointed under section 21 shall, after confirmation thereof at the next 4:> 
meeting of the committee. be laid before the 130rtrd at the next fo1-
lowing meeting of the Board. 
(2) Every action taken hv the managinp,' <"tfr~ctor and Any other 
oftieer of the Financial Corporation shall a~ SoO" as may be after ft 
Is taken by them, be reported to the B~ard.". . ;; 
11 of 1922 
43 of 

9 
29. In section 46 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1),- Amend-
ment of 
(a) for the wQrds "any institution in existence at the commen- section 46. 
cement of this Act", the words "any institution established by a 
State Government" shall be substituted; 
5 (b) the following proviso shall be inserted at the end, namely:-
10 
"Provided that no notification shall be issued under this 
sub-section in respect of any institution unless a request is 
made in that behalf by the State Government concerned.". 
30. In section 49 of the principal Act, in sub-~ection (2) ,-
(a) clause (h) shall be omitted; 
(b)' in clause (m), for the words "advisory committees for 
technical and other advice", the word "committees" shall be subliU-
tuted. 
Amend-
ment of 
IeCtJon 41. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS· 
The Financial Corporations established under the State Financial Cor-
porations Act. 1951, have been conceived as Regional Development Banks 
for acrelerating the industriftl growth in various States by providing tinan-
ciai assistance mainly to small and smaller of the medium scale industries. 
In the light of the experience ,:tained over the past 30 years, it has become 
necessary to effect certain amendments to the Act. Most of these amend-
ments are for providing more operational flexibility to the Financial Cor-
porations for functioning as developmental agencies. 
2. The main proposals for amendments are as follows: - • 
(a) J.t is proposed to widen . the definition· of "industrial conrem" 
as contained in the Act so as to enable the Financial Corporations to 
finance all kinds of industrial activities, with the exception of ship-
ping, beinji( financed by the all-India .financial institutions. 
(b) In "jew of the constantly expanding business of the Financial 
Corporations, it is proposed to raise the authorised share capital of a 
Financial Corporation from Rs. 10 crores to Rs. 50 crores or such higher 
nmount within an overall limit of Rs. 100 crores. 
(c) In order to establish an organic link between financial· and 
promotional bodies, it is proposed to make promotional agencies like 
State Industrial Development/Investment Corporations, Small Indus-
tries CorpOrations, etc., eligible to subscribe to the shares of the Finan-
cial Cor:oorations and thus get formally associated with them. 
(d) At present Financial Corporations can issue bon'ds and deben-
tures and raise dt'posits only if these are guaranteed by the State 
Governments. It is proposed to allow them to mobilise resources by 
iesuinlZ bonds, debentures and raising deposits which may not be 
guaranteed by the State Governments, to enable such of the Financial 
Corporations which are in a position to raise resources on the stl'e!~gth 
of their efficiency and profitability. 
fe) The Act !'it present limits the borrowing by the Financial Cor-
porations from the Reserve Bank against securities to ninety per cent. 
of their paid-up sharE' capital. This limit is proposed to be raised 
to the extent of twice the paid up share capital to enahle them to 
augm-mt their resour(,e5 through borrowing. 
(n The total amount of deposits which the Financial Corporations 
can mobHise at present ('annot exceed the paid-up share capital of the 
Financial Corporations. It is proposed to raise this limit of deposits 
to the extent of twice the amount of paid:"up share capital which could 
be increased up to ten timeD the paid-up share capital with the appro-
val of the Centr&l Government. This will facilitate the Financial 
Corporations to mob~ ~dequate ~pm,its to meet their financial 
requirements . 
10 

u 
(g) It is proposE'rl to expand the list of business which the Finan-
cial Corporations could undertake. This will, inter lilia, enable them 
to undertake research and service relating to marketing and invest-
ment, carry out techno-eConomic studies, provide technk:al and ad-
ministraiivc assistance to industrial concerns, plan ,and assist in the 
promotion and development of industries, discount bills of exchange/ 
promissory notes, etc. The said expansion will enable them to under-
take .promotional and developmental work and play the role of re-
gional development banks. 
(It) It is proposed to change the present security-oriented approach 
of the Financial Corporation to project -oriented approach. This will 
ena ble the Financial Corporations to grant loans, like bridge loans, 
which are not fully secured. 
(i) At present, the Financial Corporations can extend financial 
assistance tll the extent of Rs; 30 lakhs to companiesico-operative 
societies and Rs. 15 lakhs in case of partnership firms and other con-
cerns. These limits are proposed to be increased to Rs. 60 lakhs and 
Rs. 30 lakhs respectively. The provision ill the Act restricts granting 
of assistance only to indu.c;tri~l concerns having aggregate of paid-up 
share capital and free reserves up to Rs. 1 crore. This limit is pro-
posed to be raised to Rs. 3 crores or such higher limit up to Rs 301 
('rores as may be specified by the Central Government. These in-
creases will enable the Financial Corporations to assist the larger and 
medium projects in participation with other institutions and banks. 
(j) It iR proposed to provide for recovery of any outstanding 
liability as if such liability were arrears of land revenue. The amend-
ment would provide a simple and effective remedy for dealing with 
the problem of overdues. 
(k) At pl'e!lent the provisions of the State Financial Corporations 
Act, 1951 can be made applicable only to an institution in existence 
at the commencement of the said Act and which had for its objects 
the financing of industrial concerns. It is proposed to delete the 
condition that the institution should have been in existence at the 
commencement of the said Act. This will enable to apply the pro-
visions of the Act to institutions which have come into existence after 
the commencement of the Act. This will establish an organic link 
between these imtitutions and the Industrial Development Hank of 
India. 
3. It is also proposed to make certain other minor and consequential 
amendments in the Act. 
4. The Bill. seeks to achieve the above objects. 
NEW DELHI; , VISHWANATH PRATAP SINGH. 
The 29th April, 1985. 

Deftnltiolll. 
BllabUsh· 
moDt o( 
Joint Fin-
aadal Cor-
por8tio111. 
• 
ANNEXURE 
EXTRACTS FROM THE STATE FINANCIAL" CORPORATIONS Al:.T, 1951 
(63 OF 1951) 
• • • • • 
z. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
• • • •• • 
(e) "industrial concern" means any concern engaged or to be 
engaged in-
• • • • • 
(ii) mining; 
• • • • • 
(iv) the transport of passengers or goods by road or by 
water or by air; 
• • .. • • 
(viii) . the development of .any contiguous area of land as aD 
Industria~ estate; 
(ix) fishing or providing shore facilities for fishing or main-
tenance thereof; or .. 
(x), .providing special or technical lmowledge Or other 
services for the promotion of industrial growth. 
ExplanCitlon.- The expression "processing of goods" includes any 
art or process for producing, preparing or making an article by sub-
jecting any material to a manual, mechanical, chemical, electrical or 
any other like operation j 
• • • • • 
3A. (1) • • • • • 
(2) An inter-State ag·reement under sub-section (1) among ,the 
participati~g States may-
• • • • • 
(e) provide for the division aniong the participating States of 
the surplus profits payable by the Joint Financial Corporation under 
sub-section (3) of section 35; 
• • • • • 
J~ 

31 of 19S6. 
2 of 1882. 
"of 1938. 
10 of J949. 
t:~ 
4 .. (1) The authorised capital of the Financial Corporation shall be 
such sum as may be fixed by the State Government in this behalf, but 
it shall in no Case be less than fifty lakhs of rupees or exceed ten crores 
of rupees. 
. (2) .The authorised capital shall be divided into such n.umber of fully 
paid-up shares a'S the State Government may determine and shall be 
issued to the parties mentioned in sub-section (3) at such times and in 
sueh manner as that Government may determine and each such share 
shall have the same face value. 
(3) The State Government shall, with the approval of the Central 
Government, determine the number of shares which may, respectively, 
be distributed among-
'. • • • • 
(c) scheduled banks, insurance companies (including the Life 
In'Surance Corporation of India established under section 3 of the 
Life Insurance Corporation Act, 1956), investment trusts, co-operative 
banks or other financial institutions, and 
• • • • • 
(5) If any shares allocated to any of the parties referred to in ~lauses 
(c) and (d) of sub-section (3) remain unsubscribed, they shall be sulM-
cribed for by the State Government, but the State Government may at 
any time ,thereafter dispose of the shares so su:bscribed for to any party 
who was eligible to subsc.ribe for it in the first instance. 
• • • • • 
5. (1) The shares of the Financial Corporation shall not be trans-
ferable except to the State Government, the Reserve Bank, the Develop-
ment Bank or any other financial institution or class of financial institu-
tions recognised in this behalf by the State Government: 
Provided that the sha.res subscribed for by the parties referred to in 
clause (d) of sub.section (3) of section 4 shall be ~ly transferable. 
(2) Nothing contained in this section shall affect the provisions of 
sub-section (5) of section 4 . 
6. (1) . ' 
• • • • 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Acts hereinafter 
mentioned in tl),is sub-section, the shares of the Corporation shall be 
deemed to be included among the securities enumerated in section 20 of 
the Indian Trusts Act, 1882 and also to ,be approved securities for the 
pw:poses of the Insurance Act, 1938 and 1he Banking Companies Act, 
1949. :~ 
7. (1) 'l'heFinancial Corporation may; in consultation with the 
Development Bank and the Reserve Bank, issue and sell bonds and 
debentures carrying interest for the pllrpose of increasing its working 
capital and such bonds and debentures shall be guaranteed by the State 
Government as to the repayment of the principal and the payment of 
interest at such rate as the State Government may, on the recommenda-
ShBr* 
capital aDd 
share--
holden. 
Restric-
tions on 
transfer of 
Ibares. 
Shares 10 
be .uaran-
teed by 
the Slate 
Govern-
meat· and 
to be ttust 
or approv-
ed securi-
ties. 
Additional 
capital of 
the Fin-
anclal Cor-
poration 
aDd its 
borrow-· 
Jqpowen., 

DepcIIiU 
with the 
PiDaodal 
Car ..... 
.... 
;tion of the Board based on the advice of the Reserve Bank, fix at th~ time 
the bonds and debentures are issued. 
(2) The Financial Corporation may, for the purposes of carryin, out 
Its functions under this Act, boI'l'oW money from the Reserve Bank-
(a) repayable on demand or on the expiry of a fixed pertod not 
exceeding ninety qays from the date on which the money is so 
borrowed against the security of-
(i) stocks, funds and securities (other than immovable 
property) in which a trustee is authorised to invest trust money 
by any law for the time being in force in India, or 
(ii) such bills of exchange and promissory· notes as are 
eligible for purchase or rediscount by the Reserve· Bank or (is 
are fully guaran~ as to the repayment of the principal and 
payment of interest 'by a State Government; 
(b) repayable on the expiry of..a fixed period not exceeding 
eightt.!en mon_ths from the date on which the money is so borrowed, 
against securities of the Central Government or of any State Govern-
ment of any matu.rity, or subject to the previous approval of the 
State Government, against bonds and debentures iss~d by the 
Financial Corporation and maturing within a period not exceeding 
eighteen months from the date on which the money is 'So borrowed 
and every such bOnd and debenture shall be guaranteed by the State 
.. Gove.rnment: , 
Provided that the amount borrowed by the Financial Corporation under 
clause (b) shall not at any time exceed in the aggregate ninety per cent. 
·of the paid-up share capi·tal the~eof. 
• • • • • 
(5) The total amount of bonds and debentures issued and outstanding, 
the amounts bOrrowed by the Financial Co.rporation under clause (b) of 
sub-section (2), sub-section (3) and sub-section (4) and of the contingent 
liabi1iti~ of the Financial Corporation in the form of guarantees given 
by it or underwriting agreemt!nts entered. into by it shall not at any time 
exceed ten times the amount of the paid-up share capital and the reserve 
fund of the Financial Corporation. 
• .. • • • 
8. (1) The Financial Corporation may a~cept from the State Govern-
ment or with the prior approval of the State Government, the Develop-
ment Bank and the Rese.r.ve Bank, a local authority or any other person 
deposits repayable after ·the expiry of a ~riod which shall not be lela 
than twelve months from the date of the making of the deposit and on 
such other terms as it thinks fit: 
Provided -that the total amount of such deposits shall not at any time 
exceed the paid-up share capital of the Financial Corporation. 
(2) All deposits accepted under lIub-section (1), other than the depaslts 
from the State Government'shall be guaranteed by the State Government 
as to the repayment of the principal and the payment of interest. 
• • • • 

15 
10. The Board of directors shall consist of the following, namely:-
• • • • • 
(d) three directors' elected in the p.rescribed manner by the 
parties referred to in clause (c) of sub-section (3) of section 4, one 
of whom shaU be elected f10 represent scheduled banks, another to 
represent co-operative banks and the Hu.rd to represent the remaining 
financial institutions; 
• • • • • 
15. (1) The Chairman of the Board shall be one of the directors, nat 
being the managing director, nominated by the State Government, after 
considering, except in the case of the nomination of the first Chai.rman, 
the recommendation of the Board: 
Provided that the nomination of the Chairman for any period other 
than the first period shall be made only after the vacancies in the office 
of, directors occurring by efflux of time in that period have b~n filled 
by nomination or election as the 'case may be. 
• • • • • 
19. (1) • • • • • 
(5) If for any reason the Chairman of the Board or the Chairman of 
the Executive Committee is unable to attend any meeting of the Board 
or, as the case may be, of the Executive Committee,-
(a) in the case of the meeting of the Board, a director, not being 
the managing ditector, authorised by the Chaitman of the Board in 
writing shall preside at such meeting, but if the director so authorised 
is absent or if no such authorisation has been made, the Board may 
elect a director to preside at that meeting; and 
• ... • • • 
120. (1) ... • • • • 
(2) The minutes of every meeting of the Executive Committee shall 
be laid before the Board at the next following meeting of the Board:, 
21. The Financial Corporation may appoint one or more advisory 
~ommittee or committees for the pu.rpose of assisting the Financial Cor-
poration in the efficient discharge of its functions and, in particular, for 
the purpose of securing that those functions are exercised with due 
regard 10 the ci.rcumstances and conditions prevailing in, and the re-' 
quirements of, particular areas or industries. 
• .' • • • 
Board of 
directors. 
Chairman 
of the 
. Board, 
Meetinas 
of the 
Board and 
Com-
mittee, 
Powers of 
Executive 
Committee. 
Advisory 
Committee. 
25. (l) The Financial Corporation may, subject to the provision'S of Busines,a 
this Act, carryon and transact any of the foI1owing kinds of business, which 
namely: - Financial 
(a) guaranteeing, on such terms 
agreed upon,-
• • • • 
(ii) loans raised by industrial 
banks or State co-operative banks; 
• • • 
and condiotions as 
• • 
concern~ from 
\ 
• r,r~ • 
may be 
scheduled 
Corpora-
tion may 
transact. 

,6 
(4) acting as agent of the Central Government or the ,State 
Government or the Development Bank or the Industrial Finance Cor-
poration of India established under the Industrial Finance Corporation , 
Act, J9-l8, or any other financial institution notified in this 'behalf by 15 of 1948. 
the Central Government in respect o( any matter connected with, or 
arising out of, the grant of loans or advances to an industrial conce,m, 
or 'Subscription to debentures of an industrial concern; , 
(cia) sUbscribing to the stocks, shares, bonds or debentures of aD 
industrial concern fr.om out of the funds representing the, capital 
subscribed in accordance with the provision of section 4A; 
.' • • • ... 
(f) retaining as part of its, assets any stock, shares, bonds or 
debentures of an industrial concern which it may have to take in 
fulfilment of its underwriting liabilities, so however, that it disposes 
of the stock, shares, 'bonds or debentures so acquired as early as 
practicable, but in no case the stock, shares; bonds ~r debentures so 
acquired shall be retained beyond a period of 'Seven years from tthe 
date of such acquisition, except with the prior permission of the 
Development Bank: 
Provided that the Financial Corporation may subscribe tn 
stock or' shares of the industrial concern if such concern increases its 
subs~ribed capital by the issue of further stock or shares in accor-
dance with. and subject to. the p.l'ovisions of section 8.1 of the Com-
panies Act. 1956, but the stock or shares so subscribed shall not be 
retained after the stock 0,1' shares of the industrial concern take in ful-
filment of its underwriting liabilities· are disposed of; 
(g) grantim~ loans or advances to, or subscribinf1; to debentures 
of, an industrial concern, repayable within a period not exceeding 
20 years from the date on which they are granted 01;. subscribed to, 
as the case may be: 
Provided that nothing contained in this clause shall be deemed to 
preclude the Financial Corporation from grantin~ loans or advances 
to, or subscribing to debentures of, an industrial concern to which 
may be attached an option to convert such debentures Or loans into 
stock or shares of the industrial concern: 
Provided fu;rthel' that the Financial Corporation may, in the 
exercise of such option. convert such debentures or ,loans into stock 
or shares of the industrial concern and may also subscribe to stock or 
shares of the industrial concern if such concern increases it~ subscri~ 
ed capital by the issue of further stock or shares in accordance with, 
10f 1956. 
and subj'ect to, the provisions of section 81 orthe Oompanies Act. 1958; lofl951 . 
'. • ... • ... 
(2) No (lccommodation flhall he given under clauses (a). (b) and (g) 
of sub-section (1) unless it is sufficiently secured by a pledge. mortgage, 
hypothecation, or assignment of Govemment or other securities. stock~ 
shares, or secu~d debentures, bullion, movable or irmnovable property 
or other tangible assets in the manner orescribed by r~l7Ulation'S or unless 
it is guaranteed as :to the repayment of' th~ 'P!inCipal and the payment of 
interer;tby the State Governmpnt, a schedu~d bank ar a State co-operative 
bank Of unless it is covered by a guaranrtee falling under anv credit 
guarantee s~eme ,fram~d by the Central Government o~ such oth~ 
,1 
,. 

'17 of 1972. 
1 of 1956. 
2 of 1912. 
77 of 1972. 
~of 1882. 
Government or financial institution as the Central Government may notify 
in this behalf . 
• • • • • 
26. (t) On and from the commencernellt of the State Financial Corpo.;-
rations (Amendment) Act, 1972, the Financial Corporation shall not enter 
into any arrangements under clause (a), (ca) o.r (g) of sub-section (1) 
of section 25 with any industrial concern so that the total amount out-
standing against that concern in respect of all such arrangements together 
with the amount of the face value 6f tbe shares and stocks of that concern 
whether subscribed or agreed to be subscribed and the outstamiing lia-
bilities on account of underwriting agreements and ·the deferred payments 
guarantees is more than- . 
(i) thirty la~hs of rupees in the case of a company 8s defined 
in section 3 of the Companies Act, 1956 or' a co-operative society 
registered under the Co-operative· Societies Act, 1912 or any other 
law relating to Co-operative Societies for the time being in force; and 
(ii) fifteen lakhs of rupees in 'any '?'ther case. 
(2) Nothing contained in sub-section (1) shall apply to any transaction 
entered into by a Financial Corporation with any industrial CQ:Qcem before 
the commencement of the State Financial Corporations (Amendment) 
Act. 1972, and in relation to every such transaction, section 26 of the 
principal Act shall continue to apply as if the said section had not been 
amended by the first-mentioned Act. 
• • • • .. 
28. (1) The Financial Corporation shall not-
• • • • • 
(d) grant any form of assistance to any industria~ concern in 
respect of which the aggregate of the paid-up share capital and. free 
reserves exceeds one crore of rupees. --
• • • • • 
31. (1) Where an industrial aoncern, in breach of any agreement, 
makes any default in repayment of any loan or advance Or any instalment 
thereof or in meeting its obligations in relation to any guarantee given 
by the Corporation o.r otherwise ,fails to comply with the terms of its 
agreement with ·the Financial Corporation or where the Financial Cor-
poration requires an industrial concern to make immediate l'epayment of 
, any loan or advance under section 30 and the industrial concern fails 
to make such repayment then, without prejudice to the provisions of 
ser.tion 29 or'this Act and of section 69 of the Transfer of Property Act, 
1882, any officer of the Financial Corporation, generally or specially autho-
rised by the Board in this behalf, may apply to the district judge within 
the limits of whose jurisdiction the industrial concern catries on the whole 
era substantial part of its business. for one or more of the following 
rel,jefs, namely: - . . 
(a) for an order for the sale of the property pledged, mortgaged, 
hYJlOthecated or assigned to the Financial Corporation as' securi17 for 
the loan or advance; or 
• • • • • 
Limit of 
accommo-
dation. 
Prohibited 
business. 
Special 
provisions 
for 
enforce-
ment of 
claims by 
Financial 
CorporL 
tion. 

Procedure 
of district 
judge in 
respe,et of 
applica-
tions 
under 
~ection 
31. 
Funds Of 
the 
Financial 
Corpora-
tiel&. 
18 
32. (1) • • • • • 
(3~ Before passing any order un~e.r sub-section (1) or sub-section (2), 
the dIstrict judge may, if he thinks fit, ,examine the officer ni8kin, the 
apPlication. 
(4) At the same time as he passes an order under sub-section (1), the 
district judge sha~l issue to the industrial concern a notice accompanied 
by copies of tbe order, the application and the evidence, 1f any, l'ec;.orde~ 
by him calling upon it to show cause on a date to be specified In the 
notice why the ad interim order of attachment should not be made 
absolute or the injunction confirmed. 
• • • • • 
(7) After making an investigation under sub-section (6), the district 
judge may-
(a) confirm the order of attachment and direct the sale of the 
attached property; 
(b) vary the order of attachment so as to release a po,rtion of 
the 'property from attachment and direct the sale of the remaindet' of 
the attached property; 
(c) release the p,roperty from attachment; 
(d) confirm or dissolve the injunction; or 
(e) transfer the management of the industrial concern to the 
Financial Corporation or reject the claim made in this behalf: 
Providl!d that when making an order under clause (c), the district 
judge may make such further orders as he thinks necessary to pr~tect, the 
interests of the Financial Corporation and may apportion the costs of the 
proceedings in such manner as he thinks fit: 
P.rovided further that unl~, the Financial Corporation intimates to 
the district judge that it will not appeal against any order releasing any 
property from atta~hment, such order shall not be g~ven effect to, until 
the eXpiry of the period fixed under 'Sub-section (9) within which. an 
appeal may be preferred or, if an appeal is preferred, un1ess the High 
Court otherwise directs until the appeal is disposed of. 
• • • • • 
(9) Any party aggrieved by an order under sub-section (5) or sub-
seCtion (7) may, within thirty days from the date of the order, apPeal 
to the High Court, and upon such appeal the High Court may, after hear-
ing the parties, pass such orders thereon as it thinks ~roper . 
• • • • • 
33. (1) • • '. • • 
(2) All moneys belonging to the fund shall be deposited in the Reserve 
Bank or the State Bank of I~l(iia or a subsidia,ry bank as defined in the 
State Bank of India (Subsidiary Banks) Act, 1959 Or in any of the banks 
specified in column ,2 of the First Schedule to the Banking Companies 
(ACquisition and Transfer Of Undertakings) Act, 1970 or, in consultation 
with the Reserve Bank.. in a scheduled bank or n State co-operative bank. 
• • • • • 
38 of 1959. 
5 ot 187'-

26 of 1881 
19 
35A. (1) The Financial Corpo.ration may establish a special reserve Special 
fund, to which shall be transferred such portion of the dividends accruing reserve 
to the State Government, the Reserve Bank and the Develop~ent Bank fund. 
on the. shares of the Financial Corporation as may be fixed by agreement 
between "the ~tate Government, the Reserve Bank and the Development 
Bank: 
Provided that the total amount in the said fund shall at no time 
exceed twenty-five per cent. of the paid-up share capital of the Financial 
Corporation:. 
Provided further that after the specified date this sub-section shall 
have effect as if for the words "the State Government the Reserve Bank . , 
and the Development Bank", the words "the State Government and the 
Development Bank" have been substituted except as regards all dividends 
accruing in respect of any completed accounting period prior to the speci-
fied date. 
• • • • • 
36. (1) A general meeting (hereinafter referred to as the annual 
general meeting) shall be held annually at a place in the State where 
there is an office of the Financial Corporation within three months from 
the date on which the annual accounts of the Financial Corporation are 
closed, and a general meeting may ·be convened by the Board at any other 
time. . 
" 
• • • • • 
38. (1) The Financial Corporation shall futnish a statement, in the 
prescribed form, of its assets and liabilities as at the close of business on' 
the last Friday of each month Of, jf that day is a public holiday under the 
Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881, as at the close of business on the pre-
ceding working day to the State Government, the Development Bank and 
the Reserve 'Bank within ten days from the date to which the statement 
relates. 
(2) The Financial Corpo.ration shaU furnish in the prescribed form to 
the State Gove,rnment, the Development Bank and the Reserve Bank 
once every three months or, as frequently as the State Government Or the 
Development Bank or the Reserve Bank may require, a statement show-
ing the classification of its loans and investmenls and of all.loans guaran-
teed by it and underwriting agreements entered into by it. : 
• • • • • 
43. For the purposes of the Indian Income-tax Act, 1922, tlJe Finandal 
Corporation shall be deemed to be a company within the meaning of that 
. ACt and shall be liable to income-tax and super-tax accordingly on its 
income, profits and gains: 
Provided that any sum paid by the State Government under the gua-
rantee given in pursuance of section 6 or section 7 or section 8 shall not 
be ~eated as the income, profits and gains of the Financial Corporation and 
General 
meetin,.. 
Return •. 
Provisions 
relating 
to income-
tax and 
super-tax. 

Delega-
tion of 
powers. 
Power to 
apply 
Ad to 
eertain 
financial 
institu-
tions in 
existence 
at com. 
mencement 
of Act. 
Power of 
Board to 
make 
regula-
tions. 
20 
any interest on debentures, bonds or deposits paid by the Financial Cor-
poratic-n out. of such sum shall not be treated as expenditure incurred by 
it: 
Provided further that in the case of any .shareholder such portion of 
a dividend as has been paid out of any s,uch sum advanced by the State 
Government shall be deemed to be his income from "interest on securi-
ties" and the income-tax shall be· payable thereon as if it were the interest 
receivable on any security of a State Government issued income-tax free 
within the meaning of section 8 of that Act. 
«IA. The Board may, by general or special order, delegate to the 
managing director or to any other officer of the Financial Corporation 
subject to such conditions and limitations, if any, as may be specified in 
the order such of its powers and duties under thi's Act as it may deem 
necessary. 
• .. • • • 
46. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, direct that all or any of th'e p.rovisions of this Act shall, subject 
to such exceptions and restrictions as may be specified, apply to any 
institution in existence at the commencement of this Act which has for 
its object the financing of industrial concerns, and on the issue of such 
notification, the institution shall be deemed to be a Financial Corporation 
established by the State Government for the State within the meaning of 
this Act, and the provisionE of this Act shall· become applicable thereto 
according to the tenor of the notification. 
• • • • • 
48. (1) • • • • • 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the fore-
,oing power, such. regulations may provide £or-
• • • • • 
(k) the manner of determining the sufficiency of the security 
taken under sub-section (2) of section 25; 
• • • • • 
(m) the appointment of advisory committees for technical and 
other advice for the purposes of this Act, fees for attending meetlnp 
thereof and the conduct of bUsiness thereat; and 
• • • .. • 

LOK SABRA 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the State Financial Corporations Act, 1951. 
(ShTi Vishwanath Pratap Singh, Minister of Finance.) 