1
THE UNEMPLOYMENT ALLOWANCE BILL, 2014
By
SHRI ASHOK M AHADEORAO N ETE, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for unemployment allowance to all unemployed persons and for matters
connected therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-fifth  Year of the Republic of  India  as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Unemployment Allowance Act, 2014.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may by  notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
Short title and
commencement.
Bill No. 162 of 2014
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
5

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act; and
(b) “unemployed person" means a citizen of India above the age of eighteen years
having no source of livelihood.
3. (1) Every unemployed person shall be entitled to receive monthly unemployment
allowance at such rate as may be prescribed, till the time he is gainfully employed.
(2) While fixing the rate of unemployment allowance, the Central Government shall
take into account the age, educational qualifications, technical skills, physical disabilities
and such other factors, as it may deem necessary:
Provided that different rates of unemployment allowance may be prescribed for
different categories of persons and for persons living in different States or parts of States.
4. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law
in this behalf, provide adequate funds to the State Governments for the purpose of payment
of unemployment allowance to unemployed persons in the States.
5. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Unemployment
allowance to
unemployed
persons.
Definitions.
Central
Government
to provide
funds.
Power to
make rules.
10
5
15
20

3
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
There are a large number of unemployed persons in the country. Even after getting
educational qualifications, a good number of youth are not getting gainful employment.
It is, therefore, proposed that all unemployed youth shall be entitled to unemployment
allowance till they get gainful employment.
Hence this Bill.
NEW DELHI; ASHOK MAHADEORAO NETE
November 12, 2014.

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides that every unemployed person shall be entitled to receive
monthly unemployment allowance at such rate as the Central Government may fix after
taking into consideration certain factors. Clause 4 provides that the Central Government
shall provide adequate funds to the State Governments for payment of unemployment
allowance to unemployed persons in the States. The Bill, therefore, if enacted will involve
expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a sum of about rupees
one thousand crore will be involved as recurring expenditure per annum.
No non-recurring expenditure is likely to be involved.
4

5
MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 5 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character.

LOK  SABHA
——————
A
BILL
to provide for unemployment allowance to all unemployed persons and for matters
connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Ashok Mahadeorao Nete, M.P .)
GMGIPMRND—2781LS(S-3)—03-12-2014.