Bill :No. US of 1952. 
THE DURGAH KHAWAJA SAHEB BILL, 1952 
(As INTRODUCED IN THE HOUSB OF THE PEOPLE) 
:a: 
BILL 
to make provi8ion for the proper admini8tration of the Durgah and the 
Endowment of the DUTgah of Khawaja Moin-ud-din Ohi8hti, generally 
known as lJurgah I(hawaja Saheb, Ajmer. 
BE it enaoted by Parliament 8S follows:-
1. Short title and commencement.-(l) This Act may be called the 
Durgah Khawaja 8aheb Act, 1952. 
(2) It shall come into foroe on such date as the Central Governm~nt 
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 5 
2. Deflnitlons.-In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
(a) "Chief Commissioner" means the Chief Commissioner of 
Ajmer. aoting in his individual oapacity; 
(b) "Committee" means the Committee constituted under 
seotion 4; 
~o) "Durgab" means the institution known as the Durgah 
Khawaja 8abeb, Ajmer. and includes th,e premises called the Durgah' 
Sharif with all buildings contained therein, together with all addi-
tions thereto or alI. alterations thereof which may hereafter be made 
from time to time ~ 
(d) "Durgah 1!]ndowment" includes-
(i) tho Durgah Kbawaja Saheb. Ajmor; 
(ii) all buildings a.nd movable property within the boundaries 
of the Durgah Sharif; 
10 
16 
(iii) Durgah Jagir. inoluding all land. houses and shope and 20 
all immovable property wherev,er situBted belonging to the Durgah 
t:;harif; , 
(iv) all other property and all income derived from any source 
whatsoever dedicated to the Durgah or placed for any religious. 
pious or charitl\bJe purposes und~r the Durgah Administration. 
including the J ogirdari vilhlges of Hokran and Kisbanpur in 
Ajmer; and 
to) all such nazars or offerings as are received on behalf of 
the Durgah by the Nazim or an'y person authorised by him; 
(8) "Nazitll" means the Nazim appointed under section 9. 
I. ACt to oVtlrride Act, XX of 1888.-Thls Act shall have effect not-
withstanding 'anything incon8is~nt therewith contained in tbe Religious 
Endowments Act, 1863 (XX of 1863). 
26 
30 

a 
,. '!'he Oommltt ... -(l) The administration, control and management 
of the Durgab Endowment shall be vested in a Committee constituted 
in the mllDner hereinafter provided. 
(2) The Committee shall, by the name of • 'The Durgah Committee, 
6 Ajmer", be 1\- body corporate and shall have perpetual succession and a 
common seal and shall by the said name sue and be sued through its 
President. 
6. OomPOSltioD of Oommltt.ee.-The Committee shall consist of not 
less than five and not more than seven members all of whom shan be 
10 Haunfi Muslims and shall be appointed by the Central Government. 
8. Term of olllee ID4 rtIIpatioD IoIUl removal of member. and ell1l&1 
Vac&Dct88.-(l) A member of the Committee shall hold office for a period 
of five years from the date of his appointment but may resign his office 
earli,er by giving Dotice in writing thereof to the Central Government and 
IG shall cease to be a member on the resignation being accepted by that 
Uovernment. 
(2) The Central Government may remove from office any member of 
the Committe&-
(n) who is of unsound mind and stands so declared by a competent 
20 court, or 
(b) who has applied for being ad.judged an imlOlvent, or is an 
undischarged insol~ent, or 
(e) who has b,een convicted of any offence involving moral turpi-
tude, or 
26 (d) who has nbsented himself for R period of twelve consecutive 
months from the meetings of the Committee, or 
(e) whose presence on tbe Committee would, in the opinion of the 
Central Government, be prejudicial to th,e interests of the Durga.h. 
(8) Casual vBcancies among members of the Committee shall be filled, 
30 by appointment made by the Central Government in consulta.tion with 
the remainin~ members of the Committee. 
(4) The tenn of office of a member appointied to fill a Msual vacancy 
shall be for so long only 88 the member whose place h88 been filled would 
have been entitled to hold office if the vacancy had not occurred. 
'35 '1. PnIlcllllt aDd Vloe-PnII4eDt.-(l) The Committee shall eIecll B 
President and a Vice-President from among Ita members. 
(2) Wben the office of the President· is vacant or in the absence of the 
President from any meeting, the Vice·Presldent shall perfonn the func-
tions of the President. 
60 (3) In the absence of the President and Vice-Presldenti, a meeting of 
the Committl'e may be presided over by a. member elected by the majority 
of t.he members present at the meeting. 
8. 81lperlllllon of the Oommlttee.-If in the opinion of the Centrnl 
Government the Commitfee Is guilty of gross mismanagement of the at\'airs 
4& of the Dn1'gsh or of negler.t fn the perfonnance of its functions. the Central 
Government !pay supet'Bede thE' Committee and Antirust any person with full 
powers of the CommltiEle until a new Committee is consti€ulled in accor-
dnncp. with the provisions of this Ac~. 

9. Power of Central Government to appolDt :Ru1m.-(l) The Uentral 
Government may appoint a person to be the No.zim of the Durgah and the 
Nazim shall by virtue of his omoe be the Secretary of the Committ.ee as 
well us a member thereof. 
(2) 'l'he Nazim shall be paid such salary and allowances, as ~e Central 
Government may fix, out of the revenues of the Durgah Endowment. 
(3) The Uommittee shall exercise its powers of administration, oontrol 
and lIumagement of the Durgah Endowment through the Na.zim. 
5 
10. Advilory Commit.tee to advJae Ifalim.-For the purpose of advising 
th.e Nazim in the discharge of his functions under this Aot and also for 10 
such other purposes as may be specified in any bye-laws of the Committee, 
the Uentral Government may, in oonsultation with the Chief Commissioner, 
oonstitute an Advisory Committee oonsisting of suoh number of persons, 
being Hanafi ~uslims, not exceeding seven, as the Ceutral Government 
may think fit·, suoh persons being chosen from among the residents of the 15 
8tate of Ajmer or any of the neighbouring States. 
11. Powell &Dd duU .. of the OOmmitt. ... -The powers und duties of 
the Uommitt.ee shall be-
(4) to administer, oontrol and manage the Durgah Endowment; 
( b) to keep the buildings within the boundaries of the Durgah 20 
8harif and all buildings, houses and shops comprised in the Durgah 
Endowment in proper order and in a state of good repair i 
(0) to reoeiv.e all moneys and other inoome of the ·Durgab Endow-
menti 
(d) to see that the Endowment funds are spent in the manner 26 
desired by the donors; 
(6) to pay salaries, allowances and perquisites and make all other 
payments due out of, or oharged on, the revenues or income of the 
JJurgah ~ndowment; 
U) to determine the privileges of the Khadims und to r.egulate 
their presenoe in tlie Durgah by the grant to them of licences in that 30 
Iilehalf, if the Committee thinks it necessary so to do; 
(g) to define the powers and duties of the Advisory body; 
(h) to determine the functions and powers, if any, whioh the 
Sajjadanashin may exeroise in relation ~ tb.e Durgah i 35 
(i) to appoint, suspend or dismiss servants of the Durgah Endow-
menti 
(j) to make suoh provision for the eduoation and maintenance of 
th.e indigent Khadims and their families residing in India as the 
Uommittee considers expedient consistently with the financial posi- ... n 
tiOll of the Durgah ; "IW 
(1.) to delegate to the Na.zim such powers aud functions as the 
Committee may think fit; 
(l) to do all other suoh things as may be inoidental or conduoive 
to th.e efficient administration of the Durgah. 
1~. Remuneration of the 8&Jiadanaahln.--There shall bc· paid to the 
person for the time being holding the offiCQ of the Sajja.dana8hin remunera-
tion at the rate of rupees two hundred per mensem out of the revenues of 
the Durgah Endowment. 
45 

,,: 
lS. &ucceaaion to lIle oIIiee of Sal1ad&D.arh1n.-( 1) When the office of 
the Sajjadanllllhill falls vacant allli there is 110 dispute regtU"ding succession 
to that ottice, the Committee shall, with the approval of the Chief Com-
missioner, pass au order according recognition as Sajjo.danashin to the 
'0 perSOll succeeding to that office. 
(2) Wheu the ottice of· the Sajjadanashin falis vacant and there is a. 
dispute regarding succession to that office, the Committee shall, after con-
sultation with the Chief Commissioner, rofer the dispute to the Judicial 
Commissioner of Ajmer for decision and the Judicial Commissioner, after 
10 taking such evidence as he considers necessary and ufter giving an oppor-
tllllity to the parties concemed to be heard in the matter shall communicate 
his decision on the disputQ· to the Committee. 
(3) 'fhe Committee, ou the receipt of the decision, shall, with the 
previous approval of the Chief Commissioner, pass an order in acoordance 
IS with the aforesaid decision of the J udioial Commissioner declaring the 
person found entitlod to suooeed to the offioe of the Sajjadanashin and &C-
aording recognition as Sajjadanashin to suob person. 
(4) An order passed by the Committ.ee under sub·seotion (1) or sub· 
section (8) shall be tinal Bnd shall not be questioned in any court. 
~O (5) During the pendenoy of the dispute referred to in sub-section (~), 
the Committee shall, with the previous approval of the Chief Commissioner, 
muke such interim arrangements for the performance of the funotions of 
the SajjadanaBhin as it mlly think fit. 
14. Pow. to soUcit or recelve offerings em behalf of the Dugah.-lb 
25 shall be lawful for the Nazim or any person. authorised by him in this 
behalf to solicit and receive on behalf of the Durgah tiny nazars or ofter-
ings from any person, and notwithstanding anything contained in any 
rule of law or decision to the contrary, llO person other than the Nazim 
or any person authorised' by him in this beha.lf shall rec.eive or be entitled 
30 to r,eoeive nazars or off'erings on bohalf of the Durguh. 
15. Oommlttee to observe IlUlUm Law and tenets of the Ohlahtl 
Sab1\.-Save as otherwise provided under uny enactment for the·time 
being in force, the Committee shall, iu exercise of its powers and the dis-
charge of its duties, follow the rules of Muslim Lt\w applicable to Hanafi 
35 Muslims in India, and shall conduct Ilnd regulate the· established rites 
and ceremonies in acoordance with the tenets of the Chishti Saints. 
16. Board of Arbltl&t1on.-(l) If ll11y dispute arises between the Com-
mitt~e on the one part. and the Sajjadauashin, any Khadim, and any 
person claiming to be the servant of the Durgah under some h,ereditary 
iO right or under some contract of omployment or ani one or more of them 
on t~e other part and such dispute does not, in the opinion of the Com-
mitte.e, relate to any religious usuge or custom or to the performance of 
any religious office, it shall,· at the request of either party to the dis-
pute, be referred to a Board of Arbitration consisting of-
45 (i) a nominee of the Committe~; 
(ii) u nomine,e of the other party to the .dispute; and 
(iii) a person who holds or has. held the office of, or is acting or 
has aoted as, a district judge, to be appointed by the Central Govern-
ment, . 
30 and the award 'of the Board shall be final and sholl not be questioned in 
any court. . 

I; 
(2) .No suit shall. lie in any oourt in reap,eQt of any ma~ter .which is 
required by sub-section (1) to be, referred to a Board of Arbitration. 
17. Defect In Ule CODItttutlOD ot, or vacancy In, the Oommittee DOt to 
lIlvlolidate" acta and proceedlDp.-No act or proceeding of the Committee 
sha.ll be invalidated merely by reason of ~he existenceuf a vacancy among I) 
its members or a defect in the constitution th,ereof. 
18. _morcement of bal orden of OommU .. tee.- Where in the 
exercise of its powers and performance of its duti~s the Committee passes 
any tinal order against any person direoting him to do" or to abstain from 
doing, something, the person agalOs1; whom the order'is 'directed shall be 10 
bound to comply with the order IUld in oase of non-cOmpliance with suoh 
ord,er any oivil court within the local limits of whose jurisdiotion the 
person against whom the order has been psssed, resides or carries on 
business may execute the order 10 the same manuer and by the same 
procedure as if it were a decree or order passed by itself in a suit. II) 
19. Audit ot &CCo'IIDta and aDDul nJOft.-{l) 'I'he ucoouuts of the 
Durgah shall be audited every year by suoh persons and in suoh manner 
as the Central Government may direct . 
. (2) The Committee shall every year prepare a report on the administra-
tion of the Durgah, which, together with the acoounts of the Durgah and 20 
the report of the auditor thereon, shall be published in the Official Gazette. 
10. B,"laWl'''T'(l) The Committee may make bye-laws to carry out 
the purposes of this Aot. 
(2) In particular and without prejudioe to the generality of the fore-
going power suoh bye-laws may provide for- 25 
(a) the division of duties among the President a.nd the members 
of th,e Committee i 
(b) the time and place of, the quorum for, and prooedure ani 
oonduot of business at, the meetings of the Committee; 
(0) the security, if any, to b~ taken from the e~ployees of the 30 
Commit.te,e; 
(d) the books and accounts to be kept, at the offioe of the Com-
mittee; 
( 6) the custody and investment of the property and the funds of 
~D~hi ~ 
(f) the details to be included in or ,excluded from the budget of 
the Durgahi 
(g) the persons by whom receipts may be grunted for mouey paid 
to the Committee; 
(h) the maintenance of peace and order within th,e Durgah com- 40 pound; , 
(i) the duties and powers of the employees of the Durgah; 
(i) the powers and functions of the Advisorv Committee and the 
mat,tars in whioh the advioe of the Advisory COD1'mittee may be sought 
by the Nazim; ~ 
, (k) the manner of entering into contraots by or on behalf of the Committee. 
~8) Any power ~ .make bye-laws conferr~d by this section is conferred 
subject to the collciltlon of the bye-laws bemg first, published in draft for 

6 
objections by being hung up on the premises of the Durgah and of their 
not taking effect until they havti! been approved and confirmed by the 
Cenka! Government and published in the Official Gu.ette. 
(4) The Central Government in approving and oonfirming a bye-law 
5 may make any change therein whioh appears to be necessary. 
(5) 'I'he Central Government may, after previous publioation of its 
intention, Clwcel any bye-law whioh it haa approved IWd confirmed, and 
thereupon the bye·lllw shall oease to hllve effect. 
21. "l'raIUIltloDll l'rovlIloDl.-The person holding the office of Sajjadu-
10 nash in immediately before the commencement of thia Act shall on such 
commencement continue to hold the aaid office Bubjeo~ to the other pro-
visions of this Act. 
22. Bepeal.-The Durgah Khawaja Saheb Act, 1900 (XXIII of 1006) 
Ilnd the Durgah Khawaja Saheb (Emergency Provisions) Act, 196.0 (XVD 
Ii, of 1050) are hereby repealed. 

'1 
STATEMENT OF OBJEOTS AND REASONS 
In 1949, the Government of India appointed a Committee, under the 
Ohairmanship of Mr. Justice Ghulam Hassan, then a Judge of the Allaha-
bad High Oourt, to: .report on the affaira of the Durgah Khawajo. Saheb, 
Ajmer, and to make recommendations for its efficient management in the 
int~resta of the devotees. The present Bill seeks to implement ~he deci-
sions of Government on the recommendations of the Committee. The 
principal provisions are as follows:-
(i) 'rhe administkation, control and management of the :purgah 
are to vest in a High Power Committee consisting of representative 
Muslims to be appointed by the Centml Government. 
(ii) A paid Nazim is to be appointed a Member-Secretary of the 
Oommittee and to administer the Durgah. 
(iii) An Advisory Committee is to be set up to advise the Nuim 
in the discharge of his functions. 
(iv) 'l'he remuneration of the Bajjadanashin and the manner of 
determining succession to that office are laid down. 
(v) 'l'he soliciting or ~ceiving of offerings on behalf of thQ Durgah 
is to be prohibited except through the Nuim or a person authorised 
by him. 
(VI' A Board of Arbitration is to be set up to settle disputes not 
relating to any religious usage or custom or to the performance of 
. Qly religious office. 
'X. N. KATJU. 
NEW DBLBIi 
The 10th November, 19152. 

HOUSE OF THE PEOPLE 
A 
" 'BILL 
to make provision for the proper administration of the 
Durg&h and the Endowment of the Durgah of Kha.waja. 
Moin-ud-din Chishti, genera.lly known 88 Durgah 
Khawaja. Sa.heb, Ajmer. 
f'Bh,.i Kailo,s Nath Katju. 
Miniater/or Home AlJair8). 
GIPD-LAD-862 P 8--14-11-62-1,600 