1
THE TEA GARDEN WORKERS (TIMELY PAYMENT OF DUES)
 BILL, 2019
By
PROF. SAUGA TA ROY, M.P.
A
BILL
to ensure timely payment of dues to workers of tea gardens whose management
has been directed by the Central Government to be taken over by the
Tea Board vide Central Government Notification S.O. 260 (E)
dated 28th January, 2016.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Seventieth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1.  This Act may be called the Tea Garden Workers (Timely Payment of Dues)  Act,
2019.
Short title.
Bill No. 113 of  2019
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
2.  (1) The Central Government shall, within one month of the coming into force of
this Act, take such steps, including confiscation and auction of personal properties of the
office bearers of the Tea Companies in the State of West Bengal, as are necessary for
payment of wages and other dues to tea garden workers of such companies.
(2) In this section the expression "Tea Companies" means the following Tea Gardens,
whose management has been directed by the Central Government to be taken over by the
Tea Board vide Central Government Notification S.O. 260 (E) dated 28th January, 2016:—
(i) Birpara Tea Estate;
(ii) Garganda Tea Estate;
(iii) Lankapara Tea Estate;
(iv) Tulsipara Tea Estate;
(v) Huntapara Tea Estate;
(vi) Dhumchipara Tea Estate; and
(vii) Demdima Tea Estate.
Timely
payment of
dues to tea
garden
workers in
respect of Tea
Companies in
the State of
West Bengal
whose
management
has been
directed by the
Central
Government
to be taken
over by the
Tea Board.
5
10

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
The Central Government recently notified in the Gazette and authorised the Tea Board
to take immediate steps to take over the management of seven tea estates in the State of
West Bengal. These gardens belonged to the M/S Duncan Industries Limited, where rupees
seventy crores are due to the tea garden workers. But till now, the dues of workers have
not been released. A stringent law is necessary to ensure that workers dues are timely paid
and workers do not die of starvation.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW D ELHI; SAUGATA ROY
June 12, 2019.
3

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill provides that the Central Government shall, within one month of
the coming into force of this Act, take such steps as are necessary for payment of wages
and other dues to tea garden workers. Such steps may include financial assistance from
the Central Government. However, at this stage, it is not possible to give the estimates of
expenditure which would be incurred from the Consolidated Fund of India.
4

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to ensure timely payment of dues to workers of tea gardens whose management
has been directed by the Central Government to be taken over by the
Tea Board vide Central Government Notification S.O. 260 (E)
dated 28th January, 2016.
————
(Prof. Saugata Roy, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—492LS(S3)—24.06.2019.