Bill No.  113 of  2018
Short title  and
extent.
THE NATIONAL POVERTY ALLEVIATION FUND BILL, 2018
By
DR. BOORA NARSAIAH GOUD, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for the constitution of the National Poverty Alleviation Fund and for
matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-ninth Year of the Republic of  India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the National Poverty Alleviation Fund Act, 2018.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
 2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "absolute poverty" means the condition of the household below the food
threshold level;
(b) "basic sectors" means the disadvantaged sectors including farmers, artisans,
workers in the formal sector and migrant workers, workers in the informal sector, women,
persons with disabilities, senior citizens, victims of calamities and disasters, youth and
students, children and urban poor;
Definitions.5
10
As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
(c) "Fund" means the National Poverty Alleviation Fund constituted under
section 3;
(d) "human development index" means the measure of performance of a country
based on three outcomes of development namely, the state of health (measured by life
expectancy at birth), the level of knowledge and skill (measured by a weighted average
of adult literacy and enrollment rates) and the level of real income per capita, adjusted
for poverty considerations as social indicators of the citizen's ability to lead a long and
healthy life, to acquire knowledge and skills, and to have access to the resources
needed to afford a decent standard of living highlihting;
(e) "non-Governmental organizations" means any organization registered under
Societies Registration Act, 1860 focused on the upliftment of the basic sectors of
society by providing advocacy, training, community organizing, research, access to
resources, and other similar activities;
(f) "poor person" means a person or a group of persons,—
(i) living below the national or regional poverty line prescribed by the
Central Government or the State Governments concerned, as the case may be, as
per necessity, from time to time;
(ii) marked backward on the basis of human development index; and
(iii) excluded from the national development process on the grounds of
particular gender or social group;
(g) "poverty alleviation" means the reduction of absolute poverty and relative
poverty;
(h) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(i) "relative poverty" means the gap between the rich and the poor;
(j) "self-help groups" means informal associations of people who choose to
come together to find ways to improve their living conditions;
(k) "social mobilization" means the process to eradicate poverty of particular
group or community by increasing awareness and to enable them to participate in
decision making process in organized or collective way and to build up their skill and
capacity;
(1) "urban poor" means individuals or families residing in urban centers and
urbanizing areas whose income or combined household income falls below the poverty
threshold and/or cannot afford in a sustained manner to provide their minimum basic
needs of food, health, education, housing and other essential amenities of life;
(m) "workers in the formal sector" means workers in registered business
enterprises who sell their services in exchange for wages and other forms of
compensation;
(n) "workers in the informal sector" means poor individuals who operate
businesses that are very small in scale and are not registered with any national
government agency, and to the workers in such enterprises who sell their services in
exchange for subsistence level wages or other forms of compensation; and
(o) "youth" means any person who has attained the age of fifteen years but has
not attained the age of twenty-nine years.
3. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute
a Fund to be known as the National Poverty Alleviation Fund for carrying out the purposes
of this Act.
(2) The Central Government and the State Governments shall contribute to the Fund
in such proportion as may be prescribed.
(3) Such other sums as may be received by way of donation, contribution or assistance
or otherwise shall also be credited to the Fund.
Constitution
of the
National
Poverty
Alleviation
Fund.
5
10
21 of 1860.
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50

3
4. (1) The Central Government shall set up a National Poverty Alleviation Board for
the purpose of administering the Fund.
(2) The Board shall consist of—
(i) a Chairperson, to be appointed by the Central Government;
(ii) one representative each of the Union Ministries of Agriculture, Labour,
Social Justice and Empowerment, Rural Development, Women and Child Development
and Finance;
(iii) one representative of the NITI Aayog;
(iv) one representative of every State Government;
(v) three members representing the non-Governmental organisations,
self-help groups and Labour Unions to be appointed by the Central Government in
such manner as may be prescribed;
(vi) the Secretary of the Union Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs who
shall be ex-officio Secretary to the Board;
(3) The Central Government shall provide to the Board such number of officers and
staff as may be required for its efficient functioning.
(4) The salary and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of service
of Chairperson, members, officers and staff of the Board shall be such as may be prescribed.
5. (1) The Board shall formulate policies and guidelines regarding welfare of the poor
person, household or community.
(2) The Board shall utilize the Fund for the following purposes:—
(i) income generation, skill development, employment creation and production
growth in different sectors such as agriculture, livestock, cottage and small industry
based on local resources and raw materials;
(ii) improving primary health and literacy;
(iii) imparting technical education, providing employment training for youth;
(iv) providing small irrigation, facilities of drinking water, sanitation, rural
road, rural energy and environment to render support for poverty alleviation as per
necessity; and
(v) imparting training, organising seminar and field visit to build up the
capacity of the person, household, community institution and staffs involved through
the medium of social mobilization for conducting poverty alleviation programme.
6. (1) Every State Government and the Union territory Administration, as the case
may be, shall conduct a district-wise survey, in such manner and with such details of all
poor persons, household or community within their respective jurisdictions and cause
the same to be published in such manner and form, as may be prescribed.
(2) Any complaint or objection relating to inclusion or omission of name of any poor
person, household or community shall be addressed to the District Magistrate concerned
who shall, after due inquiry, decide upon the rectification of the records.
7. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of the Act.
Survey of
poor persons.
Power to
make rules.
.
Constitution
of the
National
Poverty
Alleviation
Board for
administering
the Fund.
Duties of the
Board.
5
10
15
25
30
35
40
20

4
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such
rules may provide for,—
(a) the manner in which the Fund may be applied;
(b) the conditions governing the grant of loans or subsidy;
(c) the conditions governing grant-in-aid;
(d) the standard of welfare measures and facilities to be provided out of the Fund;
(3) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
10
5

STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS  AND REASONS
Poverty refers to a situation when people are deprived of the basic necessities of life.
It is often characterized by inadequacy of food, shelter and clothes. In other words, poverty
refers to a state of privation where there is a lack of essential needs for subsistence. Many
people in India do not get two square meals a day. They do not have good dwelling units to
live in. Their children do not get proper basic education.
Poverty is a widespread condition in India. Since Independence, poverty has been a
concern of every successive Government. The percentage of persons below the Poverty
Line in 2011-12 has been estimated as 25.7 per cent, in rural areas and 13.7 per cent, in urban
areas. India is home to twenty two per cent, of the world's poor persons. Two hundred and
sixty million people in the country do not have income to access a consumption basket.
Eradication of poverty would ensure a sustainable and inclusive growth of economy and
society.
It is necessary to uplift economic and social status of the poor persons, household or
community through social mobilization to ensure their access to the basic services and
facilities and to enable them to utilize it. There is also a need to build up their capacity so that
they can exercise their right and actively participate in the decision making process. The
need is also to do everything possible and within our limits to alleviate poverty from our
country. Reduction of poverty in India is vital for the attainment of international goals.
It is imperative to establish a Fund for funding and implementation of various
programmes related to poverty alleviation through active participation of poor and backward
class of society and by providing grant and necessary assistance to the institutions involved
in the activities for poverty alleviation.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; BOORA NARSAIAH GOUD
March 27, 2018.
5

FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the constitution of a National Poverty Alleviation
Fund to which the Central and State Governments shall contribute funds in such proportion
as may be prescribed. Clause 4 provides for the constitution of a Board to administer the
Fund. Clause 5 provides for the utilisation of Fund for income generation, skill development,
promotion of literacy etc. Clause 6 provides for conducting of district-wise survey of all the
poor persons, households or community covered under poverty alleviation. The expenditure
relating to States shall be borne out of the Consolidated Funds of the respective States.
However, the expenditure in respect of Union territories shall be borne out of the Consolidated
Fund of India. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated
Fund of India. It is estimated that an annual recurring expenditure of about rupees twenty
thousand crore will be involved.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees twenty-five thousand crore is also likely
to be involved.
6

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLATION
Clause 7 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out
the purposes of the Bill. As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of
legislative power is of a normal character.
7

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for the constitution of the National Poverty Alleviation Fund and for matters
connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
Dr. Boora Narsaiah Goud, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—294Ls(S3)—10-07-2018.