LOK SABRA 
CORRIGENDA 
to 
THE BRITANNIA ENGINEERING COMPANY LIMITED (MOKAMEH UNIT) AND 
THE ARTHUf. BUTLER AND COMPANY (MUZAFFARPORE) LIMI'1ED (ACQUISITION 
AND TRANSFER OF UNDERTAKINGS) BILL, 1978 
I-To belAs introduced in 10k Sabha 7 
1 • Page (i),-
in the Title of the Bill,-
W "(MUZAFFERPORE) n read "(MUZAFFARPORE)" 
2. Page 6,-
against line 10, insert the marginal citation -
"65' of 195'1. t1 
3. Page 8, line 36,-
ru. "ve sted" ~ "va st" 
4. Page 9, line 19,-
fQl: "Co mp a.Y an d " re ad "Camp any and" 
5' • Page 10, Ii ne s 1 and 2,-
fJr "Goverment company" ~ "Government company" 
6. Page 11, line 48,-
after 
7. Page 12,-
''uni t " , insert. "or" 
iQ.r. line 2, mad-
"unit or in relation to any undertaking owned 
by Arthur Butler and" 
8. Page 12, in the marginal heading to clause 24,-
!2J:. "Accoun" ~ "Account." 
9 . Page 1 3, 1 ine 1,-
!Q.I:, "Central rnment" ~ "Central Govemroont" 
10. Page 14, line 12,-
arte r "i s " insert "in" 
NEW DELHI; 

BiU No. 113 of 1178 • 
THE BRITANNIA ENGINEERING COMPANY LIMITED (MOlCAMEH 
UNIT) AND THE ARTHUR BUTLER AND COMPANY (MUZAFFER-
PORE) LIMITED (ACQUISITION AND TR.AN~ OP' trNDJel\-
TAKINGS) BILL, 1978 
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
CLAUSICS 
1. Short title and commencement. 
2. Definitions. 
CHAPTER II 
ACQUISITION AND TRANSFER ,OF MOKAMEH UNIT AND UNDERTAKINGS OF 
ARTHUR BUTLFR AND COMPANY 
3. Vesting in the Central Government of Mokamea umt· and u~ 
takings of Arthur Butler and Company. 
4. General effect of vesting. 
5. Power of Central Government to- direct vesting of Mokameh unit 
and the undertakings of Arthur Butler and Company in a GoVem-
ment company. 
6. Britannia Engineering Company and Arthur Butler ;and Compur 
to be liable for certain prior liabilities. 
CHAPTER III 
PAYMENT OF AMOUNT 
7. Payment Of amount. 
8. Payment of further amount. 
CHAPTER. IV 
MANAGEMENT, ETC., OF MOKAMEH UNIT AND THE UNDIIIftTAKJ!JOS OF ARTHUR 
BUTLER AND COMPANY 
9. Management, etc., of Mokameh unit and the ~dert.akirigs of 
Arthur Butler and Company. 
10. Duty to deliver possession of Mokameh unit and undertakings of 
Arthur Butler and Company. 
11. Duty of the companies to furnish partkulars. 
12. Duty of persons in charge of management of Mokameh unit or 
undertakinp of Arthur Butler and Company to deliv.. ...1;8, 
etc. 

(li) 
. ~. CEr~ V 
Pao¥mmNs ULA!'ING TO J!MPLOYEIS 01' MOKAM&H UNIT AND OF ARTayB 
BuTLD AND COMPANY 
CLAUSBS 
1,. Employment of emphyees to continue. 
14. Provident fund and other funds. 
CHAPI'ER VI 
COM:MlSSlONI:B OF PAYMl:NTS 
15. Appointment of C()1TUTljssjOller of Payments. 
16. Payment by Central Government to the Commissioner. 
17. Certain pQWers of the Central Government or Government company. 
18. Claims to be made to the Commissioner. 
19. Priority of claims. 
20. Examination of cla:lma. 
21. Admission or rejection of claims. 
22. Disbursement of money by Commissioner. 
23. Disbursement of amounts to Britannia Engineering Company and 
Arthur Butler and Company. 
24. Unctisbursed or unclaimed amount to be deposited with the Gene-
ral Revenue Account. 
CHAPrER vn 
Mlsca.LANBo11s 
25. Act to have o\'en"1d:i.ng effect. 
26. Contracts to cease to have effect unless ratified by the Central 
Gowrn.ment or the Government company. 
27. Penalties. 
28. 0Jfen.ces by companies. 
29. Protection of actioo taken in ,ood Wth. 
30. Delegation of powers. 
31. Power to make rules. 
32. Power to remove dfftlculties. 
33. Declaration as to the policy of the State. 
THE FIRST SCHEDULE. 
THE SECOND SCHEDULE. 

am No. U! of ltT1 
THE BRITANNIA ENGINEERlNG COMPANY LIMITED (MOKAMDI 
UNIT) AND THE ARTHUR Bt1'1'LER AND COMPANY (MUZAn'A&-
PORE) LIMITED (ACQUISITION AND TRANSFER OF UNDD-
TAKINGS) BILL, 19'1'8 
A 
BILL 
-eo provide 1M the acquisition and traftl/ef' of the right, title and. ~~terat 
of the undertakings of Britan.taoia E'ngiMerirag Compcmll itt. rel4ticm to 
theM:~kame~ unit O1L"Red by it 4ftd the rigM, tttIe and intere.t of 
Arthutr Butte7' and Compmt.lI tn ,eLit;ora to the~.'oumecl 
'by it, with a. NW to ensuring the con.tmu.id tn4nu~ of teIl'WGy 
wa;gom and othetr goods essential to 11he neecfe.o1 t~ oou,~ in. gene-
,.al and the RailW4l1B in pcz.,ticula9', aM few matter. ~Mcte~ t~­
u'ith 09' incidental the,eto. 
WJtJ:RJ:As Britannia Engineering Company at the Mokameh unit and 
Arthur Butler and Company were engaged in the manufacflure of railway 
wagons and other goods; 
AND WHEREAS as a result of the closure of the wagon and other under-
S takinll owned by the companies aforesaid, there was a substantial fall in 
the manufacture of railway wagons and other goods; 
AND WHEREAS for the purpose of bringing .the closed works of the com-
panies aforesaid into operation the management of the Mokameh unit of 
Britannia Engineering Company and the management of the under-
10 takings of Arthur Butler and Company were taken over by the Central 
GoV'emm.ent under the Industries (Development and Regulation) Act, 
85 011951. 1951; - \ 
AND W'R8REAS it is neceuary to acquire the said· wagon and other 
undertaldngs to ensure the continued manufacture. of railway wagoll8 and 

Short title 
and 
commence 
menl 
Ddnitiena. 
other goocla which are essential to the needs of the country in general. 
and the Railways in particular; 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twenty-ninth Year of the 
Republic of India as follows:-
CHAPI'ER I 
PltELrMIN ART 
1. (1) Thm Act may be called the Britannia Engineering Company 
Umited (Mokameh Unit) and the Arthur Butler and Company (Muza-
ffarpore) Limited (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1978. 
(2) The provisions ~ sections 27 and 28 shall come into force at once 10 
and the remaining provisions of this Act shall be deemed to have come 
into force on the 1st day of April, 1978. 
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
(e) CCappointed day" means the 1st day of April, 1978; 
~', ~ (b) u~r Butler and Companv" means Messrs. Arthur Butler: IS 
,.,'. 'f'.zi::,aiY'{Mur.affarpore) Limi~d, a company within the mean-
q'., '~Ol th.a CompdrlaS' Act, 1996 •. ·aDd uving its regl.tered oftlce at 
. ,;: .. (SWiM) :R"oU1~·a&UtUi ~ift tila State of W.st Bengal; . , , 
'(c) ngritannia Engineering Company" means Messrs. Britannia 
Engineering Company Limited, a dompany within the meaning of 20 
1 of 1958 . 
'the Companies Ac~. 1956, and having its registered office at 3, Netaji 1 of 1956. 
Subhash Road, Calcutta, in the State of West Bengal; 
(d) "Commissioner" means the Commissioner of Payments 
.•. ' .. appointed under seCtion 15; , 
(eo) "Gowmment OCIIIftlpany" means a company within the 25 
meaning of 'SeCtion 8111 of the Companies Act, 1956' ed referred to 1 of 1956, 
m seetion 5, Of this Act; 
. (f) "Mokameh unit" means the wagon and other under'takings 
, 'b'W!\ed by Britannia Engineering Company at Mokameh, in the State 
~ru~ ~ 
(g) "notiftcatlon'" mean~ a nOtiftcation published in th~ Offtcial 
-Gazette· , 
, (h.) "prescribed" means prescribed by rulf'S made under this 
~~ct; , 
(£) "specified date", in r.,.tion'to ftDv prolVision of this Act, ~eu8 95 
such date a~ the Central Government may, by notification, specify for 
:the purpoSe, of. that provision and different dates may be specifted for 
cfurerent provisions of tblsAct; 
f;\ ' .. a~ri and other und~'I'u(' means thp. unttertllktnR' wbtoh 
isf!l~in tM manufacture of ranwav wa_~'S al\d other goocls; 40 
(k) words and exnre!;!'Iion'1 used herein and not defined but 
-............ 
~ef!hed in th~' COl'npan;e; ACt, 1956. have the meani1\~, respeetiwly, 1 of 1058. 
aMt.n;l!d ftt' them -in thAlt A~t. -

a 
CUAPTIlB II 
ACQt'ISInON AND TRAN~F'ER or MOKAMEIf \1NIT AND UNDERTAKINGS OF 
AJ:mroR BU'n.ER AND COMPANY 
3. On the appointed day,-
S (i) the M.okameh unit and theligbt,tiltle and inter;es.t of 
Britann.ia Engineering'Company in relation to tbeMok4lmeh .w;lit; and 
(ii) the undertakings OW1)ed by Arthllr Butler and Company 
and the tight. title and interest of Arthur Butler and Company in 
reaation to the said under~kings, 
10 sball, by virtue of this Act, stand transferred to, and shall vest in, the 
Central Government. 
4. (1) The Mokameh unit. and the undertakings of Arthur Butler 
and Company, referred to in secti'on 8, shall be deemed toinolude aU 
as'se~s, rights; leasfi..holds, powers, authorities and privileges 8Ild aU 
IS property, movable and immovable, including lands, buildings, work-
shops, stores, instruments, machinery and equipment, cash balances, 
cash in hand, reserve funda, investments and book debts pertaining to 
the Mokameh unit or, as the ease may be, the undertakings of Arthur 
Butler and Company, and ali bther rights and interests in, or arising 
20 out of, such property as were immediately bet'ore the appointed day in 
the ownership, possession, power or control-
(a') of Britannia EngineeJ;il)g Company, in relation to tl1e 
MO~!im.eh u~it, or 
(b) of Arthur Butler and Company, in relation to the under-
25 takings owned by it, 
whether within or outside India, and all books of account, registers 
and other documents of whatever nature relating 'thereto. 
(2) All properties as aforesaid which hav.e .~est.ed in the Central 
Government under section 3 i1ha11, .by force of suoh V'esting. ,be !,reed: 
30 and discharged from ally trnst, obligation, mor1jgage, charge, lien an4. 
aU' .otiher incumbrances atfecting .Lt, and U'rJ attachment, injunct,ion or 
.c:Iecreeor order of anyeourt or ot~ autherity, retrtrioting the .~ 
of such properties in anymanDer or ~ppointing any receiver in r~ 
crt the whole or any part of such properties shall be .~ to have 
3S been withdrawn. 
(3) Every mortgagee of aayproperty which has v.ested UDder this 
Ad .m ·the Ceotral .Go.vem~t and eN'ery per,Son holding any c.lwge. 
lien Ql' other intAtr.est in, or ~relation -to, any such, ~roperty s~give, 
within such .time and in such manner as may be prescribed. an inti-
40 l11aUon to the Comlnissioner ot such mortgage, .charge, lien or otJ)en 
interest. 
(4) For the reD1O'Val of. doubts, it is hereby declared -that the m'ort-
gagee of ~ny property r~erred to in su~ion .(3) or any other person 
holding any charge, lien or other interest iI)" or in relation to, any such 
4S property shall be entitled to claim, in accordance with his rights and 
interests, payment of the mortgage money or other dues, in whole or in 
part. P'~t of the amounts specified in the First Schedule and also out of 
Vl8tinliD 
the 
Central 
Govern-
mental 
Mokameh 
unit 
and under-
takings of 
Arthur 
Butler and 
Company. 
General 
eftect of 
vesting. 

Powerol 
Central 
Govern-
mentto 
direct 
vesting of 
Mokameh 
unit and 
the under-
takings of 
Arthur 
Butler and 
Company 
in a Gov-
ernment 
company. 
Britannia 
Engineer-
ingCom-
pany 
and 
Arthur 
Butler 
and com-
panyto 
be liable 
for 
certain 
prior 
JiablUties. 
4 
the monies determined under section 8, but no such mortgage, charge, 
lien 'Or other interest shan be enforceable against any property which 
has vested in the Central Government or the Government company, as 
the case may be. 
(5) If. on the appointed day. any suit, appeal or other proceeding S 
of whatever nature instituted or preferred by or against Britannia 
Engineering Company in relation to the Mokameh ~, or by or against 
Arthur Butler and Company in relation to any undertaking owned by it, 
is pending, the same ahall not abate, be discontinued or be, in any way, 
prejudiCially affected by reason of the transfer of the Mokameh unit or, 10 
as ~he case may be, the undertakings of Arthur Butler and Company, or 
of anything contained in this Act, but the suitt; appeal or other proceed-
ing may be continued. prosecuted or enforced by or again~ the Central 
Government or the Government company, as the ca-se may be. 
5. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 3. the Central IS 
Government may. if it is satisfied that a Government company (whether 
in existence at the commencement of this Act 'OT incorporated there-
after) is willing to comply. or has complied, with such terms and condi-
tions as that Government may think fit to impose, direct. by notification. 
that the Mokameh unit and the undertakings referred to in section 3, 20 
and the right, title and interest of Britannia Engineering Company in 
relatfon to the Mokameh unit. and the right. title and interest of Arthur 
Butler and Company in relation to the undertakings owned by it. which 
have vested in the Central Government under ~on 3. shall, instead 
of contlinUling to vest in the Central Government. vest in the Govern- 2S 
ment company 'E'ither on the date crf the notification or on such earlier 
'or later date (not beinll a date earlier than the appointed day) as may 
be specified in the notification. 
(2) Where the ri,;!ht. title and in1lerest in relation to the Mokameh 
unit. Rnd in relation to 1!he other undertakin~s referred to in section 3. 30 
ve!l1: in a Government companv under Ruh-section (H. the Govemment 
cnmpanv shall. on and from the date of 8ur.h vP.Stiinf,!. be rte~med to hllve 
become the owner of the Mokameh unit anrt of th'e underlakinrtc: of Arthur 
Butler :md ('ompany and 811 the riahtslmrl liaibilities of the Central Gov-
ernment in relation to the Mokameh unit :md the undm,ak;n~ of Arthur 3S 
Butler and Company shan, on and from the date of such ve.'JtinP.'. be 
cJ.efmled to hRve been the rights and linbiU1:.ies. respectively, of the Gov-
ernment company. 
G. (H Every liability of Britannia ~rrineerinJ! Company in relation 
tt', the Mokameh unit, or of Arthur Butler and Comf)8nv in relation 40 
to the undertakinJ!'S owned bv it. in resoect of any period prior to the 
appointed dav. ghall be the liabiUtv c:A. Britannia Enl1j.nee1"inl! Company, 
or Arthur Butler and Company. as the caSe may be. and sball De enfnree-
able a~nst such company and not against the Central Government or 
thE' Government company. 4S 
(2) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that.-
(a) save as otherwise expressly provided in this section or 1ft 
any othel' section of this Act,-
(i) no liability' of Britlmnia Engineering Company, In ---
tIon to the Mo1tameh unit. and so 

5 
(ii) DO liability of Arthur Butler and CemP,aDy, in re1atioll 
to the undeTtakings owned by. it, 
in respect of anY' period prior to the appointed day, shall be en-
forceable against the Central Government or the Government corn-
S pany, as the case may be; 
(b) no award, decree or order of any court, tribunal or other 
authority in relation to the Mokameh unit, or in relation to the un-
dertakings owned by Arthur Butler and Company, passed after the 
appointed day in respect o.f ahy matter, claim or dispute, which 
10 arose before that day, shall be enforceable against the Central Gov-
ernment or the Government company, as the case may be; 
IS 
20 
25 
(c) no liability incurred befare the a.Ppointed day by-
(i) Britannia Engineering Company, in relation to tbe~ 
Mokameh unit, or 
(ii) Arthur Butler and Company, in relation to the under-
takings owned by it, 
for the contravention of any provision of law for the time being 
in force shall be enforceable against the Central Government or 
the Government comp1any, as the case may be. 
CHAPl'ERIII 
PAYMENT OF AMO"&JNT 
7. (1) For the transfer to, and vestin, in, th. Central GoVIIftIIIleDt, Payment 
under seetion 3,- of amount. 
(a) of the Mokameh unit and the right, title anel; interest of 
Britannia Engineering Company, in relation to that 'IIDit; and 
(b) of the undertakings owned by Arthur Butler aDd Company. 
and the right, title and interest of Arthur Butler aDd Compmy, in 
relation to those undertaldap, 
there shall be given by the Ceatra! Government to Britaaaia EDgiDeer-
30 ing Company and Arthur Butler and eom .... y, ia cub. and ia the maDller 
speeifted hi Chapter VI, ..... IUII01IDt equal to the 8IIl8UJlt lpeciIed, res-
peetivply, in the First Sehed.ule, apinst Britannia Enpeerin, Company 
and Arthur Butler and Company. 
(2) For the removaJ of doubts, it is hereby declared that the liabili-
35 ties of-
(i) Britannia Engineering Company, in relation to the Mokam.eh 
unit, and 
(ii) Arthur Butler and Company, in relation to the undertakings 
owned by it, 
40 shan be met, in accordance with the rights and interests of the creditors 
of the respective company from the amount due, telllJ¥!Cf.ively, to Bri-
tannia Engineering ComJ*nY aDd. Arthur Butler and Company, under 
Ab-Iec4ioD (1). 

Payment 
of further 
amount. 
Manage-
ment, etc., 
of Moka-
meh unit 
and the 
under-
tald.n8s 
Of Arthur 
Butler 
aM 
CemJNlny. 
6 
8~ (1) FOr tlie "Printhil' of _i&aDD .. ' B~ Company of the 
management of the Mokameh lIbit and .. r die tIeprlvation of Arthur 
Butler and Company of the management of the undertakings owned by 
it, there shall be given, in cash, by the Central Goven1mlent tt) the res-
pective compaDY, in addition to the amount speeifted in section 7, an S 
amount computed at the rate of ten thousand I'U})ees per annum for the 
period commeacing on the date on which the management of such unit 
or, as the case may be, such undertakings, was taken over by the Central 
Government under the Industries (Development ailld Regulation) Act, 
1951 and ending with the appointed day. 10 
(2) In cODsideratien of the retrospeetive operation of the provisions 
of sections 3, " and 6, there shall a)so be given, in cash, by the Central 
Government to Britannia Engineering Company and to Arthur Butler 
Il1ld Company an amount equal to _ 8DlO1mt caleulated at the rate of 
ten thousand 'rUpees per annum for the period c~ OIl the ap- IS 
pointed day and enclin, with the date on which this Act receives the 
assent of the President. 
(3) The aaount specified in section 7 and the amount computed under 
"iulr-sections (1) and (2) allaD carry simple interest at the rate of four 
per cent. per annum for the period commencing on the appointed day 20 
and ending with the date on which the payment of amount is made by the 
Central Government to the Commissioner. 
(4) The amounts determined in accordance with the provisions of 
sub-sections (1), (2) and (3) shall be given to Britannia EngineeI'ing 
Company and to Arthur Butler and Company in addition to the amount 2S 
specified in the First Schedule, 
CHAPTER IV 
MANAGEMENT, ETC., OF MOKAMEH UNIT AND TH& UNDBRTAKDfGS OF ARTHUR 
Btrn.ER AND CoMPAMY 
t. On the ~rlted day, the' gem;raI superilrtendence, direction, con- 30 
trol and mana~t of thed&irs' and: bUlll11eSs of the Mokamell wlit 
and of' the und~lgs o'W'ned by At1btu' Butler and Company shall-
(a) where a direction has been made by the Central Government 
under section 5, vest in the Government company specified·in such 
direction, or 3S 
(b) where no suchdireetion has been made vest in sUch person , 
or body of persons as may be appointed by the Central Government 
in'this behalf, 
and thereupon the Government company so specified or the person or 
body of persorts 90 apporltlted, ts the case rtlay be; shall ~ entitled to 40 
exetWe all such powers and'do all sueb thiI1p as Britannia Engineering 
Company is l3Iuthor1sed to e;cercJse a:tid do hi relation to its Mokameh 
unit or, as the cue may be, Arthur Butler and Company i, atl1hGlftled to 
aerUe aDd de ill re1atloa to the UDdertald.n,. owned ~ it. 

s 
10 
IS 
20 
30 
35 
40 
4S 
7 
1 •. (1) Every p,erson, In whose possession or custody or control-
(i) the Mokameb unit, or 
(ii) any undertaking of ~bur Butlel' and Company, or 
any part of sucb unit or undertaking or any machinery, instrument or 
other movable assets forming part of such unit or undertaking, may be 
immediately before the appointed day, shall forthwith deliver possession 
of the Mokameh unit or such undertaking or such part, machinery, 
instrument or other asset, as the case may be, to the Central Government 
or the GO\'ernment company or to such person or body of persons as the 
Central Government or the Governme~t company may specify in this 
behalf. 
(2) Every person who has, on the appointed day, in his possession or 
under his control any assets, books, documents or other papers relating 
to the Mokameh unit or any undertaking owned by Arthur Butler and 
ComP,Bny, which has vested in the Central Government or a Government 
company under this Act, and which ~long to Britannia Engin~ring 
Company or, as the case may be, Arthur Butler and Company, or would 
have so belonged if the Mokameh unit, or, as the case may be, the under-
takings owned by Arthur Butler and Company. had not vested in the 
Central Government or the Government company, shall be liable to 
account for the said assets, books, documents and other papers to the 
Central Government or the Government company and shall deliver them 
up to the Central GoveTnment 01' the Government compl8ny or to such 
person or body of persons as the Central Government Or the Government 
company may specify in this behalf. 
(3) The Central Government may take or cause to be taken all neces-
sary steps for securing possession of the Mokameh unit and the under-
takings of Arthur Butler and Company which have vested in it under 
section 3. 
11. Britannia Engineering Comp!ally and Arthur Butler and Company 
shall, within such period as the Central Government may allow in this 
behalf, furnish to that Government a complete inventory of all its pro-
perties and assets, as on the appointed day, pertaining to the Mokameh 
unit or, 8S the case may be, the undertakings owned by Arthur Butler 
and Company which has or have vested in the Central Government under 
section 3, and, for this purpose the Central Government or the Govern-
ment company shall afford Britannia Engineering Company or Arthur 
Butler and Company all reasonable facilities. 
12. On the vesting in th.e Central Gm .. ernment or the Government 
company of the management of the Mokameh unit or of any undertakings 
owned by Arthur Butler and Company, all persons in charge of the 
management of the Mokameh unit 01', as the case may be, the undertak-
ings owned by Arthur Butler and Company immediately before the date 
of such vesting, shall be bound to deliver to the Central Government or 
the Government company or to such person or body of persons as the 
Central Government or the Government company may specify in this 
behalf, all assets, books of account, registers OT other documents in their 
custody relating to the Mokameh unit or, as the case may be, any under-
taking owned by Arthur Butl ,,' ,nd Company. 
Duty to 
deliver 
possession 
of Mo-
kameh 
unit and 
under-
takings 
of Arthur 
Butler 
and 
Company. 
Duty of 
the com-
panies to 
furnish 
particu-
lars. 
Duty ot 
persons in 
char~of 
manage-
ment of 
Mokameh 
unit or 
under-
takings of 
ArthUr 
Butler 
and Com-
pany to 
deliver 
assets" 
etc. 

Employ-
ment of 
employees 
to con-
tinue. 
Provident 
fund 
and other 
funds. 
Appoint-
mentof 
Com-
missioner 
of Pay-
menta. 
'.,' 8 
CHAPTER V 
PBOVISIONS BELATING TO EMPLOYEES OF MOKAMEB UNIT AND OF ARTHUB 
BVTLER AND COMPANY 
13. (1) Every PIerson who has been, immediately before the appointed 
day, employed by- 5 
(i) Britannia Engineering Company, in connection with the 
Mokameh unit, or 
(ii) Arthur Butler and Company, in connection with any under-
taking owned by it, 
shall become, on and from the appointed day, an employee of the Central 10 
Government or, as the case may be, of the Government company, and 
shall hold office or service under the Central Government or the Govern-
ment company, as the case may be, with the same rights and p,riviieges 
as to pensIon, gratuity and other matters as would hawe been admissible 
to him if there had been no such vesting and shall continue to do so IS 
unless and until his employment under the Central Government or the 
Government company, as the case may be, is duly terminated or until 
his remuneration and other conditions of service are duIyaltered by the 
Central Government Or the Government company, as the case may be. 
(2) NotWithstanding anything contained in the Industrial Dispu~ 20 
Act, 1947, or in any other law for the time being in force, the transfer 14 of 1947. 
of the services of any officer or other person em~loyed in the Mokameh 
unit or any undertakings owned by Arthur Butler and Company, to the 
Central Government or the Government company shall not entitle such 
officer or other employee to any compensation under this Act or any other 25 
law for the time being in force and no such claim shall be entertained 
'V any court, tribunal or other authority. 
14. (1) Where Britannia Engineering Company or Arthur Butler and 
Company has establishEd a provident fund, superannuation fund, welfare 
fund or other fund for the benefit of persons emp,loyed in the Mokameh 30 
unit or, as the case may be, any of the undertakings owned by Arthur But-
ler and Company, the monies relatable to the employees, whose services 
have become transferred by or under this Act to the Central Government 
or the Government com~ny shall, out of the monies standing, on the 
appointed day, to the credit of such provident fund, superannuation fund, 35 
Welfare fund or other funds, stand transferred to, and vested in, the 
Central Government or the Government company, as the case may be. 
(2) The monies which'stand transferred un~ sub-section (1) to the 
Central Government or the Government company, as the case. may be, 
shall be dealt with by that Government or the Government company in 40 
such manner as may be prescribed. 
CHAPTER VI 
COMMISSIONER OF PAYMENTS 
15. (1) The Central Government shall, for the purpese of disbuniD« 
the amouDt ,a,aWe under sectioDs 7 and 8 to Britannia Engineering 45 
Company and to Arthur Butler and Cempny, by notification, appoint a 
Commissioner of Payments. 

s 
9 
(2) The central Gttvemment may appoint such other persons lUI it 
may think fit to assist the Commissioner and thereupon the Commissioner 
may authorise one or more of such persons also to exercise all or any 
of the powers exercisable by . him under this Act and different perIODS 
may be authorised to exercise difterent powers. 
(3) Any person authorised by the Commissioner td exercise any of 
the powers exercisable by the Commissioner may exercise those powers 
in the la.me manner and with the same effect as if they have been con-
f~rred on tha~ person directly by this Act and not by way of authorisation. 
(4) The salaries and allowances of the Commissioner and other perR 
10 sons appointed under this section shall be defrayed out of the Consoli'-
dated Fund of india. 
16. (1) The Central Government shall, within thirty days from the 
specified date, pay, in cash, to the Commissioner, for payment to Brftan-
IS nia Engineering Company and to Arthur Butler and Company,-
20 
(a) an amount equal to that specified against each of their names 
in the First Schedule, 
(b) an amount equal to that payable to Britannia Engineering 
Com pay and Arthur Butler and Company under section 8. 
(2) A deposit account shalll be opened by tbe Central Govemment 
in favour of the Commissioner in the Public Account of India, and every 
amount paid under this Act to the Commissioner shall be deposited by 
him to the credit of the said deposit account and the said depO!;it account 
shall be operated by the Commissioner. 
(3) S<lparate records shall be maintained by the Commissioner in rel!-
25 pect of Mokameh unit and the undertakings owned by Arthur Butler and 
Company in relation to which payment has been made to him under 
this Act. 
(4) Interest accruing on the amounts standing to the ~redit of the 
30 deposit account referred to in sub-section (2) shall enure to the benefit 
of Britannia Engineering Company and Arthur Butler and Company. 
17. (1) The Central C"rQvernrnent or the Government company, as the 
ease may be, shall be entitled to receive, up to the specified date, to the 
exclusion of all other persons, any money due to Britannia Engineering 
C~mpany in relation to the Mokameh unit, or Arthur Butler and Com-
35 pany in relation to any of tht'undertakings owned by it, which has vested 
in the Central Government or the GOV'f'''llment company,~md realised 
after the appointed day, notwithstanding that the realisation pertains to 
a period prior to the apPQin1led day. 
(2) 'lbe Cen'tral Government or the G'.l~ernment company, as the case 
40 may be, may make a claim to the Commissioner with regard to every 
payment made by that Government after the appoin'ted day for discharg-
ing any 1Jiability of Britannia Engineering Company in relation to the 
Mokameh unit, or of Arthur Butler and Company in relation to any of the 
undertakings owned by it, in relation to any period prior to the appointed 
45 day and every such claim shall have rriority, in accordance with thf' 
prio'rities attaching under this Act, to the matter in relation to which such 
Payment 
by Cen-
tralGov-
ernment 
to the 
Commis-
sioner. 
Certain 
powers 
of the 
Central 
Govern-
ment or 
Govern-
ment com-
pany. 

Claims to 
be made 
to the 
Commis-
sioner. 
Priority of 
claims. 
Examina-
tion of 
claims. 
Admission 
or 
rejection 
of claims. 
I? 
liability has been discharged by the Central Government or the Gover"> 
ment company. 
(3) Savt' 8S otherwise provided in this Act, the liabilities of Britannia 
Engineering Company in relation to the Mokamch ullit, or of Arthur 
nutler and Company in relation to any of the undertakings owned by 5; 
it, in respect of any transaction prior to the appointed day, which have 
not' been discharged on or before the specified date, shall be the liabilities 
of Britannia Engineering Company or Arthur Butler and COOlpany, as 
the case may be. \. 
18. Every person having a claim against Britannia Engineering Com-. 10 
pany in relation to the Mokameh unit, or against Arthur Butler aneS Com-
pany in relation to the undertakings owned by it, shall prefer such claim 
before the Commissioner within thirty days from ~he specified date: 
Provided that if the Commissloner is &&tisfied.hat the claimant was 
prevented by s~dent cause from preferring the claim within tpesaid 15 
period of thirty days, he may entertain the claim within a further period 
of thirty days, but not thereafter. 
19. The claims arising out of the m~~ .I'rs specified in the Second Sche-
dule shall have priorities in accordance with the following principles, 
namely:-
(a) category I shall have precedence over all categories and cate-
.gory II shall have precedence over' category ITr and so on; 
(b) the claims specified in eaeh of the categories, except category 
20 
IV, shall rank equally and be paid in full, but, if the amount is in-
sufficient to meet such claims in full, they shall abate in equal pro- 25 
portion and be paid accordingly; 
(e) the liabilities speci6ed in category IV shall be discharged 
subject to the priorities specified in this section in accordance with 
the terms of the secured loan and the priority, inter Be, of such loans; 
and 30 
(d) the question of discharging eny liability with regard to a 
matter specified in a lower category shall arise only if a surplus is 
left after meeting all the liabilities speclfted in the immediately 
higher category. 
20. (1) On receipt of the claims made under section 18, the Commis- 35 
sioner shall arrange the claims in the order of priOrities specified in the 
Second Schedule and examine the same in accordance with such order 
of priorities. 
(2) If on an examination of the clatm, the Commissionel'is of opinion 
that the amount paid to him under tbis Act is not·.suffic~eDt to meet; the 40 
liabilities specified in any lower category, he shall not be reql1ired to 
examine the ciaim in respect of such lower category. 
21. (1) After examining the claims with reference to the pr,iorities 
set out in the Second Schedule, the Commis~ioner shall fix a date on or 
before which every claimant, shall file the proof of his cl"im failing 
which he will be (·xcluded from the benefit of tne disbursement made by 4! 
the Commissioner. 

II of 1908. 
II 
(2) Not less than fourteen days' notice of the date so fixed shall be 
given by advertisement in one issue of the daily newspaper in the English 
lanS4-age having circulation in the major part of the country and one 
issue of such daily newspaper in the regional language as the Commis-
5 sioner may consider suitable, and every such notice shall call upon the 
claimant to file the proof of his claim with the Commissioner within the 
period specified in the advertisement. 
(3) Every claimant who fails to file the proof of his claim wj thin the 
period specified by the Commissioner shall be excluded from the dis-
10 bursement made by the Commissioner. 
(·1) The Commissioner shall, after such investigation as may, in his 
opinion, boa necessary and after giving Britannia Engineering Company 
or, as the case may be, Arthur Butler and Company, an opportunity of 
refuting the claim and afl:er giving the claimant a reasonable opportunity 
15 of being heard, in writing, admit or relect the claim in whole or in part. 
(5) The Commissioner shall have the power to regulate his own }Jro-
, cedure in all matters ariSing out of the discharge of his functions, indud-
ing the place or places at which he may hold his sitting ~md f;Lall, for 
the purpOSE" of making any investigation under t.his Act, h.we the same! 
20 powers as arE:. vested in a civil court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 
1908, while trying a suit, in respect of the following matters, namely:-
(a) the summoning and enforcing the attendance of any witness 
and examining him on oath; 
(b) the discovery and production of any document or other 
25 material object producible as evidence; 
(c) the reception of evidence on affidavits; 
(d) the issuing of any commission for the examination of wit-
ne5Ses. 
•• (6) Any investigation before the Commissioner shal1 be dc!!medto 
30 be a judicial proceeding within the meaning of sections 193 and 228 of 
45 of 1860. the Indian Penal Code and the Commissioner shall be deemed: to be a 
2 of 1974. 
civil court fer the purposes of section 195 and Chapter XXVI of the Code 
of Criminal Procedure, 1973. 
(7) A claimant who is dissatisfied with the deciSion of the Commis-
3S sioner may prefer 'an appeal against the decision to the principal' court 
of original jurisdiction within the local limits of whose jurisd!ctlon the 
Mokameh unit or, as the case may< be, the registered «1ffice of Arthur 
Butler and Company is situated: 
Provided that where a person who is a Judge of a High Court is 
40 appointed to be the Commissioner, such appeal shall lie to the High 
Court of the State in which the registered office of Britannia Engineer-
ing CQmpany or, as the case may be, Arthur Butler and Company is 
situated, and such appeal shall be heard and disposed of by not less than 
two Judges of th;,.: High Court. 
4S 22. After admitting the claim under this Act, the amount due in res-
peetof I such claim shall be paid iby the Commissioner to the pernon or 
persons to whom such sums are due and on such payment the liability 
of Britannia Engineering Company in rdation to the Mokameh unit, of 
Arthur Butler and Company in respect of any claim relating' to the under-
50 takings owned by i,t shall stand ddsch lrgerl. 
Disburse-
ment of 
money by 
Commis-
sioner. 

Disburse-
ment Of 
amounts to 
Britannia 
Engineer-
ing Com-
pany and 
Arthur 
Butler 
and Com-
pany. 
Undis-
bursed or 
unclaimed 
amount to 
be deposit-
ed with 
the Gene-
ral ~e­
venue 
Accoun\ 
Act to 
have over· 
riding 
effect. 
Contracts 
to cease 
to have 
effect un-
less 
ratified 
by the 
Central 
Govern-
ment or 
the Gov-
ernment 
company. 
12 
Z3. (1) If out of the monies padd to him in relation to the Mokameh 
to Britannia Engineering Company, or as the case may be, to Arthur 
Company there is a balance left after meeting the liabilities as specified 
in the Second Schedule, the Commissi ~meT shall disburse such balance 
to Britannia Engineering Company, or as the case may be, to Arthur S 
Butler and Company. 
(2) Where the possession of any machinery, equipment or other pro-
perty has vested in the Central Government or the Government company 
under 'this Act, but such machinery, equipment or other property does 
not belong to Britannia Engineering Company or, as the case may be, 10 
Arthur Butler and Company, it shall be lawful for the Central Govern-
ment to continue 10 possess such machinery or equipmeIlit or other pro-
perty on the same terms and conditions under which they were possessed 
by Britannia Engineering Company or, as the case may be, Arthur BuUer 
and Company, immediately before, the appointed day. 
24. Any money paid to the Commissioner which remains :.mdisbursed 
or unclaimed for a period of three years from the last date on which 
the dislbursement was made, shall be transferred by the Commissioner 
to the General Revenue Account of the Central Government; hut 0 claim 
IS 
to any money so transferred may be preferred to the Central Govel'Yli-' 20 
meRt by thE> person entitled to such payment and shall be deAlt with as 
if such transfer had not been made, the order, if any, far payment of 
the claim being treated as an order for the refund of the revenue. 
CHAPrER VII 
MISCELLANEOUS 
25. The provisions of this Act shall have effect Mtwithstanding any-
thing inconsist'ent therewith contained in any other law for the time 
being in force or in any instrument having effect by Virtue of any law, 
other than this Act, or in any decree or order of any court, tribunal or 
2S 
other authority. 30 
26. (1) Every com,tat;~ entered into by Britannia Engineering Com-
pany in relation to the Mokameh unit, ;or Arthur Butler and Company 
in relation to any of the undertakings owned by it, which has vested in the 
Central Government under section 3, for any service, sale or supply 
and in force immediately before the appointed day, shall, on and from 35 
the expiry of, 'one hundred and eighty days from the date on which this 
Act receives the assent of the President, cease to have eft'ect unless 
such contract is, before the expiry of that period, ratified, in writing, 
by the Central Government, or the Government company, and in rati-
fying such contract, the Central Government or the Government com- 40 
pany may make such alteration or modification therein as it may think 
fit: 
Provided that the Central Government or the Government company 
shall not omit to ratify a contract and shall not make any alteration 
or modUication in a contract unless it is satisfied that such contract is 45 
unduly onerous or has been entered into in bad faith or is detrimental 
to the interests of, the Central Government or the Government CtJID. 
pany. 

i 
• I~ 
(Z) The Cellitral j,.mment or the Government company shall not 
omit to ratify a contract, and shall not make any alteration or modiftca-
tion therein, except after giving the parties to the contract a reasonable 
opportunity of being heard and except after recording in writing its 
S reasons for refusal to ratify the contract or for making any alteration or 
modification therein. 
10 
IS 
20 
25 
30 
27. Any person who,-
(a) having in his possession, custody or control any property 
forming part of the Mokameh unit, or any of the undertakings 
owned by Arthur Butler and Company, wrongfully withholds such 
property from the Central Government or the Government company; 
or 
(b) wrongfully 'obtains possession of, or retains, any property 
forming part of, the Mokameh unit, or any of the undertakings 
owned by Arthur Butler and Company; or 
(c) wilfully withholds or fails to furnish to the Central Gov-
ernment or the Government company or any person 'or body of 
persons specified by that Government or the Government company, 
as the case may be, any document relating to the Mokameh unit, 
or any of the undertakings owned by Arthur Butler and Company, 
which may be in his possession, custody or control; or 
(d) fails to deliver to the Central Government or the Govern-
ment company or any person or body ,of persons specified by that 
Government or the Government company, any assets, books of 
account, registers or other documents in his posseSSion, custody or 
control relating to the Mokameh unit, or any of the undertakings 
owned by Arthur Butler and Company; or 
(e) wrongfully removes or destroys any property forming part 
of the Mokameh unit, or any of the undertakings owned by Arthur 
Butler and (Ampany or prefers any claim under this Act which, he 
knows or has reason to believe to be false I()r grossly inaccurate, 
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend 
to two years, or with fine which may extend to ten thousand rupees, 
or with both. 
3S 28. (1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a 
company, every person w~, at the time the offence was committed, was 
in charge of, and was responsible to, the company for the conduct of the 
buB'lness of the company, as well as the company, shall be deemed to be 
guilty of !the offence and shall be ldable to be proceeded against and 
40 punished accordingly: 
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render any 
such penon liable to any punishment, if he proves that the offence was 
committed without his knowledge or that he had exercised all due dili-
gence to prevent the commission of such offence. 
45 (2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), where 
any offence under this Act has been committed by a company and it is 
proved that the offence has been committed with the consent or conni-
vance of, or is attrihutable to any neglect on the part of, any director, 
Penalties. 
Offence. 
by com-
panies. 

Protec. 
tion of 
action 
taken in 
good faith. 
14 
manager, secretary or other officer of the company, such director, mana .. 
ger, secretary or other officer shan be deemed to be guilty of that oJfsce 
arid shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly. 
Explanation.-For the purposes of this section,-
(a) "Clompany" means any body corporate and includes a firm 5 
or other association of individuals; and 
(b) "director". in relation to a firm, means a partner in the 
firm. 
!t. (1) No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against 
the Central Gov·ernment or any officer of that Government or the Gov- 10 
ernment company or other person authorised by that Government or 
the Government company for anything which is '. good faith done or 
intended 11:> be done under this At:t. 
(2) No suit or other legal proceeding shall lie against the Central 
Government or any of its officers or other employees or the Govern- IS 
ment company or any officer or other peI'Slcm authorised by that com-
pany for any damage caused or likely to be caused by anything which 
is in good faith done or intended to be done under this Act. 
Delqation 30. (1) The Central Government may, by notification, direct that all 
of powers. or any of the powers exercisable by it under this Act, other than the 20 
powers conferred by secUons 31 and 32, may also be exercised by such 
person or persons as may be specified in the notification. 
Power to 
make 
rules. 
(2) Whenever any delegation of power is made under sub-section 
(1), the person to whom such power has been delegated shall act under 
the direction, control and supervision of the Central Government. 25 
31. (1) The Central Government may, by notification, make rules for 
carrying out the provisions of this Act. 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the fore-
going powers, such rules may provide for all· or any IOf the following 
matters, namely:-
(a) the time within which, and the manner in which, an inti-
mation referred to in sub-section (3) of section 4 shall be given; 
(b) the manner in which the monies in any provident fund or 
other fund, referred to in sub-section (2) of section ·14 shall be 
30 
dealt with; 3S 
(e) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, pres-
cribed. 
(3) Every rule made by the Ct'ntral Government under this Act 
shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of 
Parliament while it is in session for a total period of thirty days which 40 
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessflons 
and if, before the expiry of the session immedia:("lly follOWing the 
session or successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making 
any modification in the rule or botb Houses agree that the rule should 

IS 
Dot be made, the rule shall thereafter have eft'ect only in such modif~ 
form OIl'be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such 
modifi.ca'tion or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of 
anything previoulfly done under that rule. 
S 32. If any diftlculty arises in giving effect to the provisions of thjs 
Ad, the Centrwl Government may, by order, not inconsistent with the 
pnvisions of this Act, remove the ditficulty: 
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of a period 
of 'two years from the appointed day. 
10 33. It is hereby declared that thds Act is for giving effect to the policy 
of the State towards securing the principles specifIed in clause (b) of 
article 39 of the Constitution. 
IS 
Explanatitm.-In this section, "State" has the stame meaning as in 
article 12 of the Constitution. 
S. No. 
1 
THE FIRST SCHEDULE 
(See sections 4, 7, 8 and 16) 
---.------.--~---------------
Name of the company 
Amount 
(Rupees in lakha) 
20 2 
The Britannia Engineering Company 
Arthur Butler and Company 
152:85 
137;70 
30 
THE SECOND SCHEDULE 
(See sections 19, 20, 21 and 23) 
ORDER OF PRIORITIES 
CategO'r'Jl I 
(i) Employees' dues on account of arrears of tripartite settle-
ment for the period from the 1st day of January, 1975 to the 31st day 
of May, 1975. 
(ii) Employees' dues on 8CCOun,t of unpaid salaries, wages, provi-
dent fund, Employees' State Insurance contribution or premJum ~ 
lating to Life Insur(U'l('e Corporation of India. 
Power to 
remove 
difficultiel. 
Declara-
tion as to 
the policy 
of the 
State. 

16 
Category II 
Secured loans from natiA;,nalised banks and aecw:ed loans f-rom Ia-
duatrjal Reconstn.l<:~on Corporation of India for the post-take~over ~ 
agement period. 
Caflegory JII 
Central Government loans for the post-take-c:wer management period. 
Category IV 
Secured loans from nationalised banks and secured loans from f\nan-
cial institutions for the pre-take-over management period. 
Category V 
Revenue, taxes, cesses, rates or other dues to Central Government, 
State Government and local 8uthoritie.; or State Electricity Board for 
the pre-take-over management period. 
Category VI 
s 
10 
Trad; and other creditors {or the pre-take-over management period. IS 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS ·AND REASONS 
Britannia Engineering Company Limited was ihcorporated in 1917 
with its registered office at Calcutta. It owned at Titagarh an engineering 
unit (where it manufactured road rollers, jute mill machinery and other 
industrial machinery) and a steel foundry .. It also set up in 1960 at 
Mokameh, a unit to manufacture Railway Wagons, steel structurals, etc. 
The engineeI'ing unit at Titagarh closed down in October 1970 Gnd on the 
22nd May, 1976 its management was taken over by the Central Govern-
anent and entrusted to Mis. Westinghouse Saxby Farmer Limited, 
Calcutta, a company managed by the Government of West Bengal and 
in which the West Bengal Government has 87.75 per ('ent. share-holding. 
The West Bengal Government has taken complete financial and mana-
gerial responsibility for managing the Titagarh unit. The steel foundry 
is being managed by Industrial Reconstruction Corporation of India. 
The wagon unit at Mokameh closed down in March 1973. The Central 
Government took over the management of this unit on the 15th February, 
1974 under the Industries (Development and Regulation) Act, 1951 and the 
unit was re-opened on the 22nd February, 1974. 
2. Arthur Butler and Company (Muzaffarpore) Limited was incor-
porated in 1919 with its registered offiCe at Calcutta and its manufactur-
ing unit at MuzaffarpuI'. In the past, the company manufactured various 
types of industrial machinery and when it closed down in February 1972, 
it was also manufacturing metre··g&uge railway wagons. The manage-
ment of this Company was taken over by the Central Government on 
the 14th December, ]973 under the Industries (Development and Re-
gulation) :Act, 1951 and the unit re-opened on the lOth August, 1974. 
3. Britannia Engineering Works, Mokameh, is engaged in the manu-
facture of Railway Wagons, Under-frames and Steel Structurals and 
Arthur Butler and Company (Muza£farpore) Limited in the manufacture 
of Wagons, Sugar Mills machinery, Structurals, Agricultural implements, 
Founchy products and Wagon components. The fabrication cd wagons, 
particularly under the old orders from the Railways, has been un-economi-
cal, causing financial loss to the Companies. These losses are being met 
by the Government by way of grant of loans to the two companies. The 
companies have been successful in taking up the new lines of production, 
such as, Coal Tubs, Bridge Girders, Brake Beams, Fwnace-St.ru.cture, 
Mine Cars and Transmission Tower Lines. 
4. After the take over of the management of these two companies, 
there has been considerable progress in the production performance. It 
is in the public interest that both the units continue their manufacture of 
wagons and other goods. These units provide substantial emp'loyment 
and their closure would render a large labour force unemployed. It is 
not possible to hand over the management of these two units to private 
management as substantial Government loans have been given to the 
units. After careful consideration of the whole matter, the Government 
has decided to acquire these units. 
17 

is 
5. The Bill seeks to acquire the Mokameh unit of Britannia Engineer .. 
ing Company Limited and the undertakings owned by Arthur Butler and 
Company (Muzaffarpore) Limited. 
NEW DELHI; GEORGE FERNANDES. 
The 17th July, 1978, 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDuM 
Clause 7 of the Bill provides for payment, in cash and in the manner 
specified in Chapter VI thereof, an amount equal to the amount specified 
against the name of each of the companies specified in the First Schedule 
to the Bill for vesting in the Central Government the right, title and 
interest of the Mokameh unit of Britannia Engineering Company Limited 
and Arthur Butler and Company (Muzatfarpore) Limited in relation to 
the undertakings owned by it. The amount payable will be of the order 
of Rs. 2,90,55,000. 
2. Sub-clause (I) of clause 8 provides for payment, to each of the com-
panies, of further amount in cash, in consideration for the depriva.tion of 
the companies of the management of their undertakings, an amount to 
be calculated at the rate of Rs. 10,000 per annum for the period com-
mencing on the da.te on which the managements of the undertakings of 
these companies were taken overby the Central Government and ending 
on the appointed day (1st April, H/78). It is estimated that this amount 
will be ot the order of. Rs. 90,000. 
3. Sub-clause (2) of clause 8 provides that in consideration of the 
retrospectiye operation of certain provisions of the Bill as specified 
therein, there shall be given, in cash, to each of the companies, an amount 
equal to the amount calculated at the rate of Rs. 10,000 per annwn for: 
the period commencing on the appointed day and ending on the date on 
which the Bill receives the assent of the ftesident. This amount is 
estimated to be of the order of Rs. 10,000. 
4. Sub-clause (3) of clause 8 provides for payment of simple interest 
at the I'ate of four per cent. per annum, in respect of the amounts pay-
able under clause 7 and sub-clauses (I) and ,(2) of clause 8, for the period 
commencing on the appointed day and ending on the date on which the 
p'ayment of such amounts is made by the Central Government to the 
Commissioner of Payments. It is estimated that the interest payment in 
terms of the provisions of sub-clause (3) of clause 8 is likely to be of the 
order of Hs· 1,00,000 per month. 
5. Clause 15 of the Bill provides for appointment of Commissioner of 
Payments by the Government with adequate staff to assist him for the 
purpose of disbursing the amounts payable to each of the companies. 
'I'he salary and allowances of the Commissioner of Payments and his 
staff and expenditure on office and establishment will be defrayed out of 
the Consolidated Fund of India. The estimated expenditure on this 
account is likely to be of the order of Rli. 10,000 per month. 
6. Funds will also have to be provided for capital expenditure for 
modernisation and expansion of the undertakings to make them finan-
cially VIable. It is estimated that about as. 20,00,000 may have to be pro-
vided on this account during the CUlTent financial year. 
19 

20 
7. It has been decided that in so far as the secured loans of Blinks and 
Financial Institutions are concerned the short-fall will be assumed by the 
Central Government outside the scheme of acquisition. This short-fall 
is estimated to be of the order of as. 33,00,000. 
8. The Bill, if enacted, is not likely to involve any other recurring or 
non-recurring expenditure. 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 31 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules 
to carry out the provisions of the Bill. Such rules may provide for 
matters, such as-
(a) the time within which, and the manner in whith, an intimation 
referred to in sub-clause (3) of clause 4 of the Bill shall be given, 
and 
(b) the manner in which the monies in any provident fund or 
other fund refelTed to in sub-clause (2) of clause 14 shall be dealt 
with. 
The matters in respect of which such rules may be made are matteI's 
of procedure and administrative detail and it is not pTacticable to pa-Q-
vide for them in the Bill itself. The delegation of legislative power is, 
therefore, of a nonnal character. 
21 

LOK SABHA' 
• 
A 
BILL 
to provide for the acquisition and transfer of the right, title and interest 
of the undertakings of Britannia Engineering Company in relation to 
the Mokameh unit owned by it and the right, title and interest of 
Arthur Butler and Company in rela·tion to the undertakings owned by 
it, with a view to ensuring the continued manufacture of railway 
wagons and other goods essential to the needs of the country in 
general and the Railways in particular and {or matters connected 
therewith or incidental theretQ, 
(Shri George Fernandes, 
Minister of Indwtry.) 