'1 8: NOV 1970 
BIU No. 111 of 1!70 
TIdE FOREIGN EXCHANGE REGULA TI0N (AMENDMENT) 
BILL, 1970 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the Foreign Exchange Regulation Act, UK7. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Twenty-first Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:-
1. This Act may be called the Foreign Exchange Regulation (Amend- ShoJIt title. 
ment) Act, 1970. 
--; of 1947.' Z. In section 19G of the Foreign Exchange Regulation Act, 1947, (here- Amend-
10 
IS 
inafter referred to as the prinCipal Act), the following Explanation shall ment of 
be inserted at the end. namely;- section 190. 
uExplanatilon.-In computing the period of O'l1e year during which 
a document (hereafter in this Explanation referred to as the said 
document) may be retained under this section, in any case where by 
reason of an injunction Or order of any court (whether such injunc-
tion or order is in relation to the said document or is in relation to 
any other document reference to which would be necessary for exa-
mining or using the said document) ,-
(a) the said document could not be examined fully for the 
purpose of determining whether it would be evidence of the con-
travention of any of the provisions of this Act or of any rule, 
direction or order made thereunder. or 

Repeal 
and 
aaYing. 
(b) the said document could not be used for commendn, aDy 
proceeding» undec section 23, or 
(c) the proceedings under section 23 could not be commenced, 
the time of the continuance of the injunction Or order, the day on 
which it wu issued or made and the day on which it was with4lrawn, S 
shan be excluded .... 
3. (1) The Foreign Exchange Regulation (Amendment) Ordinance, 
uno, is hereby repealed. 
(o!) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken 
under the principal Act as amended by the said Ordinance shall be deem- 10 
ed to have been done or taken under the principal Act as amended by this 
Act, as if this Act had come into force on the 20th day of September, 1970. 
s (If ID70. 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
Under section 19G of the Foreign Exchange Regulation Act, 1947, 
"when the Director of Enforcement or any other officer of Enforeement has 
reaaon to believe that any document furnished or seized under any of 
the proYisions of the Act would be evidence of the contravention of any 
of its provisions or of any rule, direction or order made thereunder, and 
that it would be necessary to retain the document in his custody, he may 
10 retain it for a period not exceeding one year or, if meanwhile proceed-
ingsunder the Act have commenced, till the conclusion of the proceed-
ings. It has been found by experience that though in normal circum-
Iftances this period of one year is sufficient, difficulty arises where the 
ICtutiny of such douments or connected documents is prohibited by 
reason of an injunction or order of any court. Such a difficulty arose in 
an accentuated form in a case in which the documents which were seized 
in October, 1969, remained continuously sealed by reason of court orders 
from as early as January, 1970. The period of one year for returning 
these documents was due to expire in October, 1970, and there was no 
assurance even as late as the middle of September, 1970, of the court 
orders being vacated. 
2. To overcome the afore-mentioned difficulty, as Parliament was not 
then in session, the President promulgated on the 20th September, 1970, 
the F<1reign Exchange Regulation (Amendment) Ordinance, 1970. The 
Ordinance by a suitable amendment to section 19G of the Foreign Ex-
change Regulation Act, 1947, provided that in computing the period of 
one year during which a document may be retained under the section, 
any time during which that document could not be examined fully or 
used, by reason of an injunction or order of any court in relation to that 
document or in relation to any other document reference to which would 
be necessary for examining or using the first mentioned document, should 
be excluded. The present Bill seeks to replace the said Ordinance by an 
Act of Parliament. 
NEW Da.HI; Y. B. CHAVAN. 
The 9th October, 1970. 
3 

ANNEXURE 
:.,..:.\ .... 
EXTRACT FROM THE FOREIGN EXCHANGE REeVLAnOlC ACT, 1947. 
(7 OF 1947) 
• • • • • • 
ltG. Where in pursuance of an order made under sub-section (2) of 
section 19 or of the provisions of section 19A, 19C or 19D, or of a requi-
sition or summons under section 19E or 19F, any document is furnished. 
or seized and the Director of Enforcement or any other officer of Enforce-
ment has reason to believe that the said document would be evidence of 
the contravention of any of the provisions of this Act or of any rule, 
direction or order made thereunder, and that it would be necessary to' 
retain the document in his custody, he may so retain the said document 
for a period not exceeding one year or if, before the expiry of the said 
period of one year, any proceedings under section 23-
(<<) have been commenced before him, until the disposal of those 
proceedings, including the proceedings, if any, before the Appellate 
Board and the High Court. or 
(b) have been commenced before a Court, until the documOllt has-
been filed in that Court . 
• • • • • 
4 

LOK SABHA 
A 
BILL 
further to amend the For. Exchange ReJUlation Act, J947. 
(Shri Y. B. ChtIfJ(I1I, 
Minister" Finance). 