As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2.5 AUG 2005

Bill No. 114 of 2005

THE CITIZENS (IDENTITY CARD) BILL, 2005
By
Suri K.S. Rao, M.P.
A

BILL

to provide for issue of identity cards to all the citizens of the country and for matters
connected therewith or incidental thereto.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as

follows:— |
1. (7) This Act may be called the Citizens (Identity Card) Act, 2005. Short title,
(2) It extends to the whole of India. | ह हलक 2.
5 (3) It shall come into force at once. | ment.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— Definitions.

(i) “appropriate Government” means the State Government or the Cenral
Government, as the case may be;

| (ii) ‘“‘citizen”’ means a citizen of India as defined under the Citizenship
57 of 1955. 10 Act, 1955; and


Issue of
identity card
to every
citizen.

Information
in identity
cards.

District
Collector to
act as nodal
officer for the
issue of _.
identity cards
within his
district.

List of names
of citizens
who will get
the identity
cards.

Facilities for
issue of forms
and
photographs.

Identity cards
to be issued
within six
months.

Change in the
details of
identity card.

Utilization of -

identity card.

Power to
make rules.

2
(iii) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act. 7

3. The Central Government shall issue identity card to every citizen of the country:

Provided that no identity card shall be issued to a child who is below the age of five.

years but the deta#ls of such child shall be entered in the identity card issued to his father/
mother. |

4. The identity card issued under section 3 shall contain the following information,
namely:— 3 |

(7) full name with latest photograph;
(ii) date of birth;

(iii) father's/husband's name;

(iv) address;

(v) occupation;

(vi) blood group;

(vii) telephone number, if any;
(viii) religion/caste;

(ix) number of children; and

(x) remarks column.

5. (/) Every District Collector shall act as the nodal officer for the issue of identity
cards within the jurisdiction of his district.

(2) The appropriate Government shall provide adequate staff to every District
Collector for the purpose of issuing identity cards.

6. (7) A list of names of those citizens who are eligible to get the identity cards shall be
published in all the leading newspapers and shall be displayed at such other place where the
public have an access. |

(2) If the name of any citizen has been left out from the list, he shall immediately bring
it to the notice of the District Collector concerned for inclusion of his name in the list.

7. The District Collector shall make available all facilities regarding application
forms and photographs of citizens for the purpose of issue of identity cards at convenient
locations within his jurisdiction.

8. (7) The identity card shall be issued to every citizen at the earliest but not later than
‘six months from the date of commencement of this Act.

(2) The entire expenditure on issue of identity cards shall be borne by the Central
Government.

9. (/) It shall be the duty of head of the each family to intimate in writing to the District
Collector—

(i) regarding any change in the details of identity card issued to a member of his

family; and
(ii) about the birth and death of any member in his family.

(2) The District Collector on a request shall issue a revised identity card to the citizen
on payment of such fee as may be prescribed.

10. The identity card issued under section 3 shall be used for such purposes as may
be prescribed. |

11. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazettee, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.

5



STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

India has a population of more than one billion. Therefore, it is a difficult task-to
conduct an accurate census. It becomes more difficult as nearly twenty per cent of our
population do not have any proper place to live. Since there is no correct census figure, it has
become difficult to formulate plans and projects. All plans go haywire because of incorrect
data.

Therefore, it is proposed to provide that every citizen will be issued ari identity card
which can be used for multi purposes like proof of age, date of birth, etc. Since it would be
beneficial for the citizens to possess the identity cards, it is hoped that they would come
forward to get their identity cards. Moreover, by this the illegal immigrants can be identified
and deported. |

The Bill seeks to achieve the above objective.

New DELHI; . पट. 5६. 7५७०
July 26, 2005.


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM

Clause 3 of the Bill provides that the Central Government shall issue identity card to
every citizen. Clause 5 provides for provision of adequate staff to District Collector for
issuing identity cards. Clause 6 provides that names of those citizens who are eligible for
identity cards shall be published in all the newspapers. Clause 7 provides that all the facilities
regarding application forms and photographs of citizens for identity cards shall be provided.
Clause 8 provides that the entire expenditure on issue of identity cards shall be borne by the
Central Government. The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the
Consotidated Fund of India. It is likely to involve a recurring expenditure of about rupees five
hundred crore per annum.

A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees three thousand crore is also likely to be
involved. | |



MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 11 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to frame rules for carrying out
the provisions of the Bill. The delegation of legislative power is of a normal character since
the rules will relate to matters of detail only.



LOK SABHA

A
BILL
to provide for issue of identity cards to all the citizens of the country and for matters
~ connected therewith or incidental thereto.
(Shri K.S. Rao, M.P_)

MGIPMRND—2276LS(S4)—12-8-2005.