1
Short title and
commencement.
Bill  No. 114 of  2018
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
THE REPRESENTATION OF THE PEOPLE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2018
BY
DR. BOORA NARSAIAH GOUD, M.P .
A
BILL
further to amend the Representation of the People Act, 1951.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as
follows :—
1. ( 1) This Act may be called the Representation of the People (Amendment)
Act, 2018.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may,
by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
5

2
2.  After section 29A of the Representation of the People Act, 1951, the following
section shall be inserted, namely:—
“29AA. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act or any other law,
bye-law, rule or order for the time being in force, if a political party violates the model
code of conduct by broadcasting conspiracy theories, fake news, sponsored
disinformation campaigns, illegal psychographics or micro-targeting by big data,
data theft, data mining or analytics on social media platforms with an intent to
influence the elections, the Election Commission shall de-register or withdraw
recognition of such political party:
Provided that prior to de-registration or withdrawal of recognition, the political
party concerned shall be given a reasonable opportunity of being heard.”.
Insertion of
new section
29AA.
De-registration
of political
party by the
Election
Commission.
43 of 1951.
5
10

3
STA TEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
There are increasing concerns that social media is undermining democracy by
broadcasting conspiracy theories, fake news and sponsored disinformation campaigns. In
a data-intensive society, winning an election might have less to do, with a candidate, political
party or platform and more to do with buying and selling voters' data to hack democracy.
Internet companies increasingly using data techniques to build detailed psychological
profiles about voters that can be leveraged to deliver political advertisements and propaganda.
Political parties are hiring private firms to map voter constituencies, tailor political
messaging and shape electoral outcomes through data-driven profiling. Firms such as
Cambridge Analytica have already worked with politicians in countries such as the United
Kingdom, the United States of America and Kenya to monitor, suppress and even deliver
outright lies to voters. The strategic combination of big data analytics with computational
propaganda and disinformation can distort political processes, spread skepticism and
distrust, and interfere with a citizen's ability to make sound political decisions. But powerful
political parties are increasingly leveraging big data to manufacture consensus, manipulate
public opinion and subvert democratic processes.
We are dangerously unprepared to confront challenges at the intersection of
individual privacy, social-media transparency and data-driven campaigning. Currently, no
legislation covers the activity of political parties with respect to voter data. The Election
Commission (EC) has not take up this issue of data protection for regulatory scrutiny. The EC
has in the past issued guidelines to protect election integrity and restrained exit polls and
also required candidates to disclose social media handles. However, much more needs to be
done.
The Bill, therefore, seeks to amend the Representation of the People Act, 1951 with a
view to empower the Election Commission to deregister a political party found violating the
model code of conduct by broadcasting conspiracy theories, fake news, sponsored
disinformation campaigns, illegal psychographics and micro-targeting by big data, data
theft, mining or analytics on social media platforms with an intent to influence the elections.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; BOORA NARSAIAH GOUD
March 28, 2018.

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Representation of the People Act, 1951
————
(Dr. Boora Narsaiah Goud, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—259LS(S3)—10-07-2018.