1
THE SMALL  AND MARGINAL FARMERS’ (WELFARE)
BILL, 2019
By
SHRI RAMAPATI RAM TRIPATHI, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for certain welfare measures for the small and marginal farmers of the country
and for the constitution of a welfare fund for their benefits and for matters connected
therewith and incidental thereto.
BE  it enacted by Parliament in the Seventieth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1.  (1) This Act may be called the Small and Marginal Farmers (Welfare) Act, 2019.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
Short title and
extent.
Bill No. 114 of  2019
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA

2
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “accident” means an accident caused to a farmer during the course of an
agricultural operation by any agricultural machinery and includes an injury due to fall
from such machinery, tree or into a well or electric shock, snake bite or attack by any
wild or domesticated animal;
(b) “agricultural operation” includes any work relating to agriculture, horticul-
ture, sericulture, rearing of sheep, goat, cattle, milch cattle, poultry or any other work
connected with or ancillary to agriculture;
(c) “Commissioner” means a Commissioner appointed under section 7;
(d) “Fund” means the Small and Marginal Farmers’ Welfare Fund constituted
under section 4;
(e) “marginal farmer” means any person who owns agricultural land the size of
which is not more than two and a half acres of non-irrigated or irrigated land and
includes a share-cropper or a person who cultivates land belonging to others under
the tenancy system;
(f) “partial disability” means such disability which reduces the working capacity
of a farmer temporarily of which he was capable of before the occurrence of that
accident;
(g) “permanent disability” means any disability which fully incapacitates a farmer
for all agricultural and other works of which he was capable of prior to the occurrence
of that accident;
(h) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act; and
(i) “small farmer” means any person who owns agricultural land not exceeding
five acres of non-irrigated or irrigated land and includes a share-cropper or a person
who cultivates land belonging to others under the tenancy system.
3. The Central Government shall, as soon as may be but not later than one year from
the commencement of this Act, formulate, in consultation with the State Governments, a
comprehensive welfare policy for the small and marginal farmers and implement it in such
manner as may be prescribed.
4. (1) The Central Government shall, for the purpose of this Act, constitute a Fund to
be known as the Small and Marginal Farmers’ Welfare Fund.
(2) The initial corpus of the Fund shall be rupees five hundred crore of which rupees
two hundred and fifty crore shall be provided by the Central Government, after due appro-
priation made by Parliament by law in this behalf, and rupees two hundred and fifty crore
shall be provided by the State Governments in such manner as may be prescribed.
(3) The Central Government and the State Governments shall contribute every year
to the Fund in such ratio as may be prescribed.
(4) There shall also be credited to the Fund any grants or donation that may be made
by any person or institution.
(5) The Fund shall be administered by the Central Government in such manner as
may be prescribed.
(6) The Central Government may constitute such Regional Funds as it may consider
necessary for the efficient administration of this Act.
(7) Every compensation payable under this Act shall be paid out of the Fund in such
manner as may be prescribed.
Definitions.
Central
Government
to formulate a
welfare policy
for the small
and marginal
farmers.
Constitution
of Small and
Marginal
Farmers’
Welfare Fund.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

3
5. (1) If any injury is caused to a small or marginal farmer due to an accident during the
course of agricultural operation, such farmer shall be entitled to and receive compensation
out of the Fund.
(2) The amount of compensation payable under sub-section (1), for injury resulting in
total or partial disability, shall be such as may be specified by the Central Government from
time to time, by notification in the Official Gazette, Subject to its being not less than fifty
thousand rupees in case of partial disability and one lakh rupees in case of permanent
disability or death.
(3) The compensation payable under this Act in case of death shall be paid to the
spouse of deceased farmer or to the children or to his legal heir:
Provided that in case the deceased was unmarried, the compensation shall be paid to
his parents.
6. Every person who is eligible to seek compensation under this Act shall apply to the
Commissioner in form giving such details as may be prescribed therein:
Provided that the application form shall be in the regional language and in case the
applicant is illiterate, the Commissioner shall cause the form of the applicant duly filled in.
7. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint
such number of Commissioners as it deems necessary to entertain and dispose of the
applications for claims for payment of compensation.
(2) On receipt of an application, the Commissioner shall cause such enquiry into the
claim as he may deem fit and if it is found that the death or injury was caused to the farmer
because of an accident, he shall decide the amount of compensation to be paid to the
claimant and shall record in writing reasons for coming to such a decision:
Provided that the Commissioner shall finalise the payment and release the amount
within thirty days of filing of an application for claim.
8. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, no
Civil Court shall have jurisdiction to settle, decide or deal with any decision made by a
Commissioner or to enforce any liability incurred under this Act.
9. An appeal shall lie to the High Court concerned if the appeal is made within three
months of the decision by the Commissioner.
10. The Central Government shall provide such financial assistance to the State
Governments as may be necessary, for the purposes of this Act.
11. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carryring out the purposes of the Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act by the Central Government shall be laid, as soon as
may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total
period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or
both the Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect
only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously
done under that rule.
Compensation
in case of
accident.
Procedure for
claiming of
compensation.
Appointment
of
Commissioners.
Procedure to
be adopted by
the
Commissioner.
Bar to
jurisdiction of
Civil Courts.
Appeal.
Central
Government
to provide
financial
assistance to
State
Governments.
Power to
make rules.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
There are millions of small and marginal farmers in the country. They are very poor but
their contribution towards agriculture sector is second to none. While pursuing agricultural
operations, they receive injuries quite often leading to partial or permanent disability and in
many cases they also die leaving behind their families. It is a matter of concern that while
social security schemes have been extended to organised working classes, the small and
marginal farmers remain uncovered by such schemes. As a result, whenever a farmer meets
with a serious accident and receives serious injury or succumbs to such injury, he and, in his
absence, his family members suffer tremendous hardships. The family of such a farmer is, in
fact, ruined. There is no social security net for such farmers. Now the State Government
gives compensation of few thousand rupees to the victims but that is very meagre amount.
It is, therefore, necessary in national interest that small and marginal farmers are provided
with some sort of social security in form of compensation on the occurrence of accidents
during the course of agricultural operations. Hence, it is proposed to constitute a Fund for
the welfare of small and marginal farmers.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; RAMAPATI RAM TRIPATHI
June 12, 2019.
4

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 4 of the Bill provides for the constitution of a Small and Marginal Farmers
Welfare Fund. Clause 7 provides for the appointment of Commissioners for payment of
compensation to farmers. Clause 10 provides that the Central Government shall place
necessary funds at the disposal of State Governments for the purposes of this Bill. The Bill,
therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. It is
estimated that about rupees one thousand crore is likely to be involved as recurring
expenditure per annum from the Consolidated Fund of India.
A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees five crore is also likely to be involved.
5

MEMORANDUM  REGARDING  DELEGATED  LEGISLA TION
Clause 11 of the Bill gives power to the Central Government to make rules for carrying
out the purposes of this Bill. Since the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation
of legislative power is of a normal character.
6

LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to provide for certain welfare measures for the small and marginal farmers of the country
and for the constitution of a welfare fund for their benefits and for matters connected
therewith and incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Ramapati Ram Tripathi, M.P.)
MGIPMRND—572LS(S3)—24.06.2019.