THE CENTRAL ROAD FUND (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2017
A
BILL
further to amend the Central Road Fund Act, 2000.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-eighth Y ear of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Central Road Fund (Amendment) Act, 2017.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In the Central Road Fund Act, 2000 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), in
the long title, for the words "national highways", the words "national highways, national
waterways" shall be substituted.
3. In section 2 of the principal Act,—
(i) after clause (a), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
'(aa) "Authority" means the Inland Waterways Authority of India
constituted under section 3 of the Inland Waterways Authority of India
Act, 1985;';
54 of 2000.
Short title and
commencement.
Amendment of
section 2.
Amendment of
long title.
82 of 1985.
AS PASSED BY  LOK SABHA
ON 19.12.2017
Bill No. 114-C of  2017
5
10

2
(ii) after clause (e), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
'(ea) "national waterway" means an inland waterway declared by section 2
of the National Waterways Act, 2016, to be a national waterway;'.
4. In section 7 of the principal Act, after clause ( i), the following clause shall be
inserted, namely:—
"(ia) development and maintenance of national waterways;".
5. In section 9 of the principal Act,—
(A) in clause ( a), for the words "and expressways", the words ",expressways
and national waterways" shall be substituted;
(B) in clause ( b), for the words "national highways", the words "national
highways, national waterways" shall be substituted;
(C) in clause (c), after sub-clause (i), the following sub-clause shall be inserted,
namely:—
"(ia) national waterways;".
6. In section 10 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1)—
(A) after clause (vi), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
"(via) formulation of the criteria for allocation of funds for such projects
which are required to be implemented by the Authority and also for other projects
for the development and maintenance of national waterways;";
(B) for clause (viii), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:—
"(viii) allocation of—
(a) thirty-nine per cent. of the cess on high speed diesel oil and
petrol for the development and maintenance of national highways;
(b) thirty-three and one-half per cent. of the cess on high speed
diesel oil and petrol for the development of rural roads;
(c) fourteen per cent. of the cess on high speed diesel oil and petrol
for railways safety works including the construction of road either under
or over the railways by means of a bridge and erection of safety works at
unmanned rail-road crossings, new lines, conversion of existing standard
lines into gauge lines and electrification of rail lines:
Provided that no repair, maintenance or renovation work shall be
carried out from the allocation of cess under this sub-clause;
(d) ten per cent. of the cess on high speed diesel oil and petrol on
development and maintenance of  State roads of inter-State and economic
importance to be so approved by the Central Government;
(e) two and one-half per cent. of the cess on high speed diesel oil
and petrol for the development and maintenance of national waterways;
and
(f) one per cent. of the cess on high speed diesel oil and petrol on
development and maintenance of roads in border areas.".
Amendment of
section 7.
Amendment of
section 9.
Amendment of
section 10.
17 of 2016.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Central Road Fund Act, 2000.
————
(As passed by Lok Sabha)
GMGIPMRND—2980LS(S3)—19-12-2017.