BIll Mo .. 114 of l'~ 
THE MAJOR PORT TRUSTS BILL, 1962. 
(As INTRODtlCBD IN LoK SUlfA 
ON 2310> NOYBMBBlt, 1962) 

TIlE MAJOR PORT TRUSTS BlLL, 1962 
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES 
CHAPTER I 
Pazr.naN'ART 
r. Short title, eommenc:ement and application. 
2. DeftnitiOM. 
CHAPTER n 
BOARD 0 .. TRUSTE!'3 AND COMMlllliBS TIIERIDOr 
3. Constitution of Board of Trustees. 
4:. First Board of Trustees. 
5. Board to be body corporate. 
6. Disqualification for office of Trustee. 
7. Term of ofBce of Trustees. 
8. Vacation of of!lc:e of Trustees. 
9. Eligibility of Trustee for ~ppointnlent or re-electioa. 
10. Filling of vacancies in office of Trustee. 
11. Saving provision for appointment of Trustee by Central 
Government after prescribed period. 
12. Power of Central Government to extend time for eleetion 
or appointment of Trustees in default at election.. 
13. Term of oftice in case of certain Trustees. 
14. Absence of Chairman and Deputy Chairman. 
-15. Conditions of service of Chairman and Deputy Chatrmaa. 
16. Meetin~ of the Board. 
17. Committees of Board. 
18. Fees and allowaru:es payable to TrustA!!es. 
19. Restriction of power of Trustees to vote in eertain eaRS. 
20. Defflcls in a,ppointments or election not to invalidate ._ ete. ,-, - --"'! 
2t. Dele~on of powel"II. 
22. Duties of Chairman and Deputy Chairman. 
(i) 
2128 (B) LS-l. 
, .. _ ......... 
" 

-
(ii) 
CHAP1'ER m 
STAn' 01' THE BOARD 
23. Schedule of Bo8rd's staff. 
24. Power to make appointments. 
25. Power to promote, grant leave, etc., to employees of Board. 
•. Consulting Engineer to Board. 
2'1. Sanction of Central Government nec:essary in, case of 
creation of eerta1n. posts. 
28. Power to make regulations. 
CHAP1'ER IV 
PRoPERTY' AND CONTRACTS 
21. Transfer of assets 'lIld liabilities of the Central Government, 
etc., to the Board. 
30. Existing rates, etc., to continue until altered by Board. 
31. Repayment of capital with interest. 
32. Procedure when immovable property cannot be acquired 
by agreement. 
33. Contracts by Board. 
34. Mode of executing contracts on behalf of Board. 
CHAP1'ER V 
WORKS AJm SERVICES TO n PROYIDI:D AT PORTS 
35. Power of Board to execute works and provide applienees. 
36. Power of Board to undertake eertain works. 
37. Sea-going vessels compelled to use docks, wharves, etc. 
38. If accommodation sufficient, all sea-going vessels compelled 
to use docks, wharves, etc. 
_ .. 39. Power to order vessels not to come alongside of or to be 
removed from docks, wharves, etc. 
--- 40. Power of Central Government to exempt from obligation 
to use docks, wharves, etc. ...- 41. AlI vessels other than sea-going vessel. compened to ~ 
d~)larves, etc. 
G, pmom.an~ en s~rvi~ by Bod, 
r"~ 

43. Responsibility of any Board for loss, etc., of goods. 
44. Accommodation to be provided for customs oftlcel'8 In 
wharves, etc., appointed under Sea Customs Act. 
45. Dues at customs wharves, etc. 
46. Power to permit erection of private wharves, etc., within 
a port subject to c:onditions. 
47. Compensation payable in certain cases where use of any 
private wharf, etc., rendered unlawful. 
CHAPTER VI 
bUosmON AND RECOVERY OF RATES AT PORTS 
48 .. Seales of rates for services performecJ. by Board. 
49. Scale of rates and statement of conditions for use of pr0-
perty belonging to a Board 
50. Consolidated rates for combination of services. 
51. Power to levy concessional rates of charges on coastal 
goods. 
52. Prior sanction of Central Government to such scales. 
53. Exemption from, and remission of, rates or charges. 
54. Power of Central Government to require modi1ication or 
cancellatioa. of rates. 
55. Refund of overcharges. 
56. Notice of payment of charges short-levied or erroneously 
refunded. 
57. Board not to lease rates without sanction. 
58. Time for payment of rates on goods. 
59. Board's lien for rates. 
60. Master's lien for freight and other charges. 
61. Sale of goods after two months if rates or rent are not paid 
or lien for freight is not discharged. 

Cuuua 
62. Diapoaal of goods not removed from premises of Board 
- within time limit. 
63. Ap,l~cation of sale proceeds. 
C;.i. Recovery of rates oand. charges by distraint. of veaael 
65. Grant of port-cleerance after payment of rates. 
CHAPTERVU 
BoIlBOWlNG POWBRS OJ' IIOAIID 
•. Power to raise loaoa. 
67. Port Trust aecuritiet. 
68. Right of survivors of joint or several payees of securities. 
69. Power of one or two or more joint holders to grant receipts. 
70. Indorsements to be made on security itself. 
71. lnc10raer of security not liable for amount thereof. 
72. Impression of signature on securities. 
73. Issue of duplicate securities. 
7'- Issue of converted, etc., securities. 
75. Discharee in certain cases. 
76. Power of Board to make regulations. 
77. Place and currency of loans raised by Board. 
78. Security fOl" loans taken out by Board. 
'79. Remedies of Government in respect of loans made to Boards. 
80. Power of Board to repay loans before due date. 
S1. Eatablilhment of sinking fund. 
82. Investment and application of sinking fund. 
83. Examination of sinking fund. 
M. Power af Board to ra~ loans on ahort-term bills. 
85. Power of Board to take temporary loans or overdrafts. 
86. Power of Board to borrow money from the InternatioDl'lI 
Bank for Reconstruction and Development or other 
tonip ilwtitutiona. 
CHAPTER VIU 
Rzvuru£ AND 1:XI'I:NJ)1TUU 
8'1. General Aecount of Port. 
88. Application of money. in ,eneral account. 

CLAUSES 
89. Power to transfer moneys from the general account to the 
pilotage account and vice ver.a. 
90. Establishment of reserve funda. 
91. Power to reserve Port Trust securities for Board's own in-
vestments. 
92. Prior sanction of Central Government to charge expendi-
ture to capital. 
93. Worb requiring sanction of the Board or the Central 
Government. 
94. Powers of Chairman as to the execution. of works. 
95. Power of Board to compound or compromise claims. 
96. Writing oft of loaaes. 
97. Powers, etc., of Board as Conservator or Body appointed un-
der section 36 of the Indian Ports Act. 
98. Budget estimates. 
99. Preparation of supplemental estimates. 
100. Re-appropriation of amounts and estimate. 
101. Adherence to estimate except in emergency. 
102. Accounta and audit. 
103. Publication of audit report. 
104. Board to remedy defects and irregularities pointed out in 
audit report and Central Government to pass final 
orders. 
105. Central Government to decide c:Wference between Board 
and auditors. 
CHAPTER IX 
SUPERVISION AND CONTROL or CEN'l'IAL GoVBRNMBNT 
106. AdmJaistration report. 
107. SubmiBsion of statements of income and expenditure to 
Central Government. 
lOS. Power of Central Government to order survey or examir.t,i-
tion of works of Board. 
109. Power of Central Government to restore or complete works 
at the COlt ot Boar4 
110. Power of Central Government to supersede Board. 
111. Power of Central Government to issue directions to Board. 

CLAUSES 
CHAPTER X 
PENALTIES 
112. Persons employed under this Act to be public servants for 
certain purposes. 
113. Penalty for contravention of sections 37, 38, 40 and 41. 
114. Penalty for setting up wharves, quays, etc., without penrus.. 
sion. 
115. Penalty for evading rates, etc. 
116. Recovery of value of damage to property of Board.. 
117. Other offences. 
118. Cognizance of offences. 
119. Offences by companies. 
CHAPTER XI 
MISCELLANEOUS 
120. Limitation of proceedings in respect of things done under 
the Act. 
121. Protection of acts done in good faith. 
122. Power of Central Government to make rules. 
123. General powers of Board to make regulations. 
124. Provisions with respect to regulations. 
125. Power of Central Government to direct regulatiQns to be 
made or to make regulations. 
126. Power of Central Government to make first regulations. 
127. Posting of certain regulations, etc. 
128. Saving of right of Central Government and municipalities 
to .use wharves. etc., for collecting duties and of power 
of customs officers. 
129. Application of certain prOvisions of the Act to aircraft. 
130. Power to evict certain persons from the premises of Board. 
131. Alternative remedy by suit. 
132. Requirements as to publication of notifications, orders. etc., 
in the Official Gazette. 
133. Repeal. 
134. Power to remove difficulties. 

BUI No. 114 of 1,'1 
THE MAJOR PORT TRUSTS BILL, 1962 
(As IHTROD'O'CED IN' LoK SABRA) 
A 
BILL 
to make protrision. for the constitution of port authorities for certain 
major ports in India and to v.est the administration, control and 
management of such port, in such authorities and JOT tTIIltters 
connected therewith. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirteenth Year of the Re-
public of India as follows:- . 
ClIAPTEk I 
PRl:LJM:rNART 
S 1. (1) ~is Act may be called the Major Port Trusts Act, 1962. Short title. 
commence-
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Govern· :~~~c:~~n. 
ment may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
(3) It applies in the first instance to the major ports of Cochin, 
Kandla and Vishakbapatnam, and the Central Government may, by 
10 notification in the Official Gazette,apply the provisions bf this Act to 
such other major port (not being the major port of Bombay, Calcutta 
or Madras), and with effect from such date, as may be specified in the 
notification. 
Z. In this Act. unless the context otherwise requires.-
(a) "appointed day", in relation to a port, means the date on 
which this Act is made applicable to that port; 
(b) "Board", in relation to a port, means the Board of 
TJ'\IStm ~nstlw~ ~p~er Utili Act for that porti 
Definition,. 

2 
(C) "Chairman" means the Chairman of a Board and includes 
the person appointed to act in his place under section 14; 
(d) "Chief Customs-oftleer" has the same meaning as in the 
Sea Customs Ad, 1878; .• of 18~'. 
(e) "Deputy Chairman" means the Deputy Chairman of a S 
Board and includes a person appointed to act in his plAee under 
section 14; 
(f) "dock" includes all basins, locks. euts. entrances, graving 
doeks, graving bloeks, inclined planes, slipways, gridirous. moor-
ing, transit-sheds, warehouses, tramways, railways and other 10 
works and things appertaining to any doek. and also the portion 
of the sea enclosed or protected by the arms or groynes of 0 
harbour; 
(g) "foreshore", in relation to a port, means the area between 
the high-water mark and the low-water mark relating to that IS 
port; 
(h) "goods" means every kind of movable property; 
(i) "high-water mark", in relation to a port, means a line 
drawn through the highest points reached by ordinary spring-
tides at any season of the year at the port; 20 
(j) "Indian Ports Act" means the Indian Ports Act, 1908; 
(k) "land" includes the bed of the sea or river below hi~h­
water mark, and also things attached to the earth or permanently 
fastened to anything attached to the earth: 
(Z) "low-water mark". in relation to a port, means a line 2S 
drawn through the lowest pOints reached by ordinary spring tides 
at any season of the year at that port; 
(m) "major port" has the same meaning as in the Indian 
Ports Act; 
(m) "major port" has the same meanin~ as in the Indian 30 
making use of any port, means any person havin~ for the time 
being the charge or control of such vessel or such aireraft, a. 
the case may be, except a pilot, harbour master, assistant 
harbour master. dock master or berthing master of the port; 
(n) "master tt, in relation to any vessel or any aircraft 35 
consignee, shiwer or agent for the sale, custody, loadin~ or un-
leadin~ of such goods; and (ti) In relation to any vessel or .ny 
aircraft making use of .any port, includes any part-owner. 
charterer, consignee. or mortgagee in poIIe8Iion thereof: 
IS of 1908. 

(p) "pier" includes any stage, stairs, landing place, hard, 
jetty, floating barge or pontoon, and any bridges or other works 
connected therewith; 
(q) "port" means any major port to which this Act applies 
within such limits as may, from time to time, be defined by the 
Central Government for the purposes of this Act by notification 
in. the Official Gazette, and, until a notification is so issued, 
within such limits as may have been defined by the Central 
Government under the provisions of the Indian Ports Act; 
10 (r) "port approaches", in relation to a port, means those 
parts of the navigable rivers and channels leading to the port, 
In which the Indian Ports Act is in force; 
(8) "Port Trust security" means debentures, bonds or stock 
certificates issued by a Board in respect of any loan contracted 
15 by it under the provisions of this Act or issued by any other 
authority for the payment of which the Board is liable under 
this Act; 
(t) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules or regulations 
made under this Act; 
20 (u) "public securities" means-
25 
35 
(i) promissory notes, debentures, stock or other 
securities of the Central Govel'nment or of any State Gov-
ernment: 
Provided that securities, both the principal whereof and 
the interest whereon have been fully and unconditionally 
guaranteed by any such Government shall be deemed, for 
the purposes of this clause, to be securities of such Gov-
ernment. 
(ii) debentures or other securities for money issued by 
or on behalf of any municipal body, Improvement Trust or 
Port Trust under the authority of any law for the time 
being in force in Indi~ (including the Port Trust securities) j 
(v) "rate" includes any toll, due, rent, rate, fee, or charge 
leviable under this Act; 
(w) "regulations" means regulations made by the Board 
under this Act; 
(x) "rules" means rules made by the Central Government 
under this Act; 
2126(B) LS-2. 

ConstitutiOD 
of Board of 
Trustee •• 
~ 
(y) "Trustee', in relation to a port, means a member of the 
Board constituted for the port; 
(z) "vessel" includes a caisson; 
(za) "wharf" includes any wall or stage and any part of the 
land or foreshore that may be used for loading or unloading goods, 5 
or for the embarkation or disembarkation of passengers and any 
wall enclosing or adjoining the same. 
CHAPTER D 
BOARD OF TRUSTEES AND COMMITrEES THER~OF 
3. (I) With effect frol!l such date as may be speCified by notifica- 10 
tion in the Official Gazette, the Central Government shan cause to 
be constituted. in respect of any major port a· Board of Trustees to be 
called the Board of Trustees of that port, which shall consist of the 
following Trustees, namely:-
(a) a Chairman to be appointed by the Central Government; 15 
(b) a Deputy Chairman, if the Central Government deems 
fit to appoint one; 
(c) not more than ten persons to be appointed by the Central 
Government from amongst persons who are in its opinion capable 
of representing- 20 
(i) labour employed in the port; 
(ii) the Mercantile Marine Department; 
(iii) the Customs Department; 
(iv) the Government of the State in which the port is 
situated; 
(v) the Defence Services; 
(vi) the Indian Railways; and 
(vii) such other interests as, in the opinion of the 
Central Government, ought to be represented on the Board: 
Provided that before appointing any person under sub-clause 30 
(i), the Central Government shall obtain the opinion of the trade 
unions, if any composed of persons employed in the port and 
registered under the Indian Unions Act, 1926; , 
(d) not more than fifteen persons to be elected by such 
State or local bodies representing commercial, shipping or local 35 
interests as the Central Government may, from time to time, by 
notification in the Official Gazette,·specify. 
16 of 15126. 

I 
(2) A Trustee appointed by t~ Central Government under this 
Act may be appointed by name or -by virtue of office. 
(3) Every notification issued under clause (d) of sub-section (I) 
lIlay also 8pCcify the number of Trustees that each of the bodies 
5 referred to in that clause may elect. 
(4) The election of Trustees under clause (d) of sub-section (1) 
shall be held within such period as may, from time to time, be speci-
fied by the Central Government. 
(5) The chief executive authority of every electing body shall 
10 communicate forthwith to the Central Government the result of any 
election held in pursuance of sub-section (4). 
(6) The names of persons appointed or elected as Trustees shall 
be notified by the Central Government in the Official Gazette. 
4. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 3, the :;rs~ Board 
IS Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 1 ru8tees. 
constitute in respect of any major port the first Board of Trustees 
thereof consisting of- . -• 
(a) a Chairman to be appointed by the Central Government, 
(b) a Deputy Chairman if the Central Gove.rnment deems fit 
20 to appoint one, and 
(c) such number of other Trust!i!es, not exceeding twenty-five, 
as that Government may deem expedient, to be appointed by that 
Government from amongst persons who are in its opinion capable 
of representing,-
25 (i) labour employed in the port; 
(ii) Government of the State in which the port is sftuat-
ed; 
(iii) Government departments specified in sub-clauses 
(ii) , (iii), (v) and (vi) of clause (c) of sub-section (1) of 
section 3; and 
(iv) such other interests as, in the opinion of the Central 
Government, oug~ to be represented on the Board. 
(2) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (3), the persons 
appointed as Trustees under sub-section (1) shall hold office durtpg 
35 the pleasure of the Central Government. 
(3) On the constitution of the Board under section 3, the first 
Board of Trustees shall cease to exist and stand dissolved. , 

Board to be 
body cor-
porate. 
6 
5. Every Board constituted under this Act shall be a ,body corpo-
rate having perpetual succession and a common seal with power, sub-
ject to the provisions of this Act, to acquire, hold or dispose of pro-
perty and may by the name by which it is constituted, sue or be sued: 
Provided that no acquisition or sale of immovable property and S 
no lease of any such property for a term exceeding thirty years shall 
be valid unless such acquisition, sale or lease has been made with 
the previous sanction of the Central Government. 
~::-:- 8. A person shall be disqualified for being chosen as a Trustee, if 
olBce of Tru- he- 10 Itce. 
J 
(a) has been convicted and sentenced: to imprisonment for 
an offence which, in the opinion of the Central Government, 
,involves moral turpitude: or 
(b) is an undischarged insolvent; or 
(c) holds any office of profit under the Board~ 
Provided that this disqualification shall not apply to the 
Chairman or -Deputy Chairman; 
(d) has directly or indJrectly, any share or Interest in any 
work done by order of the Board, or in any contract or employ-
ment, with, by, or on behalf of the Board: ' 
Provided that no person shall be deemed to have a share or 
interest in such work, contract or em'ployment by reason only 
of his-
15 
20 
(i) having a share in any company or firm which may 
contract wIth or be employed by or on behalf of the Bo~rd, 25 
or 
(ii) having a share or interest in any newspaper In which 
any advertisement relating to the affairs of the Board may 
be inserted, or ' 
(iii) being interested in any loan of money to the Board, 30 
or 
(iv) having a share or interest in any lease, sale, ex-
change at purchase of immovable property or any agree-
ment for the same, or 
(v) having a share or interest in any licence by the 3S 
Board, or right by agreement or otherwise wit~ the Board 
to the sole or preferential use of any railway sidIng or any 
berth for vessels in the docks belonging to tpe Board, or 

'I 
(vi) having a share or interest in the occasional sale to 
the Board, to a value not exceeding ten tho.usand rupees in 
anyone financial year, of any article in which he trades. 
7. (1) The Chairman and: the Deputy Chairman shall hold office ~: ~f 
5 during the pleasure of the Central Government. Trustees. 
10 
IS 
20 
25 
(2) Subject to the provisions of this Act,-
(a) every person elected or appointed by name 'to be a 
Trustee shall hold office to which he is elected or so appointed, 
for a term of two years commencing on the 1st day of April next 
following his election or appointment, as the case may be: 
Provided that the term of office of a member elected to repre· 
sent any body of persons shall come to an end as S90n as he ceases 
to be a member of that body; 
(b) a person appointed! by virtue of an office to be a Trustee 
shall, until the Central Government by notification in the Official 
Gazette otherwise directs, continue to be a Trustee so long as he 
continues to hold that office. 
8. (1) The Central Government shall remove a Trustee it he- ~;:t~t of 
(a) becomes subject to any of the disqualifications mentioned Trustees. 
in section 6; or 
(b) refuses to act or becomes incapable of acting; or 
(c) is, without the permission of the Board previously 
obtained, absent from six consecutive ordinary meetings of the 
Board; or 
(d) is absent from the meetings of the Board for a period 
exceeding six consecutive months; or -
(e) acts in contravention of the provisions of section 19. 
(2) A Trustee may resign his oflice by writing under his hand 
addressed to the Central Government, and on such resignation being 
30 accepted by that Government he shall be deemed to have vacated 
his oflice. 
9. Any person ceasing to be a Trustee shall, unless disqualified Eligibility'of 
d t' 6 b l' 'bI f . ttl t' Trustee Cor un er sec lon , e e Igl e or re-appom men or re-e ec Ion. re-appoint-
ment or 
re-election. 
10. (1) In the case of a vacancy in the oflice of a Trustee appoint. Filling. of. 
3S ed by name or an elective Trustee caused by the expiration of the ~ffi~~r' In 
term of office of such Trustee, the appointment to fill such vacancy Trustee. 
shall be made or an election to fill such vacancy shall be completed, 
8S the. case may be, within two months immediately preceding the 
date of expiration of such term, 

Saving pro-
vision for 
appointment 
of Trustee 
by Central 
Government 
after pre-
scribed 
period. 
Power of 
Central 
Government 
to extend 
time for 
election or 
appointment 
of Trustees 
in default 
of election. 
8 
(2) In the case of a vacancy in the office of a Trustee appointed 
by the Central Government by virtue of an office, the appointment 
to fill such vacancy shall be made within one month of the occur-
rence of such vacancy. 
(3) In the case of a casual vacancy in the office of a Trustee 5 
appninted by name or an elective Trustee caused by the death of such 
Trustee or by virtue of the provisions /itf section 8, such vacancy shall 
be filled within one month of the occurrence thereof by appointment 
or election, as the case may be, in the manner hereinbefore specified: 
Provided that the Trustee so appointed or elected shan retain his 10 
office so long only as the vacating Trustee shall have retained the 
same if such vacancy had not occurred. 
11. Nothing in the foregoing provisions shall prevent 8. person 
being appointed by the Central Government to fill any vacancy in 
the t?ffice of a Trustee appointed by the Central Government after IS 
the expiration of the period specified in section 10, if for any reason 
it has not been possible for the Central Government to make the 
appointment within the said period. 
12. (1) If the Central Government is satisfied that an electing body 
has failed to elect a Trustee within the period specified therefor in 20 
sub-section (4) of section 3 or section 10 for reasons oeyond its 
control, the Central Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, direct that the election shall be held on or before such date 
as may be specified in the notification. 
(2) In the event of default being made in electing any TrlJst<>e 25 
within the period specified therefor under sub-section (4) Of section 
3 or under section 10, or as the case may be, on or before the date 
specified in the notification issued under sub-section (1), it shall be 
lawful for the Central Government to appoint a person bv notification 
in the Official Gazette and the person so appointed shall be deemed 30 
to be an elective Trustee. 
'!ffi.: i':: case 13. Where a Trustee is appointed under section 11 or under sub-
0( certain section (2) of section 12 or elected in pursuance of a direction issued 
Trultees. under sub-section (1) of section 12, the term of office of such Trustee 
shall commence on the date on which his appointment or election, 35 
as the case may be, is notified in the Official Gazette and shall expire 
on the date on which his term of office would have expired if his 
appointment or election had been made within the period. specified 
under sub-section (1) of section 10 or, as the case may be, under sub-
section (4) of section -3. 40 

9 
14. If the Chairman or the Deputy Chairman is, by infirmity or A=f 
otherwise rendered incapable of carrying out his duties or is absent ~nd Deputy 
on leave or otherwise, in circumstances not involving the vacation Chairman. 
of his appointment, or is sent on deputation outside India for any of· . 
5 the puxposes of this Act, the Central Government may appoint another 
person to act in his place during his absence: 
Provided that the Chairman or the Deputy Chairman, while on 
deputation outside India may, if the Central Government by order 
so directs and subject to such conditions and restrictions as may be 
10 specified in that order, exercise such of the powers and perform such 
of the duties conferred or imposed on the Chairman or the Deputy 
Chairman, as the case may be, by or under this Act as he may deem 
necessary, and the Chairman or Deputy Chairman while exercising 
such powers and performing such duties shall be deemed to be a 
Trustee notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in this 
IS Act. 
15. The Chairman and the Deputy Chairman shall be paid such ~~::!t:1 
salary and be governed by such terms and conditions of service as or Chairman 
may, from time to time, be determined by the Central Government. ~~i~~~~ 
20 16. (1) A Board shall meet at such times and places and shall, ~e~in~ of 
subject to the provisions of sub-sections (2), (3) and (4), observe such t e oa • 
rules of procedure in regard to the transaction of business at its meet-
ings as may be provided by rules made under this Act. 
(2) The Chairman or, in his absence, the . Deputy Chairman, and 
2S in the absence of both, any person chosen by the Trustees present 
from among themselves, shall preside at meetings of the Board. 
(3) All questions at a meeting of the Board shall be decided by 
a majority of the votes of the Trustees present and voting and, in the 
case of an equality of votes, the person presiding shall have 't second 
30 or casting vote. 
(4) No business shall be transacted at any meeting of the Board 
unless not less than five Trustees are present throughout such meeting. 
17. (1) A Board may, from time to time, constitute from amongst 
the Trustees one or more committees, each consisting of such number Commir B .udccs o oaf. 
35 as the Board may consider unecessary, for the purpose of discharging . 
such of its functions as may be delegated to such committee or com-
mittees by the Board. 
(2) A committee constituted under this section shall meet at 
such times and at such places and shall observe such rules of pro-
• 

Fees and 
allowances 
payable to 
Trustees. 
10 
cedure in regard io ihe transaction of business ai its meetings (i1t. 
eluding the quorum) as may be provided by regulations made under 
this Act. 
18. The Trustees shall be paid by the Boa:rd such fees and allow-
ances for attending the meetings of the Board or of any of its com- 5 
mittees and for attending to any other work of the Board as may be 
provi~ed by rules made under this Act: 
Provided that no fees shall be payable to the Chairman, Deputy 
Chairman or any other Trustee who is a servant of the Government. 
Restriction 19. No Trustee shall vote or take part in the discussion of any 10 
~!J~::sr matter coming up for consideration at a meeting of the Board or any 
. to v~te in of its committees if the matter is one in which he has any direct or 
certamcases. indirect pecuniary interest .by himself or his partner, or in which 
Detects in 
appoint-
ments OT 
election not 
to invalidate 
acts, etc. 
Delegation 
of powers. 
he is interested professionally on behalf of a client or as agent for 
any person other than the Government or a local authority or a trade js 
union registered under the Indian Trade Unions Act, 1926. 6 of 1926• 
20. No act or proceeding of a Board or of any of its committees 
shall be invalid merely by reason of-
(a) any vacancy therein or any defect in the constitution 
thereof, or 20 
(b) any defect in the election or appointment of a person as 
a member thereof, or 
(c) any Trustee having acted or taken part in any proceed-
ingsin contravention of section 19, ar 
(d) any irregularity in its procedure not affecting the merits 2S 
of the case. 
21. A Board may, with the apprOval of the Central Government, 
specify- j 
(a) the powers and duties conferred or imposed UipOn the 
Board by or under this Act, which may be exercised and per- 30 
formed by the Chairman; and 
(b) the powers and duties conkred or imposed on the 
Chairman by or under this Act, which may 'be exerCised or per-
formed by the Deputy Chairman or any officer of the Board 
and the conditions and restrictions, if any, subject to which such 3S 
powers and duties may be exercised and performed: 

r"" 11 -- ... ., 
Provided that any ·powers and duties conferred or imposed 
upon the Deputy Chairman or any ofticer of the Board under 
clause (b) shall be exercised and performed by him subject to 
the supervision and control of the Chair:rnan. 
5 22. (1) It shall be the duty of the Chairman and the Deputy Du~e. of 
Chairman to attend every meeting of the Board unless prevented ~tJ 
by siclmess or other reasonable cause. Chairman. 
(2) The Chairman shaU, as soon as possible, transmit to the 
Central Government a copy of the minutes of every meeting of the 
-l() Board and shall furnish to that Government such reports, returns, 
~ocuments or other information as it may, from time .to time, call for. 
(3) The Chairman shall exercise supervision and eODJtrol over 
the acts of all employees of the Board in matters of executive 
adnrlnistration and any matters concerning the accounts and records 
IS of the Board. p"r;.' ! ,,"',7 ~'1""I'I~ 
CHAPI'ER m 
STAFF OF THE BOARD 
23. A Board shall, from time to time, prepare and sanction a gcb~le of 
Schedule of the employees of the Board whom it deems necessary staff. • 
ao and proper to maintain for the purposes of this Act and such Sche-
dule shall indica.te therein the desl.gnations and grades of employees 
and the salaries, fees and allowances which are proposed to be paid to them. . . ...... , .......,-.. : ,- .-,- p.'", r""!I , . 
. Me (1) Subject to the provisions of the Schedule for the time PcnNr to 
2S Pefng in force sanctioned .by a Board under section 23, the poWer of ~t. 
appointing the employees of the Board, to any posts, whether tem.- meat .. 
porary or permanent, shall-
(a) ,in the case of Heads of departments, be exercisable by 
the Central Government after consultation with the Chairman; 
30 (b) in the case of an employee (other than the HEad of a 
Department), where the appointment relates tt> a post the 
maximum of the ,pay-scale for which (exclusive of allowances) 
exceeds such amount as the Centml Government may from time 
to time fix in this behalf, and where no such amount has been 
35 ftxed, is not less than one thousand rupees be exercisable by the . 
Board; 
(c) in the case of any other post, be exercisable by the 
Chainnan: 
2128 (B) LS.-3. 

Power to 
promote, 
,.rant leave. ecc., to 
:r=.-
12 
Provided that no person shall be appointed ~ 18 pilot at any port, 
who ts not for the time being authorised by the Central Government 
under the provisions of the Indian Ports Act to pilot vessels at that 
port. : ..... - j 
(2) The Central Government may, by order, specify any post the 
incumbent of which shall, for the purposea of thJs Act, be regarded 
as the Head of a department. 5 
25. Subject to any regulations made under section 28, the power 
of promoting, granting extension of service to, granting leave to, sus-
pending, reducing, removing or dismissing or of disposing of any 
other question relating to the services of, the employees of a Board .1 
including the power of dispensing with the servlees of any su.cb 
employee otherwise than by reason of the misconduct of such 
employee, shall be exerclsed-
(a) in the case of an employee referred to in clause (e) of 
BUb-section (1) of section 24, by the Chainnan; and IJ 
(b) in the oase of evf!t"J other employee, by the Board: 
Provided that every such order shall, so far as the same involves 
extension of service, suspension, reduclion in rank, removal or dls-
missal of any employee referred to in clause (b), be subject to the 
sanction of the Central Government. zo 
Conlllldaa 28. A Board may appoint any person as Consulting Engineer 
::!t.ftCV • to the Board otherwise than on the basis of payment of a monthly 
salary, but e~ such appointment shall be subject to the sanction 
of the Central Government. 
SaDCtloD of n. Notwithstanding anything contained in section 23, no poll 
ge:~nt other than a post referred to in clause (e) of su~ion (1) of sec-
neceuary in tion 24 shall be C'l'eated except with the sanction of the Central cue of c:rea-don of Govemment. 
certain 
pOill. 
Power to 
make reaa-JatiDllI, 
ZS. A Board may make regulations, not inconsistent with this Ad, 
to provide for anyone or more of the following matters, namely:- sa 
(4) the appointment, promotion, suspension, removal and 
dismissal of its employees; 

s 
10 
IS 
.... 
(b) their ieave, leave allowances, pensions, gratuities, com..: 
passionate allowances and travelling allowances and the estab-
lishment and maintenance of a Provident Fund or any other fund 
for their welfare; 
(c) any other matter which is incidental to, or necessary 
for, the PUl'IpOH of regulating the eppointment and conditiODl of 
aervioe of itl employees. 
~ .. nm;:.,.,. . 
"'~ ~.I:o.n IV 
PROPERTY AND CONTRAC~ 
n. As from the appointed day in relation to any part-- Tranarer at 
ISleta and 
d • th 1 G liabilltiel of (a.) aU property, assets and funds vesta m e Centra ov- the Central 
enunent or, as the case may be, any other authority for the Govem-
. h·· I bef h da sh 11 • ment, etc., purposes of t e port unmediate yore suc y, a vest In to the 
the Board; Board. 
(b) all d~ts, obliptions and liabilities incurred, all con· 
tracts entered. into and all matters and things engaged to be dODe, 
by, with or for the Central Government or, as the case may be, 
the oth.er authority immediately before such day, for or in COD-
neetion with the purposes of the port, shall b. deemed to have 
been incurred, entered into and engaged to be done by, with or 
for the Board; 
(e) all non-recurrina expenditure incurred by the Central 
Government or any State Government for or in connection with 
the purposes of the port up to such day and declared to be eapital 
expenditure by the Central Government shall be treated as the 
capital provided by the Central Government or, as the case may 
be, the State Government to the Board; 
(d) all rates, fees, rents and other sums of .money due to 
the Central Government or, as the ease may be, the other 
authority in relation to the port immediately 'before such day 
shall be deemed to be due to the Board; 
(e) all suits and other legal proceedings instituted or which 
might have been instituted by or against the Central Govern-
ment or, as the case may be, the other authority immediately 

1. 
before such day for any matter in relation to the port may .bf 
continued or instituted by or against the Board;' 
<1> every employee serving under the Centml Government 
or, as the case may be, the other authority immediately before 
such day solely for or in connection with ,the aftairs of the port S 
. shall become 8Jl employee of the Board, shall hold his office or 
service therein by the same tenure and upon tthe same terms and 
conditions of service as he would have held the same if the 
Board had not been established and shall continue to do so 
unleils and until his employment in the Board. is terminated or 10 
until his tenure, remuneration or terms and conditions of service 
are duly altered by the Board: 
Provided that the tenure, remuneration and terms a.nd COD-
ditions of sefv1.ce of any such employee shall not be altered to 
his disadvantage without the previous sanction of the Central IS 
Government. 
Bldttln. 30. As from the appointed day, all rates, fees and other charges 
ratca. etc.. in relation to any port. shall, unless and until .they are vaded by the 
to ~n::!s competent authority in accordance with the provisions of this Act, 
b; Board. contiIiue to be levied and collected at the same rate at which they 20 
were .being levied and collected by the Central Government or, as 
the case may be, any other authority immediately before such day. 
Repayment 31. A Board shall repay, at such intervals and on such terms and 
:.i:l:!ta1 conditions as the CenJtral Government may determine, the amount 
teresta of capltal provided under clause (c) of section 29 with interest at 2S 
such rate as may be fured by that Government and such repayment 
; Proc:ed ure , when 
Immovable 
: property 
caDDOt be 
IICquired by 
Isreement. 
of capltal or payment of interest shall be deemed to be part of the 
expenditure of- the Board. 
32. Whenever any immovable property which is required for the 
purposes of the Board cannot be acquired by agreement, the Central 30 
GoYernment may. at the request of the Board, procure the acquisi-
Uon ·!thereof under the provisions of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894, I of 1894-
and bn. payment by the Board of the compensation awarded under 
toot Act and of the charges incurred by the Government in coiuiec-
tion w,ith the proceedings, the land shall vest in the Board. 3S 
ConUSc:tl 33. Subj eel to the provisions of section 34, a Board shall be' coin-
i by Board. petent to enter into and perform any contract necessary for the 
performance of its functions under this Act. 

'J 
is . 
34. (1) Ewry contract shall on behalf of a Board be made by the Mode 'ilC 
Chairman and shall be sealed with the common seal of the Board: =~~~ on 
behalf of 
Board. 
Provided that no contract whereof the value or amount exceeds 
such value or amount as the Central Government may from time to 
S time fix iil this behalf shall be made unless it has been previously 
approved by the Board: 
Provided further that no contract for the acquisition or sale of 
immovable property or for the lease of any such property for a term 
exceeding thirty years, and no other contract wnereof the value or 
10 amount exceeds such value or amount as the Central Government 
may from time to time fix in this behalf, shall be made unless it has 
been previously approved! by the Central Government. 
(2) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (1), the form and 
manner in which any contract shall be made under this Act shall be 
IS such as may be prescribed by regulations made in this behalf. 
20 
35 
(3) No contract which is not made in accordance with the pro-
visions of this" Act ~d the regulations made thereunder shall be 
binding on the Board. 
CHAPTER V 
WORKS AND SERVICES TO BE PROVIDED AT PORTS 
35. (1) A Board may execute such works within or without the Power of 
limits of the port and provide such appliances as it may deem neces- Boardtto execu e 
sary or expedient. works and 
p'ovide 
(2) Such works and appliances may include- appliances. 
(a) wharves, quays, docks, stages, jetties, piers end other 
works within the port or port approaches or on the foreshore of 
the port or port approaches, wi,th all such convenient arches, 
drains, landing places, stairs, fences, roads, railways, bridges, 
tunnels and approaches and buildings required for the residence 
of the employees of the BoardJ as the Board may consider 
necessary; 
(b) buses, railways, locomotives, rolTIng stock, sheds, hotels, 
warehouses and other accommodation for passengers and goods 
and other appliances for carrying passengers and for conveying, 
receiving and storing goods landed, or to be shipped or other-
wise; 
(c) moorings and cranes, scales and all other necessary 
means and appliances for loading and unloading vessels; 

Power Of 
Board to 
undertake 
ccnain 
works. 
i4 
(d) reclaiming, excavating, enclosing and raising any part 
of the foreshore of the port or port approaches which may be 
necessary for the execution of the works authorised by this Act, 
or otherwise for the purposes of this Act; 
.. (e) such breakwaters and other works as may be expedient S 
_We protection of the port; • 
(1) dredgers and other machines for cleaning, deepenini and 
improving any portion of the port or port approaches or of the 
foreshore of the port or port approaches; 
(g) lighthouses, lightships, beacons, buoys, pilot boats and 10 
other appliances necessary for the safe navigation of the port 
and of the port approaches; 
(h) vessels, tugs or other boats for use within the 
limits of the port or beyond those limits, whether in territorial 
waters or otherwise, for the purpose of towing or rendering IS 
assis1Jance to any vessel, whether entering or leaving the port or 
,bound elsewhere, and for the purpose of saving or protecting 
life or property and for the purpose of landing, shipping or 
transhipping passengers or goods under sectt~n 42;' 
(i) the sinking of tube-wells, and the equipment, mainte-» 
nance and use of boats, barges and other appliances for the pur-
pose of the supply of water at the port; 
(j) engines and other appliances necessary for the extin-
guishing of fires. 
38. A Board may undertake to carry out on behalf of any person 25 
any works or services ar any class of works or services, on such terms 
and conditions as may be agreed upon between the Board and the 
person concerned. 
Sea-goinl 37. (1) When any dock, berth, wharf, quay, stage, jetty or pier 
vessclln d erected at any port or port approaches under the provisions of this 30 compe e , . 
to Ule Act has been completed WIth suffiCIent warehouses, sheds and appli-
do.c:kctl,c:whar- ances for receiving, landing or shipping goods or passengers from ve, • 
and upon sea-going vessels, the Board may after obtaining the 
approval of the Chief Customs-officer and by notification published 
in three consecutive issues of the Official Gazette, declare that such 35 
dock, berth, wharf, quay, stage, jetty or pier is ready for receiving, 
landing and shipping or for landing or for shipping goods or passen-
gers from and upon sea-going vessels. 
(2) As from the diate of the publication of such notification for 
the third time, it shall be lawful for the Board from time to time, 40 

17 
when there Is room at such dock, berth, wharf, quay, stage, jetty or 
pier, to order to come alongside of such dock, berth, wharf, quay, 
stage, jetty or pier for the purpose of landing and shipping goods or 
passengers or for landing or for shipping the same, any sea-going· 
5 vessel within the port or port approaches which has not commenced 
to discharge goods or passengers, or which being about to take in 
goods or passengers, has not commenced to do so: 
Provided that before making such order, the Board shall have re-
gard, as far as possible, to the convenience of such vessel and of the 
10 shippers, in respect of the use of any particular dock, berth, wharf, 
quay, stage, jetty or pier: 
Provided further that if the Board is not the conservator of the 
port, the Board shall not itself make the order as aforesaid but shall 
require the conservator of the port, or other person exercising the 
15 rights, powers, and authorities of the conservator of the port, to make 
such order. 
38. When a sufficient number of docks,berths, wharves, quays, If accommo-
stages, jetties or piers have been provided at any port or port ~c~~n.~Ufti­
approaches as aforesaid, the Board may, after obtaining the approval 8C8-I~ing 
ao'lf the Chief Customs-officer and by notification published in three ;:n~8t:= 
consecutive issues of the Official Gazette, direct that no goods or Clocks, 
passengers shall be landed Qr shipped from or upon any sea-going :~c .. 
vessel within the port or port approaches otherwise than at such 
docks, berths, wharves, quays, stages, jetties or piers, except with 
25 the sanction of the Board and in accordance with such conditions as 
the Board may specify. 
39. Any officer appointed by the Board in this behalf may, in cases P:;er to sell 
of emergency or for any reason which appears to him sufficient, by ~ot ~o v:me 
notice in writing, order the master or owner or agent of any sea. al0tnPbidc of or 0 e . going vessel not to bring such vessel alongside of, or to remove such removed 
, ... vessel from, any dock, berth. wharf, quay, stage, jetty or pier belong. ~r:'r:c~ .. 
ing to or under the control.of the Board. and, if such notice is not etc. 
complied with, the Board may charge in respect of such vessel such 
sum as it thinks fit, not exceeding one thousand rupees for each day 
" of twenty-four hours, or portion of such day, during which such 
vessel remains at such dock, berth, wharf, quay, stage, jetty or pier: 
.t'Tovided that in the case of a vessel ordered to be removed, such 
charge shall not commence to be made till after the expiry of twelve 
hours from the sen-ice of such notice as aforesaid on the master or 
.. ) owner or agent of the vessel. 

18 ... --. 
Power of 40, Notwithstanding anything contained in sections 37 and 38, the 
~~~r~ent Central Government may, if in its opinion it is necessary in the pub-
to exemp.t lic interest so to do, by general or sp'ecial order, from time to time, 
from obliga. 't rt' 'fied I I I' . don to use perm! ce aln specl vesse s or c asses of vesse s to discharge or 
docb, what- ship goods or certain specified goods or classes of goods, at such place 5 
vea, etc. in a port or within the port approaches, in such manner, du'ring such 
period and subject to such payments to the Board and on such condi-
tions as the Central Government may think fit, . 
AU vessell 41, (1) When any dock, berth, wharf, quay, stage, jetty or pier 
other than f "I d' h' t f oods f sea-going or :receiving, an mg or s lpmen 0 g or passengers rom or 10 
.elaell Ued upon vessels, not being sea-going vessels, has been made and; com-
::: doc:Jts, pleted with all proper appliances in that behalf, the Board may, after 
"barvel, obtaining the approval of the Chief Customs-officer, by order pub-
etc. Iished in three conSecutive issues of the Official Gazette,-
(i) declare that such dock, berth, wharf, quay, stage, jetty or I, 
pier is ready for receiving, landing or shipment of goods or 
passengers from or on vessels, not being sea-going vessels, and 
Hi) direct that within certain limits to be specified therein 
it shall not be lawful, without the express sanction of the Board, 
to land or ship any goods or passengers out of, or into, any vessel, 20 
not being a sea-going vessel, of any class specified in such order, 
except at such dock, berth, wharf, quay, stage, jetty or pier, 
(2) As from the date of the publication of the order mentioned in 
sub-section (1) for the third time, it shall not be lawful, without the 
consent of the .BoaTd, for any vessel of such class.- 25 
li) to land or ship any goods or passengers at any place 
within the limits so specified except at such dock, berth, wharf, 
quay, stage, jetty or pier; or . 
(ii) while within such limits, to anchor, fasten or lle within 
fifty yards of the ordinary low-water mark. 30 
(3) If after the publication of such order, any such vessel shall 
while within the limits so specified, so anchor, fasten or lie, it shall 
be lawful for the Board to cause the same to be removed out of the ~ 
said limits at the expense of the master or owner or agent of the 
vessel. 35 
Performance 42. (1) A Board shall have power to undertake or provide the 
~= 'fol1~wing services:~ 
(a) landing, shipping or transhipping passengers, and goods 
between vessels in the port and the wharves, piers, quays or 
d()~ks belonging to or in the possession of the Board;- 40 
(b) receiving, removing, shifting, transporting, storing or 
delivering goods brought within the Board's premises; 

'. 19 
(c) carrying pauengerl by rail or by other means within 
the limits of the port or port approaehes, sttbject to such restrie· 
:tions and conditions 88 the Central Government may think At 
to impose; and 
5 (d) receiving and delivering, transporting and bookinC ad 
despat~hing goods originating in the vessel. in the pen and iD~ 
tended for carriage by the neighbouring railwaya. 01' ruee verl4, 
9 of 1890· as a railway administration under the Indian. Rallways Act, 1890. 
(2) A Board may, if ItO requested by the owner, take eharge cl the 
10 goods for the purpose of performing the service OF sentees and lb. 
give a receipt in such form..as the Board may specify. 
(3) After a'IrJ goods have been taken charge of and a recetpt .Ii'ferl 
for them uncler this section no liability for any Ieee 01' clem.,. wilith 
may occur to them shall attach to any pel'SOII to wbem .. reeeipt ,.. 
15 been given or to the master or owner of the vessel from whieh the-
goods have been landed or transhipped. 
43. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the responsibility of actponalbi-
any Board for the loss, destruction or deterioration of ggods of which ~ :''' 
it has taken charge shall,- 1Dss. otc .• of ,oad •. 
20 (i) in the case of goods received for earriage by railway, be 
9 of 1890. governed by the provisions of the Indian Railways Act, 1890; aDd 
(ii) in other cases, be that of a bailee undei' sectiOJllS 151, 162 
9 of 1872. and· 161 of the Indim Contract Act, 1872, omitting the worcls "in 
the absence of any special contract" in seetion 152 of that Act: 
25 Provided that no responsibility under this sectioft shall attach to 
the Board until a receipt mentioned ia su~8ection (2) of section 42 
is given by the Board. 
(2) A Board shall not be is any way responsible for the loss, des-
truction or deterioration of, or damage to, goods of which it has taken 
30 charge. unless notice of such loss or damage has been given within 
such period as may be prescribed by regulations made in this behalf 
from the date of the receipt given for the goods under sub-seetion 
(2) of section 42. 
44. Where the Chief Customs-ofticer has, under the provisions of AcCOllUQO-
35 any Act for the levy of duties of customs, appointed any dock, berth, ~~~e': tr 
wharf, quay, stage, jetty. pier, warehouse or shed or a portion of any CUltolDS 
warehouse or shed provided at any port under the provisions of this =.rce:;.~ 
Act for the use of sea-going vessels to be a wharf for the landing or ot~., ap-
shipping of goods or a warehouse for the storing of dutiable goods =1n 
40 on the first importation ttl·ereof without payment of duty, within the AO&ItOlllI 
<:t. 
2126 (B) LS-4. 

Duclat 
CUltoml 
.barvel, 
etc. 
20 
rneaning of the first-mentioned Act, the Board shall Bet apart and 
maintain such place on or adjoining such dock. wharf, quay, stage, 
jetty or pier, oriin such warehouse or shed or ~ion thereof, for the 
use of officers of customs as may be necessary. 
CS. Notwithstanding that any wharf, quay, stage, jetty, pier, ware- S 
house or shed or portion thereof,at any port has under the provisions 
of l'eCtion 44, 'been set apart for the use of the officers of customs at 
the part, all rates, tolls and otht!ll" charges payable under this Act 
in lespect thereof. or for the storage of goods therein, shan be pay-
able to the Board, or to such person or persons as may be appointed 10 
by the BoaI'd to receive the same. 
= to ."' (1) No person shall make, erect or fix within the limits of a 
Cion J. erec- port or port approaches any wharf, dock, quay, stage, jettYa pier, 
pr= erection or mooring except with the previous permission in writing 
:c., ~in of the Board and subject to such conditions, if any, as the Board may IS 
~ pon lub- specify. ,ect to con-
dition •• (2) If any person makes, erects or fixes any wharf, dock. quay, 
stage, jetty, pier, erection or mooring in contravention of sub-section 
(1) ,the Board may, by notice, require such person to remove it 
within such time as may be specified in the notice and if the pe-.rson 20 
.fails so to remove it, 'the Board may cause it to be removed at the 
expense of that person. 
Compell... 47. (1) Where, as a result of an order published under section 38 
:~1~ ~~r- or section 41, the use of any wharf, dock, quay, stage, jetty, pier, 
ta1n caae. erectioJl or mooring made, fixed or erected by any person is rendered 25 
where ~.o of unlawful the Board may after hearing the person concerned, by any pnvate' , 
whalf, order, close, remove, fill up or destroy such'wharl, dock, quay, stage, 
:·~~~t jetty, pier, erection or mooring or permit the use thereof to such 
person on payment of such dues, rates and charges as the Board may, 
with the previous sanction of the Central Government, determine. 30 
(2) Save as otherwise provided under sub-section (3) no person 
shall be entitled to claim compensation for any injury. damage or 
loss caused or alleged to have been caused by an order made under 
sub-section (1). 
(3) If it is proved to the satisfaction of the Board that any 35 
such wharf, dock, quay, stage, jetty. pier, erection or mooring was 
made. fixed or erected by any person with the previous permission 
of" the authority competent to grant such permission, he shall be 
paid by the Board compensation the amount of which shall be de-
termined in the manner and in accordance with the prinCiples here- <40 
inafter set out, that Is to say-
(a) in computing the compensation, there shall not be 
taken into account any tolls. dues, rates or charies whick such 

10 
10 of '940. 
35 
s oJ 11108. 
21 
person shall be liable to pay for using any wharf, quay, stage, 
jetty. pier, erection or mooring provided by the Board; 
(b) the amount of compensation shall be calculated with 
reference to the cost of construction of such wharf. quay, stage, 
jetty. pier, erection or mooring; 
(e) where the amount of compensation can be fixed by 
agreement, it shall be paid in accordance with such agreement; 
(d) where no such agreement can be reached, the Central 
Government shall appoint as arbitrator, a person who is. or has 
been. or is qualitled for appointment as, a Judge of a High 
Court; -
(e) the Central Government may. in any particwar case. 
nominate a person possessing special knowledge of any matter 
relating to any case under inquiry to assist the arbitration in 
determining any question which has to be decided. by him under 
this section, and where such nomination is made the person to 
be compensated may also nominate an assessor for the same 
purpose; 
(f) at the commencement of the proceeding before the ar-
,bitrator, the Board and the person to be compensated shall 
stat~_ what in their respective opinion is a fair amount of com-
pensation: 
(g) the arbitrator shall. after hearing the dispute, make an-
award determining the amount of compensation which appears 
to him to be just and specify the person or persons to whom 
such compensation shall be paid; 
(h) where there is a dispute as to the person or persons 
who are entitled to the compensation, the arbitrator shall decide 
such dispute and if the arbitrator finds that more persons than 
one are entitled to compensation, he shall apportion the amount 
thereof among such persons; 
(i) nothing in the Arbitration Act, 1940 shall a-pply to ar-
bitrations under this section; 
(;) the arbitrator appointed under this section. while hold-
ing arbitration proceedings under the Act. shall have all the 
powers of a Civil Court while trying a suit under the Code of 
Civil Procedure. 1908 in respect of the following ~tters,-
(i) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any 
person and examining him on oath; 

i~'- 22 
~,~, ,. 
, ,.,~ 
(ii) requiring the discovery and production of docu-
ments; 
(iii) receivin, evidence on affidavits; 
(i-o) iuuing commissions for examination of witnesses 
or documents: 
(Je) any person aggrieved by an award of the arbitrator 
made under this section may, within thirty days from the date 
of the award. prefer an appeal to the High Court within whose 
juriadi~ion the port is situated: 
Provided that the High Court may entertain the appeal io 
after the expiry of the said period of thirty days if it is satisfied 
t_t the appellant was prevented by sufficient cause from filing 
the ~ppeal in time: 
(1) ~ery award shall also state the amount of costs incur-
red in the arbitration proceedings under this section and by IS 
what persons and in what proportions they are to be paid. 
CHAPTER VI 
.IMPOsmoN AND RECOVERY OF RATES AT PORTS 
Scale, of 41. (1) Every Board shall from time to time frame a scale of 
=~ per- rates at which, and a statement of the oonditions under which, any 20 
fonIaed br of the services specified hereunder shall be performed by itself at 
Boercl. 01' in rela$ion to the port or port approaches--
(4) ,transhipping of passengers or goods between vessels if. 
the port or port approaches; 
(b) landing and shipping of passengers or goods from or to 2S 
such vellels to or from My wharf, quay, jetty, pier, dock, berth, 
mooring. stale or ~rection, land or building in the possession or 
oeeupetiOft of tbeBoard or at any place within the limits of the 
port 01' port approaches; 
(c) cranege Ol' porterage of goods on any such place; 
3() 
(d) wharfage, storage or demurrage of goods on any such 
pIece; 
(e) any other service in respect of vessels. passengers or 
goods, excepting the services In respect of vessels for which fees 
are chargeable under the Indian Ports Act. 3S 
(2) Difterent scales and conditions may be framed for different 
classe. of goods and vessels. 

• 
23 
•. (1) Every Board shall, from time to time, also frame a scale Sc:ale of 
of rates on payment of which, and a statement of conditions under ~::~t of 
which, any property belonging to or in the possession or occupation condition. 
of the Board, or any place within the limits of the port or the port ~o~~::be_ 
S approaches may be used for the purposes specifted hereunder:- longing to 
Board. 
10 
IS 
(4) approaching 01' lying at or alongside any buoy, moor-
ing, wharf, quay, pier, dock, land, building or place as afore-
said by vessels; 
(b) entering lq)on or plying for hire at or on any wharf, 
quay, pier, dock, land, building, road, bridge or place as afore-
said by animals or vehicles carrying passengers or goods; 
(c) leasing of land or sheds by owners of goods imported 
or intended for export or by steamer agents; 
(d) any other use of any land. building, works, vessels or 
appliances belonging to or provided by the Board. 
(2) Different scales and conditions may be framed for different 
classes of goods and vessels. 
SO. A Board may. from time to time, frame a consolidated scale Consolidated 
f t f b· t' f th . 'ft d . t' 48 rates for o ra es or any com Ina Ion 0 e servIceS Specl e ID sec Ion combination 
20 or for any combination of such service or services with any user of services. 
O~ permission to use any property belonging to or in the possession " 
or occupation of the Board, as specified in section 49. 
51. In framing scales under any of the foregoin~ provisions of this rower to 
Chapter, the Board may prescribe ~ lower rate of charges in res- c:ii=i 
,J,S peel of,- ' ratca Of charles 
f I d· on colltll Cal coastal' goods carried in a vessel rom one n Ian port 100 a. 
to another Indian port: 
Provtded that the Board shall not makf>.· any discrimination 
between one Indian port and another luch port in prescribing 
30 a lower rate of charges under this section; 
(b) other goods, in special cases. 
51. Every ;$Cale of rates an~ every ~~tement o~ conditions framed ~~~~rnc­
by a Board under the foregomg' prOVISIons of thIS Chapter shaH be Central 
submitted to the CentTal Government for sanction and shall have goverg menf 
J5 effect when 10 sanctioaedand published by the Board in the Official 8ca~. 
Gazette. 

24 
Exemption 53. A Board may, in special cases and for reasons to be recorded 
!=~I~~~ of, in writing, exempt either wholly or partially any goods or class of 
rates or goods from the payment of any rate or of any charge leviable thereon 
charges. according to any scale in force under this Act or remit the whole or 
any portion of such rate or charge so levied. , 
POwer of 54. (1) Whenever the Central Government considers it necessary 
g:~r!ment in the public interest so to do, it may, by order in writing together 
to require. with a statement of reasons therefor, direct any Board to cancel 
modificauon f th I' f od'f th 'th' h . d or cancella- any 0 e sca es In orce or m lye same, WI In sue perla 
tion of ratcs. as that Government may specify in the order.' 10 
Refund of 
overcharges. 
Notice of 
payment of 
charges 
short-levied 
or errone-
CUlly re-
funded. 
(2) If any Board against whom a direction is made under sub-
section (1) fails or neglects to comply with such direction within 
the specified period, the Central Government may cancel any of such 
scales or make such modifications therein as it may think fit. 
Provided. that before so cancelling or modifying any scale the IS 
Central Government shall consider any objection or suggestion 
which may be made by the Board during the specified period. 
(3) When in pursuance of this section any of the scales has been 
cancelled or modified. such cancellation or modification shall be 
published by the Central Government in the Official Gazettp ar.= 20 
shall thereupon have effect accordingly. 
55. No person shall be entitled to a refund of an overcharge made 
by a Board unless his claim to the refund bas been preferred in 
writing by him or on his behalf to the Board within six months from 
the date of payment duly supported by aU relevant documents: 2S 
Provided that a Board may of its own motion remit overcharges 
made in its bills at any time. 
56. (1) When any Board is satisfied that any charge leviable 
under this Chapter has been short-levied or erroneously refunded, 
it may issue a notice to the person who is liable to pay such charge 30 
or to whom the refund has erroneously been made, requiring him to 
show cause why he should not pay the amount specified in the 
notice. 
Provided that no such notice shall be issued after. the expiry of 
two years,- 35 
(4) where the charge is short-levied, from the date'of the 
payment of the charge; 
(b) where a charge has been erroneously refunded, trom 
the date of the refund. 

25 
(2) The Board may, after considering the representation, if any, 
made by the person to whom notice is issued under sub-section (1), 
determine the amount due from such person and thereupon such 
person shall pay the amount so determi·ned. 
5 57. A Board shall not lease, farm, sell or alienate any power vest- Board not to 
ed in it under this Act of levying rates without the prior sanction of ::t~a:tea 
the Central Government. sanction. 
58. Rates in respect of goods to be landed shall be payable imme- Time for 
diately on the landing of the goods and rates in respect of goods to rr,~~t of 
10 be removed from the premises of a Board, or to be shipped for ex- load •. 
port, or to be transhipped, shall be payable before the goods are so 
removed or shipped or. transhipped. 
59. (1) For the amount of all rates leviable by a Board under this ~oard's lien . '. ,or rates, 
Act In respect of any goods, and for the rent due to the Board for any 
15 buildings, plinths, stacking areas, or other premises on or in which 
any goods may have been placed, the Board shall have a lien on such 
goods, and may seize and detain the same until such rates and rents 
are fully paid. 
(2) Such lien shall have priority over all other liens and claims, 
20 except for general average and for the ship-owner's lien upon the 
said goods for freight and other charges where such lien exists and 
has been preserved in the manner provided in sub-section (1) of 
section 60, and for money payable to the Central Government under 
any law for the time being in force. 
25 60. (1) If the master or owner of any vessel or his agent, at or Mlste!"s lien 
before the time of landing from such vessel any goods at any dock, !~~r~~t 
wharf, quay, stage, jetty, berth, mooring or pier belonging to or in chUles. 
the occupation of a Board, gives to the Board a notice in writing 
that such goods are to remain subject to a lien for freight or other 
30 charges payable to the shipowner. to an amount to be mentioned in 
such notice, such goods shall continue to be liable to such lien to 
such amou·nt. 
(2) The goods shall be retained in the custody of the Board at 
the risk and expense of the owners of the goods until such lien is dis-
35 charged as hereinafter mentioned; and godown or storage rent shall 
be payable by the party entitled to such goods for the time during 
which they may be so retained. 
(3) Upon the production before any officer appointed by the 
Board in that behalf of a document purporting to be a receipt for, 
4- or release from, the amount of such lien, executed by the person by 

• 
2t 
whom or on whose behalf such notice has-been given, the B.rd may 
permit such goods to be removed without regard to sueh lien, pr0-
vided that the Board shall have used rellSOll8ble care in respect to 
the authenticity of such document. 
Sale of 61. (1) A Board may, after the expiry of two months from the S 
~.:"~=I time when aofty goods have pasaed into its custody. or in the case of 
if ratee or animals and perishable or hazardous goods after the expiry 01 S\lch 
~?J ~~ li!ot shorter period not being less than twenty-four hours after the land-
for f~~t i'I ing of the animals or goods as the Board may think fit. sell by public 
~.dl'C ar- auction such goods or so much thereof as, in the opinion of the Boarci. 10 
may be necessary-
(a) if any rates payable to the Board in respect of luch 
goods have not been paid, or 
(b) if any rent payable to the Board in respect of any place 
on or in which such goods have b~en stored has not been paid, 's 
or 
(c) if any lien of any shipowner for freight or other charges 
of which notice has been given has not been discharged and if 
the person claiming such lien for freight or other charges has 
made to the Board an application for such sale. 
(2) Before making such sale, the Board shall give ten . days' notiCe 
of the same by publication thereof in the Oftieial Gazette and also 
in at least one of the principal local daily newspapers: 
20 
Provided that in the case of animals and perishable or hazardous 
goods, the Board may give such shorter notice as, in the opinion of 2S 
the Board, the urgency of the case admits of. 
(3) If the adtiress of the owner of the goods has been stated on 
the manifest of the goods or in any of the documents which have 
come into the hands of the Board, or is otherwise known, notice shall 
also be given to him by letter delivered at such address, or sent by 30 
post, but the title of a 'Dona fide purchaser of such goods shall not be 
invalidated by reason of the omission to send such notice, nor shaH 
any such purchaser be bound to inquire whether such notice has 
bee..n sent. 
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, arms 
and ammunition and controlled goods may be sold at such time and 35 
in such manner as the Central Government may direct. 
Explanation.-In this section and section 62-(a) "arms and am-
munition" have the meanings respectively assigned to them in the 
Arms Act, 19S9; 40 

2' 
(b) "controlled goods" means goods the price or disposal of which 
is regulated under any law for the time being in force. 
62. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, where Dilpoaal oj 
any goods placed in the custody of the Board upon the landing there- e:sot 
5 of are not removed by the owner or other person entitled thereto from 
from the premises of the Board within one month from the date on ~remi:!rcs 
which such goods were placed in their custody, the Board may, if ~t~l1 tiDie 
the address of such owner or person is known, cause a notice to be limit. 
served upon him by letter delivered at such address Or sent by post, 
10 or if the notice cannot be so served upon him or his address is not 
known, cause a notice to be published in the Official Gazette and 
also in at least one of the principal local daily newspapers, requiring 
him to remove the goods forthwith and stating that in default of 
compliance therewith the goods are liable to be sold by public auc-
IS tion: 
Provided that where all the rates and charges payable under this 
Act in respect of any such goods have been paid, no notice of removal 
shall be SO served or published under this sub-section unless two 
months have expired from the date on which the goods were placed 
zo in the custody of the Board. 
(2) The notice referred to in sub-section (1) may also be served 
on the agents of the vessel by which such goods were landed. 
(3) If such owner or person does not comply with the requisition 
in the notice served upon him or published under sub-section (1), 
25 the Board may, at any time after the expiration of two months from 
the date on which such goods were placed in its custody, sell the 
goods by pub ic auction after giving notice of the sale in the manner 
specified in sub-sections (2) and (3) of section 61. 
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1) or 
30 sub-section (3)-
3S 
(a) the Board may, in the case of animals and perishable or 
hazardous goods, give such shorter notice under any of those 
sub-sections as, in the opinion of the Board, the urgency of the 
case requires; 
(b) arms and ammunition and controlled goods may be sold 
in accordance with the provisions of sub-section (4) of section 
61. 
(5) The Central Government may, if it deems necessary so to do 
in the public interest, by notification in the Official Gazette, enmpt 
40 any goods or classes of goods from the ~peration of this section. 
2126 (B) LS-5. 

28 
~iicatiOll 13. (l) The proceeds of every sale under section 61 or aection 68 
cced-:: pro- shall be applied in the following order:-
Recovcryof 
rate. and 
charges by 
eli.mint of 
yetacl. 
Grant of· 
pon de_-
ranccaftcr 
payment of 
rates. 
(a) in payment of the expenses of the sale; 
(b) in payment, according to their respective priorities, of 
the liens and claims excepted in sub-section (2) of section 59 S 
from the priority of the lien of the Board; 
(c) in payment of the rates and expenses of landing, re-
moving, storing or warehousing the same, and of all other charges 
due to the Board in respect thereof; 
(d) in payment of any charges due to the Board from the 10 
importer, owner or consignee of the goods under the provisions 
of this Act in respect of any other goods belonging to him. 
(2) The surplus, if any, shall, except in the case of goods confis-
cated under any law relating to customs be paid on demand to the 
importer, owner or consignee of the goods, or to his agents. IS 
64.. (1) If the master of any vessel in respect of which any rates 
or penalties are payable under this Act, or under any regulations or 
orders made in pursuance thereof, refuses or neglects to pay the 
same or any part thereof on demand, the Board may distrain or 
arrest such vessel and the tackle, apparel and furniture belonging 20 
thereto, or any part thereof, and detain the same until the amount 
80 due to the Board, together with such further amount as may 
accrue for any period during which the vessel is under distraint or 
arrest, is paid. 
(2) In case any part of the said rates or penalties, or of the cost 2S 
of the distress or arrest, or of the keeping of the same, remains un-
paid for the space of five days next after any such distress or arrest 
has been so made, the Board may cause the vessel or other thing so 
distrained or arrested to be sold, and, with the proceeds of such sale, 
shall satisfy such rates or penalties and costs, including the costs of 30 
sale remaining unpaid, rendering the surplus (if any) to the master 
of such vess~l on demand. 
65. If a Board gives to the officer of the Central Government 
whose duty it is to grant the port-clearance of any vessel at the port, 
a notice stating that an amount therein specified is due in respect of 3S 
rates, fines, penalties or expenses chargeable under this Act or under 
any regulations or orders made in. pursuance thereof, against such 
vessel, or by ihe owner or master of such vessel in respect thereof, 
or against or in respect of any goods on board such vessel, such offi-
cer shall not grant such port-clearance until the amount so charge- 40 
able or due has been paid. 

t of 1173• 
29 
CHAPTER VII 
BORROWING POWERS OF BOARD 
66. (1) A Board may, with the previous sanction of the Central ~~:ero!: •. 
Government and after due notification in the Official Gazette, raise 
5 loans for the purposes of this Act: 
Provided that no such notification shall be necessary if a loan is 
obtained from the Central Government or a State Government. 
(2) Loans may be raised by a Board in the open market on Port 
Trust securities issued by it or may be obtained from the Central 
10 Government or a State Government. 
(3) The terms of all loans shall be subject to the approval of the 
Central Government. 
67. (1) A Board may, with the sanction of the Central Govern- PortTrult 
ment, prescribe the form in which Port Trust securities shall be securities. 
IS issued by it and the mode in which and the conditions subject to 
which they may be transferred. 
(2) The holder of any Port Trust security in any form may ob-
tain in exchange therefor, upon such terms as the Board may from 
time to time determine, a Port Trust security in any other form 
20 prescribed by regulations under this Act. 
(3) The right to SUe in respect of moneys secured by Port Trust 
securities shall be exercisable by the holders thereof for the time 
being without preference in respect of priority of date. 
68. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 45 of the Ri~t of 
25 Indian Contract Act 1872- ~u.rvlvora of , Jomt or 
(a) when any Port Trust security is payable to two or more :!;~ of 
persons jointly, and either or any of them dies, the Port Trust securities. 
security shall be payable to the survivor or suvivors of those 
persons, and 
(b) when a·ny such security is payable to two or more per-
sons severally and either or any of them dies, the security shall 
be payable to the survivor or survivors of those persons, or to the 
representatives of the deceased, or to any of them. 
(2) This section shall apply whether such death occurred or 
35 occurs before or after the appointed day. 
(3) Nothing herein contained shall affect any claim which any 
representative of a deceased person may have against the .urvivor 

30 
or survivors under or in respect of any security to which sub-section 
(J) applies. 
(4) For the purposes of this section, a body incorporated under 
the Companies Act, 1956, Or .the Co-operative Societies Act, 1912 or 
any other enactment for the time -being in force, whether within 
or without India, shall be deemed to die when it is dissolved. 
Power of 69. Where two or more persons are joint holders of any Port 
one or two Trust security, anyone of those persons may give an effectual re-or more . f . joint holden celpt or any mterest payable in respect of such security unless no-
S 
~~~:. tice to the contrary has been given to the Board by any other of the 10 
holders. 
IDdorae- 70. Notwithstanding anything in section 15 of the Negotiable In-
1 of IP56. 
2 of 1912. 
:u to be struments Act, 1881, no indorsement of a Port Trust security, which 26 of 1881. 
urit; i:e~ is transferrable by endorsement, shall be valid unless made by the 
signature of the holder inscribed on the back of the security itself. 15 
Indoner of 71. Notwithstanding anything in the Negotiable Instruments Act, 
=ty not 1881, a person shaH not by reason only of his having indorsed any 25 of 1181. 
amount for Port Trust security be liable to pay any money due, either as prin-
thereof. cipal or as interest, thereunder. 
!mpreaaion 72. (1) The signature of the person authorised to sign Port Trust 20 
of Iptut:e securities on behalf of the Board may be printed, engraved or litho-
on lecurl-. h h' 1 B d tiel. graphed or Impressed by such ot er mee amca process, as the oar 
luu_ 
duplicate 
lecuritiel. 
may direct, on such securities. 
(2) A signature so printed, engraved, lithographed or otherwise 
impressed shall be as valid as if it had been inscribed in the proper 25 
handwriting of the person so authorised. 
of 73. (1) When any Port Trust security is alleged to have been lost, 
stolen or destroyed either wholly or in pact, and a person claims 
to be the person to whom but for the loss, theft or destruction it 
would ber payable, he may, on application to the Board and on pro- 30 
ducing proof to its satisfacoon of the loss, theft or destruction and 
of the justice of the claim and on payment of such fee, if any, as 
may be prescribed by regulations, obtain from the Board an order 
for-
(a) the payment of interest in respect of the security said 35 
to be lost, stolen or destroyed, pending the issue of a duplicate 
security; Bnd 
(b) the issue of a duplicate security payable to the appli-
cant. 

9 of 1901. 
II 
(Z) An order shall not be passed under sub-section (1) until after 
the issue by the Board of the prescribed notification of the loss, theft 
or destruction. 
(3) A list of the securities in respect of which an order is passed 
S under sub-section (J) shall be published in such manner as the Board 
may prescribe. 
(4) If at any time before the Board becomes discharged under the 
provisions of this Act from liability in respect of any security the 
whole of which is alleged to have been lost, stolen or destroyed, such 
10 security is found, any order passed in respect thereOf under this 
lection shall be cancelled. 
• 
74. (1) A Board may, subject to such conditions as it may pre&- bauo of COD-
cribe, on the application of a person claiming to be entitled to a :=d.:~ .. 
Port Trust security or securities issued by it, on being satisfied of the 
I S justice of the claim and on delivery of the security or securities 
receipted in such manner and on payment of such fee, if any, as it 
may prescribe, convert, consolidate or sub-divide the secudty or 
securities, and issue to the applicant a new security or securities 
accordingly. 
20 (2) The conversion. consolida:tion or sub-division referred to in 
35 
sub-section (1) may be into a security or securities of the same or 
different classes or of the same or different loans. 
75. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Indian Limitation ~ i. 
Act, 1908- Galea. 
(i) on payment of the amoUIllt due on a Port Trust security 
on or after the date on which payment becomes due, or 
(ii) when a duplicate security has been issued under 
section 73, or 
(iii) when a new security or securities has or have been 
issued upon conversion, consolidation or sub-division under 
section 74, 
the Board shall be discharged from all liability in respeC't of the 
security or securities so paid or in place of which a duplicate or new 
security or securities has or have been issued-
(a) in the case of payment-after the lapse of six years 
from the date on which payment was due; 
(b) in the case of a duplicate security-after the lapse of 
six years from the date of the publication under sub-section (3) 
of section 73 of the list in Which the security is first mentioned 
or from the date of the last payment of interest on the original 
lICurity, whichever date is later; 

• 
32 
(c) in the case of a new security issued upon conversion, 
consolidation or sub-division-after the lapse of six years froin 
the date of the issue thereof . 
,=: ~! 16. A board may, from time to time, make regulations to provide 
~te rep- for all or any of the following matters, namely:- S uoo .. 
(a) the person, if any, authorised to sign, and the mode of 
affixing the corporate seal and of attestation of documents re-
lating to Port Trust securities issued or to be issued by the 
Board; 
(b) the manner in which payment of interest in respect of 10 
such Port Trust securities is to be made, recorded and acknow-
ledged; 
(c) the circumstances and the manner in which such Port 
Trust securities may be renewed; 
(d) the circumstances in which such securities must be 1:5 
renewed before further payment of interest thereon can be 
claimed; 
(e) the form in which such secudties delivered for renewal, 
conversion, consolidation or sub-division are to be receipted; 
(f) the proof which is to be produced by a person applying 20 
for duplicate securities; 
(g) the form and manner of publication of the notification 
mentioned in sub-se<:tion (2) of section 73 'and the manner of 
publication of the list mentioned in sub-section (3) of that 
section; 25 
(h) the nature and amount of indemnity to be given by a 
person applying for the payment of interest on Port Trust 
securities alleged to have been wholly or partly lost, stolen or 
destroyed, or for the issue of duplicate Port Trust securities; 
(i) the conditions subject to which Port Trust securities 30 
may be converted, consolidated or sub-divided; 
(;) the amounts for which stock certificate may be issued; 
(k) generally, all matters connected with the grant of 
duplicate, renewed, converted, consolidated and sub-divided se-
curities: 3S 
(1) the fees to be paid in respect of the issue of .duplicate 
securities and of the renewal. conversion, consolidation and sub-
division of Port Trust securities: 
(m) the fees to be levied in respect of the issue of IItock 
certificates. 40 

31 
71. All loans contracted by a Board under this Act shall be raised Place and 
in India, and in Indian currency, unless the Central Government, by furrency, ~ 
notification in the Omcial Gazette, otherwise directs. b:nsB~:rd. 
78. All loans raised by a Board under this Act shall be a first Security for 
h roana taken , c arge on- out by 
(4) the property vested. or which may hereafter during the Board. 
currency of the loans become vested. in ,the Board other than 
any sum set apart by the Board as the sinking fund for the 
purpose of paying oft' any loan; and 
10 (b) the rates leviable by the Board under this Act. 
79. (1) The Central Govermnent or a State Government shall Remedies of 
have in respect of loans made by it to a Board, or of loans made to gove~~::: 
any other authority for the repayment ot which the Board is legal- of loan. 
ly liable the same remedies as holders of Port Trust securities :::~I. to 
IS issued by the Board; and such Government shall not be deemed to 
possess any prior or· greater rights in respect of such loans than 
holders of such Port Trust securities: 
Provided that where the terms of any such loan made before 
, the appointed day expressly provide that the loan shall have priority 
20 over all other loans in the matter of repayment by the Board, such 
loan shall have priority. 
80. A board may, with the previous sanction of the Central Power of 
Government, apply any sums, out of moneys which may come into ~ec;a~ loan~o 
its hands under the provisions of this Act and which can be so before due 
:15 applied without prejudicing the security of the other holders of date. 
Port Trust securities, in repaying to the Government any sum which 
may remain due to it in respect of the principal of any loan al-
though the time fixed for the repayment of the same may not have 
arrived: 
30 Provided that no such repayment shall be made of any sum 
less than ten thousand rupees; and that, if such repayment is made. 
the amount of interest in each succeeding instalment shall be so 
adjusted as to represent exactly the interest due on the outstanding 
principal. 
35 81. (1) In respect of every loan raised by a Board under this Act, Establish· 
which is not repayable before the expiration of one year from the =ki~~nd. 
date of the loan, the Board shall set apart half-yearly out of its 
income as a sinking fund a sum sufficient to liquidate the loan with~ 
in a period which shall not in any case, unless the previous con-
40 sent of the Central Government has been obtained, exceed thirty 

Years; but the maximum perioci shall not in any case excefd sixty 
years: 
Provided that a sinking fund need not in the absence of 'any sti-
p~tion to that effect be established in ,the case of loans taken by 
the Board from the Central Government or any State Government. S 
(2) Where any sinking fund has, before tbeappointed day, been 
established by any authority in respect of a loan raised by it for 
which loan the Board is liable under this Act, the sinking fund so 
esta~lished by that authority shall be deemed to have been establish-
. ed by the Board under this section. 10 
IDvettmC!lt 82. (1) The sums so set apart by a Board under sub-section (1) of 
= ~~- section 81 and the sums forming part of any sinking fund referred to 
kiDa fwl4. in sub-section (2) af that section shall be invested in public securltiea 
or in such other securities'RS the Central Government may approve 
in this behalf, and shall be held in trust for the purposes of this Act IS 
by two Trusteees, one being the Board and the other a person ap-
pointed by the Central Government. 
(2) A Board may apply the whole or any part of the sums accu-
mulated in any sinking fund in or towards the discharge of the 
moneys for the repayment of which the fund has been established. 2(\ 
Provided that it pays into the fund in each year, and accumulates 
until the whole of the moneys borrowed are discharged, a sum 
equivalent to the interest which would have been produced by the 
sinking fund, or the part of the sinking fund so applied. 
lbamination 83. (1) A sinking fund established for the liquidation of any loan 2S 
of linkina shall be subject to annual examination by such person as may be 
t'G4. appointed by the Central Government in this behalf, and the person 
so appointed shall ascertain whether the cash and the current 
market value of the securities at the credit of the fund are actually 
equal to the amount which would have been accumulated had in- 30 
vestments been regularly made and had the rate of interest as origi-
nally estimated been obtained thereon. 
(2) A Board shall pay forthwith into the sinking fund any 
amount which the person appointed under sub-section (1) to conduct 
the annual examination of the fund may certify to be deficient, 3S 
unless the Central Government specifically sanctions a gradual read-
justment. 
(3) If the cash and the current market value of the securities. at 
the credit of a sinking fund are in excess of the 8mOWlt whIch 
-, should be at its credit, the person appointed under Bub-section (1) 40 

9 of 191". 
as' 
shall certify the amount of this excess, and the Board may, with the 
previous sanction of the Central Government,- . 
(a) withdraw the whole or any part of the certified excess 
in which case the Trustees in whose names the sinking fund is ' 
invested tinder sub-seCtion (1) of seetion 82, shall forthwith 
transfer secUrities of the requisite current market value, or ca!lh 
and securities of the requisite current market value, to the 
Board, or 
(b) reduce or discontinue the half-yearly contributions to 
10 the sinking fund required under section 88, or 
(c) adopt a combination of these measures. 
, 84. Nothing contained in this Act shall be deemed to affect the Power of 
power of the Board to raise loans under the Local Authorities Loans ~l:~C:. 
Act, 1914. on shon-
term bills. 
IS 85. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, a Board Power of 
may borrow moneys by means of temporary overdraft or othel"Wise ~e:~~::;ke 
by pledging the securities held by the Board in its reserve funds or loana or 
on the security of the fixed deposits of the Board in its banks: overdrafts. 
Prov,ided that such temporary overdrafts or other loans-
20 (a) mall not at any time have a longer curren,cy than six 
months; and 
(b) shall not be taken, withou,t the previous sanction of the 
Central Government, if at any Ume in any year the amount of 
such overdrafts or other loans exceeds such amount not exceed-
2S ing ten lakhs or rupees, as the Central Government may fix in 
this behalf: 
Provided further, that all moneys so borrowed by temporary 
overdrafts or otherwise shall be 'expended for the purposes of this 
Act. 
30 86. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act or any oth~r Power of 
law for the time being in force, a Board may, with the previous :~::!.to 
sanction of the Central Govermnent and on such tenns and condi- money from 
tions as may be approved by that Government, raise for the pur- ~~!r~!:: 
poses of this Act loans in any currency or currencies from the In- for R:econB-
3S ternational Bank for Reconstruction and Development or from a~y ~~~~=d 
. other bank or institution in any country outside India; and no other or other nt 
provision of this Chapter shall apply to or in relation to any such r:tit:a~iona. 
loan unless the terms and conditions of the loan or the approval 
thereof by the Central Government otherwise provide. 
2126 (B) LS- __ J 

QeDeral Ac-
COUDt of 
Port. 
31 
CHAPTER VOl 
REVENUB AND EXPENDlTt1U 
87. All moneys received by or on behalf of a Board under the 
prov islons of this Act, and all moneys received by it as the Conser-
vator of the port and of the port approaches or as the body appoint-
ed under sub-section (1) of section 36 of the Indian Ports Act ex-
cluding all fees and all fines and penalties creditable to the pilotage 
account of the port under sub-section (5a) of that section, shall 
be credited to a fund called the general account of the port. 
, 
~~d, 88. (1) The money credited to the general account under 10 
ae::'" • section frT, shall, subject to the provisions of section 89 of this Act 
account. and of section 36 of the Indian Ports Act, be applied by the Board 
in payment of the following charges, namely:-
(<<) the interest and instalments of principal due in res-
pect of any loan that may have been raised or obtained by the 15 
Board or for the repayment of which the Board may be .liable, 
and payments to the sinking fund established for such loan; 
(b) the salaries fees, allowances, pensions, gratuities, com-
passionate allowances or other moneys due to-
(i) the Chairman, Deputy Chairman and other Trus- 30 
tees; 
(ii) the employees of the Board; and. 
(iii) the surviving relatives, if any, of such employees; 
(c) the contributions, if any, payable to the Central Gov-
ernment or any State Government on account of the pension 2S 
and leave allowance of any officer lent to the Board by such 
Government; 
(d) the cost and expenses, if any, incurred by the Board in 
the con~uct and administration of any provident or welfare fund 
or loan or special fund established by the Board; 30 
(e) the contributions, if any, duly authorised to be made 
by regulations made under this Act to any such fund as is re-
ferred to in clause (d); 
(f) any charges for which the Board may be liable under 
section 108 or section 109: 3' 
(g) such sums as may, frJlm time to time, be agreed upon 
by the Board and a State Government as a reasoll4lble contri-
bution payable by the Board towards the expenses in connection 
" of 1901. 

f1 
WlUl the watch and ward functions 01. the pollce force which 
the State Government may establish and maintain fQr the pro-
tection of the port and the docks, warehouses and other pro-
perty of the Board; 
S (h) the cost of repairs and maintenance of the property be-
longing to or vested in the Board and all charges upon the same 
and all working expenses; 
(i) the cost of ,the execution and provision of any new 
work or appliance specified in section 35 which the Board may 
10 determine to charge to revenue; 
(j) any expenditure incurred under section 36; 
(k) any other expenditure which xnay be incurred by the 
Board i~nerally for the purposes of this Act; 
(1) any other charge which may on the application of the 
I, Board be specially sanctioned by the Central Government or 
for which the Board may be legally liable. 
(2) All moneys standing at the credit of the Board which can-
not immediately be applied in the manner or tor the purposes speci-
fied in lub-sectoion (1) shall-
20 (4) be deposited in the State Bank of India or in such sche-
duled bank or banks. and subject to such conditions as may, 
from time to time, be specified by the Central Qovemment; or 
(b) be invested in public securities or in such other secu-
rities as the Central Government may approve in this behalf; 
2S and the said securities shall 'be held in trust by the Board for 
the purposes of .this Act. 
89. A Board may, with the previous sanction of the Central Gov- Power to 
ernment, apply any sum out of the moneys credited to the general :nr:un: tram 
account of the port towards meeting deficits, if any, in the pilotage the general 
30 account of the port maintained under section 36 of the Indian Ports ~~~O:~ 
Act or transfer the whole or part of any surplus funds in such pilo- a~cwnt aD4 
tage account to the general account of the port. VIC' wr,a. 
90. (1) A Board may, from time to time, set apart iluch sums out Batabllah-
of its surplus income as it thinks fit, as a reserve fund or funds for ment of re-
3~ the purpose of expanding exi8ting facilities or creating new facilities lerve t\mdl. 
at the port or for the purposes of providing against any temporary 
decrease of revenue or increase of expenditure from transient causes 
or for purposes of replacement or for meeting expenditure arising 
from loss or damag~ from fire, cyclones, shipwreck or other accident 
40 or for any other emergency arising in the ordinary conduct of its 
work Wlder this Act: ' 

38 
Provided that the sums set apart annually in respect of, and the 
aggregate at any time of, any such reserve fund or funds shall not 
exceed such amounts as may, from time to time, be fixed in that 
behalf by the Central Government. 
(2) Any such reserve fund or funds may be invested in public' 5 
securities or in such other securities as the Central Government m87 
approve in this behalf. . 
Power to 81. (1) ,For the purposes of any investment which a Board is 
l'eTlerve Port authorised to make by this Act, it shall be lawful for every Board rult aecu- • 
ritle_ for to reserve and set apart any se<:urlties to be issued by it on account 10 
m== of any loan to which' the consent of the Central Government has. 
been given, provided that the intention to so reserve and set apart 
such securities has been notified as a condition to the issue of the 
loan. 
Prior .. nc-
tion of 
Central 
Government 
to c:harge 
ex~fture 
to capital. 
(2) The issue by any Board of any such securities direct to and 15 
in the name of the Board shall not operate to extinguish or cancel 
such securities, but every security so issued shall bE> valid in all 
respects as if issued to, and in the name of, any other person. 
(3) The purchase by a Board, or the transfer, assignment or in-
dorsement to a Board or to the Trustees of the sinking fund set up 20 
by a Board, of any security issued by the Board, shall not operate to 
extinguish or cancel any such security but the same shall be valid 
and negotiable in the same manner and to the same extent as if held 
by, or transferred or assigned or indorsed to, any other person. 
92. (1) No expenditure shall be charged by a Board to capital 2S 
without the previOUS sanction of the Central Government: 
Provided that a Board may without such sanction charge to 
capital expenditure not exceeding such limit as may be specified, 
and subject to such conditions as may be imposed, by the Central 
Government. 30 
(2) Nothing in sub-section (1) shall be deemed to require the 
further sanction. of the Central Government in any case where the 
actual expenditure incurred as a charge to capital exceeds the 
expenditure sanctioned in this behalf by the Central Government 
unless the excess is more than ten pw cent. of the p,xpenditure so 35 
sanctioned. 
Works 93. (1) No r.ew work or appliance, the estimated cost of which 
requiring exceedS such amou'nt as may be fixed by the Ce~tral Government in 
::~ofor this behalf,··shall be commenced or provided by a Board, nor shall". 
the Cenull any contract be entered 41to by a Board in respect Of any INCh new 40 
GoYCfnJDCDt. 

work or appliance until a plan of, and estimate for, such work or 
appliance has been submitted to, and approved by, the Board; and, 
in case the estimated cost of any such new work or appliance ex-
ceeds such amount as may from time to time, be fixed by the Central 
S Government in this behalf, the sanction 'of the Central Government 
to the plan and estimate shall be obtained before such work is com-
menced or appliance provided. 
(2) Nothing in sub-section (1) shall be deemed to require the 
further sanction of the Central Government in any case where the 
10 actual expenditure incurred does not exceed by more than ten per 
cent., the estimated cost so sanctioned. 
94. Notwithstanding anything contained in section 93, t}1e P~ra of 
Chairman may direct the execution of Gny work the cost of which ~t~~~C:~ 
does not exceed such maximum limit as may be fixed by the Central don of 
IS Gove~ment in this behalf, and may enter into contracts' for the workl. 
execution of such works but in f!Very such case the Chairman shall, 
as soon as possible, make a report to the Board of any such directions 
given or contracts entered into by him. 
95. Every Board may compound or compromise any claim or ~owd of 
20 demand or any action or suit instituted by or against it for such sum c=Pourui ~~ 
of money or other compensation as it deems sufficient: COJJ1Ia• promise elm •• 
Provided that no settlement shall be made UIlder this s~tion 
without the previous sanction of the Central Government if such 
settlement mvolves the payment 'by the Board of a sum exceeding 
25 such amount as may be specified by the Central Government in this 
behalf. 
96. (1) Subject to such conditions as may be specified by the Writing off 
Central Government, where a Board is of opinion that any amount of lOlsel. 
due to or any loss, whether of money or of property, incurred by, 
30 the Board is irrecoverable, the Board may, with the previous ap-
proval of the Central Government, sanction the writing off finally 
CYf the said amount or loss: 
Provided that no such approval of the Central Government shall 
be necessary where such irrecoverable amount or loss does not 
35 exceed, lin any individual case, five thousand rupees or in the aggre-
gate in any year, one lill of rupees .. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (I), 
where the Chairman is of opinion that any amount due to, or any 
loss,· whether of money or of property, incurred by, the Board is ir-
40 recoverable, the Chairman may sanct~on the writing off finally of 
~rich amount or loss provided that such amount or loss does not 

exceed, in any individual case, one thousand rupees or in the ag-
gregate in anyone year, twenty thousand rupees; Rnd in every 
such case the Chairman shall make a report to the Board giving 
reasons for such sanction. 
Pr:::~ etc.. 97. All the powers, authorities and restrictions contained in this . S 
~on.erva~ Act in respect of the works of a Board by this Act authorised, shall 
~B:f .p- apply to the works which may be executed by the Board as the 
under IeC- Conservator of the port or as the body appointed under sub-section 
t n l:cti.~ (1) of section 36 of the Indian Ports Act, not being works the cost 
Por" Act. of which is chargeable to the pilotage account of the port under 10 
sub-section (5b) of that section and also to the sanction of such 
works, the estimates therefor, and the expenditure thereunder. 
Budaet eltl· 98. (1) A Board shall, on or before. the tbiIq-ftrst day of January 
matel. in each year, hold a special meeting at which the Chainnan of the 
Board shall submit an estimate of the income and expenditure of the IS 
Board for the next financial year, in such form as the Central 
qovemment may specify. 
(2) A copy of sucb- estimate shall be sent by post or otherwise 
to each Trustee so as to reach him not less than ten clear days prior 
to the date appointed. for the special meeting referred to in sub- 20 
section (1) . 
(3) The Board shall consider the estimate at su('h meeting and 
may provisionally approve of it with or without modifications. 
(4) The Board shall, on or before the tenth day of February, caulI~ 
a copy of such estimate as provisionally approved by it, to be sent to 25 
the Central Government. 
(5) The Central Government may sanction the estimate or may 
return it with remarks and may call for such additional information 
as it may deem necessary. 
(6) When an estimate is returned under sub-section (5), the 30 
Board shall proceed to reconsider the estimate with reference to 
such remarks and shall furnish such additional information as the 
Central Government may call for and shaU, if necessary, modify or 
alter the estimate and resubmit it to the Central Government. 
(7) The Central Government shall sanction the estimate with or 35 
without modifications. 
(8) Where any such estimate is not sanctioned by the Central Gov-
ernment before the commencement of the financial year to which it 
relates, the Central Government may authorise the Board to incur 

41 
such expenditure as may be necessary in the opinion of the Central 
Government until such time as the approval of the estimate by the 
Central Government is communicated to the Board. 
99. A Board may in the 'course of lany year for which an estimate PreparaUOD 
S has been sanctioned by the Central Government cause one or more of aupp!c-
supplemental estimates for the residue of such year to be prepared, ::~~ eaU-
and the provisions of section 98 shall, so far as may be, apply to 
such estimate as if it were an original estimate. 
100. Subject to any dirE!C?tions which the Central Government lte-appro-
10 may give in this behalf, any sum of money or part thereof of which priaUOD of 
the expenditure has been authorised in an estimate for the time ~'::. ao4 
being in force sanctioned by the Central Government and which has 
not been so spent, may at any time be reappropriated by the Board 
to meet any excess in any other expenditure authorised in the said 
IS estimate: 
Provided that no such reappropriation shall be made from one 
major head of. expenditure to another such head without the pre--
vious sanction of the Central Government. 
101. (1) Subject to the provisions of section 100, no sum exceeding Adber:tc: 
20 such amount as the Central Government may fix in this behalf shall, !~ce;: in 
save in cases of pressing emergency, be expended by, or on behalf emer,eDcy. 
of, any Board unless such sum is included in some estimate of the 
Board at the time in force which has been finally sanctioned by the 
Central Government. 
2S (2) If any sum exceeding such limit as may have been fbc:ed in 
this behalf under sub-section (1) is so expended by any Board on 
a pressing emergency, the circumstances shall be forthwith reported 
by the Chairman to the Central Government, together with an ex-
planation of the way in which it is proposed by the Board to cover 
30 such extra expenditure. 
102. (1) A Board shall maintain proper accounts and other rele- Account. 
vant records and prepare the annual statement of accounts including IDci audit. 
the balance-sheet in such form as may be specified by the Central 
Government in consultation with· the Comptroller and Auditor-
35 General of India. 
(2) The accounts of the Board shall be audited once in every 
year by the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India or such ('ther 
persons as may be appointed by him in this behalf and he shall in 
respect of such audit be paid by the Board such amount as ~e 
40 Central Government may detennine and such amount shall be debIt. 
able to the general account of the Board. 

42 
(3) The Comptroller and Audittor-General of India or any person 
appointed by him in connection with the audit of the accounts of a 
Board shall have the same rights, privileges and authority in con-
nection with such audit as the Comptroller and Auditor-General of 
India has in conneCtion with the audit of Government accounts and, S 
in particular, shall have the right to demand the production of books 
of accounts, connected vouchers and other documents of the Board. 
Publication 103. (1) Within fourteen days after the audit and examination of 
of audit th f . , report. e accounts 0 a Board have been completed, the Comptroller and 
Auditor-General of India shall forward copies of the audit report to 10 
the Central Government and to the Board. 
(2) The Central Government shall cause every audit report to 
be laid for not less than thirty days before each House of Padia-
mentas soon as may be after such report is received by that Gov-
ernment. IS 
Board to 104. Every Board shall forthwith take into considerati<m any 
de::J and defects or irregularities that may be pointed out by the Comptroller 
irregularities and Auditor-General of India, in the audit report on the income and 
r::~~ out expenditure of the Board and shall pass such orders thereon as the 
repon and Board may think fit and shall also send a report of the action taken 20 
Central 1 Go GQ\remment by the Board to the Centra vernment. 
to pass ftnal 
orden. 
Central 
GOVernment 
to decide 
difference 
between 
Board and 
auditors. 
105. If there is a difference of opinion between any Board and the 
Comptroller and Auditor-General of India on any point included 
in the audit report, and the Board is unable to accept and imple-
ment the recommendatlons, if any, made by him on such point, the 2S 
matter shall forthwith be referred to the Central GoVel'nn;lent 
which shall pass final orders thereon and the Board shall be bound 
to give effect to such orders. 
CHAPTER IX 
S'O'P\I:RVISION AND CONTROL OF CENTRAL GOVEBNMEl'ft' 30. 
. 106 As. soon as may be after the first day of April in every year 
~~~~~. and n~t later than such date as may be fixed in ~his behalf by the 
C ntral Government, every Board shall submit to the Central Gov,'-
e~ent a detailed report of the administration of the port during 
the preceding year ending on the thirty~ftrst day of March, i1) such 35 
form as the Central Government may dIrect. 

107. (1) Every Board shall annually, or oftner if din!Cted by the Submi •• lon 
Central Government so to do, submit statements of its income and ~.ta\== 
expenditure in such form and at such time as that Government may and expendi. .. ture to dIrect. Central 
Govern-
S (2) A copy of all such statements shall be open to the inspection ment. 
of the public at the office of the Board during office hours on pay-
ment of such fee for each inspection as may from time to time be 
fixed by the Board. 
108. The Central Government may, at any time, order a local Power of 
10 surveyor examination of any works of a Board, or the intended site g::!ment 
thereof and the cost of such survey and examination shall be borne to order 
d mrve,. or and paid by the Board from and out of the moneys cre lted to the exammatlon 
general account of the port. W'o:f' of 
109. If, at any time, any Board-
(a) allows any work or appliance constructed or provided Power of Central by, or vested in, the Board to fall into disrepair; or Government 
to re.tor. or 
(b) does not, within a reasonable time, complete any work c:ompleut th . worb. c commenced by the Board or included in any estimate sanctioned COlli of 
by the Central Government; or Board. 
20 (c) does not, after due notice in writing, proceed to carry 
out effectually any work or repair or to provide any appliance 
which is necessary in the opinion of the Central Government for 
the purposes of this Act, 
the Central Government may cause such work to be restored or com-
25 pleted or carried out, or such repairs to be carried out or such 
appliance to be provided, and the cost of any such restoration, com· 
pletion, construction, repair or provision shall be paid by the Board 
from and out of" the moneys credited to the general account of the 
port. 
30 110. (1) If, at any time, the Central Gov~rnment is of opinion- Power of 
(a) that on account of a grave emergency, any Board is un· ~t 
able to perform the duties imposed on it by or under the provi- : :r.nedc 
sions of this Act or of any other law, or oa • 
(b) that the Board has perSistently made default in the 
35 performance of the duties imposed upon it by or under the provi-
sions of this Act or of any other law and as a result of such 
2128(B) LS-7. 

44 
default, the financial position of the Board or the adniinistraUon 
of the port has greatly deteriorated, 
the Central Government, may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
!SUpersede the Board for such period, not exceeding six months at a 
time, as may be specified in the notification: S 
Provided that before issuing a notification under this sub-section 
for the reasons mentioned in clause (b), the Central Government 
shall give a reasonable time of not less than three months to the 
Board to show cause why it should not be superseded and shall con-
sider the explanations and objections, if any, of the Board. 10 
(2) Upon tlie pUblication of a notification under sub-section (1) 
superseding the Board,-
(a) all the Trustees shall. as from the date of supersession, 
vacate their offices as such Trustees: 
(b) all the powers and duties which may, by or under the IS 
provisions of this Act or of any other law, be exercised o.r per-
formed by or on behalf of the Board. shall until the Board is 
reconstituted under clause (b) or clause (e) of sub-eection (3) 
be exercised and performed by such person or persons as the 
Central Government may direct; 20 
(e) all property vested in the Board shall. until the Board is 
reconstituted under clause (b) or clause (e) of sub-section (3), 
vest in the Central Governmrent. 
(3) On the expiration of the period of supersession specified in the 
notification issued under sub-section (1), the Central Government 2S 
may-
(a) emnd the period of supersession for such further term, 
not exceeding six months, as it may consider necessary, or 
(b) reconstitute the Board by fresh appOintment and fresh 
election, and in such case, any persons who vacated their oftlces 30 
under clauB'E! (a) of .sub-section (2) shall not be deemed disquali-
fied for appointment or election. as the case may be, or 
(e) reconstitute the Board by appointment only for such 
period as it may consider necessary and in such a case, the persons 
who vacated their offices under clause (a) of sub-section (2) shall 35 
not be deemed disqualified for such apPOintment merely because 
they were Trustees when the Board was superseded: 

l'rovided. that the Central Government may, at any time before 
the - expiration of the period of supersession, whether as originally 
apecifieci under sub-section (1) or as extended under this sub-section. 
take action under clause (b) or clause (c) of this sub-section. 
S (4) The Central Government shall cause a notification issued 
under sub-section (1) and a full report of any action taken under this 
section and the circumstances leading to such action to be laid before 
each House'of Parliament at the earliest possible opportunity. 
Ill. (1) Without prejudice to the foregoing provisions of this Power of 
10 Chapter, every Board shall, in the discharge of its functions under g:,~:!mCllt 
this Act. be bound by such directions on questions of policy as the to issue 
Central Government may give in writing to it from time to time: ~~rB= 
Provided that the Board shall be given opportunity to express its 
views before any direction is given under this sub-section . ... 
IS (2) The decision of the Central Government whethE'r a question 
is one of policy or not shall be final. 
CHAPTER X 
PENALTIES 
112. Every person employed by a Board under this Act, shall, for PenollS 
20 the purposes of sections 161 to 171 (both inclusive), 184, 185 and 409 =S~:. 
45 of 1860. of the Indian Penal Code and for the purposes of the Prevention A:: be 
a of 1947· of Corruption Act, 1947 be deemed to be a public servant within the ~t8l:t 
meaning of section 21 of the said Code. • certain pur-
pOICl. 
113. Whoever contravenes the provisions of any order issued under Penalty for 
2S section 37 or section 38 or section 41 or fails to comply with any condi- ti:':i n-
tion imposed under section 40 shall be punishable with fine which scctioDl37'd 
, d h d' d h h . 38, 40 an may exten to one t ousan rupees, an were t e contravention 41. 
or failure is a continuing one, with further fine which may extend to 
one hundred :rupees for every day after the first during which such 
30 contravention or failure continues. 
114. Any person who contravenes the provisions of section 46 shall Pe~ty for 
be pun,ishable with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees :=~I~P 
for the first contravention, and with a further fine which may extend ~yB, etc., 
to OJ:l,e hundred rupees for every day after the first during which the ;:::UO::iOD. 
35 contravention continues. 

Penalty for 
CftdlnI rates, etc. 
Recovery 
of value of 
damqeto 
~of 
" 115. Any person who removes or attempts to remove or abets the 
removal of, any vessel or goods with the intention of evading pay-
ment of the rates lawfully due in respect thereof to any Board, shall 
be punishable with fine which may extend to twice the amount of 
the rates so due subject to a minimum of fifty rupees. 
116. If, through the negligence of any pE'rson having the guidance 
s 
or command of any vessel, or of any of the mariner, or persons 
~ployed on such vessel, any damage is caused to any dock, wharf, 
quay, mooring, stage, jetty, pier or other work in the possession of 
any Board, the amount of such damage shall, on the application of 10 
the Board be recoverable, togethe~ with the cost of such recovery, 
by distress and sale, under a Magistrate's warrant, of a sufficient por-
tion of the boats, masts, spares, ropes, cables, anchors or stores be-
longing to such vessel: . 
Provided that no Magistrate shall issue such a warrant untn the IS 
master of the vessel has been duly summoned to appear before him 
and, if he appears, until he has been heard; and provided also that no 
such warrant shall issue if the vessel was at the time under the orders 
of a duly authorised employt!e of the Board and the damage caused 
was attributable to the order, act or improper omission of such 20 
employee. . ~. ~ _ _. ~'1 
Other offen- 117. Any person who contravenes any of the provisions of this Act eel. 
or of any rule,. regulation or order made thereunder, for the contra-
vention of which no penalty is expressly provi<k!d thereunder, shall 
be punishable with fine which may extend to two hundred rupees. ~S 
~~::!~ 118. No court inferior t.o that of a magistrate of the first class shall 
try any offence punishable under this Act or any rule or regulation 
made thereunder. 
Offencel b, 
companies. 119. (1) If the person committing an offence under this Act is a 
company, every person who, at the time the offence was committed 30 
was in charge of, and was responsible to the company for the conduct 
of business of the company, as well as the company, shall be deemed 
to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against 
and punished accordingly: 
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render 3S 
any such person liable to such punishment provided in this Act if 
he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge ar 
that he exercised all due c:liligence to prevent the commission of such 
offence. 

(2) Notwithstanding aQything contained in sub-section (1), where 
an offence under this Act has been committed by a company and it 
is proved that the offence has been committed with the consent or 
connivance of, 0.1' that the commission of the offence is attributable 
5 to any negligence on the part of, any director, m~nager, secretary or 
other officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary, or 
other officer shall also be deemed to be guilty of that offence and 
shall be liable to be proceeded against· and punished accordingly. 
10 
IS 
Explanation.-For the purposes of this section,-
(a) "company" means a body~corporate and includes a firm 
or other association of individuals; and 
(b) "director", in relation to a finn, means a partner in the 
firm. 
CHAPTER XI 
MISCELLANEOUS 
120. No suit or other proceeding shall be commenced against a Limitation 
Board or any employee thereof for anything done, or purporting to ~riar:~e­
have been done, in pursuance of this Act until the expiration of one relpect of 
month after notice in writing has been given to the Board or him !t:::: t~~ne 
20 stating the cause of action, or after six months after the accrual of Act. 
the cause of action. 
121. No suit or other legal proceeding shall lie against a Board or Protection of 
any employee thereof in respect of anything which is in good faith ~d:ith.in 
done or intended to be done under this Act or any rule or regulations • 
2S made thereunder, or for any damage sustained by any vessel in 
consequence of any defect in any of the moorings, hawsers or other 
things belonging to or under the control of the Board. 
122. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Power of 
Official Gazette, make rules for all or any of the following purposes, &~~nt 
30 namely:- to make 
rulea. 
(a) the procedure to be followed for the transaction of busi-
ness at the meetings of a Board; 
(b) the fees and allowances payable to the members of a 
Board or of its committees. 
3S (2) The power to make rules under this section is subject to the 
condition of the rules bei~g made after previous publication. 
(3) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid as soon as may 
be after it is made before each House of Parliament while it is in 
!IeSsion for-a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in 
40 one session or in two successive sessions, and if before the expiry 

General .,owen of 
Boudto 
.... ereau-
IatlODI. 
of the session in which it is so laid or the session immediately follow-
ing, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both 
House agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thwe-
after have effect only in such modified form or be of.no effect, as the 
case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment ·5 
shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done 
under that Il"ule. 
123. Without prejudice to any power to make regulations contained 
elsewhere in this Act, a Board may make regulations consistent with 
this Act for all or any of the following purposes, namely:- 10 
(a) for the procedure to be followed for the transaction of 
business at the meetings of its committees; 
(b) for the form and manner in which contracts shall be 
made by the Board; 
(c) for the form of receipt to be given under sub-section IS 
(2) of section 42; . 
(d) for the period within which notice may be given under 
sub-section (2) of section 43;. 
(e) for the guidance of person employed by the Board 
under this Act; 
(I) for the safe and convenient use of the docks, wharves, 
quays, jetties, sheds, warehouses, rail!ways, tramways end other 
works constructed by or vested in the Board under this Actj 
20 
(g) for the reception, porterage, storage and removal of 
goods brought within the premises of the Board, for the exclusive 2S 
conduct of these operations by the Board or persons employed by 
the Board; and for declaring the procedure to be followed for 
taking charge of goods which may have been damaged before 
landing, or may be alleged to have been so damaged; 
(h) for keeping clean the port, river or basins or the bank 30 
of the river and the works of the Board, and for preventing:filth 
or rubbish being thrown thereiJ.l or thereon; 
(i) for the mode of payment of rates leviable by the Board 
under this Act; 
(j) for regulating, declaring and defining'the docks, wharves, 3S 
quays, jetties, ages and piers vested in the Board' on which 
loads shall be landed from vessels and shipped on board vessels; 

s 
10 
r--r-'-- --
(k) for regulating the manner in which, and the conditions 
under which, the loading and unloading of all vessels within the 
port or port approaches shall be carried out; 
(l) for regulating the lighterage of cargo between ships or 
between sh~ps and shore or between shore and ships; 
(m) for the exclusion from the premises of the Board of dis-
orderly or other undesirable persons and of trespassers; 
(n) for ensuring the safety of the port; 
(0) generally, for the efficient and proper administration 
of the port. 
1M. (1) No regulation made under this Act shall have effect P~vi.ioD' 
until it has ,been approved by the Central Governmen.rt and until such :l~~ct 
approval has been published in the Official Gazette. tion .. 
(2) No regulation other than a regulation framed under section 28 
'5 shall be approved by the Central Government until the same hu been 
published by the Board for two weeks successively in the Official 
Gazette and until fourteen days have expired from the date on which 
the same had been first published in that Gazetie. 
(3) Any regulation made under this Act may provide that a 
20 breach thereof shall be punishable with fine which may extend to 
two hundred rupees, and where the breach is a continuing one, with 
further fine which may extend to fifty rupees for every day after the 
first during which such breach continues. 
125. (1) Whenever the Central Government considers necessary Power of 
as in the public interest so to do, it may, by order in writing together=:!:,-
with a statement of reasons therefor, direct any Board to make any direct :s:: 
regulations for all or any of the matters specified in section 28 or !::to:' ~~ 
section 76 or section 123 or to amend any regulations made by the to IDIb reo-
Board, within such period as the Central Government may specify suJatjonl. 
30 in this behalf. 
(2) If any Board. against whom a direction is issued by the 
Central Government under sub-section (1), fails or neglects to 
comply with such direction within the specified period, the Central 
Government mey make the regulations or amend .the regulations· 
3S made by the 13oard, as the ease may be, either in the form specifted 
in the direction or with such modifications thereof as the Central 
Government may think fit: 
Provided that before so making or amending the regulations the 
.. Central Government shall consider any objection or suggestion made 
40 by the Board within the said period. 

50 
(3) Where in pursuance of sub-section (2), any regulations have 
been made or amended, the regulations so made or amended shall be 
published by the Central Governmenlt in the Official Gazette aDd 
shall thereupon have effect accordingly. 
~w~o~ 126. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the first 5 
~t ~ regulations under this Act shall be made by the Central Government 
DM!tti fint and shall have effect on being published in the Official Gazette. 
re~ on.. . 
~::r o~ 127. The text of the regulations made under clauses (e) to (m) 
lationl,:: of section 123 and the scale of rates together with a statement of 
conditions framed by any Board under Chapter VI shall be proml- 10 
nently posted by the Board in English, in Hindi and in the regional 
language on special 'boards to he maintained for the purpose at the 
wharves, docks, piers and other convenient places on the premises of 
the Board. 
Savina of 
riaht of Ccn-
tralGovern-
ment and 
JD1IDicipali-
tie. to USc 
wharves, 
etc., for 
collecting 
duties and 
ofpower of 
Cu.tom. 
Ofticen. 
Application 
ofcertain 
proviliOl1' 
of the Act 
to ai rcraft. 
128. Nothing in this Act shall affect-
(I) ,the right of the Central Government to collect customs 
duties or of any municipality ,to collect town duties ail; any dock, 
berth. wharf, quay, stage, jetty or pier in the possession of 8 
Board, or 
(2) any power or authority vested in the customs author!- 20 
ties under any law for the time being in force. 
129. The provisions of sections 35, 37, 38, 39,40,41,42,48,49,50,64, 
65, 115, 121, 123 and 124 shall apply in relation to all aircraft making 
use of any port while on water as they apply in relation to vessels. 
Power to 130. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law, 35 
evict:.rtaiD if a Board in exercise of the powers conferred on it by regulations 
~ the made under this Act cancel the allotment of any premises made to 
v:::r1of any employee of the Board, the Board may, by notice in writing, 
order such allottee or any other person who may be in occupation 
of the whole or any part of the premises to vacate them and deliver 30 
the same to the Board or a person appointed by the Board in that 
behalf within such period as may be specified in the notice. 
Explanation.-For the purposes of this section, IIpremises" meaDS 
any building or part of a building and includes-
(i) the gardens, grounds and outhouses, if any, appertaining 5S 
to such building or part of a building; 

51 
(ii) any fittings aftlxed to such. building or part of a building 
for ~ more beneficial enjoyment thereof; and 
(iii) any furniture, books or other things belonging to the 
Boatd and found in such puilding or part of a building. 
S (2) If any allottee or other person refuses or fails to comply with 
an order made under sub-eeotion (1), any magistrate of the first class 
may, on application made by or on behalf of the Board, order any 
police officer, with proper assistance, to enter into the premises and 
evict any person from, and take posseuion of, the premises and to 
10 deliver the same to the Board or a person appointed by the Board 
in that behalf and the police officer may, for the purpose, use such 
force as may be necessary. 
IS 
20 
(3) Any such notice as is referred to in sub-6ection (/) may be 
served-
(a) by delivering or tendering it to the allottee or eny other 
person who may be in occupation of the whole or any part of 
the premises, or 
(b) if it cannot be so delivered or tendered, by affixing it 
on the outer door or some other conspicuous .part of the pre-
mises, or 
(c) by registered post. 
131. Without prejudice to any other action that may be taken Alternative' 
under this Act, a Board may recover by suit any Rites, damages, ~cdy by 
expenses, costs, or in the case of sale the balance thereof, when the IUlt, 
2S proceeds of sale are insufficient, or any penalties payable to, or 
recoverable by, the Board under this Act or under any regulations 
IIl6de in pursuance thereof. 
132. (1) Any requirement in this Act that a notification, order, Require-
rule or regulation issued or made by a Board or by the Central Gov- menta .~ to 
30 ernrnen.t shall be published in the Ofticia1 Gazette, shall, unless other- gr~== 
wise expressly provided in this Act, be construed as a requirement tions, 
that the notification, order, rule or regulation shall- f:'::' etc .• 
Official 
(a) where it is issued or made by the Board, be published Gazette. 
in the Official Gazette of the State in which the port is situated. 
3S and 
(b) where it is issued or made by the Central Government, 
be published in the Gazette of India. 
2128 (B) LS-8. 

Repeal. 
Power to 
remove 
ditIlc:ultiel. 
52 
(2) Any noWlcation, order, rule or regulation issued or made by 
the Central Government shall, for general infonnation, be 'a1so repub-
lished in the Official Gazette of the State in which the port is 
situated. 
133. (1) On the applicatipn of this Act to the port of Kandla, the S 
Bombay Landing and Wharfage Fees Act, 1882 shall cease to h81'e Bombay ACI 
force in relation to that port. . 7 of 1882. 
(2) On the application of this Act to the paris of Coohin end 
Visbakhapaltnam, the Madras Outports Landing and Shipping Fees 
Act, 1885 shall cease to have force in relation to those ports. 10 ~:~:.~.ct 
(3). If immediately before the application of this Act to any other 
port, there is in force in that port any law which corresponds to this 
Act or to any provision Iflhereof, that corresponding law shall, on such 
application, cease to have force in relation to that port. 
134. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of 15 
this Act, particularly in relation to the tninsition from the enact-
ments repealed by this Act to the provisions of this Act, the Centml 
Government may, by general or sPecial order, do anything not incon-
sistent with such provisions which appears to it to be necessary or 
expedient for the purpose of removing the difficulty. 20 

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
At present, there are six major ports in the country, namely, Cal-
cutta, Bombay, Madras, Vishakhapatnam, Cochin and Kandla. The 
first three ports are administered by Port Trusts while the other three 
ate administered direct by the Government of India. 
2. The Port Trusts at the three major ports of Calcutta, Bombay 
and Madras are statutory bodies. They consist of a Chairman (and 
a Deputy Chairman at Calcutta) appointed by the Central Govern-
ment, elected representatives of commercial, shipping and trade in-
terests, representatives of Central Government Departments con-
cerned w1ith the working of the port, i.e. Customs, Defence and Rail-
ways, representatives of the State Government and the local muni-
cipal Corporations or Municipalities concerned and the representa-
tives of labour employed in the port. The Port Trusts administer 
the ports subject to the control of the Central Government in respect 
of certain specified matters only, for example, creation of, and 
appoint to, certain senior posts, acquisition and sale of immoveable 
property, fixation of rates and charges, fioating loans, annual bud-
gets etc. 
3. The remaining three major ports of Vishakhapatnam, Cochin 
and Kandla are under the immediate charge of a Port Administra-
tive Officer appointed by the Central Government who has been 
vested with powers similar to those of a Head of a Department. 
These powers are limited in nature and the Port Administrative 
Officer has, therefore, to obtain the orders of the Central Govern-
ment on many matters which would normally be disposed of at 
local level in the Port :£'rusts. Commercial and trade interests, 
especially at Vishakbapatnam and Cochin, have also been agitating 
for some time that they should have a direct voice in the adminis-
tration of those ports. 
4; In the circumstances and in view of the fact that statutory 
Port Trusts have successfully administered the three older ports of 
Calcutta, Bombay and Madras for many years, it is proposed to 
constitute Port Trusts at Vishakhapatnam, Cochin and Kandla also. 
t 
S3 

S4 
Provision has also been made for the extension of the Act, by noti-
fication, to any other port which may be declared as a major port 
in future. 
The Bill seeks to give e1Ject to these proposals. 
Notes on clauses explain in detail the various provisions of the 
Bill. 
NEW DELm; JAGJIV AN RAM. 
The 18th November, 1982. 

Notes on. Clauses 
Clame 1.-On the commencement of the Act, it will apply. to 
the major ports of Cochin, Kandla and Vishakhapatnam. The clause 
also empowers the Central Government to apply the Act to any 
other major port (other than Bombay, Calcutta and Madras). 
Clame 2 'contains definitions of the various expressions occur-
ring in the Bill. The definitions generally follow the pattern of 
those adopted in section 3 of the Calcutta Port Act, 1890, section 
3 of the Bombay Port Trust Act. 1879 and section 5 of the Madras 
Port Trust Act, 1905, with some modifications in the light of the 
experience gained in the working of the existing Acts. 
Clame 3 deals with the constitution of a Board of Trustees of 
each major port. The provisions of this clause correspond to sec-
tions 4, 5 and 6 of the Calcutta and Bombay Acts and sections 7, 8 
and 9 of the Madras Act except that there is a slight increase jn 
the total number of Trustees of the Board 
Clause 4 seeks to empower the Central Government to consti-
tute, as an interim measure, the first Board of Trustees for a mRjoI 
port upon the extension of the Act to that port, pending 
the completion of the necessary arrangements for the constitu-
tion of a regular Board of Trustees as provided for in clause 3. The 
composition of the first Board will 'be the same as that of tJ:1e regular 
Board under clause 3, but all the members will be appointed by 
the Central Government. 
Clause 5 corresponds to sections 4 and 55 of the Calcutta Act, 
.sections 4 and 26 of the Bombay Act and sections 6 and 32 of the 
Madras Act. 
ClauBe 6 corresponds to section 17 of the Calcutta Act, section 
14 of the Bombay Act and section 10 (1) of the M.ras Act. 
Clame 7 follows the provisions of section 10 of the Calcutta 
Act, sections 9 and 11 of the Bombay Act and section 11 of the 
Madras Act; a provision has, however, been added that the term of 
office of a Trustee electeCil to represent any body of persons 
would automatically come to an end as soon as he ceases to repre-
sent ,that body. 

56 
Clause 8 corresponds in substance to sections lOA and 17 (2) 
of the Calcutta Act, sections 11A and 14A of the Bombay Act and 
aections 11A and 10 (2) of the Madras Act. 
ClaU8e 9 corresponds to section 12 of the Bombay and Madras 
Acts. 
Clause 10 generally corresponds to sections 14 and 16 of the 
Calcutta Act, section 10 of the Bombay Act and section 11B of the 
Madras Act. 
Clause 11 is identical with section 16A (1) of the Calcutta Act 
and section 13A(I) of the Bombay and Madras Acts. 
Clause 12 corresponds to sections 7 and 16 A (2) of the Calcutta 
Act, sections 6(4) and 13A(2) of the Bombay Act and sections 
13A (2) and 18 of the Madras Act. 
Clause 13 corresponds to the proviso to sections 16 and 16A (3) 
of the Calcutta Act, sections 13 (2) and 13A (3) of the Bombay Act 
and section 13A (3) and the proviso to section 13 of the Madras Act. 
Clause 14 generally corresponds to section 12. ~f the Calcutta Act, 
section 20 of the Bombay Act, and section 19 of the Madras Act. 
A new provision has been added in the Bill empowering the Central 
Government to appoint a person in place of a Chairman or Deputy 
Chairman while on deputation outside India. It will also enable 
the Chairman or Depuiy Chairman, while on such deputation, to 
exercise his powers under the Act to the extent directed by the 
Central Government. 
Clause 15 corresponds to section 11 of the Calcutta Act, sectiQn 
15(1) of the Bombay Act and section 21 of the Madras Act. 
Clause. 16 and 17.-The existing Acts themselves set out in detail 
the procedlQ.re for the transaction of business at a meeting of the 
Board and of its Committees. As such matt.!rs are matters of pro-
cedure, it is proposed to leave them to be regulated by rules or regu-
lations, as the case may be. (See sections 29 and 40 to 45 of the 
Calcutta Act, section 16 of the Bombay Act and section 23 of the 
Madras Act). 
ClaU8e, 18 to 20 and 22 generally ce>rreIpOnci to sections 11 (3) , 
17A, 28, 42(1), and 46 of the Calcutta Act, sections 15(2), 14B, 16(7) 
and 19 of the Bombay Act and sections 22, 23A, 24. 112 and 26 (2) of 
the Madras Act. 
Clause 21.-Sections47 and 47A of the Calcutta Act and section 25 
of the Madras Act envisage delegation of powers to the Chairman 

57 
to the extent prescribed in those Acts. Clause 21 is wider in scope 
and enables such delegation being made to the Chairman, Deputy 
Chairman or any other officer in order to facilitate more efficient 
administration. 
Clauses 23 to 28 correspond to sections 30, 31, 32 and 34 of the 
Calcutta Act, sections 21, 22, 23 and 24 of the Bombay Act and 
sections 27 to 30 of the Madras Act. 
The important differences, however, are:-
(i) the distinction between the scheduled and non-scheduled 
staff in the existing Acts has been done away with. 
(ii) in the existing Acta, where the appointment relates to 
a post the maximum pay scale of which is below one thousandl 
rupees, the appointment can be made by the Chairman, but if 
it is over rupees one thousand, the appointment requires the 
sanction of the Central Govermnent. The Bill, however, would 
enable the Central Government to exceed the limit of one 
thousand rupees so that the Chairman can make the appoint-
ments in a larger number of cases. Further, the sanction of 
the Central Government will not be required for higher appoint-
ments except in the case of heads of departments. 
Clauses 29 to 31 are new clauses for which there are no corres-
ponding provisions in the existing Acts. They provide for the 
transfer of assets and liabilities of the Central Government or other 
authority responsible for the administration of the ports concerned 
to the Port Trust Boards on the application of the Act to those ports. 
Provision has also been made for the continuance of the existing 
I'8tes until they are altered by the Board. It has also been pro-
vided that the capital expenditure that might have been incurred 
by the Government prior to the application of this Act to any port 
would form the Capital debt 01. the Port Trust Board for that port, 
to be repaid to that Government. 
ClaUle 82 eoneepollda to section 58 of the Calcutta Act, section 
27 of the Bo\nbay Act and leCtion 83 of the Madras Act. 
Claue 33 CCllespoada to section 48 of the Calcutta Act, section 
16A of the Bombay Act lind sedion 87 of the Madras Act. 
Clause 34 corresponds to section 53 of the Calcutta Act, section 17 
of the Bombay Act and section 88 of the Madras Act. 

SB 
Under the existing Acts, CODtracts beyond a certain limit have 
to ·be executed on behalf of the Board by the Chairman and two 
other trustees. . It is felt that, the Chainnan being the Chief Execu-
tive Officer, it is not necessary for two other trustees to sign the 
contract alIO. 
Clave 36 COITeaponds to sections 49 and 35 of the Calcutta Act, 
section 68 of the Bombay Act and sections 35 and 36 of the Madras 
Act. 
Clause 36 is a new provision empowering the Port Trust Boards 
to undertake works on behalf of other authorities. 
Clau.ses 37 to 41.-These correspond to sections 92, 93, 95, 100, 
101, 102 and 97 of the Calcutta Act. 
Clause 42 corresponds to sections 90 and 91 of the Calcutta Act 
and section 39 of the Madras Act. 
Clause 43 is similar to sections 112 (1) and 113 ,of the Calcutta 
Act, sections 61A and 61B of the Bombay Act and section 40 of th'e 
Madras Act, 
except that the period of notice of loss, damage, etc. has been 
left to be prescribed by the respectiw Port Trust Boards. 
Clauses 44 and 45 correspond to sections 87 and 88 of the Calcutta 
Act and section 70 of the Bombay Act. 
Clause 46 corresponds to sections 83 and 84 of the Calcutta Act, 
section 81 of the Bombay Act and section 104 of the Madras Act. 
Clause 47 corresponds to section 85 of the Calcutta Act. Under 
that Act, where any private wharf, etc. was erected lawfully but the 
use thereof is subsequently declared unlawful, the party concerned 
has to go to the court for award of compensation. The Bill provides 
for the settlement of compensation by agreement and, failing which, 
for reference of the dispute to an arbitrator. Pro~lon has also 
·been made for an appeal against the award of the arbitrator. 
Clause. 48 cmd 49 correspond to sections 103, 104, 104A, 105 and 
105A of the Calcutta Act, seetions 43, 43A and 45 of the Bombay Act 
and sectlons Ganci 43 of the Madras Act. ' 
Clause 50 is on the lines of section 43A of the 'Madras Act: 
Clause 51 is similar to secti'O'Il 107 (la) of the Calcutta Act, 
section 43C of the Bombay Act and section 43B of the Madras Act. 
The proviso is an addition. 

S9 
C14U8eS S2 to 54 correspond to sections 107 (1), 109 and l09A of 
the Calcutta Act, section 43B of the Bombay Act and sedtion 44 of 
the Madras Act. 
Clause 65 corresponds to section 44A of the Madras Act. 
Clause 56 is new clause enabling the Port Trust Boards to 
recover charges shortlevied or erroneously refunded, from the par-
ties concerned. 
Clause 57 corresponds to section 56 of the Calcutta Act and 
section 47 of the Mardas Act. 
Clauses 58 to 65 correspond to sections 111,116(1),113(2), 117, 
118, 119, 119A, 120, 121, and 122 of the Calcutta Act, sed ions 61, 62, 
63, 64, 64A, 65, 66 and 67 of the Bombay Act and sections 50 to 61 
of the Madras Act. Some new provisions have, however, been in-
cluded in the Bill. For instance, clauses 61 (4) and 62(4) provide 
for the disposal of arms, ammunition and controlled goods in such 
manner as the Central Government may directj this has been pro-
vided to remove certain practical difficulties experienced by the 
Port administrations in the disposal of such goods. It has also been 
proposed that the surplus of any sale proceeds should be paid on 
demand to the importer, owner or consignee of the goods or his 
agents only in cases where the goods have not been confiscated under 
any law relating to customs. 
Clauses 66 to 86 correspond to the following provisions of the 
existing Acts:-
sections 18-27L of the Calcutta Act, 
secions 39-42L of the Bombay Act, and 
sections 63-73 of the Madras Act. 
Clauses 87 to 91 correspond to sections 123 (1) , 24B and 24C 
of the Calcutta Act, sections 48, 49, 60A, 49A, 51, SIA and 72A of 
the Bombay Act and sections 49, 74, 74A, 74B, 74C of the Madras 
Act. 
The only notable variation is to be found in clause 90(1) under 
which the Port Trust Board will be enabled to establish a Develop-
ment Fund also for the purposes of expanding existing facilities or 
creating new facilities at the port. 
Clauses 92 to 97 correspond to the follOWing provisions of the 
existing Port Trust Acts: • 
Calcutta Act: sections 75A, 49. 51, 50, 52, 75B, 123 (2). 
Bombay Act: sections 56A, 68A, 18, 56B and 72A(2). 
Madras Act: sections 75, 76, 76A, 89, 89A and 3BA. 
2126(B) L.S.-9. 

60 
Under the existing Acts, no expenditure can be charged to capi-
tal without the prior sanction of the Central Government. However, 
under clause 92 (1) of the Bill, it is proposed to fix a limit upto which 
Capital expenditure can be sanctioned by the Board without the 
sanction of the Central Government, in order to eliminate references 
to Government in respect of minor works . 
. 
In respect of other matters such as works requiring the sanction 
of the Board or the Central Government, powers of the Chairman 
relating to the execution of works, power of Board to compound or 
compromise claims, it is proposed to fix a higher limit than provided 
for in the existing Acts. It is also proposed to enhance the powers 
of the Board and the Chairman to write-off losses. 
The above proposals aim at facilitating quicker and better work-
ing of the day-ta-day administration of the port and are in accord 
with the accepted policy of Government to decentralise powers to 
the extent possible. 
Clauses 98 to 101 correspond to sections 69 to 74 of the Calcutta 
Act, sections 52 to 56 of the Bombay Act and sections 82 to .86C of 
the Madras Act. 
A new provision has, however, been made in clause 98 (8), to 
enable the Central Government to sanction "on account" expendi-
ture in cases where an estimate cannot be sanctioned by the Central 
Government before the commencement of the financial year to which 
it relates. 
Clauses 102 to 105 Similar provisions exist in sections 76 to 78 
of the Calcutta Act, sections 58 and 58A of the Bombay Act and 
sections 79, 80, 80A and 81 of the Madras Act. 
The existing Acts do not require the audit reports on the accounts 
of the Port Trusts being laid before Parliament. Such require-
ment has, however, been included in the Bill, in pursuance or a 
recommendation of the Public Accounts Committee. 
Clauses 106 to 110 are similar in substance'to sections 134B, 80A, 
36, 37 and 38 of the Calcutta Act, sections 89, 58B, 68B, 68C and 90 
of the Bombay Act and -sections ll1B, 86B, 37, 38 and 113 of the 
Madras Act. 
Clause III is a new provision, enabling the Centrai Government 
to issue directions to Port Trust Boards on matters of policy. It 
has been provided that the Board shall be given an opportunity to 
express its views before any direction is given under this clause. 

or 
61 
Clauses 112 to 118 correspond to sections 136, 94, 127, 96, 99, 83, 
84 and 89 of the Calcutta Act; sections 79, 81, 83, 84 and 85 of the 
Bombay Act and sections 101, 104, 106, 107 and 108 of the Madras 
Act. . 
The penalties have, however, been enhanced in some cases because 
the existing penalties which were fixed ~ars back are considered 
too low. 
Clause 119 deals with offences by companies and has been added 
on the lines of similar provisions in other Acts. 
Clauses 120 and 121 correspond to sections 142 and 135 of the 
Calcutta Act, section 87 of the Bombay Act and sections 110 and 111 
of the Madras Act. 
Clause 122 is self-explanatory. 
Clause 123 corresponds to section 126(1) of the Ca1cutta Act, 
section 73 of the Bombay Act and section 95 of the Madras Act. 
Clause 124 is similar in substance to sections 126 (3) and 126 (4) 
of the Calcutta Act, section 74 of the Bombay Act and section 96 of 
the Madras Act. 
Clause 125.-This is a new proviSion enabling the Central Govern-. . 
ment to direct any Board to make new regulations or to amend any 
regulations made by the Board within such period. as the Central 
Government may specify. It also empowers the Central Government 
to make or amend the regulations themselves in the event of failure 
or non-compliance by the Board of the directions issued by the Cen~ 
tral Government in this behalf. 
Clause 126 enables the Central Government to frame the first 
regulations so that the administration of the port could be carried 
on in accordance with those regulations until such time as new regu-
lations are framed, if necessary, by the Board in accordance with the 
procedure laid down in the Act;. 
Clause 127 corresponds to section 128 of the Calcutta Act, sec-
tion 76 of the Bombay Act and section 98 of the Madras Act. 
Clause 128 corresponds to section 69 of the Bombay Act and 
section 109 of the Madras Act. 
Clause 129 is similar to section 143 of the Calcutta Act, section 
86A of the Bombay Act and section l09A of the Madras Act. 
Clause 130 is similar to section 136A of the Calcutta Act, section 
88 of the Bombay Act and section UIA of the Madrq Act. 

62 
Clause 131 corresponds to sectiob 122D of the Calcutta Act, sec-
tion 67A of the Bombay Act and section 62 of the Madras Act. 
Clause 132 is similar in substance to section 3A of the Calcutta 
and Bombay Acts and section 5A of the Madras Act. 
Clause 133 repeals certain existing enactments. 
Clause 134.- This is the usual provision regarding the removal of 
difUcultiea in giving effect to the provisione of the new law. 
, 
.. 

FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Clause 29 of the Bill seeks to transfer all the property, assets and 
funds vested in the Central Government for the purposes of the 
ports, before the commencement of the Act, to the respective Port 
Trust Boards to be constituted thereunder. As on 31st March, 1962 
the amounts in the funds standing to the credit of the three ports 
are shown below:-
Vishakhapatnam 
Cochin 
Kandla 
Rs. 2 '32 Crores. 
Rs. 1'32 Crores. 
Rs. 1'50 Crores. 
2. The capital expenditure inculTed by the Government for the 
ports of Vtshakhapatnam, Cochin and Kandla upto 31st March, 1962, 
amount to Rs. 8'79 Crores, 3'36 Crores and 16'7 Crores respectively. 
Clauses 31 and 88 of the Bill provide for the repayment by the Port 
Trusts of the above capital expenditure together with interest thereon 
to Government. At the same time, Government loans will not have 
any precedence over the holders of Port Trust securities which might 
be issued by the Boards unless the terms of any such loan sO stipulate 
(Clause 79 of the Bill). 
3. After the Port Trusts come into being, it may be necessary for 
:he Central Government to advance loans to them to finance ap-
proved schemes involving capital outlay. It is not possible to indicate 
at present the amounts of the loans that may be so advanced. Pro-
posals for such loans will be submitted to Parliament in the normal 
C9urse as Bud~et dema.nds, 

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 122 gives powers to the Cen·tral Government to make rules 
for the procedure to be followed for the transaction of business at 
the meetings of a Port Trust Board and the fees and allowances pay-
able to the members of the Board or of its committees. 
2. Clauses 28, ·76 and 123 confer on a Board the power to make re-
gulations for the day-to-day administration of the port in respect of 
matters specified in those clauses. Such matters, inter alia, relate to 
the procedure to be followed for the transaction of business at the 
meetings of committees constituted by the Board, the terms and con-
ditions of service of employees of the Board, the form and manner 
in which contracts shall be made by the Board., the port trust securi-
ties, the mode of paYJDellt of rates leviable by the Board and the 
safety of the port. 
3. The rules and regulations that may be made would relate to 
matters which are of a procedural or administrative character. 
The delegation of legislative power is thus of a normal character. 

LOR SABltA 
A 
BILL 
to make provision for the constitution of port authorities for 
certain major ports in India and to vest the administra-
tion, control and management of such ports in such autho-
rities and for matters connected therewith. 
The President has, in pursuance: of clauses (I) and (3) of article 
117 of the Constitution of India, recomnlended to Lok Sabha 
the introduction and consideration of the Bill. 
M.N.KAUL, 
Secretary. 
(ShriJagjifJan Ram, 
Minister of Transport and 
Communications.) 