As IntRopucep IN Lox SABHA

28 101 2000

Bill No, 114 of 2000

THE COMPULSORY REGISTRATION OF MARRIAGES BILL, 2000
By
Suri Susopn Monte, M.P.
A
BILL
to provide for compulsory registration of marriages in India and
Sor matters connected therewith.
Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-first year of the Republic of India as
follows:— x
1. (7) This Act may be called the Registration of Marriages Act, 2000. ‘Short title and
(2) It shall come into force at once. een
2. Every marriage performed after the commencement of this Act under any law for Compulsory
the time being in force in India or under any custom or usage having the force of law shall egistration of

be compulsorily registered. marrage
3. The marriages shall be registered— Authority for
(i in the office of Panchayat in the rural areas, —

marriages.
(ii) with the Sub-Registrar or Tehsildar, or such Municipal Authority, who may
be authorised by the State Government in this behalf, in the urban areas:

Provided that where there is no Panchayat, the marriages shall be registered with the
nearest Sub-Registrar or Tehsildar who may be authorised in this behalf,


Particulars of
marriage.

Declaration at
the time of
registration,

Duty of parents,
etc. to registra-
tionand penalty
for failure,

Legal status,

Powertomake
rules.

2

4. (7) The particulars of the marriage to be entered in the marriage register to be
maintained by the Panchayat, Sub-Registrar or Tehsildar or ‘Municipal Authority, as the case
may be, and the form and manner in which such particulars shall be entered, shall be prescribed
by the respective State Governments.

(2) The State Government shall also prescribe the documents relating to marriage to
be furnished at the time of registration for record.

(3) The particulars/documents relating to marriage, to be prescribed by the State
Government, required to be furnished for registration, shall include the following, namely:—

(a) the names and addresses of the bride, bridegroom and their parents;

(6) the age of the bride and the bridegroom with documentary proof thereof;
(©) photographs of the married couple and marriage ceremony;

(@) invitation card, if printed for the marriage;

(९) an inventory of gifis received by the bride and the bridegroom from the time
of betrothal till the completion of marriage;

(0 an affidavit stating the share of the bride in her parents’ property till the date
of her marriage with an assurance to ensure her claim on her share in the property
earned after her marriage; and

(g) a statement of expenses incurred by both the parties for marriage ceremony
including betrothal

5. (/) The bride, the bridegroom and their parents or guardians shall make a
declaration at the time of registration of the marriage in the form of an affidavit, to be
prescribed by the Central Government, that they have not violated any provision of any
existing law relating to marriage, prohibition of dowry and prohibition of polygamy,
applicable to them.

(2) A person making a false declaration under sub-section (7) shall be punishable’
with imprisonment which may extend to two years but which shall not be less than six
months.

6. (1) It shall be the duty of the bride, the bridegroom and their parents or guardians
to get the marriage registered within ten days of the date of solemnisation of the marriage,

(2) In case the parents or the guardians of the bride and the bridegroom fail to apply
for the registration of the marriage and to furnish the necessary particulars/documents
within the prescribed time, they shall be liable to pay a fine which may extend to five hundred
Tupees:

Provided that if the application for registration is not made and the necessary
Particulars/documents are not furnished within thirty days after the date of marriage, they
shall be liable to pay further fine of five hundred rupees per week after the expiry of the
aforesaid thirty days.

7. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force,
a marriage which is not registered under this Act, shall not be treated as a valid marriage
and shall be declared as null and void.

8. The Central or the State Government, as the case may be, may frame rules for
carrying out the purposes of this Act.


ao

STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

The security and sanctity of marriage is fast diminishing. Number of dowry deaths
or suicides due to mental and physical torture inflicted on young wives is increasing at an
alarming rate. Women are either abandoned or deceived and lured into marrying illegally,
contravening the law relating to prohibition of polygamy.

There is an urgent need to protect women from destitution, polygamy and economic
insecurity.
This Bill seeks to achieve’ these objectives.

New Detar; SUBODH MOHITE
June 28, 2000.


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION

Clause 8 of the Bill empowers the Central and the State Governments to frame rules

for carrying out the purposes of the Bill. Since the rules will relate to matters of detail only,
68. particulars/documents relating to marriage to be furnished at the time of registration
of marriage, the delegation of legislative powers is of a normal character.



LOK SABHA

“A
BILL

to provide for compulsory registration of marriages in India and for matters connected
therewith.

(Shri Subodh Mohite, M.P.)

MGIP(PLU)MRND—1629LS—13.7.2000, +