6
Bill No. 114-F of  2020
                                                                                                                       INAL
THE BANKING REGULATION (AMENDMENT)
BILL, 2020
(AS PASSED BY THE HOUSES OF PARLIAMENT—
LOK SABHA ON 16TH SEPTEMBER, 2020
RAJY A  SABHA ON 22ND SEPTEMBER, 2020)
ASSENTED  TO  ON 29TH SEPTEMBER , 2020
ACT NO. 39 OF 2020

1
THE BANKING REGULATION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2020
(AS PASSED BY THE HOUSES OF PARLIAMENT)
A
BILL
further to amend the Banking Regulation Act, 1949.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-first Y ear of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Banking Regulation (Amendment) Act, 2020.
(2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 26th day of June, 2020, except
section 4, which, in so far as it relates to––
(i) primary co-operative banks, be deemed to have come into force on the 29th day
of June, 2020;
(ii) state co-operative banks and central co-operative banks, come into force on
such date as the Central Government may by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint:
Provided that different dates may be appointed for state co-operative banks and
central co-operative banks and any reference in any such provision to the
Short title and
commencement.
Bill No. 114-F of   2020

2
commencement of this Act shall be construed as a reference to the coming into force of
that provision.
2. In the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), for
section 3, the following section shall be substituted, namely:—
“3. Notwithstanding anything contained in the National Bank for Agriculture
and Rural Development Act, 1981, this Act shall not apply to––
(a) a primary agricultural credit society; or
(b) a co-operative society whose primary object and principal business is
providing of long-term finance for agricultural development,
if such society does not use as part of its name, or in connection with its business, the
words “bank”, “banker” or “banking” and does not act as drawee of cheques.”.
3. In section 45 of the principal Act,—
(i) in the marginal heading, for the word “reconstitution”, the word
“reconstruction” shall be substituted;
(ii) in sub-section (3), after the words “other creditors”, the words “or grant any
loans or advances or make investments in any credit instruments” shall be inserted;
(iii) in sub-section (4), after the words “During the period of moratorium”, the
words “or at any other time” shall be inserted;
(iv) in sub-section (5),  in clauses (e), (i) and (j), for the words “date of the order
of moratorium”, the words “reconstruction or amalgamation” shall be substituted;
(v) in sub-section ( 6), in clause ( a), for the word “amalgamation”, the words
“reconstruction or amalgamation” shall be substituted;
(vi) in sub-section (15), the words “or a subsidiary bank” shall be omitted.
4. In section 56 of the principal Act,—
(A) in the opening portion, for the words “The provisions of this Act, as in force
for the time being,”, the words “Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law
for the time being in force, the provisions of this Act” shall be substituted;
(B) in clause (a), after  sub-clause (ii), the following sub-clauses shall be inserted,
namely:—
‘(iii) references to “memorandum of association” or “articles of
association” shall be construed as references to bye-laws;
(iv) references to the provisions of the Companies Act, 1956, except in
Part III and Part IIIA, shall be construed as references to the corresponding
provisions, if any, of the  law under which a co-operative bank is registered;
(v) references to “Registrar” or “Registrar of Companies” shall be construed
as references to “Central Registrar” or “Registrar of Co-operative Societies”, as
the case may be, under the law under which a co-operative bank is registered;’;
(C) clause (d) shall be omitted;
(D) in clause (e), sub-clauses (i) and (iii) shall be omitted;
(
E)  in clause (f), in section 7 as so substituted, in sub-section (2),—
(I) in clause (b), the words “or co-operative land mortgage banks” shall be
omitted;
Substitution
of new
section for
section 3.
10 of 1949.
Act not to
apply to
certain co-
operative
societies.
61 of 1981.
Amendment
of section 45.
Amendment
of section 56.
1 of 1956.

3
(II) in clause ( c), in sub-clause ( ii), the words “or a co-operative land
mortgage bank” shall be omitted;
(F) clauses (fi), (fii) and (g) shall be omitted;
(G) for clause (i), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:—
‘(i) for section 12, the following section shall be substituted, namely:—
“12. (1) A co-operative bank may, with the prior approval of the
Reserve Bank, issue, by way of public issue or private placement,—
(i) equity shares or preference shares or special shares, on
face value or at premium; and
(ii) unsecured debentures or bonds or other like securities
with initial or original maturity of not less than ten years,
to any member of such co-operative bank or any other person residing
within its area of operation, subject to such conditions and ceiling, limit or
restriction on its issue or subscription or transfer, as may be specified by
the Reserve Bank in this behalf.
(2) Save as otherwise provided in this Act,—
(i) no person shall be entitled to demand payment towards
surrender of shares issued to him by a co-operative bank; and
(ii) a co-operative bank shall not withdraw or reduce its share
capital, except to the extent and subject to such conditions as the
Reserve Bank may specify in this behalf.”;’;
(H) clauses (l), (n) and (p) shall be omitted;
(I) in clause (q), sub-clauses (ii) and (iv) shall be omitted;
 (J) clauses (r), (ria) and (sa) shall be omitted;
(K) in clause (t), sub-clause (i) shall be omitted;
(L) clauses (u), (v), (x), (y), (z) and (za) shall be omitted;
(M) in clause (zaa),—
(a) in section 36AAA as so inserted,—
(i) for the words “multi-State co-operative bank”, wherever they
occur, the words “co-operative bank” shall be substituted;
(ii) in sub-section ( 1), the following proviso shall be inserted,
namely:—
“Provided that in the case of a co-operative bank registered
with the Registrar of Co-operative Societies of a State, the Reserve
Bank shall issue such order in consultation with the concerned
State Government seeking its comments, if any, within such period
as the Reserve Bank may specify.”;
(iii) after sub-section (9), the following sub-section shall be inserted,
namely:—
“(10) The provisions of section 36ACA shall not apply to a
co-operative bank.”;
(b) section 36AAB as so inserted shall be omitted;
(N) for clause (zb), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:—
“(zb) Part IIC shall be omitted;”;
Issue and
regulation of
paid-up share
capital and
securities by
co-operative
banks.

4
(O) in clause (zc), sub-clause (i) shall be omitted;
(P) clauses (zd) and (zf) shall be omitted;
(Q) for clause (zg), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:—
‘(zg) in section 49B, references to “Central Government” shall be construed
as references to “Central Registrar” or “Registrar of Co-operative Societies”, as
the case may be, under the law under which a co-operative bank is registered;’;
(R) clause  (zh) shall be omitted;
(S) for clause (zj), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:—
‘(zj) after section 53, the following section shall be inserted, namely:—
“53A. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other provisions
of this Act, the Reserve Bank may, from time to time, on being satisfied that
it is necessary so to do, declare, by notification in the Official Gazette, that
the provisions of item ( iii ) of clause ( b) of sub-section ( 1) and
sub-section (2), of section 10, clause (a) of sub-section (2) of section 10A,
sub-section ( 1A) of section 10B and clause ( b) of sub-section ( 1) of
section 35B of this Act shall not apply to a co-operative bank or class of
co-operative banks, either generally or for such period as may be specified
therein, subject to such conditions, limitations or restrictions as it may
think fit to impose.”;’.
5. (1) The Banking Regulation (Amendment) Ordinance, 2020 is hereby repealed.
 (2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the Banking
Regulation Act, 1949, as amended by the said Ordinance, shall be deemed to have been done
or taken under the corresponding provisions of the said Act as amended by this Act.
Powers to
exempt
co-operative
banks in
certain cases.
Repeal and
savings.
Ord. 12 of
2020.
10 of 1949.

A
BILL
further to amend the Banking Regulation Act, 1949.
————
(As passed by the Houses of Parliament)
MGIPMRND—906RS(S3)—07-10-2020.