1
THE REPRESENTATION OF THE PEOPLE (AMENDMENT)
BILL, 2010
By
SHRI J.P . AGARWAL, M.P.
A
BILL
further to amend the Representation of the People Act, 1951.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-first Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Representation of the People (Amendment) Act,
2010.
(2) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In the Representation of the People Act, 1951, in Part IV A, after section 29A, the
following section shall be inserted, namely:—
"29AA. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Election Symbols
(Reservation and Allotment) Order, 1968, a political party shall be treated as a recognized
National party, if—
Short title and
commence-
ment.
Bill No. 114 of 2010
TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Insertion of
new section
29AA.
Conditions for
recognition as
a National
party.
43 of 1951.
S.O. 2959
dated the
31st August,
1968.
5
10

2
(a) the number of members belonging to the political party in the House of the
People—
(i) is not less than ten per cent. of the total number of seats in the House
of the People; and
(ii) have been elected from not less than one-fourth of the total number of
States;
(b) at the last general election to the House of the People, the candidates set up
by the political party secure not less than sixteen per cent. of total valid votes polled in
one-fourth of the total number of States in the country; and
(c) at the last general election to the Legislative Assemblies, the candidates set
up by the political party secure not less than sixteen per cent. of the total valid votes
polled in one-fourth of the total number of States in the country.".
5
10

3
\\SERVER3 \ E \ BILL2010 \ LS \ 4656LS
STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
At present, a political party is treated as a recognized National party if,—
(i) the candidates set up by it, in any four or more States, at the last general election to
the House of the People, or to the Legislative Assembly of the State concerned, have secured
not less than six per cent. of the total valid votes polled in their respective States; and
(ii) such political party has returned atleast four members to the House of the People at
the aforesaid last general election for any State or States;
or
(i) its candidates have been elected to the House of the People, at the last general
election to that House, from atleast two per cent. of the total number of Parliamentary
constituencies, any fraction exceeding one-half being counted as one; and
(ii) the said candidates have been elected to that House from less than three States.
However, the security deposits of candidates contesting election to Legislative
Assembly or House of the People get forfeited if they secure less than sixteen per cent. of the
valid votes polled. So there is no rationale in recognizing any party which secures six
per cent. of the total valid votes polled in elections to the Legislative Assemblies or the
House of the People, as a National political party.
There is a need to change the conditions for recognition as a National political party.
A registered political party in order to get recognition as a National political party must have
atleast 54 members or members equal to ten per cent. of the total strength of the House of the
People, elected from atleast one-fourth of the total number of States of the country. Further,
the party must have secured at least sixteen per cent. of the total votes polled in elections to
the Legislative Assemblies and the House of the People in one-fourth States of the country.
Therefore, to achieve the above objectives, it is proposed to amend the Representation
of the People Act, 1951 in the interest of the nation.
Hence this Bill.
N
EW DELHI; J.P.  AGARW AL
August 17, 2010

GMGIPMRND—4656LS(S3)—22-10-2010.
LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Representation of the People Act, 1951.
————
(Shri J.P. Agarwal, M.P.)